Overview

July is a good time to visit Zagreb. The weather is usually very warm, comfortable, with temperatures ranging from 62—85°F (16—29°C). There are plenty of events to check out and activities to try in Zagreb during this time. Some of our top recommendations: take a day trip to the medieval town of Samobor, take a day trip to Plitvice Lakes National Park, take a guided tour of Zagreb's street art, and more!

Zagreb has plenty to offer for visitors of all ages and interests. In this article, we tell you the top things to see and do for your July trip to Zagreb. Get inspired by the events, activities, attractions, and experiences unique to July. We’ll let you know where to explore events based on your interests, whether that’s food, culture, art, music, sport or others.

We’ll let you know everything you need to prepare for the weather in Zagreb in July. Learn about what to wear and pack for your trip, the average temperatures throughout July, temperature changes from morning to evening and much more.

Visiting Zagreb? See our Zagreb Trip Planner.

Weather in Zagreb in July

Temperatures on an average day in Zagreb in July

The average temperature in Zagreb in July for a typical day ranges from a high of 85°F (29°C) to a low of 62°F (16°C). Some would describe it as very warm, comfortable.

For comparison, the hottest month in Zagreb, August, has days with highs of 85°F (29°C) and lows of 61°F (16°C). The coldest month, January has days with highs of 39°F (4°C) and lows of 26°F (-3°C). This graph shows how an average day looks like in Zagreb in July based on historical data.

Visiting Zagreb? See our Zagreb Trip Planner.

General weather summary

Very warm, comfortable

Feels like

21%

Chance of rain

0.086 in

Amount

8.2 mph

Wind speed

56%

Humidity

15.3 hrs

Daylight length

5:20 AM

Sunrise

8:41 PM

Sunset

65%

Cloud cover

Sleeveless shirt

What to wear

What to wear in July

With an average high of 85°F (29°C) and a low of 62°F (16°C), it generally feels very warm, comfortable. With that in mind, most people would dress in something very light like a sleeveless shirt