Founded 194 years ago (1828), Springbank is a distillery of some renown and this whisky, Springbank 10 Years, is their current flagship offering. If you giggled when I said “some renown”, then you are a true whisky nerd and know that’s an understatement. Whisky nerds go ga-ga for Springbank which makes it increasingly difficult to find. Even with a price that continues to climb.

Springbank has a vast and fiercely loyal fan base and I consider myself part of it. Does that mean everything they make is amazing? Of course not, that’s just not possible. I’ve had some bad Springbanks, everyone whose ventured deep into the bench has. But on the whole, they’re darn good and when they’re at their best there’s just nothing like it.

Let’s get to drinkin’!

Springbank 10 Years- Details and Tasting Notes

Whiskey Details

Non-Chill Filtered | Natural Color

Style: Single Malt (Scotch)

Region: Campbeltown, Scotland

Distiller: Springbank

Mash Bill: 100% Malted Barley

Cask: ex-Bourbon (60%), ex-Sherry (40%)

Age: 10 Years

ABV: 46%

Springbank 10 Years Price: $100

Related Whiskey

Springbank 12 Years Cask Strength

Springbank 15 Years

Springbank Local Barley 16 Years

1993 The Bottlers Springbank 16 Years

1995 Sovereign Springbank 22 Years

Springbank 10 Years Tasting Notes

EYE

Golden

NOSE

Dried orchard fruit, sultanas, banana chips, graham and some touches of honey, spice and olde candy sweetness.

Soft, easy, pleasant, there’s nothing to be mad at here.

PALATE

Dried orchard fruit, malty graham, banana chips, baking spice, honey and bits of olde candy and smoke.

Smoke isn’t quite right, more like overly roasted nuts, like almost burnt, but just shy of it.

FINISH

Medium -> Dried orchard fruit, malt, and over-roasted nuts (smokyish) fade out to sweetness and baking spice.

BALANCE, BODY and FEEL

Well balanced, medium body and a light easy feel.

Springbank 10 Years- Overall Thoughts and Score

It’s light, it’s kind of simple, but it’s not spineless or weak. It’s an easy sipping, easy mixing, perfect intro to Springbank. And, having drank more than my fair share of Springbank, I can say it’s all uphill from here on the OB releases. Sometimes they play around with weird barrels, like that Longrow Tokaji barrel release – woof that was bad.

But for the vast majority of releases, anything directly from them is at least as good as this if not significantly better than this Springbank 10 Years. And, to a large extent, that even goes for indie bottles, which are getting rarer and rarer due to that relatively high baseline of quality that’s generated such a rabid following… it’s also why a bottle doesn’t last long on my shelf.