Breeding and early years

Seattle Slew was foaled on February 15, 1974, at the White Horse Acres breeding farm in Lexington, Kentucky. He had an impressive family tree: his sire, Bold Reasoning, was the grandson of Bold Ruler, the father of the great Secretariat. His dam was My Charmer, the offspring of Myrtle Charm, the champion two-year-old filly of 1948.

Britannica Quiz

All About Horse Racing Quiz

By the time he became a yearling, Seattle Slew had filled out nicely into a 700-pound (317-kg) colt with a good disposition. Nevertheless, the horse aficionados who attended the auction sales had reservations. Some thought he was not graceful, while others harped on his sire and dam, claiming that they were unproven, this being only his third foal and her first. Therefore, the colt was rejected for showing at the prestigious Keeneland sale but was entered in the Fasig-Tipton sale in Lexington, which would not generate the Keeneland prices.

He was purchased by novice owners Karen and Mickey Taylor and their business partners, veterinarian Jim Hill and his wife, Sally. The group named the horse after Seattle (the Taylors’ hometown was White Swan, Washington) and the swamps of Florida (also known as “slews”), where Hill grew up. The owners then sent the horse to Maryland to be trained by Billy Turner.

Seattle Slew made his racing debut on September 20, 1976, during the fifth race at Belmont Park in New York, which he won by five lengths even though he had left the gate last. Turner sent him out again on October 5 at Belmont Park in a seven-furlong allowance, which Seattle Slew won easily by three and one-half lengths. Turner had no reluctance then to enter him in the prestigious Champagne Stakes at Belmont for two-year-olds. It was hardly a race, for Seattle Slew trounced the field by nine and three-quarter lengths while running the fastest mile ever by a two-year-old. Sportswriters buzzed with excitement over the results and voted him Two-Year-Old Colt of the Year.

1977: Triple Crown

Seattle Slew rested well over the winter and began his preparation for the Kentucky Derby at the Hialeah Park racetrack in Florida on March 9, winning by nine lengths in the seven-furlong allowance race and setting a track record, followed by a four-length win in the Flamingo Stakes at 11/8 miles on March 26. Less than a month later he polished off the 11/8-mile Wood Memorial Stakes in New York three and a quarter lengths in front. Because the Wood was one of the top stakes races before the Kentucky Derby and Seattle Slew was undefeated in all six races he had run in his career at that point, it was no surprise that he was the 1–2 favourite in the Derby.

Get a Britannica Premium subscription and gain access to exclusive content. Subscribe Now

Seattle Slew began the Kentucky Derby by turning his head sideways and swerving to the right while the gateman tried to push him out of the stall. By the time he did come out, he was two or three lengths behind a wall of straining horses. Jean Cruguet, the seasoned French jockey who had ridden him in all of his races, settled him down and then proceeded to pick holes in the wall of horses to slip through. By the time they reached the first quarter mile, Cruguet and Seattle Slew had left the herd behind and were challenging the leader, For the Moment. The two horses ran head-to-head down the backstretch to the far turn, and Seattle Slew pulled ahead for good with a quarter mile to go. Although the track was fast, the time was not. The 2:021/5 was hardly in the league of Secretariat’s 1:592/5.

A then-record crowd of 77,346 was on hand to watch the Preakness Stakes. Moving out of the eight post position, Seattle Slew ran neck-and-neck with Cormorant for most of the race. Cruguet hit him once in the upper stretch to keep him focused and hand-rode him to the finish for a one-and-a-half-lengths win.

Saturday, June 11, 1977, was Belmont Day, and 71,026 racing fans filled venerable Belmont Park, eagerly anticipating the crowning of a new Triple Crown champion. The eight colts came out on a track that was muddy from two days of rain. The start of the race found Seattle Slew, a 2–5 odds favourite, running up front, where he remained for the rest of the 11/2 miles. The pace was extremely slow. Run Dusty Run made a charge, as did Sanhedrin, but they were quickly dispatched. Seattle Slew won by four lengths in a time of 2:293/5, and he was named the 1977 Horse of the Year for his stellar undefeated racing season.

Final years

The following year began inauspiciously. In early 1978 Seattle Slew contracted a virus that almost killed him. He was nursed back to health and was able to resume racing. The Marlboro Cup, at nine furlongs at Belmont Park on September 16, his fourth start of the year, was remarkable because it featured, for the first time, two Triple Crown winners in the same race, as Affirmed had won the Triple Crown earlier in the year. There was never any doubt about the outcome of the Marlboro Cup from the very outset. Seattle Slew flew through the stretch and scored a decisive three-lengths victory over the younger champion. In his seven starts in 1978, Seattle Slew was the winner of five, came in second in two, and earned $473,006 in purses.

He was retired to stud in 1978, and he died in 2002 on the 25th anniversary of his Kentucky Derby victory. In his racing career of 17 races, he won 14, was second twice, and came in fourth once. He was inducted into the National Museum of Racing’s Hall of Fame in 1981.

Marvin Drager