Dr. David Parks is a highly skilled American board-certified retina specialist who has trained to understand the complexity and delicacy of the eye. He specializes in unique eye conditions concerning the retina and vitreous, and he has also done extensive training dealing with ocular inflammatory diseases and ocular complications of the Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS). Dr. Parks has committed over 20 years of his career to treating patients who seek out his medical expertise.

Dr. Parks earned his bachelor’s degree from the State University of New York at Binghamton, then graduated with honors from the Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis in 1988. He began receiving hands-on experience through an internal medicine internship at the University Hospital in Long Island, New York. In addition, he completed an ophthalmology residency in Baltimore, Maryland for the Krieger Eye Institute at the Sinai Hospital.

Determined to fine tune his skills, Dr. Parks accepted a two-year fellowship in ocular immunology and uveitis at the National Eye Institute. There, he received a government grant to study the ocular complications of AIDS in both adults and children. Furthermore, he served as a scientific investigator in a clinical trial using a new device for intraocular drug delivery for the treatment of cytomegalovirus, a retinal infection seen in many AIDS patients. Through his extensive research, Dr. Parks was able to co-author a scientific article deeming the new device safe and effective. He has also published numerous scientific journals on both clinical ophthalmology and laboratory research and proceeded to present his work to national and international meetings.

In 1994, Dr. Parks moved to Los Angeles, California to accept a fellowship at the White Memorial Medical Center, where he later was invited to join the full-time staff as director of the ocular immunology and uveitis services. Then in 1999, he began his private practice where he remains today. He has since expanded his practice to include three California offices in Beverley Hills and Lancaster, California. He later began visiting the U.S. territory of Guam to provide his retina expertise to the island’s residents. While there he developed a good working relationship with the local optometrist and ophthalmologist and soon expanded his practice to provide retina care for patients from the islands of Guam, Saipan, and Micronesia.