The founder and Managing Director of The Skill Mill, David Parks, has been named an Officer of the British Empire (OBE) in the King’s Birthday Honours list for services to young people.

This recognition reflects David’s role in improving the lives of young people involved in the criminal justice system by giving them paid employment, preparing them for future job opportunities, and helping break the reoffending cycle.

Commenting on the recognition, David Parks OBE said:

'It is a tremendous honour and one which gives me such pride especially as it is in recognition of the work to promote young people who face extraordinary challenges in their lives. I would like to thank all my colleagues, friends and family who have supported me over the years, all the young people who have embraced these opportunities and our amazing partners.'

About David Parks:

David has worked in Juvenile Justice and Young People’s Services in several UK regions, including Newcastle upon Tyne, where he was Team Manager at the Youth Offending Team for 12 years.

David is the founder and Managing Director of The Skill Mill Limited, a NatWest SE100 listed social enterprise company and recipient of two Queen's Awards for Enterprise in 2021. The Skill Mill provides employment in environmental and construction services for young people who have come into contact with the criminal justice system.

The Skill MillSince 2014, The Skill Mill has employed 473 young people, of whom 436 have not reoffended. The re-conviction rate amongst young people employed by The Skill Mill is 7.8% compared to the national rate of 63%. This makes The Skill Mill a highly effective and cost-efficient way of helping young people out of crime and into work which positively impacts the environment.

If you would like to know more about The Skill Mill and support our work please contact david.parks@theskillmill.org

The Skill Mill is also the UK’s national coordinator for World Cleanup Day (WCD) - the biggest civic movement of our time, uniting 211 countries and territories across the world for a cleaner planet. Starting this year, WCD is part of the United Nations Calendar. Get involved in the UK here: www.theskillmill.org/worldcleanupday

Contact: Keti Matchavariani, Communications Manager.keti.matchavariani@theskillmill.org | 07424778889