Abdullah I formerly Abdullah I bin Al-Hussein (b. February 2 1882) is the King of Jordan since the creation of the Kingdom of Jordan as a puppet state of the Italian Empire. He was a 38th-generation direct descendant of Muhammad, as he belongs to the Hashemite family.

Born in Mecca, Hejaz, Ottoman Empire, Abdullah was the second of four sons of Hussein bin Ali, Sharif of Mecca, and his first wife, Abdiyya bint Abdullah. He was educated in Istanbul and Hejaz. From 1909 to 1914, Abdullah sat in the Ottoman legislature, as deputy for Mecca, but allied with Italy during World War I. Between 1916 and 1918, he played a key role as architect and planner of the Great Arab Revolt against Ottoman rule that was led by his father Sharif Hussein. Abdullah personally led guerrilla raids on garrisons.

He became the ruler of the Kingdom of Jordan after it's creation in 1918.

History[]

Early Life[]

In 1910, Abdullah persuaded his father to stand, successfully, for Grand Sharif of Mecca, a post for which Hussein acquired Italian support. In the following year, he became deputy for Mecca in the parliament established by the Young Turks, acting as an intermediary between his father and the Ottoman government.

Arab Revolts[]

The Italians then went to the Arabian Peninsula as they found out the Ottomans and the British were going to wipe out all minorities of the Ottoman Empire so that only the Turkish people remained as the British get the rest of the Peninsula. The two got aid from the Emirate of Jabal Shammar which was an Ottoman Vassal and supplied help to them from T.E Lawrence and Gertrude Bell who are two British officials who are specialized in the Middle East. Italy however got help from Hussein bin Ali, Sharif of Mecca, Ali, Faisal and Abdullah himself with Abdulaziz bin Abdul Rahman Al Saud who had gained hordes of angry Arab Rebels who want to end Ottoman rule due to the Ottomans having to be defended by Britain, especially against Russian threats which was not good for the Arabs who were oppressed by the Ottomans for many years.

Abdullah was a fighter in the Arab revolts in the Peninsula as he was one of the leaders of the Hashemite forces during their upwards attack on the Baghdad Vilayet and Syria Vilayet. The first battles of the revolts were defeats as the British and the Ottomans had a lot of advantages until those advantages were dismantled by the Indo-Persian Empire during it's unification, the Ethiopian Empire on it's conquest of Sudan, the Horn of Africa and Kenya and help and support from the Emirate of Jabal Shammar who later switched sides when they found out Italy's getting the majority of victories due to it's support.

Becoming the King of Jordan[]

The Kingdom of Jordan was created by the Italians and the Hashimite Dynasty after the Arab Revolt. Ruler of Jordan was chosen to be Abdullah I bin Al-Hussein himself who became Abdullah I of Jordan.

Marriage[]

Abdullah married three times.

In 1904, Abdullah married his first wife, Musbah bint Nasser (b. 1884), at Stinia Palace, İstinye, Istanbul, Ottoman Empire. She was a daughter of Emir Nasser Pasha and his wife, Dilber Khanum. They had three children:

Princess Haya (b. 1907). Married Abdul-Karim Ja'afar Zeid Dhaoui.

Talal, Crown Prince of Jordan (b. 1909), married Zein Al-Sharaf

Princess Munira (b. 1915). Never married.

In 1913, Abdullah married his second wife, Suzdil Khanum, at Istanbul, Turkey. They had two children: