OUR GOAL IS TO DRIVE INCREMENTAL TRAFFIC TO YOUR BUSINESS, WEBSITE OR EVENT.

We work to ensure you get the results you need.

Radio is a quite remarkable media. From the first commercial radio broadcast in 1920 at KDKA in Pittsburgh, radio has been a part of our lives, communicating news, sports, and entertainment for 103 years.

Today radio continues to be very relevant, delivering news, sports, music, and other content to 93% of the nation’s population on a 12+ basis every single week of every single year.

We want to earn your business. Our singular goal is to point incremental traffic to your business, website, or event, and we’re not satisfied until we do so. We will work to ensure you get the results you need.

We purchased the technology to blanket your advertising message across a vast region. If you own a business in Lynchburg, and want to attract customers from Roanoke, we are your solution. Maybe your business is in Bedford, and you want to drive customers from Roanoke and Lynchburg to Bedford. Again, we are your station.

Customers who run annual events love us, even those who cannot hear our radio signals. Because of our broad coverage, we can reach their potential audience in Roanoke and Bedford and Danville and Lynchburg, all with the same :30 second commercial, and motivate them to visit events within a two or three hour drive.

Our broad coverage comes because of having six strategically located radio stations with eleven FM/AM frequencies. Each radio station tower is carefully positioned to ensure superior radio coverage for Central Virginia residents, regardless of where they live or travel.

We reach your customers where they are. It’s hard to think of an area you can be, where radio is not there also. This “where they are” feature separates radio from all classic competitors. And now radio is digital, meaning you can listen to your hometown station anytime and anywhere you have a digital signal on your smartphone.

Unless you’re one of the 7% we don’t reach weekly, you already know the power and relevance of radio. So, why don’t you use radio to advertise your business, event, or website? Why wouldn’t you invest capital into something that will generate a positive return?

IT’S BECAUSE YOU’RE UNCERTAIN RADIO WILL PRODUCE A POSTIVE RETURN.

(and this is a normal concern)

We have customers who have been advertising with us for years, and these customers have produced a positive return on their investment in radio over the years. They too were uncertain initially about using radio. It’s normal to be concerned about something you’re investing in for the first time.

Before you invest, test drive the difference radio can do make for you or your life or your business. Test drive some commercials, across the Virginia Radio Network. We’ll develop the commercials at no charge, record them professionally at no charge, email them you to so you can hear them before they are aired. No, the actual aired commercials are not free, but rates are very reasonable, and you can invest in one week or two initially if you prefer. … and at a price that will pay for itself in incremental sales and traffic

WE SIMPLY WANT YOU TO TRY US TO REMOVE UNCERTAINTY.

GIVE US A TEST DRIVE !

email me: swann.franklin@outlook.com

Our advertising rates are surprisingly low, especially when compared with Magazine, Television or Newspapers.

We know how to cover this market. We now have our programming on 11 frequencies delivering our Talk & Sports product to every inch of the Roanoke-Lynchburg DMA.

We also broadcast all our commercials and content via digital signal, reaching customers far beyond our tower radio signals. In fact, as of December 2022, we’ve served 3,820,132 streams.

No other Talk Radio station can make these claims.

We would like to work for your business. If you call us, I would be happy to meet with you, and so would Franklin Swann, Ed Lane, or Janet Rose.

434-534-8500 is our office number.

We can be your one stop for Radio advertising on our 11 frequencies, streaming on all devices with our popular Talk programs, CBS NEWS, WDBJ Weather, Classic Hits Rewind 1039, and CBS Sports Radio. We will show you how to do it and open your business to a form of advertising on the Radio, done our way.

Gary Burns: CEO & Principal Owner 3 Daughters Media Inc.

Franklin Swann: COO – Virginia Talk Radio Network

Copyright 2022 Virginia Talk Radio Network – All rights reserved.