Norfolk Southern Railway is one of North America's larger Class I railroads and a subsidiary of Norfolk Southern Corp. The railroad operates 20,000 route miles in 22 states and the District of Columbia, serves every major container port in the eastern United States and connects with other rail carriers. Norfolk Southern also operates an extensive intermodal network and is a major transporter of coal and industrial products.

Senior officers are Alan Shaw, president and CEO; Ann Adams, executive vice president and chief transformation officer; Mark George, executive vice president and chief financial officer; Nabanita Nag, executive vice president and chief legal officer; Paul Duncan, executive vice president and chief operating officer; Claude Elkins, executive vice president and chief marketing officer; and Michael McClellan, senior vice president and chief strategy officer.

Former Chairman, President and CEO Wick Moorman — who retired in October 2015 and led Amtrak from September 2016 into 2017 — was the 2013 recipient of Progressive Railroading's Railroad Innovator of the Year Award.

The railroad operates 36,000 track miles. Its rolling stock consists of 4,143 owned and leased locomotives and 87,714 owned and leased freight cars. Norfolk Southern Corp. employs more than 30,000 people.

Norfolk Southern's major rail classification yards are in Allentown, Pa.; Atlanta; Baltimore; Bellevue, Ohio; Birmingham, Ala.; Buffalo, N.Y.; Chattanooga, Tenn.; Chicago; Cincinnati; Cleveland; Columbus, Ohio; Conway, Pa.; Decatur, Ill.; Detroit; Enola, Pa.; Elkhart, Ind.; Fort Wayne, Ind.; Harrisburg, Pa.; Kansas City, Mo.; Knoxville, Tenn.; Linwood, N.C.; Louisville, Ky.; Macon, Ga.; New Orleans; Norfolk, Va.; Roanoke, Va.; Sheffield, Ala.; St. Louis; and Toledo, Ohio.

Norfolk Southern's facilities

The railroad's locomotive shops are at Juniata, Altoona, Pa.; Bellevue, Ohio; Chattanooga, Tenn.; Conway, Pa.; Enola, Pa.; Roanoke, Va.; Elkhart, Ind.; and Shaffers Crossing, Roanoke, Va. In Atlanta, Norfolk Southern Railway houses a center for operations and service support, crew management, eastern, northern and western regions' corporate offices, national customer service, and police communications. Located in McDonough, Ga., is the Norfolk Southern Railway training center; and in Norfolk, Va., is the Lamberts Point coal transload facility.

Norfolk Southern's other subsidiaries are Lambert's Point Docks Inc., Pocahontas Land Corp., T-Cubed, Thoroughbred Direct Intermodal Services, Thoroughbred Mechanical Services, Transworks, and Triple Crown Services.

The railroad is the product of hundreds of railroad companies that consolidated into what is now Norfolk Southern. In its current form, Norfolk Southern resulted from the consolidation of Southern Railway and Norfolk and Western Railway in 1982, and the acquisition of a portion of Conrail in 1999.

To mark its 30th anniversary in 2012, Norfolk Southern painted 18 new locomotives in commemorative schemes that reflect the heritage of its predecessor railroads.