Eva Longoria & Tony Parker

The Couple

On July 7, 2007 Eva Longoria wed San Antonio Spurs point guard Tony Parker during a lavish wedding in the City of Love. The couple was pronounced man and wife at the historic Saint Germain l'Auxerrois church in Paris in front of 200 guests. Famous friends like Jessica Alba, Ryan Seacrest and Longoria's Desperate Housewives cast mates stood witness as the happy couple said their I do's and threw a raucous reception to celebrate.

The Pre-Wedding Wardrobe

Before the big church wedding, Longoria and Parker made it official at a civil service held inside Paris' city hall. After a trip to the local Chanel boutique, Longoria arrived for the ceremony looking chic in a pink empire-waist mini-dress. Once inside, the glamour girl changed into a white Chanel embroidered dress and tulle jacket before joining Parker to be married by the mayor of Paris.

The Invitation

To honor Longoria's Hispanic roots, the couple included two traditions in their ceremony; the arras, and exchange of 13 coins illustrating the groom's ability to support his bride, and the lazo, placing a rosary around the couple in a figure eight to symbolize their union. To ensure guests could follow along, L.A. stationer Ellen Black printed explanations of the rites in the program.

The Gown

"There were a lot of people that wanted to do Eva's gown, but she knew who she wanted," says Longoria's longtime stylist Robert Verdi. Designer Angel Sanchez created the contemporary silk gown with ribbons of gazar metallic embroidery especially for the petite star. The figure-flattering mermaid silhouette of the gown balanced out the dramatic train and ensured that all eyes were on the bride during her walk down the aisle. "There [was] a little bit more of a modern note to it than I would have expected her to embrace, but I loved it," Verdi says.

The Rings

Eva and Tony exchanged Piaget Possession rings during the traditional Catholic ceremony, held at the Saint Germain L'Auxerrois church in Paris. Longoria's 18K white gold band featured two rows of 80 brilliant-cut diamonds separated by a row of 27 square-cut diamonds. Parker's ring matched his wife's-sans the stones-and each was etched with a special inscription in French. Longoria also gave her groom a custom-designed Piaget watch decorated with the number "9," Tony's San Antonio Spurs jersey number.

The Bridesmaids' Dresses

Longoria outfitted her nine bridesmaids in fiery red-the couple's favorite color-dresses from Badgley Mischka. Each of the attendants wore a different style in the same shade of either silk satin or silk chiffon from the designer's Spring 2008 collection. Each dress was embellished with Swarovski crystals to add an extra touch of glamour. Eva's mother and her Desperate Housewives co-star, Teri Hatcher also chose to wear Badgley Mischka for the occasion.

The Celebrity Guests

Jessica Alba and boyfriend Cash Warren (not pictured) arrived in style at the Saint Germain l'Auxerrois church in Paris for the lavish Catholic ceremony. Like all other guests, the couple surrendered their cell phones before entering the historic site, which was filled with white lilies for the occasion. Also in the pews were longtime Longoria pals Sheryl Crow, Mario Lopez and American Idol emcee Ryan Seacrest.

The Reception

After the I do's, guests including Jessica Alba, Felicity Huffman and Lake Bell boarded luxury buses bound for Chateau Vaux le Vicomte. The couple invited their friends and family to dine on a custom menu called "Crazy Red Passion," dance to the tunes of an 80's band, and drink in the splendor of the 17th-century castle. "Walking into Vaux le Vicomte in my gown as a string quartet was playing was pretty phenomenal," remembers Bell. "But the private fireworks ceremony was the most magical moment."

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7qrrSrbClnV6YvK57wp6jnpqinsG6e9KtmKtlk6TCsbjErGaerpFiubC6xqipopldqbyvxYypmKujlac%3D