About the school

Founded in 1914, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology‘s Sloan School of Management is one of the world's leading business schools in Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. It is known for its exceptional academic programmes, state-of-the-art research, and innovative approach to management education. Nestled within an elite group of research institutions, MIT Sloan congregates the most brilliant minds to address global challenges with practical solutions. US News & World Report shows that the Sloan School of Management is ranked No. 4 in Best Business Schools 2023-2024. The school's global network has collaborations, research partnerships, and alums connections. The international community of MIT alumni spans over 90+ countries and comprises an impressive 120,000 individuals. Among the remarkable roster of accomplished alums are Kofi Annan (Former Secretary-General of the United Nations and Nobel Peace Prize laureate) and Condoleezza Rice (Former US Secretary of State). Cambridge, Massachusetts, offers international students a diverse, academically excellent environment. Its internationally acclaimed colleges, cultural vibrancy, and student support services make the city famous for international students seeking quality education and a diverse experience.

Where is the school located?

Life at the MIT Sloan School of Management

MIT Sloan School of Management offers various affordable housing options for its graduate students, including single rooms, one-bedroom, and multi-bedroom units. There are eight graduate residences on campus, offering multiple housing options for single people, couples, and students with families. The campus environment is a vibrant mix of opportunities and activities that are continuously changing, with 80+ student clubs with membership numbers ranging from 12 to 400+ and leadership organisations that plan events, run conferences, and welcome new members. The MIT Sloan Student Life Office promotes unity and support in all programmes, collaborating with student services at Sloan. They guide students through their journey and foster an inclusive culture. At the core of Cambridge's bustling Kendall Square district, MIT Sloan benefits from its surroundings teeming with biotech firms, tech behemoths, start-ups, and research facilities. The area offers various dining options, outdoor activities, art, music, and cultural venues. Boston's extensive network of around 60 colleges and universities enriches the city's dynamic with inventive and intellectual vitality.

Additional benefits of studying at the MIT Sloan School of Management

Although graduate students at the MIT Sloan School of Management are housed in the Cambridge, Massachusetts campus, their business education has a global focus. There are plenty of opportunities for students to travel and study abroad, and the academic courses are generally international. Additionally, the school offers Action Labs where students can work on real-life problems facing businesses in China, India, and the United States. Nearly a quarter of Sloan graduates have become business presidents and CEOs. With over 120 alum clubs, students can connect with a skilled global network of individuals through the MIT Alumni Association and receive mentorship and career guidance. Students have unparalleled access to the best research, entrepreneurial tools, and cross-disciplinary partnerships. This ecosystem provides exceptional opportunities for hands-on learning and networking with forward-thinking innovators and creators, providing an environment where you can transform ground-breaking concepts into successful business initiatives.