The Federal Information Processing Standard 201 (FIPS 201) Evaluation Program (sometimes called the FICAM Testing Program) tests and certifies services and commercial products used in PIV credentialing systems, physical access control systems (PACS), and public key infrastructures (PKIs).

Program Announcements

Announcements older than four years are removed. Contact us if you have any questions.

+

-

Testing and Evaluation

We test and evaluate a variety of products and services, such as:

Smart cards (secure elements) that are used in Personal Identity Verification (PIV), Personal Identity Verification - Interoperable (PIV-I), and Common Access Card (CAC) credentials.

Physical access control systems for buildings, including readers and infrastructure.

Service providers who manage, install, or provide hosted solutions for issuing Personal Identity Verification (PIV) and CAC credentials.

If you’re looking for testing procedures related to products not listed above, review the Program Announcements. Over the years, some product testing has been deprecated to eliminate redundancy, or the product categories have become stable and represent general commercial use products.

Product Testing

Product testing is performed by either:

Third-party accredited testing labs, OR

GSA-managed testing labs

If the product passes testing and review, the vendor is granted a certification letter, and the product is placed on the Approved Products List (APL). The APL includes product information, version, date of certification, and special considerations.

Visit the Vendors page for more on testing and certification.

Testing Guidance and Documents

The sections below provide the guidance and application documents associated with the testing and evaluation of the various products and services indicated in the Testing and Evaluation section above. Functional requirements for the products are outlined in each test procedure. Review the testing agreements and the test procedure for your specific product and submit the associated agreement and package to fips201ep@gsa.gov.

Physical Access Control System

GSA tests and validates the interoperability of PIV and CAC credentials with the software and hardware used for physical access control to government facilities.

Review the PACS APL Guidance Documents and PACS Application Package Requirements listed below, choose the application documentation that applies to your solution to be evaluated, and submit it to fips201ep@gsa.gov.

PACS APL Guidance Documents

The documents in this section provide guidance and information necessary for evaluating a PACS solution to be listed on the FIPS 201 Evaluation Program’s Approved Products List (APL) and the criteria followed for the Removed Products List (RPL). It is recommended that the applicant review all the guidance documents listed in this section before submitting the Approved Product List Application Form.

Approved Product List Application Guidance Document, version 1.1.0 (PDF, Nov 30, 2023) – Provides information and lists of the documents required when submitting a new or upgraded solution for testing and instructions for completing the Approved Product List Application form.

Removed Products List (RPL) Process Document, v1.0.2 (PDF, April 2022) – If your product has been removed from the APL, review this document for the procedures.

Functional Requirements and Test Cases Guidance Documents:

PACS Functional Requirements and Test Cases Guidance Document v1.4.2 Rev. C (PDF, November 30, 2023)

Secure Messaging and On Card Comparison Companion Paper, FRTC version 1.4.2 Rev A (PDF, March 31, 2021)

FRTC Section 4 Backend Registration and Data Model Companion Paper, FRTC version 1.4.2 Rev A (PDF, March 31, 2021)

FRTC Express Process Companion Paper, FRTC version 1.4.2 Rev A (PDF, March 31, 2021)

Approved PACS Topology Mapping Form (PACS 13.01 13.02) PIN Usage Policy Testing Addendum, version 1.3.3 Rev. F (PDF, August 21, 2018) – Review this Addendum for help resetting PIN retry counters and determining the number of remaining PIN retries during Discovery Object testing.

FRTC for PACS Alternative Authenticators, version 1.0 (PDF, September 26, 2023) – This document will updated continuously as emerging technology and standards supporting FICAM compliance become available. Please review the document and provide your comments to fips201ep@gsa.gov by November 30, 2023.

Topology Guidance Documents:

Review the following guidance documentation and select from the appropriate topology that best describes your solution:

Approved PACS Topology Mapping Document (PACS 13.01), version 1.3.3 Rev G (PDF, February 1, 2019).

Approved PACS Topology Mapping Document (PACS 13.02), version 1.3.3 Rev G (PDF, February 1, 2018).

Provisionally-Approved Mobile Handheld Validation Reader Topology Mapping Form (MHVR 14.02), version 1.3.3 Rev B (PDF, November 3, 2017). - NOTE: When you complete the FRTC Workbook, use the mapping in the workbook, not the mapping inside the Mobile Handheld Topology document.

Approved PACS Wireless Reader Topology (PACS 20.01), FRTC version 1.3.3 Rev G (PDF, November 17, 2020).

All applicants, please complete the following steps:

Review, complete, and sign the FIPS 201 Evaluation Program PACS Application Package Checklist, v1.0.0 (Mandatory), and ensure all the applicable and mandatory paperwork is submitted along with the application document.

Complete and sign the Approved Products List Application Form, v1.1.0 (MS Word, November 30, 2023) (Mandatory) – Required for each solution submission, new or upgrade.

Complete and sign the FIPS 201 Evaluation Program – Evaluation Agreement, version 2.1.0 (MS Word, November 30, 2023) (Mandatory) – Required for each solution submission, new or upgrade.

List the equipment used for the APL testing in the equipment table linked here – Equipment Table GSA PACS Application v0.2.0 (MS Excel, November 2023) (Mandatory).

Complete the PACS FRTC Workbook, v1.4.2 Rev B (MS Excel, October 2021) (Mandatory) for your topology.

Provide a solution Configuration Guide (Mandatory) that includes, at a minimum:

Screenshots and instructions on configuring the submitted solution to meet the test cases.

Location of all log files needed to verify that the solution performs the test cases.

Steps necessary to verify the hardware, software, and firmware of all items listed on the equipment table in the APL application.

Responses to the Vendor FRTC Questionnaire linked in #13.

Include the following document when adding a new series or adding a new product to a prior listed series, signed by a C- or VP-level individual:

Product Series and Exemplar Self-Attestation Form v1.0.0 (MS Word, November 30, 2023) (Mandatory, if applicable).

Include the following document when licensing an existing product that is already on the GSA PACS Reader APL, signed by a C- or VP-level individual:

Product Licensing Self-Attestation Form v1.0.0 (MS Word, November 30, 2023) (Mandatory, if applicable).

Complete and sign the Supply Chain Self-Attestation Form, v1.4.2 (MS Word, March 3, 2020) (Mandatory).

Include all applicable VPAT statements, https://www.section508.gov/sell/vpat/ (Mandatory, if applicable).

Include all relevant UL-294 listing documents (Mandatory, if applicable).

Include all applicable FIPS 140-2/140-3 listing documents (Mandatory, if applicable).

Respond to the Vendor FRTC Questionnaire, v1.0.0 (Mandatory).

Submit all completed forms to fips201ep@gsa.gov.

Personal Identity Verification Credentials

Annual PIV Credential Issuer (PCI) Testing Application Form (PDF, February 2020) – If you are an agency or organization submitting for Annual PCI Review, submit this application form signed along with all the testing artifacts listed below to fips201ep@gsa.gov; two testing options are available:

In-person Lab Testing - testing organizations can provide available dates and times to visit the GSA FIPS 201 lab when sending in their signed application form OR

Remote Testing - testing organizations can leverage the tools listed below and email the outputs generated and card images to fips201ep@gsa.gov.

All applicants must provide the following required artifacts as part of the Annual PCI review:

High-resolution front and back images of the PIV/PIV-I card being tested.

Outputs generated by leveraging the following tools: Card Conformance Tool (CCT), Certificate Profile Conformance Tool, KSJavaAPI, and the SP 800-73-4-based Test Runner(Optional).

Derived PIV Credentials

Agencies that wish to issue D-PIV credentials should follow these steps:

Perform a NIST SP 800-79 assessment and receive an Authority To Operate (ATO).

Work with your Shared Service Provider (SSP) to obtain D-PIV Object Identifiers (OIDs).

Submit sample D-PIV public certificates for testing or provide results from the Certificate Profile Conformance Tool (CPCT) to fips201ep@gsa.gov.

Upon successful completion of DPCI testing, the agency or organization will be approved to issue D-PIV credentials

PIV Card Body

Personal Identity Verification (PIV) Card Body Approval Procedures, V 11.0 (PDF, April 2023) – indicates the approval procedures, outlines the evaluation criteria, approval mechanisms, and validation test reports to be employed and provided by the Evaluation Laboratory based on their evaluation of a vendor/ supplier’s PIV Card body (product), to be provided to the FIPS 201 EP for evaluation to be placed on the Approved Products List (APL).

All applicants, please complete the following steps:

Review the Personal Identity Verification (PIV) Card Body Approval Procedures v11.0 (PDF, April 2023) – outlining the approval procedures and evaluation criterion for getting the PIV Card body (Product) on the APL and Section 2 Application Package

Provide the Product itself (see Section 2) of the Personal Identity Verification (PIV) Card Body Approval Procedures v11.0 (PDF, April 2023)

Complete and provide the PIV Card APL Evaluation Program Application Form (Word, April 2023) – Required for each product submission.

Complete and provide the FIPS 201 Evaluation Program Lab Services Agreement, V3.0.0 (PDF) – Required for each product submission.

Complete and provide the FIPS 201 Evaluation Program Attestations to Federal Acquisition Regulations related to the Trade Agreement Act v3.3 – Required for each product submission.

Complete and provide the FIPS 201 Evaluation Program Attestations Form for PIV Card Body Approval v1.0 – Required for each product submission.

Test Card Loaners

GSA can loan you test cards to help you pre-test your physical access control system products.