Research and write about how Casablanca is a product of the contexts in which it was produced.

Warner Brothers started the big-screen realism trend where a large amount of gangster and crime drama films were created. They developed a house style due to the kinds of films that they produced which integrated fast paced scripts and performances, snappy dialogue and urban settings. This was contributed to by Jack Warner who produced films that were based on his personal beliefs. This therefore fuelled a number of production. One of the most notable is Casablanca.

Casablanca can be shown to exhibit qualities of the ‘Golden Age of Hollywood’ style that are often shown in Warner Brothers films. In Casablanca’s first sequence there is narration as the camera moves from the map of Casablanca to the streets showing it’s exotic and tropical location. It was common for studios to use exotic locations as it engaged audiences as in immerses them into a new and unfamiliar world. This is emphasised with the crane down to reveal the bustling Casablanca street showing a range of palm trees and monkeys to immediately immerse the viewer which is the aims of the studios in these large budget films.

After this first sequence the audience is then introduced to the antagonist of the film. As the Nazis exit the plane, lead by Heinrich Strasser (Conrad Veidt), the score turns darker and sinister showing they’re villains. Studios within the Golden age of Cinema often pushed across their personal views and ideals onto the viewers in order to influence their beliefs. Jack Warner, Warner Brothers studios executive producer, had beliefs that the US should evolved in World War 2. The negative representation of the Nazi’s through the score, therefore shows Jack warners agenda towards the Nazi’s.

Throughout the Golden Age of Hollywood, studios displayed a range of stereotypes of different nationalities. Different nationalities are portrayed throughout the opening sequence of Casablanca. Characters nationalities are presented in different ways so they are easily recognised by the audience. This is shown as Captain Louis Renault (Claude Rains) is shown to be clumsy and shabby shown by his hat contrasted to the German’s uniform. This fits into a French stereotype making his nationality easily identifiable which is essential in a films with so many different nationalities in it. This stereotype shows the Americans views on the French, as lacking militaristic skills. Contrastingly Rick Blaine (Humphrey Bogart) is shown to be intelligent and suave showing the American audience’s ideals for the stereotypical ‘perfect man’ at the time. It was very common to make the American protagonist seem vastly superior to the other characters. This appeals to the Western/American audience as the American saves the French from the wrath of the Nazis pushing forward Jack Warner’s agenda of America’s involvement in World War Two.

In the initial scene of Rick’s diner, the shots of Isla Lund (Ingrid Bergman) are lit to present her in the best possible way in order to show her beauty. This links to Laura Mulvey’s theory of the male gaze where flattering and attractive shots are used in order to engage the audience. Burgman is often filmed and lit in order to show a sparkle in her eye which is a typical technique studios use in order to accentuate her beauty. This is similarly shown with Bogart who is lit well in order to exaggerate his good looks which is very typical of Hollywood stars.