Quiz Answer Key and Fun Facts

1. Ralph the Llama has been listening to the soundtrack for the film "The Emperor's New Groove" and is thrilled to discover not one, but TWO llama songs on the soundtrack. "Run Llama Run" is a jazzy piece by John Debney. Who performed the other song, "Walk the Llama Llama"?

Answer: Rascal Flatts

"Walk the Llama Llama" was written by Sting and David Hartley. Sting had written several songs for the film which didn't make it into the movie because the scenes were deleted. However, they were included on the soundtrack. According to an interview that the country rock band Rascal Flatts gave in 2002, they were called by Sting and asked to perform the song for the soundtrack.

PDAZ is ashamed to admit to Ralph that she hasn't yet seen "The Emperor's New Groove".

2. The arguments between Flopsy and her siblings Mopsy, Cottontail, and Peter get so loud that Ralph the Llama often thinks that World War Three has broken out. To blot out the noise he used to listen to an album named after one of his small cousins but when he looked at the name of the band he decided to find something else. Which group recorded the compilation album "Vicuna"?

Answer: Nuclear Rabbit

Nuclear Rabbit is a band from Novato, California; started by bass guitarist, Jean Baudin, the band has been influenced by several genres, including metal, ska, jazz, funk, Latin, and punk. Baudin's 11-string bass (how many fingers he must have!) on which he taps, slaps, and pops lends an unusual sound to the band's music as do sudden tempo changes and various musical stylings. Membership of the band has changed several times since its foundation in 1989 and it has been on hiatus more than once.

Flopsymopsy is not an experimental metal rabbit but she has been known to go nuclear, though not in the presence of vicuna who are nice! As, of course, is Ralph.

3. Ralph is intrigued to discover that a now aging rocker is "gonna ride my llama from Peru to Texarkana". He is further delighted by the fact that the song was recorded with the help of a back-up band called Crazy Horse and appeared on an album titled "Rust Never Sleeps" that, when rereleased, was on the Rhino record label. Who is the singer?

Answer: Neil Young

Although "Ride my Llama" first appeared on "Rust Never Sleeps" (1979), it was written with the collection of songs that formed Young's 1975 release "Zuma".

Glendathecat wonders whether Ralph would also be interested to learn that the version that appears on "Rust Never Sleeps" was recorded at the COW Palace in San Francisco.

4. While he does like all kinds of music from around the world, Ralph the Llama has a particular soft spot for prog rock. He particularly likes the music of an English prog rock band, and has been seen dancing to such songs as "Never Let Go", "The Snow Goose" and "Highways of the Sun". Which group is this?

Answer: Camel

Originally consisting of guitarist Andrew Latimer, drummer Andy Ward, bass player Doug Ferguson, and keyboardist Peter Bardens, Camel released their self-titled first album in 1973, which didn't propel the band into the limelight. It wasn't until their second album, "Mirage", in 1974, that they became a success, particularly in the US. Their musical style is a blend of progressive rock and symphonic rock, a sound not unlike other bands of that era like Pink Floyd.

eburge is just as graceful as Ralph on the dance floor, though his style is more akin to flailing his limbs around in a somewhat rhythmic fashion.

5. Ralph the Llama, as a member of the species that is the beast of burden of the Andes, has great sympathy for the beast of burden of the Himalayas, the yak. Can you tell me the name of the group that had the 1950's hit "Yakety Yak"?

Answer: The Coasters

In 1958 the Leiber and Stoller song reached number one on the Hot 100 Pop List. The litany of chores that a parent extols his teenager to do ("take out the papers and the trash", "scrub the kitchen floor", "finish cleaning up your room", etc) is heard as just so much "yakety yak".

Ralph and maninmidohio agree that some things will never change.

6. Ralph the Llama just heard a wonderful song about his fourth cousin, "Alice the Camel". This fun children's song tells you that Alice has which unusual feature?

Answer: Five humps

"Alice the Camel" is a simple children's song that goes like this:

Alice the Camel has five humps

Alice the Camel has five humps

Alice the Camel has five humps

So, go Alice, go

Boom, Boom, Boom

This song continues taking away one hump on each of the next five verses until the child is singing:

Alice the Camel has no humps

Alice the Camel has no humps

Alice the Camel has no humps

Now Alice is a horse! Of course!

The author of this song is not known and there are variations which sing about Susie, her sister. Complete with hand movements and dancing steps, this is a wonderful song used to teach counting to young children.

dcpddc478 shared this song with Ralph.

7. Sometimes Ralph the Llama looks to his more exotic friends for music ideas. A feline...erm...ursine...uh-- friend suggests a particular David Wilcox song about a nocturnal animal better known as a binturong. What's the title of this 1977 song?

Answer: Do the Bearcat

"I went to the zoo just the other week

Saw the kangaroo; had a talk with the chimpanzee.

He said 'hey brotha, if you want a thing that's hip...

Do the Bearcat."

Canadian musician David Wilcox (also known for "Bad Apple", "Riverboat Fantasy", and "Downtown Came Uptown") released "Do the Bearcat" in 1977 on his debut album, "Out of the Woods". One of his characteristic blues-rock numbers, the song suggests that doing 'The Bearcat' is enough "to make you want to leave your home" and it's "enough to make you wanna get a bearcat of your own." Seems convincing!

Bearcats are better known as binturong and they're found in Southeast Asia. They are neither bears nor cats but they are compared to both.

Kyle can't get away from this song and Ralph occasionally does the dance "late at night, when the bearcat howls" (when he's looking for YOU!)

8. Whenever Ralph the Llama gets homesick, he listens to the song "El Condor Pasa", based on traditional Peruvian folk music. The song became popular after it was recorded by which legendary duo in 1969?

Answer: Simon and Garfunkel

If you don't know the name of the song, you may recognize the Paul Simon lyrics: "I'd rather be a sparrow than a snail, yes I would, if I could, I surely would". It was written in 1913 by Daniel Alomia Robles for a Peruvian musical, and the son of the songwriter sued Simon for copyright infringement when it appeared on Simon and Garfunkel's 1970 album "Bridge over Troubled Water". Simon had believed that the song was a folk melody, not a copyrighted song based on a folk melody, and the suit was settled with royalties being awarded to Robles' son.

PDAZ heard "El Condor Pasa" played on a Peruvian pan flute at Machu Picchu when she visited Peru. Llamas were watching, but Ralph wasn't among them.

9. Giving quite a scare to Ralph the Llama and many other animals, this singer threatens of having "a she wolf in a closet". Which Colombian star is being described here?

Answer: Shakira

Although Shakira sings "There's a she wolf in the closet, open up and set her free", Flopsy, Mopsy, Cottontail and Peter are unlikely to oblige. These lyrics come from "She Wolf", the title track of Shakira's sixth studio album. Although topping the Latin U.S singles charts, "She Wolf" failed to achieve the impact of some of Shakira's earlier tracks, most notably "Whenever, Wherever" and "Hips Don't Lie". Shakira also provided the official song for the 2010 FIFA World Cup, called "Waka Waka (This Time For Africa)". This song is one of the most watched on YouTube (with over 450 million views!), and it was chosen by UK deputy prime minister Nick Clegg as one of his Desert Island Discs.

Doublemm admits to having at least one Shakira song on his iPhone.

10. There is a popular animation on the internet called "The Llama Song", which features appropriate pictures to accompany the lyrics of a somewhat inane but catchy ditty. The opening lines of the song are: "Here's a llama, there's a llama, And another little llama, Fuzzy llama, funny llama, ..." The next line is the closest thing this song has to a chorus. Which of these can Ralph the Llama be heard singing around the paddock while watching the clip?

Answer: Llama, llama, duck.

Burton Earny is responsible for "The Llama Song". In 2004 he uploaded a flash animation using images to illustrate his original ditty, and it became an instant internet success. Millions of hits later, it has inspired many parodies - there is a Star Wars version (featuring Yoda), a Harry Potter version, and more. "The Llama Song" even rates an entry in "The Urban Dictionary", where the definition is given as "Only the best song ever written. Go look it up on Google. Now." Sounds like good advice to me!

Looney-tunes is glad to see that, for once, it IS the llama, even if the duck gets to horn in on the act.

Source: Author PDAZ

This quiz was reviewed by FunTrivia editor agony before going online.

Any errors found in FunTrivia content are routinely corrected through our feedback system.