SARASOTA -- You'd be hard-pressed to find a building so completely lacking in curb appeal as the Robarts Sports Arena.

From the street, it looks like a storage shed on steroids.

Inside, hard plastic seats ring the stained concrete floor. A dented disco ball rests in a closet.

The building has weathered decades of ridicule and two attempts to have it razed. A new competitor is opening to the north, and over the next few months the Sarasota County Fair Association will go public with plans to tear down the 38- year-old arena and replace it.

But don't count Robarts out.

If nothing else, it's a survivor, the beneficiary of an odd real estate deal and the sort of familiarity that can be compared to that of an old shoe.

The arena, Sarasota's biggest public venue, is on track to host 80 events this year, more than in its heyday decades ago when there was no larger place within 40 miles, and it played host to countless pro wrestling cards and the likes of Johnny Cash and the Harlem Globetrotters.

These days the arena is home to car sales, craft shows and political rallies as well as the occasional concert, all of them drawn by low rental rates and location.

It's enough to pay the bills and keep the place going.

"Back when it was built, it was called a world-class sports facility. I think they were overstating a little," said longtime fair board member Bob Johnson. "It lasted so long because it's there, and it was free."

Without Robarts, some of the groups don't know where they'd go.

"I hope they don't tear it down," said Pat Burke, president of the Florida West Coast Avian Society, which holds bird shows there. "Robarts is nice and solid. It's comfortable."

A little history

Former Chicago White Sox owner Arthur Allyn built the arena on the fairgrounds in 1966, the year after he moved here.

Named after Sarasota funeral director W.T. Robarts, the arena was operated by the Sarasota Sports Committee for a decade before Allyn gave it to the fair association.

Above the 14,000-square- foot arena, Allyn constructed a 1,200-square-foot luxury box with royal blue shag carpet, wood paneling and a full bar -- a private hangout for Allyn and members of the sports committee, a group of prominent local businessmen.

Bluegrass great Earl Scruggs played Robarts in 1975.

The Virginia Slims women's tennis competition was held there in 1974 and 1975, before it was moved to a larger venue, perhaps the first complaint that Robarts was too small.

Now, it's barely big enough for the Florida West Coast Exotic Bird Show, which was forced to put several vendors outside under a tent.

The first attempt to get rid of Robarts was in 1994, when the fair association looked into building a new conference center. The idea was shot down because the fairgrounds is a few miles from downtown and isn't connected to a hotel.

Then came a proposal to replace Robarts with a $40 million hockey rink, but a group put together a similar deal for Manatee County and got approval first.

So Robarts is still standing, getting older and funkier. The repairmen who work on its ancient air conditioning system are the sons of the guys who used to fix the thing in the 1960s and 1970s.

When volunteers for the American Cancer Society announced four years ago that they were holding their $150- a-plate Cattlebarons Ball at Robarts, nobody could believe it, said Jennie Compton, one of the organizers of the ball.

"People told us we were nuts to hold what is essentially a black-tie event there," Compton said. "These are people who are used to going to the Ritz or Michaels On East."

By the time the decorations were done for this year's ball, the arena was unrecognizable -- oak trees in planters were trucked in to hide the stadium seats, outdoor tents added to the floor space.

The cancer society will hold next year's ball at Robarts, too. Compton said she can't imagine holding it anywhere else.

'It's not a dump'

It's not surprising that Tom Houser, general manager of the fairgrounds, gets defensive after years of hearing people gripe that Robarts is too small and too old.

Most folks don't even bother to pronounce the arena's name correctly -- it's supposed to be Ra-burts, not Row-barts.

Houser's dad used to manage the place, and he's been working there on and off since he was a kid.

"Everybody has said how bad my place is," Houser said. "Everybody's making fun of me. Yes, it needs to be replaced, but it's not a dump."

The arena hosts three circuses and four sporting events a year that account for about 10 percent of the building's annual attendance, which is an estimated 325,000.

The fair (130,000 attendance) is the biggest draw, followed by festivals and outdoor events (69,000) and consumer shows (61,000), according to a 2003 report by the Sarasota architectural and planning firm SMRT.

Most concert promoters won't book first-rate acts in Sarasota, the report says. Those shows go to Tampa and St. Petersburg, and the promoters figure that people from Sarasota will drive to the other cities to see big-name performers.

So much for luring Britney Spears and Madonna here for a concert.

Instead, we get old-time rockers like Ted Nugent and Eddie Money, shows that don't generate the $25 million to $30 million to build a new arena.

The report suggests that Sarasota could support a multi-purpose arena about twice the size of Robarts, with 8,000 seats and 50,000 square feet of exhibit space -- big enough to attract more concerts, trade shows and sporting events.

The fair association plans to hold public hearings in July and August to get comment from people with ideas for a new arena that could be built with bond money or a mortgage on the 65-acre fairgrounds.

The fair association hopes to send a proposal to the County Commission in the fall.

But Robarts will be around for at least a few more years.

And if there's a hurricane in the meantime, building and grounds superintendent Rick Swift says he can't think of a better place to hunker down than Robarts.

The building's main supports are 2-foot-wide steel girders that are 40 feet long, and the seats sit on big slabs of precast concrete.

"You could drop an atomic bomb on this place and it would still be standing."