In the course of preparation of a new molecular phylogeny of Conoidea based on exon-capture some new species and species with notable morphology were revealed. The taxonomy of these species is discussed and the radula of most of them illustrated for the first time. New genera are described: Comispira gen. nov. (Cochlespiridae), type species Leucosyrinx mai Li et Li, 2008; Pagodaturris gen. nov. (Clavatulidae), type species Pleurotoma molengraaffi Tesch, 1915. New species described: Comispira compta gen. et sp. nov., Sibogasyrinx sangeri sp. nov. (both Cochlespiridae), Pagodaturris philippinensis gen. et sp. nov. (Clavatulidae), Horaiclavus micans sp. nov., Iwaoa invenusta sp. nov. (both Horaiclavidae), Lucerapex cracens sp. nov., Lucerapex laevicarinatus sp. nov. (Turridae), Heteroturris kanacospira sp. nov. (Borsoniidae). Epideira Hedley, 1918 is reallocated from Pseudomelatomidae to Horaiclavidae. The radulae of Kuroshioturris nipponica (Shuto, 1961) (Turridae), Leucosyrinx verrillii (Dall, 1881), and Leucosyrinx luzonica (Powell, 1969) comb. nov. are illustrated for the first time.

A new genus of conoidean gastropods of the family Mangeliidae, Notopropebela gen. nov., is herein described to include N. profunda (Castellanos and Landoni, 1993) previously in the genus Propebela Iredale, 1918, and two new species from the deep waters off south-western Atlantic Argentine. This new genus is characterised by small rhomboid shells with axial riblets and spiral cords, absent operculum, and radula of semi-enrolled marginal teeth. Both new species are distinguished from N. profunda by the presence of pustules covering the shell. Notopropebela pustulata sp. nov. was collected at depths ranging from 530 to 2845 m off Argentina within the Mar del Plata Submarine Canyon in the north and Burdwood Bank surroundings in the south. Notopropebela petu sp. nov., distinguished from N. pustulata by a larger spire and subsutural ramp, was described from material collected from 210 m off Buenos Aires province. The radula and details of the shell and protoconch of both new species were studied from material deposited in the collections of Museo Argentino de Ciencias Naturales (MACN) and Museo de La Plata (MLP). We conclude that the genus Propebela is absent from the south-western Atlantic. http://www.zoobank.org/urn:lsid:zoobank.org:pub:act:BABC3CF0-0301-43D5-8F61-01EB94F7D647 http://www.zoobank.org/urn:lsid:zoobank.org:pub:act:CA51AFD6-0C1D-49C2-91EE-BF3F7DBA3625 http://www.zoobank.org/urn:lsid:zoobank.org:pub:act:D0130F68-6631-4368-91B1-5E68AF0B3C85

A series of deep-sea expeditions in southeastern Australia has produced a considerable amount of conoidean (Gastropoda: Neogastropoda) material suitable for molecular and morpho-anatomical study. Previous and ongoing studies have revealed the Raphitomidae to be particularly diverse in the deep waters of this region. Here, we continue our conoidean investigation, focussing on the genera Comispira (Cochlespiridae) and Leucosyrinx (Pseudomelatomidae). We subjected two cytochrome oxidase subunit DNA sequence datasets of Conoidea to Automatic Barcode Gap Discovery (ABGD), which recognised a total of 18 primary species hypotheses (PSHs) among our target genera as well as from the cochlespirid genera Sibogasyrinx and Aforia. Following additional evaluation of shell and radular features, as well as examination of geographic and bathymetric ranges (conducted for PSHs of Australian waters), eight of these PSHs were converted to secondary species hypotheses (SSHs). Of these, three SSHs (one Comispira species, two Leucosyrinx spp.) were recognised as new to science and their full systematic descriptions are provided herein. While we discuss the relatively low diversity of Cochlespiridae compared to most conoidean families, two Comispira species and one species of Aforia are here recorded for the first time from Australian waters.