This study examines the distribution and abundance with respect to depth and type of substratum of 86 gastropod species collected from the Pacific continental shelf off Jalisco and Colima, Mexico, in August 1988. Sampling was performed with a trawl net at 22 stations, at depths of 18 to 112 m. A total of 582 individuals pertaining to 42 genera, 25 families, 4 orders and 3 subclasses of gastropods were collected. Abundance of gastropods was similar between 18 and 83 m, but the number of live individuals decreased between 41 and 60 m. Deep (61-83 m) stations registered the lowest diversity; however, the number of species collected alive decreased with depth. No gastropods were collected at stations deeper than 83 m. The number of individuals and species also varied with the type of substratum. Greater heterogeneity of the sediments was found at the shallower stations (18860 m) with medium sand, sandy silt and silty clay substrata. The greatest number of species were collected at stati...

The GASTROPODA class, one of the best known marine environments, is formed by a large number of species and the shape of their shell structure varies greatly. These mollusks are distributed from the intertidal zone all the way to the abyssal zone, and there are also swimming and floating species. This research was conducted at seven sites, located in the Marina Priority Region 32 (MPR 32), located in the State of Guerrero, Mexico. The aim of this report is to document the scope of the geographic distribution of the 34 species of GASTROPODA class. 11,263 total specimens were analyzed. 108 species were identified, of which four species are new records for Mexico, 15 for the Transitional Mexican Pacific, 11 for the State of Guerrero and four for the MPR 32. Here we report a significant number of new records of species of class GASTROPODA found on the rocky intertidal zone of the MPR 32. The reporting of these new records, demonstrates the need to focus research efforts on the study of marine diversity, since knowledge in this respect is quite incomplete, especially regarding marine mollusks, a fact that has been reported by the National Commission for the Management and Use of Biodiversity

Two field trips were made during 2017 to Cayo Arenas and Cayo Arcas, southern Gulf of Mexico. Direct and indirect sampling methods focused on shell-less marine heterobranchs were carried out. As a result, 30 species of sea slugs are reported for the first time from these 2 remote reefs off the Yucatán Peninsula. From these, 7 species hold new distribution records for the Gulf of Mexico: Sclerodoris worki, Platydoris angustipes, Polycera odhneri, Hexabranchus morsomus, Limenandra nodosa, Petalifera ramosa, and Hermaea cruciata. Hexabranchus morsomus is a considerable west geographical range extension from the known distribution range, so far restricted to the Caribbean Sea. Nine specimens were identified up to genus level: Cuthona sp., Haminoea sp., Petalifera sp. and Elysia sp. With the present contribution, the sea slug richness in the Campeche Bank increases to 94 species. Resumen En el 2017 se llevaron a cabo 2 muestreos en los arrecifes de Cayo Arcas y Cayo Arenas, al sureste del golfo de México. Se realizaron muestreos directos e indirectos enfocados en la búsqueda de moluscos heterobranquios sin concha. Como resultado, se registraron por primera vez 30 babosas marinas para estos 2 arrecifes lejanos a la península de Yucatán. De éstas, 7 especies son nuevos registros para el golfo de México: Sclerodoris worki, Platydoris angustipes, Polycera odhneri, Hexabranchus morsomus, Limenandra nodosa, Petalifera ramosa y Hermaea cruciata. Hexabranchus morsomus presenta una ampliación geográfica importante, ya que su distribución estaba restringida al mar Caribe. Nueve ejemplares fueron identificados a nivel de género: Cuthona sp., Haminoea sp., Petalifera sp. D. Ortigosa, S. Simões / Revista Mexicana de Biodiversidad 90 (2019): e902596 2 https://doi.