YOU CAN PRACTICALLY smell the leather jackets, cigarette smoke, and stale beer in The Bikeriders. The new movie (out now in theaters) from director Jeff Nichols (Mud, Midnight Special) and starring man of the moment Austin Butler is rich in musky atmosphere and cool-guy hangout vibes.

The film takes viewers deep into the lives and minds of an Illinois motorcycle group, the Chicago Vandals, started by Tom Hardy’s Johnny, that slowly descends into violence and madness over the course of a decade, while Butler’s up-and-coming member Benny and Jodie Comer’s Kathy struggle with their hot and heavy but uneasy romance. Cleverly nodding to the raucous style of Goodfellas, The Bikeriders is a gangster movie and road movie all at once, swapping mobs and Italian restaurants for hogs and dive bars, with dudes wearing their respective clubs’s “colors” and fighting for dominance.

The Vandals are fictional, to be sure, but they’re (somewhat loosely) based on the very real Chicago Outlaws. As in the movie, in 1963, bike enthusiast and photographer Danny Lyon sought to document the life of the American biker. The resulting book published in 1968, also called The Bikeriders, captured Chicago's Outlaws Motorcycle Club, which he rode alongside, in striking black-and-white photos and interviews with its members. The factual story is fascinating, if not quite as wild as Nichols’s The Bikeriders, getting to the core of a pivotal moment in biker culture and ‘60s hedonism.

We’ve scoured through various articles about the Chicago Outlaws and Lyon to whittle down the true story that inspired The Bikeriders, below, and look at what liberties the movie takes to create its own grease-stained adventure.

Buy The Bikeriders Tickets Here

Who were the Chicago Vandals in real life?

Given the fictional detours it takes, The Bikeriders renames the motorcycle gang on which it’s based. The real club that Lyon spent time with was known as the Chicago Outlaws. While the movie focuses on a specific stretch of time, the history of the actual Chicago Outlaws goes back nearly 90 years. According to the club’s official website (yes, it’s still active), the group started as the McCook Outlaws Motorcycle Club in 1935. Per its name, the original members founded their collective outside of Matilda’s Bar in McCook, Illinois, a Chicago suburb.

While fairly quiet in their early years before and during World War II, the Outlaws gradually gained momentum and made some noise when they held their first major rally at Chicago’s Soldier Field (i.e., current home of the Chicago Bears) in 1946, according to Biography. In fact, the war was central to the boom in the biker subculture around this time: Motorcycles became more affordable thanks to a surplus of ex-military bikes. Many veterans coming back home wanted to tap into something more exciting than their previous pre-combat lives. The major rival of the Outlaws, the more famous Hell's Angels, started in California in 1948.

The Outlaws kept luring in more members and in 1950 moved their home base to the Windy City, becoming the Chicago Outlaws. They eventually developed their signature skull skull logo on shirts and jackets, which is quite similar to the skull logo the Vandals sport in the movie.

What's the story with Danny Lyon?

The real Lyon, a Brooklyn native, rode with and took photos of the Outlaws, which served as the basis for Nichols’s fictional saga. His Bikeriders photo book has developed a cult reputation, and is considered an example of the New Journalism that was ascendant during the ‘60s (think: Hunter S. Thompson, Tom Wolfe, Joan Didion), which blended conventional journalism with personal accounts, literary verve, and a dash of provocation.

Indeed, Lyon’s pursuit was hardly conventional. In the movie, he remains mostly an outside observer splitting his time between hanging with the Outlaws and going to college. But in reality, Lyon, now 82 years old, had long graduated college and was starting his notable photography career (seriously, the dude is prolific) when he joined the Outlaws at 24. They quickly became friends, and he was hardly detached from the muck of their hijinks.

“In the film, Jeff cleaned me up,” Lyon told A Rabbit’s Foot. And in an interview with The Telegraph, he put it this way: “I was dirtier than [the bikers] were.”

Lyon actually visited the Bikeriders set in Cincinnati for two days, according to an entertaining profile of him in the Los Angeles Times. Even at 80, he was back to his old troublemaking. He reportedly spotted a vintage bike just like the old 650cc Triumph he used to ride.

“So I get on the motorcycle and it feels really good,” Lyon told the Times. “I look down and there’s a little key next to the oil tank. And I go, ‘Oh, I wonder if it starts?’”

And so he turned that key, which went “off like a World War I artillery barrage, it’s so noisy. A hundred people turn around and stare at me… I just wanted to ride around the corner like I used to when I was 25.” But producers quickly intervened, worrying what would happen to an octogenarian on an artifact of a bike.

What ever happened to the Outlaws?

The movie is faithful to the general arc of the Outlaws during the ‘60s and ‘70s. Things got ugly. Lyon had moved onto other photo subjects in the early ‘70s, while the club transitioned to an organized criminal gang, much like other biker clubs during that period, and violence and deaths escalated.

A specific line in a preface to the 2003 edition of Lyon’s book provided a creative jumping-off point. “There is just one line about the leader of the club, this guy named Johnny, who had been challenged for leadership,” Nichols told Time. “Just that sentence started giving me the shape of the film and the narrative.”

How does the movie switch things up?

Like his other movies, Nichols's latest is evocative of a lived-in place and time like no other. Butler’s Benny, though based on a human, emerges as an almost mythic figure, inscrutable to the end. Nichols has talked about how he departed from the known facts to conjure his twisty tale, turning up the mayhem and brutality in the second half of the movie.

“Many people say that incident [of Johnny being challenged] was the end of the golden age of motorcycles,” Nichols said.

And so a kernel of truth and a handful of flesh-and-blood bikers seen in glorious throwback photos veered off to the thrilling, scary, deeply emotional journey that is Nichols’s The Bikeriders.