Maeterlinck Maurice

Awards:

Nobel Prize in Literature-1911

Nobel Committee in its citation stated that the prize was given in appreciation "of his many-sided literary activities, and especially of his dramatic works, which are distinguished by a wealth of imagination and a poetic fancy, which reveals, sometimes in the guise of a fairy tale, a deep inspiration, while in a mysterious way they appeal to the readers' own feelings and stimulate their imaginations. "

Born: 29/08/1862 in Ghent, Belgium

Died: 06/05/1949 in Nice, France of heart attack. There was no priest at his funeral.

Citizen: Belgium

Language: French

Influence: Maeterlinck, an avid reader ofArthur Schopenhauer, considered man powerless against the forces of fate.

Maurice Polydore Marie Bernard Maeterlinck, in short Materlinck Maurice was a Belgian playwright, poet and essayist. He played a pivotal role in symbolist movement that started in France and the theme of his works were mainly search for the meaning of life. Death intrigued Maurice as much as life and formed an integral part of his subjects.

Maternlinck was born in a wealthy family, studied Law in University of Ghent, spent few months there and came in touch with the members of the symbolist movement who impacted his subsequent works.

He rose to fame with his first play Princess Maleine. He wrote symbolist plays, Intruder, The Blind emphasizing upon fatalism & mysticism . He had a relationship with the singer and actressGeorgette Leblanc from 1895 till 1918 & Leblanc influenced his work. The plays written in those periods reflect strong female characters in charge of their destiny. During 1906, he showed signs of depression and was under treatment. In 1908, his play The Blue Bird was published and the success of the play greatly lifted his spirits. In later life, he turned a socialist and donated a few of his fortunes to workers.

Notable Works: La Princesse Maleine--Princess Maleine(1889), L'Intruse - Intruder (1890), Les Aveugles- The Blind(1890), Soeur Béatrice- Sister Beatrice(1901), L'Oiseau bleu-- The Blue Bird (1909)