You Say Tomato, Pennsylvania Says... Eastern Daylight Time? confused about what time it is in the Keystone State?

Fear not, fellow time traveler (because let's face it, checking the time on your phone is basically like hopping through time zones), this post is here to shed some light on the clock situation in Pennsylvania.

It's Currently Morning in Pennsylvania, But Not Just Any Morning...

That's right, Pennsylvania is currently basking in the glorious glow of Eastern Daylight Time (EDT), which means they're one hour ahead of sleepyheads on the West Coast and rocking the same time zone as New York City (because, you know, sharing is caring... and bagels).

Fun Fact: Did you know that Daylight Saving Time (DST) wasn't actually a thing in Pennsylvania until 1937? So, for hundreds of years, Pennsylvanians just kind of... guessed at the time? Don't worry, they seem to be doing alright.

But Wait, There's More! (Because Time is a Fickle Mistress)

While the entire state of Pennsylvania observes EDT, it's always good to double-check, especially if you're planning a surprise attack with delicious Philly cheesesteaks for your friend at exactly 7:30 PM. Why? Because even though Pennsylvania is a pretty unified bunch, there are a few tiny slivers of land that border Ohio and West Virginia that actually follow Standard Time.

TL;DR: Pennsylvania is mostly on EDT, but there are a couple of rogue time zones lurking in the corners. Just be safe and assume EDT unless you're spelunking in the remote regions (and if you are spelunking, good luck with the time - reception down there is probably terrible anyway).

FAQ: Pennsylvania Time Travel for Dummies

How to know if Pennsylvania is on EDT or Standard Time?

Great question! In 99.9% of cases, Pennsylvania is on EDT. But if you're really worried, a quick Google search with the specific city and state will clear things right up.

How to adjust to the time difference when visiting Pennsylvania?

The best way? Eat a delicious hoagie. Seriously, delicious food is a universal time zone adjuster.

How to convince your friend in Pennsylvania that it's actually bedtime even though it's only 8 PM your time?

Good luck with that one. Pennsylvanians are a hardy bunch.

How to celebrate the time change in Pennsylvania?

Here's a crazy idea: enjoy an extra hour of sunshine! Or, you know, sleep in. We won't judge.

How to impress your Pennsylvanian friends with your time zone knowledge?

Casually drop the fact that you know the tiny sliver of Pennsylvania that follows Standard Time exists. Boom. Instant respect.