What started as a parody of Bruce Springsteen’s Born in the USA turned into a feature film for Cheech Marin. Born In East L.A. seemed kinda goofy in 1987 is a true nightmare for a few folks in 2019. Cheech plays an American citizen who gets caught up in a immigration sweep of a factory. Because he isn’t carrying his ID, he finds himself dumped over the border wall in Mexico with no way to “legally” get home. Thirty two years later, the film is still an active topic because of recent stories of people busted by ICE who were legal American citizens. This was his first film project without Tommy Chong even though the song was from Cheech & Chong’s Get Out of My Room album. Now Born In East L.A. is getting a Collector’s Edition from the Shout Select line. Cheech Marin has recorded a new commentary track and talks on camera about the role. Here’s the press release from Shout! Factory:

SHOUT SELECT PRESENTS

CHEECH MARIN’S

BORN IN EAST L.A. [COLLECTOR’S EDITION]

ON BLU-RAY™ MARCH 19

Los Angeles, CA – On March 19 Shout Select will release Born In East L.A. [Collector’s Edition], on Blu-ray™. Special features include new interviews with Cheech Marin, Kamala Lopez, and Paul Rodriguez, a new audio commentary with Cheech Marin, the extended television cut of the film, the theatrical trailer, photo gallery, and production notes.

Cheech Marin wrote, directed and starred in Born in East L.A., a hip, outrageous comedy that’s more timely than ever. The story follows Rudy (Marin), an American of Hispanic descent, whose south-of-the-border looks show him no mercy during an immigration raid in a migrant worker factory. As his luck goes, he is caught with neither money nor his ID and is deported to Mexico – without speaking a word of Spanish! Unable to contact his vacationing family or his newly immigrated cousin (played by comedian Paul Rodriguez), Rudy is in for a crazy ride as he tries every legal – and illegal – scheme he can think of to get back home. He finds himself in jail, in love, and practically in-sane in this hilarious case of mistaken, or rather, misplaced, identity.