Here’s one out of leftfield – comedians Cheech and Chong’s 1974 song, Earache My Eye, featured in their 1978 movie, Up In Smoke.

cheech and chong fax

Richard “Cheech” Marin and Tommy Chong are a Grammy Award winning comedy duo. They were especially popular for their films and stand-up routines in the 1960 – 70s. They parted ways in 1985 but reunited in 2002 and continue to perform to this day.

Chong is a Canadian (though he has since become an American citizen); Cheech moved to Canada in the 1960s to avoid the draft for the Vietnam War – it was in Canadian that the pair met and began working together.

Alongside their stand-up routine, Cheech and Chong produced a number of comedy films, and released a number of novelty songs and albums – including 1985’s Born in East L.A., based on Bruce Springsteen’s, Born in the USA.

Perhaps their best-known movie is Up in Smoke. Released in 1978, it has become a cult classic.

Having parted company in 1985, the pair were guests on a 2011 episode of The Simpsons, and have joined for a number of projects since that time.

earache my eye fax

Earache My Eye is a novelty heavy metal song written by Tommy Chong and Gaye Delorme and recorded by Cheech and Chong – Cheech adopting the persona of a fictitious rock star named Alice Bowie.

The song appeared on Cheech and Chong’s fourth comedy album, Cheech and Chong’s Wedding Album (1974) and later appeared in their first movie, Up in Smoke (1978).

Earache My Eye spent 13 weeks on the US singles chart.

Earache My Eye has been covered by both Soundgarden and Korn (Cheech performing the vocals on the latter), and was sampled on Eminem’s track Untouchable.

Earache My Eye lyrics.

earache my eye – cheech and chong -1974 – video

Sometimes the YouTube links dropout – if this link doesn’t work, please go to YouTube and search for the song – it will be worth it!

follow seventiesmusic on facebook.

You’ll find out when the latest blog is posted (usually about once a week).” Click the Facebook logo to go to the seventiesmusic Facebook page and click “Like.”