I’ve been listening to Faith No More for a long time, though not long as their history.

Back in 1979 there were Sharp Young Man and soon Faith. No Man. Only a handful of people remained from the whirlwind of activities between 1979 and their single debut.

Billy Gould was the bass player between all those bands & Mike “Puff” Bordin, the drummer.

Roddy Bottum (keyboards) replaced Wade Warrington in Faith. No Man in 1984.

Then the three walked away from singer/guitarist Mike “The Man” Morris. Him no more.

They released their debut record by fledging label Mordam Records in 1985.

“We Care a Lot” featured singer/rapper Chuck Mosley and guitarist “Big” Jim Martin.

Only by the time of sophomore record they managed to get a single released (Faith. No Man had theirs by 1983).

Now in Slash Records, extracted from a record labelled “Introduce Yourself” and with a re-recording of “We Care a Lot“‘s title track (plus a surreal MTV video)

And the single track they did not care a lot about. Slash Records chose an album track and commissioned a remix.

Reportedly, a friend with the band had a cock “as hard as Chinese Arithmetic“. And from this foundation Faith No More got their first single (dis)rele(ase).

Buzz-thin keyboards introduce the rhythmic assault of University of California Bordin. Careening yet careful, they raise courtains for a moody guitar motif, segued by abstract keys. Then a blurred awakening of all those sound collisions slide into Mosley’s beer talk.

It could have been a failed art project, on paper too many rejects. Oddly moving, sublime and intriguing, it stands still.

Goth tale in street smart, dysfunctional relations of youth fantasies, amuse and boredom.

We got the same ideas, we got the same old fears

They’re different colors sometimes, but, hey, who cares?

This band rollercoasts through the moods on the tips of hats, master mood setters we see.

The first single almost a decade in the making went many directions but hey, who cares.

Some of them were into Dub at the time and it shows. The B-Side “Kick and Scream Mix” (also by producer Matt Wallace) skip some layers (Bottum’s), hyperventilated others (Mosley’s stood panache, Gould’s throbbs) and threw (Bordin) in the mix. Buzzing from bad radio static, the performance still great and more unhinged, roots in (Post-)Punk.

Faith No More was a feat of recombination of falling pieces. Puzzles don’t miss marks.

Try to control bad behaviour…

Tracklist:

9.0 Chinese Arithmetic (Radio Mix)

8.5 Chinese Arithmetic (Kick and Scream Mix)

Carlos Frederico Pereira da Silva Gama

-19.916681 -43.934493

In the 21st century, mainstream Pop music sounds more elusive and experimental than Michael Jackson. By their turn, alternative artists sound less arcane and hermetic than Velvet Underground.

In debut single ‘Radio Free Europe’, R.E.M. provided ground zero for this overlapping. July 8th 1981.

Four personalities, which did not fit, well, the rockstar mold and yet, eventually they got their shot. Peter Buck, ruminant record store aficionado. Mike Mills, geeky choirboy. Bill Berry, melodic percussionist. At last, Michel Stipe, Patti Smith fan with cobwebs across tonsils.

Starting with a bang, Berry does his pretty well in straight form, opposite of his melodies. Voice unclear, Stipe ringed from another universe, tethering between British Invasion and Reagan. Buck brought back and forth jangling mysteries for the digital age. Mills sustained momentum and finds some room for unforgivable loving backings. Many precedents, the mix intoxicating. Weird yet appealing – this great trick under R.E.M. sleeves. Out of the radar through a tiny Hib-Tone Records (also their debut), what a quiet storm. Calling out in transit. Meta-message bursting across the airwaves in ways unseen since Joy Division’s ‘Transmission’. Theirs, an imminent critical approach.

– Radio station: decide yourself

– Decide yourself if radio’s gonna stay

Shifting radio frequencies and registers across 3 minutes R.E.M. paved Americana highways anew.

They refused to walk away, even in their own terms. So followed the workflow. Still urgent, wasting no time finding comfort. Giving options to mainstream yet refusing the confines of invisibility. Even before you wave up in vain, they already found new ways to any audiences. At the end of the rope, they can hear one another knocking. Recognition may follow suit, showing more empathy than underground could afford amidst Hardcore and No Wave. The acquaintance of connection, then it’s over.

– Set a trap for love, big kill

– Don’t waste your time sitting still

Tracklist:

9.5 Radio Free Europe

8.5 Sitting Still

Check out R.E.M.’s brilliant debut here: ‘Radio Free Europe’ / ‘Sitting Still’

Carlos Frederico Pereira da Silva Gama

33.522806 -5.110955

Gazes are built from somewhere. Those surroundings, those underpinnings make a difference.

Pop music seems averse to such utterances, as it transverses songs from context to context, with many things lost in translation.

As young bands decide to debut by covering ancient tunes, such differences come to surface and influence our experience of those sounds in different places and eras.

‘Love Buzz’ was a hit for Netherlands outfit The Shocking Blue in 1969. In the early stages of the age of Aquarius, it still sounded puzzling. Mariska Veres sounded little like a psychedelic rock singer, with the possible exception of Grace Slick in ‘White Rabbit’. Her meditative drone left many rooms for speculation.

Klaasje van der Wal anchors the tune with a pronounced bass pattern, still noticeable in the Nirvana version decades after (Krist Novoselic was a declared fan). Guitarist and songwriter Robbie Van Leeuwen just went with these bass motions, a combination Kurt Cobain would reverse for his Sub Pop debut (Cobain also took vocal duties). However, he provides a dazzling mid-song soloing absent from Grunge rulebooks.

Apart from an energing mini-soloing in-between vocal sections, Cor van der Beek does little but punctuating the overall hesitancy: doubt permeates the “love buzz”, a distant possibility by the time Veres closes the proceedings. Nirvana recorded with original drummer Chad Channing who ignites the performance from the start and the band gets stranded in the possibility of love, literally, buzzing through Cobain’s throbbing guitar job (one of his very best) and a respectful Novoselic. That is, until the coda arrives, with a feedback smackfest pumping straight into the heart.

Ripped vocals aim at the “queen of my heart” which, by 1988, was possibly Tobi Veil from Bikini Kill. Gender changes also brought new edges to song’s dynamics, from unfulfilled long wait to non-conformist stubbornness.

I still love the Shocking Blues a little bit more, though Nirvana were successful in making themselves heard.

B-Side ‘Big Cheese’ provides another of the character studies that fill Nirvana’s debut album Bleach. Somewhere beneath Black Flag and Black Sabbath, young Nirvana (as well as older pals Soundgarden and Melvins) were self-referential but believed Rock had any number of futures past.

A Jack Endino production with all the straps of Sub Pop circa 1988, there is still some room for innovation – for instance, Kurt and Novoselic eerily harmonizing like Alice in Chains would only in the 1990s. Better than many songs that made the cut (‘Sifting‘ comes to mind) and with a roaring guitar coda deserving a thousand Bic lighters.

An overlapping of sides, we have Nirvana career in a nutshell.

The single’s sleeve features – as de rigueur by Sub Pop – a blurred chiaroscuro photo of the band, Cobain a dead-ringer for Silverchair’s Daniel Johns (9-year old at the time). Future was already present in the past.

‘Love Buzz / Big Cheese‘ was released in November 1 1988 in a limited 1000 copies edition. It did not chart anywhere, though it assured Nirvana positive reviews at the British press in 1989, when they toured the isles sidelining Mudhoney. Sounds and Melody Maker proved pivotal in popularizing those young Seattle misfits.

Soon the world would catch-up.

Tracklist:

Love Buzz 8.5

Big Cheese 8.5

Check out Nirvana’s underrated debut here: ‘Love Buzz / Big Cheese‘

33.522806 -5.110955

Name-checking THE BEATLES, chewing vowels, as well as misspelling choruses. Riding BMWs, shagging doctors in helicopters, sniffing tissues, taking Alka Seltzer with Elza, playing on rooftops. OASIS was not that great a band by 1994. Halfway between an Indie cult and stubborn upstarts, they sounded puzzling.

‘I need to be myself

I can’t be no one else’

The insistence thrown in every rhyme, ringing to semi-acoustic guitars, downtrodden by the pound. OASIS was a numbing experience, quite dissimilar to anything else in 1994. Too late for shoegazers and somehow bringing to life sounds that preceded the Punk and Hard Rock remains of Grunge. The boogie attrition come across as a sincere homage to elders such as the Fab Four and STATUS QUO.

Noel Gallagher adorned his lad platitudes by invoking relics under the sway of atmospheric settings. Brother Liam had his feet firmly set all right now. For Bonehead and Guigsy, keeping the balance right was, well, alright! In Tom McCarroll they had a secret weapon – one OASIS would sorely miss after debut, stuck in mid-tempo balladry. The Big Issue were contrasting vices of conservative chaps.

Here Gallagher one reverbs in ‘My Sweet Lord’ soloing as Gallagher two stands by between stances with street snarl, frozen impermanence lasting a couple seconds…Then we are struck by the powers of repetition. OASIS would overdo the trick to dismay, it was a fresh fruit at Kurt Cobain’s shadow.

In the process, they shifted the grammar of popular music away from Seattle, back to their Albion.

It was an afterthought Noel recorded at 3.am, waiting for lads to return from the pub.

After all those years and erosion, ‘Supersonic’ remains their most powerful, incoherent statement.

A seemingly near-perfect debut single would incense the press and rein in the charts. However, only half the promise was assured. It stunk in #31. Mainstream not was ready for other Manchester gang.

B-Side ‘Take me Away’ is hauntingly similar to acoustic SUEDE (‘We Are So Disco’), though set in an ELVIS movie in Hawaii. Fair deal for the biggest band in the land, harrowing for those Manchester lads. Gallagher one displays vulnerability and acquiescence Gallagher two could never (we though) deal with. From Brett Anderson dragged melancholy it reaches PAUL WELLER’s common people enthusiasm. No surprise, late in the year the JAM–STYLE COUNCIL leader would record ‘Champagne Supernova’ with the gang.

Obviously, a Noel solo number in all but name. Still, those lyrics strike the bull’s eye. By supplementing ‘Supersonic’ narcissism, it supplants it in the process, and slyly so.

Those guys claimed the shoes of their idols, they could substitute as the biggest band in the world.

If only you knew, maybe they could stand a chance…

‘You could be me

And pretty soon you will be…”

Tracklist:

Supersonic 9.5

Take Me Away 8.5

Check out OASIS‘ shattering debut here: ‘Supersonic‘ / ‘Take me Away‘

Carlos Frederico Pereira da Silva Gama

33.522806 -5.110955

Before their impressive legacy, THE SMITHS seems to have existed forever. Nevertheless, the partnership between poet Morrissey and guitar maverick Johnny Marr barely last half a decade.

The Manchester quartet debuted, out of nowhere, with a ringing guitar pattern and some wicked harmonica. Mozz vocals, lyrics already on the run and Rock did not have some things comparable. One could point to the fragility of DEL SHANNON or the everlasting depths of LEONARD COHEN, though not simultaneously. As for Marr, if ROLLING STONES could devise ‘Waterloo Sunset’ they would need someone like him, kind of a Baroque Country guitarist. Oh yes, THE SMITHS also had a nice duo: bass player Andy Rourke (just in time here) and drummer Mike Joyce (propulsive force on its own terms).

No hints of synthesizers. The sound came across forcefully, a buzzing compact mass. Mozz harmonized with himself in a nervous baritone. Marr scored small armies from this foil. Rourke serpentines and Joyce kept the eye of the hurricane visible enough.

‘Hand of Glove’ rocked out of the box, out of touch with major trends. It was Indie Rock before we had a name and Rough Trade capitalized on.

‘Though we may be hidden by rags / We have something they’ll never have’

‘Handsome Devil’ was more attuned to early 1980s conventions, it could pass for a JAM session. The live version included as B-side reminds us how decent the boys were on stage. A post-Punk rhythm (Rourke pounds the anvil on Marr) meets Morrissey keeping with the times – though with lyrics Paul Weller would never devise in earnest.

‘All the streets are crammed with things eager to be held

I know what hands are for and I’d like to help myself’

This memorable debut would go down in history not set ablaze by charts. Underground success (not hurt by mysterious sleeve) made THE SMITHS a household name. Nine months on, their eponymous debut would be already the stuff of legend. Their volatile chemistry took hold of an era. Then, it was over.

Tracklist:

Hand in Glove (9.0)

Handsome Devil (Live) (8.0)

Listen to THE SMITHS‘ remarkable debut on Youtube.

Carlos Frederico Pereira da Silva Gama

33.522806 -5.110955