French experimental rock trio Hifiklub and Faith No More keyboardist Roddy Bottum released their collaborative album, ‘Things That Were Lost in the Fire’, on 16th October. Here’s the exclusive video premiere of ‘What Of The Bicycle’.

“For ‘Things That Were Lost In The Fire,’ Roddy Bottum (Faith No More) wrote on the spot, in the studio, melancholic arrangements and dark texts which contrasted with Hifiklub’s tight trance-like pop original instrumentals. Here is Bottum alone at the piano, for his unique take on the track ‘What If The Bicycle.’”

Hifiklub and Roddy Bottum met by chance in New York City when the versatile quartet from Toulon were working on their album and film ‘In Doubt, Shadow Him!’ alongside Lee Ranaldo (Sonic Youth).

A few months later, the band got together with Bottum to compose a single for a project that paid tribute to American poetess, Emily Dickinson. This first musical collaboration inspired both parties to embark on a longer project together. After a handful of rehearsals, the Hifiklub poured their impulsive desire to create into the rhythmic and melodic foundations of nine songs, including a unique cover of ‘Eye of the Tiger’ (Survivor). In a single day’s work, they recorded these instrumental compositions in the basement of an old, dingy nightclub.

Things That Were Lost In The Fire by Hifiklub + Roddy Bottum

The resulting sound was undeniably influenced by their underground work space: the tight trance-like pop that resonated through these walls was something quite different from Hifiklub’s previous experimental tracks.

A transatlantic flight later, Roddy Bottum found himself on the French Riviera, in Saint-Aygulf to be precise. Caught in the spontaneous flow of the recorded tracks, the Faith no More keyboardist wrote new arrangements and texts that led the compositions into a darker dimension. Bottum’s voice, deep and melancholy, adds a sensual vibe to this project that is further accentuated by Anthony Belguise’s modern artistic direction.

Video by Jean-Loup Faurat

Pascal Abbatucci Julien – drums, percussion

Roddy Bottum – vocals, keyboards

Jean-Loup Faurat – effects, guitar

Régis Laugier – bass

Nico Morcillo – guitar

Music composed by Pascal Abbatucci Julien, Jean-Loup Faurat, Régis Laugier and Nico Morcillo

Lyrics written by Roddy Bottum

Produced by Anthony Belguise and Hifiklub

Recorded by Anthony Belguise and Olivier Cancellieri

Mixed by by Anthony Belguise

Mastered by François Fanelli

Published by Editions Dargent and roddybottumpublishing

‘Things That Were Lost In The Fire’ is available via Dreamy Life Records and Music (USA) and Toolong Records (rest of the world)