SkyRanger R60 quadcopter defines the quality standard for safety, aerial intelligence, and controllability for an extensive scope of applications of critical importance. These involve from secretive, search and rescue operations missions, to inspections mission of various purpose for your business. R60s are deployed with over 20 militaries and in use with public safety and industrial operators in over 30 countries.

A ruggedized, IP-53 rated, carbon fiber and reinforced polycarbonate folding airframe makes the R60 both robust and quick to deploy. But there’s more to this UAS than meets the eye. Hover over the red circles below to see for yourself.

The R60’s water-resistant airframe and payloads ensure safe and reliable operations in extreme environments and inclement weather – or in this case, under a firehose.

With its industry-leading high wind tolerance, the R60 delivers stable operations in sustained 40 mph (65 kph) winds and gusts up to 55 mph (90 kph) so you can deploy when and where you need to.

The Aeryon HDZoom 30 is a fully-integrated, ruggedized, high performance electro-optical camera payload designed for demanding applications that require clear and precise images.

Integrating seamlessly with the SkyRanger, the HDZoom 30 offers 3-axis stabilization using brushless motors to capture detailed video and still photos, even under the most extreme environmental conditions.

The HDZoom 30 delivers up to 30x optical zoom and 60x enhanced digital zoom for eyes-on-target at distances up to 5 km (3.1 miles).

20 Megapixels Stills

30x Optical Zoom

60x Enhanced Digital Zoom

1080p60 H.264 HD Recorded Video

The Aeryon EO/IR Mk II is the next-generation multi-sensor imaging payload for the SkyRanger. Ideal for both day and night-time operations, the EO/IR Mk II imaging payload delivers enhanced thermal (IR) imagery in a range of color palettes – white-hot, black-hot, rainbow and iron bow.

Additional features include:

Passive and active mechanical stabilization, as well as digital image stabilization

A choice of IR lenses – 19mm focal length (tactical applications) and 13mm (thermal mapping or SAR applications)

Advanced radiometric temperature measurement, accurate to +/- 9˚ F (5˚ C)

A rugged, environmentally tolerant design tested to IP-53 standards, enabling all-weather operation.13 Megapixels Stills

1080p60 H.264 HD Recorded Video

Aeryon’s Vector Target Tracking software automatically targets and tracks moving objects up to 3 miles away. The tracking algorithm adapts in real-time to changes in target shape and maintains a hold on the target even when its position changes or another object obstructs the view.

Moving Target Indication of up to 10 Objects

In Both EO and IR

Calculate Target Heading and Speed

Gain persistent eyes on target with Automatic In-Air Replacement (AIR) which enables a fully charged, ready to launch SkyRanger to automatically replace another airborne SkyRanger when its battery is depleted or it needs to land. AIR also enables real-time payload swaps for when conditions change (daylight into night operations) where a SkyRanger flying an EO/IR Mk-II replaces a SkyRanger flying a HDZoom 30 for improved nighttime ISR.Securely Distribute ISR with the Remote Situational Awareness Toolkit (RSAT) provides a cross-domain, common operating picture for Centralized Command, Decentralized Execution. RSAT enables warfighters to ”hide in plain sight” on commercial IP networks as they securely distribute ISR from dismounted units worldwide and across all operational domains.

Remote Control – Interactive video feed can be controlled by viewers (e.g. toggle stream on/off, or switch EO and IR cameras, insert camera targets)

Real-time Telemetry – Readout of critical aspects of aircraft location and performance indicators (airspeed, battery levels, wind speed, restricted airspace, etc.)

Redundant Uplink – Multiple channels from a small form-factor appliance for low-latency delivery (as low as 3 seconds) to any screen – no application required

Source: https://www.aeryon.com/