This article is about a/an Ranger in Power Rangers S.P.D.

Schuyler "Sky" Tate is a former B-Squad Cadet of Space Patrol Delta who served as the first S.P.D. Blue Ranger of the B-Squad Rangers on Earth's S.P.D. base. After Emperor Gruumm's defeat, Sky took Jack Landors's place as the second S.P.D. Red Ranger. After Commander Anubis Cruger was promoted to Supreme Commander, Sky took his place as the Earth Base's Commander, becoming the S.P.D. Deka Ranger.

History

Dino Thunder

When Kira the Yellow Dino Ranger is the first who touched a glowing rock, she saw herself becoming a Ranger. However, she also had a vision of the new team of Power Rangers, the S.P.D. Rangers including Sky as the S.P.D. Blue Ranger. An evil space alien confronts the new team of Rangers. The S.P.D. Rangers summon a Mega Cannon called R.I.C. to take down the alien. Ethan is the second who touched a glowing rock, seen the vision of the S.P.D. Rangers call for the Delta Runners. The Delta Squad Megazord is formed to combat evil. Another alien species threatens the existence of Earth. TV STORY-Before it Began

Early Life

As a child, Sky looked up to his father, who was a former S.P.D. Red Ranger. From him, he acquired his father's power (as a result of an experimental accident) to create offensive and defensive force fields. Sky was present at the hospital when his father was killed in battle against a monster genius named Mirloc. The doctor gave Sky his father's battle damaged helmet, which Sky kept as a memento. Although Mirloc was later captured and imprisoned, his role in Commander Tate's death was never revealed to Sky. Since then, he was inspired to be just like his father and become a Red Ranger.

Sky joined S.P.D. and was top on B-Squad on weapons and fighting, along with his alien friend Dru. Abiding by S.P.D.'s rules and regulations, Sky was very neat and precise. Yet, with this attitude, he became arrogant and believed himself to be above everyone else that broke the rules when he himself did everything precisely to the book. He was usually the first one to be hard on teammate Bridge Carson's habits and ways of thinking, but Sky would always apologize if he was wrong in areas where Bridge was right. As time went on, Sky began to loosen up and enjoy life more, though he always kept himself battle ready when called upon. Despite his attitude, his teammates thought highly of him, calling him the best Ranger.

S.P.D.

S.P.D. Blue Ranger

For someone who is first in his class, Sky makes several critical mistakes early on, including and without limitation, allowing a crate of diamonds to be confiscated by the Troobians (giving them a near limitless energy supply) and allowing Dru, who has become a turncoat, into the Academy without the necessary re-evaluations in an attempt to assassinate Cruger. However, all was well in the end, and Sky usually got off the hook with just some simple chores as punishment.

When A-Squad go missing on a mission, Commander Cruger had Tate - along with B-Squad cadets Bridge Carson and Sydney Drew - step up as protectors of Earth. Unfortunately, Sky's pride got in the way and Cruger picked him to be the S.P.D. Blue Ranger and second-in-command. Sky was not happy about this, especially when he found out Jack Landors, a former thief Sky had tried to capture, was made the Red Ranger. TV STORY-Beginnings

Face-off against Mirloc

When the team was faced with several criminals they have already captured, Sky was assigned to seek advice about the monster's identity from Mirloc, who only wanted Sky to tell his most painful memory as payment. After capturing the criminal (an alien that copied other monsters), Sky returned and told Mirloc of his most painful memory - the death of his father. Mirloc says it was the best story he ever heard, and Sky shed a tear, which (as it was a reflective substance) allowed Mirloc to escape. Sky later found out that Mirloc is the one who killed his father.

Sky was furious at Cruger for not revealing his father's death truthfully to him and sought out Mirloc with the other Rangers. They were imprisoned in a mirror by Mirloc but were saved by Sam, the Omega Ranger. Mirloc was still confident in his abilities and called Sky and his father worthless because they could not defeat him. It was then that Jack thought Sky should be the one to bring Mirloc in, but felt he needed to do it as Red Ranger, and he gave Sky his Morpher so that he could use the S.P.D. Battlizer against this powerful foe. In a brilliant display, Sky captured Mirloc. Although it was an honor to be the Red Ranger, Sky realized that heroes came in all colors and returned the Morpher to Jack. TV STORY-Reflection

Dino Thunder Encounter

In 2025, Broodwing uses the Dino Gems to bring the Dino Rangers to the future where they meet the S.P.D. Rangers. Cruger insists that the Dino Rangers remain in the Delta Base to avoid problems with the timeline, but when Emperor Gruumm launches his biggest attack yet, the S.P.D. Rangers may be in over their heads so Conner, Kira and Ethan assist the S.P.D Rangers while fighting, Sky teamed up with Ethan. TV STORY-History

Some time later, Gruumm travels into the past at the year 2004 and recruits Zeltrax in his plan to conquer the Earth before the formation of S.P.D. Gruumm and Mora watch as the rest of the S.P.D. Rangers show up and join forces with the Dino Rangers once again. Tommy and Doggie meet for the first time and lead the Rangers against their opponents. Kira, Syd, and Z team up to display girl power while Sam and Trent work together using their White Ranger power. Bridge, Ethan, and Sky display teamwork once again, Tommy and Cruger, defeat Zeltrax just before he retreats. Jack and Conner both activate their Battlizers to take out Mora's creations. The Power Rangers assemble the Z-Rex Blaster and the Canine Cannon to finish off the Foot Soldiers. Before the S.P.D. Rangers return to the future, Doggie erases their and the Dino Rangers' memories. TV STORY-Wormhole

Promotion

When Jack left S.P.D. after Emperor Gruumm's defeat, Doggie Cruger amassed the team in the Delta Base’s command center where everyone was surprised, but Z admitted that Jack was one only to stay around as long as necessary before he moved on. Doggie offered to promote them to A-Squad, but the B-Squad declined due to professional pride and the treachery of their predecessors, at which point Cruger permanently retired the A-Squad position with B-Squad becoming the law enforcement squad. However, knowing that the team was leaderless, Doggie called Sky forth and asked him if he’d follow Syd should he make her the new Red Ranger. Sky asserted that he’d respect the choice and follow anyone Cruger decides was worthy. Realizing that being Blue Ranger has finally gotten over his petty, snooty and bullheaded nature, Cruger promoted Sky to B-Squad Red Ranger and told him that his father would be proud. Bridge stepped up to take Sky's original position as Blue Ranger and they left to see Jack leaving with Ally and Piggy onto the next part of their lives. The Rangers were soon called away on an emergency once again shortly after saying goodbye. TV STORY-Endings

Mission Training

Sky was shown on the screen of the viewers registered database in the archive footage as the S.P.D. Blue Ranger. He was seen during the morphing sequence with his S.P.D. Rangers, while Rex Ranger was learning from Matt and Trevor, the movements for to realize the S.P.D. Rangers morphing sequence. TV STORY-Power Rangers - Mission Training

Megaforce

Sky along with the other S.P.D. Rangers and other Ranger teams are seen in Troy's premonition about the Legendary Battle. TV STORY-Mega Mission

He and the other Rangers are seen again in another of Troy's dream/vision about the Legendary Battle. TV STORY-Stranger Ranger

Super Megaforce

Emperor Mavro was defeated, but the remaining thousands of X Borgs still stand. Tommy gathered all the existing Power Rangers, Sky returns with his fellow S.P.D. Rangers as part of the army of Legendary Rangers that helped the Mega Rangers defeat the Armada once and for all, fighting in a huge battle against hundreds of X Borgs and dozens of Bruisers. After the demise of the X Borgs, Tommy shook hands with Troy and teleported off along with Sky and the Legendary Rangers. It is presumed that he traveled from a time when he is still the S.P.D. Blue Ranger in the year 2025. TV STORY-Legendary Battle

Dino Fury

Zayto activates the Legendary Ranger Database, showing Master Blue that Master Green came to them after the Dinohenge statues were destroyed and restored them to normal. Also, Zayto says that he found Ranger teams who were saved in their darkest moments through unexplained reasons and shows them three specific moments. Including the Legendary Battle where all the Legendary Rangers including Sky and the other S.P.D. Rangers coming to the aid of the Megaforce Rangers in the Legendary Battle and helping them defeat an entire army of the Armada's X Borgs. TV STORY-Morphin Master

New Commander

It is unknown when or how, but at some point during his time at S.P.D., Sky's face became scarred, with one of the scars covering his right eye. COMIC STORY- Power Rangers: Soul of the Dragon Years after his tenure as Red Ranger, Commander Cruger was promoted to the position of Supreme Commander of S.P.D. following Supreme Commander Fowler "Birdy"'s retirement. Therefore, Sky was also promoted to Cruger's former position as the new Commander of the Earth S.P.D. base. Sky is briefly mentioned by Bridge Carson, who explained to the Overdrive Rangers why he and Sky were promoted (as Bridge took on Sky's former position as Red Ranger). TV STORY-Once A Ranger

After becoming the new Commander of the Earth S.P.D. base and much like his predecessor, Sky is allowed to take up Ranger duties in addition to commanding the B-Squad, he also acquires a new Ranger form labelled the "S.P.D. Deka Ranger". At some point, Sky and other Rangers, including Tommy Oliver, participate on the "rebel run fight" where Tommy is blasted through the walls of the S.P.D. Earth Base which later needs to be rebuilt completely after the battle. Sky also receives J.J. Oliver, Tommy's son, when he decides to join S.P.D. so he can live up to his father's legendary status.

Sky eventually sends J.J. undercover to try and stop the Witch, making it look like J.J. had quit S.P.D. without anyone knowing what really happened (including his father Tommy), he let him infiltrate a gang selling crystals that gave users the ability to obtain Ranger powers based on the Mighty Morphin Rangers and when the time was right Sky would receive a call from J.J. in order to put a sting together.

Soul of the Dragon

When Tommy Oliver finds from Anara that J.J. has quit S.P.D., he went to see Sky at the new Delta Base for some answers; when Tommy apologizes for interrupting Sky's plans, Sky just says that he only had a meeting that he was already late for, due to not checking the time. Taking a stroll through the base, Tommy is impressed by the cadet training room which Sky brushes off while they reminisce on their old times, with Sky having fond memories of being a Ranger despite it nearly being the end of the world most of the time. Sky also asks Tommy if he misses morphing since there's "nothing quite like it" which Tommy bitterly agrees to.

Once they get into Sky's office, he asks Tommy what he wants and he reveals what Anara said. Visibly frustrated at the mention of her, Sky asks him to elaborate but Tommy finally confronts him about his suspiciously aloof demeanor which seemly breaks through as Sky admits that J.J. did indeed quit, though he was only lying to keep J.J.'s cover.

When Tommy berates him for not letting him know, Sky says that he thought he'd already been told and thus it would be pointless though Tommy reminds the commander how secretive both J.J. and S.P.D. are before finally demanding to know why his son quit. After asking him to calm down, Sky lies again and tells him that J.J. was apparently "spooked" by something though they don't know what and they were "giving him space to figure stuff out", Sky also claimed that they didn't hear he had vanished until very recently. Sky then promises Tommy that he'll find his son before asking Tommy to sit this out which he reluctantly agrees to as he leaves.

After Tommy interferes with J.J.'s operation and lets him get captured, Sky allowed several Space Patrol Delta officers (including his close friend Bridge Carson) to assist the legendary Ranger in rescuing his son J.J. from the witch Scorpina. When the battle was won the remaining gang members were taken into custody by his fellow officers and J.J. would later join the B-Squad as the S.P.D. Green Dragon Ranger. COMIC STORY- Power Rangers: Soul of the Dragon

Personality

Sky's initial personality and character traits can be traced back to the relationship he had with his father. Sky saw his father as THE Red Ranger and after his death, the young kid aspired to be a Red Ranger just like him. During his time in the academy, Sky developed a friendship with Dru, which was seen as the only time when Sky really acted more casually in front of others. Sky was determined and focused on his goal, becoming the top student in the academy. Unfortunately, his desire to be the Red Ranger blinded him and made him a brash, arrogant, hotheaded, cocky, bossy and mean-spirited person. He believed himself to be better than everyone else, even talking bad about his fellow S.P.D. cadets when they were considered by Cruger as candidates for the Red Ranger position.

When Cruger made Jack the new Red Ranger, Sky was furious, feeling that he deserved more the honor of being the Red Ranger than some guy who didn't even trained at the academy, while initially they were both hostile towards each other, they eventually stopped fighting for the sake of the team. Sky came to respect Jack as seen when he thought that he died stopping a meteor, Sky later even started to think of Jack as a good leader and a great friend. During his time as the Blue Ranger, Sky started to open up and become a little less strict, finding a new understanding of his team and developing a strong friendship with them.

Sky also had insecurities, as seen when he faced the monster Mirloc, believing himself to not be good enough to capture the monster after he let him escape, thankfully he was able to reclaim his confidence when he captured Mirloc while morphed into the S.P.D. Red Ranger (thanks to Jack handing him off his Morpher), he later was able to beat his A-Squad counterpart proving that both him and his team were the better heroes.

After Jack leaves S.P.D., Sky is finally made the new Red Ranger thanks to his growth both as a cadet and as a person, he eventually even rises up to Cruger's former position as the new Commander of the Earth S.P.D. base. By the time of Soul of the Dragon some years later, almost all of Sky's negative traits have been ironed out in favor of a more friendly and outgoing if still by the books to a faulty individual.

Body Swapped

Sky and Wootox body swapped, Wootox used a golden crystal on his forehead to switch bodies with Sky. Wootox ended up in Sky's body and Sky ended up in Wootox's body. Sky while temporarily in Wootox's body, later revealed Wootox's evil plans to use the Delta Command Megazord for an attack on the city. Wootox is forced to body swap again and Sky recovers his original body. TV STORY-Recognition

Non-Ranger Powers and Abilities

Powers

Shield Projection: Sky inherited his parents' power to create powerful blue-tinted shields. They can be used defensively, e.g., as a barrier, or offensively, e.g.; to cut off an opponent's oxygen supply or as a force of propulsion.

Abilities

to be added

Weaknesses

Ocean Saber: As seen in "Badge", Sky's shields can be broken through by powerful sabers like Icthior's Ocean Saber.

Forms

Relationships

Allies

Rangers

S.P.D. Rangers - Teammates and Friends

Jack Landors/S.P.D. Red Ranger (I) - Leader, Red Ranger Predecessor & Former Rival

Bridge Carson/S.P.D. Green Ranger (I)/S.P.D. Blue Ranger (II)/S.P.D. Red Ranger (III) - Second-in-command, Blue & Red Ranger Successor

Z Delgado/S.P.D. Yellow Ranger

Syd Drew/S.P.D. Pink Ranger

Sam/S.P.D. Omega Ranger

Anubis Cruger/S.P.D. Shadow Ranger - Mentor & Commander Predecessor

Kat Manx/S.P.D. Kat Ranger

Nova Ranger

Lina Song/S.P.D. Green Ranger (II)/S.P.D. Blue Ranger (III) - Second Blue Ranger Successor

J.J. Oliver/S.P.D. Green Ranger (III)

Dino Thunder Rangers

Conner McKnight/Red Dino Ranger

Ethan James/Blue Dino Ranger - Blue Ranger Predecessor

Kira Ford/Yellow Dino Ranger

Tommy Oliver/Black Dino Ranger/Mighty Morphin Green Ranger

Trent Fernandez-Mercer/White Dino Ranger

Family

† Officer Tate - Father (deceased)

Mrs. Tate - Mother

Others

Space Patrol Delta

Boom

R.I.C.

Fowler Birdy

Sergeant Silverback

Isinia Cruger

Anara

Piggy

Katherine Hillard-Oliver

Blue Senturion

Enemies

Villain Groups

Troobian Empire

Emperor Gruumm

Broodwing

Mora/Morgana

A-Squad Rangers - Former Allies & Traitors

Charlie

A-Squad Blue Ranger

A-Squad Green Ranger

A-Squad Yellow Ranger

A-Squad Pink Ranger

Dru Harrington/Giganis - Former Friend & Traitor

Mirloc - Arch-enemy

Krybots

Blue-Head Krybots

Orange-Head Krybots

Mesogog's Army

Zeltrax

Tyrannodrones

Armada

X Borgs

Bruisers

Evil Space Aliens

Scorpina

Lokar

Others

to be added

Behind the Scenes

Portrayal

Sky is portrayed by Chris Violette. The actor who played him as a child is unknown of as today.

As the S.P.D. Blue Ranger, his suit actor was Takahiro Honma (本間 崇寛, Honma Takahiro), along with Yasuhiko Imai (今井 靖彦, Imai Yasuhiko) in Super Sentai footage from Dekaranger.

In the Japanese dub of Power Rangers S.P.D., Sky was voiced by Tsuyoshi Hayashi, the actor of his Sentai counterpart.

Design

to be added

Concept Art

Etymology

The naming of Sky's Deka Ranger form was a clear homage to Dekaranger, the Super Sentai series which S.P.D. is derived.

Ranger Key

The S.P.D. Blue Ranger Key is Sky's personal Ranger Key. This key along with the majority of the Core Ranger Keys are seen lining the Command Center's interior walls. This key is mainly used by Noah Carver (Super Megaforce Blue) who uses it to fight as the S.P.D. Blue Ranger.

When the Super Mega Rangers became the S.P.D. Rangers while fighting Tentacus. TV STORY-Super Megaforce

When the Super Mega Rangers became the S.P.D. Rangers in their fight with Cybax. TV STORY-Earth Fights Back

Notes

Jason Bischoff, the former Global Franchise Director for Power Rangers, released on Twitter in 2020 a pitch concept of the S.P.D. Fire Squad. Expanding Sky's story of being the Chief Commander of Earth's Space Patrol Delta and him assuming the role of the Deka Ranger, one of the proposed abilities of the Deka Ranger is to ‘spectrum shift’ between the colors Red & Blue, each form with its own set of abilities. [1][2]

As explained by Jason Bischoff, deka denotes a factor of ten, derived from the Greek déka (δέκα) meaning "ten." Sky's insignia 'X' is the Roman Numeral for the number 10, following the convention seen in both Omega (VI) and Nova (M). In addition, a red arrow was featured in honor of his father. [3]

Appearances

See Also

Houji Tomasu - Super Sentai counterpart in Dekaranger. See comparison page.

References

Power Rangers S.P.D. Rangers B-Squad: Jack Landors - Sky Tate - Bridge Carson - Z Delgado - Syd Drew Sam - Officer Tate - Doggie Cruger - Kat Manx - Nova Ranger Gear Delta Morphers - Patrol Morpher - Omega Morpher - Kat Morpher - Nova Morpher - Magna Morpher - Deltamax Strikers - Canine Cannon - Delta Blasters - Shadow Saber - S.P.D. Battlizer - Delta Enforcers - Delta Cruiser - Delta Patrol Cycles - Delta ATV - Uniforce Cycle - S.W.A.T. Truck Allies Piggy - Isinia Cruger - Dino Rangers - T-Top S.P.D.: Supreme Commander Fowler Birdie - Sergeant Silverback - Boom - R.I.C. Zords and Megazords Delta Runner 1 - Delta Runner 2 - Delta Runner 3 - Delta Runner 4 - Delta Runner 5 - Omegamax Cycle - Delta Base - S.W.A.T. Flyer 1 - S.W.A.T. Flyer 2 - S.W.A.T. Flyer 3 - S.W.A.T. Flyer 4 - S.W.A.T. Flyer 5 Delta Squad Megazord - Omegamax Megazord - Delta Max Megazord - Delta Command Megazord - S.W.A.T. Megazord Troobian Empire Omni Emperor Gruumm - Mora/Morgana - Broodwing - Krybots - Blue-Head Krybots - Orange-Head Krybots A-Squad Rangers Charlie - Blue - Green - Yellow - Pink Other Villains: Zeltrax - Tyrannodrones Monsters Praxis - Ringbah - Parsnippity - Scaleface - Rhinix - Hydrax - Bugglesworth - Giganis - Sinuku - Debugger - General Benaag - Drakel - General Valko - Tomars - Wootox - Katana - Invador - Changtor - Green Eyes - Shorty - Devastation - Mysticon - Al - Slate - Mirloc - Stench - Thresher - Gineka - Chiaggo - Delapoo - Blobgoblin - One Eye - Silverhead - Professor Mooney - Bork - Herock - Dragoul - Kraw - Icthior - Spotty-Eyed Monster - Green Monster - Vine Monster - Delex - Roswell - Crabhead - Spiketor - Lazor - Cricket Monster - Jackal Monster - Demon Monster - Heater Monster - Jail Bird Monster - Tentacle Monster Troobian Empire Robots Mega Drill - Ringbah's Robot - Sinuku's Ninja Robot - Marato - Robot of Destruction - Gigabot - A-Squad's Megazord View • Edit

Blue Rangers Identities

Billy Cranston • Cestro • Rocky DeSantos • Justin Stewart • T.J. Johnson • Kai Chen • Chad Lee • Lucas Kendall • Max Cooper • Tori Hanson • Ethan James • Schuyler Tate • Bridge Carson • Madison Rocca • Dax Lo • Theo Martin • Flynn McAllistair • Kevin • Noah Carver • Koda • Preston Tien • Ravi Shaw • Ollie Akana

Billy Cranston (1995 movie) • Billy Cranston (World of the Coinless) • Serge • Cenozoic Blue Ranger • Billy Cranston (2017 movie) • Eddie Banks • Lina Song • Nikolai Chukarin • Chun-Li • Blue Emissary

Secondary Rangers

Ninjor • Auric the Conqueror • Blue Senturion • Blake Bradley • Jungle Fury Shark Ranger • James Navarro • Heckyl • Kiya Kyatyl • Yale of Saard

Billy Putty • Putty • Bobby • William • Billy Clone • Stanford Winner • Blue Shadow Ranger • Robo Justin • Blue Creep • Psycho Blue • Blue Cyborg Ranger • Evil Time Force Blue • Shark Shadow Ranger • Evil Blake • A-Squad Blue • Evil Blue Mystic Ranger • Evil Blue Overdrive Ranger • Cenozoic era Blue Ranger • Robo Blue Space Ranger

Blue Battalion Ranger • Blue Blitz Ranger • Blue Prism Ranger • Blue Lightning Ranger • Brute • Orisonth

Power Sets

Blue Ranger • Blue Aquitar Ranger • Zeo Ranger III Blue • Blue Turbo Ranger • Blue Space Ranger • Galaxy Blue • Blue Lightspeed Ranger • Time Force Blue • Blue Wild Force Ranger • Blue Wind Ranger • Blue Dino Ranger • S.P.D. Blue Ranger • Blue Mystic Ranger • Blue Overdrive Ranger • Jungle Fury Blue Ranger • Ranger Operator Series Blue • Blue Samurai Ranger • Megaforce Blue • Super Megaforce Blue • Dino Charge Blue Ranger • Dino Charge Aqua Ranger • Ninja Steel Blue • Dino Charge Dark Ranger • Grid Battleforce Blue Ranger • Dino Fury Blue Ranger • Cosmic Fury Blue Ranger

Blue Ranger (1995 movie) • Blue Ranger (2017 movie)

View • Edit