That’s right. We’re doing this.

We open with a Star Wars-esque scroll explaining the background of the show for all the parents who were dragged unwillingly to the theater. And then…

We catch the Rangers (and Bulk and Skull, for some reason) preparing to skydive, which seems like something they would really need adult supervision for.

The bullies panic the second the door is opened, which I can’t blame them for — the camera shot from the plane to the open sky alone almost made me throw up.

Aisha jumps first because the movie knows what a badass she is, and the Rangers follow after her in their color-coordinated jump suits, each delivering a quip as they go.

We get a lot of cool shots of them soaring as the song Higher Ground blasts in the background, and while this is all wholly unnecessary, it’s fun regardless. Given her gymnastics background, Kimberly is especially acrobatic in flight (for example, she did a backflip out of the plane).

Evidently, this is all a charity event for the local observatory in preparation for a comet that will fly over Earth in two days. A random kid (who is easily the best child actor we’ve had thus far) at the drop spot tells his dad that this is how the pros do it, as his dad landed in the parking lot.

All of the Rangers manage a perfect landing, of course, and I can’t help but notice that Angel Grove has become a lot bigger all of a sudden.

The kid (whose name is Fred) races up to Tommy and congratulates him on the landing, and Tommy says he should come along with them next time. Fred’s dad replies that they’ll talk about that in a few years.

Bulk and Skull finally buck up the courage to jump, but we only see a few seconds of them flailing through the air before cutting to the Rangers in full roller blading gear tearing through the streets to the tune of Free Ride.

They cut through an active construction site, which doesn’t seem particularly safe, but the camera pans to Bulk and Skull making their landing in the same spot, which is exactly why teenagers should have adult supervision when jumping out of planes.

A worker comes by to scold them, and while they try to pass themselves off as inspectors, the man clearly isn’t buying it for a number of reasons — the first of them being the parachutes still attached to their backs. But he’s called away by his colleagues and leaves the bullies alone.

The reason the worker was called away is that the crew has found an oddly-shaped manhole cover, which is apparently so fascinating that every single construction worker needs to crowd around it.

They use a crane to lift the manhole cover, which leads to the emergence of…this.

One of the workers approaches the egg, but before he can make contact, it zaps him with electricity, sending him flying backwards to the ground. The others all rush to check on him, but he’s out cold.

The Rangers, meanwhile, are still rollerblading and are on their way to grab a bite to eat, but their communicators (which have a new chime) interrupt their quest. Tommy leads everyone to a quiet area, where Alpha informs them that Zordon needs them at the Command Center.

Zordon appears to bestow the news that the planet is yet again in great danger, this time from a 6000-year-old “morphological being” named Ivan Ooze who used to rule the world:

“He was on the verge of completing construction of his ultimate weapons, the Ectomorphicon Titans [you KNOW I went straight to the Wiki to confirm that spelling], twin machines capable of enslaving the entire universe.”

He was eventually defeated by a group of teens much like the Power Rangers, who lured him into the underground chamber the construction workers just unearthed (probably should have made it a little harder to pull up the manhole cover, then).

The good news: Ooze hasn’t actually managed to escape yet.

The bad news: His Ectomorphicons were buried nearby, so if he does break free, he’ll be able to get ahold of them easily.

Back at the construction site, the police (there are police in Angel Grove???) have set up a watch around the giant egg, but they’re startled by the sudden appearance of Rita, Zedd (who IMDB is insisting is still played by Robert Axelrod here, despite him sounding completely different), Goldar, and a monster I’ve literally never seen before.

Zedd puts the security guards to sleep as the movie continues to pretend like Piggy has been a character all along. He then casts a spell to crack the egg wide open, and Rita creeps forward to discover it’s filled with slime, leading to the first line that actually rings a nostalgia bell from my childhood:

“What? You spent 2,000 years looking for a tub of snot?”

The slime rises in an absolutely atrocious show of CGI (even by 1995 and Power Rangers standards), eventually settling into Ivan Ooze.

A quick aside: You’ve probably noticed by my comments so far that I do have more experience with this movie from childhood than I do the actual Mighty Morphin show. Like most kids of the 90s, my access to any given show was limited to what was shown on TV and what I (or in the case of Power Rangers, my younger brother) had on home video.

We never really had anything in terms of Mighty Morphin on VHS, which is why most of my familiarity with the series has come with time and why I’m sometimes in the dark about entire storylines. Canonically, the earliest piece of Power Rangers media we actually owned as kids was the Turbo movie — and after that, In Space, plus a bit of Lost Galaxy, Lightspeed Rescue, and Time Force. So you’ll see more familiarity from me once we get into those eras.

This movie, however, is the exception, as it was played fairly regularly on TV, meaning I saw it a bunch of times as a kid, but never had it for myself. I have no idea when the last time I watched this was, so we should be in for a fun time here.

All that entirely aside, Ivan Ooze announces to his audience of four that he’s back. Ooze asks how he can repay Zedd for freeing him, and as soon as the emperor says the words “Zordon of Eltar” (is this the first time we’ve heard the name of Zordon’s home planet?), he lets out a bellow and a bolt of energy.

The Mighty Morphin villains (+Piggy, who I will not let this movie gaslight me into believing has been a character all along) leave the movie villain to his scheming. Ooze sniffs and detects an “odious stench” that can only be teenagers.

Tommy instructs everyone to split up and look for clues, because I guess Ooze bolted as soon as he smelled puberty approaching?

One of the security guards wakes up and asks the youth what they’re doing here, to which Kimberly replies:

“You haven’t by any chance seen a morphological being lurking around here?”

He at first has no idea what she’s talking about, until he says (in a barely-concealed Australian accent because, as mentioned in previous posts, this movie was shot down under):

“Wait a second…did it look something like this?”

Ooze introduces himself and Rocky woodenly (I hate picking on his acting because I know this was Steve Cardenas’s first role, but it needed to be said) tells him they’re going to send him back where he came from.

Ooze is utterly unimpressed by Tommy’s declaration that they’re the Power Rangers, scoffing at the fact that Zordon “still uses a bunch of kids to do his dirty work,” which is a fair point, honestly. He summons his foot soldiers, which will effectively be the Putties for this scene.

He teleports away, leaving the kids with his creations, and for some reason the Rangers make the tactical decision to head lower into the construction site, thereby giving the Oozemen (I checked the Wiki) the high ground.

Tommy grabs a shovel and I guess snaps off the blade off-camera, because as soon as we see it again, it’s turned into a bo staff.

A couple notes:

The fight choreography in this scene is really good. Definitely on par with the best of what the show has given us. There is a very goofy-looking sequence in which Kimberly and Billy do about thirty back handsprings to get away from Oozemen for no particular reason, but we’ll let that slide.

The music is garbage, and they should have just let Ron Wasserman do the fight music like always. Apparently it’s by Devo and was specifically written for the movie. It is…not good.

Eventually the group is cornered, with Adam being physically hurled in their direction to get them all in one place, and Tommy calls for morphing. We get a little bit more of an actual morphing sequence this go-round, with each of them holding up their morphers in their actual locations rather than using the same recycled footage as always, and showing each of their suits individually afterward.

Speaking of the suits…

Back at the Command Center, Zordon reveals that Ivan Ooze is headed their way, and Alpha assures him that no one can get into the Command Center without a Power Coin (except for when the Rangers were first teleported in before they got their Power Coins, and when Rocky, Adam, and Aisha were there before they were actually Power Rangers…).

But Ivan Ooze doesn’t follow those rules, as he turns himself into goo and seeps through the cracks in the door.

He materializes and Alpha does his best to fend him off, but unsurprisingly his karate chop does little more than piss the big bad off. He sends an electrical current through Alpha and the robot quickly malfunctions.

Ooze takes his revenge on the Command Center for everything he’s missed since being cooped up in the egg:

“The Black Plague!…The Spanish Inquisition!…The Brady Bunch Reunion!”

All this mayhem knocks Zordon’s tube offline, but we don’t have time for the full ramifications there, because it’s time to head back to the action figures Rangers!

The Oozemen bailed as soon as the teens morphed, so the Rangers have moved to a nearby parking garage in the hopes of tracking them down. Tommy says they need some light, so Aisha says she’s “activating Power Beams.”

We get a weirdly long amount of footage of the Rangers sneaking around looking for Oozemen before Rocky announces he’s “activating Power Scope” and like…

It just occurred to me that I should probably mention that this movie is entirely non-canon, so you shouldn’t expect to see any of this come up in season three. Though you will see some of the overall elements reappear in different fashions.

The Oozemen finally make their appearance and a frankly (initially) boring fight ensues, with weird sound effects because apparently the adults who were dragged to this movie by their kids didn’t have enough to cringe about.

Also, at one point Tommy jumps and just…tornadoes onto the upper floor?

Aisha does have some good action in the middle (though I’m probably biased in saying so), and at one point, Rocky and Adam kick an Oozeman at the same time and…this happens:

Things really start to go off the rails when Billy whips out his “Stega Stinger” and straight-up grapples upward.

And then Kimberly takes out her “Pterodactyl Thunder Whip,” because of course she does.

Tommy does a sextuple front flip (I counted) off the roof of the building and is perfectly fine, naturally, but there’s technically precedent for that given all the times the teens have leapt off their Zords.

He then draws Saba, which appears to be the only one of their weapons that has survived the jump to the movie, and it soars around the monsters like Yondu’s arrow before zapping the ropes clinging to the shipping container above the remaining Oozemen, sending it crashing down on them.

The Rangers celebrate their victory and plan to go find Ooze, but their joy is short-lived, as their powers fizzle out, leaving them unmorphed.

Billy tries to contact Alpha but there’s no response, so the kids all run (I guess?) to the Command Center rather than trying to teleport there. Billy, Adam, and Tommy pry the doors open to discover the place is a wreck, even more so than when Tommy laid waste to it so long ago.

Kimberly spots Zordon…physically lying in his now-exposed chamber, and they all rush to his side.

Billy explains that outside of his time warp, Zordon is dying, and I have literally no idea how to make sense of that, so I’m just going to leave it alone for the time being.

Tommy is desperate to get him back inside his tube, but Zordon explains the impossibility of the situation:

“The power has been destroyed. It is gone. The Zords, the weapons, all of it. The Power Rangers are no more. Ivan Ooze has won.”

Kimberly is understandably distraught, but Zordon urges her to be strong and Tommy puts a hand on her shoulder to comfort her.

Because this hasn’t been heartbreaking enough, we hear a broken “Rangers” from behind, and everyone sprints to Alpha, fearing the worst. He assures them he’ll be fine with time, and that there might still be a way to save Zordon.

“It is on the distant planet of Phaedos. It’s very dangerous. All who have tried for it have perished.”

There’s just enough power left in the Command Center for Alpha to get them there, but not enough for them to return, so as Kimberly points out, they’ll have to hope the power is indeed there.

Tommy assures them that even though they’ve lost their powers, they’re still the Power Rangers, and everyone prepares to leave at once.

The teens vanish with Alpha’s warning that Zordon hasn’t much time left, and as their energy passes by the moon base, Rita is furious that Ooze let them slip through his fingers.

Ooze strolls in and flings a splat of goo at Rita when she yells at him, silencing her for the time being. He declares himself the new leader of the evildoers, and Zedd is none too pleased, hitting him with a bolt of lightning.

The attack does little more than tickle Ooze, who casts his own spell to trap them inside a snow globe.

Goldar and Piggy, who the movie still has yet to give us a name for, instantly become turncoats and pledge their loyalty to Ooze, which really shouldn’t be surprising given how fast Goldar ditched Rita for Zedd.

Ooze summons a new fleet of henchmen, this time a bunch of bird creatures called Tengu Warriors, and orders them to follow the Rangers to Phaedos and “tear them apart,” which is frankly a rather violent sentiment for this show.

The Rangers arrive on the planet, which naturally has a fully breathable atmosphere, and Aisha instantly spots something in the distance.

That something turns out to be a giant monster skeleton, which is more than enough to put everyone on edge as they continue to search the place.

Back on Earth, Ooze plots to turn all of the adults of Angel Grove to his side and have them dig up his Ectomorphicons for him. When Goldar points out that they’ll likely find him repulsive, he replies:

“You forget, I’m a master of disguise.”

To which Piggy responds:

“How could I forget? I never knew.”

Back on Phaedos, Kimberly and Tommy have a moment in which he comforts her over the loss of Zordon, assuring her that they’ll find a way to defeat Ooze and bring their fearless leader back. At that moment, the Tengu Warriors arrive, cutting their romantic scene short.

Though they put up a valiant effort, the Rangers are simply no match for the Tengu Warriors without their powers, and Kimberly is snatched by one and flown away, though she manages to wrench herself free before she’s taken too far.

A cloaked figure who has been watching them for some time leaps down from a ledge, and, uhhh…

She puts the kibosh on several Tengu Warriors and scatters the rest by snapping her staff in half and swinging the pieces, creating a noise that causes them severe pain. They flee the scene and the Rangers move to meet their savior as she snaps her staff back together.

She whacks Rocky as he thanks her, telling him and his friends to head back to wherever they came from. Billy asks if it’s true there’s a great power on Phaedos, and she snaps that “the ground is littered with the bones of those who have tried for it and failed.”

Tommy tells her that they’re different and won’t fail, but she knocks him off his feet with one sweep of her staff.

She urges them to leave at once, but her tone changes entirely when Aisha brings up Zordon. Backing off of Tommy, she introduces herself as Dulcea and asks what happened to Zordon.

As soon as Rocky tells her the story, she leads them away, letting them know that if they don’t hurry, their entire planet is doomed.

Back on Earth, Ooze kicks off his diabolical plan: giving the kids of Angel Grove a free Silly Putty-like substance of his own making. We see Fred, the kid from the beginning of the movie, looking at his case with a questioning face, before we cut back to Phaedos.

Dulcea takes the teens to the ruins of the Ninjetti Temple, from which they can see the monolith inside which the great power resides. Tommy asks if there’s any help she can give them, and she promises to call on the sacred animals of the Ninjetti.

Back on Earth, Fred’s dad spots his son’s abandoned can of ooze on the counter and curiously takes some out. The minute he touches it, it casts its spell over him, sending him out to the streets with dozens of other adults who’ve somehow already been affected, as well.

Meanwhile, Alpha works some magic so the Command Center has just enough power to get the Viewing Globe working, somehow syncing it up to a local news broadcast about the slew of suddenly-missing parents in the city.

Back on Phaedos, Dulcea commences a ceremony to unleash each Ranger’s inner animal spirit. At once, some probably culturally-not-okay costumes appear on the Rangers.

Aisha is the bear, “fierce and unstoppable,” Rocky is the ape, “powerful, smart,” Billy is the wolf, “cunning and swift,” Kimberly is the crane, “agile, light as a feather,” Tommy is the falcon, “winged lord of the skies,” and Adam, well…Adam has my favorite scene from childhood:

Dulcea: Adam? Adam, what’s wrong?

Adam: …I’m a frog.

She assures him he’s like the ones you kiss to get a handsome prince, which is very sweet, but doesn’t exactly speak highly of his abilities like the others’ superlatives.

Dulcea wishes she could go with them, but if she takes just one step off the plateau, she’ll age as rapidly as Zordon. She vows their animal spirits will watch over them and then, uh…turns into an owl.

Back on Earth, Fred comes out of his room to discover his father is missing. We then cut to the dig site, where Ooze is in the process of terrorizing the adults under his control until his Tengu Warriors return with the news that the Power Rangers have yet to be defeated.

He recognizes Dulcea from their description and is immediately concerned that she’ll lead the Rangers to the great power. He hastens the workers’ digging and decimates the Tengu Warriors for their failure.

On Phaedos, we see easily the best scene of the movie so far, as it relies more on subtlety than we usually get. Everyone is quietly preparing for the trip they know no one has ever survived, and Tommy is looking out at the distance warily. Kimberly comes to his side and silently checks that he’s okay, and when he nods, everyone joins them at the edge. With only the words “It’s time” from Tommy, they head out.

On Earth, Fred arrives at the dig site and does a good job of creeping around until he finds his father, who is working diligently with the rest of the adults. He tries to break him out of his frenzy, but his dad doesn’t so much as recognize him, let alone heed his advice.

He ducks behind a rock when he hears Goldar’s voice, and overhears enough of the villains’ plans to understand what the adults are so frantically digging up.

On Phaedos, the Rangers have entered a section of jungle littered with giant animal skeletons. With a spot-on intonation imitation, Adam utters:

“Welcome to Jurassic Park.”

One of the skeletons suddenly lifts its tail and takes a swing at Billy, who rolls out of the way just in time. To the horror of everyone, it rises to its feet and lets out a roar.

Aisha screams as the skeleton barrels toward her, but Rocky comes to her rescue by striking it with a discarded bone. The creature swats him across the forest, but it gives Aisha enough time to get away.

Neither of the girls exactly has a great showing in this fight, as the skeleton next heads for Kimberly, who flees as quickly as she can and screams for Tommy’s help. He engages successfully enough to draw its attention away from her and toward himself, and manages to climb atop it and yank the joint from its neck, sending both its head and himself careening to the ground.

On Earth, Fred has managed to infiltrate Ooze’s entire operation, which is now focused on both assembling the Ectomorphicons and producing more of his goo.

Goldar delivers the news that the Ectomorphicons are finished, and Ooze bids the adults farewell with the instruction that they’re all to head to the dig site and leap to their deaths, which is dark for this franchise.

We finally, nearly an hour into this movie, get a name for Piggy: Mordant. According to the Wiki:

“In an original draft of the script, he was revealed to be Goldar’s second cousin, three times removed, on his mother’s side, visiting for the summer, but this was written out for the final draft.”

Mordant gives the Ectomorphicons life by pumping ooze into them, and, uh, the effect is not good.

On Phaedos, the Rangers finally reach the monolith, and Tommy advises caution as they approach. He touches one of the wall carvings, but as soon as he turns away, it comes to life with vicious intent. Kimberly screams a warning to him and he’s barely able to get out of the way in time.

The other carvings come to life, as well, and the Rangers holler their sacred animals, which effectively just puts their hoods and masks back on.

Adam and Rocky take care of one of the guardians by knocking it off a cliff and into a spring, while Kimberly and Tommy flatten another with a boulder. Billy and Adam trick one into splitting another in half, and everyone comes together to nail the final one, with Tommy finishing it off with a “Ninjetti Corkscrew Kick.”

The wall opens to reveal a pyramid-shaped statue with all of the Rangers’ sacred animals engraved on it. Each of the animals soar out of their engraving and enter the bodies of their given Ranger, with Adam somehow instinctively recognizing them as new Zords.

And with the spirits of their new Zords, the Rangers are now able to morph again.

Dulcea’s owl form wishes them luck as they teleport away, and we cut back to Earth, where things have quickly gone to hell in a hand basket. The local news report is still playing on the Viewing Globe, and the reporter announces that Angel Grove has never seen such a catastrophe before, which might be overstating things a bit, given what they deal with on a weekly basis.

The Rangers arrive and summon their new Zords as soon as they get a look at the Ectomorphicons, which is reasonable. We return to our roots of Kimberly getting the short end of the stick with regards to getting-in-the-Zord lines, as she notes:

“Nice stereo.”

At the movie-revamped Juice Bar, the local kids (including Bulk and Skull) are having their way with the place sans adults.

Fred is disgusted with everyone’s behavior and leaps on a table to tell them off, alerting them to the true nature of the adults’ disappearances. Before we can see if anyone believes him, we cut away.

At the fight, Tommy is going all-in with his new Zord, blasting away at one of the Ectomorphicons. Nevertheless, Goldar is confident, slapping a hand on Ooze’s shoulder and declaring their assured victory. Ooze snarls:

“Touch me again, you’ll be chicken wings in the morning.”

Adam and Billy take on one of the Ectomorphicons together, and the CGI is…whew.

We briefly catch back up with the children of Angel Grove, who have chosen to believe the truth about their parents and are able to quickly get to the dig site because Fred is inexplicably able to operate a monorail train. There’s also a very uncomfortable moment in which Ooze and Goldar share that they both find Kimberly cute, which I really don’t want to think about too hard.

The Zord battle, while much more interesting to watch than the usual stuff, still ultimately doesn’t exactly make for riveting copy, though at one point the Falcon Zord turns into a gun, so that’s pretty cool.

At the sight of one of his precious Ectomorphicons being destroyed, Ooze finally loses his cool and does…this:

He seeps into the remaining Ectomorphicon and grabs hold of the tower Goldar is standing on, barely giving the general time to flee before wielding it against the Rangers.

The core five form the Ninja Megazord as Tommy flies off to rescue the monorail, which is evidently in trouble. Probably because a twelve-year-old is driving it.

It turns out the track is actually broken, and since none of the kids know how to stop the monorail, Tommy swoops in and forms a bridge with his Zord.

Ooze hurls the Megazord through a building and Kimberly howls at Tommy to “get your butt down here!” He arrives to form the Ninja Falcon Megazord, and Billy sets a course for outer space to try and lure Ooze away from any innocent bystanders.

The parents have finally reached the cliff they’re supposed to jump off of, and all of the kids arrive just in time to leap in front of them. Without a plan, there’s little hope, but luckily Fred also knows how to operate a crane.

He grabs Bulk and Skull from the pack and tells everyone else to do their best at holding their parents back in the meantime. He instructs Bulk and Skull to raise the crane to the height of the cliff and turn on the water pressure, blasting all the adults back with a hose that would surely leave bruising.

Meanwhile in space, Billy concocts a plan to lure Ivan Ooze in front of Ryan’s Comet (the event they were anticipating at the beginning of the movie), which frankly is pretty clever. Ooze grabs onto them just before the comet strikes, and the Rangers frantically search for a way to break free, but then Aisha decides to be an absolute badass and knee him in the crotch.

This flings him into the trajectory of the comet, which utterly destroys him. The parents of Earth are freed and Fred’s dad races to hug his heroic son.

The Rangers arrive back at the Command Center to discover it’s too late for Zordon, but Tommy has a revelation:

“Remember what we learned? To those who possess the great power, all things are possible.”

They encircle the tube and put their hands together, and the ensuing energy surge somehow serves not only to heal Zordon, but to repair the entire Command Center, his tube included.

The leader looks fondly down on his team and says how good it is to see them all again, and we cut back to Angel Grove, where “I’ve Got the Power” is playing as the town celebrates its victory over evil yet again.

Bulk and Skull, naturally, are talking up their own part in things, and the Rangers, who are eating nearby, laugh them off. Fred pops through the fence to say hello, and they congratulate him on everything he did to save the day, telling him that maybe one day he could be a Power Ranger himself.

He alternately calls himself the Silver and Gold Ranger (won’t have to wait too long for the latter), and Billy says it has a nice ring to it. Fireworks go off in the distance and everyone rises in excitement as a banner lights up with the words “Thank You Power Rangers!”

In a mid-credits scene (the MCU is QUAKING), we spot Goldar playing around in Zedd’s throne as Mordant feeds him fruit…only for Zedd and Rita to angrily burst through the doors to tell him off.

And with an “uh-oh” from them…we have a movie!

it looks dumb.