The Leading Trainer in French Flight Schools

To many observers, the Sky Ranger looks like a RANS Coyote. Based on general appearances, it appears the French light plane borrowed heavily from the popular model sold by the Kansas light plane kit leader. But, Sky Ranger importer Richard Helm bristles a bit when he hears that statement and retorts, “People compare the Sky Ranger to the RANS Coyote. They say it’s a knockoff, but the French designer didn’t take anything from the Coyote. It’s built completely different,” although he admits, “It does look a lot like the Coyote.”

Give a Yankee welcome to the Sky

Ranger. The French-designed

ultralight is typical of a trend I

think we’ll be seeing with increasing

frequency—imported light planes from

Europe. Sky Ranger is built in the

Ukraine by Aeros, Ltd. I visited this

factory with Phil Lockwood of

Lockwood Aviation in the spring of

2001. Once built by Synairgy in France,

Sky Ranger production moved to this

former eastern-block country in 1997.

Aeros has found a ready market in the

United States and around the world for

its attractively priced and good-flying

hang gliders. The company also makes

trike wings for Sabre and many other

trike manufacturers, so its entry into

fixed-wing ultralights using the

construction methods of hang gliders

was a logical development.

Because the Sky Ranger was first

introduced to the French market, it has

become one of the most popular club

planes in its native country, widely

used by instructors to train new pilots.

In France, as in most of Europe,

ultralights are commonly owned by

aero clubs that manage recreational

airfields. These aero clubs provide an

easy, low-cost way for average pilots to

fly and for newcomers to be introduced

to flying. Many aero clubs provide

instruction, and the clubs own and

maintain the aircraft. The aero club

concept has worked especially well with

sailplanes; Europe has more than twice

as many sailplanes as the United States

and several times the sailplane pilot

population. In fact, the aero club

concept is an idea that U.S. enthusiasts

may want to consider when the new

sport pilot/light-sport aircraft rules are

adopted.

French Origins

Creator Phillippe Prevot had

ambitious design goals for the Sky

Ranger: He sought to “develop an

airplane…with good performance but

with the possibility of being built by two

persons in a week and that could be

inspected and maintained by a person

without special or technical knowledge.”

Build it in a week! And maintain it

yourself? With ease? Sounds like hype,

but according to Rich and east coast

representative, Kevin Green, Sky Ranger

does go together fast and simply. Rich

states, “It’s the most popular ultralight in France, especially in the flight schools.”

In just over half a decade, the company

claims deliveries of 500 Sky Rangers.

Because the Sky Ranger is

appropriate for newer pilots,

its landing gear may

occasionally suffer hard

landings, but its easy repairability is a

benefit for recreational pilots who prefer

flying to handling wrenches. Owners

can reasonably handle more of their

own repair work, say Rich and Kevin.

Phillippe worked hard to keep the

design as simple as possible. The Sky

Ranger requires no welding, uses only

straight main airframe members, and

does not use composite materials for

structural components. “The Sky Ranger

is of typical ultralight construction with

tubes bolted together,” clarifies Rich.

Overall, Sky Ranger is based on

triangulation from the centerline of the

fuselage. According to Rich, the design

has earned a French patent for the

tubing airframe structure and its lack of

complex, formed members.

Besides the simple design concept,

the Sky Ranger has no obstructing

aircraft components to make your entry

harder. You need not slide behind,

around, or step over any tubes to enter

the Sky Ranger. This is rare among light

aircraft designs, especially those using

aluminum tubing for the main structure.

Rich says two people can fold the

wings in 20 minutes; however, I never

witnessed the effort. Folding wings have

become a marketing plus for many

designs, and Sky Ranger has also found

this to be true.

I found the Sky Ranger I flew to be a

well-equipped ultralight, especially at a

fairly modest price ($12,500 without

engine). My evaluation aircraft had

hydraulic brakes, flaps, in-flight trim,

remote primer, electric start, and an

electric Ivo prop joined to a Rotax 503.

Sky Ranger’s standard equipment flap

lever is tucked almost out of sight

between the seats and has a squeeze

handle to allow movement between

three positions of flaps plus a neutral

position. The in-flight trim is located at

the back of the seat frames between

pilots. A small lever adjusts tension on

the elevator linkage in a manner

common to ultralights.

Americans Will Fit Well

“Two large pilots should fit well in

the Sky Ranger,” says Rich. “Another

200-pounder and I fit comfortably, and

the Rotax 503 performed very well,” he

explained while also endorsing the

lower cost engine. In my flying, I also

found the popular two-stroke to be

ample.

Even for big folks, entry into the Sky

Ranger is not hampered, thanks to a

lone side structural member. Positioned

at your hips, this single tube on a 45-

degree angle is padded and mostly out

of the way.

In fact, you may come to

like it just as sports car buffs prefer their

auto seats with side bolsters to securely

hold you in place. Especially with the

doors off, pilots accustomed to some

side structure may like the tube’s

position.

In fact, I found it comforting. I have

lots of experience with even-more-open

ultralights, and I usually enjoy the

sensation. However, in the Sky Ranger

with no doors installed and almost no

side structure, I got a weird feeling that I

could fall out. This sensation

heightened when I deliberately made

uncoordinated turns or maneuvers to

test the ultralight’s control responses.

Though I rarely get this feeling and

can’t explain it in Sky Ranger, at least

the machine’s very sturdy seat belt

system and that short, padded tube at

my outside hip offered me a little

security. Doors are available for the truly

uneasy.

I found the access to the primary

controls such as the joystick, flap lever,

and trim lever to be good, but I really

didn’t care for the throttle in the Sky

Ranger. For me, it was too much of a

reach and offered no place to rest my

hand. If you keep your hand on the

throttle constantly, as I often do, the

location caused fatigue. Rich says you

can set up the throttle as a push-pull

knob, like a Cessna, but that wouldn’t

help much over the lever arrangement.

You’d still have the reach and no

support point.

Because the Sky Ranger’s seats are

only adjustable during construction, I

couldn’t move the seat up closer to

reduce my reach to the throttle. My

reach to other switches and knobs was

fine, so moving the seat forward

wouldn’t ease the long reach to the

throttle.

The Sky Ranger’s cockpit arrangement

felt somewhat like the older Kolb

Mark III as your legs and feet had to

angle toward the center of the fuselage

(New Kolb’s Mark III Extra fixes this

shortcoming). The angle was less

pronounced than in the Kolb, which

has a pointier nose, but I found it less

than optimal in comfort.

I also noticed heat being directed

onto my left, outside leg and generally

into the foot area of the cockpit. While I

would love this during a Minnesota

winter, my foot broiled in Florida’s

stifling heat.

Locating the brake on the forward

side of the joystick was as useful and

effective as any other designs that

employ this mount, and the Sky

Ranger’s hydraulic brakes worked with

surprising power.

Prevot’s skylight design—basically

encompassing the entire fuselage over

the cabin—allows you to look out the

skylight in turns opposite your seating

side. But, because you sit high relative to

the wing, turns had to be rather steeply

banked to see laterally. In the Sky

Ranger it seemed to me that you’re best

off using lateral vision before the turn.

With the doors off and its large skylight,

including two windows in the fabric

above the fuel tank area, the Sky Ranger

offers broad visibility.

Perfect for

Instructional Use

For this flight evaluation, I used an

aircraft donated by owner Tony Berman.

Tony and Phillippe built this Sky Ranger;

talk about your factory service! The two

assembled the plane in three, 16-hour days

(or 48 hours’ construction time) and flew it.

Granted, the clear coating, instrument

fitting, and attachment of the cowl came

later but in only three long days, my test

Sky Ranger went from crate to flight.

Despite the factory attention to

building, this test bird had a mild right turn

in it that caused me to use left rudder

nearly all the time. Combined with the

angled reach, I kept having to reposition

my feet on the pedals to get a better

purchase on them.

Rich says that by adjusting the bungee

cord attached well aft of the pilot in the

tailcone, you could fix some turn tendency

by sliding the bungee to the appropriate

side. This has limits, of course, but for small

adjustments, it may prove sufficient. By

creating a small opening in the skin on the

underside, you can reach up and

manipulate the bungee, which is attached

to a mid-cone cross member. Using such an

access point, you could occasionally make

adjustments. Making this access point is

easier than it sounds because the aircraft’s

covering envelope, which slips on the

fuselage, has reinforced seams joined by

cord lashing or Velcro closures. Ultimately,

you’d want to correct the turn by aileron

rigging when time permits, but a quick

adjustment as just described would help

while en route to a destination.

Rich explained that Phillippe always

tightens up the return bungees on the

rudder pedals quite firmly as he believes

this configuration is better for students, as

Rich accounted for some rudder stiffness I

noted. By making the pedals resist

movement, a student must work a little

harder to fly the plane, but Phillippe feels

they’ll get necessary feedback while their

tactile sense of control movement

sharpens.

The dissimilarity of efforts—smooth,

fairly light stick versus stiffer rudder

pedals—made the harmony between stick

and rudder less than perfect. My Dutch roll

coordination exercises in the Sky Ranger were done with much less bank angle than in the Sky Raider II I’d flown earlier in the day. I made good quality but shallower Dutch rolls, which says a lot about overall control lightness, response, and harmony. As I tried to do them as steeply as I’d just done the Sky Raider II, I wallowed around the sky. Of course, my lack of experience in the model also contributes to control sloppiness.

Get Up and Go on the Cheap

Sky Ranger has sprightly if not inspiring performance. I loved that this airplane had a Rotax 503 engine, though Rich admits that he sees the logic for the 912-engine installation. Naturally, 80 hp versus 48 hp would give shorter take off rolls and stronger climbs, but it’d also cost $8,500 more and raise the weight by 70 pounds.

My experience suggests that the agreeably priced Rotax 503 could perform well in a flight school environment. Everybody loves the 503, and you save a lot of upfront cash, though one argument in favor of the 912 is that total overhaul expenses will be lower in the long run.

Climb in the Sky Ranger with the 503 engine is only about 500 fpm, I’d estimate. Tony had not installed an altimeter, so I couldn’t be certain. Conversely, Rich and his 200-pound friend found the Sky Ranger climbed well even in Rich’s hot home state of Arizona with its higher density altitude.

Individual performance categories are important, but Sky Ranger’s overall package is a good one. Sky Ranger has won World Championship status two times since 1996. In the first two contests since the model arrived on the market— not counting one in 2001—Phillippe Zen, then a dealer for the Sky Ranger in France, won in his competition class.

Rich summarizes this achievement simply. “If it wins, it must be a pretty good performing ultralight.” Wellrounded qualities and good piloting technique combined to help Zen and his Sky Ranger to log the dual victories.

The Sky Ranger’s cruise was fairly speedy, thanks to an electrically adjusted prop. I recorded a high of 88 mph during some runs, while Phillippe reports that a 80-hp 912 will only go about 93 mph. Keep in mind that installed instrument error is always a factor in my reporting.

Stalls occurred at low speeds, in the high 30s, again dependent on instrument accuracy. But intuitively I felt I could sense the lighter weight of the smaller engine and lighter airframe. All stalls—power on, power off, and accelerated—resisted any tendency to fall on a wing, and the nose break was mild or nonexistent. Indeed, these characteristics are good for students and for the rest of us.

I did no spins or other unusual attitude maneuvers because the aircraft didn’t have a parachute. Sabre Aircraft, Rich’s company, works closely with BRS and a system installation for the Sky Ranger is expected, but none was installed on this test ultralight. However, chutes have been fitted on the design, as Rich referenced a deployment in South Africa in the last couple years. Unfortunately, information was sparse as to why the need arose or how the emergency system performed.

I’d Advise a Close Look

If you have an interest in this airplane, you have several sources to see it. At the time of its introduction, Sky Ranger was already represented in three distinct locales of the United States and in Canada.

Sabre Aircraft, located in the greater Phoenix, Arizona, area, has the U.S. and Mexican distribution rights; Speedwing has Canada. Acting as dealers through Sabre Aircraft, Florida-based Arnet-Pereyra, manufacturers of the Aventura and several other aircraft, and Kevin Green of West Virginia-based Green Landings, distribute the aircraft. Kevin is enthusiastic about the Sky Ranger and has consummated numerous sales. He also represents Flightstar Sportplanes.

The Sky Ranger is billed as an “ultra-fast build kit” with the flaps, ailerons, tailplane, vertical stabilizer, rudders, and elevator coming pre-built and covered. The rest of the airframe is referred to as “a number of subassemblies.” In addition, the factory says that, “All joints come with the bolts already in position and attachment brackets already in their places.”

Tony Berman says that covering the Sky Ranger was one of the easier jobs, as those surfaces merely slip on and tie up.

This is a big difference over conventional

dope-and-fabric covering, which then

requires heat-stretching, priming, and

painting. You save both time and money

with the Dacron envelope solution.

Green Landings advertises good prices

on all models of Sky Rangers, and they

have clear pricing about the cost to build

it for you. Even if the task is supposedly

quick and simple, it still takes 100 hours

or more, making the Green Landings’

offer of interest to many time-starved

pilots. And, if built as a Part 103

ultralight, building the aircraft for you is

completely legal.

The basic Sky Ranger kit, without

engine, runs a shade over $12,000. Add

the Rotax 503 plus mounts, exhaust,

(non-electric) prop, and your choice of

colors, the price tag hits $15,500. If you

must have the 80-hp 912 Rotax plus its

electric starter, you’ll spend almost

$24,000. Those interested in four-stroke

advantages might also choose the HKS

700-E engine, which would offer more

than adequate power at lower cost. But

those aircraft will definitely not meet the

weight limitations of FAR Part 103, so

builders would need to register those

aircraft in the experimental amateurbuilt

category.

Despite the higher price of the 912

model, Rich says, “I’ve looked at it all

and I’m convinced the 912 is the way to

go.” He calculated purchase price,

overhaul and maintenance, and fuel

consumption and believes the fourstroke

engine is worth the considerable

extra cost. Rich also agreed that the HKS

700E would make a good powerplant for

the same reasons.

To compare, the Rotax 503 adds

about $3,500 to the airframe price, not

including the effort of installation. Have

Sabre install a Rotax 912 and the

comparable value is around $11,000

(though they do the work of installation

for this price). Have Sabre fit an HKS and

the add-on to the airframe will be under

$9,000 thanks to new, lower prices from

the Japanese engine distributed by

HPower Ltd.

Big engine or little, four stroke or two,

Sky Ranger makes an interesting new

choice for private owners and flight

schools. Either way, you might feel at

home in the Sky Ranger.

Published in Experimenter Magazine