Councillors Naoise Ó Muirí and Aoibhinn Tormey have been selected by Fine Gael to represent the party in the Dublin Bay North constituency in the General Election.

Party members selected Cllr. Naoise O Muirí and Cllr. Aoibhinn Tormey in a convention held in Hilton Dublin Airport which was chaired by Deputy John Paul Phelan.

Fine Gael have now chosen nine General Election candidates in six constituencies.

Cllr. Naoise O Muirí said, “I am delighted to have been selected by the local Fine Gael membership in Dublin Bay North to carry the Fine Gael flag and contest the next General Election in our constituency.

“As an experienced public representative in our area for 20 years I will work very hard to get elected and to represent the interests of the people of Dublin Bay North in Dáil Éireann.

“Availability of housing is the most pressing issue in our community today; as a parent of three school-goers I understand families concerns;

“I’ll be pushing hard for expansion of housing policy in areas like factory-built housing, zero VAT rating for new builds, planning reform and other areas that can make a real difference to supply.

“As someone with direct experience of working in the Small and Medium Enterprises sector, I will strive to ensure that the issues and challenges faced by this vital sector of the economy are to the forefront in the formulation of both enterprise and social policy”

“Tá suim dár leith agam sa nGaeilge agus beidh sé mar aidhm agam í a chur chun cinn i Fine Gael agus sa stáit seirbhís le béim dár leith ar an teanga labharta.”

Cllr. Aoibhinn Tormey said, “I am grateful to the Fine Gael members in Dublin Bay North who have selected me as a candidate, and I look forward to engaging with residents across the constituency to ask them for their number one vote to become a TD for the area.

“I hope to continue the high standard of representation the constituency has experienced from Richard Bruton TD who has done the State a tremendous service over the course of his career and wish him all the best in the future.

“The next generation of Fine Gael TDs will address the challenges we face into the future– climate change, delivering more housing, improving public transport, investment in education, improvements in our health service, mental health and disability services, as well as business supports, access to childcare, and more gardaí on the streets.

“Drawing on my experience as a senior clinical psychologist in mental health services and over five years as a county councillor, I am committed to bringing a fresh perspective and dedicated leadership in tackling these issues,” Cllr Tormey said.