Asking for Trouble (Line of Duty, #4) by Tessa Bailey

Series: Line of Duty #4

Published by Entangled: Brazen on November 25, 2013

Genres: Contemporary

Pages: 250

Goodreads

FINAL DECISION: Hot, hot, hot. I really enjoyed this story of two opposites. An enemies to lovers story, the only negative is the plot regarding Hayden’s family which I wasn’t interested in at all. More Hayden and Brent on the page!

THE STORY: Brent Mason and Hayden Winstead are unfortunately friends of two people who are crazy in love. It is unfortunate because Brent and Hayden can’t stand one another. Brent is an explosives expert cop and Hayden is a rich society girl. The rub one another completely wrong until they rub one another completely right. Hayden is also on the edge of being forced into a marriage of convenience to save her family’s fortune.

OPINION: I enjoyed this book as the heat between Brent and Hayden was sexy and really, really hot. At the same time, I really liked these characters which had angst and drama but also a great deal of humor.

Brent and Hayden flirt and tempt one another through their initial animosity. The book begins long after their adversarial relationship has been established and Hayden has decided that she is going to finally win whatever is between them. But instead things blaze like crazy between them. Super hot and super sexy. I loved this scene which seemed to be almost perfect even though the characters are only just introduced on the page.

This moment is a breakthrough of the two them to begin seeing on another beyond their stereotypes. Brent is more than the “ape” cop and Hayden is much more complex than the “society girl”. Both of these characters care deeply and through the story, they begin to see one another more clearly.

I really enjoyed this book except for the silly marriage of convenience plot which I found a throwaway except for the great dramatic moment at the end which was over the top and just amazing.

WORTH MENTIONING: The dirty talk in this book was amazing.

CONNECTED BOOKS: ASKING FOR TROUBLE is the fourth book in the Lind of Duty series. The romance here is self-contained and can be read as a standalone. The couple here does have a close relationship with the couple from OFFICER OFF LIMITS (Book #3). This book can be read as a standalone. I haven’t read OFFICER OFF LIMITS and didn’t feel I missed anything.

STAR RATING: I give this book 4 stars.