Join a Discussion on Movies

By JANET MASLIN

t's sure to be an uphill battle for "A Price Above Rubies" to find an audience, since this is a story of life among New York's Hasidic Jews that doesn't especially aim to please.

Credit:Abbot Genser/Miramax Films Renee Zellweger and Christopher Eccleston in "A Price Above Rubies," Boaz Yakin's film about Hasidic life.

But it tells the engrossing tale of a shy, appealing heroine with a yen for love and freedom, and it also features a good deal of jewelry.

By some lights, that makes it a solid women's picture for sure.

"A Price Above Rubies" is the lively work of Boaz Yakin.

He should be no stranger to flak after his earlier "Fresh," in which this white filmmaker sharply depicted the lives of black inner-city characters and a boy involved in dealing drugs. The boy was quiet and interestingly ambiguous, as is Sonia Horowitz at the start of this story.

A new mother and the wife of an eminent Torah scholar, she arrives in Borough Park, Brooklyn, with an eagerness to obey the many rules of Hasidic life. But those rules, as the film carefully describes them, leave Sonia with a lonely life.

Perhaps Renée Zellweger does not come straight to mind as the embodiment of timid, dutiful Sonia. But Mr. Yakin has cast this film so markedly against type that the actors seem to be discovering their characters even as they play them, and that gives the film a tension that might not have been might expected.

For instance, Sonia's brilliant, uneasy husband is gently played by Glenn Fitzgerald, who demonically cooked chicken à la LSD in "Flirting With Disaster." Christopher Eccleston of "Jude" gives a warily intense performance as the brother-in-law who exploits Sonia's situation. Julianna Margulies sturdily plays his wife. The performances are serious, and Ms. Zellweger's increasingly strong, determined Sonia is an admirable stretch after "Jerry Maguire." No Melanie Griffith in Brooklyn this time.

To be sure, Mr. Yakin relies on some glaring contrivances, like the elements of quasi-mysticism that don't suit the otherwise matter-of-fact style. Similarly ill-advised is the film's effort to link Sonia's pent-up passions with those of the group's most esteemed rabbinical leader. And once her brother-in-law, for cynical reasons, sends her into the jewelry business to carry on her father's trade, Sonia need not have encountered a hunky, noble, hotblooded jewelry craftsman so early in the game.

But if these touches strain the film's credibility, they don't hurt its effectiveness as escapist fiction. The escapism becomes literal for Sonia as she glimpses the wider world, starts speaking up and begins questioning the life she accepted before.

At its start, "A Price Above Rubies" abruptly places its audience in the midst of Borough Park and its customs, which Mr. Yakin illustrates in detail. The effect is deliberately disorienting until it becomes slowly, powerfully enveloping, and until all the characters are viewed with a generosity of spirit. Surely that's what the story intended all along.