I still have never heard the friends of distinction. from this thread:

the only sealed LP in my dad's collection was "whatever" by the friends of distinction, which he had won in a radio contest but never opened, not being much for soul music. fast-forward several decades through my birth to the end of summer before my sophomore year in high school, with me picking out records of my dad's to take with me back to campus. my 70s soul obsession was in full swing, and there at the back of his albums I found the copy of "whatever." I hadn't even heard the friends of distinction at that point, so I went downstairs and asked my dad if I could take it with me. 'sure, and you can keep it,' he said, making this the very first of his records he ever gave me outright. I was psyched and decided not to open it until I got to school.

a week later, my roommate and I had spent all day setting up our dorm room and my stereo, and we were celebrating this--as well as our particularly advantageous location in the building--by surreptitiously indulging in some substances out the window. my roommate was a good friend of mine and fellow music head who I was trying to expose to soul music, and we had just finished listening to the o'jays' back stabbers. we were both getting pretty deep into it, so when I ducked my head back inside the room and spotted "whatever" in the pile of LPs, I knew it was going to be just the thing to keep our heads together. 'let's open a time capsule,' I said. I grabbed the album and my scissors, slit the shrinkwrap down the side, and slid the record out. the smell of the cardboard sleeve was surprisingly strong and spontaneously plunged me deep in thought about how my dad must have experienced the same thing every time he bought new music, decades ago but standing in much the same place as I was, away at school, with friends, in similar states of mind. I gazed down at the orange RCA label and read the title on it: José Feliciano--fireworks.

I stood there for a second and read it again. José Feliciano--fireworks. 'what?' said my roommate, who had noticed that I had gone totally silent. 'this, uh... this isn't the album it's supposed to be,' I told him, and handed it over. I was hoping that I was wrong, that we would laugh at how incredibly stoned I was, and then my historical reverie could continue bathed in the sounds of the friends of distinction, who I had built up at this point in my mind to be some kind of amazing proto-Fugees. but I knew that what we really had in our hands was an error, a terrible mistake--a copy of a record by the 'feliz navidad' guy doing easy listening covers of the stones and beatles.

my roommate looked amused. 'what the hell?' he said. 'did this used to happen?'

'I guess. maybe because it's a promo copy or something.'

'well, it's been nice knowing ya, José,' he laughed, and flung the record out our open fourth-story window and directly into the tree across the street from the dorm, where it remained for the entire rest of the school year, the orange label winking down at us every time we passed under it on our way to class.​