TORONTO, Oct. 14 -- Emilio Estevez says he was on the verge of artistic starvation until he produced, directed and acted in his latest film 'The War at Home.' 'I was at a point the last couple of years where I was feeling artistically bankrupt,' said the one member of the Sheen acting clan who uses his mother's maiden name. 'I knew artistically my spirit needed this. I think audiences are starving for this kind of material.' Films such as 'Dead Man Walking' and 'Leaving Las Vegas' have helped open the doors for serious types of films, Estevez added in an interview in Toronto with his father, Martin Sheen, in attendance. 'It's created a new bench mark,' he said. 'These scripts are few and fare between.' 'The War at Home' is the third film that Estevez and Sheen have appeared in together but it is the first in which Estevez has been in the capacity of director. Estevez said 'The War at Home' reminded him of why he went into acting in the first place, but getting anyone in Hollywood interested in making it was tough. 'There's no car chases in it, there's no violence and it was a very hard sell,' he said. 'When the Walt Disney company approached me to do 'Mighty Ducks,' I said sure I'd be happy to do it, but there was something I wanted in return and I said, 'I'll do your movie if you'll do mine.'' Estevez made his directorial debut in 1986 with 'Wisdom' and went on to direct the comedy 'Men at Work' in 1990.

'The War at Home' is a serious look at the turmoil Vietnam veteran Jeremy Collier, portrayed by Estevez, wreaks on his family when he returns from the war. Sheen plays the vet's father in the film. 'This is the only film about a veteran who brings the madness, the insanity, the violence of the war into a quote normal American household and really turns the place into a war zone,' said Sheen. 'A lad comes into the house and he reflects the whole truth and nothing but the truth because he can't live with anything less than that any more and he turns the house into a tornado because we are a home in denial and a culture in denial. 'We had destroyed our sons and daughters.' In 1968, Sheen recalled, he played a troubled World War II vet returning home in the film 'The Subject Was Roses.' Sheen gave Estevez the James Duff play, 'Homefront,' to read four years ago, Estevez said he was immediately struck with it and wanted to make it into a film. Duff also wrote the screenplay for the movie, 'The War at Home,' based his play. The film is a reflection of Estevez's own desire to look inward towarddarker cinematic material these days. As he said, he's not feeling very funny right now. Asked why he wanted to be on both sides of the camera for the making of this movie, Estevez answered, 'Because I'm completely and totally insane.' He's acted in all three of his own films, something his father puts down to his son's determined nature. 'He's a Taurus, so there you go,' Sheen said. 'And I think that's very prevalent in the film.' Working so closely together, the pair had their conflicts, but Sheen felt his son pushed him to reveal some very personal aspects of himself in the film's making and in doing so he gave the best performance in over 10 years. 'He took me into parts of myself that were scary, lonely, deeply, deeply personal,' Sheen said. 'I didn't always want to expose the dark side of myself. This was a deeply personal film.'