Greece is a country very well known for its rich mythology.

Greek civilization is one of the oldest in the world. The Greek have probably given the biggest sporting gift to the world, which also has its roots in mythology, the Olympics. One such modern day Olympian, who has left his mark in the country’s footballing history, is Giorgos Karagounis.

Beginnings

The 35 year old midfielder began his youth career at Panathinaikos in 1993. He then moved to Apollon Smyrnis, where he began his senior career. He returned to Panathinaikos in 1998. He also joined Internazionale and then Benfica in 2003 and 2005 respectively, before returning to Panathinaikos in 2007, where he has been playing ever since. His short stature and specific style of play have led to a comparison with former Greek great midfielder, Mimis Domazos.

International career

Karagounis made his national debut for Greece with the U-21 team in 1998, before getting a senior call-up in 1999. The most glorious moment for the national football team is undoubtedly, winning the Euro 2004 as massive underdogs. Nobody expected them to make it out of the group stages, but Greece shocked hosts Portugal in the opening match itself, winning 2-1. Karagounis scored a brilliant long range goal after pouncing on to a mistake made by a Portuguese player. In the ongoing Euro 2012, Karagounis has kept his legend alive, by scoring in similar fashion against Russia in the last match of the group stages. Greece needed nothing less than a win and Karagounis rose to the occasion, eliminating Russia along the way.

Team spirit

Karagounis has been a regular player for the national side ever since they won Euro 2004. He attributes whatever success the Greek have had, to their undying team spirit, passion and the effort to conquer what looks impossible to conquer. Many people consider the 2004 Euro victory as a fluke, but Karagounis is well aware of the Herculean effort which was required to make that dream come true, to cause an upset of such magnitude.

National glory

Giorgos Karagounis is currently tied at 120 national appearances, set by Theodoros Zagorakis in 2007. Had he been available for the quarter final game against Germany, he would have become the most capped Greek footballer ever. An unfortunate refereeing decision which went against him will see him miss the match.

A proud father of two boys and a girl, Karagounis is well aware of the crisis Greece is facing at the moment. Along with his teammates, he has vowed to give everything they can, to bring a smile on their supporters’ faces in such times.

You may also Like:

Cristiano Ronaldo: The Man of the Moment