1. UGO FOSCOLO (pseudonym of Niccolò Foscolo)

2. He was born on 6th February 1778 in Zakynthos-Greece (Venetian Republic) and he died on 10th September 1827 near London.

3. He was a writer and a poet. His poetry is neoclassical, but he is considered also a romantic for his patriotic ideals. His romantic temperament and flamboyant life, characterize his role as a key transitional figure in the Italian literary history. Concurrent with his military exploits, Foscolo gave literary expression to his ideological aspirations and to the numerous amorous experiences of these years. The exciting and unhappy love, the patriotic ideal, the exile and a tragic death were a model of the romantic hero and the principal themes used by Foscolo.

4. Foscolo was very enthusiastic for Napoleon liberal ideas of freedom and democracy, he lived the enthusiastic atmosphere of the ascent to power of Napoleon and joined the French side when the Austrians and Russians invaded Italy in 1799; he was a captain in the Italian division. He was a prominent member of the national committees, and addressed an ode to Napoleon Bonaparte, expecting Napoleon to overthrow the Venetian oligarchy and create a free republic. The intellectual track projects of innovation policy and the patriotic ideals belonged only to the educated classes and didn’t reach the masses, influenced by the conservative views of the Church. Quickly he turned to disillusionment when Napoleon ceded Venice to Austria in the Treaty of Campoformio.

5. This disillusion together with the pain of exile, inspired one of Foscolo's best works: “Ultime lettere di Jacopo Ortis” (The last letters of Jacopo Ortis), an epistolary novel written between 1798 and 1802. In this novel we can find some autobiographical and didactic elements. This novel is composed by letters written by Jacopo to his friend Lorenzo Alderani. In the letters we read the hopes for liberation and the following strong delusion for the renewed occupation of the Italian soil. Jacopo went to live in a small village up the hills in northern Italy, near Padua, to escape from the political persecution. Here he met Teresa and fell in love with her. The impossibility of realising his love led him to a further delusion. The last chapter is the description of the young man's last hours and the suicide written by Lorenzo, thus terminating his lonely struggle against tyranny and hypocrisy.

6. Foscolo's vitality and unflagging quest for freedom account for his immense popularity during subsequent Italian struggles for unification and independence. Banished for his anti-French drama Aiace (1811), Foscolo went to Florence and after the fall of Venice he moved to Milan, where he formed friendship with many literary relevant figures, until the entry of the Austrians; from there he passed to Switzerland, where he wrote a fierce satire in Latin on his political and literary opponents; finally he sought the shores of England at the close of 1816. During the eleven years spent in London, until his death there, he enjoyed all the social distinction which the most brilliant circles of the English capital confer to foreigners of political and literary renown, and experienced all the misery which follows a poor domestic economy.