Mention of sexual assault ahead.

It's evident that, in making Doctor Glas, director Mai Zetterling felt no obligation toward conventionality, or concern for the comfort of the viewer. Instead, she infuses her film with nightmarish, surreal images, refuses to focus the camera for particular sequences, and does her best to make visible a troubled man's inner life. And, though there are elements of storytelling that feel a little too on the nose, her approach nevertheless undeniably works.

The title character (played by Per Oscarsson, who looks so much like a narrow-jawed version of Timothy Olyphant that it's downright unsettling) is a man uncomfortable in his own skin, unable to discuss women with friends, and both unsettled and fascinated by the…

"But why, of all people, must I keep running into the Rev. Gregorius? I never see that man without remembering an anecdote I once heard told of Schopenhauer. One evening, the austere philosopher was sitting, alone as usual, in a corner of his café, when the door opens and in comes a person of disagreeable mien. His features distorted with disgust and horror, Schopenhauer gives him one look, leaps up, and begins thumping him over the head with his stick. All this, merely on account of his appearance!"

– Hjalmar Söderberg, Doctor Glas

A doctor contemplates justified homicide – of a reverend.

Very horny and tormented. Very Nördic. Very good.

Shot in late-60s Modernist style, with stark B&W images and…

Doctor Glas hates Reverend Gregorius, whom he encounters, as if it’s the devil’s work, every time he takes a stroll. Glass thinks about Schopenhauer, who once hit someone in a cafe with his walking stick on the head because he couldn't bear the sight of the guy. "But I," thinks Glas, "am not Schopenhauer."

Gregorius’s wife is something completely different! She is young and attractive and Glass does not understand why she married the disgusting, much older Gregorius. And then, a few days after Gregorius has had his heart examined by Glas, his wife also reports to the doctor. She confesses to having a lover and being disgusted by her husband, who forces her to have sex every night. Would…