MAI ZETTERLING, the Swedish actress who now directs movies ("Loving Couples," "Night Games"), seems to see herself as a tour guide of the soul, but, like too many tour guides, she has a talent for reducing everything—the magnificent, the banal and the bizarre—to the same set of common-place statistics."Dr. Glas," based on Hjalmar Soderberg's Swedish novel published in 1905, is a study of a fastidious, introverted doctor in turn-of-the-century Stockholm who becomes obsessed by sexual fantasies involving the young wife of a gross, elderly clergyman. The lady, who has a lover, has asked the doctor's help to keep the pastor from seeking what used to be called his "marital rights." The doctor, who has no hope of gaining the woman for himself, does nothing by halves. He coolly poisons the pastor and lives on alone, for another 50 or 60 years, from which vantage point the story is told in dim flash-back.The movie, which opened yesterday at the 72d Street Playhouse, is technically good, handsomely photographed (in black-and-white) and totally devoid of passion, either on the part of the characters within the movie or on the part of the moviemaker herself. Miss Zetterling is such a stolid, literal director that even scenes of sexual hallucination look like roadmaps for a subconscious as flat as Iowa.Per Oscarsson, who was so fine last year in "Hunger," has individual style as the curious doctor, a man who plays God and ends up as lonely as one suspects Him to be. Like the movie, however, the doctor is obscure without being particularly complex.Watching "Dr. Glas" (which has English subtitles to translate the Swedish dialogue) is a little like being at a terribly proper dinner party. You hope — vainly — that somebody will get drunk and do something quite rude.

The CastDOCTOR GLAS, screenplay by Mai Zetterling and David Hughes, based on the novel by Hjalmar Soderberg; directed by Miss Zetterling; produced by Joseph Hardy and Benni Korzen with Mogens Skot-Hansen as executive producer; presented by 20th Century-Fox. At the 72d Street Playhouse, east of Second Avenue. Running time: 83 minutes.Doctor Glas . . . . . Per OscarssonPastor Gregorius . . . . . Ulf PalmeHelga Gregorius . . . . . Lone HertzMarkel . . . . . Nils EklundEva Martens . . . . . Bento DessauKlas Recke . . . . . Lars LunoeBirck . . . . . Bendt RotheGlas's Father . . . . . Ingolf DavidAnita . . . . . Helle HertzFriend . . . . . Jonas Bergstrom