Turn 10 Studios, creators of the industry leading Forza racing franchise, is currently seeking a talented, highly-motivated, passionate, and experienced Sr. Manager to join the Business, Strategy and Insights team to drive the rhythms around business planning, customer acquisition and monetization for the Forza Franchise. The role will be an integral part of the team, working on planning franchise and portfolio strategy, brand management, merchandizing, advocate for the worldwide consumer and collaborate on revenue and Monthly Average Users management globally in conjunction with our Game Development, Customer and Content, Finance, Partnerships, Licensing and Business Development teams. The position reports to the Director of Business, Strategy and Insights in Redmond, WA.

This position will support and lead the business by: Partnering with the Studio Leads and leading and innovating the engagement of our players and the customer acquisition, retention and reacquisition process with input from the leadership team. Researching, analyzing and making recommendations regarding current market trends to identify new product/market opportunities, innovations in lifecycle engagement, streaming and business intelligence activity.

The role calls for strong organizational, communication and decision-making skills as it will be regularly collaborating with business partners, third party partners, licensors, and licensees. The incumbent is also responsible for working with internal stakeholders guiding investments and setting priorities on go-to-market plans, driving P&L modeling and SWOT analysis. The role will have regular contact with international business partners.

Responsibilities

Essential Functions / Major Responsibilities:

Partner with the leadership on all or part of the product development process beyond specification, ensuring that products and programs meet business goals, consumer needs are met, and that licensed products meet our requirements, performance and quality expectations, and business goals.

Makes product trade-off decisions related to time, cost, quality.

Supervises business analysis, community/game moderation, acquisition score cards and CPI analytics.

Writes comprehensive and strategic business plans especially around maximizing customer value through promotion and incentive-based programming.

Works with business management and business intelligence to help form comprehensive, actionable BI queries and plans

Researches, analyzes and makes recommendations regarding current market trends and competitive activity to identify new product/program opportunities.

Acts as liaison with development, publishing, franchise management, and licensed business partners.

Work with team supporting the creation of marketing and promotional content that is delivered directly into a digital product or website.

Drives build vs. buy and license vs. self-publish decisions.

Structures and negotiates business deals and contractual terms.

Advance the logic, cadence, and relevance of triggered messaging to customers based on their account and gameplay activities, leveraging in-client play patterns with out-of-client messaging.

Prioritize and assist product development in delivering compelling user experiences throughout the user lifecycle, focusing on acquisition, conversion, retention, and re-acquisition.

Ensure that product, features and overall marketing efforts were in-line and that revenue goals were met.

Grow the business by leading its regional & global expansion across a wide range of potential new features, services, and offerings.

Manage revenue and recommend/implement key decisions on quality, cost, and timing for marketing programs and product under parameters set by leadership

FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT:

P&L forecasting & management for multiple products

Assist with monthly business rhythms including results discussions, reviews, and reporting with studio leadership.

Works with finance on viability for new contracts/products and creates P&L forecasting for new ventures.

Partner with Producers and business partners to provide first-line business management and guidance.

Collaborate with central finance team on monthly financial close, revenue & expense reporting, and headcount management

Budget, forecast and headcount management

Partner with contract and finance team, assisting content teams with securing outsourced resources.

MONETIZATION

Provide strategic and tactical leadership to drive revenue through in-game monetization models.

Determine and define merchandising optimizations, promotions, offers, and new opportunities.

DATA MODELING & ANALYSIS

Work with greater business teams to design, update, and upgrade business models for existing and upcoming projects.

Help change, create, monitor and affect basis/metrics for deeper understanding of player behavior focused on, but not limited to player churn, average revenue per user & per paying user (ARPU & ARPPU), lifetime value (LTV), advanced demographic study, player segmentation, social mapping, and more.

ADDITIONAL

Provide guidance to internal teams who tactically execute Merchandising, service and feature development plans.

Evaluate current market trends and competitive activity; report on key findings.

Occasional travel required.

Qualifications

QUALIFICATIONS

MUST have Digital Gaming experience.

Knowledge of video games and 2+ years experience managing a digital IP, including extensive experience with virtual economies and managing evergreen consumer engagement a plus

Demonstrated experience and ability at driving, reporting, and managing project and rhythms across multiple teams of stakeholders

5+ years progressive business/brand management experience required.

Digital commerce experience required.

Loyalty marketing experience preferred

Experience working on a global brand required, management preferred

Other product marketing and/or publishing experience preferred

International experience a plus

Education and Training:

Bachelors degree in Economics, Statistics, Business or Marketing, or related experience, required.

MBA strongly preferred

Knowledge, Skills and Abilities:

Strong presentation skills required

Ability to set strategy and vision based on deep, insightful consumer understanding

Strong planning and organizational skills; ability to juggle and manage multiple priorities under tight project deadlines required.

Intellectually curious and able to ask the right questions

Proven ability to lead diverse groups of people to achieve desired results

Microsoft is an equal opportunity employer. All qualified applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to age, ancestry, color, family or medical care leave, gender identity or expression, genetic information, marital status, medical condition, national origin, physical or mental disability, political affiliation, protected veteran status, race, religion, sex (including pregnancy), sexual orientation, or any other characteristic protected by applicable laws, regulations and ordinances. We also consider qualified applicants regardless of criminal histories, consistent with legal requirements. If you need assistance and/or a reasonable accommodation due to a disability during the application or the recruiting process, please send a request via the Accommodation request form.

Benefits/perks listed below may vary depending on the nature of your employment with Microsoft and the country where you work.