Turn 10 Studios has acknowledged complaints from Forza Motorsport players about three areas of the game.

In a message co-signed by game director Andy Beaudoin, creative director Chris Esaki and executive producer Trevor Laupmanis, the studio said it has taken on board feedback about car progression, race regulations and AI driving behaviour.

“We know that the progression system in Forza Motorsport is a divisive topic among our players,” Turn 10 said.

“It is clear from looking at feedback that while many of our players are enjoying the system as is, for many others it isn’t delivering the upgrade experience that they expect from Forza Motorsport.”

While it said addressing this feedback is “a top priority for the team going into 2024… it will take some time to properly evaluate options, make the necessary code changes, and thoroughly test those code changes”.

The studio also said it’s aware that race regulations aren’t always working as they should. Examples include players receiving inconsistent or unfair penalties related to intentional and accidental collisions.

“It’s important that we capture all the data that we can about a race when FRR rulings happen in error, so over the next few months, we will be working with some long-time competitive Motorsport players to gather direct telemetry from them while they’re playing.

“They will be capturing these instances and feeding data to our team so that we can issue tweaks to make FRR more accurate and reliable. We appreciate your patience as we work on improving the system.”

Players have also complained about AI driving behaviour, including abrupt braking and slowing down, cars not accelerating out of exits, and drivers following racing lines too closely.

“We understand how important it is to have fair and competitive AI in Motorsport and are our top priorities in early 2024 are addressing overly aggressive AI, while also getting a cleaner race start into turn 1 where many of the issues above most severely manifest and impact players.”

In addition to improving these areas of the game, Turn 10 committed to publishing quarterly updates informing players where it stands on topics “the community is passionate about”.

Forza Motorsport’s first free DLC track, the Yas Marina Circuit featuring four different layouts, was added to the game in November.

The track is the current site of the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix and previously featured in Forza Motorsport 5, 6 and 7.