We aim to promote knowledge of and demand for Industrial Propertyrights though our work with companies, business intermediaries, schools and higher education institutions: our commercial search and advisory activities: and directly to users through seminars, our central enquiry unit and this website.

– For future information on our work with business, please contact Rumyana Nikolova on +3592 9701 314 or via email rnikolova@bpo.bg

Department Co-operation and

Development

Worldwide Symposium on Geographical Indications (WIPO/GEO/SOF/09) [2 document(s)]

Jun 10, 2009 to Jun 12, 2009 (Sofia, Bulgaria)

———————————————————————————————————————————–

PATLIB2009

The Patent Office of the Republic of Bulgaria hosted the EPO Annual Conference of the patent information centres in Europe – PATLIB2009.

The conference took place in Sofia, Kempinski Hotel Zografski, 20 to 22 May 2009, gathering together more than 200 participants from Europe and worldwide.

The Sofia City Court is competent to hear disputes concerning infringement of exclusive rights. Civil infringement actions may relate to:

– establishment of the fact of infringement:

– suspension of the act of infringement:

– compensation for damages suffered:

– seizure and destruction of the infringing products, as well as of the means with which the infringement was carried out.

Apart form the above, the Bulgarian Penal code provides that certain acts may constitute crime (Art. 172b. and Art. 174. Penal Code). The right holder may refer to the police or to the public prosecutor in such cases.

The administrative penal activity of the Patent

Office

BPO provides the following enforcement services to the holders of marks and designs: 1. Administrative penal procedure against anyone using in the course of trade goods or services bearing a sign that is identical with or similar to a registered mark without the consent of the proprietor thereof: and administrative penal procedure against anyone offerring for sale, placing on the market, importing or exporting, or stocking for those purposes goods manufactured by copying or use of a design without the consent of its holder. The Office has the power to impose a Fine and to seize goods that infringing registered rights

? Law on Patents and Utility Model Registration – Infringement of Patent Rights and of Utility Model Rights – Art. 27-28d: Border Controls – Art.83a, 83b: Administrative Penal Provisions – Art.84:

? Law on Marks and Geographical Indications, Infringement of Registered Marks and of Registered Geographical Indications – Art. 73 – 77: Border Controls – Art. 78a – 80a: Administrative Violations and Penalties – Art. 81-88:

? Law on Industrial Designs – Infringement of Rights in Designs – Art. 55 – 61: Border Controls- Art.62 – 64a: Administrative Violations and Penalties- Art. 65 – 70: