Following the opening of three offices in Poland and a South-European IT hub in Croatia, Intellias plans to establish a new development center in Bulgaria in the early summer of 2022. The new office will be located in the capital, Sofia. Specialists at the Sofia Intellias location will have the opportunity to work on projects for global industry leaders while leveraging the company’s resources for professional growth, developing their careers, and creating innovative technologies of the future.

Intellias plans to gather a strong team of local IT experts in Sofia who will join the company’s existing global team of 2500 specialists. By the end of 2022, Intellias expects to hire at least 40 IT experts in Bulgaria specializing in Java, .NET, DevOps, AQA, and other technologies and spheres. Intellias invites Bulgarian developers to apply to join the team right now!

The opening of the new office in Sofia is another important step towards Intellias’ development in new European markets. But it is also an opportunity to create a powerful IT community, encouraging specialists to learn from each other and grow professionally. As we do at every Intellias office, in Sofia, we will nurture a human-to-human corporate culture based on trust and support.

In Bulgaria, Intellias will continue developing expertise in strategic spheres, including in the automotive sphere. In partnership with the automotive giant HERE, Intellias creates top-of-the-line navigation and autonomous driving solutions and invites Bulgarian experts to join the team. The company also cooperates with other automotive industry leaders working in the telecom, FinTech, transport, and mobility spheres. Intellias software engineers work with innovative technologies including those related to IoT, artificial intelligence, data science, cloud, DevOps, and big data. More than 2 billion people worldwide use products created by Intellias specialists.

The Bulgarian IT industry has significant growth potential. According to the AIBEST Annual Industry Report, the country’s IT sector had a total of 77,043 full-time employees in 2020. By 2024, that number is expected to exceed 112,000. Apart from that, every year, more than 6,500 technical graduates join the talent market. The vast majority of IT specialists in Bulgaria — around 90% — live and work in Sofia, where Intellias plans to open its new office.

With over 20 years of experience working with technology, Intellias has been named one of the best employers and service providers multiple times. Intellias was named the best IT employer by Forbes Ukraine and EY in 2020 and 2021. For many years in a row, the company has been listed among the world’s top service providers according to IAOP, GSA, and Clutch. Apart from opening the new office in Bulgaria, Intellias plans to set up additional development centers in Spain, Portugal, Colombia, and other countries in Europe, Latin America, and Asia. Intellias also has representative offices in Germany, the USA, Israel, Saudi Arabia, and the UAE.