About Apago, Inc.

Apago, Inc., founded in 1991, is a software company headquartered in Alpharetta, Georgia, north of Atlanta. We provide retail applications, custom programming, private label OEM products, consultation and support for a diverse customer base.

Our goal is to provide high-quality software solutions to streamline electronic document management and publication workflows. Apago is uniquely qualified in this arena with expertise in PDF, PostScript and other graphic arts file formats.

Innovation

Apago works closely with its retail and OEM customers and various industry groups to identify new opportunities. Apago is always innovating. We developed some of the first products for the large format printing and OPI server markets. Apago’s Piktor software was among the first products to produce TIFF/IT filesets. PDF/X Checkup was the first shipping desktop product to create PDF/X files. PDFshrink was released within weeks of Apple’s release of MacOS X to address the file size issues with Mac OS X generated PDF documents. PDF Enhancer continues this innovation with groundbreaking new techniques like Searchable Outlines to resolve font management issues and Selective Rasterization for reducing complexity and file size in PDF.

Development Services

If custom programming is required, our staff has extensive experience with C++, Java and Javascript, scripting languages including Perl and Python and technologies such as HTML, XML, XSL, SQL, SOAP and REST. We actively develop on Windows, Macintosh and Linux operating systems. Our core technologies include a PostScript/PDF interpreter, a comprehensive PDF manipulation and optimization engine, a distributed processing job queue management system and sophisticated raster conversions. Our Piktor application framework has a plug-in architecture and “skinning” technology that we use to develop highly customized solutions quickly and affordably.

Customers

Apago’s retail products are distributed by a global network of dealers and resellers including Actino.de and PowerXchange. Our retail customers include Admiral Insurance, Apple Computer, Condé Nast, CPI Card Group, Hallmark Cards, Ogilvy & Mather, R.R. Donnelley, Time Inc. and many other companies and government agencies.

Apago technology has been integrated into many products through extensive OEM licensing and development partnerships. OEM customers include Anajet, Summa Graphics, Fuji and Global Graphics.