Users Put Powerful New Features of PDF Production Tool to Work Immediately

Alpharetta, GA - December 13, 2005 - Apago Inc., a software developer for

the graphic arts and document management industries, today announces the

immediate availability of PDF Enhancer 3.1, a powerful production tool for

PDF document assembly and preparation tasks. PDF Enhancer streamlines the

creation of PDF documents by automating the most common preparation tasks,

including assembly, optimization, stamping, cropping, imposition and color

correction, which previously required several applications and extensive

manual labor. The latest upgrade, which was introduced in September at the

Print 05 tradeshow, adds several important features, including support for

Mac OS X version 10.4 (Tiger), font repair, new color correction options

and digital signatures.

"We are pleased to release an updated PDF Enhancer that incorporates many

new features and capabilities that our customers requested," comments

Dwight Kelly, president of Apago. "With each release, PDF Enhancer is

becoming the tool for working with PDF files."

PDF Enhancer 3.1 user Gareth O'Brien, CEO of Objective Advantage, says, "We

found the selective color correction feature extremely useful. One of our

clients has a repository of thousands of EPS logos with RGB colors that are

used by their web-to- print system when creating PDFs. They also have

several hundred others that use spot colors with an obsolete, color-naming

convention. As a result, what should have been 2- color jobs generated up

to 8 plates. To correct these problems, we configured the client's

OANetConnect workflows to use PDF Enhancer 3.1, which eliminated the need

to manually correct the source files=F3a project that would have taken

considerable time and effort."

)From consumers and small businesses to large magazines and newspapers, PDF

Enhancer 3.1 allows users to build a new document from multiple sources, to

take "print-ready" documents and prepare them for distribution on the

Internet, or simply to modify PDF files to meet specific output

requirements. PDF Enhancer does this by taking a single, general-purpose

PDF file and targeting it to a specific use. Each "target" consists of a

collection of settings about the optimizations and improvements that will

be applied to the document. With its industry-standard, ICC-based color

conversion engine, full-featured imposition, page box, and stamping

managers, PDF Enhancer provides users with low- to high-volume needs the

tools for repurposing PDF files for optimal use according to the intended

output target. PDF Enhancer also reduces the size of most PDF files through

techniques such as image optimization, unused or duplicate element removal,

and analysis of the internal make-up of files to eliminate additional

redundancies.

New features in PDF Enhancer 3.1 include:

* Mac OS X version 10.4 Tiger and Automator support

* Digital signatures to secure documents

* Selective color correction to directly map certain colors to other

colors; for

example, CMYK to "Coke Red" spot color

* Font repair including rebuilding ToUnicode tables required by the ISO PDF/=

A

document archiving standard

* Font conversion to eliminate problematic CID fonts

PDF Enhancer key features include:

* Document Assembly: Build a new document from hundreds to thousands of PDF

documents and scanned pages in TIFF and JPEG formats. PDF Enhancer's

Merger makes it easy to select source files and set page order.

* Images and Compression: Minimize PDF file sizes by both reducing image

resolution to match specific quality requirements and compressing the imag=

es.

Enhancer supports both lossy and loss-less compression. The Advanced Serve=

r

Edition supports JBIG2, which can reduce the size of scanned pages by up t=

o

90%.

* Resize and Impose Pages: Resize (A4 to letter), crop and rotate pages. Als=

o

create booklets, n-up and step-and-repeat layouts with the imposition

feature.

* Stamps, Watermarking and Page/Bates Numbering: Add stamps and watermarks

to the foreground or background of a PDF at any location, angle, size,

transparency or layer. Include page- or Bates-numbering with complete cont=

rol

over the formatting, location and appearance.

* Fonts: Embed and subset fonts in a PDF file. PDF Enhancer can also convert

fonts to "outlines" while retaining full text search capabilities. This

unique and

exclusive feature, called Searchable Outlines, reduces file size and avoid=

s

compatibility issues with certain font formats including CID.

* Color Management: PDF Enhancer incorporates a professional-grade color

management system that fully supports ICC profiles, including DeviceLink a=

nd

ICC 4.0 profiles, and PDF/X to insure the highest-quality color conversion=

s

possible. Users can convert RGB to CMYK for printing, or CMYK to RGB for w=

eb

or screen use. The advanced options allow precise control of CMYK to CMYK

conversions.

* Security: Protect PDF files from unauthorized access or use with Acrobat-

compatible security settings with 40- or 128-bit encryption. The Advanced

Server

Edition can also digitally sign a PDF.

* Metadata: Add or modify metadata, including author information, dates and

copyrights. PDF Enhancer 3.1 fully supports Adobe's XMP metadata standard.

* Full-featured GUI application is available for Mac OS X and Windows

NT/2000/XP/2003. Command-line Server Editions are available for Windows,

Mac OS X, Sun Solaris and IBM AIX. The Windows Server Editions include a

COM/.NET component.

Pricing for Standard Edition is $199, Professional Edition $399, Server

Edition $999, and Advanced Server Edition $1,999. PDF Enhancer 3.1 is

available as a free upgrade to customers who previously purchased PDF

Enhancer 3.0. Upgrade pricing and free evaluation software is available at

http://www.apago.com/pdfenhancer. To order PDF Enhancer 3.1, contact Apago

at 770-619-1884 or visit www.apagostore.com.