Levi’s Stadium will host Spanish giants Real Madrid C.F. and English powerhouse Manchester United F.C. on Sunday, July 23rd as part of 2017 International Champions Cup presented by Heineken, as announced today by Relevent Sports, a division of RSE Ventures. The match will kick off at 2:00 p.m. PT and air on ESPN.

Real Madrid C.F. and Manchester United F.C. are both poised for success in their current campaigns, with recent domestic triumphs extending to their international competitions. With a plethora of multinational superstars, Real Madrid C.F. sits atop La Liga with their sights set on adding to their record 32 league titles. Led by FIFA Player of the Year Cristiano Ronaldo and Welsh phenomenon Gareth Bale, Real Madrid C.F. has advanced to the knockout stage of the 2017 Champions League in hopes of retaining their title. Perennial power Manchester United F.C. is led by Zlatan Ibrahimović, the team’s top goalscorer, and English legend Wayne Rooney.

As the home of the 5-time Super Bowl Champion San Francisco 49ers, Levi’s Stadium sits in one of America’s greatest sports regions. Opened in 2014, Levi’s Stadium was chosen as the site of Super Bowl 50 and has already played host to two ICC matches, including Manchester United’s 3-1 victory in 2015 over FC Barcelona. Levi’s Stadium has helped establish the Bay Area as a premiere destination for international soccer, attracting the 2017 Gold Cup Final and last summer’s historic Copa America Centenario.

Tickets for the Real Madrid C.F. v. Manchester United F.C. matchup at Levi’s Stadium will go on sale to the general public beginning Tuesday, April 4. Fans can find all venue-specific and other ticket information at www.internationalchampionscup.com.

“Last year we saw a clash of giants when Liverpool defeated AC Milan in front of a sellout crowd here at Levi’s Stadium,” said Charlie Stillitano, Chairman at Relevent Sports. “The battle between famed English and Spanish clubs continues again this year when Manchester United matches up against reigning Champions League titleholders Real Madrid. Both teams field exceptional rosters full of world class talent and are managed by two of the best in Mourinho and Zidane. The ICC is thrilled to return for a third consecutive year to Levi’s Stadium and the Bay Area where the growth and passion for soccer is unparalleled.”

“To have Relevent Sports bring the International Champions Cup back to Levi’s Stadium for a third year in-a-row is a real testament to the fans in the Bay Area and their support of international soccer,” said 49ers President Al Guido. “In partnership with the Earthquakes, we look forward to Manchester United and Real Madrid kicking off an amazing week of soccer in Santa Clara that will culminate with the finale of the 2017 Gold Cup on July 26.

The 2017 International Champions Cup presented by Heineken will run from July 19-30 and feature 12 matches played across 11 cities throughout the United States. In total, eight teams from around the globe, including England (Manchester United F.C., Manchester City F.C., Tottenham Hotspur F.C.), Italy (Juventus F.C., AS Roma), France (Paris Saint-Germain F.C.) and Spain (FC Barcelona, Real Madrid C.F.) will compete in this year’s tournament. Each team will play three contests and the club with the most points at the end of the tournament will be crowned champion. Each win in regulation will result in three points and a tie will go straight to a shootout; the winning team in a shootout will receive two points and the losing team one.

Arguably the most recognizable soccer club in the world, Manchester United F.C. is frequently mentioned among the most successful teams in English league soccer. The record 20-time league title winners have dominated English soccer for much of the last 25 years. The club is currently managed by José Mourinho, who took over the reins in May of 2016. This year’s squad features star veteran strikers Wayne Rooney and Zlatan Ibrahimović, along with young superstar midfielder Paul Pogba.

Founded in 1902, Real Madrid C.F. hold the record for most European cup/UEFA Champions League championships in any club’s history – a staggering total of 11 titles, its most recent arriving in the 2015-2016 season. Los Blancos currently field a roster featuring some of the best players in the world including Cristiano Ronaldo (Portugal), Gareth Bale (Wales), Karim Benzema (France) and captain Sergio Ramos (Spain). Led by former Real Madrid C.F. midfielder, French soccer legend and current manager Zinedine Zidane, Real Madrid C.F. returns to the International Champions Cup for the fifth consecutive year, having won each of the inaugural tournaments to take place in the United States, Australia and China.

All tournament matches will be carried on ESPN networks including ESPN, ESPN2, ESPN Deportes and streaming network ESPN3, accessible through WatchESPN and the ESPN App.

Fans can follow the ICC on social media at @intchampionscup for exclusive content and announcements, and join the conversation using #2017ICC. Fans can sign up for up news, updates and ticket information at www.internationalchampionscup.com.

LUXURY SUITE RENTALS

If you’re interested in a luxury suite rental for this event, please fill out the form below or contact us at 415-GO-49ERS, ext. 3 or premiumhospitality@49ers-smc.com.