Tottenham will face reigning champions Real Madrid and Borussia Dortmund in the Champions League group stage, while Chelsea will go up against Atletico Madrid.

It will be a tall order for Mauricio Pochettino's men in Group H with the prospect of facing former player Gareth Bale, while Apoel of Cyprus also in the group.

Group C should prove to be a lively one with Premier League winners Chelsea facing Atletico, the La Liga team striker Diego Costa is desperate to rejoin. Roma and Qarabag, the first side from Azerbaijan to reach this stage, are also in the group.

Manchester United will be satisfied with events in Monaco on Thursday evening after being drawn alongside Benfica, Basel and CSKA Moscow in Group A.

Liverpool, winners over Hoffenheim earlier this week in qualifying, are in Group E with Spartak Moscow, Sevilla and Maribor.

Following their victory over Astana in their two-legged play-off round, Scottish champions Celtic face a big challenge after being drawn with Bayern Munich, Paris Saint-Germain and Anderlecht.

Manchester City, third in the Premier League last season, are in Group F with Shakhtar Donetsk, Napoli and Feyenoord.

The opening games will take place on September 12 and 13, with the group phase running until early December ahead of the knockout stages in 2018.

The top two from each group progress to the round of 16, with the draw taking place in December and games starting at that stage in February.

The Champions League final will be played in the Olympic Stadium in Kiev on May 26.

Champions League draw recap and reaction in our blog

CHAMPIONS LEAGUE DRAW ROUND-UP

Group A: Benfica, Manchester United, Basel, CSKA Moscow

Group B: Bayern Munich, Paris Saint-Germain, Anderlecht, Celtic

Group C: Chelsea, Atletico Madrid, Roma, Qarabag

Group D: Juventus, Barcelona, Olympiakos, Sporting

Group E: Spartak Moscow, Sevilla, Liverpool, Maribor

Group F: Shakhtar Donetsk, Manchester City, Napoli, Feyenoord

Group G: Monaco, Porto, Besiktas, RB Leipzig