Maija DiGiorgio is a comedian, filmmaker. Maija's special "Maija Pinion" is now available now on Amazon Prime & AppleTV, it's already receiving rave reviews. Maija just recently recorded her first hour length special for Comedy Dynamics, "Maija! Maija! Maija!" as part of the Tribeca Film Festival in NYC. Her one woman show IncogNegro was part of the summer series at the prestigious Here theater in SoHo. She is in the process of recording her first comedy album with 800 Pound Gorilla Records.

Since her impressive start in comedy, Maija has taken her talents to countless prestigious venues worldwide-including the Beacon Theater, the New Orleans Essence Festival, and Scotland's Edinburgh Festival-as well as TV performances across most major networks including HBO's Def Comedy Jam, NBC's comics unleashed, Fox's Laughs, Uncontrolled Comedy Hour, Bet's Comic View, and Showtime's Michael Vick Comedy Explosion. Through her work, she has had the opportunity to perform alongside many industry standouts-including Dave Chappelle, Kevin Hart, Bill Burr, Dane Cook, Wanda Sykes, Louis CK, Mike Epps, and Tracy Morgan. Maija has been described as Fantastic by Dave Chappelle and been referred to her as A star! by Bill Burr and Fred Silverman. Maija's comedy explicitly examines the complexities of what it means to be a mixed race, multicultural woman. Through the context of trivial topics like dating, family, and daily observations, her witty nature and playful charisma, she is able to dissect heavy subject matter in a way that's hilarious, entertaining, and in a dialect that any culture can understand.

Maija has developed her reputation as an enthralling comedic performer because, outside of standup, she is a notably well-rounded entertainer. Influenced by her mother Sylvia Copeland-renowned concert vocalist and piano prodigy-and Uncle Henry Le Tang-Tony Award Winning choreographer-Maija has always channeled her work through a variety of artistic mediums. She's applied her Meisner acting training towards performing her one-woman, Shakespearean play "Rats!" from New York to California. She's directed the film "Bitter Jester", receiving rave reviews from Variety and The New York Times. She's also established herself as a radio personality co-hosting Hot 97's "The Morning Show with Ed and Maija". It is clear, whether she be telling jokes, acting in plays, making movies, delivering radio, creating sketches, playing drums, singing jazz, or committing to any outlet of her choosing, Maija is clearly an elite performer through and through. Presently, Maija is currently working on her upcoming comedy special "IncogNegro".