Maija DiGiorgio is a comedian, filmmaker, and NY-to-LA transplant. In her first year doing stand-up, Maija took the comedy world by storm taping five national TV appearances. Her hour special for Comedy Dynamics titled Maija! Maija! Maija! recorded at the Tribeca Film Festival in NYC and her Dry Bar Special "Maija Pinion" are both now on Amazon Prime. Her three Dry Bar segments are now reaching over six million views on the web. Being part of a summer series at the prestigious Here theater in SOHO, her one woman show IncogNegro is being developed into an upcoming special. She is also in the process of recording her first comedy album for 800 Pound Gorilla Records.

Since her impressive start in comedy, Maija has taken her talents to countless prestigious venues worldwide—including the Beacon Theater, the New Orleans Essence Festival, and Scotland's Edinburgh Festival—as well as TV performances across most major networks including HBO, NBC, Fox, Bet and Showtime. She has shared the stage with many industry standouts—like Dave Chappelle, Kevin Hart, Bill Burr, Wanda Sykes, Mike Epps, Tracy Morgan, and Craig Robinson. Dave Chappelle calls her "Fantastic," and Bill Burr refers to her as "A f**king star!"

Maija's comedy examines the complexities of what it means to be a mixed race, multicultural woman. Through her witty nature and playful charisma, she tackles such topics like dating, family, and daily observations in a way that is hilarious, entertaining, and in a dialect any culture can understand.

Maija has developed her reputation as an enthralling comedic performer and outside of standup, she is a notably well-rounded entertainer. Influenced by her mother Sylvia Copeland—renowned concert vocalist and piano prodigy—and Uncle Henry Le Tang—Tony Award Winning choreographer—Maija has always channeled her work through a variety of artistic mediums. She has applied her Meisner training in performing her one-woman, Shakespearean play "RATS!." She directed the film "Bitter Jester," which received rave reviews from Variety and The New York Times, and she had established herself as a radio personality co-hosting Hot 97's "The Morning Show with Ed and Maija".

It is clear, whether she be telling jokes, acting in plays, making movies, delivering radio, creating sketches, playing drums, singing jazz, or committing to any outlet of her choosing, Maija is clearly an elite performer through and through.