Maija DiGiorgio is a comedian, actor, writer, radio personality, filmmaker, musician and NY-to-LA transplant. In her first year doing stand up, Maija took the comedy world by storm taping five national TV appearances, receiving a standing ovation at NBC’s Live from the Apollo and performing at the HBO Aspen Comedy Festival.[1]

Career[edit]

Since her impressive start in comedy, Maija has taken her talents to countless prestigious venues worldwide—including the Beacon Theater, the New Orleans Essence Festival and Scotland’s Edinburgh Festival—as well as TV performances across most major networks—including HBO’s Def Comedy Jam, NBC’s Comics Unleashed, Fox’s Laughs, Uncontrolled Comedy Hour, Bet’s Comic View and Showtime’s Michael Vick Comedy Explosion. Through her work, she has had the opportunity to perform alongside many industry standouts—including Dave Chappelle, Kevin Hart, Bill Burr, Dane Cook, Wanda Sykes, Mike Epps and Tracy Morgan. Maija has been described as “Fantastic” by Dave Chappelle and been referred to her as “A f**king star!” by Bill Burr.[2]

In her comedy, Maija examines the complexities of what it means to be a mixed race, multicultural woman through the context of trivial topics like dating, family and daily observations. Through her witty nature and playful charisma, she is able to dissect heavy subject matter in a way that’s hilarious, entertaining and in a dialect that any culture can understand.

Maija has developed her reputation as an enthralling comedic performer because outside of standup, she is a notably well rounded entertainer. Influenced by her mother Sylvia Copeland—renowned concert vocalist and piano prodigy—and uncle Henry Le Tang—Tony Award Winning choreographer—Maija has always channeled her work through a variety of artistic mediums. She’s applied her Meisner acting training, her characters, singing and tap dancing towards performing her one woman, Shakespearean play “RATS!” from New York to California. She’s directed the film Bitter Jester, receiving rave reviews from Variety and The New York Times. She’s also established herself as a radio personality co-hosting Hot 97’s “The Morning Show with Ed and Maija”.[3]

Presently, Maija has a residency at The Hollywood Improv and radio show on Dash Comedy Radio—both entitled “The Maija Show”. Her most recent comedy album, “I Know You Are, But What Am I?” is available on iTunes. She is currently working on her upcoming comedy special “Maija X”.[4]

It is clear, whether she’s telling jokes, acting in plays, making movies, delivering radio, creating sketches, playing drums, singing jazz or committing to any outlet of her choosing, Maija is an elite performer who should be on your list of Must See!

References[edit]

[edit]

Maija (Maija Di Giorgio) on TwitterLua error in Module:WikidataCheck at line 23: attempt to index field 'wikibase' (a nil value).

Maija DiGiorgio on IMDb