The Beyond Good and Evil 20th Anniversary Edition's PS5 platinum trophy has been revealed, suggesting the PS2 remaster will launch sometime soon in 2024.

Lee Brady

Published 14 Jun 2024

Followtopics

Beyond Good & Evil - 20th Anniversary EditionTrophy ListPlayStation 5Lee Brady

After months of speculation and confusion, we've spotted those Beyond Good and Evil 20th Anniversary Edition trophies on the backend of the PlayStation Network. So, now that Beyond Good and Evil 20th Anniversary Edition's PS5 platinum trophy has been revealed, we can expect this Ubisoft PS2 classic to launch on Sony's console. You'd think Ubisoft would want more people to know about its upcoming PS5 games, right?

Beyond Good and Evil PS5 platinum trophy confirmed

It looks like Ubisoft's classic PS2-era action-adventure game Beyond Good and Evil will get the remaster we expected it to get after all! Originally leaked by the company on Xbox servers back in late 2023, we've heard nothing more about the 20th Anniversary Edition remaster since then. However, now that we have Beyond Good and Evil's PS5 trophy list below, we can hopefully expect a PlayStation launch for the re-release soon.

According to the game's PS5 trophies, we can expect this new version of the game to launch with a Speedrun mode and to feature some new customization options, although the exact details of each of these modes have yet to be revealed. For the most part, the rest of the trophy list for Beyond Good and Evil on PS5 is what you might expect.

If you've never played the game, Beyond Good and Evil stars Jade — an orphanage manager who goes undercover to take photos of the militaristic Alpha Sections in hopes of proving their role in some insidious abductions. The game takes place on the mining planet Hillys and has some wonderful science fantasy themes as well as a memorable cast of characters.

While a little dated and perhaps a touch overambitious (something I'd venture its still unreleased sequel has been struggling with as well), Beyond Good and Evil is still a great little adventure that bears checking out.

Of course, we'll first need to see how the remaster's PS5 performance shakes out first, but hopefully this turns out to be a good way to experience this PS2 classic.

Check out the full Beyond Good and Evil 20th Anniversary Edition PS5 trophy list below.

Beyond Good and Evil 20th Anniversary Edition trophy list

Name Description True Hillyan Earn all trophies Bad Jade Get fined twice by the police K-Bups Catcher Grab the K-Bups from Woof Olden Times Take a sepia photo with your camera Alpha Sectioned Out Complete all Alpha Section areas Speedy Jade Complete your first run in Speedrun mode Into Appearances Obtain all customizations items Yo Pearl Pro Break Issam's Yo Pearl record Lucky Number 13 Read Mdisk 13 obtained after winning the pallet game Surrounded by Stars Pilot the spaceship to the moon Beyond Good & Evil Complete the game Ok, let's go! Power up the Hovercraft A Helping Heart Save a companion during combat Avid Hillyan Reader Subscribe to all Hillyan newspapers I Spy System 3? Take a picture of one of the constellations Familiar Bloodsucker Take a picture of the mosquito AEDES RAYMANIS Racing Champion Score 1st place in all 4 hovercraft races Bounty Hunter Chase down all 4 looters Hidden Trophy Continue playing to unlock this trophy. Big Heart Get 13 hearts for Jade's HP Wildlife Photographer Take 6 film rolls of animal photos Data Manager Collect 18 Mdisks Pearl-fection Find 88 Pearls Besting Peepers Win 3 times in the coconut shell game against Peepers Gambling Queen Win 3 times in the pallet game against Francis (except Tutorial) Heart Giver Give a PA 1 to a companion Pig-ture Perfect Take a pig pic with Pey'j posing Something Different Listen to Something Completely Different Shauni NOhmpahkhan Beat the DomZ High Priest without losing any hearts Kicking Butt Kill 10 Alpha Section guards Hidden Trophy Continue playing to unlock this trophy. Hidden Trophy Continue playing to unlock this trophy. Hidden Trophy Continue playing to unlock this trophy. Hidden Trophy Continue playing to unlock this trophy. Hidden Trophy Continue playing to unlock this trophy.

Hopefully this Ubisoft game's trophy list doesn't wind up floating around endlessly on PSN forever like the perpetually delayed Prince of Persia remake. This Beyond Good and Evil trophy list could easily be one of the easiest PS5 platinums of 2024 as well, so I'd certainly breezing my way through it in the near future. Let us know if you'll be checking this one out too!

Written by Lee Brady

Staff Writer Lee keeps one eye on the future (Astro Bot), one eye on the past (PS1, PS2, and PS3 games), and his secret third eye on junk he really likes (Final Fantasy, Kingdom Hearts, Sonic). A PlayStation fan for over 25 years, he loves replaying classic games via PS Plus.

Hide ads

Get the biggest PlayStation news delivered straight to your inbox every week.

Join