Ubisoft has said that Beyond Good & Evil – 20th Anniversary Edition will feature a mission that links the original game to the supposedly still forthcoming sequel.

Beyond Good & Evil – 20th Anniversary Edition launches on 25th June for most modern gaming systems.

A physical and Collector edition of the game will be available for pre-order on 12th July.

Next week, Beyond Good & Evil – 20th Anniversary Edition will launch for PlayStation 5, PlayStation 4, Xbox Series X|S, Xbox One, Nintendo Switch and PC with a number of improvements.

Considering it was launched two decades ago, the newly buffed version of the game will boast up to 4K resolution, 60fps, quality of life improvements and features such as cross save.

“Alongside these updates, Beyond Good & Evil – 20th Anniversary Edition will also introduce a new Speedrun Mode to challenge players, 20+ new achievements and an Anniversary Gallery delving deep into the game’s development history and featuring tons of never-before-seen artworks, videos and so much more,” Ubisoft wrote in a press release.

“Finally, this special edition will feature hunt in which players can discover more about Jade’s past and collect exclusive cosmetic rewards. This exclusive new mission also reveals more about the narrative link to Beyond Good & Evil 2, showing Ubisoft’s enduring commitment to the franchise,” the publisher added.

That last line about BG&E2 is the first we’ve heard of the title in a long time.

The first time a sequel to Beyond Good & Evil was mentioned was in 2008. After almost a decade of silence, talk of the sequel reared up again in 2017 but aside from announcing it was being developed, there was no news. Since then, updates have been drip-fed or are outright non-existent. As such, many believe the game is vapourware and will never see the light of day.

The last update about the game from the developers were that they were shifting focus to “core development and production milestones”, and that was nearly four years ago.

In addition, the rate of layoffs at publishers and developers such as Ubisoft doesn’t inspire confidence that BG&E2 is still alive, especially as publishers opt to invest in titles they know will make them money.

Perhaps the anniversary edition of the original game will serve as a measure of interest in the BG&E franchise. Ubisoft has also said that it will be launching both a physical and Collector Edition of Beyond Good & Evil – 20th Anniversary Edition. Pre-orders for that will open on 12th July.