JAMIE Lynn Spears has given her teenage daughter a new last name.

The move comes after a playful Instagram throwdown with her husband.

Jamie Lynn, 32, has been married to Jamie Watson since 2014.

The two co-parent Jamie Lynn's 14-year-old daughter Maddie Briann Aldridge, whom the former child star shares with ex-boyfriend Casey Aldridge.

But after nearly a decade of marriage, Britney Spears' sister felt the time was right for a change.

So Jamie Lynn apparently dropped the Aldridge from Maddie's name - replacing it with Watson.

The move was reflected on Maddie's personal Instagram account, which now refers to the teen as Maddie Watson.

However, it does not appear that any legal paperwork has been filed so far.

Jamie Watson, 40, is a Louisiana native who met Jamie Lynn back in 2010, following the split between her and her baby daddy Casey.

I DON'T

Things area apparently going so well with the couple, the Zoey 101 star can even joke about getting a divorce.

On Monday, Jaime Lynn revealed that she planned to divorce her husband after he shared something personal about her on Instagram.

Jamie and Maddie were both stretched out on the living room couch together in the endearing snap her husband Jamie shared online.

The former Nickelodeon star's mouth was agape as she appeared to be peacefully sleeping under a blanket in a loose-fitting T-Shirt.

Maddie Briann also appeared asleep, sporting ripped jean shorts and a pink blouse, seemingly coming home from somewhere or resting before she went somewhere.

The teen's step dad captioned the photo of the mommy-daughter duo: "Pretty wild over here."

Taking to her Instagram Stories, Jamie reposted her spouse's Instagram post with a serious-sounding note.

"He posted without our consent," Jamie's caption said.

"I'm suing him for divorce."

JAMIE AND JAMIE

The couple has one daughter together: Ivey Joan Watson, four, who was born back in 2018.

Jamie is also the stepfather to his wife's other child, Maddie.

Back in 2008, Spears announced that she was pregnant at 16.

At the time, she was starring in the Nickelodeon series Zoey 101, which ended due to her pregnancy.

Following Ivey's birth in 2018, Spears spoke to People magazine about being a mom for a second time.

"As we all know, there was a lot of chaos around my last pregnancy," she said.

"I would say that being a mom is being a mom: It doesn't matter if you're in your teens or not, there should be no excuse to not be a great mother. It doesn't matter what your age is."

Jamie added that the only difference between Maddie and Ivey's pregnancies is the support system around her.

Maddie's father, Casey, was arrested and charged with five counts of burglary of a storage house and one count of burglary of a dwelling in 2020.

TRAGIC ACCIDENT

In 2017, when Maddie was 8-years-old, she got into a life-threatening ATV accident.

Jamie Lynn spoke about the traumatic experience in Maria Menounos’s podcast, Better Together with Maria Menounos, detailing how the events unfolded.

She shared that Maddie was riding on an ATV near her family "with every safety measure that could be taken" when she "somehow or another, drove into the water."

"We dove in and we were able to rescue her," she said. "When we were finally able to get her out of the water ... and the first responders took from me, we thought she was gone. We thought we lost our daughter."

"That moment, I felt everything that you can feel, I think, as far as the worst," she continued. "There's nothing worse than looking at your child and just feeling that you've failed her. And I didn't want her to think that I couldn't save her."

Jamie Lynn explained that Maddie was airlifted to the hospital after firefighters were able to find a pulse.

"She wasn't responding to anything and so it was not looking good for us," she recalled, telling Maria that she asked a priest to be let into the intensive care unit to pray Maddie as a "worse case scenario."

"He went to put the oil on her and read the rites and she sat up and started kicking, and her hands started grabbing at all the things," Spears said. "That was our first sign that she was there."

Jamie Lynn said that the traumatic event made her appreciate every moment of life.

"I’ve faced my worst fear now. What else can I mess up or do wrong that will be as horrible as that? Nothing. There's nothing," she shared. "God gave me the blessing of giving me my daughter back. I lost her and I got her back."

"So I don't get to make any excuses. I've been given the best, biggest blessing you can be given," Jamie Lynn added. "I'm not allowed to waste a day on this earth complaining or being ungrateful."