Jamie Lynn Spears may not be sharing custody of her daughter Maddie with baby daddy Casey Aldridge after his latest arrest. The 28-year-old was picked up on a DUI and drug charge on Feb. 11, and he awaits a ruling on his fate.

Aldridge and Spears broke up when their daughter was still a baby. The two now share custody of their daughter, who they nursed through a dramatic injury in 2017. Maddie, who was 8 at the time, flipped an ATV and fell into a pond. She was trapped under the water and nearly drowned. Maddie was airlifted to a hospital and remained unconscious for several terrifying days. She finally awoke and miraculously seemed fine, with no lasting effects from her ordeal. She is now in perfect health. Spears is now married to Jamie Watson and the two of them have a daughter together.

This is not Aldridge’s first run in with the law, nor is it his first time dealing with the consequences of drug use. He had a similar arrest in 2016 and was able to escape jail time. Will he be as lucky this go round?

So who is Casey Aldridge? Read on for all the details.

RELATED: Is Britney Spears Pregnant? All About The Rumors She's Expecting Baby #3

1. He's a hometown hero.

Casey is from Mississippi and attended Amite School Center, a private school in Liberty, MS.

Advertisement

He was a popular guy and an accomplished athlete, lettering in both football and baseball. He was also president of the student body in his senior year. Classmates and teachers describe him as good looking and bright, saying “Casey is one of those boys who really has a lot going for him. He’s handsome, smart and very, very charming.”

2. He started dating his high school sweetheart.

At the time that he started dating Jamie Lyn in 2005 or so, as she was starring on the Nickelodeon show Zoey 101. Many people assumed she would follow in her famous sister Britney’s footsteps and go form tv to a superstar music of acting career.

However, Jamie Lyn shocked fans when, in 2007, she announced that she and Aldridge were expecting a baby together. She was 16 at the time and Aldridge was 18.

Advertisement

3. He stepped up.

While the couple were admittedly very young and there were concerns about them having a child together, some of the people around Casey thought he’d be able to step into the role of father.

A teacher said at the time, “When he decides that something is the right thing to do, he is very effective. If he decides he’s going to be a great father, he will do whatever it takes to do a good job, whether that means working construction to support the baby, or reading books about how to change diapers.”

Advertisement

The couple got engaged and announced that they would be moving from California to Mississippi to start their family.

4. They broke up.

Their daughter Maddie as born in June 2008. By May of 2009, Spears announced that the couple had ended their engagement and not longer had plans to marry.

Advertisement

In 2010, they split up in February reconciled briefly over the summer, then split up for good in 2010.

5. He went down a rocky road after that.

In the years following his split from Spears, Aldridge worked as a pipe fitter and met and married April Watson. The pair had a daughter together in 2014 but went on to divorce in 2018.

Advertisement

In 2016, Aldridge was charged with reckless driving and possession of drugs and drug paraphernalia in 2016. He was sentenced to a year probation on the charges.

6. He was just arrested.

On Feb. 11, cops responded to a suspicious vehicle report. The police report says “I made contact with Casey Aldridge, who was passed out in the driver seat with the vehicle still in drive.”

Advertisement

Aldridge was arrested and taken into custody. Radar Online reports that Aldridge was charged with possession of Oxycodone, Lorazepam, Xanax and drug paraphernalia. He was released on Feb. 15. He tells Radar Online, “I’m going to do everything in my power to better myself and not have to go through situations like this and make sure it never happens again.”

It’s unknown what will happen next but Aldridge does admit that drug use has been a problem for him, saying “It’s kinda been going on a little while. It’s been an issue for a while.”

Advertisement

Rebekah Kuschmider has been writing about celebrities, pop culture, entertainment, and politics since 2010. Her work has been seen at Ravishly, Babble, Scary Mommy, The Mid, Redbook online, and The Broad Side. She is the creator of the blog Stay at Home Pundit and she is a cohost of the weekly podcast The More Perfect Union.