Pregnant 16-year-old Jamie Lynn Spears and boyfriend Casey Aldridge are engaged, his cousin, Tina Robinson, confirms to Usmagazine.com.

"He proposed a few days ago, and she accepted," Robinson tells Us.

Robinson says she hasn’t seen a ring and didn’t know whether they would wed before or after Jamie Lynn delivers.

On December 20, 2007, in an interview with OK! magazine, Spears announced that she was pregnant by her then-boyfriend, Casey Aldridge. She was 16 years old at the time; Aldridge, whom she had been dating for two years, was 18. Nickelodeon issued a statement shortly after the announcement stating that the network respected Spears' decision to take responsibility and noting that its primary concern was for her well-being. Spears confirmed her engagement to Aldridge in March 2008 after it was reported she was seen wearing an engagement ring. In May 2008, the couple moved back to Liberty, Mississippi, and purchased a house, with Spears stating they would raise their child there.

The announcement of Spears' pregnancy generated controversy, as the media was accused of using the story to "glamorize" teenage pregnancy. Some teens were disappointed with the contrast between Spears' on screen personality as a "good girl" and her real life pregnancy. Additional controversy surfaced because Spears was two years below the California age of consent, raising questions about her and Aldridge's age difference, and whether Aldridge could or would be charged with statutory rape (although Spears was neither from California nor living there). It was later confirmed that Aldridge was just under two years older than Spears, which meant that he could be charged only with a misdemeanor under California law, since the crime is only charged as a felony if the two people having sex are at least three years apart in age. On June 4, 2008, while in Amite County, Mississippi, the Spears family filed a complaint against Edwin Merrino, a paparazzo who, they believed, was following and stalking the couple. Merrino denied the allegation. He was released later in the day after posting a $1,096 bond.

Spears gave birth to a daughter, Maddie Briann Aldridge, on June 19, 2008, at Southwest Mississippi Regional Medical Center in McComb. In September 2008, following the announcement that Bristol Palin was pregnant, it was reported that Spears had sent her a gift. Comparisons between the two cases were made.

Spears and Aldridge called off their engagement in March 2009, and Spears ended the relationship and moved out in February 2010. Spears and Aldridge reconciled in August 2010, but ended their relationship a second time in November 2010.

---

Jamie Lynn Spears Has A Baby Girl

By Mary Margaret

Originally posted Thursday June 19, 2008

There is a new baby in the Spears clan! Jamie Lynn Spears and her fiancé Casey Aldridge welcomed a baby girl Thursday morning.

PEOPLE confirms exclusively that the baby was named Maddie Briann.

"Just the family was there," says a source about the birth around 9:30 a.m. at a hospital in Mississippi, near her Louisiana hometown. "Everyone is healthy and happy."

Jamie Lynn`s sister Britney, father Jamie and brother Bryan flew in Wednesday to be with her for the birth; her mother Lynne had been with her helping her get ready for the baby.

Since announcing her pregnancy in December, Britney’s little sister has retreated from the bright lights of Hollywood, opting for the comforts of her hometown of Kentwood, La.

With her Nickelodeon show Zoey 101 already ended, Jamie Lynn went home to prepare for the birth of her baby. The actress, 17, and Aldridge, 19, got engaged in March. Recently, the couple purchased a three-bedroom home in Liberty, Miss., where Aldridge went to high school.

Over the last few months, Spears has kept busy by passing her GED exam, preparing the nursery and attending multiple baby showers.

Jamie Lynn`s Zoey 101 costar, Erin Sanders, told PEOPLE earlier this year that the actress will be a fun mother.

"She is just a very good-hearted and warm person," he said. "We would always hang out on the set and she is a lot of fun, so I think she`s going to be an easygoing, fun mom."

---

Breaking News: Jamie Lynn Spears, Casey Aldridge Split

Friday – February 05, 2010

Jamie Lynn Spears has split from Casey Aldridge, with whom she has a 19-month-old daughter, UsMagazine.com has learned.

The younger sister of Britney Spears, star of Nickelodeon`s hit Zoey 101, made headlines in 2007 when she announced that she was pregnant at the age of 16.

A year later, rumors spread that she and Aldridge, now 20, were engaged after she began wearing a diamond ring. Around the same time, she wore a shirt that read, "The Rumors Are True."

Months after her 17th birthday, she gave birth to daughter Maddie Briann in June 2008 at a hospital in Mississippi, near her Kentwood, La., hometown, where she owns a home.