OTTAWA CITIZEN, By Jon Willing

Eliane Major remembers her brothers helping Lester B. Pearson push his car out of the snowy driveway of 231 Cobourg St. in the 1950s, when her family lived next door to the future prime minister.

Pearson’s wife, Maryon, would be standing at the door of the Sandy Hill home, warning him he was going to have a heart attack trying to muscle the car onto the road.

“My dad used to talk about him all the time,” Major said.

Major said there’s no doubt Pearson lived at that red-brick building at the corner of Wilbrod and Cobourg streets, even if there’s no plaque celebrating the building’s famous occupant.

But consultants who work for the current owner of the property, the Uganda High Commission, see no mention of Pearson in the city’s heritage records as it prepares plans to demolish the building.

The high commission wants to build a three-storey accessible building to become its new consulate. The new design borrows architecture features of the current building, such as the red brick and flat roof, but the third storey would have a lighter limestone exterior. A green rooftop would be landscaped with a pathway and decks.

The high commission bought the building in 1985 and operated its office there until 2014. The diplomatic mission is now in a leased office on Sparks Street.

The Action Sandy Hill community association has alerted Mayor Jim Watson and Coun. Tobi Nussbaum, the chair of the built heritage subcommittee, about the development application. In a letter last April, community association president Chad Rollins asked the politicians to “correct this oversight” of omitting Pearson from the property’s heritage impact document on file at the city.

Volunteers found evidence in a Pearson biography and in an Ottawa Directory that showed 231 Cobourg St. was his home address between 1955 and 1958.

Maryon E. Pearson is listed as the grantee in a May 1954 transaction on the property, according to the land registry file.

What is known for certain is Pearson lived around the corner, on Augusta Street, between 1947 and 1954. He moved into Stornoway when he became leader of the official opposition in 1958.

Pearson’s apparent Cobourg Street connection would fit the gap in the timeline.

In that period of Pearson’s career, in 1957, he won the Nobel Peace Prize, potentially placing even more importance on his Cobourg Street residence.

The building is in a heritage conservation district and subject to the city’s heritage protection rules.

But consultants hired by the high commission argue the building and location are largely unremarkable.

For one, it’s not even the original building for the plot of land.

According to the high commission’s heritage consultant, the building was constructed around 1945 and it replaced a pitched-roof structure that dated back to 1912.

The building is in rough shape, too.

After Action Sandy Hill toured the structure in April, it noted the “appalling state of repair” and was prepared to consider demolition, until the Pearson connection surfaced.

The exterior brick is cracking and there’s mold everywhere. The high commission vacated the building in 2014 for health and safety reasons. Structural repairs alone would cost more than $1.5 million, not including electrical and mechanical upgrades and the removal of hazardous materials, according to one report in the development application package.

“Overall, we are of the opinion that this is a marginal building in terms of contributing to the district’s heritage character,” Robert Martin, the high commission’s heritage consultant, writes in his analysis included with the development application.

Even if Pearson lived in the building for a short time, there is nothing to suggest the building played a factor in his accomplishments, Martin writes. The Pearson name attached to the property doesn’t significantly boost its heritage score, he says.

Martin also wrote to Rollins, the Action Sandy Hill president, when the community group started voicing opposition to demolition.

“Simply the fact that Mr. Pearson may have lived here for a period does not necessarily endow the building with importance, any more than if a notable figure stayed at a hotel or cottage and so on,” Martin wrote.

Advocacy group Heritage Ottawa is reviewing the development application but has not yet commented.

The deadline for feedback to the city is July 10. The preliminary timetable has council’s planning committee considering the application in September.

The city’s senior heritage planner, Sally Coutts, said the city acknowledges that Pearson lived at 231 Coburg St. while he was an MP and secretary of state of external affairs, even though the city’s own consultants didn’t mention the connection as part of a conservation district study in 2010.

Major said it’s time for an 11th-hour push to save the building before the city begins putting together a recommendation on the high commission’s development application.

“It’s only when you reach a certain time in your life when you appreciate a certain culture. There’s a value to preserve and it’s part of our heritage,” Major said.

“In light of Canada Day, we have to reflect a little bit.”