Pressmart powers the digital edition of publications from 49 countries on Web, Mobile, eReader, RSS, Podcast and other digital channels. Conversion, Hosting, Subscriptions, Ads and Analytics—all packaged in a single easy-to-use service. It starts with uploading pre-press PDF pages. Pressmart is a preferred partner of premier publishing associations around the world and the winner of several awards and recognitions for its product innovation.

Pressmart Media Limited is listed under the following publishing services categories: Pre-press and Data Conversion

Websites:

Corporate: Go to the website Submissions: For premium subscribers only Rights: For premium subscribers only LinkedIn: For premium subscribers only FaceBook: For premium subscribers only

Contacts [PubMails]:

Feature available to premium subscribers only. PubMail gets delivered to the on-line mailbox of the profile.

Corporate: For premium subscribers only Editorial: For premium subscribers only Submissions: For premium subscribers only Rights: For premium subscribers only Permissions: For premium subscribers only Sales: For premium subscribers only

Mailing address

8-2-268/R/5Banjara Hills, Road No2,HyderabadAndhra PradeshIndia500034

Phone number(s): + 91 40 6612 4000

Pressmart Media Limited is listed in the directory of publishing services suppliers of India. You can find similar suppliers in India here: List of Pre-press Companies in India and List of Data Conversion Companies in India

You can explore similar publishing service companies in Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh here. Some of the other prominent cities in India for which we have publishing services companies in our database include: New Delhi, Chennai, Mumbai, Ahmedabad, and Bangalore... See the list of all cities in India for which we have publishing companies in our database here.

PublishersGlobal is a free online information service for publishers and publishing service providers.

Pressmart Media Limited, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India is just one of over 20,000 publishing and publishing services companies in our database. If your organization belongs here and is not already profiled, you can submit a request to be listed in the publishing services directory. There are no charges associated with this service - it is totally free.