Nahal HaShofet in KKL's Ramat Menashe Park, has reopened for travelers. The stream is one of the favorite sites of visitors in the center of the country, and it opened after being closed to the public for about four years.

To remind you, the Nahal HaShofet was damaged by floods during the month of January 2020, which led to restoration, upgrading and facelift works in the amount of approximately NIS 25 million, and as part of the renovation that qualified KKL a circular access road, bridges were built that cross the stream and the entire site was adapted for people with disabilities.

Since millions of visitors visit Nahal HaShofet in Ramat Menashe Park every year, KKL, together with friends and partners of JNF-KKL Germany invested in the reconstruction of the accessible path, including adjusting the direction of walking, language simplification, accessibility for people with disabilities, benches, views of the stream, bridges, explanatory signage and guidance, and more.

Nahal HaShofet Park is an excursion area for crowds of visitors and offers a variety of activities, picnic parking lots, walking trails, areas of natural blossom, water, archeology and more. With its reopening, KKL states that the park will be managed in an innovative KKL format with a management team that will manage the site, including the management of visitors and crowd activity on site.

Yifat Ovadia Loski, chairman of KKL: "This is one of the most important projects carried out at KKL in recent years. Following the destruction, a comprehensive restoration of the stream was required. As part of the trend of making KKL sites more accessible, the restoration work focused on making the site more accessible. Nahal HaShofet is a special gem in the heart of the forest that attracts crowds of travelers The restoration that has been done allows the entire Israeli public to fully and experientially enjoy the stream. It is a beautiful green lung in the Menashe area and we are happy to arrive at the moment when spring is at its peak. We invite the public to come and enjoy nature."