Today in MJJ HIStory

Posted by Majical Child in 1971, 1975, 1985, 1988, 1993, 1995, 1997, 2002, 2006

1971 - Almost two weeks before the Jackson 5 returned to Gary, Mayor of the City of Gary, Indiana, Richard Gordon Hatcher, honored Jackson 5 by issuing a proclamation changing the name of the street they had once lived on from "Jackson Street" to be "Jackson 5 Boulevard" for the week of January 25, 1971 though January 31, 1971, and encouraged citizens to give those young men a warm welcome back to Gary.

When the Jacksons landed in on January 31, they were presented with the new street signs in front of their old house at 2300 Jackson Street.

Source: j5collector

1975 - Michael Jackson performed We're Almost There on American Bandstand

1975 - The Jacksons could be seen demonstrating parts of their family revue act on their second appearance on the Carol Burnett Show. Fans tuning in were treated to a funky lip-synch to Life of the Party from the recent Dancing Machine album, but also got a taste to what their parents and grandparents were getting in places like Las Vegas, with a tribute to vocal groups of the past; Mills Brothers, Andrews Sisters, Supremes, Sonny and Cher.

1985 - Ken Kragen chaired a production meeting for We Are The World, at a bungalow off Sunset Boulevard. There, Kragen and his team addressed where the song would be completed by the supergroup of musicians. He stated,

"The single most damaging piece of information is where we're doing this. If that shows up anywhere, we've got a chaotic situation that could totally destroy the project. The moment a Prince, a Michael Jackson, a Bob Dylan—I guarantee you!—drives up and sees a mob around that studio, he will never come in."

On the same night, Quincy Jones' associate producer and vocal arranger, Tom Bahler, was given the task of matching each solo line with the right voice. Bahler stated, "It's like vocal arranging in a perfect world". Jones disagreed, stating that the task was like "putting a watermelon in a Coke bottle". The following evening, Lionel Richie held a "choreography" session at his home, where it was decided who would stand where.

1988 - Michael's Bad was chosen as the Favorite Soul/R&B Single at the 15th Annual American Music Awards, hosted by Whitney Houston, Barbara Mandrell, Mick Fleetwood, Barry Gibb, Maurice Gibb, Robin Gibb, Smokey Robinson, at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles California. He was also nominated for Favorite Male Artist - Pop / Rock.

1993 - Michael opens the 20th American Music Awards ceremony with a performance of "Dangerous" at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles, Ca.

Michael glitters in American Music Award winning two trophies and his third special award Monday at the 20th annual American Music Awards.

For the 20th annual American Music Awards, presented on Monday, Michael had 5 nominations. But the audience got to see him before any winners were announced as he opened the award presentation with yet another dazzling performance of his Dangerous album title track. A man dropped to the floor from machine gun fire, revealing Michael standing directly behind him. Dressed in a black suit with spats and a fedora, Michael joined several dancers in a Smooth Criminal flavored performance of Dangerous featuring his usual fascinating choreography with plenty of crotch grabbing and carefully timed sound effects.

Michael won Favorite Soul/R&B Single for Remember The Time. He came from back stage to accept the award, having taken his hair down, and removing his tie. In accepting the award, he acknowledged the fans in the balcony:

Thank you very much. I love you up there. I'd like to thank everyone at Sony Music, especially Mr. Morita, Mickey Schulhof, Tommy Mattola, Dave Glew, Bruce Swedian, Quincey jones, Sandy Gallin, Jim Morey, and of course, all my fans. I love you.

Amidst the performances and award presentations, Elizabeth Taylor, recovered from a respiratory infection, returned to public life by presenting Michael's honorary award. She announced the recipient of the first ever International Artist Award narrating a video tribute to Michael featuring footage from his videos and live performances from both the Bad and Dangerous tours. She then introduced a taped message from another of Michael's friends and fans, Eddie Murphy:

Hi, Michael. Knowing how uncomfortable you feel when someone says something nice to you right up in your face, I went 3,000 miles away to do this. Now, the inscription on your award says, 'In recognition of his record-breaking international concert tours, and his album sales, and his heartfelt efforts to make this world a better place, the American Music Awards presents its first International Artist Award to Michael Jackson January 25, 1993.' In addition the American Music Awards are proud to announce that when the award is given in the future, it will be known as 'The Michael Jackson International Artist Award.' So, congratulations Michael, I know you better be smiling from ear to ear. I know you better smile bigger than that, I want to see gums! Congratulations.

Elizabeth Taylor then called Michael to the stage from his front row seat at the Shrine Auditorium. He had now changed into a black leather jacket and removed his sunglasses before going on stage. The crowd was on their feet and cheering as Michael began to speak. Michael used the stage to spread a message of love:

I love you very much, Elizabeth Taylor. Teddy Riley, you are a genius. Thank you Eddie, thank you all my friends. Traveling the world has been a great education for me and if there is one insight I've had it is this, wherever you go, in every country, on every continent, people yearn and hunger for only one thing, to love and be loved. Love transcends international boundaries and it heals the wounds of hatred, racial prejudice, bigotry, and ignorance. It is the ultimate truth at the heart of all creation. I would also like to thank God, and my mother and father, Katherine and Joseph Jackson. Thank you once again, I love you all.

Michael, who had now removed the black leather jacket came from the wings and was brief in his acceptance. "I really wasn't expecting to win. Thank you again Teddy Riley, the public, I love you very much. Thank you."

Having won in two of the five categories in which he was nominated and being named the International Artist of the Year, Michael was the night's big winner. Michael also received an honorary Merit award in 1984 and an Achievement award in 1989. He now has 14 of the awards in competitive categories.

1996 - Michael Jackson was named Hype Of The Year in "Rolling Stone's" Critics Poll.

Michael goes to The Motown Cafe in New York with his make-up artist Karen Faye.

1997 - Michael waves 85% of the $5 to $6 million ticket receipts from a concert held on November 1, 1996 in Bombay, India, and donates 1,1 million dollars to a local NGO educating children dwelling in slums - "Shiv Udyog Sena" - the sum also helping to create jobs for 270,000 young unemployed people in the state of Maharashtra, Bombay; on arriving in Bombay, the singer asks to stop in order to converse with children playing in the crowded slums for 20 minutes, according to Indian journalist, Hema Shukla.

2002 - Michael's INVINCIBLE album goes two times Multi Platinum in the USA with sales over 2 million. INVINCIBLE was certified double platinum by the RIAA.

Regina Jones interviewed Michael for the March 2002 issue of Vibe magazine at his Neverland Valley Ranch in Los Olivos.

2006 - Michael is spotted shopping in Manama.

Michael, disguised as a Bahraini woman, wears an abaya, the traditional Arabic women's veil and all-covering gown, a white shirt and men’s shoes. His head and face were wrapped in a black veil and he also wore black gloves.

He was accompanied by Blanket, Prince, Paris & Grace, was seen leaving Marina Mall in the Bahrain capital, holding Blanket by the hand. On the way out a back door, he shook hands with security guards.