Katherine Jackson has announced that The 5th Annual Michael Jackson “King of Pop” Tribute Festival of the Arts will take place in Gary, Indiana, on Aug. 28-30 at 2300 Jackson St, Michael’s birth home.

This year’s tribute festival is different from previous years. The theme is “Art for Life,” and the festival will be showcasing undiscovered talent.

The outdoor tribute festival is free to the public and will begin with the opening ceremony conducted by Gary, officials and a tribute to Michael Jackson from the Roosevelt High School marching band.

Michael Jackson’s Wikipedia page takes a more detailed look at the performer’s life, here: en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_jackson :.

“Jackson’s 1982 album Thriller is the best-selling album of all time. His other albums, including Off the Wall (1979), Bad (1987), Dangerous (1991), and HIStory (1995), also rank among the world’s best-selling. Jackson is one of the few artists to have been inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame twice. He was also inducted into the Dance Hall of Fame as the first and only dancer from pop and rock music. Some of his other achievements include multiple Guinness World Records; 13 Grammy Awards as well as the Grammy Legend Award and the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award; 26 American Music Awards, more than any other artist, including the ‘Artist of the Century’ and ‘Artist of the 1980s’; 13 number-one singles in the United States in his solo career, more than any other male artist in the Hot 100 era; and the estimated sale of over 400 million records worldwide … Jackson has won hundreds of awards, making him the most-awarded recording artist in the history of popular music. …

“Aspects of Jackson’s personal life, including his changing appearance, personal relationships, and behavior, generated controversy. In the mid-1990s, he was accused of child sexual abuse, but the case was settled out of court for about $25 million and no formal charges were brought. In 2005, he was tried and acquitted of further child sexual abuse allegations and several other charges after the jury found him not guilty on all counts. While preparing for his comeback concert series titled This Is It, Jackson died of acute propofol and benzodiazepine intoxication on June 25, 2009, after suffering from cardiac arrest.”