First there was Robert Musil the mechanical engineer, who invented a chroma meter, a device for evaluating color. Then there was Musil the philosophical scientist, interested in probability theory and logical positivism, as well as in the workings of the mind and the soul. Neither Musil seems a likely candidate for the role of novelist, even in that hotbed of modernism that was the Austro-Hungarian Empire during its dying liberal decades. Yet Musil went on to write “The Man Without Qualities,” an achievement that ranked him with Proust and Joyce.

It could just as easily have been otherwise, Ulrich, Musil’s antiheroic protagonist, might have interjected. He’s a character so ironical, so open to possibility, that no attributes stick, certainly not long enough for him to develop the kind of passionate conviction that, Musil makes clear, the worst in his time are prone to.

Musil’s scientific background is undoubtedly what gives his great human comedy its singular aspect. Packed with incisive essayistic excursions, explorations of chance, traffic accidents, pathology, probability and the weather, along with extravagant characters, picaresque sexual encounters and a rebellious questioning of love, gender and morality in a world then newly abandoned by God, “The Man Without Qualities,” which is set in 1913 and runs nearly 2,000 pages, has a contemporary flavor. Epigrammatic reflections jump from the pages: “The ideal obligation to love one’s neighbor is obeyed in two parts, the first consisting in not being able to stand the human race, and the second in compensating for that by engaging in sexual relations with one half of it.” As Ulrich thinks this thought, he is desultorily wandering the streets of Vienna, ogling a pretty woman.

The novel is famously unfinished: In a world poised to enter a cataclysmic war, definitive resolutions are elusive. Only death marks a terminus. Musil began the novel in 1921, published the first volume in 1930 to some acclaim, the second in 1933 as the Nazis came to power, only to die of a stroke while in exile in Switzerland in 1942. His wife found him in the tub shortly after he’d completed a version of a much reworked chapter called “Breaths of a Summer Day,” in which Ulrich and his sister, Agathe, in a state of contemplative enchantment, watch blossoms drift “like snow through sunshine” in his Viennese garden.

This scene constitutes the finale of AGATHE, OR THE FORGOTTEN SISTER (New York Review Books, paper, $17.95), a new stand-alone volume comprising material culled from prior editions of “The Man Without Qualities” as well as the substantial Musil archive, and appearing in English for the first time, in a translation by Joel Agee. The idea was to create a concentrated narrative focused on the twinlike siblings and what Agathe calls, at once in jest and in earnest, “the last possible love story.” Gone are the comic antics of the Parallel Campaign, that committee of the great and good searching for a big idea to celebrate the emperor’s impending 70th jubilee. (Might that be better sex for women? its leader, the beautiful Diotima, suggests in a chapter not included in this volume.) Gone is Moosbrugger, the pathological sex-murderer with the face of a saint, now interned in an asylum and awaiting trial. Gone, too, is the hysterical Clarisse, who thinks she may also be a boy and is enamored both of Ulrich and of a self-styled prophet not unlike Hitler.

In Agee’s vividly contemporary and sensuous translation, “Agathe” zeros in on a quasi-mystical adventure in living and loving. Musil’s emphasis on spiritual experience — what he calls the “other condition” — may well be in part a reaction to Nazism; in the face of the regime’s terrors, he, like so many writers of the period, retreated inward. He had initially toyed with featuring a sister in his vast novel’s title — a double for his sometimes lonely hero. He, himself, was haunted by a sister who had died four years before his birth.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.