There is still activity, I regret to report, and none of it is of the normal variety. When will these obsessive home-video enthusiasts learn? The first time an inanimate object hurls itself across the room at you is probably the time to pack a bag and bail. Don’t stick around to get the really awesome YouTube footage. “Toby,” this series’ resident demon, only likes to go viral the old-fashioned way — via possession.

Returning to the present after the flashback to the ’80s in “Paranormal Activity 3,” the fourth installment in this found-footage horror series follows a family in Nevada playing host to a creepy 6-year-old neighbor boy (Brady Allen) whose unseen mother has suddenly been hospitalized.

Robbie, who doesn’t have any other apparent relatives, is prone to turning up in random places in the middle of the night, standing and staring. This is as unnerving to Webcam-savvy teenage daughter Alex (Kathryn Newton, gorgeous enough to withstand many an up-the-nose “Blair Witch” shot) and her sorta boyfriend Ben (Matt Shively) as it is fun for her little brother Wyatt (Aiden Lovekamp), who’s bunking with the weirdo. And it’s definitely of no concern to the parents (real-life couple Stephen Dunham and Alexondra Lee; Dunham tragically died last month of a heart attack) — they are way too preoccupied with their passive-aggressive marriage to realize they’re being haunted.

Any more details would spoil things, but I think you know how this is going to play out: The “PA” formula is tried and true. Long stretches of placid green night-cam footage manage to make your flesh creep as you try to figure out if you just saw movement in the corner. Then something eventually flies dramatically across the screen, and no matter how much you tried to gird yourself, you jump. Repeat, repeat, repeat.

This is hardly reinventing the wheel, but it is serviceable, if you’re looking for a few shivery communal scares. Filmmakers Henry Joost and Ariel Schulman, who also directed the last one, even throw in a few nods to the classics, as when Wyatt rides his Big Wheel around the house, navigating a ghostly presence, à la “The Shining” — though pointing toward better and scarier fare doesn’t really do them any favors.

They also include Katie Featherston, star of the previous films, in some capacity, though she mostly seems to serve as an odd cautionary tale: Sure, supernatural things that go bump in the night are chilling, but what you really need to beware of is your crazy aunt.