A dad who allegedly tracked his girlfriend's movements through a mobile phone app, told her what to wear and cut her off from her friends, has gone on trial accused of controlling and coercive behaviour.

Damien George, who denies all the charges against him, is also alleged to have turned off the electricity at Alexandra Lee's Corwen home so she couldn't use the WiFi.

The 35-year-old of Bro Wen in Denbigh also faces two charges of dangerous driving - one occasion being when Ms Lee claimed she clung to the bonnet of her van in a bid to stop him taking it, but he continued to drive off.

At the start of his trial at Mold Crown Court today, the jury heard about a "series of events" between March and July 2018, while the pair were a couple.

Opening the case, prosecuting barrister Simon Mintz said the relationship had started "hopefully" in October 2017.

"At first, it had seemed promising, they even talked of marriage, but everything started to go rapidly downhill by the time it got to Christmas 2017," he said.

Mr Mintz said George became "increasingly controlling" in his behaviour towards Ms Lee, telling her who she could see and speak to, and even dictated which clothes and piercings she should wear and which ones she "looked stupid" in.

He also blocked certain friends from her social media and downloaded an app on his phone on her suggestion so he could track where she was.

The prosecution allege that Ms Lee's manner and appearance changed as she tried to conform to his wishes.

But Mr Mintz said the relationship became violent on March 31 when a row broke out and George "grabbed her around the throat so tightly that she couldn't breathe" and trapped her on the bed so she couldn't move.

She called her friend for help and he tried to drive away in her business van so she sat on the bonnet to stop him taking it, the prosecution claim.

But he moved off leaving her clinging on and "hit the brakes to try and throw her off."

When he failed, he stopped and ran away. The police were called but Ms Lee said she didn't make a complaint for the sake of his parents and signed police notebooks to say there had been no assault.

In April, the prosecution said another incident happened where George "crushed her hand against her keys in a tussle" and pushed her, leaving her with bruising to her ribs.

Again, the incident was not reported to police.

And in June, when they were back living together, the prosecution allege George was "being obstructive" and turned off the WiFi so she couldn't do her business paperwork and wouldn't give her her keys so she couldn't meet a client.

A fight broke out and he "slammed her into a wardrobe" - Ms Lee went to her GP about her injuries but wasn't honest about how she got them because he was with her, it was claimed.

It wasn't until July 14, 2018 that "matters came to a head" while she was cleaning a holiday cottage and George arrived with his three children in the car.

Ms Lee recorded the incident and the footage was shown to the jury. It showed George banging on the window, taking an aerial off her van and seemingly attacking Ms Lee when she goes outside.

The prosecution claim he struck her to the eye and knocked her to the ground causing her phone to break.

When she returned home, the barrels from the locks on the front and back doors had been removed and the electricity had been cut.

The following day, he pulled up in front of her car and "slammed on the brakes" almost causing her to hit him, it was claimed.

Ms Lee reported the incidents to police on July 22 when he sent her a text telling her he knew where she was and removed the number plates from her van.

Police spoke to him over the phone and he told them he was "Father Christmas" and wasn't coming back and wished to make his own allegations before finishing the call.

But he handed himself into Denbigh police station shortly afterwards and he was arrested and interviewed.

Giving evidence, Ms Lee tearfully said he wanted her "all to himself" and didn't like her having friends.

She said he got annoyed when she didn't reply straight away to his messages and he bombarded her with texts demanding to know where she was.

She said downloading the app was "almost my idea so he could see where I was and it would make him feel better."

Ms Lee, who said she used to have "quite an alternative style" with pink hair and piercings, said she changed her clothes and appearance so she "wouldn't stand out as much."

"I did it to make him happy, I just thought it was because he loved me so much," she said.

George denies the charges.