Michael Landes ( Lois & Clark: S1 ) as Det. Nick O'Malley

Alexondra Lee as Det. Kate Benson

Richard Gant ( V ) as Capt. Richard Page

Danny Woodburn ( ) as Carl the Gnome

Sean Whalen as Sean Radmon

Special Unit 2 [Season 1, Episode 0] Pilot

Shown Unaired Pilot

Special Unit 2 [Season 1, Episode 1] The Brothers

Shown 11 Apr 01

Chicago cop (and probable part-time model) Kate ( Alexondra Lee ) gets seconded to a secret plainclothes unit named SU2. Her new partner is O'Malley (Michael Landes - Lois & Clark: S1 ), a pretty-boy with a Dirty Harry attitude. Their mission - to solve crimes committed by supernatural creatures called Links.

A Flying gargoyle is attacking people. Sort of like Q: The Winged Serpent .

Special Unit 2 [Season 1, Episode 2] The Pack

Shown 18 Apr 01

Yuppie werewolves are on the rampage. Cameron Bancroft ( Codename: Eternity ) is the main suspect.

O'Malley (Michael Landes - Lois & Clark: S1 ) gets infected (yes, as if doing their job is not enough, the cops need a personal motive fo solving the case) and goes undercover.

Special Unit 2 [Season 1, Episode 3] The Wraps

Shown 25 Apr 01

A Mummy rises from its sarcophagus. Dominic Keating ( Star Trek: Enterprise ) guest-stars.

Special Unit 2 [Season 1, Episode 4] The Web

Shown 2 May 01

The team hunt a Black widow.

O'Malley (Michael Landes - Lois & Clark: S1 ) protects a young woman who looks like Erica Eleniak .

Special Unit 2 [Season 1, Episode 5] The Waste

Shown 9 May 01

A plastic surgeon is killed by a monster made out of liposuction fat. The team try to trap it, but it is smarter than they are. After all, it retains the skills of all the people whose fat make it up. And its super-fast metabolism means it must consume all the lipo fat in the city. Then it goes after the fat that is still inside people.

The first detective on the scene is O'Malley's ex-partner. The guy is angry at having the case taken from him. He is super-competitive, and wants to solve it before O'Malley (Michael Landes - Lois & Clark: S1 ) does. Therefore he will get in the way ...

This was written by Joel Surnow, creator of 24. As a police procedural it works, unlike most Sci-Fi thriller shows.

Special Unit 2 [Season 1, Episode 6] The Depths

Shown 16 May 01

We have another Sexy Victims Unit ep. After the last on a couple of weeks ago, this time the monster attacks females instead of males. Virgins, in fact. Tom Welling ( Smallville ) is a victim's boyfriend.

Carl the Gnome (Danny Woodburn) is in chains after messing with the Chief. Kate Benson ( Alexondra Lee ) has problems of her own - her younger sister is in town, and enjoys dressing like a streetwalker.

Special Unit 2 [Season 2, Episode 1] The Grain

Shown 3 Oct 01

A parasitic Link called The Sandman can jump from body to body when people are asleep, acting out their repressed urges.

Kate the Babe Cop ( Alexondra Lee ) gets infected, and becomes sexually liberated to her new BF. She wears a skimpy skintight outfit, showing off her great cleavage and legs.

The Unit has a new PR officer ( Pauley Perrette ). She is glamourous, the opposite of Abby in NCIS.

Special Unit 2 [Season 2, Episode 2] The Skin

Shown 10 Oct 01

A shapeshifter is murdering people. His MO matches that of The Chameleon (Mark Sheppard - Supernatural ), a paticularly brutal link who killed O'Malley's last partner ( Tsianina Joelson ).

The Chameleon has been in a holding cell for years, so we get the typical Silence of the Lambs storyline.

Special Unit 2 [Season 2, Episode 3] The Years

Shown 17 Oct 01

A male model is found drained of his youth, dead of old age at the age of 19. SU2 deduces that the Link responsible is a witch who can keep herself young by sucking the life-energy out of her victims. There is an obvious suspect - the victim's female employer ( Lola Glaudini ). She starts toying with the detectives like Catherine Trammel in Basic Instinct.

Special Unit 2 [Season 2, Episode 4] The Invisible

Shown 24 Oct 01

The team hunt The Boogeyman. He is a monster that is invisible to adults, but can be seen by children. Unfortunately an innocent man is in jail for one of the Boogeyman's kills.

Amy Acker was originally cast as a sexy babysitter, but the part was either re-cast or cut.

Special Unit 2 [Season 2, Episode 5] The Eve

Shown 31 Oct 01

It is Hallowe'en, and Four killers are raised from their graves in the convict graveyard. The brains of the operation is the King of the Links (John DeLancie - Star Trek: TNG ), who uses his new henchmen to hold the Chicago Museum to ransom. Not unlike Lois & Clark [Season 2, Episode 7] That Old Gang Of Mine , though the villain in that one used clones as henchmen instead of zombies.

The team try to outsmart the villain. But it turns out he was involved in the death of O'Malley's previous partner, two years ago. Yes, the villain has had two years to plan this caper. No wonder he is always a few steps ahead of them.

Special Unit 2 [Season 2, Episode 6] The Rocks

Shown 7 Nov 01

Kate the Babe Cop ( Alexondra Lee ) dates her college BF (Sebastian Spence - First Wave ).

Twin babes are picking up lonely men in singles bars. Unfortunately they are Gorgons. One note - to turn their victims to stone they use their hair-snakes' venom, not their gaze. This is actually an improvement on the original myth.

Special Unit 2 [Season 2, Episode 7] The Drag

Shown 14 Nov 01

In the 1870s a Native American tribe conducted a human sacrifice to appease a dragon. They must have avoided being charged with murder. Of course, since the dragon probably caused the Great Chicago Fire ...

Some grave-robbers messed with the grave site. The team track the stolen grave goods to a Playboy Mansion place, where the Hefner type is HRG from Heroes .

Carl the gnome is targeted by the dragon. Can he slay it before it gets him?

Special Unit 2 [Season 2, Episode 8] The Beast

Shown 21 Nov 01

Someone murders a dancer on her way home from the strip-club she works at. The too-obvious suspect is an over-enthusiastic fan of hers, although she could also have been attacked by a robber who wants to steal the massive wad of money she earned on her shift.

SU2 investigate, and discover the blame is an Ogre - not a friendly one like Shrek . Apparently he was also responsible for the Jack the Ripper killings. However, Jonathan the CSI dude states that the DNA is inconsistent.

Carl the comedy-relief gnome has an online girlfriend. Kate the Babe Cop ( Alexondra Lee ) also has a love interest - the Police Detective originally assigned to the case.

Potential suspects include a pair of lapdancing twins. They are carrion-eaters, but they do not look like the Pach-Marrah in Babylon 5 . One of them always lies, and the other only tells the truth. Kate ( Alexondra Lee ) must have seen Labyrinth , because she knows the way to work out which one is which. Then Kate goes undercover as a streetwalker to act as bait to find the killer.

Special Unit 2 [Season 2, Episode 9] The Wall

Shown 28 Nov 01

Kate ( Alexondra Lee ) goes to her High School reunion. Unfortunately there are Monsters in the walls. It turns out she discovered this at the Graduation ceremony, and as a result her former classmates all think she is crazy. It is not the first time that a character's personal subplot has overlapped with the main freak of the week, but it is shocking that a main character's personal backstory happens to be so pivotal!

Meanwhile, the Boss goes for a vacation in his isolated country shack. Carl the Gnome tags along too, as an unexpected guest.

Special Unit 2 [Season 2, Episode 10] The Straw

Shown 16 Jan 02

A couple of workmen excavate an old coffin. Inside it is a reptilian-looking scarecrow. It does not kill its victims, just scares them and feeds off their fear. Which means it can take advantage of modern horror film tropes. Cheerleaders having a slumber party are an easy target.

O'Malley (Michael Landes - Lois & Clark: S1 ) was caught giving a troll a punishment beating. He has to attend anger management sessions. Will the therapy help him face his own fears, to overcome the fear demon?

Special Unit 2 [Season 2, Episode 13] The Wish

Shown 13 Feb 02

The villain of the week is a Genie. An evil Genie, that is. She makes wishes come true by committing crimes and letting the wisher take the fall for them. And she is three wishes away from 3000, which will give her free will so she can use her magicks for her own selfish reasons.

Meanwhile, O'Malley (Michael Landes - Lois & Clark: S1 ) is having a good time with his new GF ( Cobie Smulders ). But as always, the character's private life is dragged into the main plot. The Genie makes the GF jealous, and acts like a Vengeance Demon to go after the hero. Ironic, this ep has the same title as the Vengeance Demon's first ep in Buffy.