By Region

Ontario is divided into two larger regions, Northern and Southern Ontario. Northern Ontario is divided into Northwestern Ontario and Northeastern Ontario. Southern Ontario is further divided into Central Ontario, Eastern Ontario, and Southwestern Ontario, essentially creating 5 distinct regions. These five larger regions, are further divided into 49 Counties, Districts & Regional Municipalities (more commonly referred to as Regions).

Inside the region specific sections you will learn a bit about the area, including what it is most known for and the annual events that are celebrated there. You will also be able to search through the activities and amenities you can enjoy while visiting the region.

Central Ontario

Durham – Halton Region – Muskoka District – Peel Region – Simcoe County – Toronto – York

Southwestern Ontario

Brant County – Bruce County – Chatham–Kent – Dufferin County – Elgin County – Essex County – Grey County – Haldimand County – Hamilton – Huron County – Lambton County – Middlesex County – Niagara Region – Norfolk County – Oxford County – Pelee Township – Perth County – Waterloo – Wellington County

Eastern Ontario

Frontenac County – Haliburton County – Hastings- Kawartha Lakes – Lanark – Leeds & Grenville – Lennox & Addington – Northhumberland County – Ottawa – Peterborough County – Prescott & Russell – Prince Edward County – Renfrew – Stormont, Dundas & Glengarry

Northeastern Ontario

Algoma District – Cochrane – Manitoulin – Nipissing District – Parry Sound District – Sudbury – Timiskaming

Northwestern Ontario

Kenora – Rainy River – Thunder Bay

Ontario Regions on Google Map

The 49 regions illustrated above are positioned in google maps below for trip planning.

. Click on the markers to view the region name

. Click on the top right hand corner to view larger map

. To have fewer markers to view, turn off the regions you do not want to consider at this time

. Click on a marker for the region’s name and additional information

. In the left hand panel, click on view in google maps to see a region overlay on the existing map

Feedback

If you have any feedback or suggestions to improve the use of the site, contact us, we’d love to hear from you.

By Cities & Towns

In this section you can see the location of population centres within the 10 regions currently highlighted on 2C&DO. For ease of use we’ve called them cities and towns, but it also includes population centres that are categorized as municipalities, villages and communities. Where available, links are included to City and Town pages.

Central Ontario

Simcoe County: Barrie, Orillia – Bradford West Gwillimbury, Collingwood, Innisfil, Midland, New Tecumseth, Penetanguishene, Wasaga Beach

Muskoka District: Bracebridge, Gravenhurst, Huntsville

Southwestern Ontario

Grey County: Owen Sound – Meaford – Hanover, The Blue Mountains

Dufferin County: Grand Valley, Orangeville, Shelburne

Bruce County: Kincardine, Saugeen Shores, Southampton, Port Elgin

Eastern Ontario

Haliburton County: Haliburton, Minden, Wilberforce, Gooderham

Kawartha Lakes: Bobcaygeon, Fenelon Falls, Lindsay

Prince Edward County: Picton – Bloomfield, Wellington

Northeastern Ontario

Parry Sound District: Kearney, Parry Sound, Powassan

Nipissing District: North Bay, Mattawa, Temagami, West Nipissing

Northwestern Ontario

On the google map below, the listed population centres are colour coded based on their location within the five larger regions of Ontario, and the same colour coding is used in the sections titles above.