I have quite a few CDs with Pacific Jazz recordings by Teddy Edwards, Gerald Wilson, Gil Evans, Richard Twardzik, Gerry Mulligan, Chet Baker, Cy Touff, Bob Brookmeyer, Bud Shank, Bill Perkins, Jack Montrose, Bob Gordon, Russ Freeman, Chico Hamilton, Joe Pass, Jim Hall, John Lewis, Art Blakey, Clifford Brown, Kenny Dorham, Pepper Adams, Elmo Hope, Carmell Jones, Dupree Bolton, Harold Land, Curtis Amy, Les McCann, Jazz Crusaders, Earl Anderza, Clare Fischer, and Don Ellis - too many PJ titles to list here. Fortunately, the edits Pacific Jazz owner Richard Bock made in several recordings are undone on those discs, at least where possible.

By the way, the arranger's name is Johnny Mandel.

Pacific Jazz, iirc, also midwifed the first Ravi Shankar releases in the US. Improvisations features Bud Shank on some early (circa 1962) East-meets-West stuff with Shankar . . . definitely worth seeking out.

And I'm on a bit of a Hoagy Carmichael kick of late, myself. I hear so many of his songwriting ticks in Tom Waits and Randy Newman, just to name two later performers heavily influenced by him. He's far too often overlooked, I'd say.

the richard twardzik trio session (about 1 lp side) is absolutely wonderful.

also the original gerry mulligan quartet with chet baker, and the chet baker quartet sides with russ freeman are excellent.

richard bock was known both for bad editing and indifferent tape storage which has come to haunt reissuers of this material.

by the way,do we have information on the Pacific Jazz studio? i believe Bock was

his own engineer on a lot of the sessions & that the earliest Byrds & Doors recordings

were done in his studio.

I have to second this Twardzik release. It's 20 minutes of the most amazing piano trio music ca. 1955.

Another interesting PJ release is Don Ellis "Essence" (ca 61-62) with Paul Bley on piano, Gary Peacock on bass and I forget who the drummer is. They do a lot of early Carla Bley tunes. I'm not a particluarly big fan of Ellis' big band stuff but his small group stuff at this time was quite forward looking. This one and his Candid date (also with Bley and bassist Steve Swallow) point to a direction he could have taken. And it's always good to have Paul Bley on your date, especially at this time when he wasn't as prolifically recorded.