Lynne Featherstone, the equalities minister, hit out at Mr Hilton, the Prime Minister’s director of strategy, for suggesting the Government could scrap maternity pay.

In an interview with a Sunday newspaper, the minister said: “Well, I might talk about scrapping Steve Hilton”.

Ms Featherstone also attacked as “hideous” a recommendation expected from another Downing Street adviser to shelve plans for shared parental leave and flexible working.

The Coalition has proposed allowing couples more choice in how parental leave is split which the father potentially taking up more of it.

But a report for Mr Cameron by Adrian Beecroft, a venture capitalist, on how to cut business regulation is understood to have recommended a U-turn on the plans.

The Prime Minister is now facing a split in Cabinet over the future of the policies.

Along with Mr Hilton, George Osborne and Eric Pickles are understood to be in favour of a roll back while Nick Clegg, Theresa May, Oliver Letwin and Michael Gove fear it could harm attempts to appeal to women voters.

Ms Featherstone said: “Whatever is in this Beecroft report, I think, will be swiftly swept away.

“These are hideous suggestions. What I would say about them is that it would be absolutely extraordinary if we were to abandon our commitment to those flagship policies.

"It is absolutely vital that we deliver on our rhetoric around family-friendly issues. I wouldn't support that, Nick [Clegg] wouldn't support that, and quite frankly David Cameron was campaigning last year on being the most family-friendly government. I would be very surprised if he supported that."

Figures last week showed only one in five board positions in leading companies has gone to a woman since February, far lower than the number recommended in an independent report that month.

Lord Davies of Abersoch, the former trade minister, said that FTSE 100 companies should aim for at least one in four female board members by 2015, in a review that suggested ways to increase the number of women in senior roles.

Ms Featherstone suggested the Government should look at more regulation in the form of the enforcement of quotas on directors.