life

living matter and, as such, matter that shows certain attributes that include responsiveness, growth, metabolism, energy transformation, and reproduction. Although a noun, as...

Ichthyostega

genus of extinct animals, closely related to tetrapods (four-legged land vertebrates) and found as fossils in rocks in eastern Greenland from the late Devonian Period (about...

Eryops

genus of extinct primitive amphibians found as fossils in Permian rocks in North America (the Permian period occurred from 299 million to 251 million years ago). Eryops was a...

Cacops

extinct amphibian genus found as fossils in Early Permian, or Cisuralian, rocks in North America (the Early Permian Period, or Cisuralian Epoch, lasted from 299 million to...

animal

any of a group of multicellular eukaryotic organisms (i.e., as distinct from bacteria, their deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA, is contained in a membrane-bound nucleus). They...

chordate

any member of the phylum Chordata, which includes the vertebrates (subphylum Vertebrata), the most highly evolved animals, as well as two other subphyla—the tunicates...

amphibian

any member of the group of vertebrate animals characterized by their ability to exploit both aquatic and terrestrial habitats. The name amphibian, derived from the Greek...

vertebrate

any animal of the subphylum Vertebrata, the predominant subphylum of the phylum Chordata. They have backbones, from which they derive their name. The vertebrates are also...

fossil

remnant, impression, or trace of an animal or plant of a past geologic age that has been preserved in Earth’s crust. The complex of data recorded in fossils worldwide—known...

tetrapod

a superclass of animals that includes all limbed vertebrates (backboned animals) constituting the classes Amphibia (amphibians), Reptilia (reptiles), Aves (birds), Mammalia...

Seymouria

extinct genus of terrestrial tetrapod found as fossils in Permian rocks (251 million to 299 million years old) in North America and named for fossil deposits near Seymour,...

Diadectes

extinct genus of tetrapods closely related to the first amniotes (mammals, birds, reptiles, and their relatives). Members of this genus have been found as fossils in...

dinosaur

the common name given to a group of reptiles, often very large, that first appeared roughly 245 million years ago (near the beginning of the Middle Triassic Epoch) and...

fish

any of approximately 34,000 species of vertebrate animals (phylum Chordata) found in the fresh and salt waters of the world. Living species range from the primitive jawless...

Gigantopithecus

genus of large extinct apes represented by a single species, Gigantopithecus blacki, which lived during the Pleistocene Epoch (2.6 million to 11,700 years ago) in southern...

dire wolf

canine that existed during the Pleistocene Epoch (2.6 million to 11,700 years ago). It is probably the most common mammalian species to be found preserved in the La Brea Tar...

Lucy

nickname for a remarkably complete (40 percent intact) hominin skeleton found by American paleoanthropologist Donald Johanson at at the fossil site Hadar in Ethiopia on Nov....

mammoth

any member of an extinct group of elephants found as fossils in Pleistocene deposits over every continent except Australia and South America and in early Holocene deposits of...

salamander

any member of a group of about 740 species of amphibians that have tails and that constitute the order Caudata. The order comprises 10 families, among which are newts and...

pterosaur

any of the flying reptiles that flourished during all periods (Triassic, Jurassic, and Cretaceous) of the Mesozoic Era (252.2 million to 66 million years ago). Although...

Smilodon

extinct genus of large mammalian carnivores known collectively by the common name sabre-toothed cat. Smilodon belongs to the subfamily Machairodontinae of the family...

mastodon

any of several extinct elephantine mammals (family Mammutidae, genus Mammut ) that first appeared in the early Miocene (23 million to 2.6 million years ago) and continued in...