Ancestors Descendants

This page has been accessed 170 times.

Biography

Joseph Warder Small III was born June 17, 1915, in Ambridge, Pennsylvania. Joe, as he was known, grew up in Ambridge, with a younger sister, Jane, and brother, George. His father worked for American Bridge Company for which the town of Ambridge was named. Joe's family lived at 608 Park Road, in what was one of the "better" neighborhoods, but they didn't escape the pollution. Joe would later tell about how his mother had to wash her lace curtains weekly, because of all of the soot in the air around a steel town, like Ambridge.

After completing high school in 1933, Joe followed in his dad's footsteps and went to Purdue University in West Lafayette, Indiana, where he majored in mechanical engineering. During his sophomore year, while attempting a prank on the dormitory proctor, Joe fell from a ledge on the third floor of the dormitory and shattered his leg.

While recovering from his broken leg, his sister, Jane Small, introduced him to her friend, Kay Jordan, at Indiana State Teachers College of Pennsylvania. Later that summer, Joe took Kay on a double date with Jane and Jane's friend, Don Laird, to the Westview Amusement Park. In spite of Kay's dislike for amusement park rides, Joe's and Kay's romance flourished with the aid of the many letters they exchanged on their return to their respective schools.

In 1937, Kay came back to Mars to teach the fourth grade at the Mars Grade School, while Joe, who had lost a year due to his broken leg, returned to Purdue for his senior year. After graduation, Joe got a job with the American Bridge Company in Baltimore, Maryland. Joe's job enabled Kay and Joe to really begin planning their wedding.

On September 9, 1939, Joe married Kay Jordan in Mars, Pennsylvania, and Kay moved to Baltimore, Maryland.

Joe's first child, Eleanore Jordan Small, was born May 26, 1943 at the Franklin Square Hospital, which was then located in downtown Baltimore. Kay, Joe, and baby El lived at the Northwood Apartments, until after Joe's second child, Joseph Warder Small IV, was born in XXXX (private).

In 1948, Joe and his family moved to a new house that Joe had build at 535 St. Francis Road, Towson, Maryland, adjoining the Ridgely farm, which later became part of the Hampton Mansion National Historical Site.

Shortly thereafter, Joe decided to go into business with his brother-in-law, Don Laird, an architect, and their friend, Charlie Rock, to build custom homes. They formed Laird, Rock, and Small, Inc. and built Hampton Village on parts of the Ridgely farm, which they had purchased. Later, they developed and built Fox Chapel in Baltimore County. After Don Laird and Charlie Rock left LRS, Joe brought his son, Joe Small 4th, into the company and they developed and built Scots Fancy in Harford County, Maryland.

Joe and Don got into sailing in the mid-1950s and Joe built the Moro, a beautiful wood cutter. Joe and his son actively sailed the Moro into the mid-1980s, frequently taking off from business on slack days with good winds to get in a day on the Chesapeake Bay.

Joe's and his partners' business interests expanded in the 1950s with the acquisition of Manor Tile to make roof tiles for their custom homes, when it became difficult to obtain good slate from the played-out quarries near York, Pennsylvania. They also acquired a share in a local professional ice hockey team, but moved the team to Charlotte, North Carolina, after the rink on North Avenue in Baltimore burned down. They sold their share of the team soon thereafter.

After El and young Joe were grown, Kay and Joe found more opportunities for overseas travel, including island vacations and sailing charters in the Antilles and a trip to France. They also delighted in trips to Ocean City and other activities with their three grandchildren, Ed and Jay Buckler and Greg Small.

Joe died at his home at 535 St. Francis Road, Towson, Maryland, in June 1986 from cancer.

Written up by Edward S Buckler III in early 2000s

Sources

Edward S Buckler III biography with help of Joe's wife Katherine Small