It outraged many on its release in 1971 with scenes of extreme violence and telephone sex. But, more than three decades on, Get Carter has been voted by a film publication as the greatest British movie of all time.

Set in Newcastle and filled with shocking murders and well-cut suits. The film charts the story of Jack Carter, played by Michael Caine, a London gangster who travels to the north-east for his brother's funeral.

It caused a sensation when it was released not only because of its violence but its images of Britt Ekland, wearing black lingerie and indulging in telephone sex with Carter and of Caine appearing naked in a shoot-out.

As Carter, Caine delivered some of the most memorable lines in film history, including the often quoted: "You're a big man, but you're out of shape. With me, it's a full-time job. So behave yourself."

Matt Mueller, editor of Total Film magazine, which produced the list of the Top 50 British films, said Get Carter was slated when it first came out. Today, however, Get Carter is considered a film which was groundbreaking and before its time.

"It was pretty shocking at the time for its scenes of violence, and Caine played a pretty ruthless character. But Caine's character is now seen as one of the greatest anti-heroes of all time."

Get Carter was based on Ted Lewis's book Jack's Return Home, and was written and directed by Mike Hodges.

However, he decided to move the setting of the story from Doncaster to Newcastle, and the film makes much of the city's decaying industrial landscape.

The film also stars Ian Hendry and the playwright John Osborne.

Total Film magazine polled 25 film critics for the survey, which is dominated by films from the 50s and the 60s - the most recent on the top 10 list being Trainspotting, which was released in 1996.

A Matter of Life and Death, starring David Niven, came in second while Trainspotting came third.

Top 10

1 Get Carter (1971)

2 A Matter of Life and Death (1946)

3 Trainspotting (1996)

4 The Third Man (1949)

5 Life of Brian (1979)

6 The Wicker Man (1973)

7 Kind Hearts and Coronets (1949)

8 Lawrence of Arabia (1962)

9 From Russia with Love (1963)