“Get Carter” is a useless remake of Mike Hodges’ 1971 British gangland cult classic. Stylistically mannered and amped up in ways that clearly define how mainstream narrative filmmaking has declined in recent years, this latest Sylvester Stallone “comeback” picture lacks excitement, credibility, suspense, character insight or anything else that might conceivably engage viewers, other than a certain surface showiness. Revenge drama boasts enough rough action, however routine, to lure some Stallone faithful, but pic’s dour tone and tiresomely familiar moves will make for a mild B.O. impact.

A special favorite among genre specialists, Michael Caine fans and young Brit directors who are now themselves turning out cold-blooded crimers by the trunkload, Hodges’ adaptation of Ted Lewis’ 1970 novel about an East End gangster unleashing payback for his brother’s murder was subtle, understated and insidious, as well as being thick with vivid characterization and grimy Newcastle atmosphere. Film inspired an American remake with a black cast, “Hit Man,” directed by George Armitage, in 1972.

New version tips its hat to the old at the outset as an evocation of Roy Budd’s memorable “Get Carter Theme” underscores a flashy credits sequence in which Las Vegas “financial adjuster” Jack Carter (Stallone) leaves his criminal bosses in the lurch and entrains to Seattle to attend his brother’s funeral. Initially reproached by his brother’s wife, Gloria (Miranda Richardson), and latter’s teen daughter, Doreen (Rachael Leigh Cook), for having been out of touch for years, the nattily dressed and Vandyked thug suspects his brother was murdered and begins poking around the rain-soaked city for likely suspects.

Search immediately leads Jack into an almost laughably familiar “corrupt urban underbelly” populated by the likes of Mickey Rourke playing, of all things, a coke-snorting, sun-glasses-shrouded Internet porn entrepreneur; Alan Cumming as a sniveling high-tech tycoon; Rhona Mitra as a slutty moll who had been Jack’s brother’s “lady on the side”; and, lo and behold, Michael Caine himself, taking a quick payday for four scenes as the brother’s former boss, a quaintly old-fashioned but wily club owner.

With director Stephen Kay, fresh off “The Mod Squad,” evidently preoccupied by how to keep his images popping at all times (pic is loaded with frame-skipping, off-kilter compositions and other trendy stylistic tics), any deeper levels aspired to in the pared-down script by David McKenna (“American History X”) go thoroughly unmined. While the basic plot progression of the original is followed pretty closely, update soft-pedals the vengeful brutality and quasi-existential nihilism, the better to investigate Jack’s chance at redemption.

Latter is pursued via his attempt to make amends with Gloria and particularly with young Doreen, whose role becomes more central as matters climax. This is where some deep reaching by Stallone and fine writing might have made the difference, but it’s not forthcoming; a long rooftop scene between Jack and Doreen is meant to summon up elemental emotions, but the dialogue lacks eloquence and focus, and there is nothing going on behind Stallone’s eyes and therefore nothing communicated from his character’s stoical figure. It’s clear what they were trying to do here, but it simply isn’t delivered.

Except for some fisticuffs (notably between Rocky and former real-life pro boxer Rourke) and sporadic doses of other rough stuff, bloodshed is mostly kept offscreen, while more conventional action sequences are surprisingly routine; particularly lackluster is a nocturnal car chase in which the vehicles run through a Christmas tree lot (what must “The French Connection” editor Jerry Greenberg have thought when confronted with this?).

Tech contributions are flashy, with wintry Seattle/British Columbia locations providing plenty of wet, gloomy atmosphere. Gretchen Mol goes unbilled in a brief appearance as Jack’s girlfriend back in Vegas, but doesn’t get to enact the memorable phone-sex interlude shared by Caine and Britt Ekland in the original; comparison between the equivalent scenes in the two pictures — the first gamy and provocative, the second bland and conventional — neatly sums up the vast gap between the films.