There was a time when "Mejiro Goten" (Mejiro palace), the former residence of Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka (1918-1993) in Tokyo’s Mejiro district, was something of a “famous spot” at the start of the year.

Nearly 1,000 visitors from the nation’s political, business and bureaucratic circles came to pay their respects, and they were treated to traditional “kiyari-uta” song performances and a sumptuous New Year’s party spread.

The scene was symbolic of the glory achieved by Tanaka, who was born into poverty in Niigata Prefecture and rose to the nation’s highest political office.

The Western-style residence was once occupied by an officer of the Allied occupation forces and reportedly featured decorative lighting fixtures of hand-blown glass.

Tanaka started living there in the mid-1950s and later built a pond in the garden where he kept “nishikigoi” carp from his native prefecture.

Tanaka’s day started at 6 every morning. After getting dressed in a suit and tie, he would leave the main building and go to an annex, where scores of petition groups would be waiting, which was routine.

After listening to each group for five minutes, he would say, “OK, I understand” and pick up the phone right there to speak to high-ranking government ministry or agency officials.

Tanaka made instant decisions, always.

His close friend, Prime Minister Masayoshi Ohira (1910-1980), once snuck into Tanaka’s estate by climbing a wall to avoid being seen by reporters.

He brought a box of sweets containing 5 million yen ($34,500) in cash. The money was to get Tanaka to agree to a Cabinet reshuffle.

The Mejiro Palace, where power, personal connections and money merged and the history of backstage politics unfolded, burned to the ground on Jan. 8.

Tanaka’s daughter Makiko said she had forgotten to extinguish burning incense at the family altar. I imagine she must be consumed by regret.

Tanaka’s politics could be described as a product of the period of Japan’s economic miracle when people could believe in their future.

It could be called “Showa Era politics”--a combination of the “light” in the form of extensive railway and highway networks and the “shadow” that is politics thoroughly tainted by money.

His residence was the symbol of all that and its loss reminds me anew of the changing times. The afterglow is almost completely gone and only the shadows are growing longer.

--The Asahi Shimbun, Jan. 10

* * *

Vox Populi, Vox Dei is a popular daily column that takes up a wide range of topics, including culture, arts and social trends and developments. Written by veteran Asahi Shimbun writers, the column provides useful perspectives on and insights into contemporary Japan and its culture.