FRANK WOODBURY MILLER

1939-2018

Frank Woodbury Miller was born May 7, 1939 to Joseph Larson and Nettie Woodbury Miller in Salt Lake City, Utah. He passed away at home, surrounded by family, in Brooklyn, New York on Friday, November 23, 2018 from PSP. He married his high school sweetheart, Alice Maxine Coley, on August 10, 1961 in the Salt Lake Temple. Frank was a valedictorian at West High School, Salt Lake City and an Eagle Scout. He was a varsity coxswain on the U of P crew team and graduated from the Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania. He began his career at Arthur Young & Co. and became a CPA. He was a Captain in the United States Army and served in Germany at the time of the Berlin Wall. He later became CFO and Vice-President of oil and gas venture corporations and then his own company, Millbrook Associates. He was active in the community and was President of the Midwood Development Corporation for 6 years. He continued to serve on the board as long as his health permitted and was given President Emeritus status.

He was a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and served as Brooklyn Branch President at the age of 25 and New York Stake President at 39. Under his leadership, Spanish, Korean and Chinese branches were organized. He also served as Scout Master and as a Chaplin at a national scout jamboree, Elders Quorum President, Regional Welfare Agent and Stake Patriarch. He was ordained a Sealer in the Manhattan Temple on the day of its dedication and served in that capacity for over 12 years. He also served as an Ordinance Worker and Assistant Recorder. His greatest joy was sealing families.

He was a devoted husband and father and is survived by four sons: Frank Jr. (Ruth), Brian Joseph (Lisa), Gordon Jacob, and Daniel Andrew. Grandfather of Joseph Paul, Christopher Matthias, Rachel Keertana, Jacob Cole, Makenna Brooklyn, and Colton Sawyer. He is the great-grandfather to Harlow, Leia, and Jamison. He is also survived by his two sisters and their spouses: Maxine (Claron) Crow and Janice (Wayne) Ashby. He has nurtured over 12 foster children. He loved the Lord and served in whatever capacity he could to help others. He was friends to all races and socio-economic status. He was a kind, gentle, hardworking man who was much loved and loved all.

Funeral Services will be held at 2:00 pm on Wednesday, December 5, 2018 at Lindquist’s Bountiful Mortuary, 727 N. 400 E. Bountiful, Utah, where family and friends may visit from 12:30-1:30 pm. Interment Farmington City Cemetery. Condolences may be shared at www.lindquistmortuary.com.