If you’re a basketball fan, then chances are you’re already aware of Mr. Tilman Fertitta aka the current owner of the Houston Rockets. This savvy businessman and television personality has built an empire in the billions and even wrote a book titled Shut Up and Listen!, which was released in September 2019. If you’re interested in learning more about this business magnate including his lifestyle, family, and the iconic Tilman Fertitta home, then you’re in luck. We’re here to give you the #411 on any and everything relating to him, and his infamous Tilman Fertitta house!

Array

Where does Tilman Fertitta live?

Tilman Fertitta House Houston

Fertitta and his family live in a massive palatial estate located in the swanky River Oaks area of Houston, Texas.

Tilman Fertitta House River Oaks

This gated estate is definitely one for the books. The $7.45 million home sits on a 5.4-acre lot and includes amenities such as an outdoor pool, a tennis court and a 1,323-square-foot garage complete with 11 parking spaces. The home itself (including the guest quarters) is a whopping 25,548 square feet. The main house has 6 bedrooms and 7 bathrooms.

The entrance of the home comes complete with a grand foyer which also includes a sweeping spiral staircase that rises up to the second floor. It additionally includes a family room, living room, a terrace, and a summer kitchen. There are 17 rooms in total in addition to an elevator and a fireplace.

Tilman and his family are in great company when it comes to high profile neighbors. Mega-pastor Joel Osteen’s house is just half a mile from Tilman’s.

Mr. Fertitta and his family are known for opening up their home annually during the Christmas holiday season in order to host a Santa’s Elves party which benefits pediatric cancer research at M.D. Anderson Children’s Cancer Hospital.

Array

Tilman Fertitta Net Worth

As of 2019, it’s estimated that Mr. Fertitta is worth an insane $5.3 billion. That’s a lot of cash — and he spends it quite lavishly.

Tilman Fertitta Helicopter

In addition to owning two private jets and a yacht, it’s also been reported that Fertitta owns two helicopters. Clearly, the man loves to fly in style. But none of this compares to his infamous Boardwalk yacht.

Array Array

Tilman Fertitta Yacht

Fertitta also owns a massive yacht called Boardwalk which was named after Kemah Boardwalk located on Houston’s Clear Lake. The superyacht is 50 meters long, which translates to 163 feet and has 6 bedrooms with the ability to house 12 guests. It also has 5 additional cabins which are used to house 10 crew members. According to reports, the yacht set him back a whopping $40 million.

Tilman Fertitta Private Jet

He always told himself he’d have a jet by 35 years old, and he did. He’s quoted as saying he knew he had made then. Well, duh!

Array

Tilman Fertitta Family

Tilman Fertitta Wife

Tilman Fertitta is married to his wife Paige Fertitta. According to reports, Paige was initially a little skeptical about dating Tilman, who had to ask her three times before she finally agreed.

Tilman Fertitta Kids

Fertitta and his wife have five children. Their names are Michael Fertitta, Patrick Fertitta, Blayne Fertitta, Blake Fertitta, and Victor Fertitta.

Lorenzo Fertitta Net Worth (is he related to Tilman?)

Much like his counterpart Mr. Tilman Fertitta, Lorenzo Fertitta has also made his way into the public eye due to his various successful business ventures including becoming part-owner of UFC along with his brother Frank. These ventures have also earned him a spot on the world’s list of billionaires. In fact, to date, Lorenzo Fertitta is worth a whopping $1.9 billion.

Is Lorenzo Fertitta related to Tilman Fertitta? The answer is YES. Tilman Fertitta is actually the third cousin of Lorenzo and Frank Fertitta.

What does Tilman Fertitta do?

Fertitta is perhaps most known for purchasing the Houston Rockets in October of 2017 for a whopping $2.2 billion. However, it was his various business pursuits which eventually facilitated his ability to become the official owner of an NBA team. These insane companies include the following:

Fertitta Group Inc.

Tilman is the owner of Fertitta Group Inc., an investment management company headquartered in Houston, Texas.

Landry’s Inc.

Tilman is additionally the CEO and sole owner of Landry’s Inc., which initially started out as one of the largest restaurant corporations located within the United States. Fertitta eventually gained controlling interests of the restaurants and purchased the remaining stocks in the company to become sole owner. The company currently owns and operates over 500 restaurants/gaming/entertainment and hospitality locations around the country.

His portfolio includes some huge brands, including Bubba Gump Shrimp Co., The Golden Nugget Hotel and Casinos, Morton’s The Steakhouse, and Rainforest Cafe to name a few. In 2017, Fertitta’s Landry’s acquired half of EMM Group which owns the celebrity-loved Catch Restaurants.

Hotels

Tilman is perhaps most notably known for being a hotelier second to being known as the owner of the Houston Rockets. The business magnate has both purchased and built numerous hotels and resorts since his first venture with the Key Largo Hotel in Galveston, Texas.

Casinos

In 2005 Tilman purchased the Golden Nugget Casinos chain with locations in Nevada. He also purchased the Trump Marina from Trump Entertainment Resorts, which he reopened as Golden Nugget Atlantic City. He has also opened up casinos in New Jersey, Biloxi, Alabama, and the Mississippi Gulf Coast.

He also purchased the Golden Nugget Lake Charles from Pinnacle Entertainment in part due to the fact that the location was within close proximity to his hometown of Houston, Texas.

Entertainment

Tilman additionally owns amusement parks, aquariums, and the Kemah Boardwalk, which he purchased in 1999.

Houston Rockets Owner

Tilman purchased the team back in October 2017 for $2.2 billion.

Billion Dollar Buyer Show

In 2016 it was announced that Fertitta would be starring in a CNBC reality show called Billion Dollar Buyer. Fortunately for Mr. Tilman, the first season was wildly successful which resulted in the show getting picked up for an additional season with over twice as many episodes.

Array

The show follows Fertitta as he works with entrepreneurs who have ingenious ideas/products that he could buy and or/license for his own businesses. For example, in one of his earlier episodes, Tilman found a small mom and pop company making what he thought was the most incredible hot sauce and barbecue sauce he’d ever tasted. After they implemented the changes he suggested, he offered them a massive deal to be in hundreds of his restaurant locations.

Got a great product and want to be on the show? You can apply here!

Sources

https://www.celebfamily.com/business/tilman-fertitta-family.html

https://www.cnbc.com/2016/07/11/billionaire-brothers-to-get-massive-windfall-from-ufc-sale.html

https://www.cnbc.com/billion-dollar-buyer/

https://www.pressofatlanticcity.com/news/top_three/a-conversation-with-tilman-fertitta-owner-of-the-golden-nugget/article_15b856c2-96fe-11e1-bc35-001a4bcf887a.html