The Brit School famed for fostering the talent of artists such as Adele and Amy Winehouse has been given the go-ahead to open a second site in Bradford, West Yorkshire.

Plans for another performing arts school based in the north of England have been approved by the Department of Education.

It follows the success of the first Brit School in Selhurst, Croydon, South London which opened in 1991 and launched the careers of singers Raye, Loyle Carner and Katie Melua and actor Tom Holland.

Collectively graduates from the school have sold more than 250 million albums and won 15 Brit awards over the past three decades.

The British Phonographic Industry (BPI), the representative voice for record labels across the UK, plans to open a specialist creative college in the West Yorkshire city in 2026/27.

Dr Jo Twist, BPI chief executive, said: “We are delighted with this decision and it is a positive signal that Government recognises the critical importance of creative and specialist creative arts education.

“The UK is a world leader in music and across the creative industries and if we want this to continue, we must invest in talent and the highly transferable skills needed for a competitive economy.

“This school will not only focus on producing our next generation of performers, but crucially, train young people with the important technical qualities needed for our industries to thrive and provide them with opportunities that they otherwise might not be able to access.”

Education Secretary Gillian Keegan said: “We are broadening opportunities so more of our children can access this springboard to success in the UK’s growing creative industries.”

Brit School North will be a free-to-attend specialist college for up to 500 students aged 16-19 in the centre of Bradford, with a catchment area across West Yorkshire and the North and offering a range of performance, production and digital subjects.

This bid was the result of a collaboration between the BPI; record companies Sony Music Entertainment UK, Universal Music UK and Warner Music UK; Brit School; East London Arts & Music (ELAM) and the Day One Trust.

The three record company partners have committed to contribute an initial amount of additional funding towards to the school, which is expected to be used to fund the purchase of state-of-the-art equipment.

YolanDa Brown, BPI Chair, said the news comes as the BPI celebrates its 50th year making it all the more special.

“We know that young people have moved to London and the South East to specifically attend creative schools like the Brit School and ELAM, and this approval means they will no longer have to do this.”, she added.

Bradford, which has been awarded City of Culture 2025, has already produced Girls Aloud star Kimberley Walsh and One Direction singer Zayn Malik, the latter has already expressed support for the school.

Mayor of West Yorkshire Tracy Brabin said: “With West Yorkshire becoming the home of Brit School North, more young people can follow in the footsteps of our world-class homegrown artists, from the likes of Mel B and Corinne Bailey Rae to the Kaiser Chiefs.”