Riesenberger, Christine L. (Goodwine)

Webster: November 4, 2015. Christine is survived by her husband, John Riesenberger; two sons, Kevin (Jackie) Goodwine Bryan (Cheryl) Goodwine; grandchildren, Madison, Olivia, Coltan, Avrey Goodwine; siblings, Carol (Bill) Todd, Cheryl (Jerome) Ruderman , Jim (Judy) Esterbrook Rob Esterbrook; step-sons, Rodd (Joan) Riesenberger, Dan Riesenberger; step-grandchildren, Jay, Austin, and Adeline Riesenberger; several nieces, nephews, cousins and dear friends.

Christine's visitation will be Sunday 1-5 PM at the funeral home, 1411 Vintage Lane (between 390 Long Pond Rd.) Her funeral service will be celebrated on Monday at 10 am at the funeral home followed by her entombment in Irondequoit Cemetery. In lieu of flowers donations may be sent to the Breast Cancer Coalition, 840 University Ave., Rochester, NY 14607 in Christine's memory.

Chris was born on March 12, 1947 in Denver, Colorado where she also grew up. Being the oldest of five, Chris spent a lot of time taking care of her younger siblings. When she wasn't at school, she spent time swimming on the YMCA club team. During her youth Chris completed two years at Colorado State University. She left early when she met her first husband Stanley Goodwine. She and Stan were married in Grover, Colorado and then moved to Rochester, NY when she was nine months pregnant with Kevin. Chris has two children from her first marriage Kevin and Bryan. Shortly after arriving to Rochester Chris started working in Real Estate. She spent the rest of her life working as a real estate agent and real estate appraiser.

Chris met John Riesenberger at Hugger's Ski Club event, they later married on Valentine's Day in 1998. When Chris married John she was lucky to acquire two step sons, Rodd and Dan. Chris helped raise Dan, as he was just a little guy when they met. Chris's grandchildren loved spending time with Grandma and Grandpa and often went on the weekends for sleepovers. Most recently she was helping Jay learn to drive, WHILE JAY HELPED GRANDMA DO APPRAISALS! Chris' family is still all living in the Denver area. She adores her nieces and nephews. She has seven. Stacey, Alex, Holly, Jenny, Katie, Kevin and Alex. She has a special relationship with them. Every time they saw Aunt Chris it was a big event. She loved to have fun and spoil them! Chris and John spent several winters in Florida. Some winters spent in Siesta Key and some in the Villages in Okala Florida. They accumulated dear friends during the travel.

Chris loved to play softball and played and spent many years playing with a group of woman that became long time friends. She took many girls vacations with these gals to Myrtle Beach where she went Bungee Jumping and had fun singing karaoke, golfing, and dancing the night away. After she hung up her softball glove, she spent more time golfing. She continued playing in a golf league with her dear friends.

John and Chris spent 20 years boating all over Irondequoit Bay and Lake Ontario. Chris loved to bring the grandchildren out on the boat. She would pack the cooler up with their favorite treats and they would spend the day out on the lake. She loved to attend her grandchildren's sporting events. She also loved to cook and host fabulous holiday celebrations. Christine loved the Eagles and Josh Groban, She loved to keep up with current events and styles and was a devoted subscriber to People magazine. Chris was one tough cookie! She was independent and although she enjoyed being in a committed relationship, being able to take care of herself was always a priority. Chris believed in hard work and taking risks and instilled those values in her boys. She divorced her first husband when the boys were little and did a fantastic job raising her two boys. She supported the boys in any endeavor they tackled. When Kevin was 13 he had paper route with about 300 Sunday deliveries. And come Sunday morning after working all week, Chris would get up and help Kevin stuff the inserts and haul them into her trunk. She would drink her coffee and drive while Kevin delivered. Chris was the favorite mom of all of their friends and never had a spring break where she didn't have some extra teenage boys with her. Chris did not have very much time for goodbyes after she was diagnosed last week, but several of the boy's friends made it over to see her. She got a huge surprise on Sunday when Kevin's childhood buddy Rick flew in from Charlotte for the day to see her. Mark came and shared some laughs with her about his and Bryan's childhood antics. These visits really brought her joy.

Chris loved to bring joy to others especially with overly generous gifts. She would spoil the boys rotten at Christmas time. She would load the Christmas tree with gifts! Her generous spirit continued as the boys grew older and married and had children of their own. Chris loved to take her grandchildren shopping! She made sure to get them all cell phones, even when Moms and Dads thought it too extravagant. When her oldest granddaughter left for college last year, she bought out the Northface store before she left!

Chris was very proud of her boys and was always happy to brag about their accomplishments, Again this transferred to her nieces, nephews, step-children, and grandchildren. Chris will be always be fondly remembered and deeply missed by many family and friends.

Tributes