Our technical support staff has identified the following critical information to get you started. To get the best results make sure you read through all material prior to using your Quest Product.

Sending E-Mails from spotlight via an external e-mail server does not work with port 465 (SSL / TLS).Sending E-Mails from spotlight via an internal server with smtp and port 25 is working.

Spotlight tables QUEST_PPCM_SQL_TEXT and QUEST_PPCM_SQL_SNAPSHOT continue to grow. How to shrink and truncate these tables?

Customers report certain dashboard do not show a save icon and wonder how to export the diagram graphs.

Customers inquire about why spotlight on oracle does not run as a service and if its possible to run it automatically from windows startup.

Under memory & Config, Buffer Cache there is no data displayed for the 8k buffer under Buffer Cache Details.

Spotlight allows data to be stored for indefinite amount of time but the graphs only display a day worth of data. Can the graph be adjust to display for a greater period of time?

How to apply custom alert settings of one connection to other connections?

What is new in Spotlight on Oracle 10.4?

What is new in Spotlight on Oracle 10.5?

User looking for guidance on how to correctly install Spotlight for Oracle in a multi-tenant database.

Below is a list of the recommended software along with any documentation that will help with the install process to bring your product to the version referenced.

The Spotlight on Oracle .MSI Installer can be run silently, and produce an installation that can be captured and re-used via automatic deployment techniques. MSI installers cannot be used in conjunction with the Spotlight on Oracle Installer.

What is the latest version of Oracle that Spotlight supports?

This article lists the new items in Spotlight on Oracle 10.3.1.

How to create user in Spotlight on Oracle or Spotlight on RAC Oracle using wizard.

The Spotlight on Oracle .MSI Installer can be run silently, and produce an installation that can be captured and re-used via automatic deployment techniques. MSI installers cannot be used in conjunction with the Spotlight on Oracle Installer.

How to create Spotlight user by using wizard

Technical Support has reviewed all the support information and has identified the most popular helpful tips and how to videos or articles to ensure you get the most out of your Quest Product.

What is QUEST_PPCM_SQL_TEXT?

Updated Spotlight and lost all alarm settings. Where to find these settings ?

An error occurred when requesting Snooze/Ack data. The remote server returned an error: (403) Forbidden.

Does Spotlight on Oracle support 18c?

On the Standby connection window, it is not possible to set up the DB Name on the Standby Connection Window.Connection details are for the incorrect standby database.

The Spotlight user creation script, install_post11gR2.sal, has DROP statements for SYS.EXECUTE_IMMEDIATE and SYS.BUILD_XVIEW.... BEGIN EXECUTE IMMEDIATE 'DROP PROCEDURE SYS.EXECUTE_IMMEDIATE'; EXCEPTION WHEN OTHERS THEN null; END; BEGIN EXECUTE IMMEDIATE 'DROP PROCEDURE SYS.BUILD_XVIEW'; EXCEPTION WHEN OTHERS THEN null; END;...Why do the installation script drop...

Oracle Enterprise Manager shows that various Spotlight queries are in the top 10 activities on a very busy Oracle database.

Only see the Diagnostic Server on Spotlight on Oracle mobile, but no active connections. The Oracle connection is live and active on Spotlight, but still not seen on the mobile app or Spotlight Essentials site.

Monitored connection does not show in Spotlight Essentials.

The information below represents the most common issues customers are encountering or recent resolutions to help you trouble shoot your Quest Product.

The DataGuard icon for standby connections is disabled and it is not possible configure the standby database/DataGuard home page .

Error encountered when trying to add a new connection:Message: An unexpected problem has occurred It is recommended that you send a support bundle to Quest.Click "Show details..." for more information about the problem.Details: Message: Cannot add an empty item to a drop down list Source: 0102A6B0 (Spotlight.00C296B0) 10.3.0.1632 Time: 2015-09-13 오후 4:07:05

A connection to Oracle 12C database will throw the following error: "DATE TIME","Alarm raised","The Oracle connection has failed with the error: ORA-01031: insufficient privileges in table RollbackInfo. Spotlight will attempt to re-establish this connection.",High,"Versions (Oracle Status)"

The Windows connection in Spotlight is showing yellow triangles with the message "Error 80070005: Access is denied" across all collections.

ASM alert log is full of messages like this:WARNING: too many parse errors, count=302700 SQL hash=0xa6cbf389 PARSE ERROR: ospid=4026, error=6550 for statement: 2018-04-10T14:32:00.956787+03:00 declare cursor NlsParamsCursor is SELECT * FROM nls_session_parameters;begin SELECT Nvl(Lengthb(Chr(16777216)), Nvl(Lengthb(Chr(65536)), Nvl(Lengthb(Chr(256)), 1))), Nvl(Lengthb(Chr(1)), 1) INTO :MaxCharLeng...

Spotlight alarm changes of multiple connections (50+) result in exception error.

License key for DB Admin Module does not work in Spotlight on Oracle.

When you connect Spotlight 10.3.3 to Oracle 12.2.0.1 on Windows 2012, and then click on the Top sessions menu, Spotlight errors with ORA-0918.

When configuring Spotlight connection the O/S part requires O/S user and if the private/public key is not an option for it to monitor a Linux server, then what are the options to have it FIPS compliant to meet that requirement ?

The following error occurs during database connection in User Wizard:"An error has occurred while loading the Oracle Client Interface (OCI). Please ensure the Oracle Client software is properly installed. The following error has been reported: Range check error"

Product Life Cycle

Software

Version Full Support as of Limited Support as of Support Discontinued 11.0 12/11/2023 10.10 10/21/2020 10.9 5/5/2020 10.8 10/22/2019 10.7 10/11/2018 4/11/2020 10.6 5/3/2018 5/3/2019 5/3/2020

Earlier product versions not listed are considered discontinued.

The Product Support Life Cycle table above describes the phase during which products are eligible for product support and new release downloads.

As a result of Quest's recent divestiture from Dell, Quest acquired a number of products from Dell. Some of these legacy products found on this website may still contain Dell branding. However, these products are now owned and supported solely by Quest and not Dell. Dell is not affiliated with these products or services and any services Quest provides for these products is independent of Dell.

Product Support Policies

The Product Support Lifecycle describes the phases during which our products are eligible for patches (fixes), support and downloads from the Support Portal.

It is our policy to provide support and fixes in current versions of our products when you are under a current support agreement. Fixes to older versions are at our discretion. We strive to put resources behind the most recent product releases in order to continually improve and enhance the value of our products.

We will attempt to answer questions on older versions of our products provided resources are available; however, if you are using a discontinued version, we encourage you to upgrade to the currently supported version of the product.

Our usual support policy is to provide support on both the current (n) and prior (n-1) versions of our products. Refer to the product lifecycle table on your Product Support Page or Knowledge Base for more information.

Full Support

Product is fully supported, generally available release/version.

Includes most current released version of a product and one or more prior releases.

Enhancement requests for this release are accepted and may be considered for future releases.

Maintenance releases and/or hot fixes are periodically made available for this release.

Release/version is fully supported by both Support and Development.

Release/version is available for download from Support Portal.

Limited Support

Support is available for this release/version, and we will use best efforts to provide known workarounds or fixes.

No new code fixes will be generated except under extreme circumstances and at our discretion.

Enhancement requests are not accepted.

You are encouraged to plan an upgrade to a release/version on "Full Support".

Release/version is available for download from the Support Portal.

Discontinued

Includes release/versions which are retired or discontinued.

No new patches or fixes will be created for this release.

Release is not available for download from the Support Portal.

Support will be provided to assist with upgrading to a supported version.

Support is not obligated to provide assistance on this version of the product.

Continuing Support

If you are unable to upgrade or migrate your product prior to its end-of-life, for products that do not offer Long Term Support (LTS) releases, we offer a Continuing Support service to provide you with one year of limited support beyond your software's end-of-life or end-of-support date. Continuing Support is no guaranteed on every product.

Annual software maintenance contract must be renewed.

Includes uninterrupted access to technical support via phone, online and chat.

Support Engineers will provide known workaround solutions and fixes.

Fee-based service available on selected products.

Product Enhancements

If you are interested in submitting product enhancement requests, you can do so by creating a case with support. When we receive a product enhancement request, the Support Engineer will work to define and clearly document the request. Once documented, the request will be submitted into the enhancement review system, the identification number will be provided to the submitter, and the support case will be closed.

Product Management will review the open enhancement requests on a periodic basis and consider them for inclusion in a future product release. Product enhancements will not be considered or implemented in current or prior product releases. There is no guarantee that a specific enhancement request will be implemented in a future version of our product. It is at our discretion if a certain enhancement will be offered for an additional charge or as a chargeable option.

Product Defects

If your issue is determined to be a defect in the product, it is recorded in our defect tracking system, a unique Defect Identifier (ID) will be provided to you and the support case will be closed. Notifications of new product releases will be emailed to you as long as you who have configured your profile to receive product notifications. Release Notes for new releases of products will contain the list of Defect Identifiers that were addressed in the release. You can review the release notes or search the Knowledge Base on the Support Portal using your Defect Identifier to see if the issue has been addressed. We do not guarantee that all defects identified will be fixed in a future release of the product.

Our products have license keys generated for their use. Some products require a new license key when upgrading to a new release and/or patch. We also recommend that prior to any migration or upgrade of products, new licenses are confirmed as functioning properly as some license keys are machine and machine name specific.

If you have questions regarding licensing of a product please complete the form available on the Support Portal Licensing Page. A Software Licensing Representative will respond to your query within 24 hours.

You may also email the Software Licensing team: license@quest.com.

Support for Trial Users

We offer software trials on selected products for testing purposes. Support for trial users is limited to 30 days from the registration date. Cases for your trial product may only be submitted during the first 30 days of your testing period. You will still have unlimited access to our Support Portal for accessing the Knowledge Base and Product Pages.

Customizations policy for Software and Hardware products

A customization indicates functionality and configurations added to a product that are not provided as part of the core product release and, as such, would be outside the scope of normal support and maintenance. Customizations may take the form of new or modified scripts used within or alongside our products, as well as additional functionality such as custom reports, dashboards, rules, automated actions, etc. developed by you, your partners, or our Professional Services Organization.

Support and Customizations

We do not perform or maintain customizations. The design and development of customizations to our products is your responsibility. Assistance from Support will be limited to helping ensure that the product's functionality which enables the addition of customizations is functioning as expected. Alternatively, you may obtain guidance through product specific community sites or the Support Knowledge Base.

Advanced Assistance

If more thorough and detailed assistance is needed to design and develop customizations, we recommend that you engage our Professional Services Organization or fully certified partners to assist. Their expertise in designing customized solutions will ensure customers receive maximum value and product adoption. In addition to providing post-implementation expert services, Professional Services also offers a variety of pre-packaged customizations for some products which may meet your specific requirements.

Training & Certification

We recommend that you obtain the appropriate product training before attempting to design, develop, and implement any customization to our products. Our training courses will equip you with the necessary knowledge and ability to design and implement effective changes to our products. For more detail on the training services available, please refer to Training & Certification Services .

Maintaining Customizations

Careful consideration should be given to all customizations during future migration or upgrade exercises to new product and platform versions. Customizations could inhibit the upgrade itself and may require a level of re-work to continue functioning properly. Support does not take ownership for any customizations. We strongly encourage you to document and maintain records on any implemented customization work. These records can be useful in isolating problems that may be attributable to the customization or a defect in the core product.

Support Policy on Virtualization

Virtualization is a technique for hiding the physical characteristics of computing resources from the way in which other systems, applications or end users interact with those resources. It is able to make a single physical resource, such as a server, operating system, application or storage device, appear to function as multiple logical devices. It can also make multiple physical resources such as storage devices or servers appear as a single logical resource. As a result virtualization enables IT departments to increase the utilization of resources, increase high availability, and simplify back-up, systems administration and recovery procedures. It also allows IT departments to be more responsive to the dynamic needs of the business. Examples of virtualization technologies include VMware ESX Server, Citrix/XenServer and Microsoft Windows Server 2008 Hyper-V.

Our products leverage the binary compatibility offered through virtualization technologies, which provide complete transparency to the operating systems and applications deployed. As a result, for all casework received where the Software product is being used in a virtual environment, we will assume that the problem is common to both native and virtual operating environments, and that we will only require the customer to recreate the problem in a native environment if and when there is reason to believe that the problem is unique to the virtual environment itself.

From a purely functional perspective, our products will operate in exactly the same way, however we can make no guarantees with respect to performance or scalability in a virtualization environment running multiple virtual instances. Configuration aspects such as CPU, memory availability, I/O subsystem and network infrastructure can all influence such a deployment, which should be given careful consideration to ensure the virtual layer has the necessary resources available to provide a satisfactory user experience.

Support Policy on Third-Party Software

We are committed to providing products which work on the latest platforms and technologies available in the industry today. We work closely with technology vendors to ensure earliest possible compatibility with our solutions. We provide full details of all systems requirements, together with platform and third-party product versions supported with our products, in the Release Notes published for each product. These include operating system versions, service pack levels, mail clients or server versions, database versions, browsers and other related technology supported and at which particular version level our products have been formally tested and certified to run against. The support of future platform versions, new service packs and other related technologies would be taken into consideration and addressed during the regular product maintenance and release cycles of our products. This provides ongoing upward compatibility of our products as used in customer environments. It should be noted therefore that there could be a delay between the availability of the latest platform technology release or service patch, and the product version certified to operate against this. Please contact Support should you have any questions with regards to the current support status of any product and a particular related platform, patch or third-party product support not explicitly documented in our release notes.

For more information about the latest third-party platforms and versions supported, please review the System Requirements section of the release notes for your product or search our Knowledge Base on the Support Portal. Please note that while we do not directly or officially support third-party software, we work closely with many other providers to ensure our customers receive the best possible service at all times.

Regional software license agreement applicable to your use of the software is available below (including software preinstalled on hardware or made available to you by download, disk media or otherwise, at no additional cost).

Click here to find your regional agreement.

See all Support Policies