A consistently growing database featuring topics on hundreds of thousands of software applications.

A new activity feed highlighting users' contributions and providing a customized view of all software topics, contributors and blogs that they follow.

A user reputation management system, which rewards users with points and prizes for contributions (even ones carried over from AppDeploy). Points determine users' "belt" levels, which are attached to their identities on the site.

A new Q&A system that includes allows crowdsourcing for technical problem resolutions.

Integration with Dell KACE appliances allows KACE customers to access the same information directly through the interface of heir KACE Systems Management Appliance Console.

Signing Up

If you already have an AppDeploy account, you can use that to sign into ITNinja. Otherwise, it's just a matter of creating a new account.

Once logged in, you can browse the site to follow specific topics, users, or software to begin to establish a custom activity feed. You get a listing of featured and most recent blog posts, Q&As, and shared links. Everything posted has accompanying tags, so on the right side of the page there's a list of tags on various subjects that you can quickly navigate to.

Wading Through ITNinja

You can search either by tags or keywords. Searching the tag "Hyper-V" pulled up 39 results. Searching the same term as a keyword pulled up over 300 results. The technical level of content can vary from simpler subjects like a question on problems with templates in Microsoft FrontPage to questions about very specific error codes related to virtualized environments.

What's really handy is the listing of software. You can find just about any software that gets installed on business machines. When you click open the page of a particular software, you can view the setup type, for example: Windows Installer, MSI, etc. … or you can select the setup type yourself from a drop down list and contribute information about this software. You can also see how others rated the setup process on a scale from very easy to very difficult and can view even more information about that particular software. From this page you can also post a question about this software, or write an associated blog post or share a link.

The Power of ITNinja

ITNinja is an extremely useful site for IT professionals. It's not only useful but it's fun to use. There's the element of social networking that most have become comfortable with. Of course, the site integrates with the major social media platforms out there like Facebook and LinkedIn.

There is a lot of content on ITNinja. While it may not be ideal for a quick, technical answer in an emergency situation—that type of turnaround time usually involves a harried Google search— it is a great way to problem solve issues that are not so time-sensitive, or problems that you just cannot find a solution to by performing a search on Google.

ITNinja is a great way to better familiarize yourself as an IT worker with the products you need to support on a day-to-day basis. It's also a perfect arena for sharing knowledge you have gained and for networking with peers. Being in IT means never ceasing to learn, and ITNinja is a great tool for learning and developing an as IT professional.