1

2804

by: Peter Schmiedeskamp | last post by:

Hello, I'm writing in regard to the distutils package for python. I regularly repackage installers for silent/automated distribution on numerous Windows PCs throughout an enterprise. Sites such as AppDeploy (http://www.appdeploy.com) and tools such as WISE all suggest that this is a pretty common task. Increasingly, however, I've found that tools like WISE's setup capture are becoming less relevant for this task. Rather than running...

0

1265

by: Wolfgang Keller | last post by:

Hello, Python seems to be used quite a lot for (the integration of) enterprise applications. Just as an example, there are at least three (projects for the implementation of) ERP systems in Python: - GNUenterprise - ERP5 - TinyERP

4

3604

by: Dan | last post by:

Hello all. I am currently working on a project for several Hospitals. The application is written in Java, and the database is either Oracle or MySql, depending on the client. For a while now, we have been asked to integrate our appliations database with the databases of the other Hospital applicatoins, such as payroll, scheduling and so on. I have been looking around online to see how others have done this, and I have come up with...

1

4049

by: Ton | last post by:

I have a question about connectivity between different databases. Oracle, DB2400 and SQL_server. It is easy to integrate application products that are running on different DB platforms? What products can be used to achieve this? Our consultant is mentioning .NET but then we have to run everything on SQL server. Currently we are running on Oracle but our third party generic applications are first developed for SQL server and later...

8

2591

by: rmacias | last post by:

I am maintaining an application that was writting in VB6 and has VBA 6.2 integrated into it. The VBA SDK allows the users of the application to generate VBA projects and scripts to gain access to the application and perform product specific functions. This provides maximum flexiability for our users. We are about to convert this application into .NET. In doing some proof of concepts, we were able to integrate VBA 6.4 into a .NET...

0

2312

by: Stylus Studio | last post by:

DataDirect XQuery(TM) is the First Embeddable Component for XQuery That is Modeled after the XQuery API for Java(TM) (XQJ) BEDFORD, Mass.--Sept. 20, 2005--DataDirect Technologies (http://www.datadirect.com), the software industry leader in standards-based components for connecting applications to data and an operating unit of Progress Software Corporation, today announced the release of DataDirect XQuery(TM), the first embeddable...

3

2072

by: gb | last post by:

We are in the process of upgrading part of a large system to .NET, whilst the majority will remain ASP. Sharing session state information will not be a problem at the moment as it is trivial and will be passed in using QueryString. More pressing is the synchronisation of session timeouts between the two environments. Is the only way to do this to have URL references from one environment to another. For example on the ASP pages have...

8

4067

by: Ben Bartsch | last post by:

Looking for opinions on the use of Flash with ASP.NET. Has anyone here seen or conducted any implementations of Flash that are actually useful or otherwise complement ASP.NET?

1

925

by: nospam | last post by:

I am currently developing a distributed application and have questions on integrating a web form interface into it. Currently the core component is a Windows forms application and it uses .net remoting to communicate with slaves that are windows services. I'd like to add a web ui to the core component to allow a user to do a very small subset of what they can do through the windows forms gui. My understanding that the asp stuff will be...

1

2416

by: YellowfinTeam | last post by:

Marketplace: Yellowfin reporting 3.1 with BIRT Integration Yellowfin is proud to announce the release of 3.1. The major theme of this release is enhanced integration capability. We have introduced a range of new web services and authentication processes that allows for Yellowfin to be integrated into any environment with ease. These changes include: * Single signon capability

0

9993

by: marktang | last post by:

ONU (Optical Network Unit) is one of the key components for providing high-speed Internet services. Its primary function is to act as an endpoint device located at the user's premises. However, people are often confused as to whether an ONU can Work As a Router. In this blog post, we’ll explore What is ONU, What Is Router, ONU & Router’s main usage, and What is the difference between ONU and Router. Let’s take a closer look ! Part I. Meaning of...

0

11265

by: Oralloy | last post by:

Hello folks, I am unable to find appropriate documentation on the type promotion of bit-fields when using the generalised comparison operator "<=>". The problem is that using the GNU compilers, it seems that the internal comparison operator "<=>" tries to promote arguments from unsigned to signed. This is as boiled down as I can make it. Here is my compilation command: g++-12 -std=c++20 -Wnarrowing bit_field.cpp Here is the code in...

0

10858

by: jinu1996 | last post by:

In today's digital age, having a compelling online presence is paramount for businesses aiming to thrive in a competitive landscape. At the heart of this digital strategy lies an intricately woven tapestry of website design and digital marketing. It's not merely about having a website; it's about crafting an immersive digital experience that captivates audiences and drives business growth. The Art of Business Website Design Your website is...

1

8036

by: isladogs | last post by:

The next Access Europe User Group meeting will be on Wednesday 1 May 2024 starting at 18:00 UK time (6PM UTC+1) and finishing by 19:30 (7.30PM). In this session, we are pleased to welcome a new presenter, Adolph Dupré who will be discussing some powerful techniques for using class modules. He will explain when you may want to use classes instead of User Defined Types (UDT). For example, to manage the data in unbound forms. Adolph will...

0

7189

by: conductexam | last post by:

I have .net C# application in which I am extracting data from word file and save it in database particularly. To store word all data as it is I am converting the whole word file firstly in HTML and then checking html paragraph one by one. At the time of converting from word file to html my equations which are in the word document file was convert into image. Globals.ThisAddIn.Application.ActiveDocument.Select();...

0

5882

by: TSSRALBI | last post by:

Hello I'm a network technician in training and I need your help. I am currently learning how to create and manage the different types of VPNs and I have a question about LAN-to-LAN VPNs. The last exercise I practiced was to create a LAN-to-LAN VPN between two Pfsense firewalls, by using IPSEC protocols. I succeeded, with both firewalls in the same network. But I'm wondering if it's possible to do the same thing, with 2 Pfsense firewalls...

0

6078

by: adsilva | last post by:

A Windows Forms form does not have the event Unload, like VB6. What one acts like?

1

4708

by: 6302768590 | last post by:

Hai team i want code for transfer the data from one system to another through IP address by using C# our system has to for every 5mins then we have to update the data what the data is updated we have to send another system