Queen Anne-Marie of Greece (born Princess Anne-Marie of Denmark on 30 August 1946) is the current Queen consort of Greece as the wife of Constantine II, King of Greece. She is also a member of the Danish Royal Family as the daughter of King Fredrik IX of Denmark and Princess Ingrid of Sweden.

Life[]

Anne-Marie is the youngest sister of the reigning Queen of Denmark, Margrethe II.

Marriage and Issue[]

In 1959, thirteen-year-old Anne-Marie met her future husband, Constantine, Crown Prince of Greece, when he accompanied his parents on a state visit to Denmark. They met a second time in Denmark in 1961, when Constantine declared to his parents his intention to marry Anne-Marie. They met again in Athens in May 1962 at the marriage of Constantine's sister Princess Sofia of Greece to Juan Carlos, Prince of Asturias at which Anne-Marie was a bridesmaid, and again in 1963 at the centenary celebrations of the Greek monarchy.

After the death of his father in 1964, the engagement between Constantine and 17-year-old Anne-Marie was announced. They were married on 18 September 1964 in Athens. Constantine and Anne-Marie have five children: Alexia, Pavlos, Nikolaos, Theodora, and Philippos.

Residences[]

Sartorial Information[]

Tiara Collection[]

As Queen, Anne-Marie has access to the entirety of the Greek Tiara Collection. Below are the tiaras that she personally owns.

Clothing Collection[]

Titles and Honours[]

1946-1964 Princess Anne-Marie of Denmark

1964-present Queen Anne-Marie of Greece

National Honours[]

Order of the Redeemer (1964)

Order of Sts. Olga and Sophia (1964)

Foreign Honours[]

Order of the Elephant (1964) (Denmark)

Ancestry[]

Parents Grandparents Great-Grandparents Great-Great-Grandparents King Frederik IX of Denmark King Christian X of Denmark

Princess Alexandrine of Mecklenburg-Schwerin

King Frederik VIII of Denmark

Princess Louise of Sweden

Grand Duke Frederick Francis III of Mecklenburg-Schwerin

Grand Duchess Anastasia Mikhailovna of Russia

King Christian IX of Denmark

Princess Louise of Hesse-Kassel

King Charles XI of Sweden

Princess Louise of the Netherlands

Grand Duke Frederick Francis II of Mecklenburg-Schwerin

Princess Augusta of Reuss

Grand Duke Michael Nikolaevich of Russia

Princess Cecilie of Baden

Princess Ingrid of Sweden King Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden

Princess Margaret of Connaught

King Gustaf V of Sweden

Princess Victoria of Baden

Prince Arthur, Duke of Connaught and Strathearn

Princess Louise Margaret of Prussia

King Oscar II of Sweden

Princess Sophia of Nassau

Grand Duke Frederick I of Baden

Princess Louise of Prussia

Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha

Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom

Prince Friedrich Karl of Prussia

Princess Maria Anna of Anhalt-Dessau

Lines of Succession[]