Melville, NY —

The NIKKOR Brand

NIKKOR's 90-year history commenced in 1932 with the registration of the NIKKOR trademark by Nikon (then Nippon Kogaku K.K.), soon followed in 1933 by the introduction of Aero-Nikkor aerial photographic lenses. Nikon stands out as one of the world’s few manufacturers that begins its manufacturing process from the production of optical glass. From the initial design and development to the production and final inspection, the entire process leading to the release of a NIKKOR lens is managed in accordance with Nikon's own strict quality standards. This commitment to excellence is the foundation for the exceptional optical performance and superior quality of NIKKOR lenses. Over the years, by consistently developing lenses that feature the cutting-edge optical technologies of the time, NIKKOR has grown to be a globally recognized brand renowned for its high-performance lenses.

NIKKOR F lenses, throughout their legacy of more than half a century since their initial introduction in 1959, have continually incorporated the cutting-edge technologies of the time, including features like aperture control, autofocus, and vibration reduction (VR). NIKKOR Z lenses are designed for use with Nikon mirrorless cameras for which a new mount with the largest diameter in the industry2 was adopted. Further possibilities in lens design have been unlocked through the adoption of this new mount, greatly increasing capabilities in optical performance. A wide variety of specialized NIKKOR Z lenses that support each user’s creative imaging expression has been released, including the high-performance flagship NIKKOR Z 58mm f/0.95 S Noct, which achieved the milestone of being the fastest lens in Nikon history with an aperture of f/0.953.

For more information about Nikon and its latest products, including the brand’s vast collection of NIKKOR F and NIKKOR Z lenses as well as cameras, please visit www.nikonusa.com.

About Nikon Inc.

Nikon Inc. is a world leader in digital imaging, precision optics, and technologies for photo and video capture; globally recognized for setting new standards in product design and performance for an award-winning array of equipment that enables visual storytelling and content creation. Nikon Inc. distributes consumer and professional Z Series mirrorless cameras, digital SLR cameras, a vast array of NIKKOR and NIKKOR Z lenses, Speedlights and system accessories, Nikon COOLPIX® compact digital cameras, and Nikon software products. For more information, dial (800) NIKON-US or visit www.nikonusa.com, which links all levels of photographers and visual storytellers to the web's most comprehensive learning and sharing communities. Connect with Nikon on Facebook, X, YouTube, Instagram, TikTok, Vimeo and Flickr.

###