Nikon introduced the Nikkormat line of cameras to the world in the late 1960s as a more affordable alternative to their professional F body. Nikkormats stayed in production until 1977 when they were replaced by the smaller-bodied Nikon FM. During the era when professional photographers used the Nikon F and F2, a Nikkormat body was often in their camera bag as well, serving as a back-up.

There are several cameras in the Nikkormat series. The Nikkormat FT and FS were introduced in 1965. The FT featured full-scene averaging TTL metering. It was the first Nikon camera with a built-in light meter. The FS was the FT without a meter. The Nikkormat FTn was introduced in 1967 and featured simpler lens mounting and Nikon’s 60/40 center-weighed TTL metering. All of these early Nikkormat meters were powered by 1.35v mercury batteries. The Nikkormat FT2 was introduced in 1975 and featured the Nikon F2 plastic tip on the film advance lever and self-timer and was powered by 1.5v S76 or SR44 batteries. The FT3 was manufactured for only a few months in 1977 as Nikon had the new FM in production as well. The FT3 is similar to the FT2 except that it supported Nikon’s auto-indexing lenses. There were also several Nikkormat EL models which offered auto-exposure.

With the exception of the FT3, all of the Nikkormats that preceded it require the photographer to “index” the camera’s meter to the lens. The procedure has come to be known as the “Nikon Shuffle.” The early Nikkormats had an indexing prong on the lens mount that mates to the “rabbit ears” on Nikkor manual focus lenses. When mounting the lens, you push the prong on the camera body all the way over to the right, set the lens aperture to f/5.6, line up the prong with the rabbit ears, mount the lens and then shuffle the lens aperture all the way to the left and back to the right. This “tells” the camera’s meter what the minimum and maximum aperture is of the lens you are using. Sounds complicated but it becomes second nature to anyone who has used these pre-AI Nikon bodies. I even find myself doing it when I mount AI lenses to more modern Nikon bodies.

I found my Nikkormat FT3 at my local camera shop. I was amazed at the condition this 47-year old camera is in. I cannot find a scratch or any brassing at all on the body. It appears unused. There was a similar condition FT2 on the shelf next to the FT3. I ended up making a deal on both, two of the cheapest film cameras I have ever purchased. The FT3 functions as designed. The meter in the FT2 was dead. I sent it to Jim Holman at International Camera Technicians. It is repaired and on its way back to me as I write this. Turns out the meter issue involved some wiring in the battery compartment and meter contacts that required cleaning.

While I was waiting for my FT2 to return from the shop, I spent some time with the FT3. When I mentioned earlier that the Nikkormats were marketed as less expensive alternatives to the F professional bodies, it is still very apparent that these cameras were from an era where hand assembly and inspection were the norm. Fit and finish is extraordinary. No planned obsolesce here, all metal, glass, levers and springs. The Copal Square vertically traveling focal plane shutter sounds amazing and very strong. The camera feels great in the hand, inspiring you to want to get out and take pictures.

One of the things I love about the Nikkormat is the big film frame counter. I find I need to grab my reading glasses to see what frame I am on with most cameras. Not the Nikkormat.