'OFFBEAT': Four Stars (Out of Five)

The second feature film from 18-year-old filmmaker Justen Noll (following 2014's 'THE ONE AND ONLY'). This one tells the story of an English literature teacher (from Scotland and London), at Dallas High School (in Oregon), and his girlfriend; who's a choir teacher at the local middle school. The film focuses on their relationship; as they struggle with their jobs, morals and each other. Actors Jackson Geiger and Alyssa Lang star in the movie, and they also improvised all of their own dialogue. Noll wrote, directed, produced, edited and did all of the cinematography for the film. He also did the movie's original score music, along with Ethan Noll. It's 79 minutes long and was filmed, on location, in Dallas, OR. I think the movie is a bit too long (even at just 79 mins), and a little drawn-out, but for the most part it's a pretty effective, and extremely natural, character study.

Geiger plays William Abrams; an English teacher from Scotland, who spent most of his years growing up in London. After attending Bible school, in England, he moved to Oregon to become a teacher; due to his passion for students and 'molding young minds for the future' (as he says in the film). His girlfriend, Eliza Mitchel (Alyssa Lang), is also a teacher, in Dallas, but she hasn't been paid in years; due to school budget cuts. This puts a strain on their relationship; as both also struggle with a lack of passion (in learning) from their students and some disagreement (with each other) in values.

The movie is extremely slow paced, like Noll's first feature film, but it's also more involving, amusing and believable (in my opinion). Geiger and Lang seem so natural in their roles, that it really does seem like you're watching a real couple; talk and cope with their lives. For this reason, I actually enjoyed it more than 'THE ONE AND ONLY', and I also believe it's a better accomplishment; even though I'm giving both films the same rating (I'd give this one a higher 4 star rating). I think if Noll had cut a little more out of the movie, here and there, it could have been a much better feature. It would have taken away some from the very detailed character exploration, and extremely natural feel, of the movie; but it also would have made it a better moving, effective and entertaining film. I can see why it would have been hard to cut a lot of scenes though. Once again, like Noll's other feature, it's also beautifully shot and the music is pretty emotional, and somewhat visceral at times. It's an impressive movie and definitely one that's worth the time to watch, if you have a little patience.

Watch our movie review show 'MOVIE TALK' at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DeFjQhbqAgA