Biography:

Stan Rosenberg founded and directs Scholarship and Christianity in Oxford (SCIO). He is an academic member of Wycliffe Hall and a member of the Faculty of Theology and Religion at the University of Oxford, teaching early Christian history and doctrine and science and religion. He is a Fellow if the International Society of Science & Religion. His research and teaching interests focus on Augustine’s works, early Christian cosmology and its relationship to Greco–Roman science, culture and philosophy, and the interplay between intellectual and popular thought in this period. Recent research has led to articles on early Christianity and Greco-Roman science, and the intersection of preaching, popular religion, and the development of doctrine in late antiquity. His most recent work included organizing a set of consultations around a grant funded project on Darwin and Christian theology which led to the book, Finding Ourselves after Darwin: Conversations on the Image of God, Original Sin, and the Problem of Evil. Rosenberg is on the editorial board of the journal, Religions. Since 2002 he has directed and co-directed multiple science and religion projects in Oxford funded by the John Templeton Foundation, the Templeton Religion Trust, The Templeton World Charity Foundation, The Blankemeyer Foundation, and the BioLogos Foundation. In addition, he is on the advisory council of the BioLogos Foundation and directs the Logos programme offered by SCIO for postgraduates working in ANE, OT, NT, and Biblical reception history.

Member of the Faculty of Theology and Religion, University of Oxford

Associate Tutor in Church History, Wycliffe Hall, University of Oxford

Associate, Ian Ramsey Centre for Science and Religion, University of Oxford

Research Member, Oxford Centre for Late Antiquity

Fellow, International Society for Science and Religion

Research Area:

History of Christianity, Science and Religion, Historical and Systematic Theology, Patristics

Research Interests:

St. Augustine; Science and Religion; Late Antique preaching and popular religion; Latin Patristics; Early Christian Cosmology; Early Christian Doctrine and History; Late Antique History and Culture (Latin); Late Antique Philosophy

Research Centres & Projects:

Ian Ramsey Centre for Science and Religion; Oxford Centre for Late Antiquity; Scholarship and Christianity in Oxford

Links:

http://www.scio-uk.org/stan-rosenberg/

Publications & Research Outputs:

Publications

S. Rosenberg, (general ed.), with B. ven den Toren, M. Burdett, and M. Lloyd, eds., Finding ourselves after Darwin: conversations about the image of God, original sin, and the problem of evil (Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2018) [incl. S. Rosenberg, introduction: “Making Space in a Post-Darwinian World: Theology and Science in Apposition”, pp. 3–10; and chapter on the problem of evil: “Can Nature Be ‘Red in Tooth and Claw’ in the Thought of Augustine?”, pp. 226–43].

“Not so alien and unnatural afterall—the role of privation and deification in Augustine’s sermons”, in Augustine on Heart and Life: Essays in Memory of William Harmless [Journal of Religion and Society supplement, vol. 15], ed. John J. O’Keefe and Michael Cameron (2018), pp. 170–196 [rev. edn of 2016 pubn].

“Not so alien and unnatural afterall—the role of privation and deification in Augustine’s sermons”, in Visions of God and ideas of divinization in patristic thought, ed. M. Edwards and E. Draghici-Vasilescu (Routledge, 2016), pp. 89–117.

“Nature and the Natural World in Ambrose’s Hexaemeron”, in M. Vinzent, ed. Studia Patristica, vol. 69, Papers presented at the sixteenth International Conference on Patristic Studies held in Oxford 2011, volume 17: Latin Writers; Nachleben, (Leuven: Peters, 2013), pp 15–24.

“Beside books: approaching Augustine’s sermons in the oral and textual cultures of Late Antiquity” in G. Partoens, A. Dupont, M. Lamberigts, eds., Ministerium Sermonis II: Tractatio Scripturarum, Philological, historical and theological studies on Augustine’s Sermones ad Populum, in Instrumenta Patristica et Mediaevalia, vol. 65 (Turnhout: Brepols, 2013), pp. 405–42.

“Forming the Saeculum: The desacralization of nature and the ability to understand it in Augustine’s Literal Commentary on Genesis”, in Studies in Church History, vol. 46, ed. P. Clarke and T. Claydon (Ecclesiastical History Society, 2010), 1–14.

“Orality, Textuality and the Memory of the Congregation in Augustine’s Sermons.” in Studia Patristica XLIX. St Augustine and his Opponents, ed. J. Baun et al. (Leuven: Peters, 2010) pp. 169–74.

“Interpreting Atonement in Augustine’s Preaching,” in The Glory of the Atonement, ed. Charles E. Hill and Frank A. James III (Deerfield, IL: InterVarsity Press, 2004) pp. 221–38.

Science and religion related grant-funded projects

Project Director and primary PI for Supporting Structures: Innovative Collaborations to Enhance STEM Research at CCCU Member Institutions, a project funding early career STEM faculty, supporting public engagement of STEM concerns, science and religion dialogue, advancement of faculty diversity, and support for undergraduate research; made possible with funding from the John Templeton Foundation of $2,125,000 and the MJ Murdock Charitable Trust of $256,000.

Project Director and one of four PI’s for Oxford Interdisciplinary Seminars in Science and Religion: Bridging the Two Cultures of Science and the Humanities II, a project funding mid-career scholars and supporting campus-based initiatives with funding of £990,000 from the Templeton Religion Trust and $809,000 from the Blankemeyer Foundation, 2017–2019.

Producer, US Tour of the stage play, Mr Darwin’s Tree, written and directed by Murray Watts and performed by Andrew Harrison. Fourteen performances at N. American universities made possible by a grant of £139,000 by Templeton Religion Trust, 2016.Project Director and one of four PI’s for Oxford Interdisciplinary Seminars in Science and Religion: Bridging the Two Cultures of Science and the Humanities, a project funding mid-career scholars and supporting campus-based initiatives with funding of £1,100,000 from the Templeton Religion Trust, 2014–2016.

Co-Director and one of five PI’s for Configuring Adam and Eve: Creating Conceptual Space for New Developments in the Science of Human Origins, a BioLogos Foundation-funded grant of ca. $275,000 for Science and Religion, 2013–2015.

Co-Director for the John Templeton Oxford Seminars on Science and Christianity held in conjunction with Wycliffe Hall, Oxford (co-director, Prof. Alister McGrath), supported by the John Templeton Foundation with a grant of $800,000, 2002–2005.

Texts and manuscripts grant-funded projects

Project director for Logos, The summer workshop provides postgraduates and advanced undergraduates opportunities to work with the ancient texts and engage with serious issues of scholarship, such as public education and the role of museums, as cocurricular to their degree programmes.