BOSTON, Mass.— Today, Senator Stan Rosenberg (D — Amherst) was sworn in as the 93rd Massachusetts Senate President. A true leader and advocate for the LGBTQ community in Massachusetts, Senator Rosenberg has supported a number of bills aimed at preventing discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity. Carly Burton, interim co-executive director for MassEquality, offered the following statement regarding Senator Rosenberg’s swearing in:

“This is a great day for all residents of the Commonwealth. Senator Rosenberg has been a tremendous leader within Massachusetts, advocating for the rights of the LGBT community and others. From education reform, to economic development, to social justice, Stan has spent more than two decades championing the issues that matter to Massachusetts voters. We look forward to working with Senate President Rosenberg to continue that legacy of advocacy and progress.”[pullquote] “This is a great day for all residents of the Commonwealth. Senator Rosenberg has been a tremendous leader within Massachusetts, advocating for the rights of the LGBT community and others.”—Carly Burton, MassEquality interim co-executive director [/pullquote]

MassEquality also congratulates Speaker of the House Robert DeLeo on his re-election as Speaker. We also applaud the 16 incumbents endorsed by the MassEquality PAC who won their elections including Senators Harriette Chandler, Sonia Chang-Diaz, Patricia Jehlen, Jason Lewis and Dan Wolf and Representatives Evandro Carvalho, Dan Cullinane, Marjorie Decker, Gloria Fox, Ken Gordon, Paul Heroux, David Linsky, Brian Mannal, Denise Provost, Frank Smizik and Tim Toomey. The PAC also endorsed several new legislators who will be sworn in today including Senators Barbara L’Italien and Eric Lesser and Representatives Mike Day, Michelle DuBois and Steve Ultrino.

MassEquality is the leading statewide grassroots advocacy organization working to ensure that everyone across Massachusetts can thrive from cradle to grave without discrimination and oppression based on sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender expression.

[From a News Release]