Netviewer Meet Free Version 6.1.2

Download

Free Version

Publisher Description

Netviewer Meet is a professional web and video conferencing solution trusted by 16.000+ companies in 68 countries - now freely available for personal use. Netviewers highlights are high quality desktop sharing, VoIP and audio conferencing, chat, live video and advanced collaboration tools like whiteboard, file transfer and polling functionality. With this free version of Netviewer Meet you can host online meetings and presentations, collaborate with remote colleagues or set up trainings with up to four participants - conveniently from your desktop. Joining a Netviewer session as a participant is fast, easy and secure and requires no software install on the participants side.

About Netviewer Meet Free Version

Netviewer Meet Free Version is a free software published in the Project Management list of programs, part of Business.

This Project Management program is available in English, Dutch, French, German, Italian, Polish, Russian, Spanish, Swedish. It was last updated on 22 April, 2024. Netviewer Meet Free Version is compatible with the following operating systems: Windows.

The company that develops Netviewer Meet Free Version is Netviewer AG. The latest version released by its developer is 6.1.2. This version was rated by 2 users of our site and has an average rating of 5.0.

The download we have available for Netviewer Meet Free Version has a file size of 1.05 MB. Just click the green Download button above to start the downloading process. The program is listed on our website since 2010-10-01 and was downloaded 412 times. We have already checked if the download link is safe, however for your own protection we recommend that you scan the downloaded software with your antivirus. Your antivirus may detect the Netviewer Meet Free Version as malware if the download link is broken.

How to install Netviewer Meet Free Version on your Windows device:

Click on the Download button on our website. This will start the download from the website of the developer.

Once the Netviewer Meet Free Version is downloaded click on it to start the setup process (assuming you are on a desktop computer).

When the installation is finished you should be able to see and run the program.

Program Details

General

Publisher Netviewer AG Released Date 2010-10-01 Languages English, Dutch, French, German, Italian, Polish, Russian, Spanish, Swedish

Category

Category Business Subcategory Project Management

System requirements

Operating systems windows

Download information

File size 1.05 MB Total downloads 412

Pricing

License model Free Price N/A

Version History

Here you can find the changelog of Netviewer Meet Free Version since it was posted on our website on 2016-09-06. The latest version is 6.1.2 and it was updated on soft112.com on 22 April, 2024. See below the changes in each version:

version 6.1.2

posted on 2010-10-01

Faster screen transmission and improved video and VoIP sound quality.

RELATED PROGRAMS

Our Recommendations