See other formats

"e netviewer About this user manual ceeces nsec reese meceeasecneneeeeenesaeeceeeececnemeiedeees 5 About Netviewer Meet .............0.. cece eee e eee e eee e eee enn eneennenneeneennenneees 7 Setting up Netviewer ... 2.2.2.2... cece cece eee eee eee eee eee een ne eenneeenneeeenneees 3 System POCO Ss cccatcenaasraunateacdesaeasetasennescardeooemeserenehenmuaetcecanser 8 Helpful tips before the first session ........... 2. ccc cece e ence eee e eee eeneeeeennaeeeees 8 On the moderator side icc ieceeedunccnueccceteendnnesmaetisiecewedmccanveaeadatedmbecnnses 8 On the participant: S SIde tcc eerste rere r ENE 9 Netviewer PlUS-INS 2.0.0... .. ccc cece cece cece cence eee cece eee eeaeeeeseeeeseeeeseeeeeaeees 9 Checking the VeriSign certificate exccs.ccscncasmcecacesntarewesadeancenetecenarsoedesd 11 Establishing a session with Netviewe’..............00.cceeeeeeeeeeeceeeeeeeeeees 12 M ONO anaa e ee E EE AE EE E ee E E EE ee 12 Establishing a session — the detailS............... cc cece ccc cee eee eee e eee eeeeaeeeees 12 Usor MMCORNOACG cia eaiiecrnesten Soteweaearscesuueeneaewedaneeeeumiatiankaeaateantaedaes 18 On moderator's side asses crcare sctncerotcnncnwrescinsinteatisdeade poemisenSaseneceeocaseeabeenens 18 The Start dialon dee ee eee ee eee eee ee rere 18 On the moderator's and participants’ Sid@S.............. cee eee eee cece eee eee eee ees 19 Bo) eyo |g): eee eee ee ee ee 19 AA a E ee hc eters chet cer eee tei Sees a tea ence oe A E 23 The Netviewer WINKOW ..............cccc ccc cece cence cece ee eenaeeeeeeeesaeeeeeeneaaes 24 Functions for the moderator ............00 cece nce e eee eee e eee enn enneeneenneenees 26 SESSION PlaNNET. 22 sages es haves annie desea cece PAEAS EEES RAESTE TIRIS ekis 26 Session planner interface ce cceetecnareec cerns cesunececeeaneceneueeseenseeateanceens 26 Session planner in Assistant MMOGS: sss. csaceckscnaerecesuceetecnyscaweseucaceseccens 28 Interface of the Session planner in Assistant mode....................eeeeeees 28 The integrated invitation fUnCtION ius sescece cee sesessaxeoacessepssaderateneneeeeeceasees 29 Using Session planner for INVIRGUONS -< c..c62ccn2nterceeseiacestatensieese ieee dae 29 Planning sessions with Outlook planning plUg-iN............ cece eee eee ee eee 30 Sending an invitation after a session has begun ...............eeeeeeeee ee eee ees 31 Moderating ENG SESSO 2. sctectect se censaaee dew nnne N EANET RE 33 Selecting session participants in SHOW mode ............ 2. cece cece eee eee ee ees 34 Granting remote control rights s,s scverisesaasecsnsemeteswaxsbeensedaeenceeecacoeees 34 Controlling VolP and video transmMiSSlON cig jcise cine tecceawetescueneeeneseaveien 35 Appoint participant as co-moderator. .............cce eee e eee eeceeneeeeeeeesseeseees 36 DIOCKINO CRNE SOS ON cere teeter cee ee ce tee sen cewe cian meet eee A 36 Removing participants from the Session. ............. cece ee eee eee eeeeeeeeeeeeees 36 PS SON SONOS oe ne catesuse AE E E EEE NO 37 Pe OP TUNCUO Mi essesni seni dete EEEE NENNEN 38 Netviewer NetPlayer cis ceceeencsccent ete cidweneseceeetaceccseancueeciaececdatecmmests 40 Survey Mang COR ssssssr iioii EEE ENN Er EE 42 TOE UEY MON ee E EE i 42 Netviewer Meet ( netviewer Question DY DOS scazonddentccncdaudesedeountenncexdesddoncinedanondaceaensacesencedaceunes 43 AG NOC SUNE onc2c5ccsrciencatnduenceacecesdaue2ashduanceturabecesetaacseseeeeedaseneaeon 44 SWI VO aac waco wc ees as wee eee es AEN KESE AEREE RSRS ENER EENE 44 SPONE re SUIS riiseni nnkan aaia 48 Sessions in Event NINO Gis cocoa dar eeeeenenedossunsenescacsdanieacecateeeeeasnes 50 Functions for participants veieiiccwccnviadsnendewce iene ensetindeeetiwduummermenneens 51 po] fC) E | ere eee ee eee ee ee eee ee 51 Co-moderating the SESSION accent ccassnanaceee hes ensencatmanensan aeneecesesaadaons 51 Request speech MME sesvoduscesccceecececeet nese cetenseeetecneudaueesescesssaencosueek 52 Functions for moderators and participant ............000eeeeee eee e eee eee eeeee 53 ES SON Si NOS esac ccs se peers cee EE EE eon teses 53 Functions in show mode arccs2 ec eoarec seen accasan tectum eactceepcactenctetescasese: 54 Application Selection aes ecc sescemcssene cone se srceuenersenensejeeteiacee creeereesessuces 54 My ODOR Dray crear ee cote acemecaeeee ee asaueveccencesecanateseceeneceaneae 55 FONC UONG MNS NNN aes cetera EEA 56 POOR E EEEE A tinea eee oee T esas te eee ceceea AE A 56 Romo COMO oases EEEE IEEE EEEN 56 Granting remote control rights .............cc cece cece cece eee ee eneeeeeeaeeeeeaaees 57 EE EN | So een ne ne ee ee ee eee ee ee eee ee ne ee ee 58 Netviewer SIN CN Se aoe serene eemncan tosses eaanie emenneeceennsae es 59 View in the Netviewer WINdOW...............ccceecee cece cence eeeeeeeseeeeseeeesaeees 60 Other functions in the Control panel................cc cece cece cence ee eeeeeneeeeneeees 64 Transferring files through the Control panel..................cc eee ece cece eee eees 64 VolP MVS TINS SIO spose een aces ase aaa aes creentae penaedaeenceeecmeceeeeecencceaancs 65 Video an Se NISSIM) sane ceescess ced re onnon nO ONNE r TTN 68 The Multimedia settings Gidl0g.......... cece cece eee cc eee ene ee eeneeeeeeeeeees 72 WARD O | 6 eee ee nee eee eee rr eee ee ee eet ee ee nee ree eee 73 Session feedback with EMOLICONS ..............ecee cece ee eee eee eee eee eeeeeeeeeeeee 75 RUN E ae ete ee ee ee pee ee ae estes A OE 75 Telephone conference ....... 2... cece cece eee eee eee ee eee e eee eeeesaeeeeeeaeeeeeeaeeeees 77 Sa E E E ee EE ee ee 79 Functions for Netviewer AGmiInistrators............22.ceeeeee eens eee eeeeeeeees 31 Registering in the MyNetviewer customer portal ....................cceee eee eeees 81 Netviewer user administration ....... eek cece e cece cece cece cence eeneeeeneeeesaeeeeaees 82 Contracts, licenses, users, roles, and profiles ............ ccc eee cece e eee ees 82 User adrminmistr at ON cenena er ee ee ee 83 Setting up Netviewer user administration ............. cc cece cece eee eee eee eees 84 Netviewer LICQNSGS.............c cece cece cece eee ee eee ee cence eeaeeeeeeeeeaeeenaeeeeanes 86 PGT NV CT GOMES eked eet ated ra 88 Assigning (OWES ac ccoccccccnacscncanmeanenccceaensccmmadee diemaeseinmensadacerneceneenaeaene gO Administering PNOKNGS ficcevesesecescenscest senessteeccedeesusenmeaseseSacusgcoascocueaes 91 Profile administration interface .......... eee eee cece e eect eee teen eee eeeeeeeeaeees 92 Netviewer Meet 3 ( netviewer Administering profiles ..............c cece cece cece cence eee eeeeaeeeeeeeeseeeeeaeeeeaaes 97 Customizing the e-mail invitation text and teleconference..............:20+2+ 99 E-mail invitation =>. (nena eer re re eee ree ere ee een er eee 99 Teleconference settings ......... ccc cece cece cece cee e cece nee eeneeeeeaeeenaeeeeaeeeeaees 101 POON sasore cerne ne settee ae E 103 TAT VOC TNs: tos cees tse cecn de sercat sean ccen sane feet enan E A 103 Netviewer Usage StatiStiCs............ 20. cce eee ee cece eee ee eee eee eee eeeeeeeeeeeeenees 103 MOSS i -ossea rene dor doetesiwacietaeriences EE 104 CONUAGE coiere E 107 Netviewer Meet x netviewer About this user manual The User Manual for Netviewer Meet is intended for use by moderators who use the moderator program to prepare, start, and direct a Netviewer session. Procedural descriptions of a session and Netviewer functions are primarily from the moderator's perspective. Many Netviewer functions are the same for all users, whether participant or moderator. The User's Manual will always inform you whether a function is available for all session partners or only for the moderator. Descriptive conventions in the User Manual Step-by-step directions are always numbered. Example: 1. Click on the New button. 2. Enter a topic for the session. 3. Enter when the session will begin and how long it will last. Operational elements found in the user interface (such as buttons, dialog titles, or options) are italicized in the text when these refer to specific instructions or references. Example: e To deactivate event mode, deactivate the Hold a session in Event mode option. e Inthe Application selection tray, you can select the applications that Netviewer will transfer to the session partners. Keys on your keyboard are surrounded with brackets. Example: e To switch to another screen, use the key combination [Ctrl] + [Alt] + [S]. Notices for operating Netviewer (such as warnings, special tasks) are followed by an exclamation point. Useful tips for operating Netviewer are labeled with a light bulb symbol. Netviewer Meet 5 About this user manual L) netviewer Navigating through the User Manual When reading the User Manual on your screen with Acrobat Reader, a variety of navigation functions are available. Click on the respective bookmark to move directly to a particular chapter. Click on the Bookmarks frame on the left side of your screen. From there you can jump directly to the desired chapter. Press the [Ctrl] + [F] key combination to search for specific words in the Acrobat file. For example, if you would like more information on usage statistics, enter the words "usage statistics” in the search field. This will allow you to view every location where the words "usage statistics" appear. Netviewer Meet x netviewer About Netviewer Meet Netviewer Meet enables you to hold online sessions with multiple participants. The session partners can show each other documents or applications, jointly edit documents, and communicate with each other in several ways. Examples of areas where Netviewer Meet is useful are meetings, training, or presentations. Two roles always participate in a Netviewer session: e the moderator who organizes, opens, and directs the Netviewer session e aparticipant who enters a session that has already started The number of participants who can participate in a session depends on your product variation. Neither the moderator nor the participants must install or configure any software. To start a Netviewer session, both sides need only an Internet connection and the Netviewer program, which is available immediately without installation: e The moderator uses the Netviewer Meet moderator program that he or she has licensed from Netviewer. e The participants use a nonlicensed participant program that they can obtain from the moderator's web site or other source. The main function of Netviewer is to transfer a user's screen to another computer, known as desktop sharing. When you start a Netviewer session as moderator, you initially show your own screen. You are in the so-called Show mode. The participants see on their own screens a depiction of your complete desktop. They are in Watch mode. If you (the moderator) would like to reverse the roles during the session, simply srant one of the session participants the right to display his screen. You can also grant a session partner remote-control rights. Remote control makes it possible to control a session partner's computer with mouse and keyboard entries. As the moderator, you also have access to a variety of administrative tools for session planning and user administration. During a Netviewer session, both moderator and participant benefit from functions in the Netviewer Control panel, such as video and audio transmissions, file transfer, etc. We hope you enjoy using Netviewer Meet! Netviewer Meet b netviewer Setting up Netviewer System requirements The following are required to use the moderator and participant programs: e computer with Windows 2000, XP, Vista, Windows 7; Server 2000, 2003, 2008-R2 (support of 32-bit and 64-bit versions of Windows) e Internet access (can be through proxy) with any browser e processor speed at least 1 GHz, when using Voice over IP function at least 2 GHz e atleast1GB RAM e attached and properly installed webcam (when using video function) e headset (when using VoIP function) e atleast DirectX 8.1 (when using VoIP and video) e Adobe FlashPlayer 9.028 or higher when using Netviewer Meet Web client. If your system does not fulfill the requirements described above or if your audio, webcam, and graphics drivers are not up-to-date, you may experience functional limitations in the Netviewer applications. Helpful tips before the first session Netviewer Meet requires no configuration or installation before initial use. You can start immediately after receiving the software components from Netviewer. However, the following information will increase efficiency and help simplify use of Netviewer for the moderator and the participants. On the moderator side Distributing the moderator program The people in your organization who will be permitted to establish a Netviewer session will require the Netviewer Meet moderator program (Netviewer Meet.exe). You can start the Moderator program anywhere and at any time from the MyNetviewer Customer Portal (https://my.netviewer.com). The most current version of the program is always stored here. Alternatively: Either store the moderator program at a centralized location (like on the network) or distribute it to the authorized persons. Placing a link to the moderator program on the moderator's desktop enables rapid access. Netviewer Meet Setting up Netviewer L) netviewer Distributing login data Login data protects the moderator program from unauthorized access. Upon starting, Netviewer asks the moderator to provide his or her login data for authentication and authorization. The user must provide the proper e-mail address and password. Each user specifies his or her own login data when registering in the MyNetviewer customer portal. Named User Licenses In order to utilize the full number of named-user licenses purchased from @ Netviewer, you must enter the appropriate number of users in user administration and assign them to a contract. On the participant's side Provide access to the participant program The participants you would like to invite to a session require the Netviewer Meet participant program (NV_Meet_Participant.exe). You have access to the Participant program in the MyNetviewer customer portal. You can provide the Participant program to others in the following ways: e Via the Netviewer WebStarter, which you integrate into your website as an iFrame e — asa download on your own website e in another way, such as an e-mail e as a download from www.netviewer.com, which always contains the most recent version of the participant program. Compatibility with the moderator program In most cases, every Netviewer Meet participant program will be compatible with your moderator program. The Netviewer moderator programs of version 6.0 or higher are compatible only with versions later than 6.0 of the participant programs and vice versa. The latest programs are available at www.netviewer.com. Functional settings in the participant program always adapt to the moderator program. For example, if a function is hidden in the moderator program, it will also be unavailable in the participant program. Netviewer plug-ins Netviewer plug-ins are useful for users who would like a quick and easy way to start Netviewer from other applications. Once you have installed the plug-ins, you will be able to start or participate in a Netviewer session directly from Microsoft Excel, for example, with just a simple click. Netviewer plug-ins are available for the following applications: Netviewer Meet 9 Setting up Netviewer L) netviewer e Windows Explorer e Microsoft Office (Microsoft Outlook, Word, Excel, PowerPoint) e Expanded Microsoft Outlook plug-in for planning appointments e Lotus Notes e Microsoft Internet Explorer e Mozilla Firefox Please note that Netviewer must be installed on the computer in order to use the Netviewer plug-ins. Local administrative rights are therefore also needed. Installing the plug-ins The first time the moderator program is used, a dialog box will appear that will allow you to start installation of the Netviewer plug-ins. Depending upon the configuration, the dialog box will appear either before the session starts or after the session is over. 1. Click on OX to start the installation wizard. 2. Follow the installation wizard's instructions. Or you can begin installation of the plug-ins at any time by going through the About tray in the Control Panel. 1. Inthe About tray, click on /nstall Netviewer. 2. Follow the installation wizard's instructions. During the installation process you can choose the applications in which the plug-in will be installed. After installation is complete, the Netviewer menu will appear in these applications. Using plug-ins Proceed as follows if you are working in one of the supported applications (such as Microsoft PowerPoint) and would like to spontaneously start a Netviewer session or participate in a session that has already begun: e Click on the Netviewer icon in the opened application to start the moderator program, or go to the Netviewer Meet menu and select Start Netviewer Meet. IS m start Netviewer Meet m Join a Netviewer Meet session e To start the participant program, select Join a Netviewer Meet session. Netviewer Meet ” Setting up Netviewer L) netviewer The subsequent steps required to establish a session are described in chapter “Establishing a session with Netviewer” starting on page 12. Uninstalling plug-ins You can uninstall plug-ins at any time by going through the Windows Control Panel: 1. Click on Start| Control Panel | Add or Remove Programs to open the Windows Add or Remove Programs dialog. 2. Select Netviewer Meet and click on Remove. The plug-ins will now be uninstalled. 3. If required, restart your computer in order to complete removal. Checking the VeriSign certificate Netviewer programs are signed with a VeriSign certificate to confirm their authenticity. You can confirm that you are using an original Netviewer program by opening the file properties and viewing the signature. 1. Right-click on the .exe file to open its context menu. 2. Select Properties. 3. Goto the Digital signatures tab. 4. From the list select the Netviewer certificate and click on Details. In Details, you can check the validity of the VeriSign certificate. Netviewer Meet = netviewer Establishing a session with Netviewer In brief {= Start the moderator program. Enter the login data. In the start dialog, click on one of the profiles to initiate the Netviewer session. Provide the participants with the session number. The participants start the participant program. The participants enter the session number and acknowledge their entries. The Netviewer session starts. Establishing a session — the details To start a Netviewer session, the moderator and participants must have access to the Netviewer Meet moderator or participant program, respectively. As the moderator, first start the Netviewer Meet moderator program (Netviewer Meet.exe). Enter into the login dialog the user data (e-mail address and password) that you defined when registering with the MyNetviewer customer portal. In the login dialog, select the option Save login data to save your e-mail adress and password locally on your computer. The next time you start Netviewer, your e-mail adress and password will be entered on the login form and you must only confirm by clicking on OK. If you use this option, you must be certain that no unauthorized persons will have access to your computer and therefore to Netviewer. 12 Netviewer Meet Establishing a session with Netviewer netviewer Pei Wel meet j nmm ge ee ame ell he | - business edition netviewer Login E-mail address: (miomeinmio@pdo-discard.netviewer com Fassword: M Save login data After you log in, the start dialog will open. From here you can start the session and access Netviewer's administrative tools. netviewer meet i i j mil - business edition - netviewer Start Netviewer D Start online meeting (basic) D Start online meeting (expert) D Start webinar E3 Settings Planned sessions (today) Mo sessions are planned For today, Session planner Help Fa How does Wekviewer work? 13 Netviewer Meet ~ Session number: f0/ O72 397... Establishing a session with Netviewer L) netviewer 3. Click on one of the profiles to initiate the Netviewer session. > The Netviewer Mini-Panel with the nine-digit session number and the Control Panel will appear on the right side of the screen. You have three ways to invite participants to the session: Provide the session number over the telephone The participants already have the participant program (obtained by download from your web site or www.netviewer.com) and must only enter the session number that you tell them over the phone. Ad hoc invitations After the session has started you send the participants an e-mail invitation. To do this use the /nvife button in the Mini-panel The e-mail will contain the session number and usually a link to the participant program. Invitation through the session planner You used the session planner to plan the session and you used the invitation function to send the participants an e-mail in advance. As a result, they already have the session number and the link to the participant program and simply enter the session at the agreed time. Depending upon which browser the participant is using, he can either start the Participant program directly after downloading (Internet Explorer), or he must first save the program locally before starting. To start the program faster, take advantage of the "Netviewer QuickStart" plug-in, available from the MyNetviewer customer portal. Netviewer Meet 14 © © Establishing a session with Netviewer netviewer After the participant program starts, the participants enter the session number and their names into the login dialog and confirm their entries. Pe Lv Wwel meet IE j F laj ey ee Fap 7 siness edition s, ri i] ae netviewer Start session Please enter the access data provided by your moderator, Session number: [648551779 Your name: [Tom | Connect | If you have defined a session password for a preplanned session, the participants must enter this in another dialog. Participants who wish to register for a meeting that the moderator has not yet started will be led to a virtual waiting room. The Waiting room opens ten minutes before a session is planned to start. As soon as the meeting starts, the participant will automatically enter the meeting without having to register again. Netviewer then establishes a connection between moderator and participants. As soon as the connection is complete, you (the moderator) will be showing the participants your screen. 5 Netviewer Meet Establishing a session with Netviewer L) netviewer The list of participants in the Session tray and the number of participants in the Mini-panel tell you which and how many participants have already entered the session. Inwite On the participants’ side, a Netviewer window appears and shows the contents of the moderator's screen. In addition, the Control panel with a clip for extending and retracting it is visible on the right side of the screen. Once all required participants are present, you can block the session from further access. To do this, click on the respective button in the Session tray. 16 Netviewer Meet Establishing a session with Netviewer netviewer If you use Netviewer on a computer with Windows Vista / Windows 7, a User Account Control dialog appears each time you start the program. If you are logged into the computer as an administrator or have the administrator password, you can start Netviewer with administrator rights. To do so, click "Yes" in the dialogue. In this case, your session partner can continue to have remote control of your computer (including the User Account Control dialog) if you grant him or her remote control rights. You can also start Netviewer without administrator rights, for example by clicking "No” to exit the dialog or not entering an administrator password. In this case, your session partner has remote control of your computer, but with limitations. Areas or dialogs that are protected by the User Account Control cannot be controlled remotely. (9) Do you want to allow the following program to make Y changes to this computer? Program name: Netviewer Verified publisher: Netviewer AG File origin: Hard drive on this computer (M) Show details Change when these notifications a Netviewer Meet 17 ies netviewer User interface On moderator's side The Start dialog The Start dialog will appear after logging in to the moderator program. The moderator can use the Start dialog to initiate sessions and open centralized administrative tools. The Start dialog is accessible only before a Netviewer session starts. neiviewer meet i 1 T — business edition ——— Start Netviewer D Start online meeting (basic) F Start online meeting (expert) F Start webinar E3 Settings Planned sessions (today) Mo sessions are planned For today, Session planner Help Fa How does Netviewer work? 18 Netviewer Meet Invite al] 3 participants User interface netviewer Start online meeting (basic) Starts a Netviewer session with basic functions. Start online meeting (expert) Starts a Netviewer session with all functions. Start webinar Starts a Netviewer session with all functions in Event mode and the participants in Theater mode. Settings Path to the MyNetviewer customer portal where you can administer your licenses or create, edit, and delete profiles and users. Planned sessions (today) Appointments scheduled for the current day are visible in the Session planner under Planned sessions (today). Start the session by clicking on the appointment. Session planner Open the Session planner in order to create, edit, or delete appointments for Netviewer sessions. How does Netviewer work? Open the online help for moderators in your web browser. Exit Exit Netviewer On the moderator's and participants’ sides Control Panel Both the moderator and the participants have access to the extendable Control panel with the Clip or Mini-panel. It provides access to a variety of functions, like file transfer and speech or video transmission; the Control panel is divided into "trays". The moderator's Control panel offers additional administrative functions for completing the session which the participants cannot access. Extending and retracting the Control panel e Click on the Clip or the Mini-panel in order to extend or close the Control | — panel. nen Even when the Control panel is closed, the Clip (small red handle at edge of screen in Watch mode) or Mini-panel (in Show mode) will inform you that the session is currently active. You can concentrate completely on the application that you are currently editing yet still have ready access to the Control panel. The following functions are available in the upper area of the Control panel. Gs) Retract Control panel remote control Gil OFF Revoke remote control rights from the session partner when you are currently showing your screen and another person has remote control rights. The current status of remote control is shown in yellow. Security key ([Fu], depending on your configuration) enables you to immediately deactivate remote control. 19 Netviewer Meet User interface netviewer 9 The Control panel often covers the buttons for minimizing, reducing, and closing a window below it. But, if you move your mouse to the upper right corner, the Control panel will slide down so you can access these buttons. pane r CNAN Moving the Control panel Panel From right Open You can move the Control panel to the right or left edge of your screen. Close 1. Right-click on the Netviewer icon in the system tray or the Mini-panel to Exit Alt+F4 open the context menu. j Er a 2. Select Panel from left or Panel from right. Netviewer Meet ai netviewer Trays in Control panel The following overview shows all of the trays available for the Control panel. The trays that are actually available to you depends on the profile the session was started with and your session settings. © Invite 8 Participants Remote control netviewer aceon Flt on) OFF) Session: 676 584 803 Password: (not set) Session recording: v Session @ Rec (=) | Mio Miotti Q ( Peter Moderators e To open or close a tray, click on its title bar. Session Netviewer News View the participant list and the current distribution of rights (show rights, remote control rights, etc.). The moderator also has access to centralized session data and additional functions for controlling the session and session recording. Only temporarily available. Contains important information from Netviewer, for example when a new program version @ Mio Miotti x) S JO is available. @ Peter Q =) Sanne = Telephone conference Dial-up information for the concurrent telephone © Benno 9 O conference. @ Jan Y e @ Lars 99 Application selection Define which applications and screen elements are to be SIRSE 20 displayed to the session partners while in show mode. @ Sina ~) +å & My monitor Check on the screen transfer to the session partners while v Telephone conference in sh ow mo de 1, [Ireland -] ae oe eee ee VoIP Activate and adjust voice transfer via Voice over IP. 3. Enter session number: 676584803 > Application selection Participant videos View your session partners’ videos. ey My video View your own video and control how video is transmitted to the session partners. Chat Use text messages to communicate with all or individual Myvi o session partners. [P Chat O O Whiteboard Whiteboard function for drawing and marking on the screen. > File transfer netviewer Netviewer Meet 6,1,1 (1603) Moderator program E How does Netviewer work? Start installation E why install Netviewer? File transfer Survey (only for Moderator) About Exchange files and folders during the session. Create spontaneous ad hoc surveys or extensive questionnaires. Provides information about the Netviewer variation being used, the version, and contract number and provides a link to online help. Additional information about the trays is available in the sections “Functions for the moderator” and "Functions for moderators and participants”, starting on page 26. Netviewer Meet = Y User interface netviewer Floating windows The control panel trays can be easily dragged away from the control panel and dropped anywhere on the screen. You can use this feature to organize the Netviewer interface according to your requirements. e Click and hold the title bar of any tray. While keeping the mouse button depressed, drag the tray to the desired position on your screen mehat trem fhe — arepeee ade in PPIE ance areal walne Confeeerias newiewe an —— fi ee E- + The trays Session, Application selection, File transfer, Participant videos (individual videos) and Chat are scalable when they are located outside of the control panel. e You can extend or retract a tray by double-clicking on its title bar. + Chak Moderator: Hello everybody! Please upload vour Files, Moderator: We'll start immediately., We're just waiting For Torn, Maggie: I'll give him a call, e Click on the X at the upper right corner of the tray in order to move it back to the control panel. e |f several trays are floating on the screen and you would like to bring them all back to the control panel, right-click on the Mini-panel's upper bar and select Al trays back into the Control Panel. Netviewer Meet c= | ~ Session number: Of6 765 738.. Inwite | 3 participants Invite ia oS) User interface L) netviewer Mini-panel The Mini-panel always provides the Netviewer user with the main functions. Therefore, the range of functions in the Mini-panel will change depending on whether you... e are the moderator or participant e are currently in show or watch mode. e currently being controlled remotely by another session partner. At first, and as long as no participants have entered the session, the Mini-panel will show the moderator the session number. In addition, the moderator can access the integrated invitation function (see page 28). As long as at least one session participant is in the session, the Mini-panel will show the moderator the following basic functions and information: e Check transfer progress e Number of present participants e Invite additional participants. The Mini-panel with the buttons Show and Watch indicates: You are in show mode and the other session partners are currently viewing your screen. The Mini-panel is always located in the foreground as long as you shown your screen and cannot be covered by windows or dialogs. Participants in watch mode do not have access to the Mini-panel. Instead, they see the Netviewer Clip. Positioning Mini-panel The Mini-panel can be positioned freely away from the Control panel. Separate the Mini-panel by clicking on the red bar and dragging it away from the Control panel with the mouse button held down. Position the Mini-panel where desired. e To return it to its original place, simply drag the Mini-panel to the Control panel. Netviewer Meet 23 User interface netviewer The following overview shows all operational elements that the Mini-panel can contain: Extend and retract Control panel Exit the Netviewer session. w Check progress in transferring the screen. Filled - screen transmission complete and in highest possible quality. White striped - screen transmission with reduced color depth/quality Gray - screen transmission incomplete. 3 participants Number of present participants, including moderator. RE Access the integrated invitation function. Starts the default e-mail client or enables Skype users to invite people from their Skype contact list. Switch to watch mode when you are currently showing your screen. Revoke remote control rights from the session partner who is currently controlling your computer remotely. Shows which button serves as security key to immediately deactivate remote-control (default is [Fi]). The Netviewer window The Netviewer window shows you the screen contents from the session partner who is currently in show mode. The Netviewer window operates like a normal window but provides additional functions. | C] neWiewer ~ & Moderator bel riram: ier peel dis le belo @ -c x « @ MEE ene (Ab MesittescT ie Sees) sii tee Aad Min al ee J iam BS + Sorat pees 1 ri eee pod Gi) + netviewer Coa oer ejin anii ten lees el reetes fc: chee My Metvicwer CUS DoT portal! Met negated watt Netviewer Meet 24 User interface netviewer Display The Netviewer menu contains functions for adapting the display inside the Netviewer window (see page 60). w! Original size Scale proportionally Scale Tools Mini-vided Full screen Theatre mode Check screen transfer progress (see page 23). You currently have remote-control rights. Switch to full-screen mode. Minimize the Netviewer window to the taskbar. Reduce/maximize the Netviewer window. HODOGBA Exit the Netviewer session. Netviewer window in the taskbar Netviewer is shown as a task in the Windows taskbar. In Watch mode, right click on the task to open the context menu and gain access to a variety of functions related to customizing the view of Netviewer. Original size Scale proportionally Scale Full screen Theatre mode Restore Minimize Maximize Close Alt+F4 Panel fror left The Netviewer icon in the system tray Panel From right ii ee The Netviewer icon in the system tray informs you that Netviewer Meet is Open currently being used on your computer. Close e Right-click on the icon to open the context menu, where you gain access to functions related tothe Control Panel and can close Netviewer. Exit Alt-+F4 Netviewer Meet 25 10:30 weekly meeting - controlling netviewer Functions for the moderator The moderator is responsible for organizing a Netviewer session in advance and assuming the leading role during the session. He has access to a variety of administrative functions for these purposes. Session planner Use the Session planner module to plan and administer appointments for Netviewer sessions. Netviewer appointments that you entered for the current day appear in the Start dialog and can be started by clicking on them. What are the benefits of the Session planner? e lt helps you prepare better for your Netviewer sessions, with date, time, and profile, for example. e You can send e-mails to easily invite participants to future sessions. e You always have information about current and planned Netviewer appointments. Opening the Session planner e Inthe start dialog, click on Session planner. Session planner interface Scheduled sessions and Scheduled recurrent sessions on the left side of the Session planner show you previously scheduled session appointments. If no appointments are present, you can click on Create new session... to organize a new session. The right half of the Session planner contains information about the session appointment marked on the left half. C}netvewer Session planner Overview of sessions | Actions Moderator: magnar.constantino @pdo-discard.netviewer | Scheduled sessions | Subject Moderator Last edited by F 01.10.2010, 09:30 - F 24.01.2011, 10:00 - H 26.01.2011, 10:00 - #2] 28.01.2011, 09:30 - Budgetplanung Riunione (Siemens) Reunión (BASF) Review magnar.constantino@pdo-... magnar.constantino @pdo-... magnar.constantino @pdo-... magnar.constantino @pdo-... magnar.constantino @pdo-... magnar.constantino@pdo-... magnar.constantino @pdo-... magnar.constantino@pdo-... A | Scheduled recurrent sessions Subject ay 29.12.2010, 09:00 -09:30 Jour Fixe Gi 30.12.2010, 17:00 - 18:00 Gesamtmeeting Moderator magnar.constantino @pdo-... magnar.constantino @pdo-... Last edited by magnar.constantino @pdo-... magnar.constantino @pdo-... 28.01.2011 [yr 09:30 be) Choose a profile for this session. Profile: Enter a password if you wish to prevent unauthorized access to the session. Session password: Send Outlook appointment e-mail or communicate the following access data to the attendees: A Session: 149 370 102 Session password: Netviewer Meet Functions for the Moderator L) netviewer Planning a new session 1. Click on the button Create new session.... 2. Enter a topic for the session. 3. Enter when the session will begin and how long it will last. 4. Select whether the session will take place once, daily, weekly, or monthly. Optional entries: e Profile. By selecting a profile, you can start the session with individually defined settings. You can create profiles in the profile administration area of the MyNetviewer customer portal. e Session password. The session can be protected from unauthorized access with a session password (optional). e Refer to page 28 for more information about the integrated invitation function. e Use the button Copy access data to clipboard to copy the session number and session password (if present) to the Windows clipboard. 5. Click on Apply. The session appointment will now appear under Scheduled sessions or Scheduled recurrent sessions. Regardless of when a session is planned to start, you can start it in the Session planner at any time by clicking on Meet now! Overbooking warning In case of overbooking, i.e. when more parallel sessions are planned than licenses are available for this contract, an overbooking warning appears. If you click "Ignore", the session will be created. However, it will not be possible to start this session at the scheduled time if the other simultaneously scheduled sessions have already started. Deleting session appointments You can delete previous sessions individually or all at once. e To delete a single session appointment, right click on the appointment to open the context menu and click on Delete selected session. e To delete all past session appointments, click on Delete all previous sessions from the context menu. 22121,01.2011, 10:00 - 10... New session Meet Now! Delete selected session... Strg+ Entf Delete all previous sessions Netviewer Meet 27 a netviewer Session planner in Assistant mode For example, a user with the “Assistant” role can plan sessions for other users. If he or she starts Netviewer Meet and calls up the session planner in the Start dialog, the session planner is opened in assistant mode. The role of “Assistant” is assigned to a specific Netviewer Meet contract and enables the user to create and edit sessions that are to be carried out with licenses and users of this contract. Interface of the Session planner in Assistant mode a netviewer Session planner - Assistant mode Overview of sessions Team-Meeting Actions Topic: Create new session... "Scheduled sessions H 13.12.2010, 15:59 - 16... H 13.12.2010, 16:12 - 16... T 13.12.2010, 16:16 - 16... T 13.12.2010, 16:47 - 16... HA 14.12.2010, 11:15- 11... H 16.12.2010, 16:22 - 16... FA 28.12.2010, 09:30 - 09... Hosas ceccua Nie można rozpocząć sesji... Nieuwe sessie Neue Sitzung Nouvelle session 1 Hosas ceca Review 5... Team-Meeting greta @pdo-discard.netvie... greta @pdo-discard.netvie... greta @pdo-discard.netvie... greta @pdo-discard.netvie... greta @pdo-discard.netvie... peter.peerbeek@pdo-disc... magnar.constantino @pdo... lars.incredulo @pdo-discar... Last edited by greta @pdo-discard.netvie... greta @pdo-discard.netvie... greta @pdo-discard.netvie... greta @pdo-discard.netvie... greta @pdo-discard.netvie... greta@pdo-discard.netvie... |= magnar.constantino@pdo... greta @pdo-discard.netvie... 19.01.2011 [yr 15:00 Choose a profile for this session. Profle: Enter a password if you wish to prevent unauthorized access to the session. Session password: Send Outlook appointment e-mail or communicate the following access data to the attendees: A Session: 175 584 384 Session password: Moderator Last edited by i] 29.12.2010, 09:00 -09:30 Jour Fixe magnar.constantino@pdo-... magnar.constantino @pdo-... ay 30.12.2010, 17:00 - 18:00 Gesamtmeeting magnar.constantino@pdo-... magnar.constantino@pdo-... 3] 19.01.2011, 16:00 - 17:00 Meeting (all technical depar... greta@pdo-discard.netvie... greta@pdo-discard.netvie... Ei] 19.01.2011, 16:00 - 17:00 Technik - Gesamtmeeting greta@pdo-discard.netvie... greta@pdo-discard.netvie... Planning a new session 1. Click the Create new session... button. N Enter a topic for the session. Select the Moderator who will carry out the session. Enter when the session will begin and how long it will last. WB y Select whether the session will take place once, daily, weekly, or monthly. The user with the role of “Assistant” is assigned one of the available licenses permanently. 28 Netviewer Meet Send an e-mail invitation Functions for the Moderator L) netviewer The integrated invitation function You can send invitation e-mails directly from Netviewer to people with whom you would like to hold a session. Netviewer interfaces with your standard e-mail program for this purpose. Netviewer supports virtually all e-mail programs. When the participant and moderator use the following e-mail programs, you can send an e-mail to the recipient that automatically registers in the recipient's calendar: e Microsoft Outlook e Lotus Notes You can send invitations in advance when planning the session or after the session has already started. The invitation contains an editable standard text with the session number and usually a link to the participant program. In this way, the participants receive all the information they need to enter the session without going to any extra effort. We recommend sending the e-mails in encrypted format in order to protect transmission of the session number. Please refer to the Help section of your e-mail program for encryption options. Using Session planner for invitations If you use the Session planner to prepare and plan your Netviewer sessions, you can send an advance invitation to the participants. This gives the participants an opportunity to add the session to their schedules and gives them in advance the information they need to start the session. 1. Open the Session planner through the Start dialog and plan a session as Usual. 2. Click on the /nvitation button. Netviewer then attempts to access your e-mail program. You may see a query from your e-mail program that must be acknowledged. If you use Microsoft Outlook or Lotus Notes: 3. The appointment to be sent is now opened in Microsoft Outlook/Lotus Notes. Enter the recipients of the appointment and add the necessary information, such as attachments. 4. Send the appointment. If a recipient uses a different e-mail program, the appointment will be automatically converted to a normal e-mail. Netviewer Meet =o Functions for the Moderator L) netviewer If you use a different e-mail program: 3. The e-mail to be sent will be opened in your e-mail program. Enter the recipients of the e-mail and add the necessary information, such as attachments. 4. Send the e-mail. Planning sessions with Outlook planning plug-in If you have installed the expanded Netviewer plug-in for Microsoft Outlook (see chapter "Netviewer plug-ins” starting on page 9), you can use the additional functions for planning appointments directly from Outlook. You can mark Outlook appointments as a Netviewer meeting while scheduling the appointment. When the moderator sends the appointment invitation to the participants, it will contain a direct link to the participant program. The appointment will be entered into all participants' Outlook calendars. Planning Netviewer sessions in Outlook 1. In Outlook click on Plan a Netviewer online meeting. 2. Enter your Netviewer login data when requested to do so. > The Outlook scheduling window will open. ! T z Urbana Brigrectumg 42; i i slits — r s Tepr etr Treep “galt Mjm am Mapia ege | ial E “ttre mi stviewer online a | [aan | ~*~ Fe "Ep bere hg ET EF Netviewer Support session upan Plan a Netviewer online meeting —— [7] Yes, plan this appointment as a Netviewer online meeting Session profile: | Start online meeting (basic) iv] [C] Use session password Oo i) Flanning procedure If you activate "Yes, plan this appointment as a Netviewer online meeting”, the normal Outlook appointment will become a Netviewer online meeting appointment After clicking on “Apply”, you will return to the Appointment view, There you will see a prepared invitation text with access data for joining the session. Simply select the desired participants. Everyone you select will receive the information they need to participate in the planned session. 3. Inthe appointment's Netviewer Meet */Netviewer online meeting * * tab, check the option Yes, plan this appointment as a Netviewer online meeting. 30 Netviewer Meet Functions for the Moderator L) netviewer 4. If desired, select a different profile for the session and define a session password. 5. Click on Apply. 6. The Netviewer invitation text with the download link for the Participant program will appear automatically in the Appointment tab. 7. Inthe Appointment tab enter the relevant information for the appointment and send the appointment. The appointment will be entered into your and the invited participants’ calendars (after they accept the appointment). Starting a Netviewer session from an Outlook appointment As the Moderator, you can start the Netviewer session from the Outlook appointment at the planned time. 1. Open the Outlook appointment. 2. Inthe Netviewer Meet */Netviewer online meeting ** tab click Start online meeting */Start * *. > The Moderator program will now start. 3. You will then immediately enter the session and wait until all participants have entered. Outlook appointment with Netviewer session on participant side e The participant opens the Outlook appointment and clicks on the link in the invitation text. The participant program starts and the participant moves directly into the session. * Microsoft Outlook 2003 ** Microsoft Outlook 2007 or higher Sending an invitation after a session has begun Proceed as follows if you wish to spontaneously invite participants to a session that has already started or if you need to quickly send the participants session data. 1. After starting the session as the moderator, click on the Invitation button in the Mini-panel. Netviewer then attempts to access your e-mail program. You may see a query from your e-mail program that must be acknowledged. 2. The e-mail to be sent will be opened in your e-mail program. Enter the recipient(s) of the e-mail and add the necessary information, such as attachments. 3. Send the e-mail. Netviewer Meet 31 Functions for the Moderator L) netviewer Inviting a Skype contact If you are a Skype user, you can invite people from your Skype contact list who are currently online to join a session that has already started. 1. After starting the session as the Moderator, click on the Invitation button in the Mini-panel. 2. Inthe invitation button's context menu, click on the Skype contact whom you would like to invite to the session. The Instant Messaging window from Skype will open. From here, you can send the selected contact the predefined instant message with the link to the Participant Send e-mail invitation to session l program. ina © ch Click on the Send button in the Skype instant messaging window. Tinā G James Netviewer Meet 32 Functions for the Moderator L) netviewer Moderating the session The Session tray in the Control panel is the moderator’s control centre. Here you can view the core session data (session number and session password if provided) and control how the session proceeds. You can set or change the session password by double clicking on it. The following functions are available only to the moderator: e Select which session participant shows his or her screen (Show mode). e Grant remote-control rights e Control the session participants' VoIP and video transmission. e Appoint participants as co-moderators. e Invite participants (see page 28) e Block the session e Record session e Remove participants from the session. e Change session settings + Session Gala Session: FO? 072 397 Password: (not seti Session recording: E| | Sina =) W (christian 5) Moderators @ Sina @ Caren @ Christian Participants @ Jane @ Sara @ Thomas + Netviewer Meet 33 Functions for the Moderator L) netviewer Many of the following functions can be accessed through dragging and dropping. For example, you can move the icon for remote control within the participant list or drag a participant from the participant list into the moderator list. Selecting session participants in show mode e Inthe upper dropdown menu in the Session tray, select the session partner whose screen you want to show. (al ( Lars =) As soon as the participant has agreed to transfer his screen, all session participants will see the transferred screen in the Netviewer window. Detailed information about desktop sharing and Show mode are available under "Desktop sharing" starting on page 53. Granting remote control rights e Inthe lower dropdown menu in the Session tray, select the session partner who you want to receive remote control rights. + Session @ Rec Session: 907 978609 Password: (not sek) Session recording: [=] ( Alex is ( (none) Moderators @ Alex @ Jane @ Lars Participants @ Peter © Sina + As soon as the participant who is in Show mode agrees to remote control over his computer, the selected session participant will be able to use remote control. More extensive information about remote control is provided under "Remote control" starting on page 56. Netviewer Meet 34 Functions for the Moderator L) netviewer Controlling VoIP and video transmission The moderator can control and monitor the session participants’ VoIP and video transmission through the moderator and participant list. + Session Session! 707 072 397 Password: (not sek) Session recording: E| | Sina ty | Christian Moderators @ Sina @ Caren @ Christian Participants @ Jane @ Sara @ Thomas + e To prohibit (crossed out) or permit VoIP or video transmission, click on the VoIP or video icon next to a session participant (moderator or participant). More extensive information about VoIP transmission is provided in the chapter titled “VolP transmission” starting on page 65. More extensive information about video transmission is provided in the chapter titled “Video transmission” starting on page 68. Netviewer Meet 35 Functions for the Moderator L) netviewer Appoint participant as co-moderator. As moderator, you can appoint a participant to be co-moderator. The co-moderator receives all of the rights he or she needs in order to take over moderation of the session. Participants = @ Lars a vf “ez @ Pete Activate Show mode Activate remote control 4opoink as co-moderatar w Prohibit video transmission w Prohibit VoIP transmission Remove e Click on the arrow next to the participant and select Appoint as co- moderator from the menu. The participant will now appear in the moderator list. An info dialog will appear for the participant. e Alternatively, you can drag the participant from the participant list and into the moderator list. e To revoke co-moderation rights from the participant, drag the participant from the moderator list and drop him into the participant list. An info dialog will appear for the participant. More extensive information about the co-moderator's rights is provided in the chapter titled “Co-moderating the session” starting on page 51. Blocking the session e If you would like to block the session so that no additional participants mao can enter, click on the button at the upper right of the Session tray. e To unblock the session, click on the button again. Removing participants from the session. e To remove a participant from the session, click on the arrow next to the participant and select Remove from the menu. This participant's program will close. 36 Netviewer Meet Functions for the Moderator netviewer Session settings The session settings function provides the moderator with useful functions during a session. You can temporarily change some standard Netviewer settings for the current session under "Session settings". Change session settings 1. Inthe Session tray, click on the arrow at the bottom right to open the menu and select Open session settings.... + Audio con Block session Set session password... Open session settings... Show all applice > The Session settings window will open. 2. Perform the desired changes on the Functions and Settings tabs. 3. Click on OX to use the modified settings for the current session. CI nebirewer Session settings Functions Settings This is where you set the Functions that need to be available to you and your participants during the session, Communication Iw Audio conferencing via Yoice-over-IP Video conferencing via web cam or transmission of a still picture File transfer Transferring Files directly Chat Exchanging text messages Whiteboard Laserpointer and drawing tools Survey Create ad hoc surveys and questionnaires Session recording Record session Netviewer Meet 37 Functions for the Moderator netviewer Changes that you make during an ongoing session are valid for that session only. The default settings will be reset when the session is over. Permanent session settings (known as Profiles) can be configured in the MyNetviewer customer portal. You can then choose from these profiles at the beginning of a session. You must be registered in the portal with proper authorization in order to create and edit these profiles. Recording function The recording function makes it possible to retrace Netviewer sessions. Everything from the session, including video and voice (when using VoIP), is kept in the recording. Netviewer supports session recording in file formats .nvl and .asf. The configuration of your Netviewer program will determine which file format is used for recording. If recording in .asf format, we recommend using a computer with at least 256 MB RAM, at least a 2-GHz processor, and Windows XP or Vista/Windows 7. File formats for session recording .nvl Netviewer's proprietary file format. .nvl files can be neither edited nor changed, which makes the recording suitable for auditing purposes. To play .nvl files you must use Netviewer NetPlayer, which contains the common functions of a media player. .ast Proprietary file format developed by Microsoft for audio and video data. To replay .asf files, you can use Windows Media Player and various other players available free of charge. Starting session recording Recording of the session will begin automatically when the session starts. You can use the following buttons in the Session tray to control the recording. Starts session recording Pauses session recording E Ef Stops session recording The button in yellow indicates the current status of the recording: TeL) Session recording is ongoing. CICE Session recording is paused. "mE Session recording is stopped. 38 Netviewer Meet netviewer Pausing session recording e Click on the button Pause session recording. You can start session recording again at any time or stop it completely. L Stopping and saving session recording 1. Click on the button Stop session recording. La) 2. As soon as you end session recording, a Save as... dialog will open. This allows you to specify where the recording file will be saved. If you do not specify a save location, the file will be saved by default in the same folder where the .exe Netviewer program is located. Please inform your Netviewer contact if you would like to specify in the Save as... dialog a particular location for your .nvl files as the default value for your Netviewer application. Deactivating the recording function In the profile administration area of the MyNetviewer customer portal you have the ability to deactivate session recording for certain users. Netviewer Meet 39 Functions for the Moderator Netviewer NetPlayer netviewer Use Netviewer NetPlayer to open an .nvl file. Here you have access to the following functions: > : File Play Options Help Desktop sharing, Web collaboration, Online meetings, Remote maintenance, Webinars | Netviewer - Mozilla Firefox y (6j A ® g > E bp sflemnnetviewer.confery | dil Meistbesuchte Seten |) Erste Schritte E Atual Nachrichten | 3 Deshbosrdfor Maren B... 1) Google Trandate |6 lil «mero ea netviewer HOME Online Meetings made easy Web conferences help you save vahiable tine and lower costs We show you how easy fl ts 10 Most an online meeting. Wath our video tour or iry Nebiewer yourse Start your free trial now y For private use hed, ~ Download the freeware < í Online Meetings are this easy Corporate solutions C Small businesses for freelancers and small companies More information Mid-sized companies D for global competitive advanlages More information Large companies for complete integration within your company More information References w 00:01:19.280 Direction: i A veranderingen wegae.. 3 l Th Netviewer Contract Co... g| TEH LEO Erosbrisse fir “vor. | EP hhrtietviewer customer ... l @ Desktop sharing, W... E + | - Contact Mylletewer Logn Language Netviewer Support Customer support, help desk and remote control More information Netviewer Meet Web conferences, presentations and unimn@ed collaboration More information Netviewer Admin Admurestration of unmanned computers and remote maintenance More information Netviewer Webinar Generate leads and hold im | Netviewer Suppo Start: Watching Play the session recording. Pause the playback. Duration: 4) 8 pa Netviewer explained in 2 minutes Onne Meetings made casy The new Netviewet Adinin Business v Online Meetings No more travel costs! Meat people anywhere, al ary Sime, right from your own office Wore about Online Mesinge > Online Support > Webinars > Online Training > Remote Maintenance > Online Presentations 21.01.2011 11:28:52 00:02:30:515 Increase (up to 16 times normal speed) or decrease (down to 1/16 the original speed) playback speed of the session recording. Copies the current recording image to the Windows clipboard. Netviewer Meet 40 Functions for the Moderator L) netviewer Converting an .nvl file into .asf format Using Netviewer NetPlayer, you can later convert the .nvl file to an .asf file. 1. From the File menu, select Export... 2. Inthe Export dialog, you can specify the file name and save location and whether the video, VoIP, and chat data should be exported as well. 3. When you click on Export, conversion of the .nvl file will begin. The .asf file will be created at the location you selected. . You can obtain Netviewer WNetPlayer in the MyNetviewer customer portal (https://my.netviewer.com). 1. Log in to the portal 2. In the right column click on Download. 3. Download Netviewer NetPlayer. Netviewer Meet qi Edit Start Shan progress Delete Save as Display results Publish results Save results as Functions for the Moderator netviewer Survey manager The moderator can use the Survey manager from Netviewer to spontaneously create and send to session participants brief surveys or extensive questionnaires. There are many possible ways to use the survey function: e Conduct a general or specific technical survey. e Send tests to participants who have received training. e Obtain feedback about a session. Survey manager is not accessible for the co-moderator. The Survey tray In the Survey tray, the moderator can start an ad hoc survey or open the Survey Editor in order to create a more extensive survey. In addition, the Survey tray informs the moderator about prepared, ongoing, and completed surveys. + Survey ©) Training Feedback Evaluation of the training Start the survey © analysis Planning of new establishments You have access to the following functions in the Survey's menu: Edit Opens the survey in the Survey Editor. Start Starts the survey. Show During an ongoing survey, this opens the Progress dialog in details/progress which you can monitor the status of the survey. Delete Deletes the survey from the tray. Save as... Opens the Save as dialog in order to save a survey as an XML file. Show results Opens the Aesults dialog of a survey that has been completed. Publish results Opens the Aesults dialog for the participants. The Survey tray will appear in the participants’ control panels, where they can view the survey results at any time. Save results as Opens the Save as dialog in order to save the results of a survey as an XML file. Netviewer Meet 42 Functions for the Moderator netviewer Question types You can use the following question types for an ad hoc survey or for more extensive surveys. You can define the text of the question in any way you like. Yes or No This question can be answered with Yes or No only. Yes | No Tendency This question can be answered by selecting one of five levels. You can adjust the labels to the right and left. poor good O@ O00 One answer (radio button) There are several possible answers to this type of question. Only exactly one answer can be selected. You can define the number of answers and the text associated with each answer. OO ® Several answers (Checkbox) There are several possible answers to this type of question. Several answers can be selected. You can define the number of answers and the text associated with each answer. m m = Short text This question can be answered any way the participant chooses in a single line of text. Netviewer Meet 43 Functions for the Moderator L) netviewer Long text This question can be answered any way the participant chooses in multiple lines of text. If the answer is longer than the size of the text field, vertical scroll bars will appear. Ad hoc survey Proceed as follows to create an ad hoc survey: 1. Inthe Survey tray, click on Ad hoc survey... 2. Inthe Select question type window, select the desired question type. 3. Enter the required information for the type of question you selected (text of the question, possible answers). 4. Click on Save to save the ad hoc survey in the tray (you can start it at a later time) or click on Start to start the ad hoc survey immediately. Once you have started the ad hoc survey, it will appear for the participants as a separate window. The window will remain in the foreground until the participant has answered the question or closes the window. The ad hoc survey will be complete when all participants have provided answers or the moderator ends the survey. Refer to the chapter titled “Showing results” on page 48 for more information about the results of the survey. LInetwewer Survey How do you rate the session overall? very pOor very good r Survey editor Creating a survey 1. Inthe Survey tray, click on Survey editor. 2. Enter the subject of the survey; a description is optional. This information will be visible in the Survey tray and for the participants while the survey is ongoing. 3. Click on a question type in the left area of the window to insert the question into your survey. Netviewer Meet 44 Functions for the Moderator netviewer 4. Enter the required information for the type of question you selected (text of the question, possible answers). 5. Repeat the instructions above to insert additional questions. 6. Click on OX in order to save the survey and close the survey editor. C nehewer Survey editor Subject Training feedback Description: We continually strive to improve the development of our training team and we would be grateful if you would comment on the training that you attended. Thank you for Yes or No your feedback! ves | |e | H Options por peed £ O8o 05 Questions 1 © How well the session structured Tendency very poorly very well E E oO O H 2 © What subjects were not covered fully enough i Function of the product One answer S | Nail 0 Advantages of the product © Add answer 3 ¥ Would you recommend this training to others? 4 ~* Do you have suggestions for improvement? Several answers Short text To insert a new question between two existing questions, select one of the existing questions and click on Add question in the lower section of the survey editor. The new question will be inserted underneath the selected question. Saving the survey Save your survey if you plan to use it more than once. 1. Create the survey. 2. Open the Actions menu. 3. Select Export and select a storage location. Importing the survey 1. Open the survey editor in the survey tray. Netviewer Meet 45 Functions for the Moderator L) netviewer 2. Open the Actions menu. 3. Select /mport. Starting the survey e When you are ready to start the survey during the session, click on Start survey in the Survey tray. + Start the survey Testing the survey 1. Create a survey. 2. Save and export the survey for later use. 3. Import and start the survey. You can import and edit an exported survey later at any time. Remember to save any new versions of the survey you create and export them again in order to keep the changes. Ending the survey The survey will be over when all participants have provided answers, the moderator ends the survey, or the time limit is reached (see page 46). e To end the survey before the time limit, click on the X next to the survey in the Survey tray. + Survey is running © Additional options You can define additional options for your survey if needed. w Options [ Create test ( Individual questions [ Manually define points for each answer © Questionnaire [~ Time lirit: Minutes . Moderators are participating in the survey Netviewer Meet 46 Functions for the Moderator netviewer Create test The survey function offers additional functions for testing situations. Refer to "Survey mode Create test" beginning on page 47 for more information. Individual A survey is conducted either in the form of individual questions/questionnaire questions that appear one after the other on the participant's S screen, or as a questionnaire in which all questions are displayed at once. Time limit The participants have only a limited amount of time (in minutes) to answer the questions. Moderators are The moderator and co-moderators will participate in the participating in the survey. survey Survey mode “Create test” When using the survey function Create test, you must define the correct answers while creating the survey. You also give points for correct answers. The points are used to assign a score when analyzing the survey. 1. Activate Create testin the Options area. 2. For every question that you insert, provide the correct answer. For question types Yes or No, Tendency, One answer, and Several answers, do this by clicking on or selecting the correct answer. One point will be sranted for every correct answer. Question types Short text and Long text are excluded from the point-based evaluation because the participants are asked to formulate their own responses. If you would like to specify the number of points for correct answers, proceed as follows: 1. Under Options activate the option Manually define points for each answer. @®: 6 2. Use the plus and minus buttons to adjust the number of points for each correct answer. When you publish the test results for the participants, each participant will see only his or her test results and cannot view the results of the other session participants. Netviewer Meet 47 Functions for the Moderator netviewer Action menu The Action menu in the survey editor contains the following functions: Import... Opens the Open dialog so you can open a survey (Saved as an XML file) in the survey editor. Export... Opens the Save as dialog in order to save the current survey as an XML file. You can re-use the saved survey at any time or forward it to another moderator. Reset Deletes previous entries in the survey editor. Start Starts the survey if all entries are complete. If any information is still missing, a query dialog will appear. W If you have saved a survey as an XML file, during a later session you can simply drag it from the place where it is saved (such as from Windows Explorer) and drop it in the Survey tray. Showing results After a survey has been completed, you can view the results. e When a survey is over, click on Show results in the Survey tray. The Results dialog will open. = Show results Netviewer Meet 48 Functions for the Moderator netviewer Here you have access to the following functions: Show window to Netviewer transfers the Results dialog to the participants inside the participants the Netviewer window. If this option is deactivated, the window will be blacked out on the participants’ screens. Save as Opens the Save as dialog in order to save the results of a survey as an XML file. Publish Opens the Aesults dialog for the participants. The Survey tray will appear in the participants’ control panels, where they can view the survey results at any time. Llnetwewer Results Training feedback Wie continually strive to improve the development of our training team and we would be grateful if you would comment on the training that you attended, Thank you for your feedback! How well was the session structured? very poor very good What subjects were not covered fully enough Function of the product Installation Advantages of the product Would you recommend this training to others? Yes Mo Do you have any idea of improvement? . show window to the participants Save as... | Publish | Close | When you save the survey results, both an XML file and an XSL file are generated. These files must not be renamed and have to be in the same folder so that the survey results are displayed in legible form. Netviewer Meet 49 Functions for the Moderator L) netviewer Sessions in Event mode Sessions with a large number of participants require special functions. For this reason, Netviewer provides the Event mode for handling large sessions. In order to simplify moderation of the session, the range of functions available in the participant program is limited. Changes on the participant side: The Session tray shows only the moderator list, not the entire list of participants. The pointer and speech bubble (for requesting the right to speak) are not available. The participants can send chat messages only to the moderator and the co-moderator. In the File transfer tray, the participants can only download (not upload) files. The participants see only the moderator's and co-moderator's video. VolP transmission is limited to the moderators. The participants can only hear the moderator and the co-moderator and are not able to speak themselves. The Whiteboard is not available. @ The Whiteboard is not available on the moderator side. Otherwise, the functions available in the moderator program are unchanged. Activating Event mode during the session 1. In the Session tray, click on the arrow at the lower right in order to open the menu with expanded functions. 2. Select Open session settings. 3. Inthe Settings tab, select the Hold a session in Event mode option. 4. Click on OK to exit Session settings. Event mode will take immediate effect. e To deactivate event mode, deactivate the Hold a session in Event mode option. ð If Event mode has been activated automatically due to the size of the session, you will not be able to deactivate Event mode Netviewer Meet 50 x netviewer Functions for participants Session tray In the Session tray, participants can view the list of participants. Here they will find the following information: Who is participating in the session? Who is currently showing his or her screen? Who currently has remote-control rights? Who is currently transferring his or her microphone and video signal? When a participant wishes to change his or her name in the list of participants, he or she double clicks on the name in the Sess/ontray. The name can now be modified. Co-moderating the session When the moderator has appointed a participant to be co-moderator, this person can take over moderation of the session. The co-moderator has all necessary authorizations. Moderators ai ® Sina Pas E IS @ Caren ww =) @ christian & =) The co-moderator can: appoint other participants as co-moderators. decide who shows his or her screen and who has remote-control rights. control VolP and video transmission of individual or all session participants. set a session password remove participants from the session. block the session. Refer to the chapter titled "Moderating the session", beginning on page 33, for more information on the moderator functions. The co-moderator cannot: Netviewer create and conduct surveys. use the invitation function. open and change the session settings. control session recording. Meet 51 Functions for Participants L) netviewer If the moderator leaves the session and a co-moderator has been named, the session will remain in effect and the co-moderator can continue the session. Even if the co-moderator is using the participant program, he will still utilize one of your licenses for the moderator program while continuing a Netviewer session. Once the final moderator/co-moderator leaves the session, the session will end. Request speech right In order to notify the moderator that his VoIP microphone signal is being transferred to the session partners (speech rights), the participant right-clicks in the Netviewer window. A speech bubble (visible for all) will then appear with his name. The moderator can then use the Sess/on module to grant the participant speech rights (see page 35). 52 Netviewer Meet x netviewer Functions for moderators and participants The functions that we introduce in this chapter are basic Netviewer functions. They are generally available equally to both the moderator and the participants. Desktop sharing When you start a Netviewer session as moderator, you initially show your own screen. In other words, you are in Show mode. The participants see the contents of your screen in the Netviewer window, but they are unable to control your computer with their mouse, for example. To see which applications and screen elements you can transmit in Show mode, refer to "Application selection" on page 54. Granting show rights As moderator, you can grant other session partners show rights. 1. Inthe upper dropdown menu in the Session tray, select the session partner whose screen you want to show. Initially a black screen will be visible in the Netviewer window for the moderator and the other session participants. = "iy i) 2. The selected participant will see a query. He can adjust the settings in the Application selection tray, and then acknowledge the query. The moderator and other session participants then see the released applications in the Netviewer window. Your screen content is about to be transferred. Do you want to proceed? You can use the Application selection tray in the Wetviewer Asllach | Control Panel at any time bo select which applications you = would like to transfer, @ REC Notice: The session may be recorded, The icon at left will be shown in the "Session" tray whenever recording is active, . Stop showing this dialogue during the current session If the participant would like to deactivate transmission of her screen, she must click on Watch in the Mini-panel. The Netviewer window will remain black until the moderator grants show rights to another person. 53 Netviewer Meet Functions for moderators and participants netviewer Functions in show mode You can use the following functions while showing your screen. Application selection In the Application selection tray you determine which applications and elements of your screen your session partners will see. Currently open applications are listed in the upper area. If one application has several open windows, these will be shown below the application in a tree-type structure. In the lower section, you have access to general options related to screen transmission. e Check the desired options in order to activate transmission for the session partners. e Remove the check next to an option in order to prevent sharing it. Please make sure your system fulfills the System requirements listed on page 8 , otherwise you may experience functional limitations in the behaviour of the application selection. = Application selection Show all applications Ll contract draft Octo? - Micr.., Microsoft Excel - key Figures... [+] 4 windows Explorer eS Mindjet MindManager Fro - [... Transfer newly opened applications Transfer desktop Transfer task bar and system TAQA AKA Transfer Netviewer panel Option What the session partners see Show all applications All open windows Transfer newly opened applications All windows as they are opened for as long as you are in Show mode. Transfer desktop Desktop including shortcuts, background image, etc. Transfer taskbar and system Taskbar, start menu, and system dialogs Show Netviewer Control panel Nonoperable, shaded-out Netviewer Control panel on edge of screen May cover parts of the transferred screen, so not selected by default. Netviewer Meet 54 <= Functions for moderators and participants netviewer If you move your mouse over an application in the Application selection tray, the corresponding window will be highlighted on your screen. When you change the settings in Application selection, the changes will apply only to the current session. As soon as you start a new session, Netviewer will revert back to the standard settings. My monitor tray Use the My monitor tray to control how Netviewer will display your screen to the session partners. You will see a miniaturized version of your screen including all changes in real time. Use this opportunity to organize your screen ideally for transfer by arranging Windows, closing windows, and adjusting settings in Application selection, such as hiding the Control panel. Transferring a still picture To temporarily interrupt transfer of the screen, you can switch to a still picture. Your screen will then be frozen on the other session partners’ computers. e (Click on the Pause button to transfer a frozen image of your current screen to the session partner or press the key combination [Windows key] + [S]. e Click on the arrow button to restart transfer of your current screen, including changes or press [Windows key] + [P]. 55 Netviewer Meet lp Functions for moderators and participants L) netviewer Functions in watch mode The following functions are available to you when you are looking at another session partners’ screen. Pointer While you are in Watch mode, use the pointer to draw your session partner's attention to specific areas of the screen, for example an incorrect number in a calculation. You do not need remote control rights to do this. e Simply click in the Netviewer window or move the mouse cursor while holding the left mouse button depressed. Each of the session partners will then see on his or her screen a pointer with your name. It is not possible to control the computer remotely or manipulate data with the pointer. Remote control Remote control enables you to control your session partner's computer (who is currently showing his screen) with mouse and keyboard commands. As moderator, you decide who receives remote control rights. Granting remote control rights involves a certain amount of security risk. If you intend to grant another session partner remote control rights, you should be familiar with and able to use the security functions explained in this chapter. In this way, you can avoid having the session partner perform undesirable actions on your computer. Please also explain these functions to your session partner. How does Netviewer protect remotely controlled computers? e Granting remote control: Only the moderator can grant remote control rights. However, the participant whose computer will be remotely controlled must provide explicit approval for this. e Application selection: In general, only applications and screen elements that the session partner has released for transfer can be controlled remotely. You can neither see nor control elements that he or she has not selected in Application selection. e Mouse priority: When remote control is activated, session partners share mouse and keyboard. However, the session partner whose computer is controlled remotely has a higher priority and retains control over her mouse at all times. e Security key: If the person whose computer is being controlled remotely presses the security key (by default [Fi]), he or she will immediately revoke remote control. 56 Netviewer Meet Functions for moderators and participants L) netviewer Granting remote control rights As moderator, you can grant a session partner or yourself remote control rights. 1. Inthe lower dropdown menu in the Session tray, select the session partner to whom you wish to grant remote control rights. w d Christiane i =) 2. The participant in Show mode is asked whether he would like to grant the session partner remote control rights. _ nebviewer Activate remote control Would you like to grant remote control rights to another participant? (You can interrupt remote control at any time by pressing the security key Fil.) Data is stored in your clipboard, The participant with remote-control rights will be given access to this data, 3. If he agrees, the other session partner will receive remote control rights. The small hand symbol in the title bar frame of the Netviewer window tells you if you currently have remote control rights. Forwarding remote control e If you would like to forward remote control rights to another session partner, in the Sess/on tray select that person from the drop-down menu for granting remote-control rights. Deactivating remote control e Inthe Sess/ontray, open the drop-down menu for granting remote control rights and remove the check mark next to the person's name. Remote control is now deactivated. If the participant in Show mode would like to actively revoke remote control rights from the other participant, he must only click offin the Mini-panel or in the upper area of the Control panel or simply press the security key (by default [Fi)). Netviewer Meet 37 Functions for moderators and participants netviewer Shortcuts Transferring keyboard shortcuts (key combinations such as [Ctrl] + [A]) is generally possible when remote control is activated. The following keyboard shortcuts are available immediately: Shortcut [Ctrl] + [C] [Ctrl] + [X] [Ctrl] + [V] [Ctrl] + [A] [Ctrl] + [S] [Ctrl] + [N] [Ctrl] + [O] [Ctrl] + [P] [Ctrl] + [Z] [Ctrl] + [F4] [Ctrl] + [Home] [Ctrl] + [End] [Ctrl] + [Insert] [Alt] + underlined letter in menu name [Alt] + [Space key] [Alt] + [Space key] + [X] [Alt] + [Space key] + [N] [Alt] + [Space key] + [W] [Alt] + [-] [Alt] + [Down arrow] [Alt] + [PrtScn] [Shift] + [Insert] [Shift] + [Tab key] [Shift] + [F10] [Shift] + [Delete] [PrtScn] [Fi] + [Shift] Description Copy Cut Paste Select all Save Open new window Open Print Undo Close current subprogram Move to beginning of a document Move to end of a document Copy Retrieve menu item System menu of the active window Maximize window Minimize window Restore window System menu of the current sub window Open selection menu Screenshot of active window Paste Backwards through options Open context menu Delete permanently Screenshot of entire screen Display direct help Some shortcuts act not on the session partner's computer, but instead on the local computer and for this reason Netviewer supports the following modified shortcuts: 58 Netviewer Meet Functions for moderators and participants Windows shortcut [Windows key] + [E] [Windows key] + [R] [Windows key] + [D] [Windows key] + [F] [Windows key] + [M] [Windows key] + [Pause] [Windows key] +[Tab key] [Windows key] + [F1] [Windows key] = [Ctrl] + [Esc] [Alt] + [Esc] [Alt] + [F4] [Alt] + [Tab], [Alt] + [Tab] + [Shift] Netviewer shortcuts Netviewer shortcut [Ctrl]+[{Alt]+[E] [Ctrl]+[Alt]}+[R] [Ctrl]+[Alt]+[D] [Ctrl]+[Alt]+[F] [Ctrl]+[Alt]+[M] [Ctrl]+[Alt]+[Pause] [Ctrl]+[Alt]+[Tab key] [Ctrl]+[Alt]+[F1] [Ctri]+[Shift]+[W] (CtriJ+[Alt]}+[] [CtrlJ+[Alt]+[Fa] [Alt]+[], [Alt]+[4]+[Shift] netviewer Description Explorer Run Show desktop Search for file Minimize all windows System properties Change task Windows Help Display start menu Switch between running tasks (with [Shift] to the left) Cancel application or exit Windows Show and switch between running tasks (with additional [Shift] to the left) Netviewer keyboard shortcuts are a convenient way to quickly access commonly used Netviewer functions. Netviewer shortcuts only take effect on the local computer. Netviewer shortcut [Win]+[N] [Win]+[S] [Win]+[P] [Fn] [Ctrl]+[Alt]+[S] Netviewer Meet Description Extend and retract Control Panel Interrupt screen transmission and transmit a static image Reactivate screen transmission and discard static image Revoke remote-control rights Multi-monitor support 59 Functions for moderators and participants L) netviewer Multi-monitor support If the session partner in Show mode uses several monitors, when you are in Watch mode you will always see the screen in which the Netviewer Control panel is located. To switch to another screen, the participant whose computer is controlled remotely can use the key combination [Ctrl] + [Alt] + [S]. This will switch the Control panel to the other screen so you can view it. View in the Netviewer window You can adjust the view of the transferred screen in the Netviewer window with the following functions: e Full screen e Mini-video e Theater mode e Original size e Scale proportionally e Scale Full-screen mode Netviewer depicts the transferred screen as a full-size image on your screen. This lets you view the remote computer as if it were your own (assuming equal screen resolution). e To activate full-screen mode, click on the Full-screen mode button inthe FRR enix’ frame of the Netviewer window. 60 Netviewer Meet Functions for moderators and participants netviewer Full-screen bar (flap) In full-screen mode you can control the most important session functions through the full-screen bar. After a few seconds, the full-screen bar folds in and is no longer visible. To fold it open move your mouse to the centre/top edge of the screen. The functions Scale proportionally and Mini-video are Display available in Full-screen mode (see page 63). W Original size Scale proportionally Scale Tools Mini-vided Full screen Theatre mode Check screen transfer progress (see page 23). You currently have remote-control rights. H d g Activate or deactivate pinning of the full-screen mode bar. If the bar is pinned, it will stay on top. Extend and retract Control panel Minimize the Netviewer window so it is visible only in the taskbar. Reduce the Netviewer window (switch back to normal window view). Exit the Netviewer session. 61 Netviewer Meet Functions for moderators and participants netviewer Laaban PAAA neacer mo d @ Theater mode is an expanded full-screen mode and is particularly well-suited for meetings and training sessions where the session participants should have as little distraction as possible. In addition to the transferred screen, Theater mode also shows Chat; the video of the participant who is in show mode, at upper right (large); and the videos of other session participants, below (small). The background is black so that full attention is focused on Netviewer. e Open the Netviewer menu at the top left of the Netviewer window. Select the 7heater mode option. Beaming. Education rator Halo everyfody! Piama uphosd ras Others invessor Relanian =~“ T 1I mier atar: We'l dat coneciatety. We're Rust mating for Tom I eve hee a call Trating 203A CE FISTS Duvet, EVORA IA FNO Conterern ing Setrare ard Erres Marner aaua ty LADAGA Asem Mons [Lute Te meetings and online training eve mnferencing is used ness and efficiency of online presentations during the sales 2985 use In distribution and marketing. OSa ab aed 2- v- A BRE Be*s Arget vorlag E Pamet [Tund hdr) netviewer While in Theater mode, you can show the Control panel as usual in order to use additional Netviewer functions. e To leave Theater mode, press the [Esc] key or click on the X at the upper right. 62 Netviewer Meet Functions for moderators and participants L) netviewer Mini-video The Mini-video display option shows a smaller version of the session partner's video in the Netviewer window. e Open the Netviewer menu at the top left of the Netviewer window. Select the Mini-video option. The presence of a check in front of the option will tell you that the function is activated. If the session partner has deactivated video transmission, the Mini-video will not be shown. Original size The Original size function is used when the transferred screen is shown in 1:1 scale. This maximizes the Netviewer window. In this case, the screen may need more room than the Netviewer window provides. To scroll within the Netviewer window, move the mouse along the window frame in the direction of the items you wish to view. The contents of the window will shift according to the movement of the mouse. The closer you move the mouse to the edge, the faster the contents will move. 1. Open the Netviewer menu at the top left of the Netviewer window. 2. Select the Orginal size option. The presence of a check in front of the option will tell you that the function is activated. Scale proportionally When the Scale proportionally function is active, the aspect ratio of the transferred screen will be retained when shown in the Netviewer window. 1. Open the Netviewer menu at the top left of the Netviewer window. 2. Select the Scale proportionally option. A check in front of the option indicates that the function is activated. If the transferred screen does not fully cover the Netviewer window in full-screen mode, you will see gray areas at the top and bottom or at the left and right. Scale When the Scale function is activated, the screen contents from the session partner's screen in Show mode will be adapted to the Netviewer window without retaining the aspect ratio. As a result, the screen contents and Netviewer window may be stretched or distorted so the contents completely fill the Netviewer window. 1. Open the Netviewer menu at the top left of the Netviewer window. 2. Select the Sca/e option. The presence of a check in front of the option will tell you that the function is activated. 63 Netviewer Meet Functions for moderators and participants = netviewer For a 1:1 view of the screen, select the Original size function from the menu. Other functions in the Control panel Transferring files through the Control panel Use the File transfer tray in the Control panel to exchange files with session partners. This tray serves as a container for files that all session partners can download or Upload. + File transter key Figures 2006, xls 14 kB, Owner: Moderator contract draft _Octū?. doc =| 11 kB, Owner: Moderator w + Uploading a file 1. Click on the Upload button in the File transfer tray. aa 2. Inthe file selection dialog that opens, select the desired file and confirm i your choice. All session partners can now download the file. When a session partner has uploaded a new file into the tray, the tray will blink on the other partners’ screens to inform them of the upload. Downloading a file 1. Select the desired file and click on the Download button in the File transfer tray. _* | 2. Inthe Save file dialog, browse to the local location where you wish to save the file. You can also upload or download files with Drag & Drop: Simply drag a file from your computer into the tray or from the tray onto your desktop, for example. Once you see the Plus symbol, you can let the file drop into the new location. In this manner you can also upload entire folders to the File transfer tray. Deleting a file As the moderator, you can delete any file from the File transfertray. Participants can only delete the files that they personally uploaded. e Right-click on the file and select Delete from the context menu. Netviewer Meet 64 Functions for moderators and participants L) netviewer VoIP transmission Netviewer provides an integrated VoIP function (Voice over IP) that makes it possible to establish a telephone connection over the Internet. VoIP enables up to ten people (including moderators) to speak to each other simultaneously over a full-duplex channel. The benefits of using the VoIP function instead of a normal telephone conference: e Reduce telephone charges. e The convenience of talking through a headset. e No special software required. e The only requirement: All session partners must have a headset. The moderator decides during the session who may participate in the VoIP transmission. He controls the granting of rights through the Session tray. Every session participant can decide whether he would like to permit transfer of his speech signal. He does this by using the on/off buttons in the Vo/P tray. VoIP transmission occurs only with your approval. No session partner can hear you until you confirm that you wish to transfer your speech signal. Requirements for VoIP transmission In order to take advantage of the VoIP function, you will need a computer headset. We recommend testing whether the headset is correctly attached to your computer and properly configured before the session begins. 65 Netviewer Meet Functions for moderators and participants netviewer On the moderator side When you, as Moderator, open a session, transfer of your VoIP signal is deactivated in the Vo/Ptray. e Inthe Vo/Ptray, click on to activate VoIP transmission. VolP transmission of individual session participants is controlled in the Session tray. + Session ala) Session: 707 072 397 Password: (not seti Session recording: (2 LuFa E| (Sina 5) Wy | Christian Moderators @ Sina @ Caren @ Christian Participants @ Jane @ Sara ®@ Thomas + VoIP transmission of this session participant is deactivated (off in the Vo/P tray. He can hear the other session participants, but his own VoIP signal is not transferred. ra VoIP transmission of this session participant is activated (on) inthe Vo/P tray. He can both speak and hear other session participants. If this session participant is currently speaking, the icon will blink. 4 The moderator has revoked this session partner's speech rights or all full- duplex channels are in use. The session participant can hear the others, but not speak himself. Q If ten people are already using VolP transmission, newly arriving participants will initially be able to hear only, but not speak. However, the moderator can redistribute the full-duplex channels by going through the Session tray. Netviewer Meet 66 Functions for moderators and participants L) netviewer On the participant's side When the participant enters the session, VoIP transmission is initially deactivated (offin the Vo/P tray). If one of the full-duplex channels is available, the participant can activate transmission of his VoIP signal by clicking on the on button. Functions in the VoIP tray In the Vo/P tray, each session participant can activate and deactivate his or her own speech transmission. 1. Inthe Vo/Ptray, click onin order to transmit your microphone signal to your session partner. The session participant can hear the others, but not speak with them. The session participant can hear the others and speak with them. For this to work, a free full-duplex channel must be available and the moderator must permit VoIP transmission. 2. Adjust the Volume and Microphone slide controllers to control the volume of playback a and recording g , respectively. = or = 1. Click on the arrow in the lower right of the Vo/Ptray. us ~ > The context menu will open. 2. Click on Multimedia settings. > The Multimedia settings dialog will open. 3. Use the two slide controls under Audio to adjust the volume and microphone levels. Selecting and regulating a playback device 1. Click on the arrow in the lower right of the Vo/Ptray. x 2. Click on Playback device. n 3. Select the playback device whose signal you wish to transfer to the session partner. Selecting and regulating a recording device 1. Click on the arrow in the lower right of the Vo/Ptray. tt + 2. Click on Recording device. 3. Select the recording device whose signal you wish to transfer to the session partner. 67 Netviewer Meet Functions for moderators and participants L) netviewer Video transmission Using the Video function integrated into Netviewer, you can view the Webcam videos of your session partners as well as activate and configure your own video transmission. The Participant videos and My video trays in the Control panel are available for these purposes. The Participant videos tray can show up to ten videos simultaneously. Video transmission occurs only with your approval. No session partner can see your video until you confirm that you wish to transfer your video signal. Requirements for video transmission To transfer video, you will need a Webcam. We recommend testing whether the Webcam is correctly attached to your computer and properly configured before the session begins. If you do not have a Webcam, you can also display a static image (file format .bmp or .jpg) or a video (file format .avi or .mpeg). On the moderator side When you, as Moderator, open a session, transfer of Video is deactivated in the My video tray. The following cases are possible: e A Webcam is attached to your computer. In the My video tray, click on in order to activate transmission. e No Webcam is attached to your computer. Click on the arrow at the lower right of the tray. Select Video source and then /mage... or Video... in order to transfer a static image or video file instead of a Webcam video stream. Video transmission of individual session participants is controlled in the Session tray. 68 Netviewer Meet Functions for moderators and participants netviewer + Session Cra) Session! 707 072 397 Password: (not sek) Session recording: Co [i Fay i] = (Sina =) ie © Christian =j) a Moderators @ Sina @ Caren @ Christian Participants @ Jane @ Sara @ Thomas + Transmission of the session participant's video is deactivated (off in the My video tray. His video is not visible to the other session participants. a Transmission of the session participant's video is activated (on) in the My video tray. His video is visible to the other session participants. if The moderator has generally forbidden video transmission for this session participant or all ten video channels are already occupied. The participant cannot activate video transmission. On the participant's side When the participant enters the session, video transmission is initially deactivated (offin the My video tray). If one of the ten video channels is available, the participant can activate transmission of 