Pierre-Gilles de Gennes, who died on May 18 aged 74, won the 1991 Nobel Prize in Physics for research which led to the development of liquid-crystal displays; he also carried out research on liquid adhesion that led, among other things, to the development of more effective vineyard fungicides.

Liquid crystals are substances which are not quite liquid and not quite solid. Physically they appear to flow like liquids, but they have some properties of crystalline solids, including the arrangement or orientation of their molecules. De Gennes's achievement was to describe mathematically what happens when the orderly structure of solid crystals turns into the disorder of liquid molecules and to explain why in certain circumstances molecules in liquid can form ordered states.

The son of a doctor, Pierre-Gilles de Gennes was born in Paris on October 24 1932 and attended the École Normale Supérieure. After graduating he began research on neutron scattering and magnetism at the Saclay centre of the Commisariat à l'Énergie Atomique, taking a doctorate in 1957. In 1959 he studied with the solid state physicist Charles Kittel at the University of California, Berkeley.

In 1971 he became a professor at the Collège de France, where he led research on polymers (complex synthetic chain-like molecules), describing how they moved and evolved. This research made it possible for scientists better to determine and control polymer properties. From 1976 until his retirement in 2002 he was director of the École Supérieure de Physique et de Chimie Industrielles de la Ville de Paris.

During the 1980s de Gennes developed an interest in the physical and chemical dynamics involved in the wetting of surfaces by liquids, analysing why water adheres to some but tends to be repelled by other surfaces - grapeskins for instance.

This research has had a highly practical application for wine producers, enabling the production of fungicide sprays which cover the whole grape instead of slipping off to form droplets at the base of the fruit.

The commercial spin-offs from his work on liquid crystals spawned a multi-billion-dollar international industry, and de Gennes was known to regret the fact that he and other theoretical scientists had derived little financial reward from intellectual property rights.

But de Gennes remained modest about his achievement. When the Nobel Prize jury described him as the "Isaac Newton of our time", he laughed off the description, putting it down to "Nordic lyricism".

An athletic man who loved the outdoor life, de Gennes was a passionate and energetic teacher with a gift for explaining complex concepts in a simple and straightforward way. After receiving the Nobel prize he devoted much of his time to lecturing in French secondary schools about the connections between the theoretical and practical sides of science.

As well as the Nobel Prize, de Gennes won the Lorentz Medal and the Wolf Prize in 1990.

He was also awarded the Holweck Prize of the joint French and British Physical Society and was a foreign member of the Royal Society.