Theoretical physicist, experimentalist, teacher, public personality — Pierre-Gilles de Gennes, who died on 18 May 2007, wore all of these labels, and more. His rare ability to flow across boundaries between scientific disciplines led him to found the area of 'soft matter', for which he was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1991. But his work on polymers and liquid crystals was just one aspect of his research interests.

Born in 1932 in Paris, he attended École Normale Supérieure in 1951 and worked in Saclay on magnetic phase transitions, using neutron scattering, between 1955 and 1959, during which he obtained his PhD. Then after a post-doc at Berkeley and service in the French navy, he set up a research group on superconductors at the Université de Paris in Orsay.

In hindsight, it's clear that the framework to describe phase transitions in magnets and superconductors should apply more generally to any transitions between ordered and disordered states in other complex systems such as polymer solutions and liquid crystals. But before de Gennes made the connection, they were considered disparate fields. He saw simplicity and order within complex, disordered and soft systems.

Not one to rest on his laurels, he moved on to study interfaces, wetting and adhesion. His fascination with how water adheres to some surfaces but not others eventually helped wine producers to improve pesticide coverage of a grape. Then after his retirement from the Collège de France, he focused on problems that were more biological; his most recently published paper (March 2007) is entitled “Collective neuronal growth and self organisation of axons”.

Aside from his research output, he published several books aimed at a broader audience. He was an ideal mentor. Following his Nobel prize, he visited more than 150 schools across France to encourage students to study science, showing them the beauty of hands-on, everyday physics. He was also supportive of his fellow scientists and actively participated in the peer-review process. Unsurprisingly, his was a name often recommended by authors to review their work, across several fields of research.

As an example of his approach to science, de Gennes did not set out to create the now ubiquitous flat-screen display whose technology is based on his work: he simply thought liquid crystals posed an interesting theoretical problem and used his intuitive methods to study them. Thanks to his legacy, we will never forget to do research for the sake of it, without being preoccupied with application, and regardless of the discipline.