Gilles Rubinstenn joins as an expert for our biotechnology roundtable.

Can you tell us more about “Fondation Pierre-Gilles de Gennes pour la Recherche”?

The Fondation Pierre-Gilles de Gennes is the virtual center of excellence built by three first class research institutes in Paris : The École Normale Supérieure (ENS), the École Supérieure de Physique et de Chimie Industrielles (ESPCI) the Institut Curie. The Foundation is based on interdisciplinarity in life sciences and exchanges among the institutions, with a view toward the creation of public-private partnerships. Dedicated to industrialists and academic researchers, the Foundation launches public-and-private research projects and facilitates the transformation of discoveries into innovative applications.

The Foundation can count on its four basic skill : physics, chemistry, biology and clinical practice to tackle innovative challenges leading to new solutions for Cancer, SNC or Immunological diseases by therapeutic, diagnostic, and medical device solutions.

More information can be find on http://www.fondation-pgg.org/

Why is the foundation a good partner for US-based biotech/ pharma companies?

The Foundation is intended particularly to serve innovative businesses by enabling access to high-level upstream research activities. Our intention is to focus primarily on innovative companies which do not have an easy access to this reservoir because of their size (SME) or foreign status. This would be particularly true for US-based biotech and small to mid-size Pharma companies.

• We simplify the organization of ambitious projects among these businesses and the laboratories in its network

• We serve as a facilitator for research projects

• We provide security for the acquisition of proofs of concept

Furthermore, the Research tax credit status in France, allow an almost complete cover of the cost of these research project. In the case of a US entrepreneur who would initiate a subsidiary in France to manage such a Innovation project, the cost of equity over two years, is the subsidiary makes no profit, could be as low as 4% of the total budget! If the subsidiary makes some profit, the cost of equity could even become “negative”! This is one of the primary functions of the Foundation to help building this kind of venture.