Arriving in Llanview in 1979, Clint Buchanan has found himself in many strange predicaments the most notorious being his marriage to Victoria Lord. The editor of an Arizona newspaper, Clint was recruited to come to town by Victoria's terminally ill husband Joe Reilly to take over his duties at the banner. After Joe's death, Clint was there for Viki and her children and eventually made them his own through adoption. While the two still have an emotional connection to this day, it wasn't easy for Clint to endure Viki's alter egos. Suffering from Disassociative Identity Disorder (DID), Viki took Clint on the roller coaster ride of his life for years!

During their first marriage, Viki's wild, free-spirited alter ego Niki emerged to set off and live it up! However, knowing Clint would never allow it, Niki pretended to be Viki and convinced Clint that she (Viki) wanted a divorce! Soon after, Clint found out that Viki had been ill again and came up with a plan to make her come back to him. He took Viki's sister Tina, who had a thing for Clint, to a lodge and arranged for 'Niki' to show up. When Niki entered the room and saw Clint and Tina about to have sex, it was enough to lure Viki out again!

In 2003, while Clint would get the exciting news that Natalie Buchanan was his daughter, he would get the most devastating news of his life when he found out that his daughter Jessica was really the biological daughter of Mitch Lawrence, a man who raped Viki years back. However, through it all, this Texas cowboy has remained a fair man and loving father who always looks out for his own!

After a fling with Dorian Lord, Clint fell into the arms of Nora Hanen, who was there for him, and the rest of his family, during the death of his father Asa. Clint immediately took over all the goings-on at Buchanan Enterprises - and even took part in some dirty handiness, with the help of Lindsay, to get the company back after Dorian managed a takeover!

Though Clint's Asa-like attitude almost cost him a lot of people in his family, especially his daughter Natalie, who he couldn't forgive for being involved in the Jared Banks sandal, he was able to pick up the pieces and move on as the head of Buchanan Enterprises.

However, after the tragic death of Jessica's husband Nash, Clint and Viki have their hands full once again trying to get their daughter the help she needs to recover. Once they found out that Jessica had switched her baby with Starr's, the couple was again there for Jessica and continue to help her move forward in life.

After marrying Nora, Clint found his relationship with Bo full of tension and was constantly trying to stake his claim on Nora. Unfortunately, by him doing so, in the attempt to get one up on Bo by bringing in Dr. Greg Evans to help Matthew, he pushed the two soulmates back together.

Once Clint found out they'd been reconnecting behind his back, he used his new assistant, Kim who he later married, to trap Nora into thinking they were having an affair. With the fallout before them all, Clint went to extreme measures, including using Dorian to publicly 'out' their affair, to get back at the brother, and wife, who wronged him.

Filled with revenge, and having lost Kim, Clint hired Matthew to work at B.E., which didn't sit well with Bo. He even blackmailed Inez into pretending to seduce Bo while he had Eddie kidnap Nora! Not to mention had David kidnapped and locked away in a Moroccan prison and he even had paternity tests tampered with to hide the fact that he was Rex's father.

Speaking of paternity tests, knowing Jessica slept with Ford, he paid his lackey Vimal to change the results of his daughter's baby's DNA test to prove Brody was the father. Though he didn't know Natalie had been facing paternity issues in regards to her baby, Vimal came forward and admitted he'd changed Rex and Jessica's results.

Clint's family banished him for what he'd done, except Matthew who refused to believe Clint had been behind the murder of Eddie Ford. After David had been rescued, Bo vowed he'd make Clint pay and arrested him for Eddie's murder after Rex found proof Clint had been at the crime scene holding the murder weapon.