Roles turned down by Tom Cruise:

Director Oliver Stone originally wanted Tom Cruise in the lead role.

Turned down a role in the movie Always.

Cruise was considered for the role of Miguel Bain.

Actor who got the part: Antonio Banderas

Cruise was considered for the role of Mick.

Actor who got the part: Sean Penn

Tom Cruise was considered for the role of John Nash.

Actor who got the part: Russell Crowe

Cruise was considered for the part of Sherman McCoy.

Actor who got the part: Tom Hanks

Tom Cruise was considered for the role Inman.

Actor who got the part: Jude Law

Tom Cruise was reportedly considered for the role of Cry-Baby.

Actor who got the part: Johnny Depp

Tom Cruise was attached as the lead in the 90s, when Steven Spielberg was set to direct.

Actor who got the part: Brad Pitt

Cruise was originally cast as Donnie Brasco but had to back out because production was pushed back.

Actor who got the part: Johnny Depp

Tom Cruise was considered to play Jim Morrison.

Actor who got the part: Val Kilmer

Considered for the role of Edward Scissorhands.

Actor who got the part: Johnny Depp

Tom Cruise turned down the role of Robert Clayton because he was still working on Eyes Wide Shut.

Actor who got the part: Will Smith

Tom Cruise and Val Kilmer rumored to be headlining this World War Two epic. the production was later abandoned.

Actor who got the part: never made

Set to play the lead role, but his schedule on "All The Right Moves" prevented him from accepting it.

Actor who got the part: Kevin Bacon

Was Considered For The Role Of Sam Wheat.

Actor who got the part: Patrick Swayze

Offered the part of Bruce Banner.

According to the Toledo Blade, Tom Cruise turn down the lead role.

Actor who got the part: Will Smith

Tom Cruise turned down the role of David.

Actor who got the part: Woody Harrelson

Tom Cruise was long considered for the project's lead role.

Actor who got the part: Robert Downey, Jr.

Disney spent considerable time and effort developing with director John McTiernan a fantasy epic based on works by Edgar Rice Burroughs -- works that have eluded filmmakers since the '30s. In 2008, it was announced that Pixar will attempt a version of the same material.

Actor who got the part: Film Was Never Made

Emilio Estevez was far down the list of actors for the role of Frank Wyatt. A trade paper story explained that the studio's despiration led to Estevez taking a much higher-than-expected payday. Actors who passed included Tom Cruise and Christian Slater.

Actor who got the part: Emilio Estevez

Supposedly considered for the part of Neo.

Reportedly considered reteaming with his "Collateral" director Michael Mann by playing the role of "Sonny Crockett" in the movie version of the 'Eighties TV show.

Actor who got the part: Colin Farrell

Tom Cruise decided not to return to the role of Lestat.

Actor who got the part: Stuart Townsend

Tom Cruise turned down the lead role in order to do "Risky Business" instead.

Actor who got the part: Matt Dillon

Backed out of doing the espionage thriller, the script for which was originally titled "Edwin A. Salt."

Actor who got the part: Angelina Jolie

Tom Cruise was reportedly offered the lead role but declined.

The studio wanted Tom Cruise for the lead. But when Karen Allen was cast, John Carpenter preferred an actor closer to her age. He didn't want a big star for the lead.

Actor who got the part: Jeff Bridges

Cruise was originally considered for the role of Tom Ripley.

Actor who got the part: Matt Damon

Wanted the role of Bud Fox but did not get it.

Actor who got the part: Charlie Sheen

In 1993, Tom Cruise and director Mike Nichols considered remaking the Heiress, with Cruise to play Morris Townsend.

Actor who got the part: Ben Chaplin

Cruise is one of several actors mentioned to star in a movie version of the 1941 novel about a vicious hustler who climbs to the top of the movie industry.

Actor who got the part: Project Abandoned

Tom Cruise was originally considered for Steve Prefontaine but turned it down saying he was too old.

Actor who got the part: Billy Crudup

Did you know that Tom Cruise was not the only choice for these movies? (click to learn more)