Vienna has more English-language cinemas than many British and US cities (I made that fact up, but it feels plausible).

If you do want to catch the latest Hollywood blockbuster or arthouse release, you should have few problems.

Many movie theatres specialise entirely in English-language films

Look for the abbreviations OV, OmU or OmdU

…all mean shown in the original language

See also:

What to do in Vienna

Suggestions for the evenings

Film festivals

International cinema

The number of screens showing films without dubbing is only partly due to Vienna’s large international community and visiting tourists.

Many locals want to watch films in English; partly to improve their language skills and partly because their English is often good enough for them to enjoy the movie as it was intended.

As a result, even German-language cinemas may have the occasional showing in English. However, several places specialise in original-language film.

For popular, mainstream movies, try these English cinemas:

The Haydn Kino

(The cinema we go to most)

This is where my family go to watch the latest films. The Haydn sits on one of the main shopping streets, close to the Haydn monument. Reach it easily on the U3 subway line. The area is full of restaurants and snack bars (including a McDonald’s).

The Haydn also has numerous specials, such as:

Live performances of opera, theatre and similar. La Traviata anyone?

Screenings around events or individuals. For example, Love Actually at Christmas or Barbie on International Women’s Day

Sing-a-longs to films like Mama Mia! and Grease

Address: Mariahilfer Straße 57, 1060 Vienna | Website

Artis International

(Conveniently located in the very centre of town)

Part of the Cineplexx chain and the most central of the English cinemas, slap bang in the middle of the old town between the famous Ankeruhr and Judenplatz (which has the Jewish Museum and Holocaust Memorial).

Address: Schultergasse 5, 1010 Vienna | Website

The Burg Kino

(Home to showings of The Third Man)

Another central one, close to the grand old Kunsthistorisches Museum. This cinema also does regular specials, such as Austrian and international films with English subtitles, vintage screenings or discussion evenings.

Most importantly, the Burg shows The Third Man every week.

This 1949 Oscar-winning movie based (and filmed) in Vienna is worth seeing for the locations alone. They didn’t have to build any sets for the war-torn outdoor shots: they just filmed the reality of the post-WWII city.

For further The Third Man experiences, check out my extensive location guide (with photos), the dedicated museum and the themed sewer tour.

Address: Opernring 19, 1010 Vienna | Website

Ad:

Other English-language cinemas

For less mainstream English-language movies, try the list below. When browsing, look for these abbreviations:

OV: Originalversion – original version. This means it’s shown in the original language the film was made in

OmU: Original mit Untertitel – original with subtitles. So the same as OV, but showings feature subtitles (usually meaning subtitles in German)

OmdU: Original mit deutschem Untertitel. As OmU but making it very clear the film’s subtitles are in German

OmeU: Original mit englischem Untertitel – original with English subtitles. Again, the same as OV but subtitles are in English

(A movie’s original language may, of course, be something other than English.)

(The Votiv Kino. Also home to, for example, the Festival du Film Francophone)

The first three cinemas in this list are relatively central, being close to (or on) the Ring boulevard that surrounds the old town:

Votiv Kino (often participates in film festivals so look out for special showings)

Währingerstarsse 12 (9th district) | Website

De France

Schottenring 5 (1st district) | Website (shared with the Votiv Kino)

Gartenbaukino (possibly the most prestigious address)

Parkring 12 (1st district) | Website

Filmcasino (another film festival favourite)

Margaretenstraße 78 (5th district) | Website

Shikaneder

Margaretenstraße 24 (4th district)| Website

Top Kino

Rahlgasse 1 (6th district) | Website

Film festivals

Vienna also hosts various international film festivals and film events, many featuring movies in English (with subtitles) or movies in other languages with English subtitles.

And finally…

For the record, the German for cinema is Kino.

As mentioned earlier, some local cinemas also have the occasional showing in English. If you’re checking listings in a paper or outside a movie theater, look out for these abbreviations given above that tell you about languages and subtitles.

For more English-language culture, note that opera houses, theatres, etc. in Vienna often now have English subtitles either above the stage, available through an app, or appearing on a small screen at your seat.

Oh…and enjoy your popcorn.