Hank Williams was one of the most influential artists in American music history. In the years since his untimely death in 1953, music fans have been visiting Hank’s last stop and retracing the icon’s final day alive. The entire road trip begins in Montgomery, Alabama and ends in rural West Virginia near the small town of Oak Hill. It should be noted up front that no one really knows for certain exactly what happened on that final day though we have a pretty good idea.

The last person to see Williams alive was a man named Charles Carr. At the time, he was just a 17 year old college student that was tasked with driving the singer to a concert in Canton, Ohio. He had to battle rough winter weather, an ailing Williams in the backseat, and a long, long road trip. Carr died in 2013 though his story remained the same over the years.

The state of Alabama has created a Hank Williams Trail to see a wide range of sights relating to his life and career. The stops include Hank’s childhood home, his grave site, the venue where he performed his last public concert, and the hotel where he spent the night before embarking on his final road trip.

Beyond Alabama there are at least two other stops Hank’s baby blue Cadillac made on New Years Day in 1953. One is the Burger Bar in Bristol, Virginia. This is where the young Charles Carr stopped to grab a bite to eat while in route to Ohio. According to Carr, he asked Hank if he wanted something though he said he wasn’t hungry and just wanted to sleep. Other stories and myths have floated around over the years – but this is what Carr, the only person that knew the real story, had maintained his entire life.

The road trip continued through rough winter weather conditions and Carr wound up pulling over again near Oak Hill, West Virginia. The story goes that Carr stopped to stretch his legs and use the restroom at the Skyline Drive-In. When he walked back out to the tiny parking lot, he discovered Hank Williams was dead in the backseat.

Though we’ll never know exactly what really happened on that tragic day in music history – that’s the story we’re left with.