Where did Hank Williams die? As the final hours of 1952 waned, a snowstorm worsened across the southeast. That fateful New Year’s Eve, an electric blue Cadillac set out from Knoxville, Tennessee, headed north. Let’s learn more about this Hank Williams West Virginia tragedy.

Advertisement

Advertisement

True to his word (from a song released just a month before he died), Hank never got out of this world alive. But you don’t want to get out of this world without visiting the Skyline Drive-In, Hank’s Last Stop!

Are there any other famous people from West Virginia who you miss? Let us know about your memories in the comments. And while you’re in the area, make a day of it, hitting the road and exploring the countless small nearby towns that are rich in coal heritage history of their own: Whipple, Glen Jean, Thurmond. And, of course, take in the view of the New River Gorge, which never gets old.

Want more West Virginia in your inbox?

Get the latest on things to see, do, and eat around West Virginia!

spinner

Thank you! You will receive your first email soon.

An error occured.

More to Explore

Intriguing Attractions In West Virginia

What are the most unique attractions in West Virginia?

The most unique attractions in West Virginia include:

Helvetia. A village that was created by Swiss settlers that still retains a ton of Swiss culture, style, and food.

The Mothman Museum. Located in Point Pleasant, this museum is dedicated to the urban legend of Mothman.

The Coal House in Williamson. A house entirely made of coal sits right next to the town’s courthouse.

Our Lady of the Pines. This is the smallest church in the nation. It is beside an equally diminutive post office.

Discover more of the most unique attractions in West Virginia.

What are the most amazing hidden gem attractions in West Virginia?

The most amazing hidden gem attractions in West Virginia include:

Valley State Falls Park. Come to this little-known place to see some lovely waterfalls along the Tygart Valley River.

Museum of American Glass. Located in Weston, this museum is full of the most amazing artwork made entirely of glass.

The West Virginia Botanic Garden. You’ll find this lovely place in Morgantown. The natural exhibits are well worth a visit.

West Virginia Geological and Economic Survey. This is a museum where you can see a dinosaur skeleton and some rare gemstones.

Find out more of the most amazing hidden gem attractions in West Virginia.

What are the most incredible sightseeing tours in West Virginia?

The most incredible sightseeing tours in West Virginia include:

Dolly Sods Wilderness. Come to this area in the Monongahela National Forest for some truly spectacular views.

Beckley Exhibition Coal Mine. Veteran miners will take you through this coal mine and show you what it once was like to work as a coal miner.

Mystery Hole. Gravity appears to be defied in this odd attraction where a ball can roll uphill as well as other strange phenomena.

Green Bank Observatory. This is the world’s largest fully-steerable telescope on Earth and is taller than the Statue of Liberty.

Learn more about the most incredible sightseeing tours in West Virginia.

Featured Addresses

6329 Legends Hwy, Oak Hill, WV 25901, USA