Are you a fan of Hannibal Lecter? If so, you might want to know more about the movies and how to watch the Hannibal Lecter movies in order.

About the series

The Hannibal series is inspired by the book series by Thomas Harris, and the first book was published in 1981. Over the years, these books inspired numerous adaptations, including highly successful movies and TV series.

The main focus is on Dr. Hannibal Lecter, a cannibalistic serial killer. He spent some time as a forensic psychiatrist, and after he was arrested, he helped FBI profilers catch other serial killers and psychopaths.

Movies in order of release

The first movie adaptation came out in 1986, but it wasn’t as successful as some other versions. And, of course, everyone knows of the iconic movie that inspired several sequels, won numerous awards, and so much more.

Manhunter (1986)

The first movie about Hannibal Lecktor had the release date in 1986, and it’s called Manhunter. The movie is an adaptation of the first book by Thomas Harris called Red Dragon. The story follows Will Graham after he retired from the FBI.

He was forced to talk to Hannibal (whom he arrested) and ask for his help regarding a new case. Graham returns from retirement and has to focus on facing his fears. Hannibal was played by Brian Cox, and the movie was directed by Michael Mann.

Other roles include Tom Noonan, William Petersen, Dennis Farina, Kim Greist, and others.

The Silence of the Lambs (1991)

The Silence of the Lambs is probably the most popular version that arrived on the big screen, and it is an adaptation of the 1988 novel of the same name. Hannibal Lecter is played by Sir Anthony Hopkins, it was directed by Jonathan Demme, and the movie won five Oscars.

Other roles include Jodie Foster as Clarice Starling, Scott Glenn, Ted Levine as Jame “Buffalo Bill” Gumb, and others. It is the only horror movie that won the Academy Award for Best Picture and Best Director.

Hannibal (2001)

Hannibal is a direct sequel to The Silence of the Lambs, and it was released in 2001. Hopkins continues to play the role of Hannibal Lecter, and it is based on the novel Hannibal from 1999.

The movie was a commercial success, and while it was successful at the box office, it was not nearly as popular and praised as the first one. There are also a couple of differences compared to the book, with Jack Crawford being left out as the most notable one.

Red Dragon (2002)

Red Dragon is the first prequel to the story, and Anthony Hopkins returns once again to play Lector. The movie is based on the first novel by Thomas Harris, and the series finally got to cover the story.

It is also the second adaptation of the origin story, with the first one being Manhunter from 1986.

Hannibal Rising (2007)

Hannibal Rising is the second prequel to The Silence of the Lambs and Hannibal, and it was released in 2007. The story is an adaptation of Thomas Harris’ novel from 2006, and it was received with mixed reviews.

One of the main differences compared to the first three Hannibal Lecter films is that Anthony Hopkins isn’t playing Hannibal Lecter. Instead, Gaspard Ulliel is in the main role. Other roles include Gong Li, Dominic West, Rhys Ifans, Helena-Lia Tachovksa, and many others.

Movies in chronological order

If you are a fan of horror movies and stories about the most famous cannibal, you can always watch movies in chronological order. This will give you a different look at the story, and you will be able to experience these five movies in a whole new way.

As you can probably imagine, you will start with the prequel movies and work your way through the series. You can also check out the popular TV show where Hannibal was played by Mads Mikkelsen with Hugh Dancy as Will Graham. It is available on Netflix, but it was originally made by CBS.

Hannibal Rising (2007)

While Hannibal Rising is the most recent film about Hannibal Lecter, it is the first story in chronological order. Both the movie and the book from 2006 are prequel stories, and they happen before the rest of the series.

It is a nice introduction to the story, and you will get a chance to get a glimpse into the life of a young Hannibal Lecter.

Red Dragon (2002)

The first book in the series is the second story in chronological order, and the movie adaptation was released in 2002. Besides Anthony Hopkins, other roles include Edward Norton, Ralph Fiennes as the Tooth Fairy, Harvey Keitel, Emily Watson, Mary-Louise Parker, Philip Seymour Hoffman, and many others.

The movie was directed by Brett Ratner.

The Silence of the Lambs (1991)

The third movie in chronological order is The Silence of the Lambs from 1991. It is one of the best horror movies of all time, and everything about it is simply thrilling. It is also one of the main reasons why the series continued for so long.

Hannibal (2001)

The last story in the original series, in chronological order, is Hannibal from 2001. The movie was directed by Ridley Scott, and other roles (besides Anthony Hopkins) are Julianne Moore, Ray Liotta, Frankie R. Faison, Gary Oldman as Mason Verger, and many others.

The movie was successful, but not as successful as The Silence of the Lambs. But not many movies are as successful.

Manhunter (1986)

Finally, you can watch Manhunter from 1986, which is the adaptation of the first novel, but it is a stand-alone story. There were a couple of licensing issues when filming the movie, which is why the name of the main character is spelled Lecktor.

You might notice people write the name as Hannibal Lector as well, but it is an incorrect spelling.

Audiobooks

If you are interested in learning more about Dr. Lecter and checking out all the stories Thomas Harris wrote, the simplest way is to listen to audiobooks.

Listen to Hannibal audiobooks with Speechify

If you are interested in getting one of the best, if not the best, audiobook platform, Speechify is the answer. The app is available across multiple platforms, it’s easy to use, and the quality is superb.

You will also get access to the latest novels, thousands of writers, and many different genres. You can explore Thomas Harris’ bibliography, including Red Dragon, The Silence of the Lambs, and many more horror stories by other authors. The high-quality listening experience will make you fall in love with audiobooks. Download Speechify Audiobooks today and give it a try for free.

FAQ

Is Red Dragon a sequel to Hannibal?

Red Dragon is a sequel to Hannibal, but only in terms of publishing. The story is a prequel, and it is based on the first book Thomas Harris wrote. So, the movie was released after Hannibal, but the story is set years before.

Is Manhunter and Red Dragon the same movie?

Manhunter and Red Dragon are not the same movies. However, both are based on the same story. The novel was written by Thomas Harris, and it is called Red Dragon.

Is Red Dragon before Silence of the Lambs?

Yes, Red Dragon is the first novel in the Hannibal series by Thomas Harris, and the events are set before The Silence of the Lambs.