The Hannibal Lecter franchise is an American media franchise that features the character of Hannibal Lecter, who originally appeared in a series of novels (starting with Red Dragon in 1981) by Thomas Harris. The series has since expanded into film and television.

Novels[]

Red Dragon (1981)

The Silence of the Lambs (1988)

Hannibal (1999)

Hannibal Rising (2006)

Films and television[]

Manhunter (1986)

The Silence of the Lambs (1991)

Hannibal (2001)

Red Dragon (2002)

Hannibal Rising (2007)

Hannibal (TV series) (2013–present)

The first adaptation was the 1986 film Manhunter, which was an adaptation of Red Dragon, directed by Michael Mann.

The next adaptation was 1991's The Silence of the Lambs, which was directed by Jonathan Demme and was the first film to feature Anthony Hopkins in the role of Hannibal Lecter. Silence was a success, both critically and financially, and went on to become the third film in Academy Awards history to win in all top five categories (Best Actor for Hopkins, Best Actress for Jodie Foster, Best Director for Demme, Best Writing (Adapted Screenplay) for Ted Tally, and Best Picture). Hopkins reprised the role in the next two films, 2001's Hannibal, a sequel directed by Ridley Scott, and 2002's Red Dragon, a prequel directed by Brett Ratner. In 2002, Hopkins revealed that he had written a screenplay for another sequel, ending with Clarice killing Lecter; it was not produced.

In 2007, Hannibal Rising was released. The film is a prequel, directed by Peter Webber and starring Gaspard Ulliel as Lecter.

In 2013, the TV series Hannibal premiered. Developed by Bryan Fuller, it is not a direct adaptation, but based on characters and elements from the novel Red Dragon. Some characters appear under the opposite gender, such as Freddy Lounds, who is renamed Fredricka "Freddie" Lounds.

Cast and characters[]

Manhunter

(1986) The Silence of the Lambs

(1991) Hannibal

(2001) Red Dragon

(2002) Hannibal Rising

(2007) Hannibal

(TV series)

(2013–present) Hannibal Lecter Brian Cox

(as Hannibal Lecktor) Anthony Hopkins Gaspard Ulliel

Aaran Thomas (young) Mads Mikkelsen Will Graham William Petersen Edward Norton Hugh Dancy Jack Crawford Dennis Farina Scott Glenn Harvey Keitel Laurence Fishburne Frederick Chilton Benjamin Hendrickson Anthony Heald Anthony Heald Raúl Esparza Francis Dolarhyde

(The Tooth Fairy) Tom Noonan

(as Francis Dollarhyde) Ralph Fiennes Clarice Starling Jodie Foster

Masha Skorobogatov (young) Julianne Moore Buffalo Bill

(Jame Gumb) Ted Levine Barney Matthews Frankie Faison Freddy Lounds Stephen Lang Philip Seymour Hoffman Lara Jean Chorostecki

(as Fredricka "Freddie" Lounds) Mason Verger Gary Oldman Michael Pitt Paul Krendler Ron Vawter Ray Liotta Cynthia Nixon

(as Kade Prurnell) Bedelia Du Maurier Gillian Anderson Abel Gideon Eddie Izzard

Thomas Harris' Hannibal Lecter Characters Hannibal Lecter • Will Graham • Clarice Starling • Tooth Fairy • Buffalo Bill • Mason Verger • Frederick Chilton • Jack Crawford • Freddy Lounds Novels Red Dragon • The Silence of the Lambs • Hannibal • Hannibal Rising Films Manhunter • The Silence of the Lambs • Hannibal • Red Dragon • Hannibal Rising Television Hannibal (episodes)

}