In honor of the hit new television series (of which I am a big fan) Hannibal, I decided to dissect the Hannibal Lecter movie franchise. Take a deeper look at each individual film in the order in which they were made not in any sort of ranking system or in a convoluted chronological order.

Hannibal Lecter is without question one of the best and most intriguing film characters of all time. He has become nearly a hero as opposed to villain despite being named one of the most terrifying on screen villains ever due to his real elements and everyday demeanor. Born in the world of literature he has had a new life in the world of film to a near cult status. He will always be remembered played by the brilliant Anthony Hopkins but not to be forgotten his on screen birth was by the always severely underrated Brian Cox then later as a young Hannibal by Gaspard Ulliel.

This takes us right into our list:

Manhunter (1986)

Director: Michael Mann

A young Michael Mann was the first given the privilege to start the insanity with on his second major motion picture made for the screen. While the movie is most definitely a 1980’s film with it’s shooting style and musical score, it is none the less a terrifying thriller and outside of it’s sequel, yes sequel, The Silence Of The Lambs, it is the best in the series. With Hannibal played by the ever great Brian Cox in a most striking way that unfortunately went fairly unnoticed. Will Graham who is Clarice Starling before Clarice Starling. If you are a fan of the television series this is the film out of the franchise you need to see. Will Graham is most like the disturbed TV version and the thought process and production is most similar. This film also feature Dan Butler and Frankie Faison who would later be in Silence Of The Lambs although in completely different roles. It is a great thriller and one that has always flown under the radar but should still be seen.

Silence Of The Lambs (1991)

Director: Jonathan Demme

The pinnacle movie as far as thrillers go. It’s certainly to best of the Hannibal series and one of the most successful Academy Award winning movies ever, being one of the few to sweep the major categories, movie,director,actor,actress and writer. Jodie Foster won her second Oscar and Anthony Hopkins became a household name purely off the success of his performance. Demme became a respectable name after having a reputation as comedic director without any further ability. This story is the most compelling and tense in the series be it book or film. It is the quite possibly the best film adapted from a novel outside of Gone With The Wind and is almost scene for scene accurate to the book. This is Thomas Harris masterpiece along with being the crown jewel in the series. The one “must see” of them all.

Hannibal (2001)

Director: Ridley Scott

Hannibal was the much anticipated sequel to the wildly successful Silence Of The Lambs.Not without it’s controversy at the time of it’s release due to it’s director and star replacing two Oscar winners is no ease task. Set between Europe and the US it is Clarice Starling’s continued search for Dr. Lecter. One thing is not a surprise and that is with director Ridley Scott at the helm the gore would be much more prominent than the last two films. Based of Harris’ critically acclaimed follow up to his 1988 novel much was expected but seemed to let audiences down at the time. Over time it has grown with fans and become one of the more accepted and loved of the series.

Red Dragon (2002)

Director: Bret Ratner

Director Bret Ratner was an odd choice to director what is ultimately a remake of Michael Mann’s Manhunter. Maybe producer’s thought they could recapture the magic that they once had with Demme who was also a comedic director before he helmed Lamb’s. While it is quite faithful to the book and the original film, that may be due to Ted Tally once again taking on the script. If one is in love with Hopkins as Lecter they most likely will start here to watch the films in chronological order but be advised Manhunter is the more terrifying and best of the two versions of the book.

Hannibal Rising (2007)

Director: Peter Webber

The most atrocious of the films it was directly written for novel and screen by Thomas Harris. It tells the origin of Lecter and what drove him into madness. Set in WWII Lithuania and early 1950’s Paris it is a black eye on the franchise with a terrible story and acting. It would leave one asking how this mastermind and brilliant psychologist and doctor got away with his actions for so many years across so many countries. Full of holes and terrible plot lines it is the only film of the franchise to receive multiple Razzie award nominations, though it didn’t win any it was very well deserved.