The London School of Economics is among the most prestigious universities, ranking 45th worldwide as of 2024. It is also a very diverse institution, with 72% of its students being intentional. All this combined makes it an extremely desirable institution to study in. Keep reading if you’re interested in learning more about the university and the best student areas near the London School of Economics and Political Science!

Popular Student Areas near the London School of Economics

The London School of Economics, as previously mentioned, is among the most prestigious universities in the world and is best known for its economics and politics, as well as law, sociology, anthropology, finance, and accounting. All these are taught at one campus, which is located at Houghton Street, London.

This campus is centrally located, which makes it near some of London’s top areas. Some of the best student locations to live near LSE include the following areas:

Holborn

Holborn is a popular destination for LSE students, but its popularity among London School of Economics students is because it is where the campus is located. Holborn is heavily associated with the legal sector, as the London School of Economics focuses on politics, law, and economics. It is known for its vintage boutiques, cafes, and bookstores. You will also have access to museums and galleries, all within walking distance.

South Bank

South Bank is known as an entertainment and cultural centre, especially for performing arts, as it has three major performance venues. It is also known for having live music performances. Other venues also include museums, galleries, and cinemas. Southbank is especially attractive among students as it has a vibrant nightlife and amazing shopping places.

Marylebone

This area is known for its quiet streets, its amazing places to shop and dine, and its vibrant High Street. It is also known for its indie boutiques and museums and galleries, including the Sherlock Holmes Museum, Madame Tussauds, and the Georgian Mansion, which takes you back in time with its old furnishings and collections. It is also right next to one of London’s biggest parks, Regent's Park.

Camden Town

This is one of the top student areas near the London School of Economics and has a market-town environment. This part of the city, often simply shortened to Camden, is very popular among the youth thanks to its “counter-culture.”

This is why it's popular among tourists and students. Some of this neighbourhood’s top attractions include its market, vintage clothing stores, art scene, and street food. In addition, it has various green spaces, as it is next to Regent's Park and Primrose Hill.

Mayfair

Mayfair is another favourite place for those looking to stay in student areas near the London School of Economics and is known for its luxurious Georgian townhouses. It also has some of the biggest fashion retailers located on Bond Street. Other things that set this suburb apart are its arcades and markets, which attract shoppers from the UK; the biggest are Burlington Arcade and Shepherd Market.

Clerkenwell

Clerkenwell is another youth favourite and is especially popular among young professionals. This neighbourhood is known for its amazing food and beverage scene, with many restaurants in this part of the city being Michelin-star restaurants. Another thing that sets this neighbourhood apart is its indie shops and street food stalls.

Shoreditch and Hoxton

These places once hosted the city’s cheap clothing industry and are still renowned for fashion. They are also renowned for their indie art, which is displayed everywhere. Even though they do not typically have green areas, you can still head to Shoreditch Park, the ideal place to hang out in this area when the weather is nice. These areas are also known for their nightlife, which attracts students from nearby areas.

In the following section, we’ll list some of our top picks for student accommodation near LSE and different room options, including private student housing near LSE and purposely built student accommodation.

Where To Stay Near London School of Economics Campuses

The following section will list some of our top picks for London School of Economics and Political Science accommodation, some of which are in some of the previously mentioned student areas near the London School of Economics.

Purpose-Built Student Accommodation Near London School of Economics Campuses

Lincoln’s Inn Student Accommodation

Lincoln’s Inn is a student accommodation near the London School of Economics in the area of Holborn. Its location is ideal, as it is only a five-minute walk from the campus. In addition, it offers its students maximum privacy as it provides entire apartments, which are typically two- and three-bedroom apartments.

These LSE accommodation rooms have large double beds, a wardrobe, as well as a workstation, an en-suite bathroom, and a living area containing comfy couches and flat-screen TVs. Some apartments will even have access to outdoor areas, a reading corner with a bookcase, and a breakfast bar.

The Strand Studios Student Accommodation

The Strand Studios is right next to Holborn and close to the River Thames. This option is also popular among LSE students, as it is only a nine-minute walk from the property. The property offers a wide range of studio options, all of which feature king-sized beds with under-bed storage, en-suite bathrooms, workstations, flat-screen TVs, and kitchenettes equipped with Smeg appliances.

During your stay at the property, you’ll have access to multiple services and facilities, some of which include on-site laundry facilities, a reception area with helpful staff, weekly housekeeping services to save you some time, and all bills that come included in your rent.

Stukeley Street Student Accommodation

Stukeley Street housing offers its students one- and two-bedroom apartments, which feature fully furnished living areas, en-suite bathrooms, and fully equipped shared kitchens. These apartments feature a twin bedroom in the one-bedroom apartment and two different room options in the two-bedroom apartment: an en-suite bedroom and a twin bedroom (with two separate beds).

Amenities and features include all bills included in the rent and flexible stay options. Stukeley Street is also family-friendly for students with families, in addition to being fully furnished and having cleaning services to save you the most time. In addition, this student accommodation near the London School of Economics is a 10-minute walk from the campus. It is also very close to Clerkenwell.

The Chancery Lane Collection Student Accommodation

The Chancery Lane Collection is a nine-minute walk from the campus and offers studios and one- and two-bedroom apartments. The apartments include a living area, a kitchen, in-unit laundry for maximum convenience, and various storage spaces.

These different student accommodation options near the London School of Economics typically include large beds, a wardrobe, study spaces, and great furnishing. Building facilities include an on-site gym so that you can exercise in maximum comfort, on-site laundry, and all bills are included. In addition, the property has social areas where you can meet your friends.

If you’re a pet owner, this property will be ideal for you, as this accommodation is pet-friendly. This London School of Economics and Political Science( LSE) accommodation is in Holborn.

Private Student Housing near LSE

The Bright and modern 2-bedroom apartment in Limehouse private student housing LSE offers students a two-bedroom apartment option that features everything you expect to find in a home, such as a fully furnished living area equipped with comfortable seats and a flat-screen TV. In addition, you will also have access to a fully equipped kitchen, fulfilling all of your cooking needs. A private balcony is also available, making it the ideal place to have your morning cup of coffee or breakfast. Bedrooms typically have large beds, nightstands, and storage spaces. This student housing option is a 35-minute commute from the property or a 24-minute drive.

This accommodation is in the Limehouse area, which, like its neighbouring area of Docklands, is undergoing major transformations. Both areas are riverside neighbourhoods, and both offer great, elegant housing options, unique characters, and breathtaking river views.

If you’re looking for London School of Economics and Political Science accommodation or any accommodation in London or the UK, you can contact our helpful staff. You can also make use of our helpful resources regarding London, such as Cost of Living in London as a Student 2023/2024, How to Afford Living in London as a Student?, Students’ Guide to London Boroughs, and Best Libraries in London to Study.