London School of Economics and Political Science Overview

The London School of Economics and Political Science specialises in the social sciences and is the UK’s most international university, with half its 10,000 students currently enrolled international. LSE is also part of the prestigious Russell Group, an organisation who represent 24 of the UK’s leading universities.

The London School of Economics prides itself on its student body being amongst the most academic and determined in the country. The LSE library—the largest in the world devoted to social sciences—currently holds a borrowing rate four times that of the national average. Graduates from the University also enjoy some of the best starting salaries and employment rates upon graduation.

16 Nobel Prize winners have been staff or studied at the London School of Economics, which regularly tops league tables nationally and internationally.

London School of Economics and Political Science Services for International Students

With around two-thirds of London School of Economics students arriving from outside the UK, it is among the most multicultural universities in the world. Because of this, the LSE is well placed to welcome, look after and offer the best advice and assistance possible for all new international starters.

The advice team at the Student Services Centre can provide information about all administrative services relating to courses and assessments, examinations, ceremonies and financial support.

London School of Economics and Political Science Location

The London School of Economics and Political Science is centrally located in London, just a short walk from Covent Garden and the Thames River. Five international airports are less than an hour away via the city’s numerous train stations.

London’s vast selection of museums, galleries, parks and other attractions, many free of charge, ensure that LSE students will never grow bored in one of the world’s most dynamic cities. The university's location also presents the opportunity for internships and career networking at the 100’s of world-class organisations based in the city, and the university’s excellent reputation and relationships with these companies ensure plenty of chances to make your mark.