Strandveien • 3012 Drammen

Brakerøya station is only a short walk away and has frequent train departures. Flytorget departs from Drammen station every 20 minutes. If you arrive by car, it’s only a short distance from the E18 with signposts to guide you.

Drammensbadet is Norway’s largest swimming facility at 12.000m². Here you can frolic in 5 indoor and 4 outdoor pools. Drammensbadet also offers a fitness centre and a separate wellness department for relaxation and recreation.

Bragernes Torg is Norway's largest square. And perhaps the most beautiful. The church and the two tower buildings are a well-known cityscape from Drammen. Bragernes square is a meeting place for the entire region. Here you can experience a bustling folk life with stalls and activities. Around the square there is a wonderful selection of good restaurants. There is something for everyone here.

On Brakerøya right by Fjordbyen, you will find a large shopping centre. Here there is a good selection of specialist shops, groceries, post office, liquor store, cleaners, eateries, fitness centre etc.

From Fjordbyen to Brakerøya there are wonderful walking and cycling paths. The river promenade on both sides of the river in Drammen is attractive for recreation and exercise - all year round. Beautiful planting, exciting seating sculptures and a range of training equipment in the open air make this an exciting trip.

Drammen’s Museum on the Strømsø side gives you a fantastic insight into Drammen's rich art and cultural history. Marienlyst Gård houses most of the history, while in the Lychepaviljongen you can see parts of the permanent gallery as well as new, changing exhibitions.

The pedestrian bridge Ypsilon connects the Strømsø side and Papirbredden with the library, knowledge, park and catering facilities, with the Byparken on the Bragerness side. Ypsilon with its special Y-shape has won a number of awards, and has become a new attraction in Drammen. Right at Ypsilon on either side of the river, you can listen to the sculptural river harps that absorb the bridge's oscillations.

In Drammen's theatre, you can experience classical theatre, dance performances, concerts, stand-up and a number of other cultural events. Perhaps the most important thing is to experience the theatre building itself? Drammen's Theatre is considered one of the most beautiful in the Nordic region.