Previous leg: Spikkestad-Drammen

Next leg: Galleberg-Sande

December 2013 and April 2014

Drammen – with Bragernes Church in the middle of the photo. Taken from the railway station area.

This is the entrance to the station building:

I soon found some interesting water power installations on display:

Other engineers have been busy in this area too:

I had to take a look behind this door, but the only thing I could spot, was a door. Peculiar. Can it be an effect of the Norwegian strict rules for serving alcohol outdoors? Or is it an artwork? I have to find out…

Then the trail passes a former town hall, dating from 1808. The building was turned into a school already in 1816:

Looking around the corner of it, you will spot Strømsø Chruch, a wooden building from 1667.

The street you walk, is not a new one:

Nowadays, several of the buildings are turned into shops or rebuilt:

This house is brand new, but the main door is made as a copy of the old one. The original of the decoration above the door can be found on the local museum:

It is quite different in style from the entrance to the railway station…

Here is the story behind this entrance decoration – in Norwegian, found on www:

So after Mrs. Høyer testamented the building to become a school for poor kids (in 1785), the building has been used both as a steem bath and as a factory for iron parts used in shoes before it was demolished and rebuilt. Iron parts like these:

I wonder how many km all those armed shoes could have walked, if you summed it up?!

Further on, looking back towards the Church, you will spot that Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson has given inspiration to a street name here, as he has done in many other Norwegian cities.

From here you walk uphill, and soon you get to a protected farm building:

It is called Austad, and is nowadays a part of Drammen Museum.

Further on, the streets turn into paths:

Some optimists had tried to prepare the ski slopes very thoroughly some weeks before I passed. In spite of that, there was not much snow left for Christmas…

After a short walk in the forrest, I soon arrived at this cabin – owned by the Norwegian Trekking Association:

And behold! My friend Turbo was actually hanging around inside the cabin! Only he must have had music in his ears, as he did not react as we knocked on the window. His full name is Turbo Arctic Fox, and he is the mascot of The Children’s Trekking Club. He is a happy chap always trekking the mountains, but apparently celebrating New Year’s Eve in the hills of Drammen this year.

We found another unblinded window. He keeps the cabin very tidy…

As we could not get in, we walked on. The forest roads were lighted, and looked like this:

After a while we stopped at signs pointing towards a tower, and after some discussion we left the trail to find it:

So now I know the Direct distances from here to Nidaros, Jerusalem and Mekka. But what about Santiago de Compostela? Should I rather change the goal for my walk? By the way – you have to remember to sign the protocol! I turned out as number 1718 since July, with the local dog Molly as number 1717…

If you get dizzy on your way down from this tower, you can refer to this address when you call for help!

At many cabins you will notice a blue “Nødplakat” on the wall. It tells your exact geographical position, so if you need to call for help, you call 1-1-3 and pass the numbers. This is even more accurate than a street address.

FYI: Around this corner there are some very clean facilities, and you get in even if the cabin is closed. The cabin is run by a sports club, and is occationally open.

Spring flowers next! This is Anemone hepatica.

Here we found a great view, but it was a bit windy, so you might spot that I freeze a little bit. I recommend to carry some hot tea on December walks!

Down here it was warmer again:

Sissel and I are checking the size of this stone. We tried to lift it, but we did not find any handles.

This sign tells you not to walk in the ski slope, but it doesn’t tell under what conditions this is prohibited. We took the chance…

From the Mælen farm you walk along the local road until you reach Old Skoger Church. Very little traffic, though.

As this spot had a street address, I assumed that someone had to live there, and I wondered who it could be.

Behind my back I found the answer! They were a whole colony!

Here is a telephone number, in case you want to order some honey to be placed here for your next passing.

I am impressed by the planners of the strech Drammen-Skoger. I think we passed at least five pleasant benches. Along many other pilgrim stretches the service level is much lower…

From this bench you get a grafical winter view:

At some point you will pass the coat of arms for Drammen. A key and a sword are crossed in the middle forming an x. The underlaying motto is In Fide Et Justitia Fortitudo (“in faith and justice is strength”), and the items in the seal are referring to this: key = faith, sword = justice, column on rocks = strength.

You will pass the present Skoger Church. Not far away from it, along the trail, you then arrive at the Old Skoger Church – the oldest building in the Drammen area:

There is no chance to stamp your pilgrim passport here, as far as I could find out…

But the view is great:

Information on Skoger Old Church.

It must have been raining lately:

No golfers around:

Some locals told us funny stories:

You will arrive at this road over there – between the poles. We just took a small detour to get this photo.

Looking back, you understand why they put the church where they put it, 800 years ago.

This pilgrim sign will not be easy to spot when the trees grow green…

This mighty waterfall ought to be frozen at this time of the year:

Downhill from the waterfall you can spot an old factory. Rumors tell about successful trout fishing here:

So what could have been produced?

It is not always easy to search the web for such historical information…

Noone could be seen to ask either.

An hour further south a local pedestrian was able to reveal the secret. This was originally “Drammen ullvarefabrikk” – a factory producing yarn and fabrics made of wool.

I did not see any trout nor factory workers, but the road went on, and I soon spotted signs of living creatures. Guess what sort:

Straight up the hill from the factory there is a bench with a wide view – under the pine tree to the right in this photo:

Many places I got an unclear feeling that summer was not far away:

The locals were out walking their pets:

The area offers temptations for weary wanderers:

The roads were well prepared for winter driving:

“Eh-oh! Laa-Laa?”

You should take a closer look at this photo, and combine the text of the sign with the state of the building… Is this the outcome of a high quality marketing plan? Or not?

Time to stop.

It seems that the following leg will bring some downhill walking behind that farm…

And to get back here by bus, I have to remember to schedule my trip outside the weekend…

No cross country skiers were passing us on this winter trip. But we easily passed this one:

Remember – if you walk in this area around New Years Eve, the sun sets at 03:30 p.m. – which gives you plenty of time to plan your next day!