James Tien (actor) — For other people of the same name, see James Tien (disambiguation). James Tien Tien in The Chase. Chinese name 田俊 (Traditional) Chinese name 田俊 … Wikipedia

Tien — may refer to: Tien Shinhan, a character in Dragon Ball media Tien (TV channel), a Dutch television channel Tien or T ien, now generally spelled Tian, the Chinese religious idea of God or heaven People with the surname Chang Lin Tien (1935 2002),… … Wikipedia

Tien-Yien Li — (李天岩) (born 1945) is a University Distinguished Professor of Mathematics at Michigan State University and a Guggenheim Fellow. Li and co author James Yorke published a paper in 1975 entitled Period Three Implies Chaos, in which the mathematical… … Wikipedia

James Hope Grant — als Oberstleutnant der 9th Lancers (Gemälde seines Bruders Francis Grant) Sir Hope Grant, 1860 (Foto: Felice Beato) … Deutsch Wikipedia

James Tin Yau So — Dr. James Tin Yau So, N.D., LAc., (1911 – 2000) also known as Dr. So, was one of the most influential individuals of the 20th Century in bringing acupuncture to the United States. Dr. So’s teacher was Tsang Tien Chi who studied under Ching Tan An … Wikipedia

Michael Tien — This is a Chinese name; the family name is Tien. Michael Puk Sun Tien [1] (Chinese: 田北辰, born 1950 in Hong Kong with family roots in Shanghai) is deput … Wikipedia

Nguyen Tien Hung — In this Vietnamese name, the family name is Nguyễn, but is often simplified to Nguyen in English language text. According to Vietnamese custom, this person should properly be referred to by the given name Hưng. Nguyễn Tiến Hưng Born November 1,… … Wikipedia

Hebe Tien — Este artículo o sección necesita una revisión de ortografía y gramática. Puedes colaborar editándolo (lee aquí sugerencias para mejorar tu ortografía). Cuando se haya corregido, borra este aviso por favor. Tien Fu Jen (30 de marzo de 1983,… … Wikipedia Español

Game Of Death (Film De Bruce Lee) — Saltar a navegación, búsqueda Game Of Death Juego Con La Muerte o Juego De La Muerte de la muerte fue la ultima pelicula de Bruce Lee originalmente la pelicula solo iba a ser una parte de demostracion de su arte marcial Jeet Kune Do. Más de 40… … Wikipedia Español