MELBOURNE, FL, September 15, 2015 — Modus Operandi has been selected as one of the Florida Companies to Watch by GrowFL, which expects the company to experience significant business growth over the next several years. Modus Operandi was the only company in Melbourne and one of only three in Brevard County to receive the recognition from more than 500 nominees. The list is a statewide program managed by economic development group GrowFL in association with the Edward Lowe Foundation.

According to GrowFL, Modus Operandi’s management team, competitive market position, and strong community involvement were among several factors that put it in contention for the list.

“We are extremely honored to have been chosen for this list,” said Rick McNeight, president, Modus Operandi. “We feel this is further validation for the relentless effort by our staff and management team to provide the best products and services to our government and military customers. It is also very timely recognition, as Modus Operandi recently began a concerted effort to expand into the commercial marketplace this year. We fully expect to see significant growth as a result of this expansion, and GrowFL undoubtedly recognizes that as well.”

“These stand-out companies are all led by entrepreneurs, and have demonstrated their capacity and intent to grow,” said Dr. Tom O’Neal, executive director of the Florida Economic Gardening Institute and associate vice president for the University of Central Florida’s Office of Research and Commercialization. “They also all have critical intellectual property or a niche position that gives them a competitive edge in their markets,” he said.

“This is a strong group of companies that deserve this special recognition given annually to the state's top second-stage companies,” said Dr. O’Neal. Second-stage companies are defined as those with six to 99 full-time employees and between $750,000 and $50 million in annual revenue. There are many programs and incubators promoting start-up businesses; GrowFL is the only Florida program that focuses exclusively on second-stage companies.

The 50 companies named the 2015 Florida Companies to Watch generated a total of more than $1.2 billion in revenue and added nearly 1,000 employees between 2011 and 2014.

Together, the companies project a 23 percent increase in revenue and 19 percent increase in job growth in 2015. Companies named to the list will be oﬃcially recognized on November 5 at the Hard Rock Live, Universal CityWalk, Orlando.

About Modus Operandi

Modus Operandi delivers technology that helps organizations discover the hidden patterns of potential threats and opportunities — the genius — locked in their data. We offer advanced solutions that leverage next generation semantic technologies with a rigorous implementation methodology that produces actionable results.

More About GrowFL:

GrowFL provides strategies, resources and support, including strategic research and peer-to-peer CEO mentoring and leadership development, to second-stage Florida companies. Created by the Florida legislature in 2009 and grounded in the philosophy of Economic Gardening® — growing existing businesses in a community, region or state—GrowFL is a critical component of the state’s economic development strategy and Florida’s entrepreneurial ecosystem. GrowFL is certified by the National Center for Economic Gardening through the Edward Lowe Foundation.

About the Edward Lowe Foundation:

Established in 1985, the Edward Lowe Foundation is a national, nonprofit organization that supports entrepreneurship through research, recognition and educational programs, which are delivered through entrepreneur support organizations (ESOs). The foundation focuses on second-stage companies — those that have moved beyond the startup phase and seek significant, steady growth. In addition, the foundation has a second mission of land stewardship and is committed to preserving the natural resources and historically significant structures at Big Rock Valley, its 2,600-acre home in southwest Michigan.