IGN FilmForce interviewer Kenneth Plume recently talked to composer/orchestrator Don Davis.

In his 20-year career as a composer and orchestrator, Davis has composed fifty movies, TV series, and made-for-TV movies, and orchestrated over thirty other movies. His composer credits include House on Haunted Hill, The Matrix, Bound, Tiny Toon Adventures, and Hart to Hart. Movies he's worked on as an orchestrator include A Bug's Life, Titanic, The Phantom, Toy Story, and Die Hard 2.

In his five part conversation with Ken, Davis discusses his start in the business, the difference between a composer and an orchestrator, the difficulties involved in scoring for television, the differences between scoring for film and television, scoring for animation, working with Randy Newman, James Horner, Alan Silvestri and Michael Kamen, and his work on The Matrix and its two upcoming sequels.

CLICK HERE to access the first installment of the interview.

PLUME: You also did some work on Star Trek: the Next Generation¿

DAVIS: Yeah¿ I did one show.

PLUME: A lot of people say that music was underused in that series, as opposed to its prominence in the original series and the films. Was there a dictation when you went in as a composer that the music would be subtle and almost invisible?

DAVIS: Yeah.

PLUME: What was the dictation to you? A lot of people see the invisible aspect of the music as a negative of the series, and may point fingers at the composers¿

DAVIS: I think the fact that I only did one episode makes it fairly clear how they felt about the music that I wrote. It was pretty clear to me that they thought I had written too much and it was too big and too dramatic and all that stuff. I thought I was trying to tone it down at the time, because, you know, they said they like it subtle, and I had seen the show. I guess I didn't tone it down enough for them.

PLUME: How often do you encounter that kind of direction, to where you obviously saw it as detrimental to what you were seeing on the screen and trying to get across?

DAVIS: I don't know. Maybe it's my own failing, but in the spotting session, when a producer tells me "We need action music here¿" that means write action music there, and it doesn't mean, "Well, write a chord." I guess my failing was not reading in to what they were saying and writing action music, as opposed to the inactive music that they really wanted¿I don't know. Needless to say, it didn't go very far. As far as other directors making that kind of dictation¿directors want the music that they want, and it's incumbent upon them to communicate to us what they want. There's always been a communication problem between composers and directors. The most successful composers are the ones who best translate whatever the directors are saying into music. It's not very literal, often. Our job is to communicate to the audience what the director is trying to communicate, so I can't say that the directors are wrong when they say they want the music to be one way or another, but I think it's nicer when they give the composer a chance, at least, to try to put that communication forward.

PLUME: How did you begin to transition out of TV work and into film work?

DAVIS: The goal, I think, for everyone in TV is to get into features. I think, in my case ¿ as was the case with other composers who've moved into features ¿ was that I feel I distinguished myself with my work on TV and that eventually translated itself into film work. I think that also, in my case, particularly because of Beauty and the Beast, I had made myself known as someone who could handle an orchestra. The business changed such that in the early '90's, the only place orchestras were happening was in features, so I started to get more work at that point as a feature film orchestrator. As far as becoming a feature film composer, that was kind-of a long process.

PLUME: As a stepping stone, it looks like you did a lot of TV movies¿ Is that generally a stepping stone out of TV series work?

DAVIS: It's looked to as a step-up. They call it "Moving into long form" or something like that. I think it can tend to be a little more creatively interesting, because when you're working on a series, you're dealing with similar dramatic situations from week-to-week and you're dealing with the same thematic materials in that ¿ in most cases on a TV series ¿ you're somehow adapting the TV theme to the various situations that the TV characters are involved with. With a movie-of-the-week, you're starting from scratch every time. It's a new theme and a new situation, so it's a little bit more creatively stimulating and it can be a lot more fun to do, less of a week-to-week grind.

PLUME: You've also had the opportunity to score animation¿ How would you describe your work on Tiny Toon Adventures, and how did that come about?

DAVIS: Bruce Broughton was the main composer on that show, and I believe it was actually Steven Spielberg who had come up with the idea that they wanted to do something on TV that was the same quality as the Warner Bros cartoons of the '40's and '50's ¿ which was a very high quality. One of the most distinctive things about those cartoons were the Carl Stalling scores ¿ which sound deceptively simple when you're watching those cartoons, but as you analyze them, you begin to see that they're incredibly complex and amazingly well integrated¿and a big part of the charm of those cartoons. The mandate when Bruce started doing Tiny Toon Adventures was that they wanted to get that Carl Stalling sound, which meant they wanted music that had that kind of integrity. Considering it was a half-hour show, the composers were given an exorbitant amount of time ¿ which was two weeks ¿ and an exorbitantly large orchestra ¿ which was about 27 players.

PLUME: What were you normally using for TV work?

DAVIS: It could be pared down to as small as 18. Or even less.

PLUME: Which sections of the orchestra are beefed up when you have more players like that?

DAVIS: All this depends on what you're trying to accomplish. Big action scores require more brass and winds and percussion than intimate love stories, which are more string oriented. Your average show ¿ and I'm thinking of the early '80's and shows like Fantasy Island and Hart to Hart ¿ were mildly adventurous and occasionally action shows, so when you're knocking the orchestra down, you can't really pare away the brass or the woodwinds too much, so you end up really knocking out the strings and trying to get a big sound with fewer instruments. You'll see orchestras that only had 6 violins and 2 cellos, and they were trying to sound like Max Steiner¿ It's very difficult.

Back to Tiny Toon Adventures¿ They were cognizant of the fact that, if you want to get a Carl Stalling sound, they need to at least approach a Carl Stalling orchestra. That orchestra was, indeed, smaller than what Stalling had to work with generally, but Stalling didn't work with large groups, either. I think we typically had 8 violins, 2 viola, and 2 celli ¿ it might have been 3 viola and 3 celli ¿ and then 2 trumpets, 2 trombones, a tuba, usually 6 woodwinds that would double flutes and clarinets and also saxophones, and then a piano and a couple or three percussion. It wasn't a tiny group¿it was a group that you could work with, but it was really hard, because with the Carl Stalling sound ¿ that guy put so much integrity into his work that we felt we really couldn't just blow it off. We had to get that kind of integrity. The other thing that was significant about what Stalling did in those days was that his music was very closely aligned to the action. If a cartoon character was stepping, the music would step along with him. If he blinked, the xylophone would go "twink twink" as his eyes opened and closed. The actual animation on Tiny Toon Adventures turned out to be far more frenetic than the original cartoons, such that catching all that stuff was pretty hard. Plus, any idea that you came up with you would have to abandon in a measure or two because the characters were doing something else by then.

To knock out 30 minutes of music in 2 weeks of that kind of intensity was real hard. Bruce started out on the show, and he knew he could do a number of episodes, but he knew he couldn't do them all. First of all, if they were going to have a 2-week period for a composer to write, there had to be an overlap, because they were pumping out a show every week. So he was looking for composers who could handle this, and he found out that there weren't very many. I really wanted to do the show when it first came out, because I saw it as a big challenge. I think that was the case with the other composers who did really well on the show ¿ like Richard Stone and Bill Ross. After I'd done a couple of shows, I'd proved that I could do it, and I really didn't want to do it any more because it was so intense. I did do some more shows for Bruce because he needed me, but I'll be honest with you ¿ that's some of the hardest writing I've ever done.

PLUME: But you dove in again and did the How I Spent My Summer Vacation movie, didn't you?

DAVIS: Actually, that was Bruce's bailiwick, and that was a made-for-video thing.

PLUME: But it's still 90 minutes of animation, as opposed to 22¿

DAVIS: Right, but I think the way Bruce approached it ¿ and again, he didn't have much time to do it ¿ was to split the show up into segments, and he brought in the various composers who'd done well on the show. I believe Richard Stone, Joel McNeely, and Bill Ross worked on that as well. My actual contribution wasn't all that big.

PLUME: Is animation something that you'd be willing to do again?

DAVIS: Absolutely. I'd sure like to do the Stalling thing with a bigger orchestra¿ and a little more time to do it. For awhile, a few of the studios were doing shorts that were showing with some of their major feature films, and I remember Honey, I Shrunk the Kids came out with a short¿

PLUME: The Roger Rabbit short¿

DAVIS: That's right, the Roger Rabbit short¿ There were also a couple of Bugs Bunny things¿

PLUME: Like Box Office Bunny¿

DAVIS: Yeah, Bruce Broughton did that. It seems, in the last few years, they've stopped doing that, but that would be an awful lot of fun to do ¿ to try to continue that Carl Stalling tradition. I'd love to do an animated feature ¿ something like An American Tail¿ That kind of thing. Which are really approached more like a live-action feature. The way those composers have approached them is with a little bit more of a live-action feel than the Carl Stalling "hit every kind of movement" kind of approach. There's a scope that can be attained in animation. This new Dinosaur movie that came out at Disney has an amazing look and an amazing kineticism, and I think there's a big opportunity to do some very interesting music for that sort of thing.

PLUME: What interests you most about what you could do with that?

DAVIS: I see it as a big canvas¿and a big palette that a composer can use to fill it up.

PLUME: Do you think animation lends itself to that kind of scope more so than live-action does at times?

DAVIS: Actually, it can, because animation ¿ being something fabricated from nothing ¿ traditionally needs more help in having the audience make the leap-of-faith that animation asks them to make. The audience needs to think that they're actually looking at something that they're not looking at, but they are only looking at drawings that move. Animation typically needs more help than live-action does, and the trend in the last 20 years ¿ at least with thriller-type movies ¿ is that the music should really do less than more. When live-action thrillers from 30 or 40 years ago were being made, there were many restrictions on what filmmakers could really show on the screen, and in those days, if you had a murder in a scene, the murder would usually occur off-camera or you wouldn't see any blood or anything like that. Nowadays, if there's a murder, you see the guy's brains splattered on the wall. When there's something that graphic on the screen, the music has less of a responsibility to have to drive that point home, otherwise it can really be overdone and, as such, really lose the effect of drawing the audience into the picture. There's kind-of an equilibrium there. The more real the film is, the less responsibility the music has to carry that point across. The less real it is ¿ and animation is less real than live-action ¿ the more the music has a responsibility to flesh out what isn't there and make the audience believe that it's real. The current technology in animation is such that animation can be much more grand than live-action, and can be more sweeping. I think that music is even more appropriately applied to that. I think there's a big future in animated music.

PLUME: A future you wouldn't mind being a part of¿

DAVIS: Absolutely.

PLUME: Have you been offered animated films?

DAVIS: No I haven't. Why do you suppose that is?

PLUME: I was hoping you would tell me.

DAVIS: There's sort-of a trend amongst animators, and I really don't know why this is, but when it comes time to find a composer for their movie, they tend to say, "We don't want a cartoon composer." I was working for Randy Newman when he did Toy Story, and one of the reasons that they hired Randy was because he wasn't an animation composer. Randy noted that as soon as they hired him, suddenly he was a cartoon composer ¿ whether they liked it or not.

PLUME: How did that affect the dismissal of his Air Force One score by director Wolfgang Petersen? Wasn't the reason that the score was "Mickey Mousing," and do you think that opinion was due to past works and not the merit of the score?

DAVIS: No, I don't think that was the case, really. I think there was too much of a personal chemistry ¿ not so much conflict ¿ but lack of chemistry between the composer and the director. I think it may also have been a cultural thing. Wolfgang Petersen is a very strong director, but he also expects a certain amount of respect. It's not that Randy didn't give Wolfgang respect, but when Randy walks into a room, he commands the room. It's a very different type of command than Wolfgang was used to. Randy is very much the stand-up comedian, and he's funny all the time. Wolfgang is very much the director in control, and it just didn't mix.

PLUME: So it was a matter of incompatibility, more so than the merits of the score?

DAVIS: I think so, because the Air Force One score that Randy wrote was just brilliant. It was just magnificent. I could be wrong, but I don't think that the problems were musical.

PLUME: Were you orchestrator on that?

DAVIS: Yes, among others.

CLICK HERE to jump to the third installment of Ken's interview with Don Davis – in which Davis discusses working with Randy Newman, James Horner, and the director-composer relationship on such films as Aliens and Titanic.