Teachers and students can use Google Scholar as a resource to find credible sources for reports, papers, and other assignments. The search engine results include academic theses, articles, books, abstracts, and court opinions. The content comes from professional organizations, academic publishers, university records, and other official, reputable outlets. Users can also opt to have Google Scholar search patents and legal documents from federal or state courts and can access their campus or school’s library database to find materials.

The search engine is similar to Google: Users key terms into a homepage field, then view results. Searches can be refined by author name, phrase, and publication name and date. Links to related articles and different versions appear below each result. Ready-to-use citation information is given in three formats (MLA, APA, and Chicago) to copy and paste or import to the BibTeX, EndNote, RefMan, or RefWorks citation platforms. Students can also view specific category rankings in the metrics section, including business, economics, and management; chemical and material sciences; health and medical sciences; humanities, literature, and the arts; physics and math; and social sciences. The top Chinese, Portuguese, German, Italian, French, Dutch, and Korean publication metrics are also listed.

The site’s main advantage is that it presents search findings in an easy-to-understand way and helps teens avoid the hassle of searching in numerous places for academic literature. They also get some sense of how the materials have been used and how helpful they might be. Documents are ranked based on where they were originally published, author, amount of text, and the number of times the item has been cited in other scholarly pieces. Ready-to-use citation information save teens time transcribing source info onto a Works Cited or References list. Students and teachers can also create alerts to notify them about specific topics to keep up-to-date on any developments on subjects they're researching.