Claim:

Claim: The phrase "Kilroy Was Here" began as a ship inspector's mark in World War II.

Status: Undetermined.

Example: [Collected on the Internet, February 2008]

Origins: The ubiquitous "Kilroy was here" messages found scrawled on surfaces throughout World War II have prompted many to ask, "Who was that Kilroy fellow anyway, and how could he have been everywhere?" While a number of theories have been mooted regarding his identity (including one that describes him as a GI fiancé on the lam with his USO girlfriend in hot pursuit, and folks along the way helpfully

scribbling "Kilroy was here!" as their way of helping his frustrated bride track down her man), the strongest claim of all is the one quoted above. While the purists don't quite yet feel comfortable giving it the thumbs up, many whose standards are less stringent view the tale about a shipyard inspector as the true origin of the phrase.

The story, as set forth above, mostly adheres to the information provided in news articles from the mid-1940s. While there are a few small deviations from what those old news accounts say, they are relatively minor.

James J. Kilroy was a welding inspector at the Bethlehem Steel shipyard in Quincy, Massachusetts. His account, as he provided it in 1946 during a radio contest sponsored by the American Transit Association, stated that since 5 December 1941 he'd been employed there to vet the work done by others on the inner bottoms and tanks of ships being manufactured in that yard. Whereas the e-mailed account has it that riveters were erasing his check marks so as to be paid twice for their work, Kilroy's explanation makes no mention of such chicanery. It instead gives the impetus for his adding handwritten "Kilroy was here" attestations to areas he had examined as an expression of his growing sense of frustration with bosses who would not believe he had checked over their subordinates' work areas. As he put it, "I was thoroughly upset to find that practically every test leader I met wanted me to go down and look over his job with him, and when I explained to him that I had seen the job and could not spare the time to crawl through one of these tanks again with him, he would accuse me of not having looked the job over."

In a fit of pique one day, as he emerged from the hatch of a tank he'd just inspected, he scrawled in yellow crayon on its top — where testers could easily see it — "Kilroy was here." So, it is asserted, was born the phrase that would quickly travel the globe and be found in all sorts of unexpected places.

As for the graphic that has come to be associated with the phrase, it's not clear how the two came to work together. The little drawing of a man peeking over a wall, with just his eyes and nose (and sometimes his fingers) showing, began not as Kilroy but as Mr. Chad, a British bit of tomfoolery sometimes ascribed to cartoonist George Edward Chatterton. Its catchphrase, "Wot, no ____?", was used for all manner of japes, such as "Wot, no Spam?" or on the side of a glider, "Wot, no engine?"

With GIs everywhere participating in the "Kilroy" craze during the war, "Kilroy was here" proclamations turned up all over the place, a state of affairs that provides a possible clue as to how the

phrase and the cartoon came to be wed. The endless encounters with one scrawled "Kilroy" message after another would quickly have fostered a sense of always being under the watchful eye of the mysterious Kilroy. Given that American servicemen were rubbing shoulders with a great many Brits (both civilian and military), a fair number of them would soon have been exposed to Mr. Chad, an easily-drawn scribble of a fellow peeping over a barrier. The peering little man who seems to pop his nose over a fence to stare wide-eyed at what's going on would have been the perfect embodiment of the unstated secondary message of "Kilroy was here," which is "You are being watched."

There is one other small deviance between the e-mailed account and what the news of the day reported: the use that the Transit Association's street car was put to by James J. Kilroy and his family. He did not turn it over to his children as a Christmas gift of a freestanding playhouse in their back yard; the 50-foot car was instead attached to the Kilroy home and used to provide living quarters for six of the family's nine children, thereby solving what had become an acute housing crisis for the Kilroys.

Barbara "a sated desire named streetcar" Mikkelson

Last updated: 18 February 2008

Sources:

The New York Times. "Transit Association Ships a Street Car to Shelter Family of 'Kilroy Was Here.'"

24 December 1946 (p. 18).

The New York Times. "Who Is 'Kilroy'?"

12 January 1947 (Magazine, p. 30).

The New York Times. "James J. Kilroy Is Dead; Coined 'Kilroy Was Here'"

26 November 1962 (p. 29).