26 Attractive New Home Sites in Wentzville

Just in time for the spring real estate market, Houston Homes, LLC is proud to share its Phase II Available Home Sites map for the wildly popular, family-friendly neighborhood – The Estates at Huntleigh Ridge in Wentzville, Missouri.

A total of twenty-six (26) new home sites will be offered for sale later this month. In the meantime, house hunters and realtors alike are invited to preview this attractive new offering.

View Community Lot Map

As illustrated on the Available Home Sites map, most of the 26 newly released home sites are located on cul de sac streets. Several of the new home sites in Phase II of the Estates at Huntleigh Ridge back to trees and common ground. And, many of the new home sites in Phase II will accommodate a 3-car garage.

To help buyers differentiate between home sites which will accommodate a 3-car garage and those that will not, Houston Homes, LLC has colorized its Available Home Sites map.

As a general guideline, all of the lime green colored home sites fit Houston Homes, LLC floor plans with standard garage configurations. Select plans that features a 3-car garage standard (The Spruce) or 2-car garage with 3rd tandem bay standard (The Hickory, The Sequoia) will also fit on lime green home sites.

Lots colorized in teal represent home sites that will fit any Houston Homes floor plan, including some with an optional 3-car garage. These home sites will require a lot fit for verification.

Violet colored home sites will fit any Houston Homes, LLC floor plan -- 2-car garage, 3-car garage, 2-car garage with 3rd tandem bay, and select garage extensions options will fit on violet home sites.

Each home site will have to be considered independently based on the floor plan and options selected by the intending homeowner.

Available Floor Plans

The Estates at Huntleigh Ridge offers home buyers a choice of fourteen (14) different Houston Homes, LLC floor plans, including its all-new Oakley.

The Oakley is an innovative 1,453 sq. ft. split-level 2-story with 3 bedrooms and 2 baths. Ranch, 1.5 Story and 2-Story models offered at the Estates at Huntleigh Ridge range in size from 1,255 sq. ft. to more than 3,000 sq. ft. Base pricing starts in the $300’s and include impressive standard features.

See all 14 floor plans available at The Estates at Huntleigh Ridge in Wentzville. Virtual tours are available for many of our floor plans, including the Blossom model on display at 334 Valley Bluff Drive, Wentzville, MO 63385.

Impressive Standard Included Features

Like you, we appreciate the value of a dollar, so we promise to make yours go further. When you choose to build with Houston Homes, our Signature Series Upgraded Features Package comes standard in the base price of every home – no extra charge.

Standard Features Include:

Stainless steel appliances

All-wood, dovetail constructed kitchen cabinetry with soft close doors and drawers

Wall cabinet over refrigerator

Adult height vanities in owner’s suite bath

Base & case molding

Vaulted great room ceiling (per plan)

First floor laundry (per plan)

Upgraded insulation package: R-38 ceiling, R-13 walls

Pella tilt-in windows with screens

Pre-wire for ceiling fans

10-year no-leak foundation warranty

Coach lights at garage

50 Gallon hot water heater

Architectural shingles with limited lifetime warranty

Built-in PestShield system

LP Weather Logic Air & Water Barrier with Structural OSB Sheathing and Water-Resistive Overlay

Market-best low maintenance .44 vinyl siding

Fully sodded yard

Professional landscape package

A whole lot more

Houston Homes, LLC is committed to unwavering construction standards as evidenced in our standard included features.

About Houston Homes, LLC

Houston Homes, LLC of St. Louis, MO is a second-generation, locally-owned construction company designing and building new home communities and custom homes across St. Charles, Lincoln and Warren Counties. Base pricing starts in the mid-$200,000’s. To learn more about Houston Homes, LLC, please chat with us at HoustonHomesLLC.com or call/ text 636-851-7828. Realtors are always welcome at Houston Homes, LLC.