Driving east on the Mass Pike and passing through the Ted Williams Tunnel will bring you to East Boston, where you’ll find a vibrant Colombian community with roots in Bogotá, Medellín, and a small mountain town called Don Matías. (Colombians in Eastie joke that there are more people from Don Matías living in Boston than in Don Matías itself.)

Motivations for leaving Colombia and relocating to East Boston differed from person to person — some were fleeing the cartel violence that overwhelmed parts of Colombia at the time, while others left for religious reasons, for example. Decades later, East Boston is home to Boston’s Little Colombia, and as such some of the best food in the entire city.

Head to Eastie for pandebono (Colombian cheese bread) and to watch some fútbol while sipping café con leche, and be sure to stop at these eight restaurants when you do.

Please note that a number of Boston restaurants have resumed dine-in service, and the level of service offered is indicated on each map point. However, this should not be taken as endorsement for dining in, as there are still safety concerns: For updated information on coronavirus cases in the area, please visit the Massachusetts coronavirus website.

Studies indicate that there is a lower exposure risk when outdoors, but the level of risk involved with patio dining is contingent on restaurants following strict social distancing and other safety guidelines.

Read More

Eater maps are curated by editors and aim to reflect a diversity of neighborhoods, cuisines, and prices. Learn more about our editorial process. If you buy something or book a reservation from an Eater link, Vox Media may earn a commission. See our ethics policy.

Mi Rancho features a different sopa (soup) special for every day of the week. If you’re lucky enough to stop by on a Thursday, you’ll have the pleasure of slurping down ajiaco, a rich chicken and potato soup traditionally found in bars all over Bogotá. Mi Rancho uses an herb found in Colombia called guascas, which gives the dish its signature flavor. Mondongo is served on Saturdays. Beef tripe is cooked for hours with fresh root vegetables, peppers, and spices. All of Mi Rancho’s soups come with arepas con queso, which are made fresh in house.

Mi Rancho is open for indoor dining, takeout, and delivery via Ubereats.

Coffee in Colombia is a way of life, and that is reflected at La Sultana Bakery, especially with its excellent take on café con leche. Famous for their fresh baked pastries, breads, and empanadas, La Sultana has been a staple in the East Boston community for years. Stop in to sample a buñuelo (a fritter typically made with cassava flour and small curd white cheese), which is like a Colombian doughnut. And definitely dip the buñuelo in your café con leche. Don’t stop at coffee and doughnuts — La Sultana makes some of the best homemade empanadas and arepas in the neighborhood.

La Sultana Bakery is open for takeout and catering services.

Freshly-fried empanadas are a touchstone of the street food culture in Colombia. Arguably the best empanadas in Eastie, El Rinconcito serves up this Colombian classic on a greasy paper napkin, sans frills. Whether it’s chicken, plantain, beef, or cheese, the empanadas will leave you stuffed. Order an empanada or pan de queso — a roll made with tapioca flour and grated cheese that is typical in Colombia — to go, and enjoy it walking down the East Boston Greenway or along the harbor, which are both just a couple of blocks away.

El Rinconcito is open for indoor dining and takeout.

Freshly-fried empanadas are a touchstone of the street food culture in Colombia. Arguably the best empanadas in Eastie, El Rinconcito serves up this Colombian classic on a greasy paper napkin, sans frills. Whether it’s chicken, plantain, beef, or cheese, the empanadas will leave you stuffed. Order an empanada or pan de queso — a roll made with tapioca flour and grated cheese that is typical in Colombia — to go, and enjoy it walking down the East Boston Greenway or along the harbor, which are both just a couple of blocks away.

El Rinconcito is open for indoor dining and takeout.