Welcome to https://kps.schoolerp.org/. If you continue to browse and use this website, you are to comply with and be bound by the following terms and conditions of uses, which together with our privacy policy govern Kalka Public School relationship with you in relation to this website and the product which you purchase through this website.

The terms Kalka Public School or ‘us’ or ‘we’ refers to the website whose registered office is situated at Road No - 73, West Punjabi Bagh, New Delhi - 110026, India. The term ‘you’ refers to the user/ viewer of our website. Kalka Public School is being operated under the brand name of Kalka Public School.

The use of this website and the products purchased through this website is subject to the following:

The content of the pages on this website is for your general information and uses only. It is subject to change without prior notice.

Neither we nor any third parties provide any warranty or guarantee as to the accuracy timeline, performance, completeness or suitability of the information and materials found or offered on this website for any particular purposes. You acknowledge that such information and materials may contain inaccuracies or errors and we expressly exclude liability for any such inaccuracies or errors to the fullest extent permitted by law.

You use information or material on this website is entirely at your own risk, for which, we shall not be liable. It shall be your own responsibility to ensure that any product or information available through this website meets your specific requirements

This website contains material which is owned by or licensed to us. This material includes, but is not limited to the design, layout, look, appearance and graphics. Reproduction is prohibited other than in accordance with the copyright notice, which forms part of these terms and conditions.

All the trademarks reproduced in this website, which are not the property of, or licensed to, the operator is acknowledged on the website.

Unauthorized use of this website may give rise to a claim for damages or a criminal offence.

From time to time this website may also include links to other websites. These links are provided for your convenience to provide further information. They do not signify that we endorse the website(s). We have no responsibility for the content of the linked websites(s).

You may not create a link to this website from another website or document without Kalka Public School’s prior written consent.

You use our website and any dispute arising out of such use of the website is subject to the Law of India or other regulatory authority. (Delhi Jurisdiction only)

All the information, content and material, including the software, text, images, graphics, video and audio contained in the website and the products and services are copyrighted property of Kalka Public School. All trademarks, service marks, trade names, and trade dress are property to Kalka Public School. You understand that “Kalka Public School” is a registered trademark owned by Kalka Public School. This trademark may not be used in any manner without prior written consent of Kalka Public School. No information, content or material from our products and services may be copied, downloaded, reproduced, modified, republished, uploaded, posted, transmitted or distributed in any way without obtaining prior written permission from Kalka Public School and nothing on this website shall be deemed to confer a license of or any other right, interest or title to or in any of the intellectual property rights belonging to Kalka Public School retains full and complete title to the information, content or materials and all intellectual property rights therein.

Your use our products and services provided for herein is solely for your personal non-commercial uses only. Any use of the website or its content other than for personal purposes is prohibited. Your personal and non-commercial use of this website and/ or our services shall be subject the following restrictions:

You may not decompile, reverse engineer, or disassemble the contents of the website and/ or our products, or (c) remove any copyright, trademark registration, or other proprietary notices from the contents of the website and/or our products.

You shall not (a) use our products or services for commercial purposes of any kind, or (b) advertise or sell any products, services or otherwise (whether or not for profit), or solicit others (including, without limitation, solicitation for contributions or donations) or use any public forum for commercial purposes of any kind, or (c) use the website and/ or our products and services in any way that is unlawful, or harm Kalka Public School or any other person or entity as determined by Kalka Public School.

Kalka Public School or any of its subsidiaries or content partners shall have no responsibility for any loss or damage caused to tablet or any other hardware and/ or software, including loss of data, those result from the uses of our products and services.

In no event will Kalka Public School be liable for damages of any kind, including without limitation

Indirect, punitive, special, exemplary, incidental, or consequential damage (including loss of business, revenue, profits, use data or other economic advantages, loss of programs or information), or

Direct damages in excess of the amount paid to Kalka Public School for the products and/ or services, arising out of the use of, misuse of or inability to use, or errors, omissions or other inaccuracies in the Site or the products and/ or services, or any information provided on the Site. Some jurisdictions do not allow the limitation or exclusion of liability. Accordingly, in such instances, some of the above limitations may not apply to the User.

The Institute employs strict refund policies for its classroom programmes. It advises the students to make a judicious decision before joining course(s). A student can cancel his registration that has been joined online within seven days of joining the course i.e., within 7 days of making the online payment. Cancellation past 7 days shall not be entertained and refunded, under any circumstances.

Kalka Public School may also contact the user through sms, email and call to give notification on various important updates. Therefore, user holds Kalka Public School non liable to any liabilities including financial penalties, damages, expenses in case the user’s mobile number is registered with DO not call (DNC) database.

In the event of breach of the terms and conditions of this Terms of Uses by the User, the User shall be promptly liable to indemnify Kalka Public School for all the costs, losses and damages caused to Kalka Public School as a result of such a breach.

In the event of your breach of the Terms of Uses, you agree that Kalka Public School will be irreparably harmed and will not have an adequate remedy in money or damages. Kalka Public School therefore, shall be entitled in such event to obtain an injunction against such a breach from any court of competent jurisdiction immediately upon request. Kalka Public School’s Right to obtain such relief shall not limit its right to obtain other remedies.