Kalka is an attractive town which is situated in the Panchkula district of Haryana, India. The town is situated in the foothills of the Himalayas. The place is well known as a gateway to neighbouring state of Himachal Pradesh. The name of the town is derived from the goddess Kali. The town is on the National Highway 22 between Chandigarh and Shimla, and is the terminus of the Kalka-Shimla Railway. To the south of Kalka is Pinjore, and the industrial town of Parwanoo (Himachal Pradesh) is to the north on the NH 22.

Industrial development has led to a continuous urban belt from Pinjore to Parwanoo, but Kalka remains largely unaffected by these developments. Nearby is Chandimandir Cantonment where the Western Command of the Indian army is based. A large number of tourists follow the route, which passes through Kalka, to reach Shimla as one can take a ride of toy train from Kalka. Acccording to 2011 census the population of Kalka is 30,314.

Kalka enjoys a amusing weather for most of the year, compared to nearby big cities like Ambala, Delhi, Chandigarh, etc. Summers are hot during May and June. Monsoon bring in heavy rainfall for about 4 to 5 months starting around late May/June. From October/November temperature start falling rapidly and chilling winter sets in by December. Winter season lasts for another 3 to 4 months. Kalka also receives some rainfall from Western Disturbance, near the end of winter. Winter season, despite being chilly, is mostly free of fog unlike most north Indian cities in the plains.

Kalka was acquired by British India from the Princely state of Patiala in 1843 as a depot for Shimla, the summer capital of the Raj. It became the junction for the Delhi-Ambala-Kalka, and the Kalka - Simla railways. By 1901, the town was administered as a notified area and had a population of 7,045, a railway workshop, and was a market for ginger and turmeric.The Kalka municipal committee was created on 11 April 1933.

Major Kalka attractions include Shri Balaji Temple, Pinjore Garden and Kali Mata Temple. Its ancient goddess temple is a major attraction which is well-known among tourists. Yadavindra Gardens is a place at Pinjore which is considered to have been built by Mughals, and is a famous tourist destination.

Shri Balaji Temple

In 1988 an ancient temple of Balaji (childhood incarnition of Hindu god Hanuman) was excavated on one of the hills overlooking the town. Every year thousands of devotees come to pay their respects to the Hindu God Hanuman. This temple has also become famous destination among devotees, including localites. This temple is getting more and more famous day by day

Pinjore Garden

The Yadavindra Gardens at Pinjore is considered to be founded by Mughals, it is another popular destination among people who visits the area. Every year a Mango Mela is organised here in which 500 varieties of mangoes are displayed for the visitors. There are many buildings which was made by Mughals and was of greenery only.

Kali Mata Temple

The ancient temple of the Hindu goddess Kali is situated on the National Highway 22 that runs through Kalka town. It is believed that this temple was build in the age of Mahabhrata by Pandvas, during "Agyat Vas" when they stayed here for some time.

The temple is very famous with hundreds of devotees who pay their respects annually during the Navratri.