Our mission

The Walkley Foundation benchmarks the industry standard for excellence and best practice journalism. We work independently with all media organisations to enable Australian journalists to tell the stories of our nation and strengthen our democracy. We aim to engage both the media and the public to value, celebrate, and support great Australian journalism.

The Walkley Awards are the pinnacle of achievement for any Australian journalist. With a rich 68-year history, the Walkley Awards now include 30 categories across all platforms, peer-judged with a two-tier process. No matter their era, Walkley Award-winning stories have always chronicled Australia’s history, people and events.

The Walkley Foundation also runs and administers honours that benchmark excellence for freelance journalists, women’s leadership in media, industrial reporting, arts journalism and criticism, and more.

The Walkley Awards are the pinnacle of achievement for any Australian journalist. With a rich 67-year history, the Walkley Awards now include 30 categories across all platforms, peer-judged with a two-tier process. No matter their era, Walkley Award-winning stories have always chronicled Australia’s history, people and events.

The Walkley Foundation also runs and administers honours that benchmark excellence for freelance journalists, women’s leadership in media, industrial reporting, arts journalism and criticism, and more.

The Walkley Foundation provides professional development programs for journalists from across the industry. We want to help journalists of all experience levels and backgrounds to develop their skills, build contacts and have access to new opportunities that will support them as they hone their craft.

The Walkley Foundation provides professional development programs for journalists from across the industry. We want to help journalists of all experience levels and backgrounds to develop their skills, build contacts and have access to new opportunities that will support them as they hone their craft.

The Walkley Foundation supports Australian journalism through offering scholarships, fellowships, mentoring, training and grants. We’re also building a digital archive of six decades of Walkley-winning journalism as a resource for journalists, students, and the public. Bringing the first draft of history to life!

We’ve got an important role to play in helping all Australians understand why great journalism makes life better, safer and fairer for all of us. We’re spreading the word by giving the best journalists a platform at public events and festivals, through The Walkley Magazine, our newsletter and our podcast.

The Walkley Foundation is a not-for-profit organisation and relies on support from corporate organisations, tertiary institutions, government, foundations and individuals to develop a wide range of programs including providing scholarships, offering grants and developing tools for increased digital media literacy.

If you would like to join us in building a news ecosystem that is thorough, far-reaching and trusted for today and for future Australians, consider partnering with us or making a donation today.