Pajwar Map — Satellite Images of Pajwar

original name: Pājwar

geographical location: Badakhshan, Afghanistan, Asia

geographical coordinates: 37° 54' 0" North, 71° 27' 0" East

detailed map of Pajwar and near places

Welcome to the Pajwar google satellite map! This place is situated in Badakhshan, Afghanistan, its geographical coordinates are 37° 54' 0" North, 71° 27' 0" East and its original name (with diacritics) is Pājwar. See Pajwar photos and images from satellite below, explore the aerial photographs of Pajwar in Afghanistan. Pajwar hotels map is available on the target page linked above.

Do you like this map? Link to it or recommend it!

Register at Pajwar or add new placemark for Pajwar.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Pajwar hotel reservations

Book hotel in Pajwar online and save money

Browse & Book hotels – low rates, no booking & cancelation fees »

Pajwar hotels – Pajwar hotel guide »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Pajwar hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Pajwar, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Pajwar, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included.

Pajwar hotels map

The location of each Pajwar hotel listed is shown on the detailed zoomable map. Moreover, Pajwar hotel map is available where all hotels in Pajwar are marked. You can easily choose your hotel by location.

Pajwar hotel reviews

Many photos and unbiased Pajwar hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision.

Pajwar hotel deals

Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Pajwar hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Hotels nearest to the centre of Pajwar

HAYOT **** (in Toshkent, distanced approximately 410 km)

Grand Tashkent Hotel (in Toshkent, distanced approximately 420 km)

Grand Mir Hotel **** (in Toshkent, distanced approximately 420 km)

Hotel Sayokhat (in Toshkent, distanced approximately 420 km)

Sayram Hotel (in Toshkent, distanced approximately 420 km)

Hotel Uzbekistan **** (in Toshkent, distanced approximately 420 km)

Nur Hotel (in Toshkent, distanced approximately 420 km)

more Pajwar hotels »

Pajwar car rental

Compare Pajwar car rental offers of 500+ suppliers

We search over 500 approved car hire suppliers to find you the very best Pajwar rental prices available. You can compare offers from leading car hire suppliers like Avis, Europcar, Sixt or Thrifty as well as budget rental deals from Holiday Autos, Budget, Economy, EasyCar, or 121 carhire. Choose Pajwar car hire supplier according to your preferences. The booking process is secured and is made as simple as possible. You don't have to browse through several websites and compare prices to find cheap car rental in Pajwar — we will do it for you!

Car hire Pajwar and neighbourhood

Car rental offices nearest to Pajwar the city centre. Compare Pajwar car rental offers by various suppliers.

Islamabad International Airport car rental (distanced approximately 490 km)

Islamabad City car rental (distanced approximately 490 km)

Allama Iqbal International Airport car rental (distanced approximately 760 km)

Lahore Downtown car rental (distanced approximately 760 km)

Karachi Airport car rental (distanced approximately 1 500 km)

more offers and Pajwar car hiring guide »

Flights from airports close to Pajwar

Search and compare flights

Flights to nearby airports to Pajwar »

Overview of flights to and from Afghanistan »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Pajwar. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Airports in Pajwar and in the neighbourhood

Airports nearest to Pajwar are sorted by the distance to the airport from the city centre. Follow relate airport hotel guides for accommodation booking.

Sheghnan Airport (distanced approximately 45 km) – airport hotels

Kuran-O-Munjan Airport (distanced approximately 63 km) – airport hotels

Darwaz Airport (distanced approximately 81 km) – airport hotels

Khwahan Airport (distanced approximately 110 km) – airport hotels

Faizabad Airport (distanced approximately 120 km) – airport hotels

Pajwar 3D map in Google Earth

3D map of Pajwar in Afghanistan

You can also dive right into Pajwar on unique 3D satellite map provided by Google Earth. With new GoogLe Earth plugin you can enjoy the interactive Pajwar 3D map within your web browser.

See the 3D map of Pajwar, Afghanistan in Google Earth »

Get more out of Pajwar map

Add placemark to Pajwar

No placemark has been added to this place yet. You can add the first.

users registered in this area

No users is registered to this place. You can be the first.

recommend this page

If you would like to recommend this Pajwar map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is the easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

Pajwar google map link options

link to us:

small Pajwar google map image link

medium Pajwar google map image link

large Pajwar google map image link