An emotional roller coaster ride through a living hell, “Lilya 4-Ever” is a hard-hitting, dark and tragic story that rarely lets up. With this story of a young Russian girl who escapes one hopeless existence only to find another in Sweden, helmer/writer Lukas Moodysson (“Fucking Amal,” “Together”) firmly establishes himself as the most interesting director working in Scandinavia today. However, though pic is likely to score high with international critics, its dark tone and grim subject matter will probably alienate many viewers who turned his previous movies into local hits and offshore arthouse clicks.

Pic starts with a young girl running through the streets of Malmo, southern Sweden. On the soundtrack, we hear German rock group Rammstein’s deafening song, “Mein Herz brennt” (My Heart Burns). Lost and despairing, the girl goes to a bridge and contemplates jumping onto the highway beneath.

Popular on Variety

Cut to some rundown apartments and the caption “three months earlier, somewhere in what used to be the Soviet Union.” The girl seen on the bridge turns out to be 16-year-old Lilya (Oksana Akinshina), who lives with her mother (Lyubov Agapova). Lilya happily tells her friend, Natasha (Elina Benenson), that she’s moving with her mother and the latter’s new boyfriend to the U.S.

However, on the day of departure, Lilya’s mom tells her she’ll send for her later. Lilya is to be taken care of by her aunt, Anna (Liliya Shinkaryova), who immediately forces the girl out of her family apartment and into a stinking flat a couple of blocks away. (It later turns out that the aunt wanted the better apartment for herself.)

Lilya befriends 14-year-old Volodya (Artiom Bogucharski), who’s repeatedly thrown out on the street by his father. Already into booze and pill-popping, despite his age, Volodya starts spending more and more time with Lilya, especially after she prevents him suiciding from a bridge.

At a nightclub, Natasha goes off with an older man and sleeps with him for money. When her father discovers the cash, Natasha says she got it from Lilya and that it was Lilya who prostituted herself. The rumor quickly spreads that Lilya will sleep with anyone for a couple of banknotes and she tries to ignore those who taunt her. On a wooden bench she carves the words “Lilya 4-Ever.”

At an abandoned submarine base, Lilya and Volodya look at pictures from the old communist days and sniff glue together, talking about life and death, and the possibility of becoming angels when you die. One of Lilya’s most valued possessions is a painting of a couple of angels; wherever she goes, it’s always the first item she packs.

Lilya still hasn’t received any letters or money from her mother in the U.S., and one day she’s told by the authorities that her mother has disowned her. That night, she goes to the night-club and prostitutes herself. And it’s there, later, that she meets Andrei (Pavel Ponomaryov), a Russian who works in Sweden, who invites her to fly back with him, promising her work and a better life. In fact, she finds anything but that, and pic ends ambiguously.

Though the depiction of life in Russia is hardly flattering, Sweden fares no better, portrayed as a country of dark, neon-lit streets and de-humanized men who seek sex sans emotion. Shooting almost entirely on location, with much handheld, antsy camerawork, Moodysson and regular d.p. Ulf Brantas manage to convey even the smell of life in Russia’s rundown houses, where everything is for sale and no drug is too dangerous. There’s a constant, onward flow to the movie, as Lilya is drawn from the bad to the even worse, plus a sense that she can do nothing but wait for events to unfold.

Despite the film’s concentration on sex — and particularly its ugly sides — sex scenes are few and visually restrained. In one haunting sequence, Moodysson shows a string of men who use Lilya’s body but never shows the girl herself, only her p.o.v. of the grunting, ugly males.

As in Moodysson’s previous films, the soundtrack is carefully honed, using everything from the thundering Rammstein tune in the opening sequence, through classical excerpts, to Nathan Larson’s evocative original score. One notably effective moment is the ironic use of ’70s German rock group Alphaville’s song “Forever Young” during Lilya and Andrei’s first date.

Dialogue is almost entirely in Russian, with only a small amount in English and Swedish. In the challenging, emotionally difficult title role, Akinshina (from Sergei Bodrov Jr.’s “Sisters”) is excellent, and screen newcomer Bogucharski, though in a smaller role as Volodya, proves a real discovery. Other thesps are fine, and technical credits ditto, with a good quality blowup from Super-16.