Lilya 4-Ever (Moodysson, 2002)

I first saw this film in a lecture whilst studying film at the University of Portsmouth. It was nine o’clock on a Friday morning and we were all sat in our assigned seats in the underground screening theatre.

However, instead of pressing play on this week’s installment of Contemporary European Directors, our lecturer took a moment to issue a warning. Acknowledging that we were all “hardened third years”, the lecturer’s usually light tone shifted. For the first time in my three years studying film, we were told we were allowed to leave the screening if we found the images on the screen too uncomfortable to watch.

Immediately every student sat up in their seats and every eye in the room became fixated on the screen. The film was Lilya 4-Ever (Moodysson, 2002), a story of a sixteen year old girl who, after being abandoned in Estonia by her mother, gets caught up in child prostitution and is later tricked into moving to Sweden and sold to a sex trafficker. It was single-handedly the most compelling yet horrific film I have ever seen.

Shock tactics

One scene seems to stand out in the minds of all that have been exposed to this fantastic film. After Lilya has been sold to a sex trafficker, she is taken to a house where she is expected to have sex with a man far older than her. Soon a montage of sex scenes unravel, where we are asked to assume the role of the young girl as the camera captures this experience from Lilya’s perspective, looking up at the faces of the men that are raping her.

Lilya 4-Ever, with its preoccupation with social realism, does not intend to entertain the audience. In fact, during an interview with David Noh for the Film International Journal, Moodysson stated “I wanted my film to be like a train running over the audience. If you want to sit back and think, it’s not that kind of movie, because it drives right over you”. Moodysson achieves this very well. By destroying any possible artifice, which usually allows the audience to distance themselves from what is happening on screen, and by instead employing pseudo-documentary techniques Moodysson forbids his audience from ever becoming comfortable.

Leaving that lecture theatre that day was like walking through a post apocalyptic scene, where students were left rigid and expressionless by the film. However, what was most interesting about the audience’s response to Lilya 4-Ever was their inability to express how they felt about the film the following week during a seminar. These normally articulate students said that they found it difficult to express any enjoyment of the film and gave two reasons for this verbal paralysis.

Firstly, the film is about acute human suffering and any enjoyment of the film would therefore suggest sadomasochistic tendency in the spectator who finds pleasure in viewing such torment. Secondly, as stated before, there is no opportunity for relief in the film.

We are only given one really rounded and believable character, Lilya, who is offered not one glimmer of hope from the moment her mother leaves her, to her untimely end as she eventually commits suicide. Unlike the classical Hollywood narrative that sticks to a rigid formula of setting its protagonists obstacles, which they defeat in turn, each one making them stronger, Lilya is on a downward spiral which can only end in tragedy.

Does Lilya 4-Ever go too far?

It was during this seminar that my central question was raised. Does Lilya 4-Ever go too far in exploring the themes of the sex trade industry and its damning effects on the young girls involved, or do we need to see it to be able to understand and become emotionally involved in such issues?

Personally, I will hold my hands up and say that, in retrospect, I can see that I was completely ignorant to the issue of sex trafficking previously to watching Lilya 4-Ever. Obviously I had been aware that sex trade industry existed before seeing this film; however, I had been able to blissfully block this out of my mind. Being placed in front of such a powerful film, albeit in the artificial viewing environment of a lecture theatre, I felt as if I could not escape the harsh reality that I had arrogantly avoided and extreme guilt overtook me for being so passive and naïve. It is exactly for this reason that Lilya 4-Ever is now being shown in schools in Sweden, to educate children about true social issues and the dangers of society.

Film to educate or to entertain?

However an important question that arises here is this, is it a fictional feature film’s job to try and educate their audience? Surely we should leave that to documentary film makers to try and portray the realities of the world rather than screenwriters and directors who fabricate narratives and sub plots which effectively manipulate the issue?

At school I remember watching many documentaries about the holocaust, which accepting my lack of interest in German history at the time, had very little affect on me. What if Britain took Sweden’s lead and showed films like The Pianist and Schindler’s List during class, would that have made more of an impact on me? Certainly it would have demanded my attention more than a documentary, whose attempt to make its audience engage by using a monotone voice over to relay information, was not in the least affective on a young audience.

Where does Britain stand?

This leads me to wonder what would happen if Britain spawned such a renegade filmmaker like Lukas Moodysson. Someone who had loyalty to their country and felt the responsibility to provide a film that could essentially solve the cultural problems. Perhaps if our country could find the courage to loosen the cotton wool in which we wrap around our youth, we could expose them to films that would shock and terrify them into behaving more appropriately.

Like Moodyson who tackles issue that are close to home, I would urge aspiring British filmmakers to tackle ideas of teenage pregnancy, the effects of drug use, and even stretch as far as suggesting tackling pedophilia in film to really get the message across.

Benefits of film to education

Had I the chance to argue this case to someone higher up, I’d suggest that the benefits of this cinematic education could be limitless. There is no doubt that today’s youth are scarily unconcerned about cultural issues, with the majority of the new generation thinking that the ‘credit crunch’ is a make of cereal rather than a major economic threat. By employing a youthful and representative cast these films could tap into children’s moral conscience and allow them to identify with the narratives, unlike the patronizing documentaries which schools currently show.

However, what I will not be ignorant about is the knowledge that my notion of the cultural awareness film is a distant dream. The week we were shown Lilya a debate broke out amongst the film lecturers on whether they should be showing young and impressionable students films with such depressing content. Really? This suggests that the educational authorities in Britain are more cautious about showing students that range from twenty years old a film that Swedish authorities deem appropriate for children. Doesn’t that explain a lot?

Britsh equivalents to Moodysson

Instead, we have filmmakers like Danny Boyle and Shane Meadows who have dipped their toes into controversial waters, yet have not found the balls to dive in. In fact, I find it slightly surprising that a country, whose film industry is so deeply rooted in social realism, has not yet made the epic leap from the commercially acceptable, like popular youth culture films like Trainspotting and Human Traffic, to truly harrowing portrayals of modern Britain.

In this debate we must consider the dangers of relying on fictional film to be historically accurate, which in the majority of cases, is far from the truth. Film is an artificial representation of a situation or moment in history and every film comes from the perspective of the filmmakers whose political, social, or religious beliefs will unintentionally bleed onto the finished product.

What inspirted Lilya 4-Ever

The inspiration for Lilya 4-Ever came from a conversation Moodyson had with a woman involved in sex trafficking in his home town in Sweden. Although Moodyson fabricated this true story by developing a narrative, Moodyson justifies the film in an interview on the Lilya 4-Ever special features disk. Moodyson claims that not only did the woman whose story he was telling feel that the film conveyed her experience particularly well, but also that it could have gone much further in showing the horror of what it was like to be involved in sex trafficking.

Perhaps the reason that filmmakers shy away from making films like Lilya is that they can not be classed as entertainment. It must take a lot of inner strength and courage to have the patience to pursue a project based on the harsh reality of dire human suffering.

Hollyood’s attitude

I remember once hearing a quote from Brad Pitt on the radio where he stated that he preferred to make light, entertaining films rather than films that make people “think too much”. Now, maybe that’s why my bid for these cultural awareness films will never be taken seriously.

Unfortunately the Pitt-mentality that emerges from the glossy promises of Hollywood still dominate mainstream film, making the struggle that quirky challenging films face to get funding and distribution far more difficult. Obviously I am coming from a creative perspective which enables me to ponder such ideas with little consideration to the financial issues. However, I would have to admit that films about pedophilia are hardly going to sell t-shirts and promotional popcorn in the cinemas.

Lilya in the cinema

It is on that note that I would like to consider what effect Lilya would have on the average cinema-going audience. My first experience of the film was in a very controlled environment, where my purpose for watching the film was to analyze it and deconstruct every shot. We were viewing the film, as Swedish school children do, for entirely educational purposes. The cinema environment, particularly with the recent rise of the multiplex, is very different.

In many cases, today’s cinema audience is compiled of people who are watching the film for the sake of watching a film, with no previous knowledge of its background, no intention to decode the film, and a strong desire to ‘be entertained’. And quite rightly so. Going to the cinema is a leisurely act that should be associated with pleasure, and with the ever rising price of box office tickets, you at least expect to leave with a smile on your face.