Arfha Rizky Firdausya

·

Follow

10 min read

·

Mar 14, 2024

--

One of the classics, the most traumatic Roman empires.

Trigger Warning: Suicide, human trafficking, sexual assault, rape.

While spending your precious leisure time, you wished to experience a happily-ever-after plot, or at least see how far the main characters got wiser and fulfilled in life.

But if you’re thinking of choosing Lilya 4-ever (2002) as your weekend Netflix agenda, that’s not going to happen.

While Lilya 4-Ever is a powerful and thought-provoking film, its disturbing content and emotional intensity may not be suitable for all viewers. This is certainly not the best pick for your ‘good cry’ session.

The Movie Plot

Lilya 4-ever (2002) is a poignant and unsettling Swedish film directed by Lukas Moodysson that delves into the harsh realities of human trafficking.

Set in an unnamed country, the film follows the tragic fate of Lilya, a 16-year-old girl abandoned by her mother to live in the USA with her new boyfriend, leaving Lilya to fend for herself in a bleak and unforgiving world.

Struggling against poverty and societal indifference, Lilya dreams of a better life. Living life without a guardian makes Lilya prone to false hope. Lilya has no money, no power, and no one, yet she is a pretty and optimistic girl. She then met a seemingly kind Swedish man. Later on, he promised Lilya a new life in Sweden, free from the hardships she faced in her hometown. Little did she know, it would make her wish to turn back time.

The film blew up the industry at the time, being a big winner at the Gijón International Film Festival, the 2003 Guldbagge Awards, and other awards. It has also been utilized by humanitarian organizations in information campaigns against human trafficking in various Eastern European countries.

Lilya 4-Ever soon comes to success, adding more to the Moodysson’ list of masterpieces, next to Show Me Love (1998) and Together (2000). With its engrossing storyline and thought-provoking narrative, Lilya 4-Ever continues to be a critically acclaimed film that resonates with audiences on a deeply emotional level.

Speaking of which, I consciously decided to watch it recently, and of course, I fell for the reviews of ‘how much they regret watching this movie’. Besides doing it for the plot, it left me stunned and unsettled.

Even days later, this film did not leave my head, forcing me to empathize with generations of women who had endured such misfortune.

Well, my tummy might well be a bit too sensitive to feel stirred just by watching a movie. An old movie, precisely. So I went on looking for other people’s experiences and gasped into this:

Since this film does its job too seriously, I’m going to make sure you will have better sleep than I do (the least I could do). Here, I am sharing with you some considerations for not daring yourself over curiosity.

1. Depressing character development

Witnessing her character develop into something she seems to hate is what will break your heart. We can see at the beginning of the movie that, unlike her friend Natasha, any sexual intercourse is just not her thing.

She didn’t date and didn’t flirt with boys.

There was this scene where Volodya pulled out the suicidal prank, and out of fear, she gave him CPR. Volodya then ended up getting thrown out of her apartment. The prank kiss was just enough to piss her off at that moment.

Lilya’s innocence stays through the beginning of the movie until she receives a letter from the authorities saying that her mother disowned her legally. She was left with no choice but to sell her body.

Clients passing by, she is still not fond of her job; we can see it through the gradual scenes, as her eyes become more hollow each time.

Another part I like about this movie is how Lilya (Oksana Akinshina) expresses the emotional turbulence of a real-life teenager (which she has every right to do), and at some point, I think, that feeling is something that also might’ve grown in me.

Ever since her departure to the USA was canceled, she has kind of developed a love-hate relationship with her mom. You can barely get it because Moodysson gave us the clue every once in a while, like when Lilya ignored her mother and the next thing was that she begged her to stay.

Or that time she felt enough, tore her mother’s photograph, and then glued it back together? All of that is part of the show, but what I am talking about is the feeling that we know we will always need our mom, knowing that we can never resent her. This is what I am talking about—the climax of the show.

Let’s fast forward to the scene where Lilya got beaten up by her pimp in her attempt to escape. It is hard to forget that she was presumedly brutally assaulted right before that ride. In her condition (which I thought could never get lower), she was calling out to her mom in unconsciousness while in pain, both physically and mentally.

Don't say I didn't warn you; watching the movie stinks! Well, the movie is great by itself. It’s just going to piss you off. I have read a review somewhere that says:

Unless you’re very, very dead inside, Lilja 4-ever will horrify you, move you to tears, and leave you speechless. At least, in its immediate aftermath.

2. Capture the hardship of being a woman in the Post-Soviet Union

It is said that the story happened in an unnamed country, but most viewers agreed that Moodysson brings us back to some god-forgotten village that used to be under the powerful USSR—Paldiski, Estonia.

As Soviet values and structures crumbled and fell, some consequences arose—economic decline, hunger, and excess mortality. Adding to that, the Russian mafias were no longer subservient to corrupt Communist party bosses or black-market millionaires and started to control the economy. This made crazy amounts of children get involved in illegal activities to support their families.

Looking at the time setting of the movie (1999–2000), it was around the age when severe poverty emerged at its peak. Historically, poverty has always been performed as the greatest fuel for life-changing decisions (a.k.a., cannon events).

Longing for a better life, or maybe even the fear that things could only get worse, Lilya accepts Andrei's offer to become a vegetable picker in Sweden. The thing is, she wasn’t initially so sure about the ‘moving to Sweden’ plan. It is so sad that her mind was made up after she was gang-raped by her former friends.

For people like her, who are always left in darkness, just a bit of light would make them run toward the glimpse. We see through Andrei, and even little Volodya does, but she is blinded by the prospect he describes:

“You’ll make more money there in a week than a doctor here makes in a month.”

Perhaps, but not for herself. She was taken advantage of by everyone she trusted. Every time life gives her a chance, it gets her all over again.

Women and children who live in poverty are at greatest risk of becoming trafficking victims. Prostitution in Russia spread rapidly at that time, with women from small towns and rural areas migrating (willing or unwillingly) to big cities such as Moscow, St. Petersburg, Omsk, or Yekaterinburg to engage in prostitution.

Russian women are also lured abroad with sham promises of jobs such as dancers, models, waitresses, or domestic helpers and end up caught in forced prostitution situations.

3. Lacks of escapism

I don’t mean to spoil it, but Lilya 4-Ever (2002) offers little in the way of hope or redemption for its characters. The film’s bleak and uncompromising narrative leaves little room for optimism for the viewers, with its ending offering no easy answer and an uncomfortable resolution. This lack of closure may leave some viewers feeling unsatisfied or disheartened.

Moreover, if you think it through (in case you watch it anyway!), Lilya left the town the same way her mom did. Déjà vu! There is this fan’s assumption that her mother might be lured and get fraud for just the same motive—sex trafficking.

That assumption explains her sudden disdain for the way the mom never sent letters or called. In my wildest guess, yes, the pimp might do the procedure, so no one would look for the mom anymore. BUT, I think in the mother’s case, she might get a worse condition than Lilya’s.

4. Triggering Content

Due to its graphic depiction of sexual abuse and exploitation, Lilya 4-Ever may be triggering for survivors of trauma or individuals with personal experiences related to the film’s subject matter. If you are asking me, the scenes weren’t total graphics. However, the cinematography is giving off more disturbing vibes than I expected.

The excellent cinematography helps in creating this universal sense, as during the montage of ‘customers’ we only see their faces and not Lilya’s.

This is a very unique stance, and the fact that we do not see Lilya generalize the scene to the people in public shows that these customers could be on top of anybody, even you.

I find this montage to be very powerful because we as the audience are forced to be in this position, and so in a sense, it is us that this is being done to, making us identify with the ones being trafficked.

So, once again, the viewers need to consider their emotional well-being before choosing to engage with such challenging content.

5. A real-event adaptation of Danguolė Rasalaitė’s story

The film is inspired by real-life events and is based on the tragic fate of Danguolė Rasalaitė, a young Lithuanian girl who underwent 5 months of sex enslavement before committing suicide.

In building the story, Moodysson surely built the fundamentals of the plot with Danguolė’s story and developed its novelty by adding the supporting character, Volodya. In short, you can find many identical details in Lilya’s stories that are originally Danguolė’s, and some twisted plots in Lilya’s that *ingeniously* help add a dramatic roadmap to Lilya’s story but are still raw and realistic.

For instance, in fact, the late Danguolė managed to escape her enslavement life and meet a boy who said he ‘wanted to help her’. However, life betrayed her once again; she was gang raped by her new boyfriend and his 2 other friends. These inhumane boys unfortunately pushed the button. Danguolė was found under the bridge the day after.

You will realize that Lilya & Danguolė technically undergo the same assault that leads them to make a suicidal decision. Although Lilya’s plot is more metaphorical, trusting Andrei is suicide, no matter what.

Fun Fact: The screenplay was originally supposed to be deeply religious, with God, or guardian, being a prominent character, walking next to Lilya throughout the story.

However, this god figure only takes the form of the ‘angel’ Volodya during her hostage days. He appears in her dream, giving guidance and encouragement from the perspective of a friend.

This angel-winged Volodya is not only symbolic of the afterlife but also an embodiment of God who answers Lilya’s prayers (yes, based on the socio-cultural background of that year, there is a higher chance that Lilya is a committed Catholic).