Jerry I. Roberts passed away on May 4, 2024, at St. Francis Regional Medical Center with family by his side. Jerry was 87 years old.

Born on Oct. 5, 1936, in Worthington, Minnesota, he was one of 12 children of Earl and Lillian Roberts. He attended high school in Worthington and after graduating attended Bemidji State University earning a bachelor’s degree in education.

Jerry started his teaching career in Medford in 1961 and remained at Medford high school until his retirement in 1997. He taught history and physical education, coached basketball and baseball and was athletic director during his 36-year career in Medford. Jerry was also an active member of the Athletic Directors Association during this time as well. In addition to his career, Jerry was an active member in the community and volunteered his time and energy to give back. He was a dedicated volunteer for the Salvation Army in Owatonna as well as the Steele County Food Shelf. He also served on the food shelf board for many years. In his spare time Jerry enjoyed reading, tinkering in his garage, and creating walking sticks for his son, daughter-in-law, grandchildren, and great grandchildren. He was a regular for breakfast at the Kernel and coffee at McDonald’s with the guys. Most importantly, he loved spoiling and being there for his grandchildren and great grandchildren. There was nothing more important to him than his family and friends. Maybe a close second was his love for his Minnesota sports teams. Jerry could often be found watching or listening to the Twins, Vikings, and Gophers and loved the Lakers, even after they left Minnesota. Jerry was preceded in death by his parents Earl and Lillian and two brothers.

He is survived by his wife Joyce, his son Jeff (Roxi), grandchildren Chad (Kate), Stephanie (Chad), and his great grandchildren Moody, Mamush, Scarlett, Sylas, and Elias. He is survived by eight sisters and one brother. A Celebration of Life will be held at the Steele County Historical Society on June 22, 2024 from 1 to 3 p.m. Please feel free to wear your favorite Medford or Minnesota sports team gear.