Two Confessions is the ninth episode of season one of the series featured on the ABC channel, The Commish. The episode aired on November 30, 1991.

Synopsis[]

Identical twins both initially confess to the same murder then accuse each other of the crime.

Plot[]

Commissioner Tony Scali is inspecting a crime scene in an apartment where a woman named Claudia Henderson was murdered, and officer Ricky Caruso along with officer Ronnie Lopez are investigating the crime. Tony theorizes that it's a crime of passion, where the woman rejected the culprit and then she was thrown to the fireplace and hit her head. Ricky disagrees and say that it must be a premeditate murder where the culprit grabbed the victim, hit her in the head, and made the crime scene looks like an accident. Tony dryly say that Ricky must be a romantic person.

Ronnie brings an old man named Ira Goldblume who say that it was the victim's boyfriend, Jeffrey Borman, who killed his girlfriend after an argument as he saw him leaving the apartment. Tony orders Ronnie to check out Jeffrey's home address, but Ricky is eager to do his own sleuthing and wants to asks the culprit's whereabouts but the commissioner instead order him to stake out Jeffrey's house with Ronnie.

Officer Stan Kelly and Officer Carmela Pagan are on patrol and they stop at the gas station when Stan doesn't allow Carmela to pump the gas. As Carmela begrudgingly goes to pay for the gas, two robbers runs from the gas station, and she goes in pursuit but Stan yells at her to arrest the shorter man while he is chasing the tall one. Carmella goes to arrest the short robber, but Stan returns without the other robber. Stan explains that he lost him, and Carmela scolds him for losing the robber.

At home, Rachel Scali is showing the latest phone bill. Apparently, someone in the house has been calling 555-SEXX and it cost $500. Tony is angry as both he and Rachel are thinking that it must their ten year old son, David Scali, because the timing during the phone calls are usually after he got off from school and after supper. Tony plans to yell at David, but first he wants to bust the sex phone company who allowed a child called their numbers daily.

Ronnie and Ricky are staking Jeffrey's house, and it's obvious that Ricky is very eager to handle his first murder case. Ronnie is a veteran in murder cases and he immediately sees Jeffrey arriving at his house. When he calls him, Jeffrey runs away and Ricky chases him by foot. Ricky easily captured him and as he's being arrested, he confesses that he killed his girlfriend, Claudia.

At the Eastbridge Police Department, Tony questions Carmela why she and Stan let a robber got away. Carmela doesn't want to snitch at Stan, but Tony can see right through her. Stan has a chivalry problem where he thinks that women are delicate so they can't handle tough situations. Which is why Tony paired them together so Stan could see a cop not a woman, but apparently the young man hasn't learn anything. Tony determined to teach Stan a lesson, and asks whether she ever heard of Spinning Wheel Bar.

Ricky excitedly tells Tony that he's bringing Jeffrey as the killer, especially that the killer confessed of killing his girlfriend to both him and Ronnie in the car. Jeffrey is a mess and as he about to talk to the commissioner, Officer Jeff Hartley knocks on the door and brings another suspect who confessed that it was him who killed the woman; the man looks exactly like Jeffrey. Apparently, it's his twin brother Greg Borman. Everyone is stunned to see two identical twins confessed for the same crime sitting together.

The neighbor who witnessed that Jeffrey was in the apartment, Ira Goldblume, has to come to the police department to identify the man who left the apartment after the murder. At first, he immediately points to Jeffrey during the police line-up. But when they brings out Greg, it surprises Ira because he can't differentiate the twins.

David is being called to Tony's office and his father immediately accuses him of calling the sex phone numbers. David denies the accusation and it makes his father angry because he thinks that his son is lying. David is upset and cries that his father doesn't believe him that he didn't do anything wrong.

During the interrogation, Jeffrey admits that he loved Claudia so much but she rejected his proposal and he got angry so he killed her, although it was supposed to be an accident as he pushed her and she hit her head. Greg, however, claims that he went to Claudia's apartment to persuade her to accept Jeffrey's proposal, but when she refused, he pushed her down and she hit her head.

Tony rants to Ricky that both men are guilty and unfortunately they can't arrest both suspects for the crime that they aren't even sure who did it, so they have to let go both of them. A few hours later, Chief of Detectives Irv Wallerstein informs Tony that Claudia had a high amount of estrogen, but she wasn't pregnant, only got an ovarian cyst. Tony then orders Ricky to arrest Greg again for obstructing justice to separate him from his brother, so the commissioner can talk to Jeffrey.

Ronnie managed to track down the sex phone company, and both he and Tony are surprised to see the women who works there aren't prostitutes or sex workers; most of them are regular housewives and a man who talks in seductive voices to their callers. Tony threatens the owner that he would shut the company down because they are accepting calls from a minor. A woman named Gloria recognize Tony, and immediately rant at him for ruining Arnie's life.

Tony is surprised to see a tall lanky woman informing him that Arnie has been calling and talking to her every night, Apparently, they both have been talking about his dreams and they both are falling in love. Ronnie interjects that it wasn't David who called the sex numbers, which Tony realizes he made a mistake. Tony asks Gloria to stop talking on the phone because it's expensive, and tells her to ask Arnie on a date. When the nerdy Gloria asks how, he tells her to tell Arnie that he is against the relationship.

During their patrol, Carmela tells Stan to go to Spinning Wheel Bar and hit a huge man in the corner of the stool bar as a ritual and to get some respect from the people in the area.

Trivia[]

Tony refers to the two identical twin brothers as "The Brothers Karamazov". There are no twin brothers in Dostoyevsky's classic novel. There are two full brothers, one half brother, and one illegitimate brother.

Cast and Characters[]

Starring[]

Michael Chiklis as Tony Scali

Theresa Saldana as Rachel Scali

Kaj-Erik Eriksen as David Scali

Geoffrey Nauffts as Stan Kelly

Matthew Laurance as Greg Borman

Mitchell Laurance as Jeffrey Borman

Gina Belafonte as Carmela Pagan

Nicholas Lea as Ricky Caruso

Jason Schombing as Ronnie Lopez

Alex Bruhanski as Irv Wallerstein

David Paymer as Arnie Metzger

Guest Starring[]