Princess Srinagarindra born Sangwan Talapat (Thai: สังวาลย์ ตะละภัฏ; RTGS: Sangwan Talaphat) was a member of the Royal Thai Family. She was part of the House of Mahidol, which is descended from the Chakri Dynasty and was originated by Prince Mahidol Adulyadej. She was the mother of Princess Galyani Vadhana, the Princess of Naradhiwas, King Ananda Mahidol (Rama VIII), and King Bhumibol Adulyadej (Rama IX) and was the paternal grandmother of King Vajiralongkorn (Rama X).

Princess Chulabhorn of Thailand, the Princess Srisavangavadhana is a princess of Thailand, the youngest daughter of King Bhumibol Adulyadej and Queen Sirikit, and the younger sister of King Vajiralongkorn. She is officially styled Her Royal Highness Princess Chulabhorn, which corresponds to her full Thai title Somdet Phrachao Nong Nang Thoe Chaofa Chulabhorn Walailak Agrarajakumari (Thai: สมเด็จพระเจ้าน้องนางเธอ เจ้าฟ้าจุฬาภรณวลัยลักษณ์ อัครราชกุมารี). In 2019, she was bestowed the second-highest of royal ranks by appointment – "Krom Phra" by King Vajiralongkorn. She also received a first-class King Rama X Royal Cypher Medal.

Chanon Santinatornkul, nicknamed Non and also known by the alias Nonkul, is a Thai actor. He is best known for starring in the 2017 film Bad Genius, as well as various television roles with Nadao Bangkok.

Cherprang Areekul is a member of the Thai idol girl group BNK48, an international sister group of the Japanese idol girl group AKB48. She is one of the first-generation members of the group, and is also the first captain of the group and the current general manager of the group.

Khun Ying Pornthip Rojanasunand, also spelled Porntip Rojanasunan is a Thai forensic pathologist, a currently member of the Senate of Thailand and medical doctor. First appearing in the media in 1998, her work and outlandish hairstyles quickly granted her celebrity status, and she became the best known of Thailand's forensic scientists. An author of several best-selling memoirs, her work introduced the Thai public to the role of DNA evidence, among other forensic methods, in crime investigations.

Prommin Lertsuridej, M.D. is a Secretary General to Prime Minister Srettha Thavisin, former student leader, former Secretary General to Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, former Deputy Prime Minister in charge of economic affairs, and former Minister of Energy in the Thaksin government. After a 2006 military coup overthrew the Thaksin government, Prommin was arrested and detained by the junta for three weeks. He was released from captivity on 1 October 2006. Prommin is married to Mattaya Lertsuridej, M.D. and has 2 children and 2 grandchildren.

Weng Tojirakarn is a Thai medical doctor and politician. He is an activist of the United Front for Democracy Against Dictatorship (UDD), colloquially known as "Red Shirts" and since 2011 a member of parliament for the Pheu Thai Party.

Winai Dahlan is the Founder Director of the Halal Science Center Chulalongkorn University. He is also the Head of The Lipid and Fat Science Research as well as International Graduate Program Chair in Food and Nutrition, Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Chulalongkorn University.

Dipendra Jha is the first and incumbent chief attorney of Madhesh Province, one of seven provinces of Nepal. He assumed the office in February 2018. He is the legal adviser to the Chief Minister Lalbabu Raut and the Convener of Bill Drafting Facilitation Committee in Madhesh Province. Article 160 (5) of the Constitution stipulates: "The Chief Attorney shall be the chief legal advisor to the State Government. It shall be the duty of the Chief Attorney to give opinions and advices on constitutional and legal matters to the State Government and such other authorities as the State Government may specify."

Dato' Pahlawan Dr. R. Mohana Dass is a former head of the Malaysian Armed Forces Health Services. He has held leadership roles in educational institutions and universities in Malaysia and is registered as a specialist in Public Health in the National Specialist Register.