Established in 1966, the Department of Parks, Recreation and Tourism Management (PRTM) at Clemson University boasts a 57-year legacy of service and excellence. Our department emphasizes the management of people and places, environmental stewardship, and the application of scientific research to practical settings. We are committed to understanding the significant impacts of parks, recreation, and tourism management on local, regional, and national economies, as well as on community and individual well-being.

Undergraduate students can choose from diverse emphasis areas including Sport and Recreation Management, Recreational Therapy, Tourism and Event Management, and Parks, Conservation, and Outdoor Recreation, complemented by six minors like Nonprofit Leadership and Park and Protected Area Management. We offer both on-campus and online graduate programs, featuring options such as M.S. in PRTM (on campus and online), M.S. in Youth Development Leadership (online), Ph.D. in PRTM (on campus and online), and a Graduate Certificate in Youth Development Leadership.

Our Values

Innovate: We believe, in a constantly changing world, we must be innovative in our approach and connections to people, nature, cultures and communities.

Respect & Integrity: We believe respect and integrity are at the core of our work. We shall uphold these values in how we treat our team members, our students, our stakeholders, our partners, the environment and the communities we serve. As people of integrity and as people who are respected and respect others, our chance to be effective agents for change is magnified.

Service: We believe that healthy, thriving and sustainable communities and organizations are built by sharing the strengths in ourselves through intentional service to the communities that we live, work and play in.

Learning: We believe, as an academic unit, in the importance of life-long and continuous learning in all aspects of life, work and within all areas of our organization.

Collaboration: We believe we can do great things together. Together we are stronger and can contribute more. Shared goals and mutual support lead to greater success.

Diversity & Inclusion: We believe in promotion of diversity, equity and inclusion in an ethical manner in all aspects of our operations.

Life-Work Balance: We believe in the importance of supporting each other in incorporating leisure and restoration in personal and professional lives, as this is a basic tenet of achieving a positive quality of life and state of physical and mental health.