CULVER CITY, Calif., May 17, 2011 /PRNewswire/ -- In anticipation of the release of Columbia Pictures'/MGM's summer comedy Zookeeper on July 8, 2011, the studio has launched a new application themed to the movie in the App Store. The free Zookeeper application showcases a bright, colorful, interactive environment in which users can play up to four animal-themed casual games that take advantage of the unique capabilities of iPhone, iPod touch, and iPad.

The app features games starring animal characters from the movie. Upon download, players can jump right into the action and progress as far as they can go in endless gameplay: get the monkey to collect bananas as he leaps through the branches; guide the giraffe to eat leaves on the trees before they fall to the ground; and keep the gorilla entranced with a swinging tire.

The United States version of the app also has a real world extension in which users may unlock an additional fourth game, featuring the Zookeeper elephant, by visiting a local participating zoo or aquarium (at http://www.aza.org/findzooaquarium/) accredited by the Association of Zoos & Aquariums. (The final game can also be unlocked by achieving the top rank in the other three games.)

Players can also earn achievements and badges themed to each animal via Game Center and share their progress on Facebook. By achieving the top rank for the Monkey, Gorilla, and Giraffe games, users can also receive exclusive wallpapers for their device. The application will be offered worldwide and available in 12 different languages.

Commenting on the announcement, Dwight Caines, president, Worldwide Digital Marketing, said, "With the many unique and fun animal personalities in Zookeeper, it was a natural choice to extend the movie to an app for iPhone, iPod touch, and iPad. This app was inspired by the fun animals in the movie and includes games that will appeal to everyone."

The Zookeeper game is available from the App Store now.

http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/zookeeper/id434264236?mt=8

About Zookeeper

In Zookeeper, the animals at the Franklin Park Zoo love their kindhearted caretaker, Griffin Keyes (Kevin James). Finding himself more comfortable with a lion than a lady, Griffin decides the only way to get a girl in his life is to leave the zoo and find a more glamorous job. The animals, in a panic, decide to break their time-honored code of silence and reveal their biggest secret: they can talk! To keep Griffin from leaving, they decide to teach him the rules of courtship - animal style. The film also stars Rosario Dawson and Leslie Bibb and features the voices of Cher, Nick Nolte, Adam Sandler, and Sylvester Stallone. Directed by Frank Coraci. The screenplay is by Nick Bakay & Rock Reuben & Kevin James and Jay Scherick & David Ronn. Story by Jay Scherick & David Ronn. Produced by Todd Garner, Kevin James, Adam Sandler, Jack Giarraputo, and Walt Becker. Visit www.Zookeeper-movie.com for more information.

About Columbia Pictures

Columbia Pictures, part of the Columbia TriStar Motion Picture Group, is a Sony Pictures Entertainment company. Sony Pictures Entertainment (SPE) is a subsidiary of Sony Corporation of America, a subsidiary of Tokyo-based Sony Corporation. SPE's global operations encompass motion picture production and distribution; television production and distribution; home entertainment acquisition and distribution; a global channel network; digital content creation and distribution; operation of studio facilities; development of new entertainment products, services and technologies; and distribution of entertainment in more than 140 countries. Sony Pictures Entertainment can be found on the World Wide Web at http://www.sonypictures.com.

About the Association of Zoos and Aquariums

Founded in 1924, the Association of Zoos and Aquariums is a nonprofit organization dedicated to the advancement of zoos and aquariums in the areas of conservation, education, science, and recreation. Look for the AZA logo whenever you visit a zoo or aquarium as your assurance that you are supporting a facility dedicated to providing excellent care for animals, a great experience for you, and a better future for all living things. The AZA is a leader in global wildlife conservation, and your link to helping animals in their native habitats. To learn more visit www.aza.org.

For More Information:

Steve Elzer

Senior Vice President, Media Relations

Columbia TriStar Motion Picture Group

310-244-7142

steve_elzer@spe.sony.com

SOURCE Columbia Pictures

SOURCE: Columbia Pictures

Columbia Pictures Launches "Zookeeper" App for iPhone, iPod touch and iPad

PR Newswire