Starring the Jonas Brothers and Demi Lovato, Disney's Camp Rock is set to become the movie event of the summer. Kidzworld has a preview.

Camp Rock tells the Cinderella story of Mitchie Torres (Demi Lovato), a teen with an amazing voice and a dream to be a pop singer who wants to spend her summer at Camp Rock. Unfortunately, an expensive music camp is a bit much for her family, but her mother gets a job as Camp Rock's cook so that Mitchie can attend as long as she helps out in the kitchen between classes. When she's overheard singing, but not seen, by celebrity camp instructor and lead singer of Connect Three, Shane Gray (Joe Jonas), he is completely taken and sets out to find the girl behind the beautiful voice. Meanwhile, Mitchie will have to confront her fears, and step out of the kitchen and into the spotlight.

Main Characters

Mitchie Torres (Demi Lovato) - More than anything, Mitchie wants to go to Camp Rock, but her family has never been able to afford it. When her mom gives her the chance to go and work in the kitchen, it looks like Mitchie's dreams might all come true.

Shane Gray (Joe Jonas) - Shane is the lead singer of Connect 3 and a celebrity counselor at Camp Rock. He hears Mitchie singing and is determined to find the girl who belongs to the voice.

Nate (Nick Jonas) - Nate is the guitarist and vocalist for Connect 3, and is kind of bossy and serious towards his band mates. He is the one who suggested Shane go to Camp Rock.

Jason (Kevin Jonas) - Jason is the lead guitarist for Connect 3 and he is the spaced-out, air-head of the band.

Caitlyn Geller (Allyson Stoner) - Caitlyn becomes Mitchie's best friend at Camp Rock. She wants to be a producer and has a rivalry with Tess.

Tess Tyler (Meaghan Jette Martin) - Tess is the camp's Queen Bee, and wants to be a pop-star like her famous mom. She's very popular but also very mean.

Ella (Anna Maria Perez de Tagle) - Ella is the girly one of Tess' mean girl clique and she isn't very smart.

Peggy Warburton (Jasmine Richards) - Peggy is another one of Tess' sidekicks and dreams of being a famous guitarist and singer.

Connie Torres (Maria Canals) - Connie is Mitchie's mom and is very supportive of her daughter's dream. She agreed to cook for the camp so Mitchie could go.

Lola Scott (Aaryn Doyle) - She is a talented singer and long time Camp Rock camper, she becomes friends with Caitlyn, Barron, Sander, and Mitchie

Barron (Jordan Francis) - Jordan is a prankster at Camp rock and Sander's best friend. He and Sander want to be Reggae singers.

Sander (Roshon Fegan) - He is Barron's best friend and also wants to be a Reggae singer.

Andy (Giovanni Spina) - Andy is Barron and Sander's best friend and wants to be a drummer.

Fun Facts

Camp Rock premieres Friday, June 20th at 8/7pm c.

After its premiere on Disney Channel, Camp Rock will also premiere on ABC, ABC Family, and online.

Camp Rock is the first Disney Channel Original Movie to give access rights to other cable networks of the Disney company from ABC to ABC Family in airing the film's screen debut.

In a scene when Joe Jonas was running he tripped, and the director decided to keep it in the movie.

Brenda Song has a cameo appearance as a girl near the lake, similar to how Miley Cyrus appeared in High School Musical 2.

Quotes

"You're going to Camp Rock!" - Connie Torres

"I don't want to waste my summer at some camp! I'm Shane Gray for crying out loud!" - Shane Gray

"Hey man we used to love this place. Three years ago we were campers. " - Nate

"Yeah man, this is where Connect 3 connected. " - Jason

"It's just for once I wanted to fit in and be popular. Just once." - Mitchie

Related Stories:

Jonas Brothers Biography

Demi Lovato Biography

Disney's Magical Blu-ray Tour

More Great TV Shows

Share It!

Like It!