It is in the last 1,000 years that we must look today to discover what it takes to be a great livery company for the next 1,000 years....

Reflecting on the road the Worshipful Company of Management Consultants must travel to become a great modern Livery Company I was struck by the quotation from Lao Tzu[1], ‘Do the difficult things while they are easy and do the great things while they are small. A journey of a thousand miles must begin with a single step’. This article is about twelve small things we must do well if we are to become a great modern Livery Company.

In the 25 years since 1992, when I attended the first dinner of what was then just an idea for a modern City company to represent Management Consultants, much has been achieved. I am very proud to have played my part in our progression to become the 105 livery company by precedence. It has so far been an extraordinary journey and the WCoMC is the only organisation I am part of which thinks in terms of a 1,000 year legacy. It is in the last 1,000 years that we must look today to discover what it takes to be a great livery company for the next 1,000 years.

Supporting our Almoner is the first of the small things which must be done well. During the 10th century in early medieval times a number of guilds had begun to form in London and other towns in England and Europe when men and women working in the same crafts or trades (known as ‘misteries’) joined together in informal associations or fraternities for mutual benefit and protection. Members of guilds paid a fee and in return, the guilds looked after members and their families if they fell on hard times, paid for members’ funerals, and represented members in legal actions and settled trade disputes. Whilst our Company no longer pays for funerals of our members we have an Almoner who helps members who are sick and our Objects require us to look after members who fall upon hard times.

Taking part in the governance of the City and other civic duties is the second small thing which must be done well. In the 12th century some towns and cities were communes, which meant that they had secured the right to self-government by elected aldermen, often in the face of opposition from kings like Henry II, Eleanor of Aquitaine’s husband, who disapproved of towns being independent from the crown. London which in the 12th century had a population of 35,000 was by far the largest and most important city in England. Its chief citizens were known as Barons. The Barons were a politically active clique who wielded considerable influence. After Henry II’s death, in 1189, Eleanor of Aquitaine, seeking financial support for her son Richard I’s crusade, declared the City a commune and the City elected its first mayor Henry FitzAilwin.

Paying your Annual Livery Fine and making an Annual Charitable contribution of at least £200 is the third small thing which must be done well. London’s Livery Companies are the direct descendants of the medieval guilds. The Anglo Saxon word ‘gild’ meant ‘payment’ and the members of the guilds raised funds which could be used for social, charitable and trade purposes. One of the important uses of the funds was to make a contribution to the Exchequer in return for which a Charter confirming certain privileges, rights or liberties would be granted by the King. It is the recording of such a payment which establishes the Weavers as London’s oldest Company, the Pipe Roll of 1130 has an entry of a payment of £16 by Robert Levestan on the Weavers’ behalf[2].

Supporting the Objects of the Company’s Royal Charter of Incorporation, taking your place on the Court of the Company and ensuring proper Governance of the Company’s affairs are the fourth, fifth and sixth small things which must be done well. In 1155 the Weavers’ Guild was granted a charter by Henry II which stated, ‘Know I have conceded to the Weavers of London to hold their gild in London with all the liberties and customs which they had in the time of King Henry my grandfather’. These liberties and customs included the rights to elect Bailiffs, supervise the work of their craft, punish defaulters and collect the ferm (tax). It is clear that by the mid-12th century the Weavers’ guild had established a monopoly of its craft in London and control of its members through its own Court.

Supporting the Common Council[3], Livery Committee[4], Financial Services Group[5] and other City wide bodies and initiatives are the seventh small thing to be done well. As the original textile guild, the Weavers were very powerful, for the cloth trade was the basis of England’s economy through the middle-ages. Both King John and the other trades in the City became jealous of the pre-eminence of the Weavers’. In the early years of the 14th Century the Weavers’ Guild submitted to the authority of the Mayor. In time it lost its pre-eminence as other textile guilds developed, many of them powerful merchant companies like the ~Mercers, Drapers, Merchant Taylors, Haberdashers and Clothworkers.

Ensuring the Company’s traditions such as the Company oath, livery[6] and clothes of office are maintained and respected is the eighth small thing to be done well. In the 15th century the greater guilds were incorporated and so officially recognised as companies. The senior members of these companies were clothed in the livery and the companies became known as Livery Companies. It was the custom of all members of the guild to appear in livery at guild functions and on public occasions, such as great processions through the City. As time passed, the wearing of livery became the privilege of the senior members of the Companies, such as the Masters of the craft who could sustain the expense and responsibility of running the Company. The Court of Assistants chose the Clerk and Beadle and formulated general rules for government of their craft. They also selected the Liverymen from among the general body of Freemen.

Keeping the excellent reputation of the Company for hospitality is the ninth small thing to be done well. In the 12th century the guilds met to conduct their business in churches, monasteries or hospitals. Over the years as the Livery Companies became wealthier they acquired their own buildings or halls. Our Company has as part of its objects a requirement to seek a building as its Livery Hall[7] though this may take a few centuries to achieve. Dinners and feasts were originally held in private homes or in local taverns and it became an important part of the reputation of each Company that it should provide excellent hospitality[8]. Like our Company those Companies which do not have halls customarily book the use of another hall for their formal gatherings, giving members and guests the opportunity to visit and enjoy different City livery halls by rotation. This has the disadvantage of subjecting our Company to significant cost pressure from external caterers. This is resisted by ensuring that the Wine Committee and the Clerk are engaged, by policy of the Court, in every decision to book a Company event. Ceremonies such as singing at Livery dinners and the Loving Cup became an important part of the movement as it brought together the different trades in a common code of conduct. Many of the older Livery Companies have built their own Wine Cellars and are able to enjoy excellent wines at low prices. Our Company is building its own Wine Cellar through the efforts of the Wine Committee and the Wine Club Members who provide interest free loans to the Company. Today the Company Cellar is its largest asset at some £15,000.

Taking part in elections of the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs is the tenth small thing to do well. In time the guilds within the walls of the City of London gained regulatory powers over their individual crafts and trades. They made sure that standards were maintained, proper wages paid and working conditions satisfactory. Most importantly they controlled entry into their trades by apprenticeship. In 1215, when the City obtained its charter from King John, it became essential for anyone who planned to trade in the City or who wanted to participate in civic life, or to hold civic office to be a Freeman of the City; and that status was gained, before the19th century, by becoming a freeman of a Livery Company. Liverymen still retain voting rights for the senior civic offices, such as the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs and City of London Corporation - the municipal authority with extensive local government powers.

Ensuring that your activities within the Livery Company are restricted to charitable, educational and social matters and you do not discuss business is the eleventh small thing to do well. Before the Reform Act of 1832 voters in Common Hall exercised their franchise by being freemen of the City and members of Livery Companies but these were mutual organisations playing a public role. It was seen as un-demographic that Liverymen had the exclusive right to elect four members of Parliament representing the City. Between 1832 and 1918 being a Liveryman was one of a number of franchises which could qualify a parliamentary elector in the City of London Constituency as it was preserved as an ancient borough franchise under the 1832 Act. It is true that in 1700 nominal servitude remained one standard way to qualify to join a Livery Company. Yet for various reasons including social distinction, sociability, charitable assistance and the right of voting itself had led to a large increase in the number of people seeking to join the Livery Companies and more and more people were admitted by patrimony and redemption. This led to many companies becoming unrepresentative of the trades whence they once sprang. As social organisations with political rights and other charitable functions the Livery Companies had in effect an optional membership, regulated by individual choice and a sufficiency of wealth and social standing which was unacceptable under the Reform Act. This 18th century expansion was furthered by the institution of a number of new Livery Companies so that by 1832 there were 77 active livery companies. After the Reform Act of 1832 no further Livery Companies were given a grant of Livery by the Court of Aldermen until 1932[9]. Our Company today is careful to ensure that members’ business is kept outside of the Company e.g. the Professional evenings are not run by the Company but by a group of members and others who choose to come together for professional networking and discussion. Today the livery companies keep their heads well below the parapet. They are still afraid if they set themselves up they’ll be knocked down. But a significant legacy remains. The expression ‘to be at sixes and sevens’ derives from a dispute between the Merchant Taylors and the Skinners as to who would take sixth and seventh position in the annual parade from Guildhall to the Royal Courts of Justice. The 13 loaves of the Baker’s dozen also originated with the livery companies and up until the 1850’s only Freemen of the livery companies had the right to trade in the City.