Article source: FERRER ARQUITECTOS

The project is located in one of the most important plots in the centre of Almeria which was occupied by the old Ismael Moratón Sports Complex. The intervention keeps the building of the 25m indoor pool built for the Mediterranean Games and demolishes the remaining existing buildings. At the corner of Avenida del Cabo de Gata and Calle Angel Jover an L-shapedbuilding in two heights is designed to house the Sports Centre and other commercial uses that complement an interesting range of services for citizens. The roofs are occupied by a series of paddle and other sports courts.

Architects:FERRER ARQUITECTOS

Project: Ego Sport Center

Location: Almería, Spain

Photography: David Frutos

Developer: UTE CDS Almadrabillas

Architect: José Ángel Ferrer.

Architectural technologist: Antonio Pérez

Internal collaborators: Raúl Vallejo, Antonio Palenzuela, Javier de Simón, Antonio García, Rafael Robles, smael Motos, Pedro Seguíand José Espín

External collaborators: E3i. Eycom, Ayma, Ernesto Miras

Contractor: Construcciones Tejera and FACTO

Built area: 13.554.35 m2

This L-shaped building gives access to the entire complex, which is situated below a flying body in the corner that marks the entrance to the building and which results in a double-height lobby where the reception is located. The facades are designed to seek crossed visions of the sea and the city landmarks such as the Mineral Loading Platform providing adequate thermal and solar protection. The facades are configured as a white concrete shell of variable sizes depending on the requirements of light, views, acoustic protection of the adjacent buildings and so on. The performance is complemented by another area of public and commercial use on the Paseo Marítimo and the retractable roof of the existing Olympic pool that will allow its use at any time of the year.

It has been 20 years since the creation of FERRER ARQUITECTOS. Its founder, José Ángel Ferrer (1966), graduated from the University of Seville School of Architecture in 1993. Having graduated as an architect, he opened a practice in Almería and later in Madrid, Seville and London and he proceeded to carry out numerous projects for housing and other facilities, both in Andalusia and in other cities in and outside Spain.

His interest and dedication to architecture are manifested in the form of numerous articles he has had published in the press and magazines or in his participation as a professor and speaker in courses, university master’s programmes and conferences. Presently, he is finishing his doctorate’s thesis on the museums of Rafael Moneo. José Ángel also belongs to several important associations and foundations for the promotion of architecture, in which he has held office, as Secretary for the Architects Association of Almería or as President of the Association of Architectural Practices in Almería (ASARAL).

Standing out among Ferrer’s works are: the Sports Hall for the XXV Mediterranean Games, the buildings for Andalusian Radio and Television (RTVA) Headquarters in Almería, Granada and Cádiz, the restoration of the “largest Spanish Civil War Shelters”, secondary school buildings, social centres, health centres, the restoration of an important part of Almería’s cultural heritage -the mineral pier, or so-called “Cable Inglés”-, PITA (Technology Park) and Tecnova Headquarters, the AVE (TGV) Station in Vera or Ego Sport Centre. All of them first prize winners in competitions.

National magazines and from other countries such as Germany, Portugal, France, Brazil, China, the US or UK have shown interest in his projects, publishing his works. Furthermore, José Ángel Ferrer has received numerous prizes and mentions; he was selected for the FAD, ARCO and NAN Awards, winning the Award for the Best Architect given by the Marble Business Association.

His great concern for matters dealing with quality and the environment, led him to direct the implementation of the quality systems ISO 9001, ISO 14001 and OHSAS 18001 at FERRER ARQUITECTOS, which makes this architectural practice the only one in Andalusia certified bye AENOR in these systems. Ferrer Arquitectos is the only Spanish architectural practice that is part of the Advisory Council of the Spanish section of BREEAM, the largest organization of sustainable buildings in the world.

Even though our architecture doesn’t respond to dogmas or clichés, it does however exude a great interest in offering a current day response to a constantly changing society. Sensibility towards setting and innovation, both constructive and formal, is the foundation of our performance, together with a comprehensive service to our clients. We believe that properly monitoring all participants who take part in the constructive process is vital to achieve the best final result. In order to guarantee that, we boast and extensive team of architects, technicians and collaborators who share a common goal: to offer the highest quality in service and the best quality in architecture.

Related

Tags: Almería, Spain

Category: Sports Centre