- Advertisement -

- Advertisement -

The Achampet-conceived Vijay Devarakonda, who is Creating sensaional in film industry records with his most recent discharge ‘Arjun Reddy’, reports the entry of Telangana stars in standard Telugu silver screen.

He joins the temporary fad of other bankable stars like Nithiin, Nikhil and to some degree Nani who was conceived in Hyderabad and contracting the space for Andhra-born stars. We couldn’t have envisioned such a situation even only three years prior. May be new state and new yearnings are driving these performers to scale new statures.

Obviously, we had a standard star Kanta Rao long back, however Telangana silver screen was generally related to masterful and award winning film like ‘Matti Manushulu’, “Daasi” and ‘Komaram Bheem’ and progressive movies like ‘Erra Sanyam’ and ‘Cheemala Dandu’, yet now things are changing for better.

So our stars can become the overwhelming focus in standard Telugu silver screen,” says Hyderabad-born producer , direcor Chandra Siddharth, with a gleam of pride.

Nonetheless, it was new-age movie producer and Warangal– born Raj Kandukurri who restored the Telangana language in his blockbuster and national-award winning film ‘Pellichoopulu’.

The yaasa was for the most part manhandled in standard Telugu silver screen yet we demonstrated the magnificence of the language in “Pellichoopulu” and gathering of people lapped it up,” he says and congratulations Sekhar Kammula for expanding the appeal of Telangana language in ‘Fidaa’.

Director Sekhar kammula took it to the following level and put his characters in our telangana rregion, while Sai Pallavi and Sai Chand influenced crowd of their feet by mouthing languages in sweet telangana language.

These movies printed cash even in the Andhra pradesh state also, demonstrating that silver screen has no local boundaries, just great substance checks, independent of the language,” he includes.

The some of Telangana celebraties are in tollywood film industry are B. Narsing Rao is an Indian film director, composer, producer , Shabana Azmi is an Indian actress , Nithiin is an Indian film actor , Venu Madhav is a comedy actor , Siva Reddy is a popular Telugu language mimicry artist,comedian and actor .

Aditi Rao Hydari is an Indian film actress , Udaya Bhanu is an Indian presenter and film actress , Ramesh Ramilla, better known as Thagubothu Ramesh, Fish Venkat is a film Actor who works in Tollywood Film Industry , Keerthi Reddy is an Indian former film actress , Uttej is a Tollywood actor.

- Advertisement -