Through a Queer Lens is a series which explores films from queer cinema.

Keith Froelich, 1996

What happens when you are an outcast from not only society at large, but also from your immediate community? This is one of the themes explored throughout Keith Froelich’s The Toilers and the Wayfarers.

The film opens in the German-American town of New Elm, Minnesota. New Elm, named after the town of Elm in Germany, is populated by German immigrants who take pride in their heritage and strive to keep their traditions alive.

Dieter and Philip are sixteen year old best friends, in fact each other’s only friends, who have grown up in New Elm.

Dieter comes from a very strict household. He has been brought up to hide his emotions. He grew up only watching educational television, his father calling everything else “mind candy”. His father still administers corporal punishment for transgressions.

Conversely, we do not learn about Philip’s family, but he dreams of leaving New Elm for the excitement and promise of freedom in Minneapolis.

As a way to distance himself from his stifling family atmosphere, Dieter attempts to keep his heritage a secret. When Udo, a young German in his twenties, comes to America to live with his aunt, Philip sees an opportunity to make a new friend, blowing Dieter’s cover in the process. Apparently, Udo and his aunt have been invited to dinner with Dieter’s family, a dinner he feels doomed to “suffer through”.

Surprisingly, during the dinner, Dieter finds Udo’s presence a refreshing change. While the family and Udo’s aunt are dressed very formally, Udo shows up in jeans and a t-shirt. His lax attitude is also shown through his seeming lack of table manners, a fact which amuses Dieter. However, Udo’s lack of social graces stems partly from his alcohol problem.

After once again taking the blame to protect Philip from getting into trouble at school, Dieter gets caught off guard when Philip kisses him. Philip, revealing that he is gay, states that he thought his friend was also, but, due to Dieter’s reaction and rejection, Philip, no longer sees any need to stay in New Ulm and runs away to Minneapolis.

Meanwhile, the newly awakened feelings about his own sexuality cause Dieter to become closer to Udo. Over the ensuing months, their quickly blossoming friendship soon becomes the talk of the community, culminating in Dieter’s father brutally pulling his son away from Udo and threatening him if he doesn’t leave Dieter alone. Dieter protests that he and Udo are just friends, while accidentally letting slip that he himself is gay. This results in Dieter receiving a humiliating spanking from his father, who feels that selling the television will solve the issue.

With nowhere to turn, Dieter hides out with Udo. The two decide to try to make it on their own in Minneapolis. When they arrive, Dieter reunites with Philip, who has been making a living as a hustler, a career choice which he feel brings him the freedom and independence he craved in New Ulm. While worried for his friend’s safety, Dieter is nonetheless both stunned and intrigued by the idea.

As Udo loses himself in his alcohol problem, Dieter and Philip become closer than ever. While Udo can’t seem to keep a job, Dieter finds success joining Philip as a hustler. Eventually, however, the risks of the job rear their ugly head. Dieter is arrested, while Philip contracts a certain unnamed illness.

When the detective handling Dieter’s case contacts his father, he doesn’t let Dieter come back home, as an arrest for prostitution confirms the idea that Dieter is in fact gay, which does not fit in with the community’s standards. Dieter’s father even convinces the detective that Udo seduced and kidnapped Dieter, setting the police on the trail of Udo. After warning Udo by phone, Dieter escapes from the police.

Dieter arrives to find Udo gone and Philip alone and sick. The two boys finally consummate their love, before Dieter leaves him behind to try his luck in New York.

The path tread by Dieter and Philip in the film is an all too familiar one to many gay men. From a young age, the young gay man usually has an inkling of being different, even if he does not have a name for it. Having grown up in a hostile family and community environment, he dreams of escaping one day to the more accepting environment of the big city. Eventually, he figures out his identity, as Dieter began to do when Philip kissed him.

Udo is a good example of how gay men use drugs and alcohol to deal with the depression and loneliness they experience. This not only complicates their relationships with other people, but also remains a problem throughout their entire lives.

Due to not having the same adolescent experiences as their straight counterparts, they tend to go through their adolescence late. This is shown in Philip and Dieter taking up hustling as their key to the freedom they crave. It may not be the smartest path to take, but it is one which comes out of the emotional immaturity their early lives have fostered. It also leads to outcomes which result in regret. For Dieter, it leads to police involvement and its aftermath, despite the fact that prostitution, being sex between two consenting persons, should not be a criminal act. For Philip, it leads to illness which, while not explicitly stated, is assumed to be AIDS. At its height, the AIDS epidemic claimed the lives of so many promising young men too early in life.

Homophobia causes undue hardship for many gay men throughout their lives. The truly unlucky ones commit suicide, while others never stop carrying this burden. While more and more men end up well-adjusted, society still has a long way to go before this cycle can come to an end.