5 RGAĖ, f. 484, op. 19, d. 1960, l. 11.

All goods in the shops in our district (raion) are sold only upon payment with eggs (prodaiut tol´ko pod zagotovku iaits). A shop received a delivery of salted fish. In order to buy one kilogram one had to bring (nuzhno sdat´) six eggs. Flour, yeast, kerosene, soda – everything is sold in exchange (prodaiut v obmen) for eggs.

7The egg-story further exposes some key ruptures within Soviet rural society, which were partly a result of the policy of gradual monetization. The role of rubles and money in the everyday life of kolkhozniki was different from the role of rubles and money in the lives of sovkhozniki. While sovkhozniki were paid in cash, a guaranteed monetary wage for kolkhozniki was only introduced in July 1966. In ‘our year’ 1962, kolkhoz wages were to a considerable extent still paid in kind. The first section of this article will analyze how this diverging money economy played out when rubles were substituted with eggs. It will consider the repercussions for village consumers, who came to realize that their hard earned rubles were essentially made worthless and only good for buying eggs. The second section will look at the peculiar role consumer cooperatives played in the provisioning of food while at the same time being the local trade institution. In other words, the second part will explicate the political economy of eggs. Finally, section three considers the impact of such a policy on trade personnel, their work, and their eventual fate in this system. It furthermore will explain how everyday practices of procuring made the transition to eggs as surrogate currency self-evident.

Hatching money – Eggs as surrogate currency

8On 24 March 1962, five women from Odessa oblast wrote to “Dear Nikita Sergeevich” (Khrushchev):

16 GARF, f. 5446, op. 96, d. 1040, l. 89.

“Not only is there nothing to buy in our shops, if there is, it is sold for eggs…”

19 GARF, f. 5446, op. 96, d. 1040, l. 89/89ob.

Scarves were delivered. The price of one scarf is seven rubles. One needs to provide 100 eggs. For the woolen scarf Ar. 7481, which costs four rubles 20 kopeks, one needs to give 60 eggs.

10Some of the reported prices in eggs were an exact correspondence of egg prices in rubles. Since the official price for one egg was seven kopeks in that region, a scarf for seven rubles equated to exactly 100 eggs. Almost all letter writers who complained to Soviet institutions (be it the general secretary Nikita Sergeevich himself or the editorial offices of Pravda) about having to pay with eggs in their local shops garnished their letters with some of the egg prices they were made to pay. A pricelist compiled from various regions reads as follows:

20 RGAĖ, f. 484, op. 19, d. 1960, l. 8, 9, 10.

One kilogram of yeast – 10 eggs,

half a liter of vodka – 10 to 25 eggs,

1 kilogram of butter – 20 eggs,

one sack of flour – 100 eggs,

one radio – 100 eggs,

one sewing machine – 500-600 eggs.

15For their part, sovkhozniki felt threatened by egg-currency because they relied entirely on money and village retail trade for buying food and consumer goods. All their consumption rested on functioning product-money relations because sovkhozniki received monetary wages only. In contrast to kolkhozniki, whose wages were paid to some extent in kind, sovkhozniki had no direct access to food except by way of money, which at the local level was now represented in eggs. Whereas the diet of kolkhozniki was constrained if they were not able to buy what they needed in the village stores, sovkhozniki would have no diet at all. Comrade Akshin from Kaluga oblast complained that rye flour was only to be purchased for eggs:

34 RGAĖ, f. 484, op. 19, d. 1960, l. 9.

However, where to get them [eggs]? I work in the sovkhoz, I receive a monetary wage. I need flour in order to bake bread, as the bread is delivered to us only irregularly and then it is stale anyway.

16For Akshin his monetary wage now became a problem. Usually, sovkhozniki, like everybody else, were used to getting along without certain deficit items, but now that their everyday diet and their most important food item – bread – depended on having and paying in eggs, they became anxious and took to the pen. With eggs as the effective currency in the local stores, sovkhozniki felt dismissed and ignored. From their perspective, kolkhozniki now seemed to have a two-fold advantage. Their allegedly easier access to eggs through private plots and the pay-in-kind system (food) made them less dependent on buying food (now for eggs). Sov-khozniki, who were used to being better off than kolkhozniki (because sovkhozniki earned monetary wages and were remunerated in absolute higher numbers), had to realize that having monetary wages could serve as a disadvantage. Now, direct access to food and goods was needed, and rubles were not much help – hence the envy of the kolkhoznik with his wages-in-kind and his private plot. With sovkhozniki feeling that they were losing the privilege of earning rubles, they interpreted eggs-as-currency as a threat to established social hierarchies in rural areas.

36 RGAĖ, f. 484, op. 19, d. 1960, l. 11.

But where should I get them [eggs] from? The shop clerks simply tell me to buy them at the bazar and re-sell them to the shop.

18Indeed, if village dwellers were unable to ‘produce’ money with their hens or somehow obtain eggs from other co-villagers, rural consumers had to go to the bazar/market in the next district town, buy eggs there, get back home, and spend the purchased eggs in their local store in order to finally buy the necessary items. Distances for “shopping” rapidly multiplied: the next district town (raigorod) with bazars could be as far as 50 kilometers away. Time commitments for shopping increased as well, since purchasing eggs up to 50 km away could easily take two days given the non-existent public transport, the quality of the roads, and the scarcity of vehicles. Local stores on the other hand could simply rely on the fact that their consumers needed the essential items on sale and would eventually pay in eggs. Due to the even longer distances to district towns, locals could not organize all of their everyday food there, and both sovkhozniki and kolkhozniki still had to work in their local economies. As improbable as this scheme sounds, letter writers had indeed travelled to far-away markets, bought eggs there, brought them home, and spent them locally.

38 RGAĖ, f. 484, op. 19, d. 1960, l. 12.

Who pocketed the [other] 80 kopeks? I was so offended, I almost went crazy (chto ia mesta naiti ne mog). This can’t be fair?”

The political economy of eggs

22The egg-story of 1962, which was a union-wide phenomenon from Krasnodar krai in the South to Kalinin oblast in the North, from Mordvinia in the West to Kirghizia in the East, opens up several key questions: how could such a practice become commonplace if not ordered from above? Why eggs in the first place? They were, after all, an indisputably fragile currency to carry around! As I will show in this section, eggs functioned as temporary surrogate currency (on a local level only) due to the peculiarities of the Soviet system of state procurements and the central role of consumer cooperatives (potrebitel´skie kooperativy – potrebkoopy) in it.

Practicing procurement

34A letter written by the shop assistant Valentina Zaitseva to Nikita Khrushchev offers a relatively clear picture about how egg procurements were done on the local level. Zaitseva worked in the Borskii raimag (raionyi magazin – district shop) in Kuibyshev oblast. She wrote her letter to Khrushchev in February 1962, which marked the height of the egg-currency when local consumers were confronted with egg pricelists at their local stores and pupils were asked to bring eggs to school. Every year Zaitseva’s store received its numbers for egg procurements. In 1962, the number was 60,000 eggs. This corresponded to about 4,300 eggs per person for the 14 people working in her raimag. In order to procure their allotted quota, she explained to Khrushchev, the shop assistants had to walk around the villages after work (podvornyi obkhod), asking the local population if they were willing to sell two to five eggs to them. According to Zaitseva, if she succeeded in procuring 50 to 100 eggs on one podvornyj obkhod this was already a good day. Based on her numbers, every collector would have had to spend a minimum of 85 days procuring eggs – outside her or his official working hours. “Nikita Sergeevich, this is unpleasant work,” Zaitseva wrote. “Unpleasant” did not refer to the immense amount of time she had to spend wandering around but rather to the attitude with which she was met: “The thing is, they look at us as if we were beggars and if they sell, they do so under conditions.” She went on to explain that there was not much interest in selling eggs to her for the price of 68 kopeks per ten eggs, when the price that could be gained at the local kolkhoz markets was 1.10 to 1.30 rubles.

73 RGAĖ, f. 484, op. 19, d. 1977, l. 60.

You probably ask: “but how did you fulfill the plan?” We did fulfill the plan, we even overfulfilled it, yet how? We sold deficit goods for eggs. For example, we sell [prodaëm] a sewing machine and the buyer sells [prodaët] 400 to 500 eggs and so on.

81 RGAĖ, f. 484, op. 19, d. 1961, l. 55.

They handed me over to the police, to the authorities, who now are investigating me for a violation of Soviet trade law. I ask – why? What for? Surely not for the reason that I fulfilled my procurement plan for eggs, for me struggling to keep my head above water, for running around back and forth, doing everything in order to fulfill the state plan for egg procurements?

38Kuntushvili stressed that he had done everything for the economy and state, that he had fulfilled his plan, and that he was committed to his work. Even as his traditional way of procuring had cost him his job, his immediate superior, comrade Litvin, chairman of the raipotrebsoiuz in Shorsk, had received a 170 ruble bonus.

40Zaitseva and Kuntushvili used common methods for procuring eggs that were deeply engrained into the fabric of the Soviet command economy and its system of procurements. Both characterized vstrechnaia prodazha as a successful method for procuring eggs. In contrast to methods like false receipts, vstrechnaia prodazha was not about manipulating numbers. The procurement agencies purchased more eggs thanks to how Kuntushvili and Zaitseva operated. This is why Kuntushvili was so surprised about being persecuted. He did what he had always done – sell scarves for eggs – and none of his supervisors in the raipotrebsoiuz had ever interfered. On the contrary, they embraced his method because it guaranteed their bonuses for achieving the procurement numbers.

Conclusion

43Although I have focused on one particular year only, the egg story of 1962 allows us to understand the intricate ties within rural economies, its material dependencies and fragile balances. When eggs sidelined the ruble and acquired money-like qualities, the social fabric of Soviet villages shifted. Those with rubles suddenly lost what had previously been a position of privilege. The complaints about seemingly minor and random practices in remote village stores illuminate systematic and union-wide economic practices. Local procurement conditions elevated eggs to a surrogate currency. The shift from vstrechnaia prodazha to simply selling everything for eggs as the most successful method of procurement was obvious and simple. This is why such incidents almost automatically occurred all over the Soviet Union. The egg-pricelists in local village stores were nothing other than a successful attempt by local procurers and their party organizations to achieve the ambitious numbers of the Seven-Year-Plan.