KIEV, July 31 -- Ukrainian officials have pledged to ban hard currency trade as of Aug. 1, but storekeepers and other skeptics in the former Soviet republic said Monday they were not sure the policy would be implemented. The government announced the ban back in May in a bid to boost the national coupon, the Karbovanets, and prime the economy for the planned introduction of a full-fledged Ukrainian currency to be called the Grivna. But the prohibition is the latest in a number of attempts by the National Bank of Ukraine to restrict foreign currency transactions and bring the economy in the in line with smaller neighbors that have toughened up their currencies. 'We are lagging behind,' National Bank Assistant Director Alexander Kireyev said, comparing the second largest former Soviet republic with others that have introduced currencies pegged to foreign money. The dollar-dominated shadow economy is thriving alongside the struggling official economy, and bank officials hope restricting hard currency use will strenthen the slumping Karbovanets, currently selling at about 151,000 to the U.S. dollar. But merchants in Kiev expressed doubt that the ban would be implemented on schedule, citing several eleventh-hour postponements of the long-promised move in the past. 'The last time they changed their minds at the last minute,' said Robert Blanchard, a Briton who manages a hard currency restaurant in the center of the Ukrainian capital. 'We were all ready to go, all set up to deal in coupons.' The ban will have the most affect in Kiev and the Black Sea port city of Odessa, which the National Bank says between them account for 70 percent of Ukraine's foreign currency trade.

When restrictions were last annouced this spring, many establishments dealing in hard currency insured themselves against cash flow troubles by installing on-site currency exchange booths that are in effect commercial bank branches. Blanchard had a booth installed in his restaurant in May but it still sat empty Monday, and he said he was not preparing his staff for the new payment policies. Across town at Ring, a hard currency grocery store owned by a kick boxing association, had prepared for the ban by building a new, freshly- painted exchange booth despite doubts they would need to use it. 'We don't want to lose customers,' explained assistant manager Vitaly Kosenko, who added he favored the ban as an attempt to build a strong Ukrainian currency.