Freiburg im Breisgau is an attractive university town located on the Dreisam River in southwest Germany’s Black Forest region. Freiburg is known for its brooks (bächle) that crisscross the picturesque medieval old town. There’s a nice variety of running in Freiburg im Breisgau, including paths along the river, nice parks, and trails in surrounding mountains and the nearby Black Forest.

A great way to get oriented is to sample some of the 8 km of paths along the Dreisam River. Also near town is the scenic Schlossberg (Castle Mountain), which features hilly trails and great views from the 450m summit. One of the best places to run in Freiburg is Seepark, which has a nice lake loop and some additional trails. For a flat run around farm-like terrain, we recommend the Freiburger Rieselfeld wildlife refuge. Just south of town are the hilly, forested trails of the Jägerbrunnen. There are also extensive trails in the Black Forest, to the north of Freiburg.

Good spot for a longer off-road run. A paved multi-use runs along the Dreisam River from the Oberaubrücke bridge west for up to 6.2 km to Lehener Brücke (bridge). Nice water views and main road buffered by trees.

Seepark is one of the more popular spots for a run in Freiburg. There's a 1.8 km loop around the Flückigersee (lake), additional paths, and a running track. A highlight is the Schwimmender Steg, a scenic boardwalk across the lake.

One of the most scenic spots for a run in Freiburg. Nice network of forested paths around Castle Mountain, and a winding, steep path to a tower, featuring great views of the city and the Rhine Valley.

Several km of scenic, open farm-like paths in this wildlife refuge located on a former industrial site. It's ~2 km east-west and ~3 km north-south. Freiburger Rieselfeld is 5 km west of the city centre.

There's an extensive network of trail running options in the hills and forests near Freiburg. South of the city is more forested terrain, while Wildtalereck area northeast Freiburg is more open, rolling hills.

RUNNING STORES

Drescher Running Outdoor is the go-to running shop in Freiburg. They do group runs in season.

City Sport DER Freiburger Laufladen is another great option for outdoor gear.

GROUP RUNS

The Drescher running store does weekly group runs in season.