Imprint

VivoSensMedical GmbH

Limburger Str. 74 C

04229 Leipzig, Germany

Tel: +49 (0) 341 35 58 78 95

Fax: +49 (0) 341 35 58 78 99

E-Mail: info@vivosensmedical.com

Authorized representative and Managing Director:

Sebastian Alexander

HRB 27028 District Court Leipzig

Registered Office: Leipzig

VAT: DE276491389

Supervisory authority:

State Directorate Dresden

Occupational Health and Safety

Leipzig Branch Office

Oststraße 13

04317 Leipzig

www.ldd.sachsen.de

Registration under ElektroG

WEEE-Reg.-Nr. DE 94387890

Person responsible for content according to § 6 MDStV (State media treaty):

Sebastian Alexander

VivoSensMedical GmbH is funded by the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), the Saxon State Ministry for Economic Affairs, Labour and Transport (SMWA) and by the State Ministry of Science and Art (BSEC) and the city of Leipzig. OvulaRing was supported within the framework of the EXIST-Gründerstipendium by the Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology (BMWi).

Technical Implementation:

Content & Code GmbH

Marienplatz 1

04103 Leipzig

E-Mail: hello@content-code.de

www.content-code.de

Graphical implementation:

KOCMOC.net GmbH

Marienplatz 1

04103 Leipzig

E-Mail: info@kocmoc.net

www.kocmoc.net

Photographs:

KOCMOC.net GmbH

Andreas Matthes

Marienplatz 1

04103 Leipzig

Peter Eichler

Hardenbergstraße 34

04275 Leipzig

mail@petereichler.com

www.petereichler.com

Exclusion of liability :

1. Liability for Content

The author assumes no responsibility for the topicality, correctness, completeness or quality of the information provided. Liability claims against the author based on damage of a material or non-material nature resulting from the use or disuse of the presented information or by the use of incorrect and incomplete information are excluded, provided that the author is not guilty of demonstrably willful or gross negligence. All offers are subject to change without notice and are nonbinding. The author expressly reserves the right to change, supplement, or delete parts of the pages or the entire content without separate notice and to discontinue publication thereof either temporarily or permanently.

2. References and links

As regards direct or indirect references to external websites (“links”) which lie outside the area of responsibility of the author, liability would only apply if the author had knowledge of content and if it was technically possible and feasible to prevent their use in case of illegal content. The author hereby expressly declares that no illegal content was found on the linked pages at the time the links were made. The author has no influence whatsoever on the current and future design, contents and authorship of the linked / referenced pages. For this reason, the author expressly dissociates himself from the contents of all linked / referenced pages which were changed after the links were first established. This statement applies to all links and references set up within the author’s own website as well as to external entries in the guest books, discussion forums and mailing lists created by the author. Only the provider of the page to which reference was made shall be liable for illegal, incorrect or incomplete contents and notably for damage resulting from the use of or failure to use such information provided, but not the person who merely refers to the publication in question via links.

3. Copyright

In all publications, the author strives either to observe the copyright of the graphics, audio and video clips and texts used, to use graphic art, audio and video clips and texts created by himself or to resort to license-free graphic art, audio and video clips and texts. All brands and trademarks mentioned as part of the internet offer and, where applicable, all brands and trademarks protected by third parties are subject without restrictions to the regulations of the currently applicable law on trademarks and related signs, as well as the rights of ownership by the registered owner. The mere fact that a trademark is mentioned must not lead to the conclusion that trademarks are not protected by third-party rights! The copyright for published items created by the author himself remain solely with the author of the pages. Copying or using such graphics, audio and video clips and texts in other electronic or printed publications is prohibited without the express permission of the author.

4. Privacy

Provided that the possibility of entering personal or business details (i.e. e-mail addresses, names, addresses) exists within the internet offer, the disclosure of such data on the part of the user is done on an expressly voluntary basis. Using and paying for all services offered is – in as much as this is technically possible and feasible – also permitted without entering such data and / or anonymously entering data or by using an alias.

5. Legal validity of this disclaimer

This disclaimer is deemed as part of the website from which the user was referred to this page. If parts or individual formulations of this text do not comply with the current legal position, the remainder of the document shall not be affected by this, neither in terms of content nor validity.