Germany is the ninth-most visited country in the world. It is also home to some of the most popular brands and serves as an amalgam of old cities and modern localities. So, whether you want to call Germany from the US for business or reach your loved ones, we have a cost-effective solution.

So, let’s get started without any further ado.

A Step-by-Step Guide on How to Call Germany from the US

1 ) Fully Digitized Phone Network

Entire Germany has a single country code, i.e., +49. This was not the same from the start. Earlier, East Germany used +37, and West Germany was using +49. It was unified to +49 two years after German unification.

Since 1997, Germany has entirely digitized its phone network. This allows increased flexible use of the numbering spaces.

2 ) How to call Germany from the US [To Landlines]

Step 1: Dial the US exit code, i.e., 011.

Step 2: Dial the German country code, i.e., 49.

Step 3: Dial the area code. For example, 341 for Leipzig.

Step 4: Dial the seven-digit phone number.

3 ) How to Call Germany from the US [To Cell Phones]

Calling on one German cell phone number to another while in Germany:

Just dial the number and the area code.

No need to include 049 in the code.

Calling a German mobile number from an international country:

You’ve to start by dialing the German country code and then follow it by the area code. After the area code, you’ve to enter the phone number.

Calling any number from a German phone number while traveling outside of Germany:

Dial Germany phone code +49, followed by the local code, and then the phone number.

Calling from your non-German cell phone number:

Dial the “+49” followed by the country code, area code, and number.

Ignore using any other prefix.

Thus, these are the different guidelines to call into and from Germany, but additional charges are associated with it. Getting an international calling facility on your phone is not enough. In this quest of low-chargeable calling, you can use low-cost business phone numbers for calling Germany from the US.

How to use area codes when calling Germany from the US?

Area code is a two to five-digit code depending on the country that helps to identify a specific telephone service area. Germany has around 30 area codes from Aachen with an area code of 241 to Wuppertal with an area code of 202. The other different area codes of Germany are:

Aachen: 241

Augsburg: 821

Berlin: 30

Bielefeld: 521

Bochum: 234

Bonn: 228

Brandenburg: 3381

Bremen: 421

Chemnitz: 371

Dortmund: 231

Dresden: 351

Duisburg: 203

Dusseldorf: 211

Essen: 201

Frankfurt: 69

Gelsenkirchen: 209

Hamburg: 40

Hannover: 511

Karlsruhe: 721

Koln: 221

Krefeld: 2151

Leipzig: 341

Mannheim: 621

Menz: 33082

Munchen: 89

Munster: 6071

Nurnberg: 911

Stuttgart: 711

Wiesbaden: 611

Wuppertal: 202

Whenever you’re calling Germany from the US, you have to dial the US exit code, followed by the Germany phone code, the area code, and phone number. Thus, it is essential to note the area code of the location you’re calling for your business or personal reasons. It is best to go for the German area codes dictionary to avoid mistakes in dialing the numbers.

Saving numbers in your German cell phone directory

Your interaction with Germany serves you best when you relieve yourself from the dialing process and save the cell phone directory numbers. Thus, you can save the numbers in the following international dialing format:

(Country Code) (Area Code) (Number)

Thus, next time you want to make a call, go to your cell phone directory, and you can do it quickly. You can further add the “+” sign to any phone number using the 0 key on your smartphone’s dial pad.

Dialing a cell phone number in Germany from the US

If you’re looking to dial a cell phone number in Germany, you can use the landline while you’re in the US. You can do so in the following manner:

Enter the US exit code.

You have to dial 011 on your phone to place an international call to Germany.

Enter the German country code, i.e., 49.

Remove the trunk code.

Dial the mobile phone code.

There is no need for trunk code assistance in this process as needed when you’ve to call in Germany from other places. You’ve further to add 1, i.e., the mobile phone code.

Enter the area code.

As discussed earlier, you’ve to choose from the area code of Germany’s location that you wish to call.

Enter the phone number.

Once you’ve done this process in the desired format, you need to press the call button for dialling Germany from the US.

How to Make a Business Call from the US to Germany?

Placing a business call from the US to Germany requires attention, but its duration will take some time. Thus, it is imperative to understand the business calls process to Germany.

The method of calling Germany from the US remains the same. Thus, once you’re clear with the way, it is time to take care of the duration as the entire process is costly. Whether you’re pitching some clients in Germany or inquiring about a business, it is mandatory to consider its cost.

You’ve to be ready with all the specific points of discussion. Make sure that you call the persons on time. According to the German guidelines, the offices are working up to 5 PM from Monday to Thursday and up to 4 PM on Fridays.

Since you can’t compromise the duration of a business call, it becomes necessary to look for the economic means for how to call a german number from the US.

How to Dial a German Number from a U.S. Cell Phone at the Lowest Cost?

Businesses thrive on follow-ups. If you’re located in the US but want to tap German markets, it is mandatory to have an established two-way communication system. Further, nobody wants to have the services from a business that requires dollars for inquiry only.

Hence, many businesses suffer from the incremental costs of calling Germany. With VoIP phone systems, you can give preference to the internet for using calling. Thus, all you need is an established internet connection for staying in touch with your clients.

Further, having a virtual phone number solves the complexity of dialing. You can hire a local area code number that is the same as that of your business location. Customers will attract like never before to your business as they get the assurance of local code numbers.

Thus, both these methods lower the costs of calling to Germany regularly. Reaching an international number is never easy and cheap. Therefore, you can use the different techniques to get on your budget’s positives while making your next critical business call.

When to Call Germany From the US

Whenever you are calling internationally for business purposes, time is of the essence. So knowing the time difference and the working hours of the country you are dialing to is essential to avoid untimely calls and gain optimum results. Talking about the time difference between USA and Germany, Germany is 6 hours ahead of the USA and working hours in Germany start from 8-9 A.M. and normally end at 5-6 P.M.

So when calling German from the US, the effective hours are between 3 A.M. to 12 P.M as this is the time that matches the working hours of Germany.

Why CallHippo?

CallHippo is your one-stop solution for all needs of calling Germany from the US. You can leverage the advantages of virtual phone numbers in case you’re a small business. Further, the call center software services of CallHippo are ideal for your significant business needs.

Reach CallHippo today for the best tailor-cut solutions on international calling. Get connected to Germany from the US in a way less than a dollar only.

Frequently Asked Questions

1 ) What is the Cost of Dialing Germany from the US?

You can dial Germany from the US for as little as $0.038 with Callhippo’s Germany phone number,

2 ) How to Call the US from Germany?

Follow the given instruction to call us from Germany.

First, dial 00, the Germany exit code.

Next, dial 1, the country code for The US.

Then dial the area code.

Finally, dial the phone number (10 digits).

More Resources on How to Call From Other Countries