I find words fascinating. That might be part of why I enjoy learning new languages so much: so many new words! And so many new ways of looking at the same words; that is to say, different words with the same meaning.

As I detailed in another one of my comics, I felt like some sort of etymological gumshoe after cracking the case of why in German the word for “french fries” is pommes, which is not a German word – it’s the French word for “apples,” but pronounced “pum-ess.” Why would that be? It wasn’t until I learned more of both German and French that it finally clicked (if you’re competent in those languages as well, it might strike you as a no-brainer, but to me it was a revelation). Language shifts and warps itself in amazing ways to better serve its users.

German is particularly fun to come at with an outsider’s perspective. To Germans, they’ve never thought twice about the fact that Krankenhaus is just “sick” (krank) inside a house (Haus). “Sick house!” I love it. Who but the Germans could come up with a more practical, no-nonsense approach to their vocabulary? Of course, we’ve got “lawn mower” and “vacuum cleaner”, but in German it goes far beyond household appliances – Glühbirne (“lightbulb”) literally translates to “glowing pear,” Fahrrad (“bicycle”) means “go-wheel,” unsterblichkeit (“immortality”) is literally “un-dying-able-ness,” and my personal favorite, Stinktier, which translates to “stinky animal,” is the German word for “skunk.”

At this point, some among you might protest, and rightly so. “Now hang on,” you’re saying. “‘Immortality’ is etymologically no different from unsterblichkeit if you look at the Latin root, immortalis, which literally means ‘death-less.’ Same with ‘dictionary’ or ‘airplane’ from your comic. They’re just as obvious, if you take it apart. Why pick on the Germans?”

Well, from an English-mother-language perspective, that’s just it. We don’t say “death-less” to mean “immortality,” where the Germans would be hard pressed to think of a clearer way to express “un-dying-able-ness” than unsterblichkeit. English borrows from its ancestry, while German just lays it all out there on the table, no frills about it. And I sympathize! With apologies to the Belgians and Canadians, look at French, where the simple “potato” becomes a glorified, overly poetic “apple of the earth” (pomme de terre).

Half of English’s ancestry comes from German too, of course. We’ve stolen our fair share of words with forehead-slappingly obvious translations: Schadenfreude (“joy from harm”), Zeitgeist (“spirit of time”), Kindergarten (“children’s garden”), Doppelgänger (“double-goer”), etc. And that’s just my point – English doesn’t have its own words for these things, so it borrows from other languages, putting an extra layer between us and the word’s origin. The etymology is hidden to us, where it wouldn’t be to Germans or the French.

My Italian wife was baffled to hear about spelling bees in the USA – in Italian, words are spelled exactly as they sound and vice versa, so there’d be no earthly reason to hold a competition just to see who can spell better. Similarly, it could be that in languages such as German or French, etymology is in fact a completely unrewarding study, as uncovering the origin of most words is a simple matter of popping off the prefixes and suffixes and seeing what remains behind. Only in English, the language cobbled together from every other language, would we need to make a hobby of it. (German/French etymologists among the readership, feel free to pipe up and prove me wrong!)

Hang on, I think we’ve got something here: etymology bees! Kids must correctly guess the root and meaning of obscure English words! “Bamboozle”, anyone?

I know you all speak an impressive variety of tongues. Any etymological curiosities from your own languages that you can throw our way?