The Smiling Lieutenant

Hymyilevä luutnantti / Leende löjtnanten. US (c) 1931 Paramount. P+D: Ernst Lubitsch. SC: Ernest Vajda, Samson Raphaelson - based on the operetta Ein Walzertraum (1907) composed by Oscar Straus, with the libretto by Leopold Jacobson and Felix Dörmann (= Felix Biedermann) - and a story in the book Buch der Abenteuer by Hans Müller (= Hans Lothar). DP: George Folsey - early sound aperture 1:1,2. M: Oscar Straus. MD: Adolph Deutsch.

"Toujours l'Amour in the Army", music by Oscar Straus, lyrics by Clifford Grey, sung by Maurice Chevalier twice

"While Hearts Are Singing", music by Oscar Straus, lyrics by Clifford Grey, played on piano by Maurice Chevalier and sung by Claudette Colbert

"Breakfast Table Love", music by Oscar Straus, lyrics by Clifford Grey, sung by Maurice Chevalier and Claudette Colbert

"One More Hour of Love", music by Oscar Straus, lyrics by Clifford Grey, sung by Maurice Chevalier

"Kaiserlied (Austrian National Anthem 1795-1918)", music by Joseph Haydn, lyrics by Lorenz Leopold Haschka,

"Ach Du lieber Flausenthurm", sung a cappella by Maurice Chevalier to the tune of the 18th century German folksong "Ach Du lieber Augustine"

"Jazz Up Your Lingerie", music by Oscar Straus, lyrics by Clifford Grey, played on piano by Claudette Colbert and Miriam Hopkins and sung by both; reprised on piano by Hopkins [soundtrack listing courtesy IMDB]

Starring Maurice Chevalier (Niki), Claudette Colbert (Franzi), Miriam Hopkins (Princess Anna), Charles Ruggles (Max), George Barbier (King Adolf XV). 89 min. Restored print from UCLA viewed at Helsinki, Cinema Orion, 25 September, 2008. - For the first time I saw a good film print of this. The print is excellent (both sound and image), better than the ones seen of The Love Parade and Monte Carlo. - The synchronization of sound and image is deliciously humoristic, the small details as charming as the gags. - Lubitsch's specialty is that he is not only making an operetta film but also having fun with the whole operetta phenomenon. Somehow he transforms this into a vehicle of satire. The subjects of his satire include vanity and pretension. At the bottom there is great tenderness. We like his characters. We laugh with them. - The slight story starts with a misunderstanding. Maurice Chevalier is smiling at his sweetheart, the leader of the band Viennese Swallows (Claudette Colbert), but the insecure princess (Miriam Hopkins) thinks he is smiling at her. It all leads to marriage, unhappy at first, but Claudette gives Miriam a few sexy tips. At last, the checkers board is thrown on the bed.