"Ready set go!" Opportunities abound for students and educators both, even in relation to GIS. The chance to match a set of criteria defined by someone else is excellent practice for all the years ahead. Understand what someone seeks, think creatively, and show what you can do. And for all the GeoMentors out there, this is even a chance for you to shine, with encouragement, instruction, and supportive critique.

Esri's ArcGIS Online Competition for US High School and Middle School students is underway. Work singly or in pairs, students investigate and report on a topic of interest within the state borders, and present findings as a web app or Story Map. Students submit their entries to the school, the school submits its top five to the state, and the state chooses 5-HS and 5-MS entries each to receive $100, then submits these to Esri for the next level, with top 1-HS and 1-MS awardees from the nation earning a trip to the Esri User Conference in San Diego.

Esri's Teacher Video Challenge is for US K12 teachers to create a 60-second video of how they work with ArcGIS Online, post it publicly, and create a database entry. Each month, Esri selects one for digging deeper with a richer video, and provides a $500 honorarium.

Even the US Congress is in the act, with the US Congressional App Challenge. This is for US high school and middle school students. While it is a much broader "STEM education" challenge, it is a great opportunity for students to submit an original application using GIS to a panel of reviewers who may be less familiar with, and thus more impressed by, the power of geospatial apps. This has a tight deadline -- Nov.1, 2017 -- but there can be winners within the boundaries of each participating legislator.

It takes courage to explore an opportunity, empathy to see the goals and constraints, dedication to do the work, and humility to propose a solution, on top of the technical skills. But all these traits are highly prized among adults, and take practice to develop, so every attempt brings rewards.

We can all agree, drones are pretty cool. Yet, as the 'ooo's' and 'aahhh's' start to diminish after you pull it out of the box, people start to wonder how it can provide value to your organization.

Just west of LA, is an area called the Cajon Pass and it plays a critical role in Southern California. Not only does a major rail corridor and interstate travel through the pass, but there are some major transmission lines travelling through as well. Just last year (2016), there was a big wildfire (Blue Cut Fire) that ended up burning 37,000 acres. The interstate ended up getting closed, rail was impacted, and the fire burned right under 500 kVa conductor. The fire was incredibly disruptive, but could have been even more so if any of the transmission lines had been taken out.

So, a few of us decided to take a road trip over to a small section of the Cajon Pass that didn't burn during the fire, which would provide a chance to see how vegetation could impact the transmission line in a future fire. Along with monitoring the vegetation, we wanted to accomplish a couple of things:

Conduct tower inspections in the field using Drone2Map

Build out orthomosaics to show the right of way (ROW)

Create point clouds of the transmission towers

Determine where vegetation could threaten the conductor

The goal was also to accomplish all of this with out of the box Esri tools. Recent software releases from Esri now provide customers with the ability to process, analyze, share, and view ortrhomosaics, point clouds, and inspections within core software.

Inspections

The first flight that we conducted was a free flight, to capture some of the detail on the transmission tower. We wanted to see how a drone could be used to get more detail than conducting a ground based visual inspection.

One of the cool things about Drone2Map, is the ability to use it as a field application. After landing the drone, we pulled out the SD card and started a new 'Inspection' project in Drone2Map.

Drone2Map takes a few minutes to pull in all of the imagery, builds out the flights lines, and places all of this over the World Imagery Service provided by Esri. There is also an inspection viewer that opens up to let users see the detail in their photos.

Includes the ability to create mark-up on the photos

From the ground, it would have been impossible to discern whether there were any occupants in the couple of nests that were located on the tower. Using Drone2Map in the field would have been a great way to capture avian protection information.

Ca-Caw!

Imagery

The next flight we conducted, was a grid. We wanted to capture photos shooting straight down at the ground, while flying over the conductor and towers. This would help us build out orthomosaics and some 3D datasets. Drone2Map provides a couple different options for how a user can build out their imagery and also provides a rapid setting so that you can see how your coverage looks while in the field. Rather then running the rapid mode, we ended up processing our imagery back in the office, so that I could build out all of the output options (DTM, DSM, and imagery).

Flight paths, with ArcGIS Online World Imagery

Flight paths with an orthomosaic processed in Drone2Map

While Drone2Map stitches together the images to build orthomosaics, it also builds a point cloud from the imagery, which is used to create the DSM and DTM. While the point cloud is not displayed in Drone2Map, users can take that LAS output and bring it into other applications (ArcGIS Pro).

Point Clouds

From the previous flight, Drone2Map built out an unclassified point cloud which we will use in ArcGIS Pro in a minute. But, we also wanted to conduct a 3rd flight that orbited just the towers, to see what kind of visualization we could build out for the structures.

Orbit flight path

Point cloud from the orbit flight in ArcGIS Pro

I also just want to make sure everyone is clear that this point cloud was not collected via a Lidar scan or with a Lidar sensor, this is built from the imagery that was flown.

Vegetation

Lastly, we wanted to take some of the data that was built out using Drone2Map and use ArcGIS Pro to determine the impact that vegetation could have on the conductor.

By using the orthomosaic that Drone2Map built out, we can use the imagery tools in ArcGIS Pro to segment and classify the imagery. This segmented image can then be used to classify our point cloud. So, now we know where all of the vegetation is...

Then, we can use the 3D Analyst tools in ArcGIS Pro to see what actual vegetation is within a certain distance of our conductor.

Close

While drones are really cool, there are a number of great applications for there use in the utility space. In just one short morning, we were able to conduct field inspections, build orthomosaics, and create 3D data for both visualization and vegetation management.

Recent software releases from Esri now provide customers with the ability to process, analyze, share, and view ortrhomosaics, point clouds, and inspections within core software.

Lastly, all of these outputs can now be shared to the web via ArcGIS Online or Portal! So, any of the point clouds or imagery that you produce can be shared with users across your organization.

Experienced GIS users (even K12 students) often speak in terms of custom projects. This is where GIS helps students be at their most powerful -- digging into a topic of one's choosing, allowing the user to explore, analyze, and customize at will. Tom Baker's blogpost on instructional materials and this Instructional Use of GIS document from Esri's T3G Institute show custom projects at the "high end" of learning activities. But it's tough to start there.

GeoInquiries let teachers and students jump into "core content" through maps. Their primary intent was as intro in situations where educators want quick nuggets and focused guidance. Some educators are going beyond the original purpose of GeoInquiries, enhancing and saving the maps as their own, but that takes some experience.

EarthXplorers was designed as a free, powerful guide along the path toward projects. Built by the Learning Technologies Media Lab at the University of Minnesota, with rich content support from the National Trust for Historic Preservation, this is a "scaffolded guide to learning the GIS project process." Six modules invite users to investigate historical sites and contexts, working with one's ArcGIS Online Organization account along the way. After walking through a carefully crafted activity with rich supports, students are challenged to turn around and apply the same tools and processes on a local project.

The best module for starting out is the "History of Cartography," which gives users interesting background about mapping and essential instruction about the ArcGIS Online environment. After that, users could do any of the other five projects in any order, as appropriate to time and interests: Elkhorn Ranch, Mississippi Delta, James River, Hinchliffe Stadium, and Manhattan Project. Through it all, a teacher management system helps teachers track and review student work. While big screens are always a help with GIS, EarthXplorers can work effectively in a 1024x768 environment like a tablet. (As always with online mapping, adequate bandwidth to handle each computer is a critical resource.)

GIS has unlimited capacity for instruction, but it takes experience to engage in the most powerful ways. Just as one doesn't start pole vaulting at 19 feet, projects require important skills that take time and experience to establish. The resources of EarthXplorers can help educators who want students to step into projects, but would like to provide students "project training wheels" to keep them upright at the beginning.

Esri supported student work in remote sensing by donating ArcGIS software to each member of the winning team of the NASA DEVELOP video presentation contest. NASA DEVELOP is a national program that fosters an interdisciplinary research environment where applied science research projects are conducted under the guidance of NASA and partner science advisors. The program is unique in that young professionals lead research projects that focus on using NASA Earth observations to address community concerns and public policy issues. DEVELOP nurtures future science leaders, and therefore it was a pleasure to support NASA’s efforts in this way and to give students software that will enable them to continue working with GIS and remote sensing data. We have supported the winners with software donations for many years and truly believe in the value of this program. This year, the contest included 138 researchers conducting 30 projects across 12 DEVELOP locations.

The virtual posters, featured on IEEE Earthzine, were scored by a 26-member panel based on content clarity (including community concern, project partner, NASA Earth observations, and products created), along with production quality, and professional communication.

Parts of the video from the winning project team.

The grand prize winner of the DEVELOP VPS video presentation was Say No to the Glow: Using NASA and NOAA’s Suomi NPP Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite to Mod..., by a team of four participants at DEVELOP’s Wise County, Virginia location. Their study focused on this issue: "As more outdoor lighting is installed for safety and development, light pollution has become a growing problem that threatens the quality of life for humans and wildlife. The onset of light pollution in cities and dark sky areas hinders humans from seeing the stars and the Milky Way and has been linked to health disorders in humans and behavioral changes in flora and fauna. Park officials at Grand Teton National Park are concerned about light pollution’s impacts on visitor experience and the environment. Thus, in collaboration with the National Park Service and Wyoming Stargazing, our team created the Skyglow Estimation Toolbox (SET), a Python program that calculates images of artificial sky glow from the vantage point of a viewer on the ground." See the project's highlights in this video.

Mentors and advisors included Dr. L. DeWayne Cecil (NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information, Global Science & Technology), Dr. Kenton Ross (NASA Langley Research Center), and Bob VanGundy (The University of Virginia’s College at Wise).

The People’s Choice Award for the most popular video this summer goes to “Tree Health Time Machine,” conducted by three participants at the NASA Ames Research Center DEVELOP node in Moffett Field, California.

Congratulations to all who participated in the NASA DEVELOP program. By engaging in real-world issues with geospatial technologies, you are all winners!

*Updated 2023

We are continuing to see questions about ArcGIS and high-performance computing (HPC), such as:

I am part of a grant involving HPC – how do I run ArcGIS in HPC?

What specific ArcGIS tools work in HPC environment?

How do I license ArcGIS in a HPC environment?

Where do I go for further questions?

Conceptual Summary

Some of the inquiries we’ve received do not distinguish between multicore computers and HPC. This could stem from general fuzziness about what some people mean by HPC, and how the term has evolved in recent years. Most modern desktop computers, including laptops, are “multicore” – meaning they have more than one CPU (central processing unit).

If there is an environment where multiple computers are connected (and each of these may have multiple cores), then you have a compute cluster or distributed compute environment, which could be run in various infrastructures, commercial cloud being the likely place for such an environment. Traditionally HPC, or a distributed compute environment, is described as multiple computers (hundreds) connected and traditionally application software was specifically written for this compute environment.

A lot of the tools in ArcGIS Pro can take advantage of multicore hardware and parallel processing. Some tools do this automatically, some honor a geoprocessing environment, that allows one to specify how many processors one wants to use. Note that not all ArcGIS Pro tools run parallel processing and these tools do not run across multiple machines, therefore a user would need a large single machine to do a big job.

For a full list of the spatial analysis tools that can utilize parallel processing, please refer to this documentation: ArcGIS Pro Parallel Processing

ArcGIS Pro is desktop software which runs on a Windows platform, but what if you are running a Linux HPC environment?

Deployment Options

The vast majority of HPC environments are Linux based, for which a build for ArcGIS Pro does not exist.

For users who have a Linux HPC, there are 2 options available.

Option 1: Deploy ArcGIS Enterprise

ArcGIS Enterprise and the GeoAnalytics Server and Image Server (Raster Analytics) server roles are designed to run in distributed compute environments and can also run across multiples cores of a single machine. These roles are designed to take advantage of distributed storage (not all on one node/disk) and distributed computation (multiple computers).

With a deployment of ArcGIS Enterprise, users can then deploy any of the additional server roles that suit their analytical needs.

These roles are made available via ArcGIS Enterprise but can be accessed from a desktop application, such as ArcGIS Pro, or from a web browser (such as the Map Viewer). Running analysis tools utilizing these server roles can be much faster since the analysis tools have been optimized for the distributed computation across multiple nodes. Users utilizing these tools do not need to do anything additional (coding or writing an application) to take advantage of their distributed compute environment.

For additional guidance, below is documentation related to various configurations for raster analysis and deep learning:

Configure and deploy raster analytics

Configure ArcGIS Image Server for deep learning raster analytics

Option 2: Deploy ArcGIS Server

If a user is looking for core geoprocessing tools that are part of ArcGIS Pro (the ArcPy python library), these are found within ArcGIS Server.

By installing and licensing ArcGIS Server, users can then programmatically run the ArcPy geoprocessing tools via scripting environments.

Conclusion

With a Windows HPC environment, users have the option of installing ArcGIS Pro, ArcGIS Enterprise, or ArcGIS Server. In a Linux based cluster, ArcGIS Enterprise or ArcGIS Server provide the best options. Secondly, the GeoAnalytics Server and Image Server (Raster Analytics) server roles utilize distributed computing and can run across multiple machines, or multiple cores of a single machine. A base ArcGIS Enterprise deployment would need to be setup, and these additional server roles enabled.

Further questions

As an academic user, please reach out to highered@esri.com with any Education-related questions.

For over 25 years, the Esri Schools Program has created or collaborated on a variety of instructional materials. Perhaps you recognize some of these. Maybe you've even used some of them.

Carl Rogers' Diffusion of Innovations is a theoretical model that describes how ideas (and technologies) can be spread over time in a social system. The innovation, communication channels, time, and a social system are all necessary to spread an idea according to the model. At some point, as an idea continues to diffuse it can reach “critical mass”. People in the social system are described based on their roles as either: innovators, early adopters, early majority, late majority, or laggards. Each group of people have typical actions within the system – from the rate at which they adopt a new technology to how they share that adoption. In this way, each group has strengths and weaknesses that must be planned for. For the interested reader, there are several additional elements (e.g. Moore's Chasm, Maloney's Rule) to be considered in the model; it is worth an extended read.

Imagine this curve representing the population of all U.S. school teachers – and the major groups they might fall into with respect to technology adoption. Historically, our materials have been great at supporting innovative teachers and early adopters of technology. Our materials were great at helping people learn our technology – especially useful for application in project focused learning. Unfortunately, as many of us know, project based learning is not all that commonplace in U.S. schools. It takes time, resources, an experienced educator – and sometimes even runs counter to a school’s standards-based priorities. This tends to relegate project based learning to the realm of innovative teachers.

For this reason, in 2014, we began developing GeoInquiries™ - materials targeting the receptive mainstream (Early Majority) to support the Esri ConnectED Initiative - a part of the Obama White House ConnectED Initiative. Representing nearly a third of the teaching population, the segment's use of GIS quickly surpassed the use of GIS in project focused applications in the classroom.

Mainstream materials are subject-focused and use GIS to help teachers with day-to-day instructional objectives, supporting a range of classroom technologies, pedagogies, and levels of expertise. These materials are free, fast, and open access. To understand how these materials support a segment of the community, rotate the diffusion curve 90 degrees counter-clockwise. In addition to visualizing the mainstream Early Majority, we can also see how Early Adopters and Innovators have commonly used GIS instructionally. (Click the graphic to enlarge.)

While our mainstream solutions, like GeoInquiries and Mapping Our World directly serve the Early Majority of the receptive mainstream in the teaching community, more advanced users, namely the Early Adopters, tend to blend pre-built content with custom classroom activities, while the Innovators tend to work with local and custom projects. Keep in mind, these are generalizations about instructional behavior. They don't describe the whole story of GIS use in classrooms.

Today, we commonly see fifty-thousand web hits a month for these mainstream activities and maps. Moreover, with the release this past summer of three new collections (American Literature, Mathematics, and World History) we now offer mainstream materials for all core disciplinary areas taught in school - with added support in the science and social sciences.

Does it work? We surveyed teachers six months after a short, regional workshop event last year and found that approximately 50% of teachers are teaching completely from or blended with pre-built materials like GeoInquiries. A smaller group of Innovators (~18%) continues to blaze forward with customized curricula and local projects and other adaptations. Ideally, we'd love to see everyone teaching around local project work, but in the meantime, a significant body of educators is now teaching with GIS in the standards-based, mainstream classroom.