The glitter in the ESRI Caf? Saturday wasn’t just the panoramic window walls, it was also the colorfully dressed guests and the gaudy necklaces they wore as they sat at brightly colored tables around the balloon-bedecked room.

The colorful balloons hung near the ceiling and festive candles and glitter adorned the tables for Sunrise Rotary’s first Crab and Jazz Dinner and Beer Tasting, “A night of Mardi Gras Festivities.”

It won’t be their last, said Cheryl Evans, one of the coordinators of the event.

Proceeds from the evening will support projects for children and youth both locally and internationally. They include high school and junior college scholarships, Read for Life, underprivileged children’s Christmas party, Mexican orphanage projects, Quarters for Kenya sanctuary support and local youth AIDS awareness, Quarter Notes for Kenya music awards, Rotary Youth Leadership Awards, Rotary district youth speech contest, Middle school students of the month and Wheelchair Foundation.

The evening began with a tour of ESRI, the global information system (GIS) company campus on New York Street where the cafe is located. A brief introduction to ESRI was given by Lou Nelson, a former Redlands police chief now in charge of the ESRI Industry Solutions Department. He explained the facility is the “world’s largest provider of geographic information systems.”

Begun in 1969, it has grown to include about 1,700 employees on the Redlands campus and totals about 4,000 worldwide. Additionally, that day ESRI had held a job fair seeking some 500 more people to join the firm.

Nelson said ESRI built the first digital map of the world. It now builds maps and provides information for fire and police departments, schools, communities, cities, counties, states and governments throughout the world.

Maria Jordan of ESRI took the Sunrise Rotary guests around the campus, explaining the work that takes place in each building. She said the firm, which began with an investment of $1,500, now employs 75 PhDs in Redlands, has 10 regional offices across the United States and 80 distributors worldwide.

Returning to the cafe, guests sampled beer varieties and voted for their favorites, lined up for a gourmet crab meal produced by the ESRI Cafe staff and listened to the music of popular group the Zanja 8, a student jazz ensemble.

A new addition to the Zanja 8 was vocalist Heather Baguyo, 18, of Redlands High School. Band members (which can vary from eight to 10 students) include Ben Davis, 14, Redlands High School, guitar; Sheena Dreher, 16, Redlands East Valley High School, trumpet,; Garett Walker, 16, RHS, alto sax; Paige Caldwell, 16, REV, trombone; Alex Perez, 16, REV, drums; Jared Lopez, 14, RHS, guitar; Bryan Wong, 18, REV, tenor sax; Myles Davis, 13, REV, clarinet, flute and vibes; and Daniel Reasoner, 18, RHS, bass. Tina Caldwell, Redlands Unified School District music specialist, directs the band.

Guests also browsed the silent auction items, the top prize of which was a seven-to-eight-day Mexican cruise. The surprised winner of the reverse drawing (the last ticket drawn is the winner) was none other than Carolyn Kelsey, president of the club. And while she was surprised to be the winner, she said “I’m going to enjoy it.”

Among the many other prizes were plumbing for a year, a dinner in a wine cellar, a tour of Redlands by Curtiss Allen, Sr. in his vintage vehicle, a facial and more.

Evans said more than $10,000 was raised by the event, ensuring its continuance.

Among those enjoying the evening was John Miechowicz of Pomona, a Rotarian with membership in Anaheim. He was joined later in the evening by his son, also named John Miechowicz. The latter Miechowicz said he had been a barbecue chef earlier that day, feeding 25 to 30 participants and spectators of the Redlands Bicycle Classic at the home of George Barich. He said the whole day was “so much fun.”

Brian Gano won the beer-tasting event with two of his beers. His American Pale Ale came in first with his Nut Brown home brew second. Allen, Redlands bandmaster, spread the word about the wins because Gano is his son-in-law.

John Hoghuag and Bryan Reid shared the duties of master of ceremonies. Reid was able to easily capture the attention of diners by blowing his herald’s trumpet. He explained the musical instrument was one he had purchased off eBay. It was identical to the one he had used when he participated in the 1984 Olympics, and which he had regretted not buying when it was offered then. Incidentally, that’s where he met his wife, he said. She was part of the entertainment group for the games.

The hardworking committee for the evening included chairman James Petty; Cheryl Evans, who handled the silent auction; Sharon Guggisberg, tickets; Kelly Bowden, decorations; Bryan Reid, Curtiss Allen Sr., Leon Fiske, Chris Johnson and Tom Beyer.

Donors included Citrograph Printing; Montecito Mortuary, KOLA, Bevmo, Morebeer, ESRI, Uncle Howie Pizza; Brian Gano, Jennifer and Christopher of Evans & Co.; Fred Coop Coin Gallery, Redlands Country Club, Krikorian Theater, Gallager Jeweler and Finishing Touch, Marisa’s Skin Care at Evans and Co., Pleasure Point Marina, Jim Pettey MD, Perfect Day Vineyard, Las Fuentes, El Torito, Salon del Sol, Judy Lister at Evans and Co., Alta Dena Drive Thru Dairy, the Redlands Daily Facts, Somerford Place, Redlands Our Town News, Plumbtastic Plumbing, Heather Kirkhart at Evans and Co., Applebee’s, Party Plus, Fred Ford Wood and Miracle Springs Spa & Resort.

Bobbe Monk is a freelance writer who lives in Yucaipa.