ESRI Building Q, Corporate Headquarters

Redlands, CA

60,000 SF

R.M. Byrd and Associates has completed over 250,000 SF of office space for ESRI in recent years. The new corporate headquarters, designed by world renowned Henrik Hvidt, incorporated cast in place concrete walls and steel moment frame. The full height interior atrium utilized suspended bridges, stairways, and Pilkington glass for a truly dynamic space.

Cucamonga Valley Water District Frontier Project

Rancho Cucamonga, CA

14,000 SF

LEED platinum certified demonstration building constructed using insulating concrete form (ICF) walls with steel framing. Due to the sustainability and LEED requirements for the building, high percentages of recycled materials were designed for and incorporated into the specifications. Building challenges including sloped cast in place concrete walls, spiral sloping concrete stairs and a 30’ tall curves glass storefront system required a high level of coordination between the design disciplines and contractor throughout the design and construction phases. Complex 3-D structural computer models were used to perform the lateral analysis of this very unique building.

O.H. Kruse Grain and Milling

Colton, CA

New 5 story concrete and masonry structure designed for the delivery, storage, milling, packaging and shipping of grain and flour. Highly complex milling processes required close coordination of multiple floor openings. Due to liquefaction concerns, the foundation system utilized precast, prestress driven concrete piles.

Westin Desert Willow Resort

Palm Desert, CA

Residential: 410,000 SF

Clubhouse: 40,000 SF

The project consists of 304 residential units organized in various two and three story configurations. The clubhouse was constructed of structural steel braced frame, with metal stud walls. The clubhouse was constructed over subterranean parking. Due to extremely detailed exterior spaces, the system used a two slab concept, allowing the architect to simply integrate sloping sitework, planters and water proofing detailing.

Rubidoux Library

Rubidoux, CA

39,500 SF

One and two story library facility with community meeting space. Highly detailed exterior trellis structures and Architectural features required precise, creative, and aesthetic detailing for exposed structural components. Primary structural system consists of wood framing with a lateral system of plywood shearwall.

Santa Monica Post Office

Santa Monica, CA

133,000 SF

Post Office facility on a high density urban site consisting of three stories of parking with a two story work room and administrative facility. The parking structure was constructed of post tensioned concrete slab and beam, concrete cast in place shear walls, with a foundation of driven prestress concrete piles. The workroom facility was constructed of steel frame with composite metal deck. This project utilized the Design-Build delivery method.

Anaheim Post Office

Anaheim, CA

9,000 SF

Located in the redevelopment area of Anaheim, this highly detailed facility was a true Architectural gem, suited to the local environment. Exposed structural detailing required intensive coordination with all disciplines to meet the goal of the design team. The structural system consisted of a combination of steel brace and moment frames.

Avalon City Hall

Avalon, Catalina Island, CA

9,000 SF

A compact site and materials availability due to a remote location produced unique challenges. The used of wood frame with exposed Glulam construction was highly cost effective and detailed with simplicity in mind. This very successful project utilized plywood shearwalls for the lateral system.

Santa Clarita Sports Complex

Due to durable finishes requirements, extensive use of exposed concrete masonry was utilized for this aquatics facility. Creative detailing was applied to the exposed trellis structures and shade elements. Coordination of complex piping, overflow, and surge pits was accomplished with an early involvement approach embraced by the design team.

Fontana Senior Center

Fontana, CA

40,000 SF

Two story senior and community center constructed of wood frame with integration of plywood shearwall and steel concentric braced frame lateral system. Challenges created by high volume interior spaces were mitigated by effective and efficient detailing of ties and shear transfer mechanisms.

Cottonwood Christian Center

Los Alamitos, CA

166,000 SF

Multi-building campus consisting of an interim sanctuary, Sr. High ministry building, and children’s ministry facility. Structural system utilized concrete tilt up construction, steel truss roof structure. Due to liquefaction potential, the foundation was constructed of Auger Drilled Displacement Piles, a cost effective mitigation technique. Highly detailed facade elements required extensive coordination with Architectural detailing.

Abundant Living Church

Rancho Cucamonga, CA

160,000 SF

A campus composed of nine one and two story buildings, including the sanctuary which incorporated a 200 foot clear span for a truly dynamic interior volume. Construction consisted of concrete tilt-up panel bearing and shear walls, composite metal deck floors, and steel bar joist roof trusses.

Bonita USD Performing Arts Facility

San Dimas, CA

21,030 SF

700 seat performing arts facility with a construction budget of $23 million. Project was the recipient of the Pacific Coast Builders Conference, Gold Nugget Grand Award of Honor; Los Angeles Business Council, Architectural Award of Excellence; CASH – AIA/California Council, Leroy F. Greene Design Award of Excellence; Learning by Design, Outstanding Project Award; and American School & University, Architectural Portfolio, Outstanding Design

Mt. San Antonio College Design Technology Center

Walnut, CA

32,500 SF

R.M. Byrd and Associates has extensive experience with Mt. San Antonio College, completing the Health Careers Center, English as a Second Language Classroom, new Data Center, and he Design Technology Center, a 33,000 SF two story facility. A special concentric braced frame system was selected to assist in lateral drift reduction required due to the full height atrium at the center of the building. Architecturally desirable thin overhangs required specific and well integrated detailing.

Azusa Pacific University Duke Academic Complex

Azusa, CA

90,000 SF

Complete modernization and remodel of existing warehouse facility to change the use to institutional classroom, while altering the exterior elevations to complement the surrounding campus. Seismic retrofit of existing building components, incorporation of new curved concrete cast in place facade, and integration of new mechanical systems required creative approaches to structural challenges.

Escondido Police Facility

Escondido, CA

120,000 SF

Construction sequencing and time was an important factor on this project. The owner, wishing durable, non penetrable exterior surfaces, desired concrete masonry. Construction sequencing related to steel erection and masonry bearing wall construction was prohibitive, so our firm introduced an interior frame concept that would permit steel erection and masonry to be non reliant. Threaded wall dowels in lieu of permanently grouted dowels at each floor proved to be a construction advantage, and schedules were met. This project utilized an Owner, CM, multi-prime delivery method. This facility was designed to essential services standards.

Highland Police Facility

Highland, CA

33,000 SF

Two story police facility and neighboring storage building constructed of concrete masonry bearing and shear walls. Two story entry element utilizes suspended ballistic panels integrated into metal stud framing. Sound mitigation was achieved by utilizing concrete on composite metal deck. This facility was designed to essential services standards.

San Marcos Fire Station

San Marcos, CA

12,000 SF

Concrete masonry construction for the apparatus bay, and wood framing for the two story living and support facilities was selected based on versatility and economics. This highly efficient structure, constructed on time and well within budget, was designed to essential services standards. Fire stations include multi-discipline coordination efforts due to the garage, dormitory, living, training, and recreation uses.

San Marcos Fire Training Facility

San Marcos, CA

40,000 SF

Five story fire training tower constructed of cast in place concrete floors and concrete masonry bearing and shearwall construction. A subterranean cistern was utilized to collect and reuse water from training exercises. The single story training and administration structure was constructed of masonry bearing wall and wood framed roof. These facilities were designed to essential services standards.

LAX Fire Station

Los Angeles World Airports

Los Angeles International Airport

28,000 SF

Fire station facility consisting of a seven bay apparatus hanger and a contiguous two-story support facility constructed of masonry walls with steel framing. Designed to essential services standards and constructed under an accelerated schedule, coordination and cooperation with the contractor was essential to delivering the completed building on time to the client.

Burbank Entertainment Village/AMC Theater

AMC Theatres

Burbank, CA

244,000 SF

High density urban site required special considerations such as shoring adjacent to existing structures to accommodate two levels of subterranean parking, complex stadium theater layout over one additional above grade parking level, integrated retail, and high visibility graphics and display panels. The parking garage was constructed of post tensioned cast in place concrete, the theater and engaged retail constructed of steel and concrete over metal deck, with special concentric braced frame lateral system.

Downtown Disney AMC Theater

Anaheim, CA.

66,000 SF

R.M. Byrd and Associates was one of the pioneers of stadium seating. This facility at Downtown Disney was no exception, and utilized our proven methodologies, for a successful integration into a high profile site. The steel framed courtyard entry dome structure, which was a collaborative effort between the Architect and Structural Engineer, has become an icon for the project. The structure was published in Modern Steel Construction soon after completion.

Artificial Trees

Steel Art Trees that provide an arboreal environment for the enjoyment of the patrons at a variety of venues including libraries, museums, medical offices, casinos and other themed environments. The steel structure of the tree can be designed as a freestanding cantilevered structure or around one of the building columns and stand as tall as 50 feet with canopies also reaching as far as 50 feet in diameter.

Maywood Pedestrian Bridge

Maywood, CA

New 100-foot span pedestrian bridge, designed with an open bay Vierendeel Truss for high visibility and a light and airy appearance. End abutments and elevator towers of Concrete Masonry on drilled pile foundations. The bridge was designed and fabricated as a single unit, and shipped to the site for overnight erection.