Redlands Symphony music director Jon Robertson turned on the television Tuesday to catch up on the news.

“That’s when I saw there was a 7-point earthquake in Port-au-Prince (Haiti),” he said.

Florence Bellande-Robertson, Robertson’s wife, was at their house in the mountains when the earthquake hit. One of their daughters, Nadege Robertson-Tippenhauer, lives down the street.

“I tried to call, everything was dead,” said Robertson, who lives in Delray Beach, Fla., and comes to Redlands to conduct the symphony. He had also been in Haiti over the holidays.

“I was frantic but there’s nothing you can do,” said Robertson, whose daughters Berangere Robertson-Tucker and Sabine Robertson-Phillips live in Redlands.

“It was like I was numb – there was a resignation, another kind of franticness,” Robertson said. “This was just a tremendous blow.”

His wife contacted him Tuesday night through a friend’s Florida landline. She and their family in Haiti were fine, and their home, her family’s estate, was not damaged, Robertson said.

The international Red Cross on Thursday estimated up to 50,000 people were killed in the earthquake.

Now is almost the worst of it, he said.

“I spoke with my wife this morning,” he said Thursday afternoon by phone from Florida. “It’s the next phase that’s beginning to come to light with the serious health problems because there are dead bodies around, of course there will be a water problem, a food shortage.”

And there are the survivors, especially the children.

“The children are traumatized because of the aftershocks – that’s really very frightening for them,” he said.

The Robertsons have a foundation, Foundation Hope for Haiti, that works with orphanages and health organizations. The foundation is accepting donations, Robertson said.

“This is going to take massive effort from around the world,” he said.

He said his wife told him images on CNN and other news channels come no where near to doing the disaster justice.

“There are people who have been around the world, catastrophe after catastrophe, and they’ve said they’ve never seen anything like this,” Robertson said.

There are currently no commercial flights allowed in or out of Haiti, so there is no telling when Robertson’s will get home, he said.

The difference between the situation in Haiti and such a disaster in the United States is there is no disaster response infrastructure in Haiti, he said.

“So these kinds of situations are just beyond our understanding,” he said.

The problem now is logistics and transportation.

“A road I know very well completely buckled – one can be five feet high, another like a ditch,” he said.

To that end, Redlands’ largest company is also offering assistance to agencies responding to the quake.

Environmental Research Systems Institute’s Web site has a link to its disaster response services. ESRI posted earthquake maps and resources for organizations.

“One of the No. 1 things is to understand what you lost and what you still have,” said former Redlands Police Chief Lew Nelson, now law enforcement manager and industry solutions department manager for ESRI.

“We’re finding those data sets external to Haiti – hospitals, food, ports – and combining that with updated information to determine what’s there and what’s not, so people can actually map that and say, `do they have any hospitals left?’ ” Nelson said.

ESRI is also helping clients and other agencies like the United Nations, FEMA and nonprofits responding to the quake with software, licensing, and data as needed, Nelson said.

ESRI and its partners are also posting data for responders on ESRI’s Internet data center, GIS Online, “so people can utilize that data in responding and search and rescue for people affected in Haiti,” Nelson said.

In the past, including during recent wildfires, ESRI has put staff on the ground. Right now the focus is search and rescue, survival necessities and removal of those who did not survive, Nelson said.

“There’s a lot of people trying to move a lot of assets to help Haiti out and doing what we can to support them,” he said.

The goal is to give agencies information so they can conduct the most intelligent response possible, he said.

“We’re doing whatever takes to provide the needs of these folks – they’re in dire circumstances,” he said.

ESRI volunteered its staff and resources during local and state wildfires and after hurricanes, including Katrina and Rita.

Other local help

Redlands Police Officer Rodney Walters is a volunteer with the federal Region Disaster Mortuary Operational Response Team. He was deployed to help recover bodies in the aftermath of a tsunami that hit the Samoas in September and worked with recovery teams in Louisiana in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina.

Because his group was recently deployed and is one of the farthest from Haiti, they have not yet been called, according to Redlands city spokesman Carl Baker.

“If the death toll is as high as is being estimated there’s a good chance he will be deployed,” Baker wrote in an e-mail.

Loma Linda University is also responding to the earthquake.

The Loma Linda University School of Medicine Class of 2010 adopted the Hopital Adventiste d’Haiti in Port-au-Prince, a 70-bed facility built in 1978. The hospital is functional and serving as a clinical center for the country, according to Loma Linda University. Loma Linda University has established a fund to facilitate donations to the hospital.

Information on local help for Haiti

Jon Robertson and Florence Bellande-Robertson’s Foundation Hope for Haiti, Inc.: P.O. Box 212673, Royal Palm Beach, FL 33421; 786-245-7232; www.foundationhopeforhaiti.org

ESRI: Go to www.esri.com and click on “Disaster Response and Assistance” or contact ESRI’s Disaster Help Coordination Team at disaster_help@esri.com

Loma Linda University has established a fund to facilitate donations to the Hopital Adventiste d’Haiti, a main clinic site. Donations may be made at www.llu.edu, by calling (909) 558-5010 or mailing checks to Loma Linda University – Haiti Earthquake, Office of Philanthropy, 24519 Redlands Blvd., Suite A, Loma Linda, CA 92354.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.