Bangalore, India - March 2, 2010:

Sybase Software (India) Pvt. Ltd. (“Sybase India”), the Indian subsidiary of Sybase, Inc. (NYSE: SY), an industry leader in enterprise and mobile software and Wipro Infotech, the India and Middle East IT Business of Wipro Ltd and a leading provider of IT and business transformation services, today announced a partnership to extend SAP applications to a variety of mobile device types. With these solutions, SAP customers will be able to securely access their business-critical enterprise applications while on the move.

Sybase and SAP are jointly delivering co-developed solutions for extending SAP CRM and SAP Business Suite to mobile devices. SAP customers will now be able to leverage Wipro’s SAP implementation skills to customize these Sybase® Mobile Solutions for SAP, in addition to developing custom mobile applications for other SAP modules such as SRM SCM, PLM, etc. that will be directed towards areas like mobile services, mobile sales, time and travel approvals, workflows, warehouse management, asset management, etc. Wipro’s solutions will be based on Sybase® Unwired Platform (SUP), a mobile enterprise application platform that provides systems integrators, independent software vendors, and enterprise developers with the ability to easily develop, deploy and manage mobile applications. This comprehensive, yet flexible mobility infrastructure will enable enterprises to implement, manage and expand their mobile computing initiatives in a coherent, streamlined and cost-effective manner. Mobile solutions created using the Unwired Platform enable mobile workers to access business critical data anytime, from anywhere, leading to a positive impact on productivity and revenue.

Mr. Sunil Jose, Managing Director, India & Sub-continent, Sybase Software (India) Pvt. Ltd. said, “The Sybase & Wipro partnership will offer Wipro’s SAP customers', applications on the go. SUP supports a wide variety of popular mobile platforms. This enables true mobility for a large section of employees and not just top or middle management. Through this, SAP’s customers' will be able to create an information edge by optimizing and enhancing the infrastructure they already own, linking valuable data resources in place, and securely delivering information anytime, anywhere.”

Commenting on the partnership, Sairaman Jagannathan, Vice President, Business Solutions Division, Wipro said, "Building on our SAP partnership, this partnership with Sybase demonstrates a strong synergy between our companies as we share a common goal of providing businesses easy access to valuable information contained within enterprise applications. As Sybase's implementation partner, we will bring in tight integration with a wide range of mobile environments to ensure secure and real-time access to information. Wipro chose Sybase as a strategic partner based on the strength of its mobile enterprise application platform, rich expertise and proven leadership in the enterprise mobility space."

As part of this joint initiative, Wipro will set up a Center of Excellence at its research Center, Sangam, in Bangalore, where customers will be able to experience the various mobile applications developed by Wipro to mobilize SAP. This Centre of Excellence will also be used to develop newer industry frameworks that can be used across different customer verticals.

Mr. Sunil Jose further added, “Sybase is in the best position to support the movement away from siloed mobile applications to the mass adoption of mobility across the entire enterprise. With the growing number of end users and device types to the demand for real time access to information, our enterprise mobility platform is unrivaled in the industry. We believe our position in Gartner’s leader quadrant is a further validation of the significant advancements made to our Sybase® Unwired Platform and success in building out our partnership ecosystem”.

Recently, Gartner, Inc. positioned Sybase in the Leaders quadrant in its Magic Quadrant for Mobile Enterprise Application Platforms (MEAP) report, authored by William Clark and Michael King (December 2009). “We believe that more than 95% of organizations will be choosing MEAP or packaged mobile application vendors as their primary mobile development platforms through 2012,” states the Gartner report. “From 2010 through 2013, the number of enterprises choosing multichannel MEAP vendors will rise 10% annually.”

In Related News

SAP AG and Sybase today announced today announced two new solutions for mobile workers to carry out key business and customer relationship management (CRM) processes via iPhone and Windows Mobile. Built on the industry-leading Sybase® Unwired Platform, the mobile solutions extend the capabilities of SAP® Business Suite applications, including SAP® Customer Relationship Management (SAP CRM), and also can be customized to tap into a variety of back-end data sources, including databases, Web services, files and any enterprise application that leverages service-oriented architecture (SOA). The announcement was made at the CeBIT trade fair, being held in Hannover, Germany, March 2-6.

Sybase Unwired Platform

Sybase Unwired Platform leverages the vast experience Sybase has in delivering mobility to hundreds of thousands of customers and users over the last 20 years. The Unwired Platform addresses the challenge of creating and managing multiple mobile applications that securely connect a variety of heterogeneous back-end data sources to all major device types. As the enterprise landscape becomes increasingly complex, Sybase Unwired Platform enables enterprises to embrace mobility across the entire organization through the use of a consistent, but highly adaptable, development platform.

About the Magic Quadrant

The Gartner Magic Quadrant is copyrighted 2009 by Gartner, Inc., and is reused with permission. The Magic Quadrant is a graphical representation of a marketplace at and for a specific time period. It depicts Gartner’s analysis of how certain vendors measure against criteria for that marketplace, as defined by Gartner. Gartner does not endorse any vendor, product or service depicted in the Magic Quadrant, and does not advise technology users to select only those vendors placed in the “Leaders” quadrant. The Magic Quadrant is intended solely as a research tool, and is not meant to be a specific guide to action. Gartner disclaims all warranties, express or implied, with respect to this research, including any warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose.

About Wipro Infotech

Wipro Infotech, a division of the US$5 billion Wipro Limited, provides enterprise customers with high value Information Technology Products, Software Services, Solutions and Consulting Services in India and the Middle East. Headquartered at Bangalore, Wipro Infotech serves customers in India through a network of 22 offices and 170 service locations across the country. It also has regional offices across the Middle East serving the region.

For more information, please visit our websites at

www.wipro.com

www.wiprocorporate.com

www.wipro.in

About Wipro Ltd

Wipro Limited provides comprehensive IT solutions and services, including systems integration, information systems outsourcing, IT enabled services, package implementation, software application development and maintenance, and research and development services to corporations globally. Wipro Limited is the first PCMM Level 5 and SEI CMM Level 5 certified IT Services Company globally. In the Indian market, Wipro is a leader in providing IT solutions and services for the corporate segment in India offering system integration, network integration, software solutions and IT services. In the Asia Pacific and Middle East markets, Wipro provides IT solutions and services for global corporations. Wipro also has profitable presence in niche market segments of consumer products and lighting. Wipro's ADSs are listed on the New York Stock Exchange, and its equity shares are listed in India on the Stock Exchange - Mumbai, and the National Stock Exchange.

For more information, please visit our websites at

www.wipro.com

www.wiprocorporate.com

www.wipro.in

Wipro's forward looking and cautionary statements

Certain statements in this release concerning our future growth prospects and our ability to successfully complete and integrate potential acquisitions are forward looking statements, which involve a number of risks, and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in such forward looking statements. The risks and uncertainties relating to these statements include, but are not limited to, risks and uncertainties regarding our ability to integrate and manage acquired IT professionals, our ability to integrate acquired assets in a cost effective and timely manner, fluctuations in earnings, our ability to manage growth, intense competition in IT services including those factors which may affect our cost advantage, wage increases in India, our ability to attract and retain highly skilled professionals, time and cost overruns on fixed-price, fixed-time frame contracts, client concentration, restrictions on immigration, our ability to manage our international operations, reduced demand for technology in our key focus areas, disruptions in telecommunication networks, liability for damages on our service contracts, the success of the companies in which Wipro has made strategic investments, withdrawal of fiscal governmental incentives, political instability, legal restrictions on raising capital or acquiring companies outside India, unauthorized use of our intellectual property and general economic conditions affecting our industry. Additional risks that could affect our future operating results are more fully described in our filings with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission. These filings are available at www.sec.gov. Wipro may, from time to time, make additional written and oral forward looking statements, including statements contained in the company's filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission and our reports to shareholders. Wipro does not undertake to update any forward-looking statement that may be made from time to time by or on behalf of the company.

About Sybase, Inc. and Sybase Software (India) Private Limited

Sybase is an industry leader in delivering enterprise and mobile software to manage, analyze and mobilize information. We are recognized globally as a performance leader, proven in the most data-intensive industries and across all major systems, networks and devices. Our information management, analytics and enterprise mobility solutions have powered the world’s most mission-critical systems in financial services, telecommunications, manufacturing and government.

For more information, visit http://www.sybase.com.

Sybase is a registered trademark of Sybase, Inc. or its subsidiaries. All other company and product names mentioned may be trademarks of the respective companies with which they are associated.

Special Note: Statements concerning Sybase's future growth, prospects and new product releases are, by nature, forward-looking statements that involve a number of uncertainties and risks, and cannot be guaranteed. The words "anticipate," "believe," "estimate," "expect," "intend," "will" and similar expressions relating to Sybase and its management may identify forward-looking statements. Such statements are intended to reflect Sybase's current views with respect to future events and may ultimately prove to be incorrect or false. Factors that could cause actual events or results to differ materially include shifts in customer demand, rapid technology changes, competitive factors and unanticipated delays in scheduled product availability. These and other risks are detailed from time to time in Sybase's Securities and Exchange Commission filings, including, but not limited to, its annual report on Form 10-K and its quarterly reports on Form 10-Q (copies of which can be viewed on Sybase's Web site).

PR Contacts

Sybase Inc

Cynanda Noronha

Pink & White Consulting PR

cynandan@pinkandwhiteconsulting.com

Tel no: +91 22 24450900/ 01/ 05

http://www.pinkandwhiteconsulting.com

Wipro Infotech

Purnima Burman

K2 Communications Pvt Ltd

Mobile: +91-9900512025

mail: purnima.burman@wipro.com