Sybase has a number of well-regarded products. That's why experts are concerned about the disposition of its best-of-breed DM assets.

In retrospect, SAP AG's acquisition of Sybase Inc. seems like a no-brainer, even at a reported $6 billion purchase price.

As industry veteran Mark Madsen puts it, "If I were buying into this market, I'd buy Sybase too." If nothing else, says Madsen, a principal with business intelligence (BI) and data warehousing (DW) consultancy Third Nature, Sybase gives SAP broad analytic reach.

"I believe they saw the rising analytic database market and wanted in." With more than 2,000 IQ customers -- including users in several key verticals -- Sybase certainly gives them that, Madsen suggests.

The analytic aspect of the acquisition takes center stage, of course. It's largely thanks to demand for its (venerable) Sybase IQ analytic database that Sybase has enjoyed a revival of sorts.

Sybase has several well-regarded products, which is one reason industry watchers believe SAP got a bargain -- even at $5.8 billion.

In addition to Sybase IQ, there's Sybase Adaptive Server Enterprise (ASE), which -- in spite of its substantially diminished market share -- remains entrenched in key verticals such as financial services.

What's more, Sybase boasts a creditable -- and in the case of both its replication (Sybase Replication) and federation (Sybase Data Federation) assets, enviable -- data integration (DI) portfolio, too.

Add in a market-leading mobile portfolio (anchored by its Sybase iAnywhere subsidiary), a best-in-class modeling tool (Sybase PowerDesigner), and several application- or vertical-specific offerings (Sybase Complex Event Processing; Sybase RAP The Trading Edition), and you have a recipe for an especially robust technology stew.

A Mobile Computing Boondoggle

In spite of its best efforts, Sybase never could leverage its premium ingredients (Sybase iAnywhere; Sybase IQ; Sybase ASE; Sybase PowerDesigner; Sybase Replication, and Sybase Data Federation, which is based on technology acquired from former EII-high-flier Avaki Corp.) to dramatically improve its standing relative to rivals IBM Corp., Microsoft Corp., and Oracle Corp. in the broader data management (DM) market.

Although IQ has given Sybase new life in the combined BI and DW market, it nonetheless continues to trail its DM rivals -- to say nothing of entrenched leaders such as Teradata Corp. or SAS Institute Inc. -- in this market, too.

Sybase iAnywhere, on the other hand, is a juggernaut in the mobile computing space. SAP co-CEO Bill McDermott and other officials say the pieces of Sybase's iAnywhere mobile portfolio are what prompted SAP to pursue its acquisition bid in the first place.