SUNNYVALE, CA--(Marketwire - Oct 25, 2012) - KANA Software, Inc., a global leader in customer service solutions delivered on-premise or in the cloud and used by more than 900 organizations worldwide, including half of the Global 100 and 250 government entities, today extended its congratulations to two of its government customers -- the City of Buffalo, New York, and the City of San Francisco -- for receiving 2012-2014 Citizen-Engaged Community designations from the Public Technology Institute (PTI).

The prestigious designation program recognizes city and county governments' excellence in multi-channel contact centers and best practices for the use of Citizen Relationship/Records Management (CRM) systems, 311 services, web portal technology, telephony systems and mobile communications infrastructure. Both the City of Buffalo and the City of San Francisco received awards during the PTI 2012 Technology Leadership Conference earlier this week in San Diego, Calif.

Local governments are invited to apply for the PTI Citizen-Engaged Community designation each year. All applications are reviewed and scored using metrics and standards developed by PTI in three key areas for multi-channel contact centers: Citizen Participation Processes, Integrated Communication Channels and Technology, and Performance Reporting.

Both the City of Buffalo and the City of San Francisco are leveraging KANA technology to become more citizen-centric and service oriented; KANA is regarded as the leader in the 311 CRM space in the United Kingdom, Australia, and North America. The City of Buffalo leverages its KANA Lagan system to support multi-channel 311 service and support as well as its CitiStat accountability program, whereby department or division heads regularly report and review key performance metrics with senior administration officials to ensure compliance with accountability, productivity, and efficiency goals for the City's workforce. Additionally, 311 Buffalo has been instrumental in aiding the City's "Operation Clean Sweeps" effort, where city, state and federal partners, in conjunction with health and human service providers visit different neighborhoods weekly and go door to door, talking to residents, offering governmental, employment, and health care services, and providing essential information about how to access available services. As a result of the collaborative data-sharing from 311, the City of Buffalo's "Operation Clean Sweep" conducted 26 'sweeps' and 2 'mini-sweeps' citywide in 2012, as part of the Mayor's quality of life initiative.

"On behalf of City of Buffalo residents, I am extremely proud of this recognition given to our 311 Call and Resolution Center," said Byron W. Brown, Mayor of Buffalo, New York. "Since the inception of our new call center, we have seen an increase in call volume and self-service requests, via the city's on-line self-service portal, which indicates a growing awareness of the City's success of receiving service requests, sending them to the appropriate department, and addressing them in a timely fashion. I am especially grateful to city residents, in particular Citizens' Participation Academy Graduates, who participate in focus groups and provide feedback about how to make 311 more robust and customer-centered."

The City and County of San Francisco has led the way in engaging with and serving residents in an open and accessible way, 24/7, with the San Francisco 311 Customer Service Center. With the aid of KANA Lagan's Government Solutions, the City of San Francisco improved service delivery by managing interactions with citizens efficiently and effectively through any communication desired: the contact center via phone, email, text, Twitter or Facebook; and self service via a citizen web portal or mobile connected devices. All customer requests received through any channel are seamlessly and automatically integrated into the work order processing system and tracked to completion.

"KANA congratulates both the City of Buffalo and the City of San Francisco on being named PTI Citizen-Engaged Communities," said David Moody, head of worldwide product strategy for KANA Public Sector. "Today, the 311 contact center has become the clearing house for local government information and service delivery, coordinating everything from housing, forestry, utilities, crime prevention, transportation, streets and sanitation, emergency response and even tourism. Citizens are empowered and engaged when they can interact through multiple channels and effect change; and governments and communities are empowered when they can leverage technology for improved service delivery."

About KANA Software

KANA makes every customer experience a good experience. A global leader in customer service solutions delivered on-premise or in the cloud, KANA lets organizations take complete control over customer service interactions, so they can take care of customers, while managing costs and reinforcing brand. By unifying and maintaining context for customer journeys across agent, web, social and mobile experiences, KANA solutions have reduced handling time, increased resolution rates and improved net promoter score (NPS) at more than 900 enterprises, including half of the Global 100 and more than 250 government agencies. KANA is based in Silicon Valley, California and has offices worldwide.

Follow KANA on Twitter: http://twitter.com/KANAsoftware

KANA is a registered trademark of KANA Software, Inc. All other company and product names may be trademarks of their respective owners.