In the 10 years since launching his solo music career, Southern California born and raised musician Tim Myers has racked up a long list of accomplishments.

Of his many achievements, Myers is best known for his role as a founding member and former bass player of OneRepublic; he co-wrote several songs for the band, including the number one hit “Stop and Stare” from their debut album, Dreaming Out Loud.

As a busy songwriter and producer, he has created songs for well-known artists like Five For Fighting, Joy Williams, Michelle Branch, Hailee Steinfeld, Lea Michele, James Arthur and Kesha. His own original music has received placement in multiple feature films, television shows, promotional media, and commercials for campaigns with big brands such as Apple, Google, Pepsi, Coke, Toyota and Target. Currently, Myers is prepping for the release of his new music from his third LP record, Portraits, from his own record label, Palladium Record. His joyous and catchy lead single ‘Lover My Love” peaked at No. 5 on the Billboard Top Dance Charts.

Myers’ latest single from Portraits, “Mother,” is a special collaboration with American Idol‘s Phillip Phillips, who co-wrote the song with Myers as well as lends backup vocals to the track. Fun fact: while the two songwriters have written together in person before, “Mother” was formed over the course of a Skype session.

Mother’s Day comes early with this upbeat, sincere and loving pop ode to family, gratitude and the wide open possibilities of life, complete with inviting sonic synths alongside instrumentals. When asked about the inspiration for the song, Myers’ says, “My wife is a mother to our two kids, and with my personal experiences with my own mom and Phillips’ mom, it felt like an easy one to write and feel a real connection. Hopefully this song makes you want to go give your mom a big hug and get a heart tattoo with her name on it.”

Listen to “Mother,” share and dedicate the song to your mother (or the mother figure in your life), and stay tuned for more heartfelt and infectious songs with a personal touch from Myers’ upcoming Portraits, due for release this February.

“Mother” by Tim Myers & Phillip Phillips is now available to download or stream.