The Institute Die drei Standorte des BfR "Identify risks - Protect health" - this is the guiding principle for the work of the Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (BfR) in the field of consumer health protection. The Institute was set up in November 2002 to strengthen consumer health protection. It is the scientific agency of the Federal Republic of Germany which is responsible for preparing expert reports and opinions on food and feed safety as well as on the safety of substances and products. In this context, the Institute plays an important role in improving consumer protection and food safety. BfR reports to the Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Consumer Protection (BMELV). It enjoys independence in respect of its scientific assessments and research. Tasks Its tasks include the assessment of existing and the identification of new health risks, the drawing up of recommendations on risk reduction, and the communication of this process. The results of its work serve as the basis for scientific advice to the relevant federal ministries and other agencies, for instance the Federal Office of Consumer Protection and Food Safety (BVL) and the Federal Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (BAuA). In its assessments and recommendations BfR is not influenced by any economic, political or social interests. It presents them in such a way that they can be easily understood by the general public. Cooperation BfR engages in scientific cooperation with international institutions and organisations and with the institutions of other countries involved in consumer health protection and food safety. One focus of its work is its cooperation with the European Food Safety Authority, EFSA.

Website

http://www.bfr.bund.de

External link for Bundesinstitut für Risikobewertung

Industry

Government Administration

Company size

1,001-5,000 employees

Headquarters

Berlin

Type

Government Agency

Founded

2002

Specialties

gesundheitlicher Verbraucherschutz, Risikokommunikation, Biologische Sicherheit, Lebensmittelsicherheit, Sicherheit von Pestiziden, Chemikalien- und Produktsicherheit, Sicherheit in der Nahrungskette, and Experimentelle Toxikologie