Jan Hoffmann is a German figure skater who represented East Germany in competition. A four-time Olympian, he is the 1980 Olympic silver medalist, the 1974 & 1980 World Champion, and a four-time European Champion.

Jan Hoffmann was born on October 26, 1955, in Dresden, Saxony, Germany. His birth geographical coordinates are 51° 3’ 3” North latitude and 13° 44’ 18” East longitude. Jan Hoffmann is currently 68 years old.

Astrologically, Jan Hoffmann falls under the Sun sign of Scorpio, with Capricorn as his Ascendant, Pisces as his Moon sign, and Sagittarius as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Scorpio Moon Pisces Mercury Libra Venus Scorpio Mars Libra Jupiter Leo Saturn Scorpio Uranus Leo Neptune Libra Pluto Leo Ceres Capricorn Chiron Aquarius Eros Libra Hygiea Scorpio Juno Scorpio Pallas Sagittarius Vesta Virgo Ascendant Capricorn Black Moon Lilith Sagittarius Midheaven Scorpio North Node Sagittarius South Node Gemini Part of Fortune Aries Vertex Leo

Sunin Scorpio2° 15’ 37”

The Sun in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you enigmatic and sexually expressive. You are empowered and self-confident. You seek unique ways to express […] Read more »

Moonin Pisces0° 58’ 47”

The Moon in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you expressive and inspiring. You are sensitive and understand other people’s needs. You are gentle and […] Read more »

Mercuryin Libra14° 20’ 31”

Libra Mercury in the Natal Chart makes you charming and romantic. You are sentimental and can be expressive and kind. Your gentle and friendly nature […] Read more »

Venusin Scorpio16° 45’ 44”

Scorpio Venus in the Natal Chart makes you loving and sensitive. You are creative and relate to your loved ones emotionally and intellectually. You are […] Read more »

Marsin Libra8° 20’ 6”

Libra Mars in the Natal Chart makes you long for balance. You are motivated to express your unique fantasies and find the passion and motivation […] Read more »

Jupiterin Leo27° 23’ 39”

Leo Jupiter in the Natal Chart makes you open about your ideals. You pursue your desires and can be creative and expressive. You are charming, […] Read more »

Saturnin Scorpio21° 16’ 35”

Is Saturn in Scorpio good or bad? Scorpio Saturn in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a generation obsessed with security and power. […] Read more »

Uranusin Leo2° 15’ 40”

Leo Uranus in the Natal Chart makes you a part of an excitable and enthusiastic generation. You are born among people with a Karmic mission […] Read more »

Neptunein Libra28° 8’ 42”

Libra Neptune in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation that craves connection. You want intellectual and emotional intimacy. You are artistic […] Read more »

Plutoin Leo28° 18’ 9”

The Pluto in Leo generation empowers celebrities, giving those with status the authority to lead. Society is materialistic during this transit, and you are part […] Read more »

Ceresin Capricorn19° 9’ 38”

Ceres in Capricorn in the Natal Chart indicates a generation committed to making others comfortable. You are sensitive to others’ needs and can be compassionate […] Read more »

Chironin Aquarius0° 15’ 58”

Aquarius Chiron in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for healing and self-expression. You are true to your authentic desires and channel intense creative […] Read more »

Erosin Libra4° 14’ 6”

Eros in Libra in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for exploring lusty desires through creative, intimate encounters. You are attracted to people who […] Read more »

Hygieain Scorpio21° 17’ 5”

Hygiea in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you health-conscious and eager to research new health breakthroughs. You are obsessed with developing strength and maintaining […] Read more »

Junoin Scorpio27° 57’ 43”

Juno in Scorpio in the Natal Chart indicates a desire for love and intimacy. You are passionate about sharing your insights and can be persuasive […] Read more »

Pallasin Sagittarius26° 48’ 31”

Pallas in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart makes you determined and focused. You are generous and can be a natural leader who inspires others to […] Read more »

Vestain Virgo25° 40’ 34”

Vesta in Virgo in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a devoted healer. You are on a clear spiritual mission and face restraints […] Read more »

Ascendantin Capricorn0° 18’ 41”

The Capricorn Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you responsible. You have the appearance of someone reliable and mature. Others look to you for guidance […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Sagittarius25° 29’ 50”

Sagittarius Black Moon Lilith makes you daring and indepenent. You are willful and can be creative. You channel inner frustrations and fears to help you […] Read more »

Midheavenin Scorpio5° 4’ 13”

Scorpio Midheaven in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for uncanny wit and instincts that help you thrive in your career. You rise to […] Read more »

North Nodein Sagittarius19° 37’ 10”

Sagittarius North Node in the Natal Chart makes you determined and headstrong. You overcome being scattered and develop a passion for your mission. Your destiny […] Read more »

South Nodein Gemini19° 37’ 10”

Gemini South Node in the Natal Chart indicates you have the potential to lead others as a creative and independent thinker. You are comfortable with […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Aries29° 1’ 51”

Part of Fortune in Aries in the Natal Chart makes you daring and expressive. You can be athletic and use your gifts to inspire others. […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Ninth House Moon Second House Mercury Ninth House Venus Tenth House Mars Ninth House Jupiter Eighth House Saturn Tenth House Uranus Seventh House Neptune Ninth House Pluto Eighth House Ceres First House Chiron First House Eros Ninth House Hygiea Tenth House Juno Eleventh House Pallas Twelfth House Vesta Eighth House Black Moon Lilith Twelfth House North Node Twelfth House South Node Sixth House Part of Fortune Third House Vertex Seventh House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 16 major aspects, alongside 13 minor aspects, as well as 7 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Sun Square Uranus Neptune Sextile Pluto Sun Trine Moon Moon Quincunx Uranus Jupiter Sextile Neptune Jupiter Conjunct Pluto Moon Trine Neptune Moon Opposite Pluto Sun Conjunct Neptune Sun Sextile Pluto Moon Opposite Jupiter Uranus Square Neptune Sun Sextile Jupiter Venus Conjunct Saturn Mercury Conjunct Mars Jupiter Square Saturn

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Jan Hoffmann’s life journey.

Sun Square Uranusorb: 0°

The Sun square Uranus in the Natal Chart makes you resistant to changes. But when you navigate unexpected changes, you find freedom and empowerment. You […] Read more »

Sun Trine Moonorb: 1°

The Sun trine Moon in the Natal Chart helps you relate to your family without being stifled by your home life. You may have a […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Uranusorb: 1°

When the Moon is quincunx Uranus in a Natal Chart, this creates tension between the need to rebel and the need to find emotional security. […] Read more »

Jupiter Conjunct Plutoorb: 1°

Jupiter conjunct Pluto in a chart can create a lot of power and influence, but it isn’t always easy to deal with. There are many […] Read more »

Moon Trine Neptuneorb: 3°

The Moon trine Neptune in a chart typically indicates that a person is caring and compassionate. They are sensitive and friendly, and it is probably […] Read more »

Moon Opposite Plutoorb: 3°

The Moon opposite Pluto in a Natal Chart can create a lot of wild and tumultuous emotions. A person with this opposition in their chart […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Neptuneorb: 4°

The Sun conjunct Neptune makes you empathetic and transparent. You wear your heart on your sleeve and can be romantic and affectionate. You fall in […] Read more »

Sun Sextile Plutoorb: 4°

The Sun sextile Pluto in a Natal Chart makes you powerful and self-assured. You are comfortable taking charge and prefer to lead others. You don’t […] Read more »

Moon Opposite Jupiterorb: 4°

A person will likely seem incredibly friendly when the Moon is opposite Jupiter in a Natal Chart! This opposition doesn’t always seem to be as […] Read more »

Sun Sextile Jupiterorb: 5°

The Sun sextile Jupiter in the Natal Chart makes you idealistic and expansive. You are outgoing and love meeting new people and can be thoughtful […] Read more »

Venus Conjunct Saturnorb: 5°

Venus conjunct Saturn in a Natal Chart makes you sincere and authentic. You fall in love slowly and can be cautious in relationships. You have […] Read more »

Mercury Conjunct Marsorb: 6°

Mercury conjunct Mars in the Natal Chart makes you outspoken and dramatic. You are intense and speak passionately. You are demanding and can be focused […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Mercury Sextile Vertex Saturn Conjunct Hygiea Pluto Square Juno Moon Sextile Ascendant Jupiter Square Juno Jupiter Trine Pallas Neptune Sextile Pallas Neptune Opposite Part of Fortune Pluto Trine Pallas Pluto Trine Part of Fortune Jupiter Trine Black Moon Lilith Jupiter Trine Part of Fortune Uranus Opposite Chiron

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Jan Hoffmann’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Ceres Quincunx South Node Vesta Square Black Moon Lilith Chiron Square Part of Fortune Juno Quincunx Part of Fortune Pallas Square Vesta Pallas Conjunct Black Moon Lilith Ascendant Trine Part of Fortune

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Jan Hoffmann’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.