Jan Hoffmann (born May 21, 1971) is a German conductor who was born in Kassel, Germany. He received his higher education in Vocal, Choral, Orchestral Conducting at the Mainz School of Music at the Johannes Gutenberg University.

Career

From 1998 to 2023, Jan Hoffmann was choirmaster and conductor of the Giessen Municipal Theatre (German: Stadttheater Gießen).[1] At the same time, during the season 2015-2016, he held the position of deputy general director of the theater. While working at the Giessen Municipal Theatre, he directed many theater performances of operas, operettas, and musicals, including: Schwanda the Bagpiper (J. Weinberger),[1] The Barber of Baghdad (P. Cornelius), The White Lady (F. Boieldieu), The Conquest of Granada (E. Arrieta), The Secret Garden (A. Stradella). Also, numerous choral compositions were performed under his guidance, including: The Christmas Oratorio, St John Passion, St Matthew Passion, h-Moll Messe (J. Bach), Messiah (G. Handel), The Seasons, The Creation (J. Haydn), Elijah, St. Paul (F. Mendelssohn), A German Requiem (J. Brahms).

From 2005 to 2014, he held the position of Director of the festival choir at Ludwigsburg Castle. In this position, he prepared the choir for participation in the Salzburg Festival.[2]

In the season 2019-2020, Jan Hoffmann held the position of First Choir Director of the Saxon State Opera (German: Semperoper).[3] [4] From the season 2024-2025, Jan Hoffmann will continue his activities as Choir Director of the Semperoper.[5]

Jan Hoffmann is a practicing professional whose activities have a clear pedagogical focus. In particular, since 2015 he has been a teacher at the Frankfurt Singing Academy[6] and since 2022 – at the European Choral Academy in Goerlitz (German: Europa Chor Akademie).[7] The main educational disciplines taught by Jan Hoffmann are: choral conducting, choral class, voice production. The high level of Jan Hoffmann's pedagogical skill is evidenced by the achievements of individual scholars of the European Choral Academy, in particular, the grand prize of the 2023 European Grand Prix for Choral Singing in Budapest.[8]

References

Add External links