Hey there, time traveller!

This article was published 16/10/2015 (3200 days ago), so information in it may no longer be current.

Stephen Harper would never hire Stephen Harper. But that’s OK, because Stephen Harper would never work for Stephen Harper.

That’s because Stephen Harper can’t work for anyone. In the few real jobs he held before becoming prime minister, Harper would bristle, rebel and walk out the door every time his boss didn’t realize Harper should really be the boss.

It’s one of the many genuine insights into the character of Canada’s 22nd prime minister in this biography by John Ibbitson.

The Globe and Mail’s veteran political journalist has won a Governor General’s Award and written three previous books, including the best-seller The Big Shift, with Darrell Bricker.

Harper, born and raised in a comfortable Toronto suburb, fled the University of Toronto and its central-Canadian elites, becoming a mail-room clerk in Calgary for three years while he sorted it all out.

Ibbitson has conducted exhaustive research to illuminate how the forces that shaped Harper as an individual have become part of the Canadian consciousness during his 10-year tenure.

Harper’s steadfast support for Israel is based on his father’s friendship with a Holocaust survivor, while his tax-cutting ways come from the right-leaning faculty at the University of Calgary, where he eventually earned his economics degree.

Harper first morphed from a Pierre Trudeau Liberal into a Joe Clark Progressive Conservative, and then into one of Preston Manning’s original Reformers.

He told Manning, then his boss, what to do to win government in a memo in the party’s early days. When Manning didn’t take his advice, Harper quit and became president of the National Citizens Coalition, a right-wing lobby group.

When the political winds were right, he put the plan Manning rejected into action, uniting the Reform and Progressive Conservative parties and building support among suburban Toronto and conservative Quebec voters.

Harper fans and foes alike will be frustrated by Ibbitson’s principal achievement: he is scrupulously fair.

Harper deserves credit, he says, for helping the Canadian economy recover from the 2008 recession with infrastructure spending that was the “right size.”

Ibbitson makes negative judgments when he feels they are warranted, such as calling Harper’s decision to cancel the long-form census one of his “most discreditable and puzzling acts,” especially considering Stephen Harper the economist knows the importance of accurate information.

But he dismisses as “rot” the persistent claims Harper wants to impose a socially conservative, fundamentalist Christian agenda on Canada.

Why look for right-wing bogeymen under the bed, Ibbitson asks, when what you can see is so objectionable — including the attempt to appoint an unqualified justice to the Supreme Court by retroactively changing the law?

In his autobiography Strength of Conviction, federal NDP Leader Tom Mulcair is doubtless trying to make the same sort of connection between personal experience and political conviction Ibbitson makes for Harper.

In a couple of cases it works well enough, but in others it’s jarring and sometimes off topic.

Mulcair was a cabinet minister in the Liberal government of Quebec under premier Jean Charest. He resigned on an issue of principle, refusing as then-minister of environment to approve a private development in a provincial park. Then-NDP leader Jack Layton recruited him to boost the federal NDP’s fortunes in Quebec.

Born to an Irish father and French-speaking mother, Mulcair grew up speaking only English. He attended English schools, capped off by law school at McGill University. He learned French late in life and still gets help from his wife, Catherine, who was born and raised in France.

A section on Mulcair’s experience with Canada’s two official languages could have led to a thoughtful discussion of the bilingual nature of Canada. Instead, Mulcair flies into a rant about Bill C-51, the anti-terrorism legislation.

Huh?

Mulcair’s bilingualism and rare combination of degrees in both British common law and the Quebec Civil Code landed him a job in the early 1980s in Winnipeg, translating all of Manitoba’s statutes from English to French, as required by a Supreme Court decision.

His impression of the city was dismal.

“I was struck by the numbers of destitute indigenous people on the streets of Winnipeg. Many came in young from distant reserves in northern Manitoba, drawn by the lure of the city, in search of work, but couldn’t get hired. Too many fell prey to booze and drugs, with no way home.”

Mulcair concludes the book by giving voters his best pitch for dumping the two old-line parties and giving the federal New Democrats the chance to show what they can do.

Canadian voters wanting to find out more about the three main party leaders should delve into these books and Common Ground, the autobiography released last year by federal Liberal Leader Justin Trudeau.

Monday night, one of the books will give valuable insight into Canada’s prime minister-designate. The other two will be about losers.

You’ll find them in the discount bins.

Donald Benham is manager of hunger and poverty awareness at Winnipeg Harvest.