Stephen Harper biography

Rt. Hon. Stephen Harper, P.C., has been appointed as Independent Director of the Company. Mr. Harper was elected the twenty-second Prime Minister of Canada in 2006 and served in such role until 2015, making him the longest serving Conservative Prime Minster since Sir John A. MacDonald, Canada’s first Prime Minister. Mr. Harper is Chairman of Harper & Associates Consulting, which is affiliated with Dentons, a leading global law firm, and acts as a strategic consultant to clients around the world, providing advice on matters relating to market access, the management of global geopolitical and economic risk and the maximization of value in global markets. Mr. Harper has received a bachelor and master’s degree in economics from the University of Calgary, and was awarded an honorary doctorate of philosophy from Tel Aviv University in 2014. In recognition of his government service, Mr. Harper has been awarded the Ukrainian Order of Liberty, the Woodrow Wilson Award for Public Service, the B’nai B’rith International Presidential Gold Medallion for Humanitarianism and was named as the World Statesman of the Year in 2012 by the Appeal of Conscience Foundation.

What is the salary of Stephen Harper?

As the Independent Director of Colliers International, the total compensation of Stephen Harper at Colliers International is CAD$404,600. There are 9 executives at Colliers International getting paid more, with Jay Stewart Hennick CM having the highest compensation of $14,675,252.

What does Colliers International do?

Colliers International Group Inc. provides commercial real estate professional and investment management services to corporate and institutional clients in the Americas, Europe, the Middle East, Africa, and the Asia Pacific. It offers sales brokerage services, including real estate sales, debt origination and placement, equity capital raising, market value opinions, acquisition advisory, and transaction management services; and landlord and tenant representation services. The company provides outsourcing and advisory services, such as corporate and workplace solutions; valuation and advisory services; workplace strategy services; loan servicing; property marketing; research services; and engineering design services for property and building, infrastructure, transportation, environmental and telecommunications end-markets. It also offers property management services comprising building operations and maintenance, facilities management, lease administration, property accounting and financial reporting, contract management and, construction management; and project management services, which include bid document review, construction monitoring and delivery management, contract administration and integrated cost control, development management, facility and engineering functionality, milestone and performance monitoring, quality assurance, risk management and strategic project consulting. In addition, the company provides investment management services that consists of asset management advisory and administration, transaction, and incentive services. The company was founded in 1972 and is headquartered in Toronto, Canada.