Britannia Industries is one of India’s leading food companies with a 100 year legacy and annual revenues in excess of Rs. 9000 Cr. Britannia is among the most trusted food brands, and manufactures India’s favorite brands like Good Day, Tiger, NutriChoice, Milk Bikis and Marie Gold which are household names in India. Britannia’s product portfolio includes Biscuits, Bread, Cakes, Rusk, and Dairy products including Cheese, Beverages, Milk and Yoghurt. Britannia is a brand which many generations of Indians have grown up with and our brands are cherished and loved in India and the world over. Britannia products are available across the country in close to 5 million retail outlets and reach over 50% of Indian homes.

The company’s Dairy business contributes close to 5 per cent of revenue and Britannia dairy products directly reach 100,000 outlets.

Britannia Bread is the largest brand in the organized bread market with an annual turnover of over 1 lac tons in volume and Rs.450 crores in value. The business operates with 13 factories and 4 franchisees selling close to 1 mn loaves daily across more than 100 cities and towns of India.

We have a presence in more than 60 countries across the globe. Our international footprint includes presence in Middle East through local manufacturing in UAE and Oman, are the No 2 biscuit player in UAE with a strong contention to leadership and have a similarly strong market position in the other GCC countries. We are also the market leaders in Nepal and are in the process of investing a manufacturing facility in the country.

Our foot print spreads across North America, Europe, Africa and South East Asia through exports and we are investing in a state- of- the- art facility in Mundra SEZ, Gujarat, to service the exports markets.

Our strategic expansion plan is based on the principle of ‘One new market a year’. We plan to expand through local operations in Africa and South East Asia in the coming years.

Britannia takes pride in having stayed true to its credo, ‘Eat Healthy, Think Better’. Having removed over 8500 tonnes of Trans Fats from products, Britannia became India’s first Zero Trans Fat Company. Over 50% of the Company’s portfolio is enriched with essential micro- nutrients which nourish the body.

The company set up the Britannia Nutrition Foundation in 2009, and began working on public private partnership to address malnutrition amongst under-privileged children and women.

Brand Britannia is listed amongst the most trusted, valuable and popular brands in various surveys conducted by prestigious organizations like Millward Brown, IMRB, WPP Group and Havas Media Group to name a few.

Our relentless focus on quality and freshness have won us prestigious accolades including the Golden Peacock National Quality Award and the Ramakrishna Bajaj National Quality Award.

However, the award that we cherish the most is the one given by our consumers.Britannia is recognized as one of the most trusted, valuable and popular brands among Indian consumers in various reputed surveys.

Britannia believes that ‘Taste & Trust’ are its sobriquet and will constantly endeavor to make a Billion Indians reach out for a delightful and healthy Britannia product several times a day!

Imagine Britannia.

Desired Competencies:

Familiarity with the tools, concepts and methodologies of quality management.

Basic knowledge of applicable software to infer statistical data. Negotiation skills.

Customer Orientation.

Educational Qualification: Graduate in Food Technology/ Msc. Chemistry

Key Responsibilities:

Quality & Food Safety Execution

 Ensure on-line product quality monitoring &amp; immediate action taken through production officers &amp; CP management to address any non-conformity

 Ensure testing of finished goods as per standard sampling &amp; test method with correct documentation. Participate in product quality exercise regularly.

 Periodic verification of process records, incoming quality check records, ingredient shelf-life records, in-process quality check records

 Regular verification of correct functioning of critical process equipments like weighing balances, metal detectors, sifters,dividers,moulders,oven, slicers and coders

 Ensure basic hygiene, food safety &amp; GMP requirements are complied with in manufacturing.

 Ensure critical to food safety processes are being complied with at any point in time during manufacturing. This would include metal detector, pest control, conveyor

 Conduct training sessions for workers to create awareness on quality standards, GMP, food safety &amp; hygiene

 Regular audit of systems, processes &amp; lab to verify compliance to quality &amp; food safety standards

 Immediate &amp; suitable action against issues related to process/system/norm non- adherence, equipment malfunctioning, quality monitoring, food safety &amp; hygiene to prevent the outcome affecting consumers &amp; brand value.

Statutory Compliance

 Ensure wrappers are checked for presence of correct addresses,MRP, veg logo, mandatory declarations &amp; necessary documentation maintained

 Ensure sufficient samples are checked for weight at every stage of production

 Ensure immediate action in process to correct the non-adherence before continuing

 Verification of compliance to pack weights by random sampling on regular basis

 Ensure no lots detected with underweight packs are released without 100% checking &amp; sorting

 Ensure functioning of coder with legible printing on each &amp; every pack across

SKUs

 Ensure systems are followed during change in date, shift, supervisor&#39;s name with necessary documentation

 Verification of compliance to coding by random sampling on regular basis

 Ensure all weighing balances &amp; dead weights are calibrated as per schedule &amp; not in use without necessary certification

 Consumer Complaints

 Share each &amp; every complaint as &amp; when they are received with CP management &amp; concerned supervisors, operators &amp; shop floor workers

 Identify probable causes of the complaint irrespective of sample availability in consultation with CP management, supervisors, operators &amp; workers

 Assist in designing corrective &amp; preventive measures along with the team &amp; implement the same with immediate effect

 Evaluate the effectiveness of action through regular evaluation of process &amp; product &amp; trend of complaint of similar nature in subsequent months.

 Analyze all complaints registered in terms of category, SKU,extent, trend etc. &amp; share with CP management on regular basis to demonstrate status of improvement &amp; drawing up further action plan

Benchmarking

 Visit to retail outlets &amp; distribution points weekly once for understanding customer &amp; consumer quality concerns

 Evaluate competition products in terms of grammage, packaging, product quality features etc.

 Identify improvement opportunities &amp; share action plans with operation &amp; quality for improvements

 Measure effectiveness of improvement through market evaluation &amp; customer feedback

 Process Improvement Initiatives

 Identify and prioritize improvement opportunities in areas like system , process, cost,time in consultation with operations &amp; quality &amp; apply project based approach towards improvement

 Periodically review improvement in the overall quality of processes and systems at the factory

 Management information System

 Send periodic summary report on factory quality performance to quality manager

 Communicate critical to quality &amp; food safety concerns to quality manager &amp; all other concerned as soon as they are observed

Desired competencies Technical :

1. Food safety systems with ISO-22000 requirements

2. Dairy Technology

3. Food chemistry and microbiology

4. General manufacturing process &amp; systems

5. Root cause analysis &amp; corrective action planning

6. Presentation skill

7. Conversant with MS-Office ( Word, Excel, Power Point), data analysis

Behavioural :

1. High degree of Conceptual and Quantitative skills

2. Analytical and Articulate

3. Ability to collaborate effectively with cross functional stakeholders

4. Ability to convince others through data &amp; objective evidences

5. Ability to collaborate and work in matrix organization

6. Effective Communication