Michael D. Sallah is a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist and the Post-Gazette's deputy managing editor who has led the newspaper's investigations team since late 2020, overseeing stories that have uncovered sweeping failures in Pittsburgh's housing program, money laundering in the U.S. steel industry, and regulatory breakdowns at big banks that allowed criminal networks to move billions through the institutions. His work in accountability reporting has led to criminal investigations, legislative reforms and the recovery of hundreds of thousands in taxpayer dollars. He has previously worked on investigations teams at the Washington Post, Miami Herald, USA Today, and Toledo Blade.

Debbie Cenziper is a Pulitzer Prize-winning investigative reporter and nonfiction author who writes for ProPublica’s national desk. She spent more than a decade at The Washington Post. Over 30 years, Cenziper’s stories have changed laws, prompted congressional and FBI investigations, and helped secure more funding for affordable housing, mental health care and public schools. She has won dozens of awards in American print journalism, including the 2007 Pulitzer Prize for local reporting. She is a professor at the Medill School of Journalism at Northwestern University and runs the Medill Investigative Lab in Washington, D.C.

Mike Wereschagin is the Post-Gazette's assistant managing editor for investigations and data. During his two decades as a Pittsburgh-based journalist, he has been part of a wide range of investigations that included dangerous vulnerabilities in the country's natural gas infrastructure, sweeping breakdowns in healthcare at the Pittsburgh VA, efforts by ISIS to recruit U.S. citizens and the ways state legislators hide millions in spending on themselves. A long-time politics reporter, he works with the Post-Gazette's government reporting team on accountability and investigative stories about public officials. His work has won the statewide John V.R. Bull Freedom of Information Award and the national Investigative Reporters and Editors Freedom of Information Award.

Michael Korsh is a data reporter on the Post-Gazette’s investigations team, where he has used his computer skills and data analysis to expose breakdowns in the city of Pittsburgh's housing program, critical gaps in police crime reporting and anonymous ownership of properties in Allegheny County. Prior to joining the Post-Gazette, he collaborated on stories for ProPublica, The Washington Post and the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists through the Medill Investigative Lab in Washington DC. He received his bachelor’s and master’s degrees from Northwestern University's Medill School of Journalism.

Evan Robinson-Johnson reports on technology and business for the Post-Gazette. He previously covered health and education for the Jackson Hole (Wyo.) News&Guide, winning state awards for beat reporting and feature writing. A Boston native, Robinson-Johnson holds bachelor's and master's degrees in journalism from Northwestern University, where he was a member of the Medill Investigative Lab in Washington DC.