ALBANY, Ga. (WALB) - The city of Albany is filled with rich culture and history. A piece of that history is located at the Ray Charles Plaza in Albany.

Ray Charles is an Albany native and his legacy lives on through Albany residents and our state song “Georgia on My Mind.”

Before he would become a global superstar, Ray Charles Robinson, Sr. was born right here in Albany. Who knew that decades later Charles would win prestigious awards and global acclaim for songs like " Yesterday,” “Crying Time,” and our state song “Georgia On My Mind.”

Charles’s music and impact have spanned the globe, and Albany native Willie Moody says performing for Ray Charles at 8 years old was the catalyst to his lifelong passion for music.

“When Representative White and my former piano teacher Dr. Bacon asked me if I would be interested in performing that evening, I was so happy about it,” Moody said. “After the show, I sat in his lap. It was recorded by JET magazine and everything and he [Ray Charles] told me to continue in music. He thought I was great at that time and that the skies were the limit for me.”

Inspiring future musicians wouldn’t be the only way Charles would impact the city of Albany. Since 2001, Ray Charles along with his foundation have donated over $3 million to Albany State University alone and close to $50 million to various scholarships, programs, and medical expenses.

“Mr. Charles was blind, but he had vision,” Ray Charles Foundation President Valerie Ervin said. “Mr. Charles understood and knew that there was a great need for young people, not only in education, but in the hearing impaired which was his first core. So, he funded his foundation with $1 million of his own money, and he started anonymously paying for cochlear implants for those who couldn’t hear.”

The Ray Charles Foundation prides itself in generating the funds it donates solely from Charles’s intellectual property and music and not from outside donations. Ervin seems confident that Charles’s impact is lasting, and his legacy will continue to inspire generations to come.

“He often said, music is the one catalyst that bridges and brings everyone together. Music has no color; it has no boundaries. It’s a feeling. I hope that through that his name will carry in through his music. That will continue to feed and fund this foundation because that is how we earn to give back to these programs throughout the country through his music, “Ervin said.

Charles’s impact and music have withstood the test of time, and it all began right here in the Good Life City.