Grossharthau Map — Satellite Images of Grossharthau

original name: Großharthau

geographical location: Bautzen, Sachsen, Sachsen, Germany, Europe

geographical coordinates: 51° 7' 0" North, 14° 6' 0" East

detailed map of Grossharthau and near places

Welcome to the Grossharthau google satellite map! This place is situated in Bautzen, Sachsen, Sachsen, Germany, its geographical coordinates are 51° 7' 0" North, 14° 6' 0" East and its original name (with diacritics) is Großharthau. See Grossharthau photos and images from satellite below, explore the aerial photographs of Grossharthau in Germany. Grossharthau hotels map is available on the target page linked above.

Do you like this map? Link to it or recommend it!

Register at Grossharthau or add new placemark for Grossharthau.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Grossharthau hotel reservations

Book hotel in Grossharthau online and save money

Grossharthau hotels »

Browse & Book hotels in Germany »

Grossharthau hotels – sortable list of all Grossharthau hotels »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Grossharthau hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Grossharthau, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Grossharthau, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included.

Grossharthau hotels map

The location of each Grossharthau hotel listed is shown on the detailed zoomable map. Moreover, Grossharthau hotel map is available where all hotels in Grossharthau are marked. You can easily choose your hotel by location.

Grossharthau hotel reviews

Many photos and unbiased Grossharthau hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision.

Grossharthau hotel deals

Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Grossharthau hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Hotels nearest to the centre of Grossharthau

Hotel Kyffhäuser (at Dresdner Strasse 3 in Grossharthau)

Hotel Evabrunnen *** (in Bischofswerda, distanced approximately 5.7 km)

Landgasthof Buschmühle *** (in Ohorn, distanced approximately 5.9 km)

Logis l'Auberge Gutshof ** (in Bischofswerda, distanced approximately 7.2 km)

Landhotel Wesenitz *** (in Stolpen, distanced approximately 9.6 km)

Landhotel Waldblick *** (in Pulsnitz, distanced approximately 11 km)

Pension Teichblick (in Lichtenberg, distanced approximately 12 km)

more Grossharthau hotels »

Grossharthau car rental

Compare Grossharthau car rental offers of 500+ suppliers

We search over 500 approved car hire suppliers to find you the very best Grossharthau rental prices available. You can compare offers from leading car hire suppliers like Avis, Europcar, Sixt or Thrifty as well as budget rental deals from Holiday Autos, Budget, Economy, EasyCar, or 121 carhire. Choose Grossharthau car hire supplier according to your preferences. The booking process is secured and is made as simple as possible. You don't have to browse through several websites and compare prices to find cheap car rental in Grossharthau — we will do it for you!

Car hire Grossharthau and neighbourhood

Car rental offices nearest to Grossharthau the city centre. Compare Grossharthau car rental offers by various suppliers.

Pirna car rental (distanced approximately 21 km)

Dresden - Airport car rental (distanced approximately 23 km)

Dresden - Hauboldstreet 05 car rental (distanced approximately 25 km)

Dresden - BMW Niederlassung car rental (distanced approximately 25 km)

Dresden - Neustadt car rental (distanced approximately 26 km)

more offers and Grossharthau car hiring guide »

Flights from airports close to Grossharthau

Search and compare flights

Flights to nearby airports to Grossharthau »

Overview of flights to and from Germany »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Grossharthau. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Airports in Grossharthau and in the neighbourhood

Airports nearest to Grossharthau are sorted by the distance to the airport from the city centre. Follow relate airport hotel guides for accommodation booking.

Kamenz Airport (distanced approximately 20 km) – airport hotels

Pirna Pratzschwitz Airport (distanced approximately 22 km) – airport hotels

Dresden Airport (distanced approximately 23 km) – airport hotels

Bautzen Airport (distanced approximately 30 km) – airport hotels

Nardt Airport (distanced approximately 38 km) – airport hotels

Grossharthau 3D map in Google Earth

3D map of Grossharthau in Germany

You can also dive right into Grossharthau on unique 3D satellite map provided by Google Earth. With new GoogLe Earth plugin you can enjoy the interactive Grossharthau 3D map within your web browser.

See the 3D map of Grossharthau, Germany in Google Earth »

Get more out of Grossharthau map

Add placemark to Grossharthau

No placemark has been added to this place yet. You can add the first.

users registered in this area

No users is registered to this place. You can be the first.

recommend this page

If you would like to recommend this Grossharthau map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is the easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

Grossharthau google map link options

link to us:

small Grossharthau google map image link

medium Grossharthau google map image link

large Grossharthau google map image link