The École normale supérieure Paris-Saclay is a selective higher education institution providing training in research and higher education professions and, more broadly, a training school for the elite with major scientific expertise.

The School is interdisciplinary and brings together a large number of disciplines from the fields of experimental and fundamental sciences, engineering sciences, humanities and social sciences. In each of them, the School has high quality professors and researchers working in world-class research laboratories. During their four years at the École normale supérieure, the 1,500 or so students enrolled on degree courses benefit from bespoke training, in close contact with their teachers. This ensures they acquire a broad and solid scientific culture, early immersion in research, international experience, together with an ability to transfer their knowledge and address the issues and questions of the contemporary world.

In close collaboration with industry, the School conducts many high-level research programmes through research chairs and joint laboratories involving companies in the aeronautics, aerospace, energy, automotive, and IT sectors (Airbus, EDF, Atos, Hewlett-Packard, etc.). Through its laboratories, ENS Paris-Saclay is involved in four clusters in the greater Paris region and in numerous laboratories and international research groups in China, Korea, Japan, Israel, India, Brazil and the United States.

Above: © Renzo Piano Building Workshop.

e-flux announcements are emailed press releases for art exhibitions from all over the world.

Agenda delivers news from galleries, art spaces, and publications, while Criticism publishes reviews of exhibitions and books.

Architecture announcements cover current architecture and design projects, symposia, exhibitions, and publications from all over the world.

Film announcements are newsletters about screenings, film festivals, and exhibitions of moving image.

Education announces academic employment opportunities, calls for applications, symposia, publications, exhibitions, and educational programs.

Sign up to receive information about events organized by e-flux at e-flux Screening Room, Bar Laika, or elsewhere.