Burst into the weekend with this outrageous shot from Gael Monfils in last year’s Madrid Open round of 64 match against Carlos Gimeno Valero.

Sadly, we have not been able to witness the Frenchman perform at the Madrid Open. However, the star did have a short spell in the Prosperita Open, which saw him exit in the round of 16 after being defeated 3-6, 4-6 by Bosnian star Damir Dzumhur.

Gael Monfils has always been an exciting player to watch and has given us many unbelievable moments over the course of his career. However, this shot against Spanish star Carlos Gimeno Valero is undoubtedly up there amongst his best shots.

Both players put on an exciting performance, winning important shots with stylish efforts.

The Spaniard sent a precise drop shot that would have caught many players out. However, Monfils was determined to not be one of them. The Frenchman sprang into action, making a darting run to the back of the court.

The-36-year-old then returned the shot with his own brilliant effort. The Parisian star leaped into the air to retaliate with a blistering behind-the-back forehanded strike that was too perfect for the young Spaniards to counter.

It was truly unbelievable to witness such a devoted display from Monfils, who certainly stunned Gimeno Valero and everyone in view of his immaculate effort.

He then went on to destroy his 21-year-old opponent with a confident 6-3, 6-0 win, which only lasted 55 minutes. This saw the French star move on in the tournament and to find himself facing world No. One Novak Djokovic.

The Frenchman needed to be more clinical in his match against the Serbian star and found himself on the wrong end of a difficult defeat from Djokovic. The pair battled it out for one hour and 28 minutes before the 35-year-old grabbed a 6-3, 6-2 win over Monfils. This marked the 18th time the stars faced one another and the 18th time that Djokovic defeated his 36-year-old opponent.

Although, the stars put up a scintillating match in the round of 32 that saw both stars produce some incredible moments of magic. Unfortunately for Monfils, his Serbian competitor proved that he was no match for his trickery.

Djokovic then advanced on to the semi-finals, where he took on a confident Carlos Alcaraz. The pair put up a brilliant display, resulting in a narrow 7-6, 5-7, 6-7 win for the rising star. It was an exciting match that lasted for three hours and 36 minutes before Alcaraz continued his push to claim his first-ever Madrid Open title.

READ MORE: WATCH: Magnificent Madrid Open shots from Rafael Nadal, Gael Monfils, and co