One of the cosmopolitan figures at global scenario and in educational, cultural and philanthropic circles of India and abroad; Santosh Shukla is Supreme Court, Advocate (Cyber Security), hon’ble member of Bar Council of India and founder president of ALMA , Apart from this, he is president of World Book of Records. He has been awarded honorable membership of various international organizations. He is well- known personality and doing a lot of social work in promoting social causes. He involves in social and cultural activities across the world. He has always been dedicated in promoting social, cultural, education, environmental, positive journalism, economic development, human rights and humanity cause. He has been founder president of International Brahmin Parliament (IBP).

Born in 06 December 1973 at Sukulpur- a small village in Allahabad of Uttar Pradesh India, his formal education was completed from Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh. Inspired by the philosophy of thinker of the world, he studied and travelled a lot to promote universal brotherhood and empowering youth. His journey from Prayagraj to London has never been easy but his spirit and vision paved the way for dreams that came into reality. In the year 2000 under the guidance of Acharya (Dr.) Prabhakar Mishra, Murli Manohar Joshi (Former HRD Minister , Govt of India), Pt. Vishnu Prasad Shukla and Prof. Dr. Rajeev Sharma , the organization ALMA came into being to support the cause of IT education and vocational computer education to empower youth. ALMA got motivate by keen guidance of Shri Rajeev Shukla (Former Union Minister, Govt. of India), Shri Manish Tiwari (Former Union Minister, Govt. of India) and others. In 2007, under the gracious presence of the then Hon’ble Governor Justice V S Kokje (Himachal Pradesh), All India IT Association took shape to serve people. At international people like Shri Virendra Sharma (Member of Parliament, England), Dr. Diwakar Sukul (London), he tried a global venture to start World Book of Records, and World Book &Quality Certification in UK. Besides, he promotes positive journalism being chief editor of Alma Times, Alma Today, CTV and other news portals.

He is International President of World Book of Records London which is one of the leading organizations in international certification of world records. It works intercontinental from Europe, North America, South America, Africa, Asia and Australia with global network. It recognizes potential of talent and capabilities in world records through international certification. It also honors personalities and lists places of outstanding contribution for humanity and universal peace. He has also been holding key position as president of Quality Certification (QC) which is a globally authorized company for quality control and performance grading through World Book of Records & World Record and Quality Certification Limited, USA, UK & INDIA. It is a certification division of World Book Records - London for quality and control in products and services of corporate world. Quality Certification (QC) dedicates to improve individual, organizational and social performance.

Apart from this, he is also the President of the All India Information Technology (AIITA) and Asiatic Liberal Multifarious Association (ALMA) that promoting the cause of Computer Education. He does social, cultural, educational activities in various States of India and Abroad. He has been having more than two decades of experience of corporate and organizational management. He traveled extensively and erudite scholar of legal matters. To achieve the goals of eradicating poverty and creating economic stability for all, it is essential to address the longer-term structural issues that hold back a faster progress towards sustainable development; his vision conceptualized the entity of South Asian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (SACCI).

He has been recipient of various recognition and honor of national and international repute. The journey of 20 years of ALMA and its International venture pride of having 5 lakh families in pursuit of its mission.

Business Profile

Always setting new standards of excellence in the ocean of business and industry worldwide, Santosh Shukla has become a synonym of success .He has always dreamed big and has exceeded the limits of what is possible during his 20 years of career in international business. Dedicating his life to building new standards in businesses, creating jobs for eradication of unemployment, he introduced himself as pioneer of this Ultra modern business world. Inspiring the youth with owning several business sectors including educational he is known his expertise even for non-academic faculties as well. His amiability with all age groups, he posses all the qualities of true Leader .His leadership skills shows that he is the man of his words. His decision making abilities proves his inquisitive nature that seeks betterment of society in every respect. Following the footsteps of Mahatma Gandhi, he dedicates his life to create better opportunities for young generations. Due to his social services, people respect his philosophic approach. With the thinking to transform adversity into positivity, his optimistic thinking always sees the opportunities in challenges. With a natural aptitude for business, his approaches have been ideal for youth across the world.

Presence in International forums: