Adv Santosh Shukla is a Supreme court lawyer, for cyber crime in India. He has been invoved in gammut of activities. He has been setting new guidelines of suprimacy in business and industry around the world.. He has consistently thought ambitiously and has surpassed the restrictions of what is conceivable during his 20 years of profession in global business.Devoting his life to building new norms in organizations, creating various employment opportunities for upliftment of socienty with prime oject to eliminate joblessness. He has been a motivating identity among the youth and own business from diversified business segments including education, he is known for his aptitude in any event, for non-scholastic resources too. He hold the administration abilities showing and all the characteristics of genuine Leader. Due to his immense involment in social services, people respect his philosophic approach. One of the cosmopolitan figures at global scenario and in educational, cultural and philanthropic circles of India and abroad; Santosh Shukla is Supreme Court, Advocate (Cyber Security), hon’ble member of Bar Council of India and founder president of ALMA.

His Presence in International forums:

International Association for Community Development: Baltic Chambers, Suite 305, 50 Wellington Street, Glasgow, G2 6HJ, Scotland, UK

International Association Of Business Communicator: San Francisco, California, United States

Indo UK Cultural Forum, London

Indo Japan Business Forum, Tokyo

Positions Held By Adv. Santosh Shukla

Aufait International Law: Ex-President India

World Book of Record Limited : Founder, Director & President United Kingdom

World Book of Records Inc: Founder, Director & CEO United States of America

World Book of Record Limited : Founder, Director & CEO India

South Asian Chamber of Commerce & Industry: Director General SAARC Countries

World Record & Quality Certification Limited: Founder, Director & CEO United Kingdom

NGOs Association of India : National President India

World Book Of Records PTY Limited

Founder, Director & CEO Australia & Newzealand

Alma Kids International Pre School : ounder, Director & CEO Asia

Alma Today : Chief Editor India

International Informatics Mauritius Limited : Ex-Manging Director Mouritius & African Countries

International Brahmin Parliament : National President Asia

All India IT Association : National President India

Alma Times : Chief Editor India

Alma Limited : Managiging Director, India

Its an honor to have a dignitfied social woker, educationist, business man as a parton of Law Hub. He imparts with his knowlege that propells in expansion of Lawhub for various business and law related research activities. His guidance as a patron of lawHub is a driving force for the growth and expansion of LawHub to international arena in future.