Radiohead

Origin: Abingdon, Oxfordshire, England Genres: Art rock • alternative rock •

electronica • experimental rock Labels: XL Recordings • Ticker Tape Ltd. • Hostess Entertainment • TBD Records • Parlophone Records • Capitol Records Members: Thom Yorke

Jonny Greenwood

Colin Greenwood

Ed O'Brien

Philip Selway

Radiohead are an English rock band formed in Abingdon, Oxfordshire in 1985. The band consists of Thom Yorke (vocals, guitar, piano, keyboards), brothers Jonny Greenwood (lead guitar, keyboards, other instruments) and Colin Greenwood (bass), Ed O'Brien (guitar, backing vocals) and Philip Selway (drums, percussion).

As of 2011, Radiohead have sold more than 30 million albums worldwide. Their awards include six Grammy Awards and four Ivor Novello Awards. Rolling Stone named them one of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time and their readers voted them the second-best artist of the 2000s. Five of their albums have been nominated for the Mercury Prize, making them the most nominated act in the prize's history. They were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2019.

Why They Rock

Their songs are very inspirational.

Some of their songs are emotionally vulnerable.

Their lyrics are quite thought-provoking.

Thom Yorke has great vocals.

Their album, OK Computer, has been considered one of the best albums ever released.

They released their seventh studio album, In Rainbows, for free.

The Only Bad Quality

"Pablo Honey" was met with mixed reception from fans and critics.

Band Members

Thom Yorke – vocals, guitar, piano, keyboards

Jonny Greenwood – guitar, keyboards, ondes Martenot, orchestral arrangements

Colin Greenwood – bass guitar

Ed O'Brien – guitar, effects, backing vocals

Philip Selway – drums, percussion

Additional live members

Clive Deamer – drums, percussion (2011–present)

Discography

Studio albums

Pablo Honey (1993)

The Bends (1995)

OK Computer (1997)

Kid A (2000)

Amnesiac (2001)

Hail to the Thief (2003)

In Rainbows (2007)

In Rainbows Disk 2 (2009)

The King of Limbs (2011)

A Moon Shaped Pool (2016)

Archival albums