QUICK_EDIT

Attach signature (signatures can be changed in profile) close

It seems that Petroglyph Games, the authors of Grey Goo are working on a new real time strategy game called 8-Bit Armies. It is still work in progress, but it seems to be developed enough to get a Steam page of its own. Check the video and tell us if something on it rings a bell in some way:

Quote:

A Blast from the Past

8-Bit Armies is a classic, C&C-style Real-Time Strategy PC game. It's our most fast-paced, friendly, and accessible RTS game to date. Featuring offline single-player missions, co-op mode, skirmish, and PvP multiplayer modes running on dedicated servers.

Initial release includes:

25 offline campaign missions

10 co-op missions to play with your friends

10 multiplayer/skirmish maps that support up to 8 players online

AI with multiple difficulty options to play with cooperatively or fight against

Classic Base-Building mechanics let you construct the ultimate HQ from which to launch attacks against your foes

Destructible environments on maps ranging from small to very large

Easy to understand modern military units and structures lets RTS beginners jump right in

From the same team that brought you RTS classics such as Star Wars: Empire at War, Universe at War, and Grey Goo

8-Bit Armies is for anyone that enjoys RTS games, or felt overwhelmed by more serious games. With hours of solo and co-op gameplay included, there's something here for everyone!

And for those who are wondering about modding for this new game, here's a quick answer:

Quote:

Question: Are there any plans to introduce modding tools or a level editor?

Answer: Yes, we have plans to release the tools sometime after launch. If the demand is there, we'll definitely provide them. We know how important it is to get players building and sharing content for the game. Right now, our focus is on a great core game first.

I won't be surprised if what they are calling 'tools' will be just a map editor with, at the best of the possibilities, the ability to add custom civilian buildings on it.

Key Words: #8BitArmies #News #PetroglyphGames #Modding

Last edited by Banshee on Mon Mar 28, 2016 5:27 pm; edited 1 time in total

QUICK_EDIT