Robert M. Solovay, John R. Steel, Martin Stokhof, Anne Sjerp Troelstra, Alasdair Urquhart,

Moshe Y. Vardi, W. Hugh Woodin, John Woods On Tuesday, July 13, 2021 at 5:03:03 PM UTC-5, Dan Christensen wrote:

> WARNING TO STUDENTS: Don't be a victim of

AP writes: I suspect what Dan Christensen is complaining about is the fact that AP showed the world that Boole Logic needs massive repair and one of the most hideous Anti-logic of Boole was the Either Or..Or.. Both which is a standing contradiction alone. I mean to be a Logician means you can never stomach a contradiction and yet logicians of the past have made Either Or Or Both practically a centerpiece of their life's failure in logic.

Partial List of the World's Crackpot Logicians-- should be in a college Abnormal-Psychology department, not Logic//

Peter Bruce Andrews, Lennart Aqvist, Henk Barendregt, John Lane Bell, Nuel Belnap,

Paul Benacerraf, Jean Paul Van Bendegem, Johan van Benthem, Jean-Yves Beziau,

Andrea Bonomi, Nicolas Bourbaki (a group of logic fumblers), Alan Richard Bundy, Gregory Chaitin,

Jack Copeland, John Corcoran, Dirk van Dalen, Martin Davis, Michael A.E. Dummett, John Etchemendy, Hartry Field, Kit Fine, Melvin Fitting, Matthew Foreman, Michael Fourman,

Harvey Friedman, Dov Gabbay, L.T.F. Gamut (group of logic fumblers), Sol Garfunkel, Jean-Yves Girard, Siegfried Gottwald, Jeroen Groenendijk, Susan Haack, Leo Harrington, William Alvin Howard,

Ronald Jensen, Dick de Jongh, David Kaplan, Alexander S. Kechris, Howard Jerome Keisler,

Robert Kowalski, Georg Kreisel, Saul Kripke, Kenneth Kunen, Karel Lambert, Penelope Maddy,

David Makinson, Isaac Malitz, Gary R. Mar, Donald A. Martin, Per Martin-Lof,Yiannis N. Moschovakis, Jeff Paris, Charles Parsons, Solomon Passy, Lorenzo Pena, Dag Prawitz,

Graham Priest, Michael O. Rabin, Gerald Sacks, Dana Scott, Stewart Shapiro, Theodore Slaman,

Robert M. Solovay, John R. Steel, Martin Stokhof, Anne Sjerp Troelstra, Alasdair Urquhart,

Moshe Y. Vardi, W. Hugh Woodin, John Woods

Now I should include the authors of Logic textbooks for they, more than most, perpetuate and crank the error filled logic, the Horrible Error of 2 OR 1 = 3 with 2 AND 1 = 1, that is forced down the throats of young students, making them cripples of ever thinking straight and clearly.

Many of these authors have passed away but their error filled books are a scourge to modern education

George Boole, William Jevons, Bertrand Russell, Kurt Godel, Rudolf Carnap,

Ludwig Wittgenstein, Willard Quine, Alfred North Whitehead, Irving Copi, Michael Withey,

Patrick Hurley, Harry J Gensler, David Kelley, Jesse Bollinger, Theodore Sider,

David Barker-Plummer, I. C. Robledo, John Nolt, Peter Smith, Stan Baronett, Jim Holt,

Virginia Klenk, David Agler, Susanne K. Langer, Gary M. Hardegree, Raymond M. Smullyan,

John Venn, William Gustason, Richmond H. Thomason,

All of them are clowns of logic, although they have interest in logic, none are past a baby stage understanding of what Logic is. They are all worse than the fool George Boole. All of them are a disgrace to the subject we call Logic. All of them are in the same boat as George Boole-- catching pneumonia and then having his wife douse him in bed with cold freezing water and taking cold showers-- thinking that combatting pneumonia is done by getting colder.

All of the above listed should never be allowed to teach their nonsense and pollute the minds of youngsters with their crazy 9 OR 5 = 14 with 9 AND 5 = 4, all because a crazy Boole with Jevons in the 1800s thought that OR was add and AND was subtract. All because a true logician has more than a microgram brain of Logic in his head, and realizes that if you had a string of statements, say 10 statements and if just one single statement of those ten is true, makes the entire set of 10 to be true also, regardless of the truth value of the other 9 statements. Said in a different manner, if you have a truth of a single statement, and, no matter how you surround that single statement with 9 other statements, regardless of their truth value, because of the truth of the one statement makes the combined all 10 statements have a true value.

The stupid microgram brain of Boole and Jevons in the subject of Logic (witness their history with pneumonia) is not a Logic at all, for it leads to the incredibly stupid formulation that 3 AND 2 = 1 with 3 OR 2 = 5. Yes, those two logical idiots Boole and Jevons and every idiot of Logic since those two, have thought the truth table of AND was TFFF, when according to a real true logical person-- you need just 1 true statement to make a compound statements as a whole be true. So the true true truth table of AND was TTTF. And this makes sense in the above idiots of Logic with their OR, so confused were those idiots that they combined a "or" with an "and" and generated a "inclusive or" of TTTF. I mean what clowns are these? Who think that OR has to be compounded or a composite of "and", with "or" forming the idiot idea of an "inclusive or" and, not even realizing that you no longer have a primitive-connector. The true truth table of OR is exclusive and is FTTF, which is subtraction in mathematics.

Inclusive OR, INCLUSIVE OR, is the invention of an idiot of logic, pure slab of bonehead worthless bonehead of Logic, for the "inclusive or" is a village idiot mind that stacks together the OR and the AND all into one idiotic product of Either ,,Or,, Or Both. Not an accident waiting to happen in Logic, a multiple chain collision on the expressway is the Either Or Or Both. It is not a primitive logical Connector that the 4 primitive logic Connectors need to be, no, the Either Or Or Both is already a fool's built compound connector pretending to be primitive connector. A village idiot of the 1800s like George Boole and his compatriot Jevons would not have enough of a logical mind to see that Either Or Or Both is a compound piece of worthless nonsense. Even a 8 year old can see that Either Or Or Both is a compounded piece of crap and has no business of being in Logic primitive connectors.

To be in Logic, you need a Logical Mind to even do logic, and to come up with a SELF CONTRADICTION in terms like it is updown or it is overeasy-hard, is the same as Inclusive-Or, a term and idea that is a self-contradiction. Logic is about staying away from contradiction. And here, starting with Boole and Jevons, they built their logic on a Contradiction of the inclusive-or. It would be like at the Olympics in the 100 meter dash, at the sound of the gun, a runner, instead of going forwards, goes backwards in running step in the dash, not to the finish line but to oblivion running backwards.

So, please stop torturing the brains and minds of our young students just because you are a clown of microgram brain of logic. And throw out all the OLD LOGIC textbooks for they are not learning or teaching but brainwashing by polluting moneygrubs, more concerned over money flow than what is the truth of logic.

#1 first comes Logic-- think straight and clear which many math professors are deaf dumb and blind to

My corrections of Old Logic have a history that dates before 1993, sometime around 1991, I realized the Euclid proof of infinitude of primes was illogical, sadly sadly wrong, in that the newly formed number by "multiply the lot and add 1" was necessarily a new prime in the indirect proof method. So that my history of fixing Old Logic starts in 1991, but comes to a synthesis of correcting all four of the connectors of Equal/not, And, Or, If->Then, by 2015.

History of AP Logic starts with 1991 and culminates with New Logic that replaces Old Logic by 2015. Old Logic is like comparing a flat earth theory to a true round earth theory.

Before you do Mathematics, you need to be able to think correctly, straight and clear. Unfortunately schools across the world do not teach proper true Logic. They teach a mish mash gaggle of error filled garbage and call it Logic.

The 4 connectors of Logic are:

1) Equal (equivalence) plus Not (negation) where the two are combined as one

2) And (conjunction)

3) Or (exclusive or) (disjunction)

4) Implication

New Logic

EQUAL/NOT table:

T = T = T

T = not F = T

F = not T = T

F = F = T

Equality must start or begin logic because in the other connectors, we

cannot say a result equals something if we do not have equality built

already. Now to build equality, it is unary in that T=T and F =F. So

we need another unary connector to make equality a binary. Negation is

that other connector and when we combine the two we have the above

table.

Equality combined with Negation allows us to proceed to build the

other three logic connectors.

Now, unfortunately, Logic must start with equality allied with

negation and in math what this connector as binary connector ends up

being-- is multiplication for math. One would think that the first

connector of Logic that must be covered is the connector that ends up

being addition of math, not multiplication. But maybe we can find a

philosophy-logic answer as to why Logic starts with equal/not and is

multiplication rather than addition. That explanation is of course the Space in which the Logic operators govern, and the full space is area, so that is multiplication. And we see that in a geometry diagram

T T

T T where all four small squares are T valued making a 4 square

While addition is and with a Space like this

T T

T F and we have just 3 of the 4 smaller squares covered by addition.

Here you we have one truth table equal/not whose endresult is 4 trues and now we move on to AND as addition.

New Logic

AND

T & T = T

T & F = T

F & T = T

F & F = F

AND is ADD in New Logic, and that makes a whole lot of common sense.

AND feels like addition, the joining of parts. And the truth table for

AND should be such that if given one true statement in a series of

statements then the entire string of statements is true. So if I had P

and Q and S and R, I need only one of those to be true to make the

string true P & Q & S & R = True if just one statement is true.

The truth table of AND results in 3 trues and 1 false.

New Logic

OR(exclusive)

T or T = F

T or F = T

F or T = T

F or F = F

OR is seen as a choice, a pick and choose. So if I had T or T, there

is no choice and so it is False. If I had T or F there is a choice and

so it is true. Again the same for F or T, but when I have F or F,

there is no choice and so it is false. OR in mathematics, because we

pick and discard what is not chosen, that OR is seen as subtraction.

OR is a truth table whose endresult is 2 trues, 2 falses.

New Logic

IMPLIES (Material Conditional)

IF/THEN

MOVES INTO

T -> T = T

T -> F = F

F -> T = U probability outcome

F -> F = U probability outcome

A truth table that has a variable which is neither T or F, but U for

unknown or a probability outcome. We need this U so that we can do

math where 0 divided into something is not defined.

Now notice there are four truth tables where the endresult is 4 trues,

3 trues with 1 false, 2 trues with 2 falses and finally a truth table

with a different variable other than T or F, with variable U. This is

important in New Logic that the four primitive connectors, by

primitive I mean they are independent of one another so that one

cannot be derived by the other three. The four are axioms,

independent. And the way you can spot that they are independent is

that if you reverse their values so that 4 trues become 4 falses. For

AND, reversal would be FFFT instead of TTTF. For OR, a reversal would

be TFFT instead of FTTF.

To be independent and not derivable by the other three axioms you need

a condition of this:

One Table be 4 of the same

One Table be 3 of the same

One Table be 2 of the same

And to get division by 0 in mathematics, one table with a unknown variable.

So, how did Old Logic get it all so wrong so bad? I think the problem

was that in the 1800s when Logic was being discovered, is that the

best minds of the time were involved in physics, chemistry, biology

and looked upon philosophy and logic as second rate and that second

rate minds would propose Old Logic. This history would be from Boole

1854 The Laws of Thought, and Jevons textbook of Elementary Lessons on

Logic, 1870. Boole started the Old Logic with the help of Jevons and

fostered the wrong muddleheaded idea that OR was ADD, when it truly is

AND.

Now the way people actually live, is an indicator of how well they

thought and how well any of their ideas should be taken seriously. In

the case of Boole, he went to class in a downpour rain, why without a

raincoat? And reaching class, instead of changing into dry warm

clothes, stood for hours in front of students, sopping wet and

shivering. Of course he caught pneumonia, but instead of being

sensible, common sense that even a fly would have, he insisted his

wife give him cold showers and make the bed all wet and freezing. Of

course, he would die from this. Now, does anyone today, think that a

mind like that has anything to offer Logic or mathematics, is as crazy

as what Boole was.

But once you have textbooks about Logic, it is difficult to correct a

mistake because of the money making social network wants to make more

money, not go around fixing mistakes. So this nightmarish mistakes of

the truth tables was not seen by Frege, by Russell, by Whitehead, by

Carnap, by Godel, and by 1908 the symbols and terminology of the Old

Logic truth tables were so deeply rooted into Logic, that only a

Logical minded person could ever rescue Logic.

1.1 The "and" truth table should be TTTF not what Boole thought TFFF.

Only an utter gutter mind of logic would think that in a series of

statements, that AND is true when all statements are true, but to the

wise person-- he realizes that if just one statement is true, the

entire series is true, where we toss aside all the irrelevant and

false statements --(much what life itself is-- we pick out the true

ones and ignore all the false ones). In fact, in a proof in mathematics, the proof can be full of false and nonsense statements, so long as the proof itself is there and be seen as overall True. For example the proof of SAS in geometry, side angle side, can be packed with false statements and irrelevant statements and still be true.

1.2 The error of "if-then" truth table should be TFUU, not that of TFTT

1.3 The error of "not" and "equal", neither unary, but should be binary

1.4 The error that Reductio Ad Absurdum is a proof method, when it is

merely probability-truth, not guaranteed

1.5 The error, the "or" connector is truth table FTTF, never that of TTTF, for the idea of an inclusive "or", --- either A or B or both, is a self contradiction. And funny, how the fathers of Logic-- Boole and Jevons had a connector that was self contradictory, as if the fathers of logic had no logical mind to be doing logic in the first place.

1.6 So that begs the question, what in mathematics has a truth table of TFFF. Well the simple answer is that it is a reverse of TTTF which is AND, and so the former can be got by that of a NOT function on AND. But in isolation, what is a table of TFFF in mathematics? My guess is it is Absolute Value, a form of Absolute Value in mathematics, but that is only a guess. In 2016 I gave a half hearted argument that TFFF was absolute value.

Suspend all College Classes in Logic, until they Fix their Errors // Teaching True Logic series, book 1 Kindle Edition

by Archimedes Plutonium (Author)

Last revision was 29Mar2021. This is AP's 5th published book of science.

Preface:

First comes Logic-- think straight and clear which many logic and math professors are deaf dumb and blind to, and simply refuse to recognize and fix their errors.

The single biggest error of Old Logic of Boole and Jevons was their "AND" and "OR" connectors. They got them mixed up and turned around. For their logic ends up being that of 3 OR 2 = 5 with 3 AND 2 = either 3 or 2 but never 5, when even the local village idiot knows that 3 AND 2 = 5 (addition) with 3 OR 2 = either 3 or 2 (subtraction). The AND connector in Logic stems from the idea, the mechanism involved, that given a series of statements, if just one of those many statements has a true truth value, then the entire string of statements is overall true, and thus AND truth table is truly TTTF and never TFFF. And secondly, their error of the If->Then conditional. I need to make it clear enough to the reader why the true Truth Table of IF --> Then requires a U for unknown or uncertain with a probability outcome for F --> T = U and F --> F = U. Some smart readers would know that the reason for the U is because without the U, Logic has no means of division by 0 which is undefined in mathematics. You cannot have a Logic that is less than mathematics. A logic that is impoverished and cannot do a "undefined for division by 0 in mathematics". The true logic must be able to have the fact that division by 0 is undefined. True logic is larger than all of mathematics, and must be able to fetch any piece of mathematics from out of Logic itself. So another word for U is undefined. And this is the crux of why Reductio ad Absurdum cannot be a proof method of mathematics, for a starting falsehood in a mathematics proof can only lead to a probability end conclusion.

My corrections of Old Logic have a history that dates before 1993, sometime around 1991, I realized the Euclid proof of infinitude of primes was illogical, sadly sadly wrong, in that the newly formed number by "multiply the lot and add 1" was necessarily a new prime in the indirect proof method. So that my history of fixing Old Logic starts in 1991, but comes to a synthesis of correcting all four of the connectors of Equal/not, And, Or, If->Then, by 2015.

Cover picture: some may complain my covers are less in quality, but I have a good reason for those covers-- I would like covers of math or logic to show the teacher's own handwriting as if he were back in the classroom writing on the blackboard or an overhead projector.

Length: 72 pages

File Size: 773 KB

Print Length: 72 pages

Publication Date: March 12, 2019

Sold by: Amazon Digital Services LLC

Language: English

ASIN: B07PMB69F5

Text-to-Speech: Enabled ￼

X-Ray: Not Enabled ￼

Word Wise: Not Enabled

Lending: Enabled

Screen Reader: Supported ￼

Enhanced Typesetting: Enabled ￼

#6-2, 27th published book

Correcting Reductio Ad Absurdum// Teaching True Logic series, book 2 Kindle Edition

by Archimedes Plutonium (Author)

Last revision was 9NOV2020. This is AP's 27th published book.

Preface:

These are the TRUE Truth Tables of the 4 connectors of Logic

Equal+Not

T = T = T

T = ~F = T

F = ~T = T

F = F = T

If--> then

T --> T = T

T --> F = F

F --> T = U (unknown or uncertain)

F --> F = U (unknown or uncertain)

And

T & T = T

T & F = T

F & T = T

F & F = F

Or

T or T = F

T or F = T

F or T = T

F or F = F

Those can be analyzed as being Equal+Not is multiplication. If-->then is division. And is addition and Or is subtraction in mathematics. Now I need to emphasis this error of Old Logic, the If->Then conditional. I need to make it clear enough to the reader why the true Truth Table of IF --> Then requires a U for unknown or uncertain with a probability outcome for F --> T = U and F --> F = U. Some smart readers would know that the reason for the U is because without the U, Logic has no means of division by 0 which is undefined in mathematics. You cannot have a Logic that is less than mathematics. A logic that is impoverished and cannot do a "undefined for division by 0 in mathematics". The true logic must be able to have the fact that division by 0 is undefined. True logic is larger than all of mathematics, and must be able to fetch any piece of mathematics from out of Logic itself. So another word for U is undefined. And this is the crux of why Reductio ad Absurdum cannot be a proof method of mathematics, for a starting falsehood in a mathematics proof can only lead to a probability unknown, undefined end conclusion.

Now in Old Logic they had for Reductio Ad Absurdum as displayed by this schematic:

| | ~p

| |---

| | .

| | .

| | q

| | .

| | .

| | ~q

| p

Which is fine except for the error of not indicating the end conclusion of "p" is only a probability of being true, not guaranteed as true. And this is the huge huge error that mathematicians have fallen victim of. For the Reductio Ad Absurdum is not a proof method for mathematics, it is probability of being true or false. Math works on guaranteed truth, not probability. This textbook is written to fix that error.

Length: 86 pages

Product details

• ASIN : B07Q18GQ7S

• Publication date : March 23, 2019

• Language : English

• File size : 1178 KB

• Text-to-Speech : Enabled

• Enhanced typesetting : Enabled

• X-Ray : Not Enabled

• Word Wise : Not Enabled

• Print length : 86 pages

• Lending : Enabled

• Best Sellers Rank: #346,875 in Kindle Store (See Top 100 in Kindle Store)

◦ #28 in Logic (Kindle Store)

◦ #95 in Two-Hour Science & Math Short Reads

◦ #217 in Mathematical Logic

•

#6-3, 143rd published book

DeMorgan's Laws are fantasies, not laws// Teaching True Logic series, book 3 Kindle Edition

By Archimedes Plutonium

Last revision was 30Apr2021. This is AP's 143rd published book.

Preface: The Logic community never had the correct truth table of the primitive 4 connectors of Logic, (1) Equal compounded with NOT, (2) AND, (3) OR, (4) IF->THEN. In 1800s, the founders of Logic messed up in terrible error all 4 of the primitive logic connectors. And since the 1990s, AP has wanted an explanation of why Old Logic got all 4 connectors in total error? What was the reason for the mess up? And in the past few years, I finally pinned the reason to starting Logic with DeMorgan's fake laws, from which Boole, a close friend of DeMorgan, was going to keep his friendship and accept the DeMorgan Laws. That meant that DeMorgan, Boole, Jevons accepted OR as being that of Either..Or..Or..Both, what is called the inclusive OR. But the inclusive OR is a contradiction in terms, for there never can exist a combo of OR with AND simultaneously. This book goes into detail why the DeMorgan laws are fake and fantasy.

Cover Picture: Looks a bit rough, but I want students and readers to see my own handwriting as if this were a lecture and the cover picture a blackboard where I write out DeMorgan's two (fake) laws of logic.

Product details

• File Size : 620 KB

• Word Wise : Enabled

• Print Length : 38 pages

• ASIN : B08M4BY4XM

• Publication Date : October 27, 2020

• Language: : English

• Enhanced Typesetting : Enabled

• X-Ray : Not Enabled

• Text-to-Speech : Enabled

• Screen Reader : Supported

• Lending : Enabled

•

•

#6-4, 100th published book

Pragmatism, the only Philosophy I loved // Teaching True Logic series, book 4 Kindle Edition

By Archimedes Plutonium

I need to give credit to the philosophy of Pragmatism, the only philosophy that I know of that is based on science. Credit for my discovery of the Plutonium Atom Totality in 1990, came in part, partially due to a passage of the Pragmatist Charles Sanders Peirce in Peirce's Cosmology:

Peirce's The Architecture of Theories...

...would be a Cosmogonic Philosophy. It would suppose that in the beginning - infinitely remote - there was a chaos of unpersonalized feeling, which being without connection or regularity would properly be without existence. This feeling, sporting here and there in pure arbitrariness, would have

started the germ of a generalizing tendency. Its other sportings would be evanescent, but this would have a growing virtue. Thus, the tendency to habit would be started; and from this, with the other principles of evolution, all the regularities of the universe would be evolved. At any time, however, an element of pure chance survives and will remain until the world becomes an absolutely perfect, rational, and symmetrical system, in which mind is at last crystallized in the infinitely distant future.

--- end quoting Peirce's Cosmology ---

But also I must give credit to Pragmatism for making it a philosophy one can actually live their lives by, for living a life of pragmatic solutions to everyday problems that occur in my life. A case in point example is now in March 2020, being the pragmatist that I am, and enduring the 2020 corona virus pandemic. No other philosophy that I know of is so keenly in tune with a person, the surrounding environment and how to live.

Length: 123 pages

Product details

• File size : 807 KB

• Word Wise : Enabled

• Print length : 123 pages

• Publication date : March 14, 2020

• ASIN : B085X863QW

• Language: : English

• Text-to-Speech : Enabled

• Enhanced typesetting : Enabled

• Screen Reader : Supported

• X-Ray : Not Enabled

• Lending : Enabled

• Best Sellers Rank: #4,160,707 in Kindle Store (See Top 100 in Kindle Store)

◦ #61,471 in Philosophy (Kindle Store)

◦ #193,599 in Science & Math (Kindle Store)

◦ #240,849 in Philosophy (Books)

y z

| /

| /

|/______ x

More people reading and viewing AP's newsgroup than viewing sci.math, sci.physics. So AP has decided to put all NEW WORK, to his newsgroup. And there is little wonder because in AP's newsgroups, there is only solid pure science going on, not a gang of hate spewing misfits blighting the skies.

In sci.math, sci.physics there is only stalking hate spew along with Police Drag Net Spam of no value and other than hate spew there is Police drag net spam day and night.

I re-opened the old newsgroup PAU of 1990s and there one can read my recent posts without the hassle of stalkers and spammers, Police Drag Net Spam that floods each and every day, book and solution manual spammers, off-topic-misfits, front-page-hogs, churning imbeciles, stalking mockers, suppression-bullies, and demonizers. And the taxpayer funded hate spew stalkers who ad hominem you day and night on every one of your posts.

There is no discussion of science in sci.math or sci.physics, just one long line of hate spewing stalkers followed up with Police Drag Net Spam (easy to spot-- very offtopic-- with hate charged content). And countries using sci.physics & sci.math as propaganda platforms, such as tampering in elections with their mind-rot.

Read my recent posts in peace and quiet.

https://groups.google.com/forum/?hl=en#!forum/plutonium-atom-universe

Archimedes Plutonium