The map illustrates Algeria's landscape which consists mostly of high plateaus and the Sahara Desert.

The Atlas mountains sit to the north, and the Ahaggar Massif is southeast. The high plateaus stretch for more than 372 miles (600 km) and consist of undulating, steppe-like plains averaging 3,608 - 4,265 ft (1,100 - 1,300 m) and dropping to 1,312 ft (400 m) as you move east. The highest point of the country is Mt. Tahat at 9,850 ft. (3,003 m); the lowest point is Lake Chott Melrhir at -131 ft. (-40 m). Lake Chott Melrhir is an endorheic (closed basin) salt lake whose size varies throughout the year, yet is the largest lake in Algeria with its maximum area about 2,600 sq. miles (6,700 sq km). To the north is a hilly and narrow coastal plain along the Mediterranean Sea with a few small rivers.

Provinces Map of Algeria

Algeria has 58 wilayas (provinces) :

Prior to December, 2019: Adrar, Aïn Defla, Ain Temouchent, Algiers, Annaba, Batna, Bechar, Bejaia, Biskra, Blida, Bordj Bou Arreridj, Bouira, Boumerdes, Chlef, Constantine, Djelfa, El Bayadh, El Oued, El Tarf, Ghardaia, Guelma, Illizi, Jijel, Khenchela, Laghouat, Mascara, Medea, Mila, Mostaganem, M'Sila, Naama, Oran, Ouargla, Oum el Bouaghi, Relizane, Saida, Setif, Sidi Bel Abbes, Skikda, Souk Ahras, Tamanghasset, Tebessa, Tiaret, Tindouf, Tipaza, Tissemsilt, Tizi Ouzou, Tlemcen.

Ten new provinces were added as of December 2019 : Timimoune, Bordj Badji Mokhtar, Ouled Djellal, Beni Abbes, In Salah, In Guezzam, Touggourt, Djanet, El-Meghaier and El-Menia.

With an area of 336,839 sq. km, Tamanghasset is the largest province. Algiers is the most populous one and hosts the national capital of Algiers.

Where is Algeria?

Algeria is a country located in the Maghreb region of North Africa. It is located in the Northern Hemisphere. As the Prime Meridian passes through the country, it has territory in both the Eastern and Western Hemispheres. Algeria is bordered by seven countries. These are Tunisia, Libya, and Niger to the northeast, east, and southeast respectively. Mali, Mauritania, and Western Sahara lie to the southwest. Morocco borders Algeria to the west. The country also has a coastline on the Mediterranean Sea to the north.

Algeria Bordering Countries: Libya, Morocco, Tunisia, Mali, The Niger, Western Sahara, Mauritania.

Regional Maps: Map of Africa