"Citizen Kane," considered by many critics to be the greatest American film, is to be reissued for commercial theatrical release on May 1, exactly 50 years after it was first shown in movie theaters. The film, the story of a newspaper tycoon's rise to wealth and power, was directed, written and produced by Orson Welles, then 25 years old, who also starred as the publisher, Charles Foster Kane.

Though widely seen on television and in film school courses, "Citizen Kane" has not been given an unlimited run in movie theaters in more than 30 years, said executives at Paramount Pictures and the Turner Entertainment Company, which are releasing the film.

In preparation for the release, a new and sharper print and sound track have been made, but the new copy will be in the original black and white, not color. Turner Entertainment has colored many of the films it has acquired in recent years, including classics like "Casablanca," and has been widely criticized for doing so. Welles's Contract Cited

"Orson Welles's contract with R.K.O. provided him with sufficient creative control that we felt our right to colorize this picture was questionable, and therefore we decided not to do it," Roger Mayer, president of Turner Entertainment, said today. "Until then, there was some talk of colorizing it for television, but we never had any intention of putting a color version into theaters."

Initially, "Citizen Kane," which has won several polls to name the best film of all time, will be shown in specialty houses in New York, Los Angeles and five other cities, with broader distribution following. An advertising and publicity campaign capitalizing on the 50th anniversary is planned, but a release in hundreds of theaters, which is the norm for movies these days, is not anticipated.

"We don't think there's that big an audience," Barry London, co-president of Paramount, said. "We primarily believe it will be the same historically defined audience that has an interest in this kind of programming and supports movies in repertory theaters."

Turner Entertainment, which acquired the R.K.O. film library in 1987 and two years later signed a distribution agreement with Paramount, also plans to release a new video version of the film this summer. That 50th-anniversary edition will consist of the new print, a documentary on the life and work of Orson Welles and testimonials from leading directors on the impact "Citizen Kane" has had on them.