Gloria Corry Marsh, of Conyers, passed away Monday, February 7, 2022, at the age of 71.

Gloria was born on September 27, 1950, to the late Jesse and Lucy Pickett Corry in Salisbury, North Carolina. Gloria attended Livingstone College and later in life she graduated with an Associate’s Degree from DeKalb College.

Gloria was married to Mr. Ben Marsh for 29 years. She raised two talented daughters, Delania Brown and Melanie Patterson, both of Covington, Georgia.

Gloria was a dedicated employee of AT&T; after 45 years of service, she retired in 2017 and spent her time building her embroidery business, making beautiful quilts for family and friends, collecting dolls, and spending time with her family.

She was preceded in death by her parents, Jesse and Lucy Pickett Corry; sisters, Mary Corry, Alberta Corry, Nancy Corry Waiters, Margaret Corry Rush; brothers, Steven Corry, Arthur Corry, and Jesse Corry.

Survivors include her husband, Mr. Ben Marsh; daughters, Delania Brown, Melanie Patterson (Leon); step-daughter, Kimberly Willis (Russell); grandchildren, Acacia Morton-Mack, Dexter Julien Morton, David Patterson, Leah Patterson, Joshua Patterson; great-grandchild, Lauren Mack; sisters, Frances Gibson, Carolyn Corry; brothers, Walter Corry (Carlotta), Hayward Corry (Raquel), David Corry, Fredrick Corry (Pearline); widowed brother-in-law, Rev. Dr. Henry B. Waiters; widowed sister-in-law, Clara Corry; Dexter Morton whom she affectionally called her son; and a host of nieces, nephews, cousins and friends.

A visitation for Gloria will be held Tuesday, February 22, 2022, from 5:00 – 7:00 P.M., at Caldwell & Cowan Funeral Home, 1215 Access Road, Covington, Georgia. A Homegoing Memorial Service will be held at God’s Tabernacle for Believers in Rockwell, North Carolina, Saturday, February 26, 2022, 11:00 A.M.

This obituary was prepared with love and affection by her daughter, Melanie Patterson.

Governor Brian Kemp’s latest executive order has eliminated restrictions on large gatherings; however, CDC guidelines recommend social distancing (6 feet apart) and wearing of masks while in public. Caldwell & Cowan Funeral Home requests that you observe these recommendations while in our funeral home attending visitations and/or services.