Quiz Answer Key and Fun Facts

1. Which of these ladies was married to Adam?

Answer: All of these

Adam's wives, for now, are Althea Chandler, Erica Kane, Brooke English, Dixie Cooney, Natalie Marlowe, Gloria Marsh, Liza Colby, Arlene Vaughn, and Krystal Carey.

2. Which wife listed below did NOT make a child with Adam?

Answer: Brooke English

Even though Brooke was the first wife that Adam married out of love, they never shared a child together. Brooke had children with Tom Cudahy (Laura) and Tad Martin (Jamie)

3. David Canary portrays Adam on AMC. What year did he win his first Emmy for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series?

Answer: 1986

Five time Emmy winner Canary won his first Emmy in 1986 opposite Lead Actress Emmy winner Erika Slezak. He won his other Emmys in 1988, 1989, 1993, and 2001.

4. Adam and Palmer's feud goes back many years because Adam holds Palmer responsible for whose death?

Answer: Lottie Chandler

It was indeed Lottie, Adam's sister, who passed away and Adam blamed Palmer for her death. Palmer and Lottie dated for several months and, one day, she committed suicide. Their feud still goes on to this day.

5. With which wife did Adam fake his kidnapping?

Answer: Gloria Marsh

Adam tested Gloria's loyalty and faked his kidnapping. Gloria found out about his scheme and divorced him.

6. Adam switched his sperm sample with who to be the father of Liza's baby?

Answer: Jake Martin

Adam purchased the fertility clinic where Liza got artificially inseminated and, at the last minute, switched Jake's sperm with his to be the father of his and Liza's daughter, Colby.

7. Adam has a grandson named Adam Chandler III. Who is the father of Adam Chandler III?

Answer: JR Chandler

JR Chandler and Babe Carey share a child, Adam Chandler III. Since JR is Adam's son, Adam Chandler III would make him Adam's grandson.

8. Adam slept with which woman to get David Hayward acquitted of drugging people with libidozone?

Answer: Kaye Campobello

Adam and Kaye had a fling years ago and Hayward threatened to have Adam's son, JR, arrested for breaking into his hotel room if Adam did not get the charges against him dropped.

9. Adam did a dastardly thing when he resurrected Marian's past at her dinner date with Stuart. What did Adam do?

Answer: He invited all the men Marian slept with while she was a hooker to the dinner

Apparently, this did not change Stuart's feelings for Marian since he still loved her. Shame on Adam!

10. Gloria poisoned Adam with what?

Answer: Arsenic

Gloria poisoned Adam with arsenic since she blamed him for the death of their daughter, Anna Claire.

Source: Author CAGuy0206

This quiz was reviewed by FunTrivia editor Gamemaster1967 before going online.

Any errors found in FunTrivia content are routinely corrected through our feedback system.