Pittsburgh, PA, May 22, 2012 --(PR.com)-- The MAGNET Global Network continues to grow its ranks with the Sagon-Phior agency joining as the newest member of the international association of independent advertising agencies. Sagon-Phior, an integrated marketing and advertising firm based in Los Angeles, is highly regarded for its award-winning creative. Over its 25-year history, the firm has been sought out to create thousands of highly successful integrated marketing and advertising campaigns for many major consumer and business-to-business brands including Sony, McCormick Distilling, Princess Cruises, Microsoft, Ford, Honda, 20th Century Fox, Cablevision, Pioneer Electronics, Condusiv Technologies, Nevada State Bank and Rodney Strong Vineyard Estates.

“Our goal in joining MAGNET is to further enhance the resources, capabilities, market intelligence and global reach we can bring to our clients,” said CEO/Partner Glenn Sagon. “We believe that our unique expertise in Emotional Marketing will be helpful to the organization, so we look forward to creating many mutually beneficial opportunities with our Network partners and colleagues.”

Early in his career, Sagon started as an art director with Foote Cone Belding and later as creative director for Columbia Pictures, producing many global campaigns for blockbuster movies such as Ghostbusters, The Big Chill, The Karate Kid and Against All Odds. Sagon’s partner and co-founder of the agency, Rio Phior, chief creative officer/partner, is another advertising and entertainment industry veteran. Phior's career began as a fashion illustrator and designer, segueing to art director and copywriter for Wells, Rich Greene Advertising. Rio then became executive creative director for George Lucas and Steven Spielberg at Lucasfilm where she was responsible for developing the worldwide branding, advertising and merchandising for many of their films including Raiders of the Lost Ark, The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.

Their well-honed skills and success in understanding how to connect with an audience in an emotionally compelling way and understanding “the art of making something famous,” have been the perfect platform for Sagon-Phior’s creative approach for clients in all industries. “The foundation for every client integrated marketing and advertising program we create is ‘emotional marketing;’ painting a picture that viscerally connects and resonates with people long after the message has ended,” says Phior. “It’s about storytelling at its best, effectively bonding with people, because how people feel about a brand is what motivates them to act.”

About Sagon-Phior

The agency was founded in 1986 by Glenn Sagon and Rio Phior after highly successful careers in the advertising and entertainment industries. The firm employs 30 people and is headquartered in Los Angeles, with satellite offices in New York, Kansas City, Kan., Dallas and San Francisco. They provide a wide range of services including strategic brand planning, integrated marketing, multi-cultural and cause marketing, comprehensive creative development across all channels, media planning and buying, social media, online marketing and app development. Clients cover a multitude of industries including alcoholic beverages, associations, charities, communications, education, entertainment, fast food, financial, healthcare/hospitals, technology, packaged goods, restaurants, travel and tourism. Visit www.sagon-phior.com.

About MAGNET Global Network

Providing global experts and local expertise, MAGNET agencies work with more than 1,000 consumer, retail, business-to-business and industrial clients worldwide. Members share experience, knowledge and ideas with partner agencies domestically and internationally, collaborating on business opportunities and enhancing their ability to compete, serve clients, grow and raise their standard of work in the advertising agency business. Member firms must also maintain a level of commitment to the network to stay in good standing. Currently comprising more than 40 agencies and affiliations, MAGNET is continually seeking to add leading independent agencies throughout the world. Visit www.MAGNETGlobal.org or on Twitter @MAGNETGlobalNet.