Frederic is also a Member of the Board of Directors at Greenwood Hall since 2015. Frederic brings to Greenwood Hall diversified industry experience in high technology, entertainment, telecommunications, manufacturing, software, consumer products, publishing, data and digital storage, power electronics, networking and fiber optics.

In his leadership roles, Frederic has raised more than $200 million in capital through public offerings, private equity, bank, lease and strategic partner financings. Frederic currently serves on the board of directors and as Treasurer and Chairman of the Finance and Audit Committee of C5 Youth Foundation of Southern California, a five-year youth leadership development program for high-potential, at-risk youth.

Most recently, Frederic was Chief Financial Officer of enterprise software provider Condusiv Technologies Corporation from 2013 to 2014.

From 2011 to 2012 Frederic was Chief Financial Officer of Spanish language radio and television broadcaster Liberman Broadcasting, Inc.

Earlier, Frederic worked with Data Direct Networks to direct the company’s financial turnaround, serving as Chief Financial Officer from 2009 to 2011.

Prior to that, Frederic was Chief Financial Officer and Corporate Secretary of Nasdaq-listed Optical Communications Products, Inc. from 2006 until the company’s premium priced acquisition by Oplink in 2008.

From 2002 to 2006 Frederic was Chief Financial Officer of Nasdaq-listed Qualstar Corporation, a manufacturer of automated electronic data storage solutions and power supplies and earlier, he was Chief Financial Officer and Corporate Secretary of Nasdaq-listed Accelerated Networks, Inc., joining the company in its pre-revenue and pre-IPO beginning through its successful merger with Occam Networks in 2001.

Earlier in his career, Frederic held progressive financial and operational positions with Software Dynamics, Incorporated (sold to SI Corp.); ADC Telecommunications, Inc.; CBS, Inc.; Raytheon Company; and Beatrice Foods. Various positions held were chief financial officer, vice president of finance and administration and controller.

Frederic’s professional affiliations include active membership in Financial Executives International and National Association of Corporate Directors (NACD) and previous independent board positions with GF Acquisition Corporation and WISE & Healthy Aging. Frederic is a certified Director of UCLA’s Public Company Training and Certification Program.

Frederic holds an MBA from Loyola Marymount University and B.S. degrees from California State University Los Angeles and California State Polytechnic University.