V-locity Alternatives

Condusiv Technologies

Alternatives to V-locity

Compare V-locity alternatives for your business or organization using the curated list below. SourceForge ranks the best alternatives to V-locity in 2024. Compare features, ratings, user reviews, pricing, and more from V-locity competitors and alternatives in order to make an informed decision for your business.

1

Google Cloud Platform

Google

Google Cloud is a cloud-based service that allows you to create anything from simple websites to complex applications for businesses of all sizes. New customers get $300 in free credits to run, test, and deploy workloads. All customers can use 25+ products for free, up to monthly usage limits. Use Google's core infrastructure, data analytics & machine learning. Secure and fully featured for all enterprises. Tap into big data to find answers faster and build better products. Grow from prototype to production to planet-scale, without having to think about capacity, reliability or performance. From virtual machines with proven price/performance advantages to a fully managed app development platform. Scalable, resilient, high performance object storage and databases for your applications. State-of-the-art software-defined networking products on Google’s private fiber network. Fully managed data warehousing, batch and stream processing, data exploration, Hadoop/Spark, and messaging.

2

Google Compute Engine

Google

Compute Engine is Google's infrastructure as a service (IaaS) platform for organizations to create and run cloud-based virtual machines. Computing infrastructure in predefined or custom machine sizes to accelerate your cloud transformation. General purpose (E2, N1, N2, N2D) machines provide a good balance of price and performance. Compute optimized (C2) machines offer high-end vCPU performance for compute-intensive workloads. Memory optimized (M2) machines offer the highest memory and are great for in-memory databases. Accelerator optimized (A2) machines are based on the A100 GPU, for very demanding applications. Integrate Compute with other Google Cloud services such as AI/ML and data analytics. Make reservations to help ensure your applications have the capacity they need as they scale. Save money just for running Compute with sustained-use discounts, and achieve greater savings when you use committed-use discounts.

3

ConnectWise Automate

ConnectWise

Solve IT problems at the speed of business with ConnectWise Automate. A robust remote monitoring and management (RMM) platform, ConnectWise Automate helps boost the effectiveness of IT teams. It offers teams the ability to discover all devices and users that need to be proactively monitored, remove delivery roadblocks, and support more endpoints without adding headaches or head count.

4

Site24x7

ManageEngine

ManageEngine Site24x7 offers unified cloud monitoring for DevOps and IT operations within small to large organizations. The solution monitors the experience of real users accessing websites and applications from desktop and mobile devices. In-depth monitoring capabilities enable DevOps teams to monitor and troubleshoot applications, servers and network infrastructure, including private and public clouds. End-user experience monitoring is done from more than 100 locations across the world and various wireless carriers.

5

NMIS

FirstWave

FirstWave’s NMIS is a complete network management system that provides fault, performance, and configuration management, performance graphs, and threshold alerts. Business rules allow for highly granular notification policies with many types of notification methods. NMIS consolidates multiple tools into one system, ready for Network Engineers to use. Scalable, flexible, open, and simple to implement and maintain, NMIS is the Network Management System that underpins the operations of over one hundred thousand organizations worldwide – making it one of the most widely used open-source Network Management Systems in the world today. FirstWave enables partners, including some of the world’s largest telcos and managed service providers (MSPs), to protect their customers from cyber-attacks, while rapidly growing cybersecurity services revenues at scale. FirstWave provides a comprehensive end-to-end solution for network discovery, management, and cybersecurity for its partners globally.

6

ManageEngine OpManager

ManageEngine

OpManager is a network management tool geared to monitor your entire network. Ensure all devices operate at peak health, performance, and availability. The extensive network monitoring capabilities lets you track performance of switches, routers, LANs, WLCs, IP addresses, and firewalls. Monitor the finer aspects of your network with: Hardware monitoring enables CPU, memory, and disk monitoring, for efficient. performance of all devices. Perform seamless faults and alerts management with real-time notifications and detailed logs for quick issue detection and resolution. Achieve network automation, with workflows enabling automated diagnostics and troubleshooting actions. Advanced network visualization-including business views, topology maps, heat maps, and customizable dashboards give admins an at-a-glance view of network status. 250+ pre-built reports covering metrics like device performance, network usage, uptime, facilitate capacity planning and improved decision-making.

7

New Relic

New Relic

There are an estimated 25 million engineers in the world across dozens of distinct functions. As every company becomes a software company, engineers are using New Relic to gather real-time insights and trending data about the performance of their software so they can be more resilient and deliver exceptional customer experiences. Only New Relic provides an all-in-one platform that is built and sold as a unified experience. With New Relic, customers get access to a secure telemetry cloud for all metrics, events, logs, and traces; powerful full-stack analysis tools; and simple, transparent usage-based pricing with only 2 key metrics. New Relic has also curated one of the industry’s largest ecosystems of open source integrations, making it easy for every engineer to get started with observability and use New Relic alongside their other favorite applications.

8

SolarWinds Server & Application Monitor

SolarWinds

SolarWinds® Server & Application Monitor (SAM) is designed to monitor your applications and their supporting infrastructure, whether running on-premises, in the cloud, or in a hybrid environment. Don’t let slow applications and downtime impact your end users and business services. Pinpoint the root cause of application issues across various layers of the IT stack. Automatically discover your application’s environment and start monitoring, typically in about an hour. No professional services or consultation needed.

9

Cruz Operations Center (CruzOC)

Dorado Software

CruzOC is a scalable multi-vendor network management and IT operations tool for robust yet easy-to-use netops. Key features of CruzOC’s integrated and automated management include performance monitoring, configuration management, and lifecycle management for 1000s of vendors and converging technologies. With CruzOC, administrators have implicit automation to control their data center operations and critical resources, improve network and service quality, accelerate network and service deployments, and lower operating costs. The result is comprehensive and automated problem resolution from a single-pane-of-glass. Cruz Monitoring & Management. NMS, monitoring & analytics -- health, NPM, traffic, log, change. Automation & configuration management -- compliance, security, orchestration, provisioning, patch, update, configuration, access control. Automated deployment -- auto-deploy, ZTP, remote deploy. Deployments available on-premise and from the cloud.

Starting Price: $1350

10

V2 Cloud

V2 Cloud Solutions

Desktop virtualization doesn't have to be complicated. And V2 Cloud is the IT nerd you need. As a fully integrated Desktop-as-a-Service solution, we focus on speed and simplicity—so you can work faster from anywhere. Let our support team get rid of your worries—use your cloud computer safely. Quickly. And economically. Try V2 Cloud risk-free and say hello to the simplest cloud desktop!

11

Netreo

Netreo

Netreo is the most comprehensive full stack IT infrastructure management and observability platform. We provide a single source of truth for proactive performance and availability monitoring for large enterprise networks, infrastructure, applications and business services. Our solution is used by: - IT Executives to have full visibility from the business service right down into the infrastructure and network that supports it. - IT Engineering departments as a decision support system for capacity planning, and architecting modern solutions. - IT Operations teams for real time visibility into what is failing in their environment, what bottlenecks exist and who it is affecting. We provide all of these insights for systems and vendor mixes in large heterogeneous and constantly evolving environments. We have an extensive and growing list of supported vendors (over 350 integrations) including network vendors, servers, storage, virtualization, cloud platforms and others.

12

Azure Virtual Desktop

Microsoft

Azure Virtual Desktop (formerly Windows Virtual Desktop) is a comprehensive desktop and app virtualization service running in the cloud. It’s the only virtual desktop infrastructure (VDI) that delivers simplified management, multi-session Windows 10, optimizations for Microsoft 365 Apps for enterprise, and support for Remote Desktop Services (RDS) environments. Deploy and scale your Windows desktops and apps on Azure in minutes, and get built-in security and compliance features. Bring your own device (BYOD) and access your desktop and applications over the internet using an Azure Virtual Desktop client such as Windows, Mac, iOS, Android, or HTML5. Choose the right Azure virtual machine (VM) to optimize performance and leverage the Windows 10 and Windows 11 multi-session advantage on Azure to run multiple concurrent user sessions and save costs.

13

VMware Fusion

VMware

VMware Fusion gives Mac users the power to run Windows on Mac along with hundreds of other operating systems side by side with Mac applications, without rebooting. Fusion is simple enough for home users and powerful enough for IT professionals, developers and businesses. Running Windows on Mac is only the beginning. VMware Fusion lets you choose from hundreds of supported operating systems, from lesser-known Linux distributions to the latest Windows 10 release, to run side by side with the latest macOS release. Fusion makes it simple to test nearly any OS and app on a Mac. Build and test apps in a sandbox while securely sharing local source files and folders. Fusion Pro now includes a RESTful API to integrate with modern development tools like Docker, Vagrant, Ansible, Chef, and others to fit the power of VMware into today’s Agile and DevOps-oriented production pipelines.

14

VMware Horizon

VMware

VMware Horizon is a modern platform for secure delivery of virtual desktops and apps across the hybrid cloud, from the market leader in software-defined data center and digital workspaces. By leveraging unique integration with trusted VMware technology, Horizon helps IT efficiently deploy and scale virtual desktops and apps from a single control plane with rapid provisioning, automation, and simplified management to extend the best digital workspace experience to end users.

15

Uila

Uila

The core of the Uila virtual infrastructure architecture is a big data store and analytics engine that is designed from the ground up to scale out to accommodate large data center deployments with thousands of servers, to scale in to record data in high resolution, and maintain historical data while maintaining real-time responsiveness. Built-in redundancy offers high availability, mitigates downtime, and reduces maintenance overhead. UMAS can be installed in the Private, Public or SaaS Cloud. The analytics engine is the brain that correlates application to infrastructure performance metric by providing the smarts to pinpoint the infrastructure root cause behind application performance degradation. The trending reports generated from the historical data helps identify infrastructure hot spots, and maintains optimal application performance. The Uila Dashboard offers a simple and yet powerful way to view the results of the analytics engine and reveal the health of applications.

16

ManageEngine Applications Manager

ManageEngine

ManageEngine Applications Manager is an enterprise-ready platform designed to monitor an entire application ecosystem of a business organization. Our platform helps IT and DevOps teams get visibility into all the dependent components within their application stack. With Applications Manager, it becomes easier to monitor the performance of mission-critical web applications, web servers, databases, cloud services, middleware, ERP systems, messaging components, and more. It has tons of features that fast-track the troubleshooting process and help reduce MTTR. This way, issues are fixed before application end-users are affected. Applications Manager has a fully functional dashboard that can be customized to get performance insights at a glance. By configuring alerts, it constantly keeps a lookout for performance issues within the application stack. Combining this with intelligent machine learning, Applications Manager helps turn performance data into actionable insights.

Starting Price: $395.00/Year

17

Heroix Longitude

Heroix

At Heroix we believe in delivering technology that simplifies IT monitoring – helping our customers save time and money. With decades of history in the system management marketplace Heroix understands what it takes to deliver elegant yet powerful IT solutions. Longitude, our all-inclusive agentless monitoring solution, encompasses the entire technology stack: from physical to virtual to cloud, from network to server, and from IT infrastructure to application. Longitude is currently in use on tens of thousands of systems around the world, in enterprises large and small. The efficiency and intelligence built into Longitude enable better results with less effort, and provides exceptional versatility to address routine as well as unique management challenges – helping our customers save time and money. To learn more - access our online demo environment at https://go.heroix.com/longitude-live-demo-and-download

Starting Price: $495/Annually

18

VMware Workstation Pro

VMware

VMware Workstation Pro is the industry standard for running multiple operating systems as virtual machines (VMs) on a single Linux or Windows PC. IT professionals, developers and businesses who build, test or demo software for any device, platform or cloud rely on Workstation Pro. VMware Workstation Pro allows you to run multiple operating systems at once on the same Windows or Linux PC. Create real Linux and Windows VMs and other desktop, server, and tablet environments, complete with configurable virtual networking and network condition simulation, for use in code development, solution architecting, application testing, product demonstrations and more. Securely connect with vSphere, ESXi or other Workstation servers to launch, control and manage both virtual machines (VMs) and physical hosts. A common VMware hypervisor maximizes productivity and enables easy transfer of VMs to and from your local PC.

19

QEMU

QEMU

QEMU is a generic and open-source machine emulator and virtualizer. Run operating systems for any machine, on any supported architecture. Run programs for another Linux/BSD target, on any supported architecture. Run KVM and Xen virtual machines with near-native performance. Guest memory dumps are now fully supported, along with pre-copy/post-copy migration and background guest snapshots. Support for nw DEVICE_UNPLUG_GUEST_ERROR to detect guest-reported hotplug failures. macOS hosts with Apple Silicon CPUs now support ‘hvf’ accelerator for AArch64 guests. M-profile MVE extension is now supported for Cortex-M55. AMD SEV guests now support measurement of kernel binary when doing direct kernel boot (not using a bootloader). Support for vhost-user and numa mem options across all boards.

20

Softchoice

Softchoice

VMware Enterprise Licensing Agreement (ELA). Simplify software asset management (SAM) for VMware. Make the most of your VMware investments. Even the most advanced IT department may struggle to procure, deploy and manage thousands of enterprise VMware assets. Navigating the negotiation and renewal process only adds time and complexity. Without a deep understanding of VMware licensing programs, terms and conditions, it’s easy to fall behind – and risk overspending. A VMware enterprise licensing agreement (ELA) simplifies licensing and reduces costs. With enterprise-wide coverage and 3-year terms, it frees IT resources from time-consuming licensing tasks. Working with Softchoice ensures you get the best value from your ELA. Make the most of your VMware investments. Right-size your SAM strategy. Enterprise software agreements have made it much more cost-effective to acquire the technology that powers your business.

21

Igiko Management Tools

Igiko

Igiko Management Tools is web-based software for remote access, management, and monitoring of physical and virtual machines within a permission-based security model. Igiko has a built-in remote desktop gateway that allows you to establish connections with your computers or VMs. Thanks to HTML5 RDP control implemented in the web console, users can work with remote desktops from anywhere using a web browser. Unlike most RMM tools, the Igiko application is an agentless service. You can only install it to one machine to provide monitoring, management, and remote access capabilities to all local computers and VMs. Embedded web server and tunnel providing clients with dedicated DNS address on Igiko server make configuring and accessing the application worldwide seamless and easy to operate. Igiko is ideal for small and medium enterprises, hosting providers, software development and engineering companies, e-learning companies, virtual labs, and home users.

Starting Price: 5$ for a machine (host or VM)

22

Flaneer

Flaneer

Say goodbye to latency due to software updates. You’ll stop losing time and use it to focus on your core mission. With Flaneer, you can change your graphics or computing power to suit your needs. ‍ You can modify your configuration yourself directly in the dedicated administration area of your virtual machine. By using Flaneer, you can say stop to E-waste while reducing your ecological impact. Keep using your old devices to stream state of the art machines! We’ve all had that moment when we thought our computer was going to take off for another planet. Protecting your information is our top priority. We store your data in secure servers, audited by 3rd party security firms, and the most sensitive data is encrypted. When a new employee joins a team, the first days are dedicated to installing the project and its dependencies. With Flaneer, you eliminate this waste of time and get a work environment ready at once.

Starting Price: €47.50 per month

23

Traverse Monitoring

Kaseya

Traverse by Kaseya offers unified monitoring of hybrid cloud and network infrastructure in enterprise and managed service provider (MSP) environments. With Traverse, IT professionals and MSPs can quickly detect and resolve data center and networking issues before they impact service levels. It links and correlates all underlying IT components that support a business service or process so users can have a comprehensive service-oriented view of their IT infrastructure. Traverse's top features include unified proactive monitoring, actionable alerts, and predictive analytics, among others.

24

The Galileo Suite

The ATS Group & Galileo Suite

Full-Stack Monitoring and Visibility. Reimagined. From basic monitoring to immersive 3D exploration, identify and resolve your IT issues faster than ever before. There's a better way to monitor and measure the health of your environment. Meet the Galileo Suite. It automatically visualizes your asset relationships, analyzes your device health, and displays it in a single view so you can quickly remediate issues and get on with your day. Join the smart IT teams that rely on the Galileo Suite to make smarter, faster decisions to keep their systems running optimally and their business growing. Try Galileo for 🆓 FREE 🆓 today.

25

IBM Turbonomic

IBM

Cut infrastructure spend by 33%, reduce data center refresh costs by 75%, and get back 30% of your engineering time with smarter resource management. Increasingly, complex applications run your business. And they can run your teams ragged trying to stay ahead of dynamic demand. When application performance drops, teams are often reacting at human speed, after the fact. To avoid disruption, you may overprovision resource allocations, making estimates that are often costly and don’t always pay off. The IBM® Turbonomic® Application Resource Management (ARM) platform allows you to eliminate this guesswork, saving both time and money. You can continuously automate critical actions in real time—and without human intervention—that proactively deliver the most efficient use of compute, storage and network resources to your apps at every layer of the stack.

26

KVM

Red Hat

KVM (for Kernel-based Virtual Machine) is a full virtualization solution for Linux on x86 hardware containing virtualization extensions (Intel VT or AMD-V). It consists of a loadable kernel module, kvm.ko, that provides the core virtualization infrastructure and a processor specific module, kvm-intel.ko or kvm-amd.ko. Using KVM, one can run multiple virtual machines running unmodified Linux or Windows images. Each virtual machine has private virtualized hardware: a network card, disk, graphics adapter, etc. KVM is open source software. The kernel component of KVM is included in mainline Linux, as of 2.6.20. The userspace component of KVM is included in mainline QEMU, as of 1.3.

27

Hive Fabric

HiveIO

HiveIO Delivers the Most Advanced Virtualization Platform for VDI. Period. The only solution to deliver an entire Virtual Desktop Infrastructure, tightly integrated into a single product. For many organizations considering VDI, Microsoft’s Windows Virtual Desktop seems like a great option at first glance. However, there are several questions you should ask before making a quick decision. This whitepaper will explore several key considerations when determining if WVD is the best choice for your team. HiveIO’s free community edition is intelligent virtualization software that give you the ability to create 5 virtual machines on a single host. See how Hive Fabric enables your remote workforce in a secure fashion -- at a fraction of the cost of other VDI options. Using swarm theory, intelligently utilize resources and scale your infrastructure.

28

VM Backup

Hornetsecurity

VM Backup (formerly Altaro VM Backup) is an award-wining virtual machine backup and replication solution for Hyper-V and VMware environments. It is used by 40,000+ businesses worldwide. Designed for IT departments, IT resellers, IT consultants and Managed Service Providers (MSPs), the solution provides robust, streamlined, enterprise-level functionality. It’s characterised by ease of use, speed and affordability. With its WAN-Optimized Replication and Continuous Data Protection (CDP), you can achieve minimal RPO and RTO, i.e., drastically reduce the length of time your virtual machines are down and the amount of data lost when disaster strikes – to just minutes. Virtual machine backup and replication software packed with powerful features for Hyper-V and VMware.

29

Cameyo

Cameyo

Cameyo is the secure Virtual Application Delivery (VAD) platform for any Digital Workspace. Cameyo makes it simple, seamless, and secure to deliver Windows and internal web applications to any device from the browser without the need for virtual desktops or VPNs. By enabling organizations to provide their people with secure access to the business-critical apps they need to stay productive from anywhere, Cameyo helps make remote & hybrid work, work. Hundreds of enterprises and organizations utilize Cameyo’s Digital Workspace solution to deliver Windows and internal web applications to hundreds of thousands of users worldwide.

30

Parallels Desktop for Mac

Parallels

Whether you need to run Windows programs that don’t have Mac versions, or you are making the switch from PC to Mac and need to transfer your data, Parallels Desktop has you covered. Develop & test across multiple OSes in a virtual machine for Mac. Access Microsoft Office for Windows and Internet Explorer. Fast—run Windows apps without slowing down your Mac. Quickly move files, apps and more from a PC to a Mac. Use Windows side-by-side with macOS (no restarting required) on your MacBook, MacBook Pro, iMac, iMac Pro, Mac mini or Mac Pro. Share files and folders, copy and paste images and text & drag and drop files between Mac and Windows applications. Parallels Desktop automatically detects what you need to get started so you are up and going within minutes! If you need Windows, you’ll be prompted to Download and Install Windows 10 OR Choose your existing Windows, Linux, Ubuntu, or Boot Camp installation.

Starting Price: $99.99 per year

31

AppSignal

AppSignal

AppSignal gives you error tracking, performance monitoring, custom metrics, host metrics and anomaly detection in one great interface. By developers for developers. Monitoring for your servers: keep an eye on CPU, Disk, Network & more. Avoid surprises and set triggers for anomalies on any metric you'd like. Collect metrics from your code and chart them on dashboards. Get alerted in real-time when your application is down. 1500+ development teams rely on AppSignal to ship code with confidence. We are sharing a few of their stories with you. We love the diversity of languages that are used to build the web. AppSignal is a powerful APM that works out of the box for the following languages and frameworks. Our monitoring gem provides Ruby on Rails error tracking, performance monitoring, server monitoring and more. Our monitoring package provides Elixir error tracking, performance monitoring, server monitoring and more.

Starting Price: $19 per month

32

FlashSoft

SanDisk

FlashSoft® software from SanDisk enables solid-state storage in the server (NVMe, PCIe, SAS or SATA) to enhance storage performance with full compatibility with currently deployed SAN storage systems. The software automatically places applications’ most frequently accessed data on the flash device in the server and keeps the data fully synchronized with the underlying storage. This cost-effective, high-performance flash solution improves application performance, virtualization capability, and storage efficiency without requiring any changes to existing applications or data center processes. Typical 2-4X faster with no changes to existing storage by reducing latency and increasing data delivery bandwidth. With reduced storage latency, virtual host servers can support 2X – 3X the number of virtual servers, at the same performance. Storage savings by serving storage traffic from the server-based cache, FlashSoft relieves overhead from expensive storage infrastructure.

33

Uranium Backup

Nanosystems

The intuitive interface allows configuring a backup set in a few seconds. Data are always under control, as the reporting system will alert in case of malfunction. This saves your time and ensures security. The support team provides a fast, skilled and free technical support to all subscribers of a license. You can access Support by phone or e-mail. Uranium Backup performs backup of files and folders, disk images (Drive Image), Exchange mailboxes, databases, and virtual machines on multiple storage such as hard disks, NAS, tapes, FTP servers and Cloud destinations. With more than 100K active users in 110 countries and 7 million backups performed every month, Uranium Backup is the all-in-one solution chosen by thousands of companies, professionals and individuals. Each installation requires one, unlimited license. This includes updates and free technical support. No extra charge on Server systems.

Starting Price: $95.00/one-time

34

VirtEngine

DET-IO

Powerful all-in-one cloud management platform for your company & your clients. With billing integrated you can build a feature-full public cloud and beat the cloud market. Your cloud on steroids, automation tools for you and your clients. Auto failover & self-healing technology, easily launch the platform and add new infrastructure. Offer cloud solutions with Infrastructure, Platform and Storage services supported. Offer competitive cloud solutions and beat the market. Allow authorized users to launch from thousands of pre-packaged applications with scaling, monitoring, and management tools. Add new applications to the marketplace for your organization to utilize, or launch custom applications in a few clicks. Save your money, go OpenSource. We give back to the community, that includes you or anyone capable of carrying their own installations and technical enough to support themselves.

35

ScienceLogic

ScienceLogic

Discover all components within your enterprise – standard and unique – across physical, virtual and cloud. Collect and store a variety of data in a clean and normalized data lake. Understand relationships between infrastructure, applications and business services. Use this context to gain actionable insights. Integrate and share data across technologies and your IT ecosystem in real-time. Apply multi-directional integrations to automate both responsive and proactive actions at cloud scale. See everything across multi-cloud and distributed architectures, contextualize data through relationship mapping, and act on this insight through integration and automation. No matter where you are along the path to AIOps, SL1 offers you the capabilities to progressively improve service visibility and automate your IT workflows to demonstrate business impact.

36

XPM

ProtocolSoft Tech., Inc.

XPM is a commercial quality and enterprise level performance management/monitoring and traffic analysis solution. XPM is a high-performance enterprise product based on Linux, which supports continuous operation of 7*24*365. Therefore, it may not be suitable for individual users, but more suitable for enterprise users who need higher IT service quality. XPM monitoring objects include: 1. Applications using HTTP protocol; 2. Databases (Oracle, MySQL, MS-SQL server); 3. URL Transaction; 4. Network, server and client. Awards of XPM: Innovation Award of ITSS 2018, ITSS is a department of Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of the People's Republic of China. Please note that: The downloadable version here is XPM standard version, which can analyze about 1 Gbps of traffic in real time, and only supports X86 server deployment. If you need vProbe-XPM to monitor virtual machine traffic, or XPM-H version over 1 Gbps, please contact us by email.

Starting Price: $0/month/module

37

Virtuozzo

Virtuozzo

Virtuozzo, is a global leader in alternative cloud enablement, providing unique, purpose-built software which enables infrastructure and platform solutions to over 600 service providers around the world. Performance, flexibility, and ease of use define the product line up. Our partners can quickly, cost effectively and profitably create alternative private, public, hybrid or multi-clouds, rivalling those from major cloud providers, but with greater ROI, and customization. Service providers and enterprises can choose between various products and capabilities, using software defined networking, storage and powerful compute management and monitoring. Virtuozzo’s primary products allow for the rapid construction of virtual private servers (VPS), IaaS, PaaS, Storage-as-a-Service, Kubernetes-as-a-Service, WordPress-as-a-Service and Anything-as-a-Service (XaaS).

38

BVR CLOUD

BVR CLOUD

BVR CLOUD is an American privately-owned cloud hosting company that provides Cloud Products Ranging from Virtual Machines to Managed Satellites. Currently, it Provides More than 50 Products." BVR CLOUD Products Includes Virtual Machines Baremetal Servers GPU Kubernetes Virtual Desktops Onetime Bandwidth Object Storage Block Storage Longterm Store Longterm Store Plus Content Delivery Network Cloud firewall Managed Satellites Audio/Video Streaming Transcoder Loadbalancer, etc.

39

Synology Virtual Machine Manager

Synology

Virtual Machine Manager opens up abundant possibilities. You can set up and run various virtual machines, including Windows, Linux, or Virtual DSM, on one Synology NAS. What's more, you can also test a new software version in a sandbox environment, isolate your customers' machines, or increase the flexibility of your server. Synology VMM lets you build a cost-effective and easily managed virtualization environment by combining computing, storage, and networking resources on a single hardware platform. You can run multiple virtual machines on your Synology NAS with operating systems including Windows, Linux, and Virtual DSM. Provides an equally intuitive experience as DiskStation Manager, offering a reliable storage solution with robust features. You can run multiple virtual machines on your Synology NAS with operating systems including Windows, Linux, and Virtual DSM.

40

STORServer VMB

STORServer

STORServer® Virtual Machine Backup (VMB) lets you back up and archive VMware virtual machines to your IBM Spectrum® Protect server on a STORServer Appliance or in an existing IBM Spectrum Protect environment. STORServer VMB can be installed and configured quickly, takes minutes a day to manage, and is an ideal solution for businesses backing up virtual environments. STORServer VMB supports the use of two different backup technologies, one developed by STORServer (VMB Native, which is used by default) and the other, VMB Spectrum, which is based on IBM Spectrum Protect for Virtual Environments, Data Protection for VMware. You may configure STORServer VMB to use the backup technology that best meets your backup needs. Virtual machine (VM) data is moved directly to and from VMs and IBM Spectrum Protect storage pools without ESX/ESXi server involvement. Changed block tracking (CBT) minimizes the amount of data transferred.

41

myDEAC Digital Cloud Space

DEAC European Data Center Operator

A cloud-based platform for creating and managing virtual machines and ordering other services with just a few clicks. Unlimited traffic, predictable monthly costs, flexible firewall configuration, and advanced backup solutions are just some of the convenient features available anytime, anywhere. Predictable costs No hidden costs or additional fees - secure your monthly costs by unlimited inbound and outbound traffic with a 1 Gbps connection. Easy to Manage Manage your IT infrastructure with a dedicated web console, and stay informed with a comprehensive monitoring system that sends alerts via email, Slack, and SMS. Easily solve the main requests: • Web hosting and web server hosting • Running self-hosting apps • Running a game server • Setting up a mail server • External backup server • Setting up a VPN • Running incompatible software • Testing and development tasks • Fast environment distribution between project members and much more.

Starting Price: $10

42

SQL Server on Azure Virtual Machines

Microsoft

Migrate your SQL Server workloads to the cloud to get the performance and security of SQL Server combined with the flexibility and hybrid connectivity of Azure. Lower your total cost of ownership (TCO)1 and get free, built-in security and automated management when you register your virtual machines (VMs) with the SQL Server IaaS Agent extension at no extra cost. Save time with seamless post-deployment conversions—there's no need for production redeployment. Lower your ongoing operational costs with automatic image maintenance, updates, and patches. Simple, familiar SQL Server for versatile virtual machines.

Starting Price: $1,543.950 per month

43

Veeam Backup & Replication

Veeam

Veeam Backup & Replication™, the foundation of Veeam Platform, is the single backup, recovery, and data management solution for all your cloud, virtual and physical workloads. Avoid proprietary hardware lock‑in. Choose your infrastructure with over 100 storage and cloud integrations for ultimate flexibility and best TCO. Veeam patented Instant Recovery for lightning-fast recovery at scale for VMs, applications, servers and NAS to meet your recovery objectives. Secure backup is your last line of defense. Protect your data with trusted immutability and instantly recover at scale once your other defenses get breached.

44

Dotcom-Monitor

Dotcom-Monitor

Website monitoring and performance testing solutions. Combined with powerful monitoring features such as real-time dashboards and performance reporting options, and nearly 30 global monitoring network locations, you can quickly identify where performance issues are occurring. Quickly and easily record custom scripts to monitor interactive websites and web application elements and user scenarios with the EveryStep Web Recorder. Dotcom-Monitor makes it easy to ensure performance, functionality, and uptime of the most complex websites, web applications, and web services.

Starting Price: $19.99/month

45

Serverless360

Kovai

A portal focused on Operations and Support for Microsoft Azure Serverless resources. Complementary tool to Azure portal in supporting Azure Serverless Application. Manual and Automated message processing, way beyond Service Bus Explorer. Detect failure, autocorrect state, correlate run resubmission, Azure portals gaps addressed. Detect anomalies, autocorrect state, achieve what are not possible through Application insights. View and process dead-letters in Event Grid subscriptions along with extensive monitoring. Simulate test environment, monitor partitions, check for active clients and much more. Auto clean blobs. Monitor storage account components on their state and properties. Monitor Products, Endpoints and Operations at multiple perspectives. Auto manage APIM state. Manage and monitor Azure Relays including Hybrid relays along with analytics. Detect HTTP errors, CPU time, Garbage collection and health of the Azure Web Apps.

46

Atatus

NamLabs Technologies

NamLabs Technologies is an Indian software company that publishes a software suite called Atatus. Atatus is a SaaS software & a full stack observability platform. It provides a wide range of monitoring capabilities including Application Performance Monitoring, Real-User Monitoring/ End User Monitoring/ Browser Monitoring, Synthetic Monitoring, Infrastructure Monitoring, Logs Monitoring, and API Analytics. Analyze the performance of your application for performance issues such as slow transactions, database queries, website availability, uptime, latency, response time, and throughput, much more. 24x7 customer support is guaranteed.

Starting Price: $49.00/month

47

Oxide Cloud Computer

Oxide Cloud Computer

Vertically integrated and scale-ready. Bringing hyper-scaler agility to the mainstream enterprise. Software that empowers developers and operators alike. Launch projects within minutes of powering on. Per-tenant isolation gives you full control of networking, routing, and firewalls through VPC and network virtualization capabilities. Network services scale with your deployment, eliminating traditional bottlenecks. Elastic compute capacity can be provisioned against a single infrastructure pool, with support for the tools developers already use. High-performance, persistent block storage service with configurable capacity and IOPS per volume. Go from rack install to developer availability in a matter of hours, compared to weeks or months today. Takes up two-thirds as much space as traditional on-premises infrastructure. Manage with technologies you already know and use with our Kubernetes and Terraform integrations.

48

Scaleway

Scaleway

The Cloud that makes sense. From high-performance cloud ecosystem to hyperscale green datacenters, Scaleway provides the foundation for digital success. Cloud platform designed for developers & growing companies. All you need to create, deploy and scale your infrastructure in the cloud. Compute, GPU, Bare Metal & Containers. Evolutive & Managed Storage. Network. IoT. The largest choice of dedicated servers to succeed in the most demanding projects. High-end dedicated servers Web Hosting. Domain Names Services. Take advantage of our cutting-edge expertise to host your hardware in our resilient, high-performance and secure data centers. Private Suite & Cage. Rack, 1/2 & 1/4 Rack. Scaleway data centers. Scaleway is driving 6 data centers in Europe and offers cloud solutions to customers in more that 160 countries around the world. Our Excellence team: Experts by your side 24/7 year round Discover how we help our customers to use, tune & optimize their platforms with skilled expert

49

VirtualBox

Oracle

VirtualBox is a powerful x86 and AMD64/Intel64 virtualization product for enterprise as well as home use. Not only is VirtualBox an extremely feature rich, high performance product for enterprise customers, it is also the only professional solution that is freely available as Open Source Software under the terms of the GNU General Public License (GPL) version 2. See "About VirtualBox" for an introduction. Presently, VirtualBox runs on Windows, Linux, Macintosh, and Solaris hosts and supports a large number of guest operating systems including but not limited to Windows (NT 4.0, 2000, XP, Server 2003, Vista, Windows 7, Windows 8, Windows 10), DOS/Windows 3.x, Linux (2.4, 2.6, 3.x and 4.x), Solaris and OpenSolaris, OS/2, and OpenBSD. VirtualBox is being actively developed with frequent releases and has an ever growing list of features, supported guest operating systems and platforms it runs on. VirtualBox is a community effort backed by a dedicated company.

50

Virtual Administrator

Recursive Technology

VA2 is a software system that provides application management with out-of-the-box plugins for Siebel and customization features that can be applied any software system. VA2 provides application management with out-of-the-box plugins for Siebel and customization features that can be applied any software system. Monitor Siebel components - VA2 provides in depth views to the working of your Siebel server. Historical reports on Application systems -User-defined time series graphs, allows complex system trending. VA2 is a Software Application monitoring system. See How it can help you manage you Enterprise software layer For the lowest cost and most flexible infrastructure available. Leverage the power of Open source to manage your Enterprise Applications for fractions of traditional costs. Siebel application servers are multi process Systems. Without intelligent distillation of OS level Operations correlated with Siebel Application server Tasks and components.

Starting Price: $5000 one-time payment