Company Management Description SPi Global

www.spi-global.com

Ratan Datta,

President & CEO

SPi Global is a market leader in technology-driven solutions for the extraction, enrichment and transformation of content assets. Its suite of proprietary technology platforms combined with deep understanding of content workflows and data structures is the reason SPi Global is the partner of choice of leading information companies. Condusiv

www.condusiv.com Jim D’Arezzo, CEO Condusiv® Technologies is the world leader in software-only storage performance solutions for virtual and physical server environments, enabling systems to process more data in less time for faster application performance.

KMC Controls

www.kmccontrols.com

Richard Newberry, CEO KMC Controls is an independent American manufacturer of building automation and IoT solutions for system integrators, system distributors, IT providers and OEM partners. For nearly 50 years, KMC has been helping facilities achieve higher levels of energy efficiency and indoor environmental quality by automating and controlling building systems.

Orbit GT nv

www.orbitgt.com

Peter Bonne, CEO Orbit Geospatial Technologies is world leader in solutions for exploiting 3D Mapping content in managing, viewing, extracting, publishing, sharing and embedding in workflows, either desktop or cloud based. Orbit GT specialises in 3D Mapping solutions for Mobile Mapping, UAS Mapping, Indoor Mapping and Aerial Oblique Mapping, replacing the big data dilemma with ease of use.

Sophos

www.sophos.com

Kris Hagerman, CEO More than 100 million users in 150 countries rely on Sophos’ complete security solutions as the best protection against complex threats and data loss. Simple to deploy, manage, and use, Sophos’ award-winning encryption, endpoint security, web, email, mobile and network security solutions are backed by SophosLabs—a global network of threat intelligence centers. Comodo Cybersecurity www.comodo.com

Steve Subar,

President & CEO

Comodo Cybersecurity is a global innovator of cybersecurity solutions, and a division of Comodo Security Solutions Inc. For over 20 years, Comodo Cybersecurity has been at the forefront of successfully protecting the most sensitive data; and today, we deliver an innovative cybersecurity platform that renders threats useless across the LAN, Web & Cloud.

TIBCO

www.tibco.com

Murray Rode, CEO TIBCO fuels digital business by enabling better decisions and faster, smarter actions through the TIBCO Connected Intelligence Cloud. From APIs and systems to devices and people, we interconnect everything, capture data in real time wherever it is, and augment the intelligence of your business through analytical insights. Thousands of customers around the globe rely on us to build compelling experiences, energize operations, and propel innovation Simpson Healthcare

www.simpsonhealthcare.com

Kelly Simpson-Angelini,

Chief Strategy Officer, & CEO

Simpson Healthcare is an established scientific agency providing the pharmaceutical, biotechnology, medical diagnostic and device industries with a wide range of services in support of overall marketing strategies. The products and services provided enhance a company's value for the benefit of the stakeholders, while simultaneously disseminating new biomedical knowledge for the benefit of healthcare providers and their patients.

Anuva

www.anuvatech.com

Hemal Desai,

Founder & CEO

Anuva is a search engine marketing innovator striving to improve our client's website value and to achieve their business goals. We provide an array of Internet marketing services designed to expose your business where you can access millions of potential customers with just a few clicks.

ScaleMP

www.scalemp.com

Shai Fultheim, Founder,

President & CEO

ScaleMP is the leader in virtualization for in-memory high-end computing, providing higher performance and lower total cost of ownership as compared with traditional shared-memory systems. The company’s innovative Versatile SMP (vSMP) architecture aggregates multiple x86 systems into a single virtual x86 system, delivering an industry-standard, high-end shared-memory computer.

Zaloni

www.zaloni.com

Ben Sharma,

CEO & Co-Founder

Zaloni simplifies big data for transformative business insights. We work with pioneering enterprises to modernize their data architecture and operationalize their data to accelerate insights for everyday business practices. A leader in big data for more than a decade, Zaloni’s expertise is deep, spans multiple industries, and has proven invaluable to customers at many of the world’s top companies.

OneLogin

www.onelogin.com

Brad Brooks, CEO OneLogin is the leader in Unified Access Management, Enabling Organizations to Access the World™. We make it simpler and safer for organizations to access the apps and data they need anytime, everywhere.

Fortinet

www.fortinet.com

Ken Xie, CEO Fortinet secures the largest enterprise, service provider, and government organizations around the world. Fortinet empowers its customers with intelligent, seamless protection across the expanding attack surface and the power to take on ever-increasing performance requirements of the borderless network - today and into the future.

ASI DATAMYTE

www.asidatamyte.com

Rick Bump, President ASI DATAMYTE‘s (ASI) singular focus for more than 40 years has been the development and global deployment of hardware and software related quality management solutions. This focus has given us the knowledge and experience to create a unique position in the world of manufacturing. ASI is the global standard for innovative quality management solutions.

ObserveIT

www.observeit.com

Michael McKee,

CEO & Director

With ObserveIT, organizations can significantly reduce the risk of security incidents by monitoring user behavior and offering real-time education and deterrence. ObserveIT cuts investigation time from days to minutes and offers full playback of security incidents to improve response times and simplify compliance.

Remsoft

www.remsoft.com

Andrea Feunekes,

Co-Founder, CEO

Remsoft’s software solution uses data analytics to offer precise operational plans and schedules and long-term strategies that help businesses improve performance and productivity.

Ski Butlers

www.skibutlers.com

Bryn Carey,

Founder & CEO

Ski Butlers specializes in and ski and snowboard rental delivery to over 35 North American Ski Resorts. Ski Butlers does one thing and does it very well. Deliver the highest quality equipment with the best customer service to our guests in all 11 of our locations. Everything we do at Ski Butlers, from our decision-making processes, team member orientation, to how we communicate with our customers, must fall in line with our mission statement and core values. Motive Interactive www.motiveinteractive.com

Brendan Smith,

CEO, Founder

Motive Interactive is a global mobile app optimization and marketing company that combines over 15 years of experience in the digital advertising and sophisticated programmatic technology to drive user acquisition for the world’s top app brands and Fortune 500 companies. Motive has been recognized by Inc. Magazine, Entrepreneur Magazine, Deloitte, and San Diego Business Journal as one the fastest growing private companies in the United States.

Signavio

www.signavio.com

Dr Gero Decker,

Co-founder & CEO

Signavio enables organizations to keep up with the pace, volume and complexity of change. Our Business Transformation Suite is the smarter way to continuously translate between strategy and execution. Radient Technologies, Inc. www.radientinc.com Denis Taschuk, CEO Radient Technologies Inc. is an expert in the extraction, purification and isolation of high-value naturally derived compounds and ingredients for use in the manufacture of pharmaceutical intermediate, nutraceutical, food and cosmetic products. Radient produces these high-value natural substances by uniquely combining MAP , a patented extraction technology and our proprietary knowledge and experience in the critical downstream processing areas of purification and extraction. Centric Business Systems www.centricbiz.com

Alex Richard Bastinelli,

President & CEO

Centric is driven by the same “customer-first” approach we were founded on more than 25 years ago. Our products meet a unique and highly demanding set of expectations—ours. We look beyond what technology can do and focus on what you can do with the technology.

Zerto

www.zerto.com

Ziv Kedem,

Co-Founder & CEO

Zerto helps customers accelerate IT transformation by eliminating the risk and complexity of modernization and cloud adoption. By replacing multiple legacy solutions with a single IT Resilience Platform, Zerto is changing the way disaster recovery, data protection and cloud are managed.

Icera

www.icerasemi.com

Stan Boland,

CEO, President & Founder

Icera is the world’s leading company in the design, production and sales of soft modem chipsets that deliver high performance communication engines for cellular products. These chipsets are at the center of our lives today - smartphones and tablets plus modules and USB sticks that turn our notebooks into internet-everywhere devices.

Absolute

www.absolute.com

Steve Munford,

Interim CEO

Absolute set the new standard for endpoint visibility and control with self-healing endpoint security and always-connected IT asset management to protect devices, data, applications and users — on and off the network. Bridging the gap between security and IT operations, only Absolute gives enterprises visibility they can act on to protect every endpoint.

Boost media

www.boostmedia.com

Rob Lenderman,

Founder & Chief Product Officer

Today, Boost Media is the leading Creative Optimization Platform and has delivered more than $1 billion in optimized digital ads for enterprise brands. With Boost Media, marketers can source, test and optimize ad creative across search, social, image, and mobile. Boost also provides unprecedented insights that let marketers pinpoint which creative strategies are working and why.

Vaultize

www.vaultize.com

Anand A. Kekre,

Co-Founder & Executive Chairman

Vaultize is a comprehensive enterprise file security platform that secures and protects corporate files wherever they are, wherever they go and however they are used. It features Enterprise Digital Rights Management (EDRM aka information Rights Management or IRM), enterprise file sync & share (EFSS), VPN-free anywhere access, Mobile Content Management (MCM) and Endpoint Data Protection

Euclideon

www.euclideon.com

Bruce Dell, CEO Euclideon is a forward-thinking, advanced technology company based in Brisbane, Australia, best known for its Unlimited Detail (UD) 3D visualisation technology. The revolutionary nature of UD – that is, a complete rethinking of what was considered possible – is a fundamental philosophy of the company.

HeartSciences

www.heartsciences.com

Mark Hilz,

CEO & President

HeartSciences is advancing the field of electrocardiography through the application of wavelet signal processing and artificial intelligence to develop next generation ECG technology. Innovus Pharmaceuticals, Inc www.innovuspharma.com

Bassam Damaj,

President & CEO

Innovus Pharma® is an emerging over-the-counter (“OTC”) consumer goods and specialty pharmaceutical company engaged in the commercialization, licensing and development of safe and effective non-prescription medicine and consumer care products to improve men’s and women’s health and vitality and respiratory diseases.

Mantis

www.mantis-ai.com

Feras Maddah, CEO MANTIS is a state-of-the-art activity-based, advertising-centric automated video understanding platform. It utilizes ground-breaking research in deep-learning strategies & architectures to perform activity detection & video summarization in faster than real-time (5-10x faster on a single GPU). AlgEternal Technologies www.algeternal.com David Damian Ramjohn, CEO AlgEternal Technologies, LLC focuses on reducing human dependence on fossil hydrocarbons and creating sustainable economic activity resulting in a healthier planet and improved quality of life for all, by harnessing the power of the planet’s primary producers: algae.

DemandLink

www.demandlink.com

John Garren, CEO DemandLink's team has over 30 years combined experience in demand planning and replenishment for seasonal and intermittent goods. Our experience with both production and retail requirements allow us to build tools that are unmatched by the competition. We make sure you have the right tools to answer those Monday morning questions and the right stock to maximize sales performance.

LivesOne

www.lives.one

Jeff Chen, CEO The LivesOne can quantify online behavior's value through blockchain technology and hatch Symbiosism Economy in order to facilitate the development of the new economy form. LivesOne created a new social and economic relationship, and provided a new online economic platform. Internet users and businesses will establish a new energetic Symbiosism eco-system.

CrisSoft, LLC

www.crissoft.com

Paul Criswell, Co-founder For over 35 years CriSoft company has been focused on producing robust software for all sorts of business types. We have proudly created products that range from Medical Billing Software, Complete Trust Management Software to comprehensive Funeral Home Management Systems. Our products are created in business environments that serve production, process and customer service needs.

VoteBash, Inc

www.votebash.com

Martijn Atell,

Founder, & CEO

VoteBash provides brands, businesses, and organizations with real-time feedback, brand awareness, and personalization within a new space of engagement on an emerging global digital media marketing research platform for both desktop and mobile environments with over 20 localizations.

YANGAROO

www.yangaroo.com

Gary Moss,

President, and CEO

YANGAROO, the leading secure digital media management company, provides forward-thinking technology solutions that enable high quality audio and video content to be managed and distributed quickly, securely and cost-effectively. Tesla NanoCoatings Inc www.teslanano.com

Todd Hawkins,

Founder, President & CEO

The Tesla NanoCoatings team brings real-world field-tested experience and university-based research and development talent. World headquarters are in North Canton, Ohio and the company has access to brilliant scientific minds from nearby University of Akron and other institutions where breakthroughs continue to be made in corrosion and technology. Skinny Wimp Moving Co www.skinnywimpmoving.com Lance Clauson, President Skinny Wimp Moving Co. is a full service licensed moving company serving residential and commercial customers in Ventura and Los Angeles counties. In addition to providing complete moving services, Skinny Wimp also offers packing and unpacking before and after moves.

Nfina Technologies

www.nfinausa.com

Warren Nicholson,

Founder, CEO

Nfina Technologies develops, manufactures, and markets highly reliable server and data storage products, designed to solve the most demanding data center requirements and mission critical applications. Our staff has decades of experience in computer design, network equipment design, manufacturing, data center design, and financial management.

Aligned Business

www.alignedbiz.com

Kevin Jin, Co-Founder Aligned Business is a fast growing software vendor that specializes in providing sales automation solutions for insurers and insurance intermediaries via product configuration on eCommerce platforms. River Point Technology www.riverpointtechnology.com Jeff Eiben, Founder Big Data is the future of business, but optimizing your technology and IT infrastructure can be a challenge. By maximizing the tools you have in place and supplementing them as needed, River Point Technology will deliver best-in-breed solutions and transform your data into a prized business resource.

defi SOLUTIONS

www.defisolutions.com

Stephanie Alsbrooks,

CEO & Founder

At defi SOLUTIONS, we provide a flexible, innovative loan origination software platform that gives auto lenders the tools they need to compete efficiently. By leveraging defi’s technology, lenders can increase applications and fund them faster. Our industry-leading, browser-based loan origination system (LOS) is completely configurable, quick to implement and provides actionable insights based on actual performance.

CITsmart

www.citsmart.com

Emauri Gaspar, CEO CITsmart's mission: To provide complete solutions that include concept, method, tool and good practices, improving business, generating good results, with return on investments for its clients, partners, shareholders and employees.

bulb Digital Portfolios

www.bulbapp.com

Eric Goldreyer, CEO bulb is an ed-tech company specializing in digital portfolios. bulb is committed to the discipline of learning and the craft of teaching; we believe that technology should enhance and accelerate both rather than detract from them. bulb understands that form follows function so we not only make bulb pleasing to the eye, we also make it super easy to use.

Orig3n

www.orig3n.com

Robin Smith,

Co-founder, & CEO

Orig3n helps people understand the links between their genes and how their minds and bodies work. From fitness to nutrition to personality, our DNA tests provide easy, affordable access to genetic information and guidance on how to use it. We help people take charge of their health with the knowledge they need to make more informed choices.

CloudQuant

info.cloudquant.com

Morgan Slade, CEO CloudQuant believes that providing access to algorithmic development tools to curious and innovative people on the internet will lead to profitable trading algos. All the crowd needs are access and opportunity. We began as an internal research tool for proprietary traders with extraordinary trading ideas to be able to explore quantitative trading ideas within the Kershner Trading Group, a veteran of the trading industry for over 23 years.

KWHCoin

www.kwhcoin.com

Girard Newkirk,

Founder and CEO

KWHCoin is a blockchain based community, ecosystem and cryptocurrency backed by units of clean, renewable energy. Physical deliverable units of KWh energy are leveraged from multiple sources including smart meters, sensor readings and green button data. This measurable export output is tokenized on the blockchain to create digital KWh Coin tokens for participants.

SuretyWave

www.suretywave.com

Dennis Steckler,

Founder & CEO

SuretyWave is a web-based surety bond network that enables clients, brokers/agents, obligees, and carriers to manage surety bond requirements efficiently. SuretyWave digitally connects the world of surety by enabling seamless communication among and between obligees, principals and sureties.