The majority of computer and video games owing to J.R.R. Tolkien's works are based mainly on or influenced by The Lord of the Rings films; only some are based solely on Tolkien's canon of Middle-earth. From the early 1980's onward, numerous video games set in Middle-earth have been developed, including titles by Electronic Arts, Sierra, and Melbourne House.

Official games[]

Early efforts[]

In 1982 began a series of licensed The Lord of the Rings graphical interactive fiction games with The Hobbit, based on the book of the same name. They went on to release 1986's The Fellowship of the Ring, 1987's The Shadows of Mordor, and 1990's The Crack of Doom. A BBC Micro text adventure released around the same time was unrelated to Melbourne's titles except for the literary origin. In 1987, Melbourne House released War in Middle-earth, a turn-based strategy game, followed by its sequel Riders of Rohan.

In 1990, Interplay, in collaboration with Electronic Arts (who would later obtain the licenses to the film trilogy), released The Lord of the Rings Vol. 1 (a special CD-ROM version of which featured cut-scenes from Ralph Bakshi's animated adaptation) and next year's Lord of the Rings Vol. II: The Two Towers, a series of role-playing games based on the events of the first two books. A third installment was planned, but never released because Interplay couldn't decide whether to do it as an RPG like the first two, or as a strategy game. Interplay's games mostly appeared on the PC and but later they did a Lord of the Rings game for the SNES, which played nothing like their PC games and instead was more like The Legend of Zelda.

Film trilogy revival[]

Thereafter, no official The Lord of the Rings titles were released until the making of Peter Jackson's The Lord of the Rings film trilogy for New Line Cinema in 2001-2003, when mass-market awareness of the story appeared. Electronic Arts obtained the licenses for the three films, although they only produced games for The Two Towers and The Return of the King. Sierra Entertainment, having lost out on the film licenses, obtained the license to produce games based on the books (as opposed to the film trilogy) from Tolkien Enterprises instead, entitling them to use the story, but not material from the film.

This gave rise to an unusual situation. Electronic Arts produced no adaptation of The Fellowship of the Ring, but Sierra did. However, they did produce adaptations of The Two Towers and The Return of the King. This produced an unofficial "complete trilogy" of games. Sierra's entry to the series received average reviews, and Electronic Arts' entries received rave reviews, although Peter Jackson has criticized EA for leaving him out of the development process and has declared that he is unhappy with the quality of the titles.[1]

While Sierra Entertainment's access to the book rights prevented them from using material from the film, it permitted them to include elements of the Lord of the Rings books that were not in the films. EA, on the other hand, were not permitted to do this, as they were only licensed to develop games based on the films, which left out elements of the original story or deviated in places. Fans' opinions differ on the better of the two styles. Some prefer EA's action-oriented hack and slash-style games, which tend to pass on large segments of the story and place a reliance on film clips and the film's music, citing the almost cinematic quality that the game produces as similar to the film. Others preferred the Sierra adventure title, which, while featuring less action and epic battles than the EA title, cover the story in greater detail and offer a more cerebral challenge.

Sierra's consequent adaptation of The Hobbit also received average reviews. It is unknown which developer/publisher would assume the task of adapting a film version of The Hobbit to a video game, especially since Jackson chose to work with Michel Ancel and Ubisoft on King Kong in light of his displeasure with EA.

Eventually in 2005, EA was able to secure the rights to both the films and the books, thus the Battle for Middle-earth II incorporates elements of a Northern Campaign only alluded to in the books.

Post-film trilogy efforts[]

The popularity of real-time strategy (RTS) titles led Sierra and Electronic Arts to independently produce two RTS games. Sierra produced The Lord of the Rings: War of the Ring in 2003, based on the books. The title was well received by the press, but some criticized the derivative nature of the game.[2] Some fans also took issue with the many liberties taken with the source material. A year later, EA released The Battle for Middle-earth, based on the films. The title was given rave reviews in the gaming media and sold well.[3] However, as with War of the Ring, some fans took issue with the liberties taken with the books.

EA then released a console RPG in 2004 entitled The Third Age, based on the universe portrayed in the films, though not the original story. It was based on an original story that runs parallel to the events of the movies. The game received average reviews, with many quoting the poor quality of the story in relation to its source. The game also contains a range of unrelated situations that divert from the original plot, such as the final melee combat versus the Eye of Sauron.

In July 2005, EA was granted the rights to develop games based on the books, alongside the separate agreement for games based on the New Line Cinema films. EA released The Battle for Middle-earth II on March 2 2006. While it sold well, some fans, as ever, took issue with the liberties taken with the books, as with its predecessor. That November, EA released a PSP-exclusive title, The Lord of the Rings: Tactics. In October, 2006, an expansion pack for The Battle for Middle-earth II was released, called The Rise of the Witch-king, focusing on the war between the Witch-king and Arnor.

A MMORPG expansion by Turbine, Inc. entitled The Lord of the Rings Online: Shadows of Angmar, endorsed by Tolkien Enterprises, was released on April 24, 2007.

In June 2022, developer Free Range Games and publisher North Beach Games announced the coming of The Lord of the Rings: Return to Moria. It is due to release in 2023 exclusively on PC, through the Epic Games Store. It will be the only survival crafting video game set in the Fourth Age of Middle-earth. Summoned to the Misty Mountains by Lord Gimli Lockbearer, players take control of a company of Dwarves tasked to reclaim the lost spoils of Khazad-dûm in the depths below their very feet.

Unofficial games[]

Aside from officially licensed games, unofficial games have also been made. Two of the longest-lasting are Angband, an open-source game based loosely on The Silmarillion, and Multi-Users in Middle-earth (MUME), a MUD based on The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings.

Another is Shadows of Isildur, a free to play RPI MUD. Having started in the year 2460 of the Third Age, SoI allows its players to become a character on the side of either Gondor, or Mordor.

Many Tolkien-inspired addon mods, custom maps and total conversion mods have been made for many games. An overview of some notable examples:

Game Modification Warcraft III Warcraft III Tolkien mods Total Annihilation: Kingdoms Conflict of Arda Rome: Total War Lord of the Rings: Total War

Fourth Age: Total War

Medieval II: Total War Third Age: Total War

Submods:

Silmarillion Total War

DCI: Last Alliance

Third Age: Reforged

Divide and Conquer

Mount & Blade

Mount & Blade Warband The Last Days (of the Third Age of Middle-Earth)

It is important to note that legal action was threatened against MERP (Middle-Earth Roleplaying Project), a mod designed to convert the Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim into Middle-Earth, suggesting a future game on the same scale as Skyrim may be released.

List of video games[]

Title Year Publisher Developer Platforms The Hobbit 1982 Melbourne House Beam Software Amstrad CPC, ZX Spectrum, Commodore 64, BBC (no graphics), Dragon 32, Oric Atmos, MSX, Apple II, IBM PC Lord of the Rings: Game One (AKA: The Fellowship of The Ring) 1985 Melbourne House Beam Software ZX Spectrum, Commodore 64, BBC, Dragon 32, Apple Macintosh, Apple II, IBM PC The Shadows of Mordor 1987 Melbourne House Beam Software Amstrad CPC, Commodore 64, ZX Spectrum, Apple II, IBM PC War in Middle-earth 1988 Melbourne House Melbourne House C64, Spectrum, Amstrad CPC, Amiga, Atari ST, IBM PC The Crack of Doom 1989 Melbourne House Beam Software Commodore 64, IBM PC The Lord of the Rings Volume 1 1990 Interplay,

Electronic Arts Interplay, Chaos Studios (Amiga) Amiga, IBM PC The Lord of the Rings Volume 2 1991 Interplay Interplay IBM PC Riders of Rohan 1991 Konami, Mirrorsoft Beam Software, Papyrus IBM PC Multi-Users in Middle-earth (MUME) 1991 Non-commercial Volunteers Any telnet or web capable device J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings, Volume 1 1994 Interplay Interplay Super NES The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring 2002 Vivendi Universal Games Surreal Software MS Windows, PlayStation 2 The Whole Experience Xbox Pocket Studios Game Boy Advance The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers 2002 Electronic Arts Stormfront Studios

Hypnos Entertainment (GCN) PlayStation 2, Xbox, Nintendo GameCube Griptonite Games Game Boy Advance The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King 2003 Electronic Arts

Aspyr (Mac OS X) Electronic Arts,Hypnos Entertainment (GCN & Xbox)

Beenox (Mac OS X) MS Windows, PlayStation 2, Xbox, Nintendo GameCube, Mac OS X Electronic Arts Griptonite Games Game Boy Advance The Lord of the Rings: War of the Ring 2003 Sierra Liquid Entertainment MS Windows The Hobbit 2003 Sierra Midway Austin MS Windows, PlayStation 2, Xbox, Nintendo GameCube Saffire Game Boy Advance The Lord of the Rings: The Third Age 2004 Electronic Arts Electronic Arts PlayStation 2, Xbox, Nintendo GameCube The Lord of the Rings: The Third Age (GBA) 2004 Electronic Arts Griptonite Games Game Boy Advance The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth 2004 Electronic Arts EA Los Angeles MS Windows The Lord of the Rings: Tactics 2005 Electronic Arts Amaze PlayStation Portable The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II 2006 Electronic Arts EA Los Angeles MS Windows, Xbox 360 The Lord of the Rings: The Battle for Middle-earth II: The Rise of the Witch-king 2006 Electronic Arts EA Los Angeles MS Windows The Lord of the Rings Online: Shadows of Angmar 2007 Turbine, Inc., Midway Turbine, Inc. MS Windows The Lord of the Rings Online: Mines of Moria 2008 Turbine, Inc., Midway Turbine, Inc. MS Windows The Lord of the Rings: Conquest 2009 Electronic Arts Pandemic Studios Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, MS Windows, Nintendo DS The Lord of the Rings Online: Siege of Mirkwood 2009 Turbine, Inc. Turbine, Inc. MS Windows The Lord of the Rings: Aragorn's Quest 2010 Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment Headstrong Games

TT Fusion Wii, Nintendo DS, PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable, PlayStation 3 The Lord of the Rings: War in the North 2011 Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment Snowblind Studios PlayStation 3, MS Windows, Xbox 360 The Lord of the Rings Online: Rise of Isengard 2011 Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment Turbine, Inc. MS Windows The Lord of the Rings Online: Riders of Rohan 2012 Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment Turbine, Inc. MS Windows Guardians of Middle-earth 2012 Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment Monolith Productions Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PC (Steam) LEGO The Lord of the Rings: The Video Game 2012 Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment Traveller's Tales Microsoft Windows, Wii, Nintendo 3DS, PlayStation Vita, PlayStation 3, Nintendo DS, Xbox 360 The Hobbit: Kingdoms of Middle-earth 2012 Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment Kabam Android, Apple iOS The Hobbit: Armies of the Third Age 2013 Kabam Middle-earth: Shadow of Mordor 2014 Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment Monolith Productions PC, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360, Xbox One Lego The Hobbit 2014 Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment Traveller's Tales, TT Fusion, Feral Interactive PlayStation 4, PlayStation 3, Xbox One, Microsoft Windows, Xbox 360, PlayStation Vita, macOS, Wii U, Nintendo 3DS Middle-earth: Shadow of War 2017 Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment Monolith Productions PC, PlayStation 4, Xbox One Untitled Lord of the Rings MMO Canceled Amazon Amazon Game Studios, Leyou Technologies PC, consoles The Lord of the Rings: Gollum 2023 Daedalic Entertainment, Nacon Daedalic Entertainment Microsoft Windows, Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox One, Xbox Series S, Xbox Series X The Lord of the Rings: Return to Moria 2023 North Beach Games Free Range Games PlayStation 5, Xbox Series X and Series S, Microsoft Windows Tales of the Shire: A 'The Lord of the Rings' Game[4] 2024 Private Division Wētā Workshop PC

References[]

[]