The Lord of the Rings franchise is not only one of the greatest series of novels of all time, but it’s also responsible for providing the greatest forms of entertainment in the world of movies, animation, video games and more.

In 2003, we had arguably one the best movie-to-video game adaptations of all time with The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King which was released for PC, PlayStation 2, original Xbox and Nintendo GameCube. This is certainly a far better game than what was released 20 years later with The Lord of the Rings: Gollum, one of the worst-rated video games ever.

Check out the Middle-earth: Shadow of Mordor trailer below!

One other video game inspired by The Lord of the Rings that can be ranked amongst the best is Middle-earth: Shadow of Mordor released in 2014, which earned a respectable score of 87 on the aggregate website, Metacritic.

“Fight through Mordor and uncover the truth of the spirit that compels you, discover the origins of the Rings of Power, build your legend and ultimately confront the evil of Sauron in this new chronicle of Middle-earth,” reads the synopsis of the game.

Shadow of Mordor did receive a sequel in 2017 with Shadow of War which was controversially filled with microtransactions at release. Regardless, it was still a decent game, though perhaps not quite as well received as its predecessor. Sadly, there seems to be no sign of this series ever getting a third title from publisher Warner Bros. Games anytime soon.

Thankfully, however, if you game on PC, you can at least take advantage of this stunning fan-made new-gen remaster for Middle-earth: Shadow of Mordor. The gameplay featuring the remaster in question was uploaded to the Digital Dreams YouTube channel and it’s fair to say that this is the remaster of our dreams taking full advantage of PC hardware with incredible ray tracing, reshade and at a glorious 8K and 60fps. To no surprise, the comments section of the YouTube upload was full of praise.

Unfortunately for console gamers, this remaster is only possible on PC and you’d also need a beast of a gaming set-up to make use of it. Middle-earth: Shadow of Mordor is out now on PC, PlayStation and Xbox.