These media sources are moderately to strongly biased toward liberal causes through story selection and/or political affiliation. They may utilize strong loaded words (wording that attempts to influence an audience by using appeal to emotion or stereotypes), publish misleading reports and omit reporting of information that may damage liberal causes. Some sources in this category may be untrustworthy. See all Left Bias sources.

Overall, we rate National Memo Left Biased based on story selection that always favors the left and is Mostly Factual for reporting rather than High due to poor sourcing techniques on some articles and a lack of transparency with ownership.

Detailed Report

Bias Rating: LEFT Factual Reporting: MOSTLY FACTUAL

Country: USA

Press Freedom Rating: MOSTLY FREE

Media Type: Website

Traffic/Popularity: Minimal Traffic

MBFC Credibility Rating: MEDIUM CREDIBILITY

History

The National Memo is an American online news site and newsletter. Founded in 2011 by award-winning journalist and editor Joe Conason, it features daily breaking news and commentary and analysis from America’s top progressive thinkers. With a focus on American politics, The National Memo also covers world news and events, consumer finance, health, travel, and entertainment. According to their about page, “The National Memo is a political newsletter and website that combines the spirit of investigative journalism with new technology and ideas. We cover campaigns, elections, the White House, Congress, and the world with a fresh outlook.”

Read our profile on the United States government and media.

Funded by / Ownership

The National Memo does not clearly state who owns the website; however, it is assumed Joe Conason is the owner as he is also the founder. Revenue is derived through advertising, sponsored content, and a store that sells merchandise.

Analysis / Bias

In review, The National Memo publishes news and opinion geared toward a progressive liberal audience. There is often use of moderately loaded emotional language in headlines and articles such as this: Mitch McConnell Piously Urges ‘Civility’ In Politics. This article is republished from the American Independent Institute, which we have rated left-biased. In another article that demonstrates loaded emotional language, Sean Spicer Is Still Defending The Indefensible; there is a complete lack of sourcing. Therefore, National Memo sometimes sources information properly, but not in every article.

Editorially, all stories favor the left and often denigrate the right such as this: Conservatives May Soon Run Out Of Values To Defile. Generally, stories are fact-based and mostly sourced properly; however, not always, while editorial positions always favor the left.

Failed Fact Checks

None in the Last 5 years

Overall, we rate National Memo Left Biased based on story selection that always favors the left and is Mostly Factual for reporting rather than High due to poor sourcing techniques on some articles and a lack of transparency with ownership. (D. Van Zandt 3/11/2017) Update (01/23/2023)