Muzaffar Shah I, sometimes known as Zafar Khan, was a Muzaffarid dynasty ruler who ruled the Gujarat Sultanate from 1407 to 1411. Tughluq of the Delhi Sultanate appointed him governor of Gujarat, and he declared independence and formed the Gujarat Sultanate when Delhi was in chaos following Timur's attack. His ambitious son Tatar Khan deposed him, but he reclaimed the kingdom before dying.

Muzaffar Shah I was a Muslim convert from the Tank Rajput or Khatri tribe. In this article, we will discuss the Important Ruler of the Muzaffarid Dynasty in Gujarat Zafar Khan/Muzaffar Shah (1407 – 1411 CE) which will be helpful for UPSC exam preparation.

Background

Zafar Khan/Muzaffar Shah - Background

Muzaffar Shah was the founder of the Muzaffarid dynasty.

Wajih-ul-Mulk was the father of Muzaffar Shah.

He was appointed as governor by Sultan Nasir ud din Muhammad Shah III in 1391.

He was governor of Gujarat from 1391 to 1403 before he was deposed by his son Tatar Khan.

Tatar imprisoned him and declared himself sultan under the name Muhammad Shah in 1403.

He marched towards Delhi, but his uncle Shams Khan poisoned him along the way.

Muzaffar was released from prison after Muhammad Shah's death and again assumed leadership of the administration in 1404.

In 1407, he declared himself an independent monarch and assumed the title of Muzaffar Shah after Timur's invasion.

Muzaffar Shah began a protracted battle with Malwa.

Hushang Shah of Malwa was beaten and captured, and he temporarily occupied his realm.

Reign

Reign of Zafar Khan/Muzaffar Shah

Governor of Gujarat

In 1391, Sultan Nasir ud din Muhammad Shah III named Zafar Khan, the son of Wajih-ul-Mulk, as governor of Gujarat and bestowed the title Muzaffar Khan upon him.

He defeated the army of Farhat-ul-Mulk Rasti Khan near the village of Kamboi in 1392 and killed him and the city of Anhilwada Patan was seized.

He established a village on the battleground called Jitpur (the city of triumph) to celebrate the victory.

The Rao of Idar, who had refused to pay the regular tribute in 1393, was Zafar Khan's first warlike expedition.

He marched against the Rao of Junagah in 1394 and demanded tribute.

He then proceeded to Somnath, where he demolished the temple, built a Jumma Mosque, preached Islam and established a thana in the city of Somnath Patan or Deva Patan.

In 1396, he conquered the leaders of Sambhar and Dandwana before attacking the Rajputs of Delvaa and Jhalavaa, defeating them and returning to Patan.

Tatar Khan, Zafar Khan's son, begged his father to march against Delhi in 1403, but he declined.

As a response, Tatar imprisoned him in Ashawal (Ahmedabad) in 1403, and declared himself sultan under the name Muhammad Shah.

He marched towards Delhi, but was poisoned along the route by his uncle, Shams Khan Dandani, in Sinor, on the north bank of Narmada River.

Zafar was released from prison in 1404 after Muhammad Shah's death and assumed command of the administration.

In 1407, at Birpur or Sherpur, he declared himself Sultan Muzaffar Shah, wore the imperial insignia, and issued coins in his name.

Sultan of Gujarat

Zafar Khan ruled as a sultan from 1407 to 1411.

He led a victorious expedition against Sultan Hushang Ghori of Dhar (Malwa).

Muzaffar Shah dispatched his grandson Ahmed Khan with an army to reinstall Sultan Hushang Ghori to Dhar which was captured by Musa Khan.

This mission was a success, the castle of Mandu was captured, and the usurper Musa Khan was deposed.

Muzaffar marched towards Delhi to assist Nasir-ud-Din Mahmud Shah Tughluq, stopping Sultan Ibrahm of Jaunpur from attacking the capital.

Due to his declining health, he abdicated the kingdom in 1410 in favour of his grandson Ahmad Shah I.

Ahmad Shah made his grandfather Muzaffar Shah swallow poison to take revenge for his father’s death and killed him.

He was laid to rest in Patan.

In 1411, at the age of 19, Ahmad Shah I succeeded him.

Conclusion

Conclusion

Muzaffar Shah was the founder of the Muzaffarid dynasty. Initially, a governor of Gujarat under the Tughlaq dynasty, he declared himself an independent monarch and assumed the title Muzaffar Shah in 1407 CE, following Timur's invasion. He was a Rajput who converted to Muslim. He was killed by his grandson Ahmad Shah, who then succeeded him in 1411.