Why choose Scottish Fuels?

We're proud to keep Scottish homes topped up whatever the weather.

20 years and counting

We’ve been keeping Scottish homes up and down the country topped up with heating oil for over 20 years. We’re part of Certas Energy which is rated 4.7 on Trustpilot with thousands of reviews. We offer a choice of heating oils, including our premium fuel Glowmax. Customers can also opt for automatic deliveries, or choose to pay for their annual fuel by Pay Monthly Direct Debits.

So much more than fuel

Scottish Fuels has drivers and teams the length and breadth of Scotland. We’re truly local at heart, and whatever your fuel and heating needs, you can rely on us to be your doorstep.

Glowmax, our premium kerosene

Optional automatic top ups

Fuel services with Direct Debits

Boiler servicing and repairs

Replacements tanks and servicing

Smart fuel monitors

OFTEC registred heating engineers

Easy online services

Loyalty rewards

On doorsteps across Scotland

count on us all year round

When you buy heating oil with us, you can rest assured that we put your safety first when we come to deliver. We’ll always be fair and transparent with our pricing, with no hidden fees. Just reliable heating oil deliveries, when you need them most, that’s what we do.

You can never be too safe

From delivering your heating oil in the safest way possible, to checking over your tank before we top it up, our drivers are always trained to keep you safe all year round.

Rated 4.7 stars on Trustpilot

We’re part of Certas Energy, who are rated 4.3 stars on Trustpilot. They’re the country’s most trusting heating oil providers. So you’re in safe hands.

Manage your heating oil your way

We’ll help you manage your heating oil the way you like it. You can set up an online account in just a few clicks and order, track your delivery and view or pay your bills, all at the click of a button. Or, if you prefer, you can speak to a real person in your local Scottish Team. The choice is yours.