The energy transition presents Scotland with a once-in-a-generation opportunity to be a global player in the emerging energy markets.

To discuss this and the impact it will have, Insider and Scottish Enterprise brought together a group of experts in Aberdeen.

Around the table were:

Bob Sanguinetti, chief executive of the Port of Aberdeen

Maggie McGinlay, chief executive of the Energy Transition Zone (ETZ)

Stephen Swindell, managing director of Xodus

Suzanne Sosna, director of energy transition at Scottish Enterprise

Bob MacDonald, co-founder of Climate Solutions

Rebecca Allison, chief operating officer at the Net Zero Technology Centre (NZTC)

Sharon McKendry, head of energy transition at Scottish Enterprise

Sosna got the event started with an introduction to Scottish Enterprise and how the energy transition is one of its key missions as an organisation.

“Our work on energy transition is not just a team within Scottish Enterprise, it cuts across all of our work - be that business support, international development, our investment arm and everything we do with partners from the public and private sectors.

“We don't see this as Scottish Enterprise acting alone, partners such as the ETZ, the NZTC, industry bodies like Scottish Engineering, the other enterprise and business support agencies, the clusters and other relevant organisations are all part of the push.”

This so-called just transition from oil and gas to renewable sources of energy is also an opportunity to create new jobs, foster skills and wider economic opportunity.

“Obviously much of this is focused here, in the northeast, capitalising on all the knowledge and experience that has grown up around the energy industry in this part of the country - but the northeast’s success is very much Scotland's success, and vice versa,” said Sosna.

“Our focus also covers all renewable areas that will be part of that journey, so while much of the focus has been there [the north east], it’s not exclusive to offshore wind, we’re also looking at hydrogen, wave power, carbon capture and storage and things like sustainable aviation or alternative fuels.”

After her initial thoughts, the conversation started on how positive energy policy was crucial to ensure continued Scottish job creation and overseas investment in the region.

McGinlay said her message to those in power is to really try to understand the industry. “Of course it’s about BP and Shell, but it’s also about the likes of Technip FMC or Subsea7, which have a massive footprint in Scotland and want to keep their investment here as they’re transitioning - as well as all those indigenous companies that have been around for many years,” she commented.

Swindell said the current uncertainty is pushing some decisions down the line. “We have seen some projects pause, which means we have to be reactive and rework plans.

“To unlock the potential of initiatives like X-Academy - our not-for-profit energy jobs accelerator - to see the large offshore wind projects, and the work promised by the ScotWind leasing rounds, we need a more welcoming investor environment.”

Sosna shared that Scottish Enterprise’s international division Scottish Development International has seen a swell of interest, as the country has a reputation for energy innovation and a perceived first-mover advantage and advised that now is the time to take advantage of that.

“The declaration that we want to get to net zero is very easy to make, it’s like saying you want to bake a cake, but with little idea of the ingredients or method; what we really need is some kind of roadmap to delivery,” she stated. “Investors crave certainty - and this is true across the democratic world.”

A key part of Scottish Enterprises international work is helping to provide support for potential inward investors and minimise any uncertainty that overseas companies may have.

Sanguinetti said that ScotWind and the Green Freeports have been important steps in the right direction, but there is opportunity to go further.

“There needs to be the carrot and stick approach, incentives alongside mandated legislation - which is something the EU is forging ahead with - you need to be able to get beyond that initial hurdle of the upfront cost, which can be very expensive in new technologies,” he argued.

“It is difficult to invest in green infrastructure unless you are confident that there is a client on the other side who’s going to take it up, and if it’s cheaper for them to take fossil fuel-based solutions, rather than renewable ones - unless they’re mandated to do so - they are likely to choose the former.”

Sanguinetti explained that the port is running a project part-funded by the UK Government to provide green electricity to ships when they’re docked, so they can shut down generators and not run on diesel.

“I can only do it because I’m working with shipping and energy companies which have signed up to getting their ships converted, as well as mandating that they must plug in, even if the electricity is more expensive,” he said, adding that approaches like this need to be rapidly scaled up.

Sosna pointed to the market for secondary steel as just one part of the jigsaw, explaining that a lot of steel structures are going to be needed in the coming years, so Scottish Enterprise has looked at the detail of what will need to be procured and if Scotland can supply products and services - “where the gaps are and where the money can be made” - in order to figure out which opportunities are coming, before working with companies so they understand how to diversify or invest in order to be able to bid for those contracts.

“But if they don’t have a line of sight of when the contracts are coming, the longer that goes on, the trickier the conversation becomes,” Sosna added. “It needs to be unlocked at the grid, consenting, Contracts for Difference level, so that all the rest can unravel.

“Ultimately, businesses will follow the money, so we can take away obstacles, but there has to be commercial viability to allow projects to proceed.”

McKendry has taken on responsibility for building hydrogen capabilities within Scotland and said that there are many companies interested in diversifying.

“Many traditional oil and gas companies are keen to get involved in hydrogen, but the projects aren’t quite there yet, so I think it’s about getting that balance right, building the interest, but for genuine opportunities,” she said.

Swindell said that a more managed energy transition, with a diversity of companies, is required.

“We’ve become very good at managing risk, it’s almost what developing oil and gas is about - you don’t know how much was there, so you build in mechanisms for managing risk,” he suggested. “With renewables, it’s managing a different type of risk - wind and tidal are much more predictable, so you don’t have to worry about whether it’s there or not - the risk now is in the supply chain and whether you can manufacture the right material in time.”

He added: “There is a lot of will from the sector to speed this up.”

Allison turned the conversation to academia being a crucial starting point for the innovation that will power the energy transition over the next few decades.

“Because of uncertainty we can’t get the investment to scale, you can get to the demonstration stage with some of these university spin-out projects, but beyond that it’s very difficult,” she said. “We need continued funding to attract inward investment, because the industry cannot self fund at the moment.”

MacDonald said that while higher education institutions are improving commercial spin-outs, there still remains a lot of work to be done - including in the north east - to focus academia to real industrial challenges.

“I don’t think we’re giving these young entrepreneurs of the future the challenges at an early stage, that they could, by the time they leave university, have lined up their own first business,” he added.

McGinlay commented: “We’ve got the NZTC, the ORE Catapult, the National Subsea Centre, the National Decommissioning Centre, two leading universities here - it’s such an amazing array of research and innovation capacity and a really entrepreneurial supply chain.

“What needs to be clear is what challenges are being faced that can be solved by these companies and organisations.”

Sosna concluded by referring to Scottish Enterprise’s focus on innovation.

“Scotland has a fantastic range of universities covering a wide number of disciplines and doing some world-leading research and innovation, but that doesn't always translate into successful company creation, or those spin-outs struggle to scale.

“So scaling innovation is a real focus for us, helping to encourage more companies to grow in Scotland by making sure they have the support they need to do so.”