We were born and bred in Peterhead, North East of Scotland, and we’ve never been far away from the sea.

With depots in Peterhead and Fraserburgh - two of Scotland’s busiest ports - we specialise in fuel and lubricants for the marine market. We’ve been fueling the fishing industry since we began in business – providing a reliable service to fishermen 24 hours a day – and now we supply support vessels for oil and gas and other seaborne traffic too.

We live and work throughout parts of North East Scotland where lots of homes are ‘off grid’ for natural gas.

So thousands of families use oil-fired heating to warm their homes - and many of them rely on John A. Smith & Sons to deliver. We offer a competitively-priced, dependable year-round service, throughout North East Aberdeenshire.

You can’t run a farm without fuel, and dependable deliveries are as vital as sun and rain. Fortunately, you can depend on John A. Smith & Sons till the cows come home.

We supply a full range of fuels for all farm vehicles and machinery, together with heating oil for farm buildings. We can also deliver all the lubricants, greases and coolants you need, for everything on the farm.

We supply fuels to a wide range of local businesses, including clients in the haulage, manufacturing and energy industries.

Whether it’s heating oil, commercial or marine diesel, or any number of other key fuels, we provide a competitive, dependable supply. We can also provide a full range of lubricants for most industrial applications.

Engine oils, transmission fluids, brake and clutch fluids - they all become more and more specialised as the machinery itself becomes more sophisticated.

So it’s important to keep up, using the correct product for each application. At John A. Smith & Sons, we supply specialist lubricants, greases and coolants for fishing vessels, farming equipment and all kinds of vehicles and machinery. And as experts, we’re happy to advise about what to use and how to use it.

We’re very much a family firm. John A. Smith & Sons was founded in 1958, and today it’s headed by John’s four sons, with the third generation - his grandsons and granddaughters - responsible for much of the day-to-day work.

For nearly sixty years we’ve been serving the people of North East Scotland, providing a fast, efficient and dependable service to homes, farms, boats and businesses. We’ve always supplied the highest quality fuels and lubricants - and we’re proud to call many of our customers friends.