MUMBAI: Reliance Infocomm has renewed its contract with Intec Telecom Systems, a supplier of business and operations support systems (BSS/OSS) to over 350 customers across the global telecoms and IPTV industry. Reliance Infocomm has used Intec's carrier grade BSS/OSS solutions for its mediation, retail and wholesale billing within its core IT infrastructure since the start of its operations in December 2002.

"We consider Intec as a vital technology partner that will continue to grow with us in our journey to scale and speed, in our ambition to lead the Indian market, and in our mission to deliver true value to our customers," Reliance Anil Dhirubhai Ambani Group chairman Anil Dhirubhai Ambani. "Intec's technology, experience and capabilities in BSS/OSS are helping us to optimize our business model through the rapid launch of innovative, cost-effective products and services to a huge and growing customer base. Intec's scalable solutions help us create a competitive differentiation for Reliance Infocomm as a significant player in India, and we look forward to the continuing benefits that this partnership brings to both companies."

"Subscriber numbers, particularly in developing economies like India, continue to accelerate, and many operators are faced with the challenge of finding BSS/OSS technology that can cope with both substantial volumes and complex new services," says Intec CEO, Kevin Adams. "Intec Convergent Billing, Intec Interconnect and Intec Mediation are proven solutions in many of the world's largest wireless, fixed, cable and IP carriers, supporting hundreds of millions of events per day in our largest accounts. We're proud of our strong relationship with Reliance Infocomm, and we are confident of supporting their ambitious growth and development plans."

Intec is the fastest growing major BSS/OSS vendor in the world, recording a 69 per cent increase in sales from 2004 to 2005, and increasing its customer base by 27 per cent to a total of over 350 customers worldwide. Intec's solutions have been chosen by over 60 per cent of the world's top 100 carriers, claims an official release. Intec invests heavily in both its core technology and its customer service capabilities on a global basis, including, for example, its expanding technical facilities in India which are delivering and supporting successful OSS/BSS projects to operators in India as well as around the world, the release adds.

Intec MD Asia Pacific, John Rocca adds, "Intec is proud to be recognized as an integral technology and solutions partner, working with Reliance Infocomm to deliver high quality, leading edge technology, robust performance and the benefits of next generation services to a wider spectrum of the Indian market."