Join me in this live, two-hour class and discover the Five Things I’ve Learned about why writing happens best when we summon the faith and the nerve to get out of our own way – and free-fall instead into our psyche and imagination.

Dear Fellow Writers,

My name is Andre Dubus 3, and I’m the author of five novels, two short story collections, a memoir, and a forthcoming collection of personal essays. I have been writing since the early 1980s, but I’ve also been teaching creative writing for nearly as long, and one of the many things I’ve discovered in the classroom is that we writers quite often and quite easily can get in our own way.

Getting in the way is a difficult habit to recognize, and an even harder habit to break. And that’s why I want to invite you to my upcoming live class, Five Things I’ve Learned about Writing as Dreaming. Whether we’re writing fiction or creative non-fiction, we tend to want our work to illuminate something in particular – perhaps the challenges of marriage (gay or straight), of racism and patriarchy, of the ravages of addiction, etc – and so we control our writing, and we beat it into submission until it says just what we authors want it to say. But, if I’ve learned nothing in my decades of creative writing, I’ve learned this: the writing is larger than the writer, a surrender of each writer’s ego and its attendant authorial desires to something larger than herself, and this can only happen with a brave free-fall into the writer’s own psyche and imagination.

And so, during our time together, I’ll explain to you why I recommend that you do not outline your work. And why I urge you not to think out the plot, the narrative arc, the protagonist’s journey, whatever you want to call it. Instead, try to find the story through an honest excavation of the characters’ total experience of the situation in which they find themselves. Do that, and I promise the story will begin to write itself, with little need for the controlling hand of the godly, intelligent, well-read, and ambitious author.

How, precisely, does one go about this “excavation”? And how, technically speaking, can we ignite a story into “writing itself”? Come to this two-hour class, and I will seek to demystify those writerly tools and skills that time and time again, if they are sharp enough, and if the writer can summon enough daily faith and nerve, can penetrate the mystery of story itself.

Thank you. I look forward to working with you.

– Andre

If you’ve not received confirmation of your purchase, it’s not because we haven’t sent it. In fact, we send an immediately confirmation to the email address you share with us to ensure that we can reach you with class details.

If you don’t receive a confirmation within 10 minutes or so making your purchase, please first check your “junk” or “promotions” email first — some people’s email programs group unfamiliar emails in these types of folders. The email date and time should match closely the time you purchased your ticket online.

If the confirmation email is not there, there’s a small possibility that your email address wasn’t entered as you intended when you registered. (You’d be surprised, but this happens.)

In any case, we want to make sure we can reach you. And we want to make sure you’re registered for the class you want. if you can’t find your confirmation email, please send us a note at pre.event@extendedsession.com. We’ll get back to you right away.

Your ticket entitles you to ongoing access to this class — even after the live session concludes.

If you purchase a ticket in time to join the class live, you can view the archive as soon as it’s posted, as often as you like. Look for an email with information about how to access the course archive within 48 hours of the end of the live class. Once you get it, you’ll have all the information you need to access it as you like across any and all devices you own.

If you purchase a ticket after the live class takes place, you can view the archive immediately, and you can return to it as frequently as you like