Actor Nicky Henson, who passed away at the age of 74 today, made his name as a lothario who gave Basil Fawlty the run around.

The actor found fame in the 1960s with his charm, cheeky grin, foppish good looks and a public school accent - but it also made him popular with women, earning him a reputation as something of a ladies' man.

Henson was best known for playing Mr Johnson in the episode of Fawlty Towers called The Psychiatrist, in which John Cleese's Basil Fawlty becomes obsessed with catching his character breaking hotel policy by hiding a woman in his room.

And for the actor, it was a case of life imitating art as he enjoyed an equally dramatic love life.

In 1969, aged just 25 he married the actress Una Stubbs, before he walked out on her and into relationships with Avengers star Linda Thorson and then Susan Hampshire, with whom he starred in several stage productions.

Speaking only last year the grandfather-of-four said the only regrets he had in life were the hearts he had broken.

He said: 'The only regrets are the upsets I've given people in my life, particularly ladies, when I was young. I've said sorry to Una [Stubbs]. I was always very, very immature - in fact, I've only grown up recently.'

He and Worzel Gummidge actress Stubbs had sons Christian and Joe, both of whom are composers. The pair divorced in 1975.

In an interview he said: 'I was 25 going on 16 when I married Una, so I was very immature.

'Luckily I've had a wonderful relationship with Christian and Joe – they were very understanding.'

In 1986 he eventually settled down and enjoyed a 35-year marriage to dancer and teacher Marguerite Porter, the one-time Royal Ballet star, by whom he has third son, Keaton.

In a twist of fate, Hensen was reunited with his first wife Una when they both landed parts in EastEnders in 2006.

She joined the soap as Caroline Bishop, the aunt of Honey Edwards who arrived in Albert Square to help her prepare for her wedding to Billy Mitchell.

She played the sister-in-law of Jack Edwards, Honey's father.

Fortunately, the pair had remained friends and speaking at the time, Stubbs said: 'It has been a life-long ambition to be united on screen with Nicky Henson and Barbara Windsor, who are two very good friends of mine.'

In an interview last year, Henson said he could not have coped without his 'amazing' wife Marguerite, saying she had 'probably saved my life at least five times over the last few years with her quick thinking and caring for me.'

He added: 'It was love at first sight when I met her, but I couldn't get up the nerve to ask her out.

'In the end a friend got us together. We've been married for 32 years and have one son.

'Altogether I have three wonderful sons, all composers, and four grandchildren.'

Discussing if he had any regrets, Henson said: 'Not about my career - I've done pretty well for someone with no ambition.

'The only regrets are the upsets I've given people in my life, particularly ladies, when I was young. I've said sorry to Una. I was always very, very immature - in fact, I've only grown up recently.'

In a career spanning some 57 years, the actor had roles in EastEnders, Downton Abbey, the George Clooney movie Syriana, The Bill and Vera Drake as well as stage work with the Royal Shakespeare Company and National Theatre.

But he was perhaps best known for the role of Mr Johnson in 'The Psychiatrist' episode of Fawlty Towers in 1979 - an amorous guest who landed himself in hot water with Basil Fawlty after trying to sneak a girl into his room.

The grandfather-of-four was diagnosed with gastrointestinal stromal tumours at Christmas nearly two decades ago, and had half of his colon and a third of his stomach removed, before being diagnosed with prostate cancer in 2008.

His death was confirmed by his fellow actor Ian Ogilvy today, who paid tribute to his 'oldest and dearest friend', adding he had battled cancer with 'great fortitude and good humour'.

In a statement, his family said this morning: 'Nicky Henson has died after a long disagreement with cancer.'

His son Christian added: 'After a very long disagreement with cancer we lost our Dad Nicky in the early hours of this morning. He was with family and died peacefully. We will honour his life by making sure the laughter and the music never stops.'

Henson, from Richmond, south-west London, previously spoke out about how he battled three cancers in three years.

In 2012, he underwent 21 medical procedures over a 12-month period for kidney stones which had been caused by radiation treatment for prostate cancer.

He told the Mirror last year: 'I haven't smoked for about 45 years, but I drink alcohol and I'm not going to stop having a good time.

'If I'm going to be here, you need to enjoy it! I consider myself a very lucky person.'

Mr Ogilvy posted on Facebook today: 'After an illness which started twenty years ago, and which was born with great fortitude and good humour, my oldest and dearest friend, my mate Nicky Henson, has gone [sic].'

Michael Boyd, former RSC Artistic Director, who directed Nicky in Twelfth Night in 2005, told MailOnline: 'The life force in Nicky Henson was phenomenal.

'Only after the press night of our Twelfth Night in 2005, when he broke it to me that he was seriously ill with cancer, did I understand why such a vigorous man had been so careful to conserve energy in rehearsals.

'Making it to press night on Twelfth Night in 2005 had been an act of defiance, generosity and great courage.

'Making such a great Toby Belch, albeit for one night only, and then going on to succeed as an actor and defeat his disease for so long was an amazing achievement of spirit, experience and skill.'

Henson was born in London, to British stage and screen actor Leslie Henson - who entertained the troops during the war and appeared on the bill at various Royal Variety Performances - and his third wife Billie.

Henson, who had known Cleese for more than 50 years, once revealed how the comedian called him to ask him to play Mr Johnson because he would be too embarrassed to be so rude to an actor he didn't know.

He said in an interview: 'I played a flash guy, a medallion man in leather trousers and a chamois shirt,' Henson said of his guest spot. Basil was dreadfully nasty to me.'

He later revealed how he was paid just £150 to appear in the episode.

'We didn't realise what a huge hit the show was. John did say to me, 'I can probably guarantee 100 per cent of your original fee in repeats.' My fee was £150 - and Fawlty Towers is still topping up my pension!'

He joked that despite his 50 years of acting, his tombstone would probably read: 'Here lies Nicky Henson - he was in one episode of Fawlty Towers'.

Green Wing and Alan Partridge star Stephen Mangan tweeted today: 'RIP Nicky Henson, fine actor and the first ever Garry Lejeune in Noises Off. I will salute you today by falling backwards down a flight of stairs.'

EastEnders and Strictly star Emma Barton, who played Henson's daughter in the soap, tweeted: 'Truly devastated to hear about the passing of my beautiful TV Dad. A wonderfully talented actor, a true gentleman, not forgetting his terrifically wicked sense of humour. Thinking of his family.'

His fellow EastEnders actor Stuart Antony tweeted this morning: 'RIP the wonderful Nicky Henson - The man with million stories all of them funny. A true gent x'

Brookside actress Julie Peasgood tweeted: 'He was indeed a wonderful guy.'

Giles Brendreth added: 'Sad news. Nicky Henson was the just the loveliest & most brilliant guy, an actor of such energy & style. He's been ill for too long & was so courageous. RIP.'

Henson trained at RADA as a stage manager, before trying his hand at pop music, but acting was always his dream.

In 1998, he was nominated for a 1998 Laurence Olivier Theatre Award for Best Supporting Performance in a Musical of 1997 for his role in Enter the Guardsman.

He starred in The Frost Report in 1966 and more than 30 films, including Witchfinder General, Psychomania, Vera Drake and Syriana.

He then went on to appear as washed-up music hall performer Charles Grigg in the first and fourth seasons of Downton Abbey.

Henson also appeared in the Jason Statham movie, Blitz, as well as TV shows including Inspector Morse, Midsomer Murders, The Bill, Heartbeat, Vera Drake, and Doctors.

He recorded his first single in 1961 and had a three-year contract writing songs for The Shadows and Cliff Richard.

Henson's most recent acting credit was as Latham in the crime drama Tango One in 2018.

He was first diagnosed with cancer on Christmas Day 19 years ago.

He said last year: 'For the last 18 years, I've regarded myself as 'being in extra time', which I never expected to have, so I'm very thankful for it.

'I got my first cancer on Christmas day 18 years ago and didn't think I was going to survive, after I was told I had a large tumour and would have to be operated on.

'To get rid of the first tumour, I had to have half my colon and a third of my stomach removed. I was fine, but a routine scan a few years later revealed I had another tumour.

'I was prescribed a drug, Gleevac, for six months, to reduce it to an operable size.

'During that time, I got my dream part as Sir Toby Belch in Twelfth Night at the RSC, but the physical strain of the part and the side effects of the drug meant I had to give it up.

'I knew then I'd never act on stage again, which broke my heart.'

Henson said he could not have coped without his 'amazing' wife Marguerite, saying she had 'probably saved my life at least five times over the last few years with her quick thinking and caring for me.

'It was love at first sight when I met her, but I couldn't get up the nerve to ask her out.

'In the end a friend got us together. We've been married for 32 years and have one son. Altogether I have three wonderful sons, all composers, and four grandchildren.'