Kill Bill is the 4th film written and directed by Quentin Tarantino. It was released in two parts, Volume 1 (2003) and Volume 2 (2004), with an integral version entitled "The Whole Bloody Affair" still planned for home video release which was premiered at Cannes in 2006.

Starring Uma Thurman, David Carradine, Michael Madsen, Daryl Hannah, Lucy Liu, Vivica A. Fox, Sonny Chiba and Gordon Liu.

Two Volumes, One Film

Kill Bill was created as one film and then released as two volumes. However, it is considered to be one film (the entire saga has been termed The Whole Bloody Affair). The film in its entirety is divided into ten chapters. The first volume consists of the first five chapters. The second volume is the last 5 chapters. While Volume 1 is a no holds barred, violent Grindhouse Revenge thrill ride, Volume 2 is longer in running time and slows the breakneck speed down to give viewers a more in depth look at the characters Tarantino created. On another level, Volume 1 has a more Asian Kung Fu-Samurai inspired feel while Volume 2 plays more like an American/Spaghetti Western.

Tarantino decided to release a slightly altered version in Japan and some other Asian countries, showing a number of additional scenes of violence, and a full color version of The House of Blue Leaves massacre. The alterations in Volume 2 are only minor recuts and hardly contain major additions.

The Story

The Bride, an ex-professional assassin who is pregnant, is shot and left for dead at her wedding, by none other than her former boss Bill. She wakes up from a coma after five years, without her baby (believing it to be dead) and sets out for revenge on her ex-assassin associates (The Deadly Viper Assassination Squad). After regaining her strength she tracks down the DiVAS and attempts to kill them one after another. Among them are: O-Ren Ishii, who has subsequently become the head of the Yakuza in Japan. Vernita Green, who is now a housewife, and Budd, Bill's brother, who works as a bouncer at a strip club and lives in a shitty trailer. Not until the very end, does The Bride get to face her arch nemesis and ex-lover Bill, to take her final revenge for all that he has done to her, only to find out about a surprising truth. But...she will still...Kill Bill.

Facts and Figures

Film length: 111min (Vol 1), 136 (Vol 2)

Ratings: R (USA) (Extended Cut: NC-17)

Format and technical specifications: 2.35:1 anamorphic widescreen. Panavision. 35mm

Release Dates Volume 1: October 10, 2003 (USA)

Release Dates Volume 2: April 16, 2004 (USA)

Release Date Integral version: ?

Books

Unofficial Casebook

The Kill Bill Diary

From Shane to Kill Bill

and...

Media

Merchandise