Nearly four years after winning a championship with the Los Angeles Lakers in 2020, former NBA big man Dwight Howard is apparently hoping for “one more chance.” In a video that recently surfaced on social media, Howard is seen asking Lakers president Jeanie Buss for another stint with the team. However, it is unclear if Howard is serious or just being playful.

Furthermore, on his 38th birthday, Howard tweeted about wanting to play in the NBA In-Season tournament.

Once the most dominant big man in the NBA, Howard has not appeared in a game since 2022. Though he is most known for his time with the Orlando Magic, Howard had three separate stints with the Lakers. In total, Howard spent three seasons with the team, including his latest one. With the Lakers, he averaged 10.7 points, 8.8 rebounds, and 1.5 blocks per game.

Despite not being in the NBA, Howard has not stepped away from basketball just yet. The 38-year-old joined the TaiwanBeer Leopards, then known as the Taoyuan Leopards. Additionally, in March, Howard signed with the Mets de Guaynabo team based in Puerto Rico.

Former Los Angeles Lakers Champion Hopeful for Reunion?

How Likely Is a Dwight Howard Return to the NBA?

Howard returning to the NBA at this stage in his career is likely guaranteed not to happen. The former Magic star last made an All-Star team in 2013-14, his first season with the Houston Rockets. While he possibly could play spotty minutes, Howard is not a rotation piece in 2024. Plus, he turns 39 in December and has played in at least 80 games during a season once since 2010-11.

In the offseason, the Golden State Warriors met with Howard and considered signing him to the team. Ultimately, nothing came to fruition and Howard sat out the entire 2023-24 season.

The Last Word

The eight-time NBA All-Star was one of the most dominant big men in the game during his prime. However, his prime has been over for a long time. Additionally, it is tough to imagine he can hang with the up-and-coming big men who may change the game. In his career, Howard was a one-time NBA champion, an eight-time All-NBA Team selection and NBA All-Star, a five-time All-Defensive Team selection, a three-time Defensive Player of the Year, a five-time rebounding champion, and a two-time blocks champion. Currently, Basketball Reference gives Howard a 99.7% chance of making it into the Basketball Hall of Fame.