The Atlanta Business Chronicle notes that Morris, Manning & Martin,LLP topped the list of law firms performing private equity deals in 2007. In its yearly Deal Maker section, the publication points out that MMM represented Noble Investment Group in closing the Noble Hospitality Fund LLC, which totaled $310 million in equity commitments. The fund has the capacity to acquire and develop more than $1 billion in lodging assets.

MMM also completed more than 40 other funding transactions, including venture capital, preferred stock financings and revolving credit facilities. MMM lawyers represented one out of every five transactions listed on the Business Chronicle’slist of 2007’s largest venture capital deals.

Mergers and acquisitions activity was also brisk, with dozens of deals, including acquisitions of MMM clients by major technology and business services companies. The firm represented:

Tandberg TV in its acquisition by Ericsson

Caraustar Industries Inc. in the sale of its composite can and plastics businesses to Sonoco Products Company

Stratature’s acquisition by Microsoft

Firethorn Holdings LLC in its acquisition by Qualcomm Incorporated

Cambia Security Inc.’s acquisition by nCircle Network Security Inc.

The firm’s lawyers also counseled several fast-growing businesses as they continued their development. These include Knology, Inc., which acquired PrairieWave Holdings; Silverpop Systems, which acquired Vtrenz, Inc. in an all-stock transaction; and Digital Envoy, which acquired Cydelity.

The firm also played a key role in attracting China-based General Protecht to Georgia, where it will build a new manufacturing plant. The deal will eventually be worth $100 million, and create about 350 jobs.

About Morris, Manning & Martin, LLP

Morris, Manning & Martin, LLP, (www.mmmlaw.com) enjoys national prominence for its corporate finance, securities, mergers and acquisitions, litigation, technology, intellectual property, real estate and real estate capital markets, environmental, insurance and healthcare practices. The firm has offices in Atlanta, Washington, D.C., Charlotte, Raleigh-Durham and Princeton.

###

Media Contact: Terri Thornton, Thornton Communications, (404) 932-4347 territhornton@mindspring.com