Patrick Heim, CISO at ClearSky venture partners

Patrick Heim is a senior executive with over two decades working in security spanning Fortune 500 enterprises, cloud providers as well as early stage security technology companies. He joined ClearSky as an Operating Partner and Chief Information Security Officer. Mr. Heim is a senior security executive with over two decades working in security spanning Fortune 500 enterprises, cloud providers as well as early stage security technology companies. Prior to joining the Fund, Mr. Heim was Head of Trust and Security at Dropbox. He also served as Senior Vice President and Chief Trust Officer at Salesforce.com. Patrick has also held Chief Information Security Officer roles at Kaiser Permanente and McKesson Corporation. In the startup world, he was Vice President and Chief Technology Officer at eNetSecure (a subsidiary of Applied Signal Technologies, now Raytheon). Mr. Heim also has previously held senior positions at nCircle and Ernst & Young. Patrick holds a B.S. from Indiana University marketing as well as an MBA in international business / finance from the University of South Carolina. He currently serves as a director for Preempt Security and Ticto and has previously served on the boards of Cylance, Solebit, and BigID.

Panel member:

Sherry Ryan, IT Vice President and Chief Information Security Officer Juniper Networks.

Sherry Ryan is IT vice president and chief information security officer of Juniper Networks. Previously, Sherry held similar positions at Blue Shield of California, Hewlett-Packard, Safeway and Levi Strauss where she established and led their information security programs. Sherry holds the Certified Information Security Manager (CISM) certification from ISACA and the Certified Information Systems Security Professional (CISSP) certification from ISC2. She is a member of the High-Tech Crime Investigation Association (HTCIA) and the Information Systems Security Association (ISSA). Sherry has a bachelor's degree in Business Administration from the University of Redlands and earned her master's degree in Business Administration from the College of Notre Dame.

Panel member:

Richard Seiersen, Senior Vice President and Chief Information Security Officer LendingClub.

Richard is a security executive with ~20 years’ experience ranging from start-ups to global organizations. He currently is the SVP/CISO of Lending Club. Previously he was the CISO and VP of Trust for Twilio as well as the VP & GM Cybersecurity & Privacy for GE Healthcare. His current focus is developing quantitatively informed strategies, building agile teams that scale and making digital risk measurable. Likewise, he recently co-authored a decision analysis book called How To Measure Anything In Cybersecurity Risk (Wiley 2016) and is in the process of writing his next book, "Prove It! Confronting Security With Data."

Panel member:

Eddie Borrero, Chief Information Security Officer Robert Half International.

Eddie Borrero is the chief information security officer for Robert Half, which specializes in the placement of professionals in the accounting and finance, technology, legal, creative and administrative fields. As a thought leader in the industry with over 15 years of information security management experience, Eddie is completely inspired by the challenge of creating and growing Information security practices and programs within large organizations – which, fits nicely with his passion for managing and developing people. Eddie joined Robert Half in 2015 and is responsible for the management of information security globally for the company. Previous to his current role, Eddie worked in governance, oversight, and management of enterprise information protection programs for Intuit, Amgen, Electronics Arts, and PG&E.