SAN FRANCISCO -- nCircle, the leading provider of agentless security risk and compliance management solutions, today announced that it has completed the acquisition of Cambia Security, the leader in agentless configuration auditing. The combination will enable enterprises to manage their security risk and automate compliance and auditing efforts with an integrated solution.

The Cambia solution discovers system configurations, how they are changing, and how these changes comply with configuration policies for audit and control purposes. The solution provides a rich library of policies based on standards such as CIS and NIST and includes prescriptive policies for regulations such as PCI, HIPAA and SOX. This customer-requested functionality complements nCircle's patented agentless discovery technology, breadth and depth of coverage, risk prioritization, and advanced analytics.

"nCircle has achieved significant traction and market share delivering security solutions for the enterprise building on their methods of discovering and dynamically tracking complex system configurations," said Peter Christy, Founder and Principal, Internet Research Group. "As the security market focuses more on business risk management, consolidation is bound to see most of today's smaller participants acquired by larger players. Anticipating this inevitable process, nCircle has built a platform capable of integrating complementary solutions and delivering increasing value to enterprise customers."

"Cambia's best-in-class, proven agentless configuration compliance technology enables nCircle to deliver a security risk and compliance management solution that is unparalleled in the market today," stated Abe Kleinfeld, President and CEO of nCircle. "Our customers have seen significant benefits from nCircle's security risk solutions and are asking that we expand our agentless technology to address their configuration compliance challenges as well. This combination will transform the way enterprises perform these critical security and IT operations by providing a comprehensive solution for managing security risk and compliance."

nCircle