There are more than just attitudes changing with latitudes (thanks, Jimmy!).

Climates change. But it doesn't always work the way you would think: The farther north you go, no matter where above the equator you are, it doesn't get uniformly colder.

Most of Europe lies farther north on the globe than the United States. But London, which is latitude 51.5 degrees north, rarely gets snowfall, while Boston, farther south at 42.3 degrees, gets a whole lot - a record 23¶ inches in one day in 1978.

Portland, Maine - an admittedly chilly locale - lies on the same latitude as Genoa, on the warm coast of Italy, and Cannes, the resort town on the Mediterranean coast of France.

The average winter temperatures in these areas are rarely below 40 degrees and the summers average in the low 80s. There are tropical gardens, palms, hibiscus, all growing outdoors. The Jardin Exotique de Monaco - with cacti and succulents planted on a hillside - is never frostbitten. Don't try those plants outdoors in the maritime provinces.

Boston, which is likewise more than a tad cold in the winter - is the same latitude as Rome. The climate in Rome is generally pleasant: warm and sunny in spring and autumn. Winters are mild, though cold spells can occur.

We pretty much know how cold Boston and New York can get in January - very.

Just because towns are on the same latitude doesn't mean they will have the same climates. Different air and ocean currents make all the difference.

Over half the heat that reaches the Earth from the sun is absorbed by the ocean's surface layer - which covers 70 percent of our planet - so surface currents move lots of heat. Winds do play a role in weather patterns, but water holds heat more than air, so it makes more of a longterm impact.

Floridians are familiar with the Gulf Stream, a surface current and one of the strongest in the world - warm, deep, fast and relatively salty. It separates open-ocean water from coastal water.

The Gulf Stream is not completely born in the Gulf of Mexico. Its elements begin with the South Equatorial Current, which flows east.

That splits in two when it hits the tip of Brazil. The half that goes north joins the North Equatorial Current, the major eddy in the Atlantic.

This "river" branches again when it nears the Caribbean Basin. The eastern half is called the Antilles Current; the half that runs west goes past the Yucatan Channel into the warm and shallow Gulf of Mexico.

It swirls around clockwise and squirts through the Straits of Florida, which is only 50 miles wide and 2,500 feet deep in places. Think of a finger at the end of a water hose, concentrating the flow: The current can reach speeds of 10 miles per hour, carrying over a billion cubic feet of water every second.

It rejoins the Antilles Current and as these push northward they collide off the Northeast with the colder currents coming south from the Arctic area, with dramatic temperature differences and ensuing fog and violent weather. Cold water is saltier, so it sinks; the Gulf Stream stays on top as it continues northeastward toward the British Isles.

There the water finally cools, releasing heat into the atmosphere. Winds blowing west to east carry this moist warmth toward Europe.

The Greenland and Norwegian seas remain free of ice because of this Caribbean cocktail.