Disclaimer: This page may contain affiliate links. I earn a small commission if you make a purchase through these links (at no additional cost to you).

If you’re wondering ‘Where is London England?’, I’ve got all of the information you need on London latitude and longitude right here!

London, the capital of England, is an exciting city full of culture and world-class attractions. With its rich history, diverse neighborhoods and iconic landmarks, London is a popular travel destination with something to suit every interest.

With London coordinates of 51°30′ N 0°7′ W (51.51 degrees North latitude and 0.12 degrees West longitude), London’s location gives it a moderate climate. This makes it a great destination for travelers eager to experience all four seasons.

In London, the warm summer days are ideal for exploring its many attractions while winter months offer cool temperatures and the occasional snowfall. This makes London an excellent destination year-round!

Ready to learn all about London latitude and longitude, and how this impacts the weather in London? Lace up your shoes and let’s go!

Where is London? London latitude and longitude

Where is London?

London is located in the Southeast of England, on the River Thames. It’s considered a part of the United Kingdom, which also includes Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.

London is the capital of England, a country located in Western Europe. With a population of over 8 million, London is one of the largest cities in the world.

The neighboring countries of England are Wales and Scotland, which are located on the same island as England.

What is the latitude of London?

London’s latitude is 51°30′ N, which is 51.51 degrees North of the equator. This means London lies north of the Equator.

Since London’s latitude is higher than the latitude of Paris France, it means that London is closer to the North Pole than Paris.

What is the longitude of London?

The longitude of London England is 0°7′ W, which is 0.12 degrees West of the Prime Meridian. This means London is located further west than Paris, making it closer to North America than its European neighbor.

What parallel is London England?

London England is located in the Northern Hemisphere, so it lies on the 51st parallel north. This means that it is at 51 degrees north of the equator.

London’s main airport, Heathrow Airport, lies on the same parallel as its city center – in this case, the 51st parallel.

Does latitude impact hours of daylight in London?

Absolutely, the latitude of a city significantly influences its daylight hours.

As you journey away from the equator towards the poles, the summer days extend, and the winter nights become longer.

This impact is quite apparent in London, located on the 51st parallel north in the Northern Hemisphere.

During the summer months, London enjoys longer daylight hours, perfect for extended sightseeing, and then in winter, the days are much shorter.

You’ll want to keep this in mind when making your travel plans. You can certainly fit in a lot more sightseeing in the summer in London!

Does longitude impact hours of daylight?

No, longitude does not impact the hours of daylight in a given location. The hours of daylight depends only on its latitude.

Longitude is only used to pinpoint the coordinates of a city. It does not change the amount of daylight hours experienced in any given season.

How many hours of daylight are there in London in the summer?

In the summer, there are usually around 16-17 hours of daylight in London (based on ‘official’ sunrise and sunset times).

This varies slightly from day to day, but overall, you can expect plenty of daylight during the summer months in London.

The longest day is on the summer solstice, which is usually on the 20th or 21st of June.

Even after the sun has set you will still see some light in the sky, so true darkness is quite a bit later. In northern cities, a summer day in Dublin or London feels like it goes on forever!

This makes it the perfect city for long summer days filled with sightseeing and exploring!

How many hours of daylight are there in London in the winter?

In the winter, there are usually around 8-9 hours of daylight in London. This varies from day to day, but overall you should expect much shorter hours of daylight during the winter months.

(That’s only half of the hours of daylight in the summer! Those long winter evenings are great for enjoying a pint in a friendly pub or snuggling up with your special someone in front of a cozy fire.)

The shortest day is the winter solstice, which is typically on December 21 or 22.

So, if you’re visiting London in the winter, be sure to plan your sightseeing carefully to make the most of those precious daylight hours!

Does latitude affect climate?

Yes, latitude does affect climate. As you move away from the equator and closer to the poles, temperatures tend to be cooler in general.

This is why places located on higher latitudes like London and Dublin tend to have more temperate climates and experience four distinct seasons.

Conversely, places with lower latitudes (such as the latitude of Rome, the capital of Italy) will tend to experience more tropical climates. These locations will experience much less temperature variation throughout the year.

While latitude is a large factor in a city’s climate, it is not the only one. Other variables affecting climate include elevation and proximity to large bodies of water.

What is the climate in London?

The climate in London is classified as a temperate oceanic climate.

London summers are generally warm, and its winters are cold. London experiences rainfall throughout the year, so be sure to carry along an umbrella on your trip to London!

What is the daily temperature range in London?

The daily temperature range in London varies greatly depending on the season.

In the summer, temperatures typically range from 17-25°C (63-77°F). London doesn’t often get heat waves, but it can still be quite warm during summer months. Make sure your hotel has air conditioning and bring a bottle of water to stay hydrated.

In the winter, temperatures range from 4-12°C (39-54°F). London can have days where the temperature drops below 0°C (32°F) in its coldest months of January and February.

It’s important to bring appropriate clothing and layers for both summer and winter when visiting London. Temperatures can fluctuate more than the yearly average, so it’s a good idea to be prepared.

You won’t want to miss out on any sightseeing due to being unprepared for the weather! So plan ahead and enjoy exploring London in comfort and style.

Does it snow in London?

Yes, it does snow in London. On average, London gets around 15-25 days of snow each winter.

Snow usually falls in small amounts and won’t last very long before melting away since London doesn’t get bitterly cold during the winter.

What city is on the same latitude as London?

The Canadian city of Calgary has a latitude very close to that of London, with a latitude of 51.0447° N.

In Europe, the latitude of Bruges, Belgium has a latitude of 51.2092° N, and Cologne Germany is 50.9375° N, both of which are close to the London latitude of 51.5072° N.

What US city is on the same latitude as London?

All of the continental United States is further south than London. The state of Alaska is of course much further north than London! Even Ketchikan, which is one of the more southern towns in Alaska, still has a latitude of 55.3422° N.

Are Seattle and London on the same latitude?

No, Seattle and London are not on the same latitude. The latitude of Seattle Washington is 47.6061° N, which is significantly different than London’s latitude of 51.5072° N.

Even though a summer day in Seattle is long, it doesn’t have as many hours of daylight as a day in London!

London Latitude and Longitude Fun Facts

Latitude and Longitude FAQ

There you have it! Now you know everything about the latitude and longitude of London.

And you’ll be well informed for what to expect when visiting London throughout the year, from seasonal temperatures to hours of daylight (all of which are impacted by the latitude of London!)

So, who’s ready to start planning their next trip to London? I know I am!

With this helpful information, you’ll be able to make the most of your time in London. Happy Travels!

You may also enjoy these posts about England’s neighbor to the West, Ireland!

A Perfect Day in Dublin: 21 Best Things to Do and See

The Johnstown Estate: Honest Review by a 4-Month Guest

15 Best Things to Do in Kilkenny: A Medieval Gem

Dublin vs Belfast: Which is the Best City to Visit?

Is Dublin in Northern Ireland? The UK? EU? Easy Answers

Like it? Share it!