Equatorial Guinea (EQG) is an upper middle-income country. It is composed of a mainland, Rio Muni, and small islands including Bioko (where the capital Malabo is located), Annobon, Corisco, Elobey, and others. Its population was estimated at 1.5 million people in 2021. The country is bordered in the north by Cameroon, in the east and south by Gabon, and to the west by the Gulf of Guinea. It is well endowed with arable land and mineral resources ranging from gold, uranium, diamond, columbite-tantalite, and gas and oil, discovered in the 1990s.

Political Overview

In power since 1979, President Obiang was re-elected for a six-year term on November 26, 2022, with 94.9% of the ballots. The absence of real checks and balances grants his political party, “El Partido Democratico de Guinea Ecuatorial (PDGE)”, absolute executive power. The PDGE won almost all the seats at the Chamber of Deputies, the Senate, and at the municipality level. General elections including municipal, legislative, and presidential elections were held the same day.

In April 2022, President Obiang initiated consultations with different parties to organize the coming legislative elections and launched an electoral census in the country. Early September 2022, the parliament had approved a move to prepone the presidential elections to November 20, 2022, while the presidential term expired in April 2023. Government officials of Equatorial Guinea had based this decision on the current economic downturn and the consequent need to streamline public expenditure.

A new Prime Minister, Manuela Roka Botey former Deputy Minister of Education was appointed on January 31, 2023. She became the first woman to fill this role in Equatorial Guinea.

On February 14, 2023, the European Parliament adopted a resolution on the respect for human rights in Equatorial Guinea, urging EU member states to demand an end to all political persecution.

Economic Overview

The discovery of large oil reserves in the 1990s has allowed Equatorial Guinea to become the third-largest producer of oil in Sub-Saharan Africa, after Nigeria and Angola. However, EQG’s macroeconomic and fiscal situation deteriorated at the end of the last commodity super cycle of 2014, with an average negative GDP growth from 2015 to 2021.

After seven consecutive years of recession, the Equatoguinean economy is estimated to have rebounded with 3,1% growth in 2022 for the first time since 2014, mainly owing to a pickup in hydrocarbon output. Inflation in Equatorial Guinea is estimated to have surged to 4.9% in 2022 (compared to 1.8% in 2021) due to higher global food and energy prices, which have been exacerbated by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

To restore its external debt and fiscal imbalances, EQG has been undertaking several reforms and entered an IMF Staff Monitored Program (SMP) in May 2018. The reforms included raising non-hydrocarbon tax revenues and reducing the non-hydrocarbon primary deficit, improving PFM in coordination with the other CEMAC countries, supporting social sectors, protecting the banking sector through the non-accumulation of new arrears, and improving governance. In 2021, the country took measures to address governance and corruption challenges by adopting an anti-corruption law that promotes fiscal transparency.

The government's new economic diversification strategy has seven objectives: i) to establish a new framework for attracting private investment; ii) to boost priority sectors such as digital, the blue and green economy, energy and tourism; and iii) to promote gender equality.

Economic and social Outlook

Equatorial Guinea’s oil-dependent economy is slowly emerging from the ravages of the COVID-19 pandemic and the 2021 Bata explosions, but substantial challenges remain. The relaxation of pandemic containment measures and higher international oil prices are helping boost economic activity, government revenues, and export earnings.

However, surging food prices and high rate of food insecurity particularly among the rural population are still prevalent. Owing to the country overreliance on imports for its food consumption (80%), high food prices are fueled by global recovery from the pandemic and supply shocks caused by the war in Ukraine.

Considering the secular decline in hydrocarbon production, policy priorities include changing the current development model to promote economic diversification. While the government has taken positive steps in some areas, significant progress in adopting and fully implementing key reforms to boost economic diversification is needed. Policies should focus on supporting social cohesion and human development, strengthening governance, boosting trade integration, and creating an enabling business environment to promote economic diversification and inclusive growth.

Last Updated: Apr 10, 2024

World Bank Group Engagement in Equatorial Guinea

The World Bank Group is involved in Equatorial Guinea through Reimbursable Assistance Services (RAS) and Advisory Services and Analytics (ASA). Since 2011 The World Bank has been supporting the country’s capacity to produce timely and accurate statistical data, notably by providing institutional support for the creation and operationalization of the National Statistical Office (INEGE); training a national team in the preparation of national accounts. Other targeted activities include:

Strengthening public investment management

A technical assistance undertaken from 2014 to 2017, was aimed at strengthening the management of public investments, through the training of senior government officials in the management and administration of public investments.

Improving the National Statistical Program

World Bank’s supported the preparation of the National Strategy for the Development of Statistics (SNDS 2016-2020); development of modeling tools for quarterly GDP estimation.

Also, the World Bank provided technical assistance to Egencia 2020—for the implementation of the national, social, and economic development plan, Horizonte 2020—and the Public Investment Division of the Ministry of Economy, Planning and Public Investment to improve their capacity, monitor its implementation, and to strengthen their public investment management systems.

Conducting Advisory Services and Analytics (ASA)

The World Bank's support in the form of its advisory and analysis services is a privileged framework for its commitment to Equatorial Guinea.

Publications such as the Country Economic Memorandum, the Digital Economy Assessment, the Household Survey, the Congo Basin Forest Initiative have been produced, and the first economic conjuncture bulletin on fossil fuel subsidy reform was published in June 2023.

Since 2019, the WB has supported INEGE to conduct a business census and a household survey. The business census was completed in March 2022. The government aims to utilize these data to improve national accounts and to inform domestic resource mobilization efforts. These surveys will provide a new poverty profile and outline the social agenda for the next years by providing data on key human capital indicators. The results will form the basis of a poverty assessment.

The WB has also been financing statistical activities already underway, namely Support for the preparation of annual and quarterly national accounts; the implementation and dissemination of the National Household Welfare Monitoring Surveys (ENH2) and the Enterprise Census (CE1-2020); the preparation and implementation of the National Statistics Development Strategy (NSDS) for 2022-2025. In addition, it has also funded two telephone surveys to measure the socioeconomic impact of COVID-19, in 2020 and 2021.

Public Procurement Reform

The World Bank is supporting the government in a strategic program to reform its public procurement system, which is obsolete and has been in place since the country's independence in 1968. Thus, it has financed the following:

February 2020: an assessment of the country's procurement system has been conducted and presented to the Government. The diagnostic report has identified main findings weaknesses. It also has also recommended key priority actions for the establishment of a modern national procurement system that meets international standards, and enables economic development

May 2022: a draft law on public procurement and contracts in Equatorial Guinea provides for the implementation of an electronic procurement and contracting system. This innovation is consistent with recommendations made by the WB diagnostic report on government procurement. Among the main novelties are the incorporation of procurement procedures such as electronic reverse auctions and framework agreements, as well as the creation of an institutional framework for public procurement and contracts.

Last Updated: Apr 10, 2024