Peter Kater has written music for over 100 television and film programs, including eleven On and Off-Broadway dramatic plays. His more than 40 critically acclaimed CD releases in 25 years range from Contemporary Jazz, World Fusion and Native American collaborations to full orchestrations and, of course, his signature solo piano recordings. Receiving extensive world-wide airplay on a diverse array of radio formats, Kater’s broad creative stroke has touched millions of hearts. In addition, because of his commitment and dedication to the environment and humanitarian causes, Peter was honored with the Environmental Leadership Award by the United Nations and performs over 50 concerts each year. He has received eleven Grammy™ Nominations.

Peter scored the film 10 Questions for the Dalai Lama. The film won awards at film festivals around the world (10questionsforthedalailama.com). Over the last few years, Peter has written the music for several short films and was heard in the NBC broadcast of the 2000 & 2004 Summer Olympics. He also collaborated with Kenny Loggins on his CD December and performed at Carnegie Hall in New York City.

In his work, Kater has collaborated with many greats, legendary director Marshall Mason; Pulitzer Prize winning playwright, Lanford Wilson; and actors including John Malkovich, Jon Voight, Ethan Hawke, Tyne Daly, Tony Randall, Joan Allen, Christopher Reeve, Jennifer Jason-Leigh, Judd Hirsch, Laura Linney and Christine Lahti to name a few.

Also, through repeated invitations to perform at various exclusive events at Robert Redford’s Sundance Institute and John Denver’s Choices for the Future and countless environmental and humanitarian symposiums around the world, Kater has had the honor of performing for celebrities and dignitaries such as Mikhail Gorbachev, George Bush, Thich Nhat Hanh, Gerald Ford, Ted Turner, Shirley Maclaine, Dustin Hoffman, Sean Connery, Sidney Pollack, Alan Alda, Bill Murray, Chevy Chase, Dennis Weaver, Griffin Dunne, Raul Julia, Karl Malden, Laura Dern, James L. Brooks and many others.

Currently, Peter lives in Southern California, enjoying the climate, lifestyle and the incredible resource of talent and creative opportunities that exist there.