Citrix Online announced a definitive agreement to acquire Netviewer AG, a privately held European Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) vendor in collaboration and IT services. With Netviewer’s influence in the European market, the acquisition becomes a powerful tool for Citrix Online’s expansion of SaaS leadership in Europe Provided that closing condition are met, the transaction is expected to close in early 2011.

Two market leaders sharing a vision for virtual workstyles, innovation, and excellent customer service will accelerate Citrix Online’s expansion in Europe, especially in the existing Netviewer market, which includes UK, France, Germany, Switzerland, Austria, Benelux, the Nordics, Italy and Spain. Netviewer offers services that complements that of Citrix Online, if not, crucial to Citrix’s virtual computing strategy.

“SaaS based collaboration and IT Services have been key to our growth story. We believe there is even more opportunity ahead as the global market matures and customers look for a strong, experienced partner,” said Brett Caine, Senior Vice President, Online Services Division, Citrix Systems, Inc. “With the acquisition of a company that shares our vision, we will continue to execute on our strategy for global expansion and accelerated growth by delivering products that offer a simpler, better experience to enable customers to succeed.”

Huge economic trends in Europe such as globalization, distributed teams, and environmental concerns shows a rapidly increasing demand for more virtual communication and IT services. Citrix Online has positioned itself well enough to handle a good chunk of this demand where its clients are concerned.

But not everybody is happy with the acquisition. According to finance magazine Baron, “Shares of Citrix Systems (CTXS) are down 42 cents, or 0.6%, at $68.75 after the company this morning said it will purchase privately held Netviewer AG, a Karlsruhe, Germany-based software maker founded in 2001 that allows online collaboration and video meetings.”

Netviewer has installed base for more than 18,000 customer, big and small companies alike. Robert Gratzl, Netviewer’s Spokesperson for the Board, will be Citrix Online’s EMEA (Europe, Middle East and Africa) VP and General Manager.

“In Citrix Online, we found a partner with a similar market philosophy, good cultural alignment and the drive, passion and resources to leverage the accelerating growth opportunities across Europe. Our customers will benefit enormously from our combined resources through greater innovation and faster time to market,” said Gratzl.