A01=John Norman

Age Group_Uncategorized

Age Group_Uncategorized

Author_John Norman

automatic-update

Category1=Fiction

Category=FM

COP=United States

Delivery_Delivery within 10-20 working days

Language_English

PA=Available

Price_€10 to €20

PS=Active

softlaunch

Tarnsman of Gor

★★★★★

★★★★★

English

By (author): John Norman

The first novel in the long-running sword-and-planet series set on a Counter-Earth, where warriors rise above the chaos of bondage and brutality.

Tarl Cabot has always believed himself to be a citizen of Earth. He has no inkling that his destiny is far greater than the small planet he has inhabited for the first twenty-odd years of his life. One frosty winter night in the New England woods, he finds himself transported to the planet of Gor, also known as Counter Earth, where everything is dramatically different from anything he has ever experienced. It emerges that Tarl is to be trained as a Tarnsman, one of the most honored positions in the rigid, caste-bound Gorean society. He is disciplined by the best teachers and warriors that Gor has to offer . . . but to what end?

Rediscover this brilliantly imagined world where men are masters and women live to serve their every desire.

Tarnsman of Gor is the 1st book in the Gorean Saga, but you may enjoy reading the series in any order. See more

Current price €14.35

Original price €17.50

Save 18%

Quantity

Quantity

A01=John NormanAge Group_UncategorizedAuthor_John Normanautomatic-updateCategory1=FictionCategory=FMCOP=United StatesDelivery_Delivery within 10-20 working daysLanguage_EnglishPA=AvailablePrice_€10 to €20PS=Activesoftlaunch

Delivery/Collection within 10-20 working days

Product Details

Dimensions: 133 x 203mm

Publication Date: 13 May 2014

Publisher: Open Road Media

Publication City/Country: United States

Language: English

ISBN13: 9781497648753

About John Norman

John Norman born in Chicago Illinois in 1931 is the creator of the Gorean Saga the longest-running series of adventure novels in science fiction history. Starting in December 1966 with Tarnsman of Gor the series was put on hold after its twenty-fifth installment Magicians of Gor in 1988 when DAW refused to publish its successor Witness of Gor. After several unsuccessful attempts to find a trade publishing outlet the series was brought back into print in 2001. Norman has also produced a separate science fiction series the Telnarian Histories plus two other fiction works (Ghost Dance and Time Slave) a nonfiction paperback (Imaginative Sex) and a collection of thirty short stories entitled Norman Invasions. The Totems of Abydos was published in spring 2012. All of Normans work is available both in print and as ebooks. The Internet has proven to be a fertile ground for the imagination of Normans ever-growing fan base and at Gor Chronicles (www.gorchronicles.com) a website specially created for his tremendous fan following one may read everything there is to know about this unique fictional culture. Norman is married and has three children.