Dallas, TX (PRWEB) May 15, 2014 -- EY announced that Patrick Brandt, Zimbra CEO, is a finalist for the EY Entrepreneur Of The Year™ 2014 Award in the Southwest region. The awards program recognizes entrepreneurs who demonstrate excellence and extraordinary success in such areas as innovation, financial performance and personal commitment to their businesses and communities. Brandt was selected as a finalist by a panel of independent judges. This year’s winners will be announced at a gala event on June 21 at the Sheraton Dallas Hotel.

“It’s an incredible honor to be recognized as a finalist for the 2014 EY Entrepreneur of the Year, however it’s really all about the Zimbra team. This is more a testament to the hard work everyone in our organization does on a daily basis,” said Brandt. “It’s truly humbling to be part of such a great group of individuals, and I view this honor as a direct reflection of the company’s success and accomplishments over the past year.”

A veteran enterprise software entrepreneur and executive, Brandt has a proven track record of leading companies through rapid growth and expansion. In July 2013, Telligent acquired Zimbra from VMware. The two businesses merged to form Zimbra, Inc., where Brandt currently serves as CEO and Chairman. Zimbra powers modern collaboration for the mobile era, connecting people and information with a unified communications software platform that combines traditional and social collaboration. Prior, Brandt was the founder and CEO of Skywire Software. During his eight-year tenure at Skywire Software, Brandt led the company through organic growth, 11 acquisitions and the negotiated sale of Skywire Software's enterprise software business to Oracle.

Now in its 28th year, the program has expanded to recognize business leaders in more than 145 cities in more than 60 countries throughout the world. Regional award winners are eligible for consideration for the EY Entrepreneur Of The Year National program. Award winners in several national categories, as well as the EY Entrepreneur Of The Year National Overall Award winner, will be announced at the annual awards gala in Palm Springs, California, on November 15, 2014. The awards are the culminating event of the EY Strategic Growth Forum®, the nation’s most prestigious gathering of high-growth, market-leading companies.

###

About Zimbra

Zimbra powers collaboration for the way you work. Zimbra connects people and information with unified collaboration software that includes email, calendaring, file sharing, activity streams, social communities and more. With technology designed for social, mobile and the cloud, Zimbra gives individuals the flexibility to work from virtually anywhere, through nearly every computer, tablet and mobile device.

Zimbra’s software is trusted by more than 5,000 companies and government customers, as well as by service providers who manage Zimbra in the cloud for more than 200,000 businesses. With customers including NTT Communications, Comcast, Dell, Investec, Rackspace, Red Hat, Mozilla, H&R Block and Vodafone, a vibrant open source community and worldwide partner network, Zimbra is the third-largest collaboration provider in the world. Zimbra is privately held with corporate headquarters in Frisco, Texas and offices in San Mateo, California; London; Tokyo; Singapore and Pune, India. For more information, visit Zimbra.com or connect with us on Twitter, Facebook and LinkedIn.

About EY Entrepreneur Of The Year™

EY Entrepreneur Of The Year™ is the world’s most prestigious business award for entrepreneurs. The unique award makes a difference through the way it encourages entrepreneurial activity among those with potential and recognizes the contribution of people who inspire others with their vision, leadership and achievement. As the first and only truly global award of its kind, Entrepreneur Of The Year celebrates those who are building and leading successful, growing and dynamic businesses, recognizing them through regional, national and global awards programs in more than 145 cities in more than 60 countries.

About EY’s Strategic Growth Markets practice

EY’s Strategic Growth Markets (SGM) practices guide leading high-growth companies. Our multidisciplinary teams of elite professionals provide perspective and advice to help our clients accelerate market leadership. SGM delivers assurance, tax, transactions and advisory services to thousands of companies spanning all industries. EY is the undisputed leader in taking companies public, advising key government agencies on the issues impacting high-growth companies and convening the experts who shape the business climate. For more information, please visit us at ey.com/us/strategicgrowthmarkets, or follow news on Twitter @EY_Growth.

About EY

EY is a global leader in assurance, tax, transaction and advisory services. The insights and quality services we deliver help build trust and confidence in the capital markets and in economies the world over. We develop outstanding leaders who team to deliver on our promises to all of our stakeholders. In so doing, we play a critical role in building a better working world for our people, for our clients and for our communities.

EY refers to the global organization, and may refer to one or more, of the member firms of Ernst & Young Global Limited, each of which is a separate legal entity. Ernst & Young Global Limited, a UK company limited by guarantee, does not provide services to clients. For more information about our organization, please visit ey.com.

Contact:

Metis Communications

Suzanne Casey, +1 617-236-0500

zimbra(at)metiscomm(dot)com