Address:

Spetchley, Worcester WR5 1RS

How to find us | Access information

Opening times:

The church is open year round. Please note the gate for direct access to the church from the A44 road is currently closed. Please use the car park at Spetchley Gardens and access the church via through gardens entrance. The Garden opening hours can be checked at https://www.spetchleyparkestate.co.uk/the-gardens/visitor-information, and for access at other times please contact: [email protected]

Overview

Map

What's nearby

Spectacular life-size monuments

This simple 700-year-old church sits next to Spetchley Park and gardens. Spectacular historic monuments to the Berkeley family who own the Park, feature life-size figures in glorious seventeenth-century costume. Particularly splendid is the central monument in the south chapel to Sir Rowland Berkeley (died 1611) and his wife, lying under an arched canopy with obelisks at the four corners.

This church is maintained by the Churches Conservation Trust rather than the Specthley Estate, so please make a contribution towards the upkeep of this church via our at our red donate button. A donation can also by made by texting "SPE" to 70970 to donate £5 or 70191 to donate £10.

Thank you

St Michael's Church, Churchill, Worcestershire

1.75 miles

A tiny atmospheric church

St Swithun's Church, Worcester, Worcestershire

2.79 miles

A gracious church for gentlefolk

Church of St Mary Magdalene, Croome D'Abitot, Worcestershire

5.55 miles

A masterpiece of architectural fantasy in a National Trust park

Access information

For those with mobility issues it is possible to arrange parking nearer to the church by contacting Spetchley Gardens on [email protected] in advance of your visit.

There is a level gravel path from Spetchley Park Drive. There is a cobbled entrance path which leads to the west porch and there is level entrance to the nave.

Facilities & Hire

This church has electricity and fixed pew seating. Toilet facilites can be found in the grounds of Spetchely Park Gardens.

Hirers may wish to get in touch with Spetchley Park Gardens regarding parking, access and catering.

Directions

3 miles east of Worcester on A422 towards Alcester and Stratford-upon-Avon; the church is in the grounds of Spetchley Park, which is well signposted, and is close to the Deer Bridge over the main road.

Park in the Spetchely Gardens car park and ask at reception for access to reach the church. Check the website for opening hours.

Transport

Nearest railway stations: Worcester Scrub Hill (2.4 miles). Worcestershire Parkway Station (4.1 miles)

History & Further Information

Useful information

Why not make your visit more enjoyable and informed by finding out more about this church and the CCT before you visit? You can download a range of publications below including the relevant county guide, and any walk round guides we have for this church.

Worcestershire and Herefordshire County Guide 2012

This free of charge short guide contains details of all the churches CCT cares for in Herefordshire & Worcestershire.

All Saint's Church, Spetchley guidebook

Community information

Click here to download a copy of the Church Plan which sets out the shared vision for the future of the church. This is a working document that will be updated on a regular basis. If you have any feedback or if you want to contact us about the church plan please drop us a line. When you write, please do give the name of the church, thank you!

Latest church plan:

Spetchley Church Plan - November 2023.pdf 3

Useful Links

Visit Worcestershire

Things to do in Worcestershire

Family Days out in Worcestershire

Worcestershire Archaeological Society

Worcestershire Industrial Archaeology & Local History Society

The Birmingham and Midland Society for Genealogy and Heraldry

A list of churches in Worcestershire

Worcestershire is in the Diocese of Worcester