James (Jim) Haggett Brown, 75, of Dublin, Ohio, entered eternal rest on February 28, 2023 at Dublin Methodist Hospital. James was born on June 15, 1947 in Hartford, Connecticut to Donald Haggett Brown and Mary Gates Brown. James married Amy Albert Brown on February 15, 1992 and they enjoyed many happy memories together.

James graduated from Athens High School and attended the Ohio University. Jim worked at the American Red Cross, Meals on Wheels, State of Ohio Computer Op and driving truck all gave him great joy. He enjoyed cruising the Caribbean, Mexico and Aruba. James enjoyed sailing, swimming, diving and anything around water. He loved OSU football and the Browns as well as riding horses, his dogs Colbey and Jack, and visiting the casino.

James made many friends when he lived in Freeport, Maine; Ukia, California; Anthens and Columbus, Ohio. James loved belonging to the North Columbus Jaycees and was state photographer. He also did Hospice dog visitation with his beloved Colbey his toy poodle.

James is survived by his loving wife Amy Albert Brown. Brother Douglas Gates Brown of Panama City, Florida; sisters: Susan (Will) McDonald of Santa Fe, New Mexico, Jennifer (Jay) Ellington of Albequerque, New Mexico and sister-n-law Julie (Gary) Fellure of Heath, Ohio. Nieces and nephews: Justin (Cassie) Fellure, Rusty (Jessica) Fellure, Kaleb Ellington, Rowen Ellington, Donya (David) Warren and Lori Brown (Bill Horner). One of his best friends was Jack who gave great comfort his teacup poodle. Jim also leaves many friends, great nieces and a great nephew, cousins and friends.

James is preceded in death by his parents: Donald Haggett Brown, M.D., Mary Gates Brown, R.N. and step mother Barbara Story Brown, R.N.; mother-in-law Helene Knapp Albert, father-in-law Paul ”X” Albert; sisters-in-law Colleen G. Albert and Paula Albert. His toy poodle Colbey of 18 years.

James’s life will be celebrated on April 1, 2023 at North Columbus Jaycee Village 5905 Beechcroft Rd Columbus, Ohio 43229. Visitation starts at 1 pm followed by the Memorial Service at 2:00 pm with Pastor Douglas Tackett officiating. Please plan to wear your favorite OSU or Browns attire.

Thank you to Dublin Methodist Hospital and North Columbus Jaycees for the care and support given to James.

In lieu of flowers, donations may be given to:

Buckeye Jaycees Foundation recognizing Jim

North Columbus Jaycees Village 5905 Beechcroft Rd Columbus, Ohio 43229