BRIDGTON — MY LAST WORD: I, Steven Lynn Haggett, born May 16, 1944, in Bridgton Me., passed away July 21, 2020, due to a long illness.

Son of Malcolm Augustus Haggett and Nadine Lizzie Moulton Haggett Peterson both of Bridgton.

Spouse to Bonita Mae Chadbourne Tarbox Haggett, the love of my life, deceased Oct. 1, 1999

Survived by my sister, Nona Rae Haggett Bauer; daughter, Kursten Michelle Haggett TenHoor; and grandchildren, Caroline Grace and Kate Elizabeth TenHoor.

Thank you to caregiver and friend Sandra Hatch, cousin and frequent visitor Cathy Cross, neighbors Bill and Bev Warren and all the many friends and family that I loved dearly!

I went to local schools, graduated Bridgton High School 1962, attended Maine Central Institute, University of Maine Orono and Gorham State Teachers College... then to the School of “Hard Knocks.”

Employment started with picking raspberries for the neighbor, then on to pumping gas (and lounging around on stacked tires) at my dad’s ESSO Service Station, painting houses, tending a mason, and building modular homes. Next stop was Pleasant Mountain, where I enjoyed skiing and teaching skiing. I managed various operations for a large company that sold and distributed gasoline and diesel/fuel oil throughout the New England areas. Moved on to pounding nails and sawing boards to build houses and chicken coops. Lastly, I was a Machine Fixer at Bridgton Knitting Mill (Malden Mills).

Eventually, age and health issues made physical work more difficult! So, early retirement was supplemented by my Home Inspection and House Watch Business. I got to spend time in the home I built and loved and enjoyed working on my tractor, snowblowing, rototilling, mowing, and ditch digging. So, when I have said on (FB) I worked from coat and tie to ditch digging, I meant it literally!

I enjoyed most sports and outdoor activities, had many passions including woodworking, gardening and travelling around Maine from Estcourt Station to Kittery, not to forget the numerous trips all around Northern New England, America, Canada and a few exotic islands.

Well, my time has come; and it is with deep “Regret that I leave this world,” as I have appreciated my stay here immensely! I enjoyed most every minute of my life and tried to forget and forgive those moments that I didn’t! I have had my “share of happiness and heartbreak.” I do regret being the last of this branch to carry on the “family name.” Not that I did not try! I truly was “a limited edition.” I passed some tests and failed others! I got lucky sometimes and won; I also lost a great many as well!

Our family is large, complex, diverse, divided and filled with secrets spread far and wide, and I deeply cared for them all! I also met a lot of folks over the years and hopefully left them with “pleasant memories.” For those that I have wronged, discouraged or angered... “I am sorry.”

I sincerely hope any achievements I may have accomplished become beneficial to others, and wish health and happiness to all that remain and hope I have left pleasant memories! “TOODLES.”