Hollywood weddings are strongly characterized by lavish and expensive ceremonies. These days, news of failed celebrity marriages tends to dominate the media rather than the marriage itself. Surprisingly, the most successful and least successful celebrities, even those who seemed inseparable ab initio, have all fallen victim to these marriages. As Hollywood has recorded the highest number of failed celebrity marriages, the industry is increasingly accommodating as the likes of Ben Indra and Anna Faris have also joined the long list of failed celebrity couples. Learn more about Ben Indra and his relationship with the talented actress below.

Who is Ben Indra?

Ben Indra is a talented American actor in film and television. He is best known for appearing in hit films such as Raising Dads, Voodoo Academy, and Eye of the Storm, among others. Anna Faris, a multi-talented American actress, rose to fame through her marriage. The two men had been married for four years before their relationship caught fire.

The movie star was born on the 23rd day of February 1979 in Sonoma County, United States. His birth name was Benjamin Jeffery Indra, but he later adopted Ben Indra as his official name. Ben is a very private person, therefore, not much is known about his childhood, family background, and educational credentials. As an actor, you can easily see why he naturally has a talent.

Her career began in 1999 playing the minor role of Bradley in the romantic drama. Lovers Lane After that, he joined the cast of the MTV anthology series Undressed where he portrayed the role of Marlon in the fourth season. In the early 2000s, Ben starred in all three movies, including Voodoo Academy, Damaged Products, and Eye of Storm.

He then starred as Brad in the short. Rites and Kate in Kate Brasher He also joined the cast of the popular family comedy television series Raising Dad which aired from 2000 to 2001. Playing the role of Josh, he appeared alongside Bob Saget and Kat Dennings in several episodes of the series through 2001. More late in 2005, Ben starred in Love Inc after which he disappeared from television screens. Since then, there has been no news of Ben’s further efforts.

What is his relationship with Anna Faris?

It is an already known fact that Ben Indra was once married to the stunning movie star and author Anna Faris. Anna is best known for her roles in films such as Alvin and Chipmunks, Scary Movie, Lost in Translation and The Bunny House, to mention a few. The actress was born and raised in Baltimore, Maryland in the United States. She started her acting career at the age of nine and has starred in dozens of films to date. Apart from being an actress, Faris is also a comedian, writer and producer. She earned a degree in English Literature from the University of Washington in 1999.

The pair first saw each other while filming Lovers Lane in 1999. Seeing their on-screen chemistry, the pair fell in love with each other and eventually sparked a relationship. After five years of a successful relationship, the couple walked down the aisle in June 2004. Their wedding ceremony was celebrated by close friends and family members.

After their marriage, the couple continued to enjoy a happy married life until three years later when their relationship deteriorated. Due to irreconcilable differences, the couple filed for divorce in April 2007. However, their divorce proceedings were completed in February 2008. The settlement of divorce proceedings provided for the payment to Ben Indra of the sum of 900,000 dollars as alimony, in addition to other property.

Soon after their divorce, Ben who has been a quiet personality decided to step out of the limelight. Since then, he has had no news of his subsequent relationships and connections. Anna, on the other hand, started a new relationship with Chris Pratt, an American actor in 2007. The couple fell in love while appearing side by side in the film. Take me home tonight The following year, they announced their engagement and then exchanged their wedding vows in July 2009. Their wedding took place in Bali, Indonesia.

The couple welcomed their first child, a son named Jack Pratt in August 2012. Much like her first marriage to Ben, Anna’s relationship with Chris also took a drastic turn; thus leading to a divorce which was finalized in 2018. After the divorce, both brothers were granted equal custody of their son.