Before Anna Faris found love with Chris Pratt, she was married to her first husband, Ben Indra. The pair tied the knot in 2004 and were together for four years before Faris pulled the plug on their romance via a phone call.

Anna Faris had an immediate attraction to Chris Pratt

Before Faris made it big in the 2000 slasher comedy Scary Movie, she made an appearance in the 1999 movie Lovers Lane, in which Indra also appeared.

After working on the film together, the pair began dating. In 2004, the couple tied the knot after Indra proposed to Faris — twice.

Three years into their marriage, Faris met Pratt on the set of the 2007 film Take Me Home Tonight. In her 2017 autobiography, Unqualified, the House Bunny star revealed that she and the actor developed a close friendship while filming the movie.

She shared how the Guardians of the Galaxy star would walk her to her door and even tracked down her credit card once when she had lost it.

It wasn’t long before Faris had built up an attraction to Pratt, which had gotten so strong that she would get “incredibly jealous” of the “background actresses” he was hooking up with at the time.

Faris’ feelings toward Pratt reached an all-time high one evening at a co-star’s apartment; where she realized that their chemistry was undeniable.

Anna Faris dumped her husband to be with Chris Pratt

After accepting the fact that she was incredibly smitten with Pratt, Faris decided to end her marriage to Indra, which, she revealed in her book, was crumbling at the seams.

Before pulling the plug on her marriage, Faris confided in her friend Dan Fogler, telling him that she was ready to call it quits from Indra.

“Dan also told me that if I was going to leave my husband, I had to be a surgeon with a scalpel about it,” she recalled in her book, per The Daily Mail. “‘Do it immediately and effectively,’ he said.”

Faris then picked up the phone and told Indra that they were over. According to the actor, Indra didn’t take her seriously at first and dismissed her as just being “tired.”

“You’re just tired; you’re really tired,” Faris remembered her husband telling her at the time. “I just said: “Nope, I’m leaving you.” And that was that.”

Anna Faris and Chris Pratt had an eight-year marriage

Shortly after breaking up with Indra over the phone, Faris says she headed over to Pratt’s house, where she told him that she was “ready to get boned.”

She described their hookup as “‘hot and heavy in a way that [she’d] never experienced before.”

In April 2007, Faris officially filed for divorce from Indra, citing irreconcilable differences. Their divorce was finalized a year later.

On July 9, 2009, Faris and Pratt eloped after attending a friend’s wedding in Bali, Indonesia. Three years later, they welcomed their son, Jack, in August 2012.

To fans, it seemed like Faris and Pratt had the perfect relationship as many considered them to be one of Hollywood’s most adorable couples.

Unfortunately, the pair’s relationship came to an end in 2017, with them announcing their separation on social media.

The same year their divorce was finalized, in 2018, Pratt began dating author Katherine Schwarzenegger. They were married on June 8, 2019, and welcomed their first child together, Lyla Maria, in August 2020.