PARIS, ngày 16.10.2015 (PTTPGQT) – Ngày 9 tháng 10 vừa qua, Phòng Thông tin Phật giáo Quốc tế đã cho đăng tin Văn phòng Luật sư The Tammy Tran Law Firm can thiệp với Sư Giác Đẳng và ông Steven Điêu để giải quuyết vấn đề bàn giao sổ sách Giáo hội và vụ Chùa Phật Quang.

Đó là văn kiện tiếng Việt được Văn phòng Luật sư gửi đi ngày 7-10 đòi hỏi phía Sư Giác Đẳng và Steven Điêu phải công bố tất cả tài liệu minh chứng về “Việc Phát mãi Ngôi Chùa Phật Quang vào ngày 17-9-2015, và các vấn đề về tài sản của Unified Buddhist Church of Viet Nam – Giáo hội Phật giáo Việt Nam Thống nhất”. “Hạn cho bên phía Sư Giác Đẳng – Steven Điêu bảy (7) ngày, tức là đúng 5 giờ chiều ngày thứ Tư, ngày14 tháng 10 năm 2015 mà không có hồi đáp các yêu cầu” thì “thân chủ của chúng tôi tiến hành các thủ tục theo luật định”.

Văn kiện tiếng Việt 8 trang kèm với các tư liệu minh chứng làm thành hồ sơ dài 99 trang. Đặc biệt là bộ luật của tiểu bang Texas về các tổ chức phi lợi nhuận hầu phơi rõ những sai lầm mà Sư Giác Đẳng vi phạm để những ai từng đóng góp mua chùa Phật Quang hiểu rõ ràng các bằng chứng pháp lý vừa được Văn phòng Luật sư khám phá.

Một tuần lễ đã trôi qua kể từ ngày 7-10 đến 5 giờ chiều ngày 14-10. Phía Sư Giác Đẳng và Steven Điêu không hồi đáp lòng mong mỏi đối thoại và hoà giải bằng đường lối Lục hoà của Tổ hợp Luật sư The Tammy Tran Law Firm. Nên bước thứ hai bắt đầu hôm thứ năm 15-10 khai mở thủ tục pháp lý của sự Tố tụng.

Nhiều độc giả biên thư hỏi xin chúng tôi văn kiện tiếng Anh. Chúng tôi xin công bố hôm nay để đáp ứng nhu cầu độc giả. Bản tiếng Anh lần này so với bản tiếng Việt, tuy có cùng nội dung, song được Tổ hợp luật sư bổ sung nhiều chi tiết mới và quan trọng. Xin mời quý vị độc giả theo dõi sau đây. Do toàn bộ hồ sơ dày hơn trăm trang, chúng tôi không thể đăng trong một Thông cáo báo chí. Quý vị nào cần xem toàn bộ tài liệu phụ chú và minh chứng trên một trăm trang này, xin vào xem ở Link https://www.queme.net/vie/doc/Van-ban-tieng-anh-&-Ho-so-tron-bo_2015.pdf

Nhân tiện chúng tôi xin loan tải ở cuối Thông cáo báo chí, bản tin về cuộc trao đổi và hội luận của Hoà thượng Thích Huyền Việt tại chùa Từ Bi ở ngoại thành Dallas hôm chủ nhật 4 tháng 10 vừa qua.

——————

THE TAMMY TRAN LAW FIRM

ATTORNEYS AT LAW, LLP

2915 Fannin Street

Houston,Texas 77002

Telephone : (713) 655-0737

Telecopier : (713) 655-0823

Writer’s e-mail : ttran@tt-lawfirm.com

www.tammytranlaw.com

October 13, 2015

VIA EMAIL AND CERTIFIED MAIL

Rev. Thích Giác Đẳng (a/k/a Pham Dang)

13913 S. Post Oak Rd.

Houston, TX 77045

Phamdang0308@gmail.com

Attorney Steven Dieu

13913 S. Post Oak Blvd., #B

Houston, TX 77045

Steven.dieu@cao.hctx.net

Mr. Trần Đình Minh

13913 S. Post Oak Blvd., #B

Houston, TX 77045

Minhdtran45@yahoo.com

Mr. Lê Quang

13913 S. Post Oak Blvd., #B

Houston, TX 77045

Mr. Nguyễn M. Huy

13913 S. Post Oak Blvd., #B

Houston, TX 77045

Mr. Mai Xuân Châu

13913 S. Post Oak Blvd., #B

Houston, TX 77045

Chaumai64@hotmail.com

Mr. Cao V. Hiền

13913 S. Post Oak Blvd., #B

Houston, TX 77045

Mr. Nguyễn Cương

13913 S. Post Oak Blvd., #B

Houston, TX 77045

Ancu.cnn@gmail.com

Ms. Ngọc Hân Nguyễn

10613 Bellaire Blvd., #136

Houston, TX 77072

Ms. Que Phuong Bui,

Individually and President of Phương Que Bui, Inc.

2714 Garner Ct.

Houston, TX 77584

Orange Coast Title Company of Southern California

520 N. Santa Cruz Ave.

Los Gatos, CA 95030

RE: The Sale of Phat Quang Temple on September 17, 2015 – Title Order No. 350-1692423-11; Escrow No. P51974-AP and Various OtherProperties of Unified Buddhist Church of Viet Nam – Giao Hoi Phat Giao Vietnam Thong Nhat (i)

____________________________________________

Dear Ladies and Gentlemen:

The Tammy Tran Law Firm represents Most Venerable Thich Huyen Viet and Members of Unified Buddhist Church of Viet Nam – Giao Hoi Vietnam Thong Nhat (“UBCV – GHPGVNTN”) in conducting an investigation of the sale of Phat Quang Pagoda, (ii) as well as other financial matters of UBCV – GHPGVNTN. (iii) The following Members who contemplate bringing a derivative action on behalf of UBCV – GHPGVNTN are: Mr. Kien Van Dang, Mr. Vinh Huu Cao, Mr. Anh Duc Le, Mr. Tay Gia Nguyen, and Mr. Hung Manh Nguyen (“The Member Plaintiffs). (iv)

Based on our clients’ request, we are currently investigating allegations against Mr. Dang Pham (Rev. Thich Giac Dang), Mr. Steven Dieu, Mr. Trần Đình Minh, Mr. Lê Quang, Mr. Nguyễn M. Huy, Mr. Mai Xuân Châu, Mr. Cao V. Hiền, and Mr. Nguyễn Cương, and Ms. Ngoc Han Nguyen (hereinafter referred to as “The Thich Giac Dang Team”), and Phương Que Bui, Inc. and Ms. Que Phuong Bui,

I. Standing of Most Venerable Thich Huyen Viet under the Church Hierarchy and Texas Law.

Under the Church Hierarchy, Most Venerable Thich Huyen Viet currently serves as: 1) Chargé d’Affaires and 2) Vice Chair of the Overseas Executive Office of the UBCV Institute for the Dissemination of the Dharma; and 3) under Texas law, He serves as Pastor representing Lotus Buddhist Congregation. His standing is based on:

A. Article III of Decision No. 21, decreed on October 2, 2015 by His Holiness Thich Quang Do, The Supreme Fifth Patriarch of the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam, (v) which specifically stated:

Article III of Decision No. 21: Conferred upon Most Venerable Thich Huyen Viet, Chargé d’Affaires of the Overseas Office of the UBCV Institute for the Dissemination of the Dharma (a/k/a Oversea Executive Office of the UBCV)and its remaining members, along with the Executive Council of the Overseas UBCV in the United States, and in collaboration with the Head of the UBCV Communications Department, the International Buddhist Information Bureau and the UBCV International Relations Office (the overseas agencies representing the UBCV) in step by step demanding justice for the UBCV … (vi)

U.S. law clearly recognizes the authority of the Principal Church in a foreign country to control a religious, nonprofit corporation in Texas.

The complexities of resolving this question are well stated in 49 N.Y.Jur., Religious Societies, sec- 8:

When investigating the law relative to religious societies and corporations, it is well to keep in mind that the fact that the churches and other religious societies are of any kinds of denominations, varying in the type or degree of their formal organization,….under [certain] systems a local church is but a member of a larger and more important religious organization, and is under its government and control. [49 N.Y.Jur., Religious Societies, sec- 8.]

Thus, His Holiness Thich Quang Do’s UBCV – GHPGVNTN in Vietnam can control UBCV – GHPGVNTN’s Board of Directors in Texas. Therefore, by the power vested in Him, Most Venerable Thich Huyen Viet is authorized to obtain all assets, and corporate books and records of UBCV – GHPGVNTN. As such, you, The Thich Giac Dang Team, are respectfully requested to assemble information and documents for Most Venerable Thich Huyen Viet’s inspection.

B. Most Venerable Thich Huyen Viet’s standing is also based on the fact that He represents Lotus Buddhist Congregation which donated and organized a successful fundraiser in 2014 in Houston, Texas for UBCV – GHPGVNTN to purchase Phat Quang Pagoda which has recently been sold by the Thich Giac Dang Team. (vii)

II. Standing of the Member Plaintiffs under Texas Law.

The Member Plaintiffs have standing to bring a derivative action pursuant to Texas law. Texas courts have repeatedly said:

[That] a corporate act is invalid because it was beyond the authority of officers or directors may be asserted by a member in an action against the corporation to enjoin the activity. An action may also be asserted by the corporation acting directly or through members in a representative suit if the action is against incumbent or former officers or directors of the corporation for exceeding their authority. See, e.g., Governing Board et al. v. Pannill, 561 S.W.2d 517, 524 (Tex. Civ. App. — Texarkana., 1977, writ refused n.r.e.).

TEX. BUS. ORG. CODE § 22.351 also authorizes the Member Plaintiffs to inspect the books and records of the nonprofit corporation, including all records relating to the sale, all resolutions authorizing the sale, all deeds, all bank statements, all financial records, all closing documents, and so forth. Section 22.351 of the Texas Business Organization Code specifically provides:

A member of a corporation, on written demand stating the purpose of the demand, is entitled to examine and copy at the member’s expense, in person or by agent, accountant, or attorney, at any reasonable time and for a proper purpose, the books and records of the corporation relevant to that purpose.

TEX. BUS. ORG. CODE § 22.351.

As such, the Member Plaintiffs hereby make a demand to inspect the corporate books and records of UBCV – GHPGVNTN. (viii) This demand is made before the Member Plaintiffs bring a derivative action against The Thich Giac Dang Team for committing an ultra vires act in selling the sole property of the Buddhist Church and for failure to account for corporate funds.

III. The Thich Giac Dang Team Sold Phat Quang Pagoda, the Sole Asset of UBCV – GHPGVNTN on September 17, 2015; and Their Conduct, Arrangements, and Activities Occurred in Houston, Texas. (ix)

A. History.

On June 13, 2014, to serve His Buddhist People overseas outside Communist Government Control, His Holiness Thich Quang Do conferred upon Rev. Thich Giac Dang the title of Acting Chair of the Overseas Executive Office of the UBCV Institute for the Dissemination of the Dharma. (x) On July 3, 2014, Rev. Thich Giac Dang caused Attorney Steven Dieu to incorporate UBCV – GHPGVNTN under Texas law with three founding members: Mr. Pham Dang – Rev. Thich Giac Dang; Ms. Penelope Faulkner (a/k/a Ms. Y Lan), Commissioner for International Relations of the Overseas Executive Office of the UBCV Institute for the Dissemination of the Dharma; and Mr. Minh D. Tran. (xi) Attorney Steven Dieu served as the corporate attorney and filed the nonprofit organization documents with the Texas Secretary of State on July 3 and July 7, 2015. (xii)

On November 25, 2014, with funds raised by Lotus Buddhist Congregation organized by Most Venerable Thich Huyen Viet and many others, as well as with money borrowed from various members, Phat Quang Pagoda was purchased for $1,225,000.00 which was recorded under UBCV – GHPGVNTN. (xiii) It was purchased as a place for the Overseas Executive Office of the UBCV Institute for the Dissemination of the Dharma to serve the Buddhist members and to promote the teachings and principles of Buddha in the United States. However, Rev. Thich Giac Dang did not register or failed to cause to register the property as an asset of UBCV – GHPGVNTN in Viet Nam and UBCV Institute for the Dissemination of the Dharma Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam as instructed.

B. Rev. Thich Giac Dang Resigned from the Board and from All Positions

Subsequently, His Holiness Thich Quang Do received reports, and therefore on July 21, 2015 demanded Rev. Thich Giac Dang to account for the purchase and financial matters of Phat Quang Pagoda, and the charitable funds for the Nepal Victims and the Philippines Victims in the amount of $230,000.00 and $67,968.00 respectively.

On August 4, 2015, Rev. Thich Giac Dang tendered his Resignation Letter to His Holiness Thich Quang Do, resigning from “all positions in Unified Budhist Church of Vietnam – Giao Hoi Phat Giao Viet Nam Thong Nhat” including the position as Board member of UBCV – GHPGVNTN in Texas and from the position of Acting Chair of the Overseas Executive Office of the UBCV Institute for the Dissemination of the Dharma. (xiv) He also promised to hand over to his successor all properties, corporate records, and accounts of UBCV – GHPGVNTN. (xv)

On August 8, 2015, His Holiness Thich Quang Do issued Decision No. 20, formally accepting Rev. Thich Giac Dang’s resignation from “all positions in the Overseas Executive Office of the UBCV Institute for the Dissemination of the Dharma and position on the Board of Directors of UBCV – GHPGVNTN.” (xvi) (Emphasis added.)

C. The Purported New Board Directors and the Sale of Phat Quang Pagoda

After resigning from the Board and from all positions, on August 18, 2015, Rev. Thich Giac Dang, although no longer having any power to act as a board director, called a special meeting of the Board of UBCV – GHPGVNTN purportedly to elect six (6) new board members over the objection of the remaining Founding Member. Ms. Penelope Faulkner strenuously objected to Rev. Thich Giac Dang’s wrongful act because he already resigned on August 4, 2015, and his resignation was officially accepted by the UBCV -GHPGVNTN in Vietnam and His Holiness Thich Quang Do on August 8, 2015. (See email of Ms. Faulkner on August 20, 2015, at 12:24 PM: “on 4 August you submitted your resignation to the UBCV leadership of this [the board] and all other functions within the UBCV. The UBCV Fifth Supreme Patriarch Thich Quang Do issued his acceptance of your resignation in Decision 20 on 8 August 2015.”) (xvii)

On August 22, 2015, Attorney Steve Dieu filed Form 802, Periodic Report – Domestic Nonprofit Corporation with the Texas Secretary of State, listing six (6) purported new Board Directors, including himself as purported Chairman and President of the Board. (xviii)

On September 2, 2015, Attorney Steven Dieu drafted the Bylaws for UBCV – GHPGVNTN. Article III, Section 3.1 of the Bylaws gave the Board power to conduct “all internal affairs and all lawful business and activities…” (xix) Article IV, Section 4.2 mandated that “Members shall be… U.S. citizens or legal permanent residents, and have resided in the United States at least (5) years.” (xx) This Section excludes the Founding Board Member, Ms. Penelope Faulkner. Interestingly, it even excludes His Holiness Thich Quang Do from having any voice in the very Buddhist Church overseas that He decreed to be formed. The reason for exclusion is simple: His Holiness Thich Quang Do is not a U.S. citizen and certainly does not reside in the U.S.

Strangely, Article XIII, Section 13.2 provides that “[i]n the event of dissolution of the UBCV – GHPGVNTN, the residue, remainder, or excess of funds contributed to the UBCV – GHPGVNTN shall be disbursed in any lawful manner including, but not limited to, contributions to political candidates, political parties, other political committees… as determined by ¾ vote of the board of Directors.” (xxi) The so-call new directors thus changed UBCV – GHPGVNTN from being a religious organization to become a political institution to serve their political agenda.

On September 17, 2015, less than one month after becoming the purported Chairman and President of UBCV – GHPGVNTN, Attorney Steven Dieu sold Phat Quang Pagoda to Phuong Que Bui, Inc. d/b/a The Galleria Holding (xxii) (the Purchaser) for $1,100,000.00. (xxiii) According to the Orange County’s deed records dated September 21, 2015, the Sale Price is $1,100,000.00. Pursuant to Orange County Treasurer – Tax Collector’s Information, Phat Quang Pagoda’s Real Property is currently valued at $1,225,000.00 in 2015. So the sale incurred a loss of $125,000.00.

Furthermore, the proceeds were presumably to be used to pay all of the debts of the UBCV – GHPGVNTN. But according to the Short Form Deed of Trust and Assignments of Rents, Phương Que Bui, Inc. was allowed to owe UBCV – GHPGVNTN $900,000.00. (xxiv)

Thus, unbeknownst to the Member Plaintiffs and millions of Vietnamese Buddhists in Vietnam and abroad, 10 months after the purchase (November 26, 2014 to September 17, 2015), Phat Quang Pagoda was sold to a Texas private entity with a large debt remaining unpaid. Not until September 30, 2015, (13 days after the sale and after several Members discovered the transfer) did Defendants then disclose the shocking news of the sale of Phat Quang Pagoda on the website of Tieng Noi Luong Tri, a website which belongings to The Thich Giac Dang Team. (xxv)

Needless to say, thousands of contributors and members of UBCV – GHPGVNTN are shocked, hurt, and devastated. To millions of Vietnamese Buddhists at home and abroad, selling Phat Quang Pagoda, a place of the Overseas Executive Office of the UBCV Institute for the Dissemination of the Dharma, is like selling the Church’s sacred altar, a travesty and a violation of their faith!

On October 2, 2015, His Holiness Thich Quang Do decreed Resolution No. 21, expelling Rev. Thich Giac Dang (Pham Dang) and Mr. Minh D. Tran, from the Church Hierarchy and from UBCV – GHPGVNTN, and ordered Most Venerable Thich Huyen Viet in “step by step demanding justice” for the Church and for numerous Buddhist Members. (xxvi) This Demand Letter, therefore, is presented herein.

IV. Due to His Official Resignation, Rev. Thich Giac Dang Could Not Vote to Elect the Six (6) So-Called New “Board Directors.”

As indicated, on August 18, 2015, Rev. Thich Giac Dang, having no power to act as a board director, called a special meeting of the Board of UBCV – GHPGVNTN, and imprudently cast his vote purportedly to elect six (6) so-called new board directors. Ms. Penelope Faulkner could not attend the special meeting with only 24-hour notice, and thus objected to: 1) the short-notice meeting, 2) the fact that Thich Giac Dang could not vote, 3) the lack of quorum (because only Mr. Minh D. Tran could be present at the Special Meeting), and 4) the illegality of the election of the purported new directors. (xxvii)

Pursuant to Section 22.212 of the Texas Business Organization Code, the resignation of Rev. Thich Giac Dang created a vacancy which can only be filled “by the affirmative vote of the majority of the remaining directors, regardless of whether that majority is less than a quorum.” TEX. BUS. ORG. CODE § 22.212 (emphasis added). The majority of the Board (Ms. Faulkner and Mr. Minh D. Tran) did not vote affirmatively to re-elect Rev. Thich Giac Dang. Therefore, he had no board power to act. (See id.)

Furthermore, Section 22.206 of the Texas Business Organization Code specifically provides that “directors other than the initial directors are elected by the [initial] board of directors.” TEX. BUS. ORG. CODE § 22.206. To have a valid election of the new board members, other than the initial directors, at the special meeting on August 18, 2015, a quorum of the initial Board of directors must be met (xxviii) or an affirmative vote of the majority is required. (xxix)

A. Notice of the August 18, 2015 Special Meeting called by Rev. Thich Giac Dang, after resigning, to elect 6 new directors

TEX. BUS. ORG. CODE § 22.217(b):

Special meetings of the board of directors shall be held with notice as prescribed by the bylaws. Attendance of a director at a meeting constitutes a waiver of notice, unless the director attends a meeting for the express purpose of objecting to the transaction of any business on the ground that the meeting is not lawfully called or convened.

There were no bylaws at time of meeting, but common sense dictates that 24 hour notice of a meeting called by a resigned board member is not proper notice.

B. The August 18, 2015 Board Meeting lacked a quorum

TEX. BUS. ORG. CODE § 22.213 provides.A

(a) A quorum for the transaction of business by the board of directors of a corporation is the lesser of:

(1) the majority of the number of directors set by the corporation’s bylaws or, in the absence of a bylaw setting the number of directors, a majority of the number of directors stated in the corporation’s certificate of formation; or

(2) any number, not less than three, set as a quorum by the certificate of formation or bylaws.

(b) A director present by proxy at a meeting may not be counted toward a quorum.

TEX. BUS. ORG. CODE § 22.213.

Section 22.213 (a) requires there be at least two board members in order for there to be a quorum. Rev. Thich Giac Dang resigned as a director before meeting. See TEX. BUS. ORG. CODE § 22.211 (“a director of a corporation may resign at any time by providing written notice to the corporation”). Ms. Faulkner was not present. Because no quorum was present, the vote of the alleged board to elect 6 new directors is invalid. Section 22.212. which allows the majority of the remaining board to fill a vacancy even if no quorum is present, does not authorize the election of new directors. The reason is: there was no affirmative vote of the majority of the remaining directors. TEX. BUS. ORG. CODE § 22.212(a) (“a vacancy in the board of directors of a corporation shall be filled by the affirmative vote of the majority of the remaining directors, regardless of whether that majority is less than a quorum”). (1)

Because no quorum was present, the resolution to elect the new board is invalid, and any vote of the new board to sell the Pagoda is invalid.

Stated differently, on that day, to meet the quorum, the majority of the initial board of directors listed on the corporation’s Certificate of Formation must be at least two. (See the Certificate of Formation with Mr. Danh Pham (Rev. Thich Giac Dang), Mr. Minh D. Tran, and Ms. Penelope Faulkner.) Because Mr. Dang Pham already resigned (thus his presence was not counted), Ms. Penelope Faulkner was not present and only Mr. Minh D. Tran was present at the meeting, a quorum was not met. Nor was there an affirmative vote of the majority of the initial board at that special meeting. As such, Rev. Thich Giac Dang’s vote purportedly to elect the six new board directors was invalid. Because the vote to elect the purported new board members was invalid, any subsequent vote on any matter of such so-called new board members of UBCV – GHPGVNTN was also invalid as a matter of law. In other words, the purported new board directors, via its so-called Chairman, had no authority to vote on the filing of Form 802, the drafting and the voting on the Bylaws, the selling of the assets of the corporation, and the illegal retaining of the legal name and assumed name of UBCV – GHPGVNTN.

On October 10, 2015, in an attempt to cure their mistake after the fact, at the General Assembly in San Jose, The Thich Giac Dang Team asked the members to vote. (xxx) However, they could not do so because it was too late! Via the Certificate of Formation which was filed with the Texas Secretary of State, the power to decide on any Fundamental Business Transaction – i.e. the sale of UBCV – GHPGVNTN’s fundamental asset at the time of sale (September 17, 2015) was vested in the Board. Since the Board of Directors, except Mr. Minh D. Tran, was not a valid Board, the Board’s act was invalid. Therefore, the sale of Phat Quang Pagoda was invalid as a matter of law. As such, members of UBCV – GHPGVNTN have no power to vote authorizing or ratifying the illegal sale. See TEX. BUS. ORG. CODE § 22.252 (b) (“ If the corporation has . . . no members with voting rights, the sale of all or substantially all of the assets of the Corporation must be authorized by the vote of directors required by Section 22.164.“)

As such, seven of the purported board directors and one initial board member, Minh D. Tran, exceeded their authority to act for the corporation. Consequently, the Member of UBCV – GHPGVNTN are entitled to bring a declaratory action asking the Court to declare the sale of Phat Quang Pagoda void as a matter of law. See, e.g., Governing Board et al. v. Pannill, 561 S.W.2d 517, 524 (Tex. Civ. App. – Texarkana., 1977, no writ).

V. Pursuant to Article H, Section 22.351 of the Texas Business Organization Code, (xxxi) The Thich Giac Dang Team is Requested to Assemble the Following Information and Documents for Member Inspection in 14 days:

1) Evidence of the cash sale proceeds — $200,000.00 — which is the difference between $1,100,000.00 and $900,000.00. Please advise whether the purchaser paid $200,000.00 cash. If so, where is the cash? And if not, why not? If the $200,000.00 cash was used to pay any creditor(s) as represented by the Thich Giac Dang Team at the General Assembly, please provide evidence of indebtedness and payments to the creditors including their identities, names and addresses;

2) Copies of the Federal Income Tax Returns and Financial Statements for 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015 of Phuong Que Bui, Inc. The reason is: in order for the Chairman and President of the Board of Directors, the Members of the Board, and the Officers to allow Phuong Que Bui, Inc. to owe the UBCV $900,000.00, they are charged with a fiduciary duty imposed by law to diligently check into the financial stability of such corporation to verify whether it can pay the debt;

3) The Promissory Note in the amount of $900,000.00 and all of the Notes concerning the Sale of Phat Quang Pagoda. According to The Thich Giac Dang Team’s disclosure at the October 10, 2015 General Assembly held in San Jose, the purchaser will pay $100,000.00 per month. Please provide the notes/agreement(s);

4) The Short Form Deed of Trust and any other Deed of Trust concerning the Sale of Phat Quang Pagoda;

5) The Closing Statements, Title Insurance, Title Search, Loan Documents prepared by the attorney(s) and any documents contained in the file of Orange Coast Title Company of Southern California;

6) Any Leases and/or Agreements concerning the Rents and Assignments of Rents Sale of Phat Quang Pagoda;

7) List of all creditors and donors who have lent and/or donated money to UBCV – GHPGVNTN for the purchase of Phat Quang Pagoda and evidence of such loans (short term and long term) and donations via copies of checks, cashier’s checks, cash receipts, and/or wire transfers;

8) Copy of all loan agreements and extensions (short term and long term), if any;

9) Copy of the Appraisal of Phat Quang Property upon which The Thich Giac Dang Team determined the sale price;

10) Copies of all credit card statements showing all expenditures that the Thich Giac Dang Team, including Rev. Thich Giac Dang individually and Ngoc Han Nguyen individually, allegedly spent on behalf of UBCV – GHPGVNTN and Phat Quang Pagoda;

11) All telephone bills paid and/or reimbursed by UBCV – GHPGVNTN and Phat Quang Pagoda;

12) All text messages, emails, phone bills, and correspondence between Ms. Ngoc Han Nguyen and Mr. Dang Pham – Rev. Thich Giac Dang concerning conversations regarding the financial matters of UBCV – GHPGVNTN;

13) All expenses Rev. Thich Giac Dang incurred on any trip(s) since June 2104 to the present time, including but not limited to Nepal and Philippines; and

14) Bank Statements from Chase Bank and other financial institutions showing deposits of the Loan Proceeds and Donations which were deposited into Mr. Dang Pham and Ms. Ngoc Han Nguyen’s accounts or the accounts of their related entities.

VI. Please assemble all of the Statues, Pictures, Bibles, Books, Furniture, Equipment, and All Other Personal Properties of Phat Quang Pagoda for Member Inspection in 14 Days.

VII. Pursuant to Article H, Section 22.351 of the Texas Business Organization Code, The Thich Giac Dang Team Is Requested to Assemble the Following Accounting Records of UBCV – GHPGVNTN and Phat Quang Pagoda for Member Inspection in 14 days:

1) All Bank Statements of all Bank Accounts (from the inception of the UBCV – July 3, 2014 to the present time) of which Rev. Thích Giác Đẳng, Mr. Dang Pham, and Ms. Ngoc Han Nguyen are signatories or any other persons who are signatories;

2) Federal Income Tax Returns (or Form 990 Returns) for the year of 2014 of UBCV – GHPGVNTN;

3) Copies of all checks of all bank, savings, or other financial accounts of UBCV – GHPGVNTN from July of 2014 to the present;

4) Financial Statements of UBCV – GHPGVNTN from July of 2014 to the present;

5) All applications for Tax-Exempt Nonprofit Organization 501(c) Status of UBCV – GHPGVNTN so that the Members and Contributors can declare deductions; (xxxii) and

6) Name(s) and address(es) of all and any CPA, Accountant, and/or Bookkeepers of UBCV – GHPGVNTN;

7) Copies of Ledgers and Quick Books of UBCV – GHPGVNTN;

8) Names and addresses of the Financial Institutions where Mr. Dang Pham and Ms. Ngoc Han Nguyen have accounts; and

9) Copies evidencing properties (real and personal) under the name of Mr. Dang Pham and/or Ms. Ngoc Han Nguyen, if any.

VIII. Pursuant to Article H, Section 22.351 of the Texas Business Organization Code, The Thich Giac Dang Team is Requested to Assemble the Following Accounting Records of UBCV – GHPGVNTN and Phat Quang Pagoda for Member Inspection in 14 days:

1) All documents filed with the Texas Secretary of State; (xxxiii)

2) All drafts of and executed Bylaws of UBCV – GHPGVNTN;

3) Notices sent to each Member of the Board Directors and Officers regarding the sale of Phat Quang Pagoda;

4) Board Resolutions regarding the sale of Phat Quang Pagoda;

5) All Board Resolutions and Minutes of the Meetings of UBCV – GHPGVNTN from July 3, 2014, to the present time;

6) All emails, correspondence, and text messages exchanged between and among Mr. Steven Dieu, Mr. Dang Pham (Rev. Thich Giac Dang), Mr. Trần Đình Minh, Mr. Lê Quang, Mr. Nguyễn M. Huy, Mr. Mai Xuân Châu, Mr. Cao V. Hiền, Mr. Nguyễn Cương.(“The Thich Giac Dang Team”) Ngoc Han Nguyen, and Bui, Que Phuong; and

7) All copies of any communications, including but not limited to, communications via social media between and among Mr. Steven Dieu, Mr. Dang Pham (Rev. Thich Giac Dang), Mr. Trần Đình Minh, Mr. Lê Quang, Mr. Nguyễn M. Huy, Mr. Mai Xuân Châu, Mr. Cao V. Hiền, and Mr. Nguyễn Cương.(“The Thich Giac Dang Team”) and Ngoc Han Nguyen, and Bui, Que Phuong.

IX. Regarding the Huntington Beach City’s Order to Close Phat Quang Pagoda:

Please present to the Member Plaintiffs all warnings and violation tickets, as well as the shutdown orders. Please show evidence of all efforts of UBCV – GHPGVNTN’s Board of Directors and Officers to comply with the warnings, instructions, and citations of Huntington Beach City.

X. Regarding the contributions of $230,000.00 for the Nepal Victims and $67,968.00 for the Philippines Victims, Please Provide Detailed Accounting of the Expenses and Donations Directly Made to the Nepalese and Filipino Victims for Member Inspection

Sections XI and XII have been redacted by the UBCV Communications Department and Director of the International Buddhist Information Bureau. We shall present these Sections to the Court if litigation is unavoidable.

Having presented our clients’ claims, however, as we have previously indicated, with the compassion and merciful mind of the Buddha, Most Venerable Thích Huyền Việt and the Members of UBCV – GHPGVNTN would ask you to reflect upon your conscience, and we all pray that we may have wisdom, spiritual understanding, and discernment. Together, we can cooperate with him and his Members so that he can fulfill his duty in reporting to the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam (UBCV – GHPGVNTN); His Holiness Thich Quang Do; and UBCV – GHPGVNTN’s other members, donors, creditors, regarding the above matters.

Our Team of Certified Public Accountants (“CPA”) is willing to work with you to expedite the accounting process. As an attorney for almost 28 years, I submit that litigation should only be used as a last resort when all other remedies are exhausted. Therefore, I would strongly urge both sides and each of you to consult with your own independent legal counsel in order to receive objective advice. We are willing to work with your attorneys to find a solution based upon the laws, but with a compassionate and merciful spirit, so that the teachings of Buddha and service to His People (including millions of people in Vietnam who are suffering under oppression), can be fulfilled in peace and harmony. In this way, we can seek a neutral formal judge to serve as a mediator, whom everyone would agree upon to assist us in starting a process of pre-lawsuit mediation.

However, due to the urgency of time, we can only extend our deadline to seven (7) days for you, until 5:00 PM on Monday, October 19, 2015, before our clients are forced to begin the litigation process. Also, under Texas Law, you have 14 days after this demand letter to assemble the entire records of UBCV – GHPGVNTN for inspection, before the Members file the derivative lawsuit. The choice of following a peaceful path that honors the teachings of Buddha, His Holiness Thich Quang Do, The Fifth Supreme Patriarch of the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam, (xxxiv) and His People, or falling into costly litigation is now in your own hands.

Very truly yours,

THE TAMMY TRAN LAW FIRM

TAMMY TRAN ATTORNEYS AT LAW, LLP

By: /s/ Tammy Tran

TAMMY TRAN

Respectfully Submitted to:

His Holiness Thich Quang Do

The Fifth Supreme Patriarch of the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam

Thanh Minh Thiền Viện

90 Trần Huy Liệu, Phường 15, Quận Phú Nhuận, TP Saigon

Most Venerable Thích Thanh Quang

Acting Head of the UBCV Institute for the Dissemination of the Dharma

Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam

Most Venerable Thích Huyền Việt

Chargé d’Affaires of the Overseas Office of the UBCV Institute

for the Dissemination of the Dharma

Pastor of Lotus Buddhist Congregation

6709 Howell Sugar Land Road

Houston, TX 77083 –

Mr. Lê Công Cầu

General Secretary

Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam

90 Trần Huy Liệu, Phường 15, Quận Phú Nhuận, TP Saigon

Professor Võ văn Ái

Head of the UBCV Communications Department, Director of the International Buddhist Information Bureau and Commissioner for Foreign Affairs and Commissioner for Lay-Buddhist Affairs of the Overseas Office of the UBCV Institute for the Dissemination of the Dharma

Ms. Penelope Faulkner (a/k/a Ms. Y Lan)

Founding Member of the Board of Directors of UBCV – GHPGVNTN

Deputy Director of the International Buddhist Information Bureau and Commissioner for International Relations of the Overseas Office of the UBCV Institute for the Dissemination of the Dharma

————————————-

(i) A letter in Vietnamese was previously provided to you.

(ii) The Main Asset of UBCV – GHPGVNTN.

(iii) UBCV – GHPGVNTN is incorporated in Texas under the Order and Blessing of Most Venerable Thich Quang Do and UBCV – GHPGVNTN Vietnam. It is an overseas extension of the following:

Unified Buddhist Sangha [Church] of Vietnam (“UBCV”) is a Buddhist organization in Vietnam. The Unified Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam was founded in 1964 to unify 11 of the 14 different sects of Vietnamese Buddhism at the time present in the country. The unification also came in response to a government that was seen as increasingly hostile to Buddhists during the Vietnam War.

After the communist victory, the new government in 1981 consolidated all Buddhist organizations under the umbrella group Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam and placed it under government control. The Unified Buddhist Sangha of Vietnam and all other non-sanctioned organizations became banned within Vietnam. It continues to operate in exile outside of Vietnam.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unified_Buddhist_Church_of_Vietnam (Footnotes omitted.) (Emphasis added.). See also https://www.hrw.org/reports/1995/Vietnam.htm

(iv) (“Plaintiffs” or “Member Plaintiffs.”)

(v) Head of the Church’s Hierarchy.

(vi) (See Exhibit 1 – Decision No. 21 dated October 10, 2015, issued by His Holiness Thich Quang Do, The Supreme Fifth Patriarch of the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam.) (See also Decision No, 16 issued on November 25, 2011. https://saveubcv.wordpress.com/2011/11/25/the-fifth-patriarchs-decision-no-1-personnel-of-the-overseas-ubcv-in-the-united-states-of-america-2011-2015-term).

(vii) Lotus Buddhist Congregation itself donated $10,000.00, and its members have lent tens of thousands of dollars for the purchase of Phat Quang Pagoda in 2014.

(viii) Mr. Dang Pham (Rev. Thich Giac Dang), Mr. Steven Dieu, Mr. Trần Đình Minh, Mr. Lê Quang, Mr. Nguyễn M. Huy, Mr. Mai Xuân Châu, Mr. Cao V. Hiền, and Mr. Nguyễn Cương (the “Thich Giac Dang Team”).

(ix) Note that this Section only applies to each of you and to Ms. Phuong Que Bui, Phuong Que Bui Inc., and Orange Coast Title Company of Southern California.

(x) (See the June 13, 2014 – Decision of His Holiness Thich Quang Do.)

(xi) (See Exhibits 2 and 3 – the corporate documents of UBCV – GHPGVNTN filed with the Texas Secretary of State by Mr. Steven Dieu – showing the initial Board consisted of only 3 Founding Members of the Board per instruction of His Holiness.)

(xii) (See id.)

(xiii) (See Exhibit 4 – The Purchase Price for Phat Quang Pagoda in November of 2015, was $1,225.000.00.)

(xiv) (See Exhibits 5 – Resignation Letter of Rev. Thich Giac Dang dated August 4, 2015.)

(xv) (See id.)

(xvi) (See Exhibits 6 – Decision No. 20 of His Holiness Thich Quang Do accepting Rev. Thich Giac Dang’s Resignation.)

(xvii) See Exhibits 7 – See email of Ms. Faulkner at 12:24 AM on August 20, 2015.”)

(xviii) (See Exhibits 8 – Form 802 of UBCV – GHPGVNTN filed with the Texas Secretary of State by Mr. Steven Dieu to increase the Board by 6 new Members.)

(xix) (See Exhibit 9 – the So-called Bylaws of UBCV – GHPGVNTN drafted by Attorney Steven Dieu on September 2.)

(xx) (See Exhibit 10 – His Holiness Thich Quang Do’s Decision No. 20.)

(xxi) (See id.) (Emphasis added.)

(xxii) (See Exhibit 11 – the corporate documents of Phuong Que Bui, Inc.)

(xxiii) (See Exhibit 4 – The Sale Price for Phat Quang Pagoda on September 17, 2015, was $1,100.000.00.)

(xxiv) (See Exhibits 12 and 13 – Grant Deed dated 9/16/2015; Short Form Deed of Trust and Assignments of Rents dated 9/17/2015.)

(xxv) (See Exhibits 12, 13, and 14 – Grant Deed dated 9/16/2015; Short Form Deed of Trust and Assignments of Rents dated 9/17/2015; and Announcement of the Information Bureau posted on Dong Hanh managed by Mr. Cương Nguyen, dated September 30, 2015.)

(xxvi) (See Exhibit 1 – Decision No. 21 dated October 10, 2015, issued by His Holiness Thich Quang Do.)

(xxvii) (See Exhibits 7 – Emails between Ms. Faulkner and Rev. Thich Giac Dang regarding the Special Meeting to increase the number of Board Members.)

(xxviii) TEX. BUS. ORG. CODE § 22.213 (a) (1).

(xxix) TEX. BUS. ORG. CODE § 22.212.

(xxx) Only about 150 persons present vis-a-vis thousands of other members who chose not to attend.

(xxxi) (See Exhibits 15 – the Texas Business Organization Code at Section 22.351; please see also Exhibit 8 – the So-called Bylaws of UBCV – GHPGVNTN drafted by Attorney Steven Dieu.)

(xxxii) “A 501(c) organization, also known colloquially as a 501(c), is a tax-exempt nonprofit organization in the United States. Section 501(c) of the United States Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. § 501(c)) provides that 29 types of nonprofit organizations are exempt from some federal income taxes. Sections 503 through 505 set out the requirements for attaining such exemptions. Many states refer to Section 501(c) for definitions of organizations exempt from state taxation as well. 501(c) organizations can receive unlimited contributions from individuals, corporations, and unions.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/501(c)_organization

(xxxiii) (See Exhibits 2, 3, and 8 – the corporate documents of UBCV – GHPGVNTN filed with the Texas Secretary of State by Mr. Steven Dieu.)

(xxxiv) (See Exhibits 16 — Thich Quang Do, Le Gandhi Vietnamien (Thich Quang Do, The Gandhi of Vietnam 2)

——————–

(1) Even if they seek to use section 22.212(a), it requires an affirmative vote of the “majority of the remaining directors.” Here, because Ms. Faulkner did not vote to elect the 6 new directors, there was no vote of the majority of the remaining two directors.

*********************************

HT Thích Huyền Việt trao đổi và hôi luận về

Hiện tình của Giáo hội Phật giáo Việt Nam Thống nhất

tại Chùa Từ Bi thành phố Arlington, tiểu bang Texas, Hoa Kỳ

Vào lúc 2 :00 giờ chiều ngày chủ nhật, 04 tháng 10 năm 2015, Chùa Từ Bi đã cung thỉnh Hòa Thượng Thích Huyền Việt, Xử lý Thường vụ Văn Phòng II Viện Hóa Đạo (VPII/VHĐ) Giáo Hội Phật Giáo Việt Nam Thống Nhất (GHPGVNTN) đến Hội trường chùa để nói chuyện, trao đổi về hiện tình của Giáo Hội.

Thành phần tham dự gồm có đại diện cộng đồng Hạt Tarrant County, Báo Thế giới mới, Khuôn hội Phật giáo Dallas, Đoàn Hộ pháp Tu Viện Huyền Quang, cùng đông đảo đồng hương Phật tử vùng Arlington, Fort Worth, và toàn thể đạo tràng Chùa Từ Bi. Tổng cộng trên 250 người.

Sau phần chào quốc kỳ Hoa Kỳ, Việt Nam Cộng Hòa, Phật Giáo Kỳ và phút Mặc niệm, Đạo hữu Chúc Bảo Lương Tích Đức, Trưởng Ban Tổ chức, chào mừng Hòa Thượng và hân hoan đón chào quý đồng hương đã quan tâm đến hiện tình của Giáo Hội đến tham dự buổi nói chuyện. Đạo hữu Chúc Bảo cũng đã nêu lý do của buổi gặp gỡ Hòa Thượng và đồng hương Phật Tử hôm nay.

Đạo hữu nói : “Do những biến động ở VPII/VHĐ trong thời gian qua, đồng hương Phật tử trên toàn quốc Hoa Kỳ rất hoang mang, thắc mắc. Một số người đã vận động chúng ta đi theo con đường này, con đường nọ. Do đó chúng tôi cung thỉnh Hòa Thượng Xử lý Thường vụ VPII/VHĐ của GHPGVNTN truyền thống, là người có đủ thẩm quyền, về đây để cho chúng ta biết Gíao hội đang đi về đâu, và có gì trở ngại chúng ta cần tham khảo để củng cố niềm tin vào sự lãnh đạo của đức Đương kim Tăng Thống Thích Quảng Độ, từ đó chúng ta dìu dắt nhau trên bước đường tu học.”

Tiếp theo, Hòa Thượng mở đầu buổi nói chuyện bằng câu hỏi :

“Kẻ thù của kẻ thù dân tộc (dân tộc đây là dân tộc Việt Nam) là gì của dân ? Ngài nói : “Kẻ thù của kẻ thù dân tộc là ân nhân của dân”. Và “Ai là kẻ thù của dân tộc ta ? – Chính là Cộng Sản”. Hòa thượng nói tiếp : “Ai là Kẻ thù của Cộng Sản ? — Hòa Thượng Quảng Độ và Phòng Thông tin Phật Giáo Quốc tế. Vậy thì tại sao có người lại đánh phá Đức Tăng Thống và Phòng Thông tin Phật Giáo Quốc tế ?” Hòa thượng hỏi lớn : “Điều đó có nên không thưa quý vị ?” Cả hội trường đồng thanh trả lời : “Không !”. Hòa thượng kết luận : ”Điều đó quá rõ”.

Sau đó Hòa thượng đọc lá Thư Từ chức của Thượng Tọa Giác Đẳng. Hòa Thượng nói tiếp, nếu Thượng Tọa Giác Đẳng làm đúng như lời TT nói trong lá Thư Từ chức này, thì không có những biến động xẩy ra. Tại sao sau khi từ chức rồi, TT còn lập ra cái gọi là Hội đồng Quản trị / UBCV đưa vô thêm sáu người chẳng có chức vụ gì trong GHPGVNTN, trao cho luật sư Steven Điêu làm chủ tịch. LS Steven Điêu không phải là người của Giáo Hội, chưa bao giờ là thành viên của GHPGVNTN như lời ông tuyên bố qua 3 cuộc họp báo do TT Giác Đẳng tổ chức. Mục đích để làm gì ? Là để bán chùa Phật Quang. Đó là điều nhức nhối nhất mà chúng ta ai cũng cảm thấy đau lòng. Có được chùa Phật Quang là do lời kêu gọi của Ngài Đệ ngũ Tăng Thống Thích Quảng Độ, của Ngài Cố Viện Trưởng VHĐ Hòa Thượng Thích Như Đạt. Do đó, Phật tử khắp nơi đã hưởng ứng lời kêu gọi của quý ngài mà sẵn sàng cúng dường hay cho mượn tiền để tạo mãi Ngôi Chùa Chung cho Giáo Hội. Sự vận động để mua chùa Phật Quang đã có sự phối hợp nhịp nhàng và hữu hiệu giữa Hội Đồng Lưỡng Viện trong nước, Phòng Thông tin Phật Giáo Quốc tế và VPII/VHĐ, không phải riêng một mình TT Giác Đẳng mà làm được điều đó như có một số người lầm tưởng.

Sau khi trình bày mọi chi tiết, Hòa Thượng yêu cầu quý quan khách có những thắc mắc gì về hiện tình của Giáo Hội cứ mạnh dạn đặt câu hỏi. Hội trường trở nên sôi nổi với nhiều câu hỏi và những góp ý.

Ngoại trừ một số câu hỏi liên quan đến trách nhiệm của TT Giác Đẳng, Hòa Thượng từ chối trả lời, tất cả những thắc mắc về Giáo Hội đều được Hòa Thượng giải đáp thỏa đáng.

Trước khi buổi nói chuyện của Hòa Thượng chấm dứt, đạo hữu Tâm Long Lê Văn Thiệu, Phó Ban Tổ chức có đôi lời chân thành tri ân Hòa Thượng đã dành thì giờ đến với chùa Từ Bi để giải tỏa mọi ưu tư của Đồng hương Phật tử về tiền đồ của Giáo Hội. Đạo hữu Lê văn Thiệu nói : “Sau buổi nói chuyện của Hòa Thượng, chúng con tin tưởng rằng rồi đây sóng gió sẽ qua đi. Sau cơn mưa trời lại sáng ; ánh bình minh của chánh pháp sẽ xua tan màn đêm u tối của các thế lực vô minh đang cố đẩy con thuyền Giáo Hội xuống bờ vực thẳm. Chúng con hoàn toàn đặt niềm tin vào sự lãnh đạo sáng suốt của Đức đệ ngũ Tăng Thống Thích Quảng Độ và sự dìu dắt của Hòa Thượng trong cương vị Xử lý Thường vụu VPII.VHĐ để vững tiến trên con đường tu tập”. Và sau cùng đạo hữu cám ơn quý Cộng đồng, hội đoàn, quý đồng hương Phật tử đã đến tham dự đông đủ.

Buổi nói chuyện của Hòa Thượng Huyền Việt chấm dứt lúc 5:00 giờ chiều cùng ngày. Mọi người ra về trong tinh thần thoải mái và phấn khởi. Niềm tin đang sống dậy.