Contents

1. Overview

2. Geophysical

3. Hydrology and Geohydrology

4. Ecology

5. Climate

6. Land-use

7. Populated Places

8. Tributaries

9. Dams

10. Water Treatment

11. Wastewater Treatment

Overview

The Berg River rises in the Franschhoek and Drakenstein

mountains. It flows northwards past Paarl, Wellington,

Hermon and Gouda, where it is joined by the Klein Berg

and Vier-en-Twintig rivers. The Berg River then flows

westwards past Porterville, Piketberg, Hopefield and

Velddrif to discharge into St. Helena Bay on the west

coast.

The Berg River Catchment covers an area of almost 9

000km2 and is the largest catchment in the Western Cape

Province. (Berg River Baseline Monitoring Programme

Final Report: Volume 1, September 2007). It has nine

major and seven minor tributaries, six of which were

naturally perennial, namely the

Franschhoek,Wemmershoek, Dwars, Klein Berg, Vier-en-

Twintig and Matjies rivers.

The Berg River has its source in the

Drakenstein and Franschhoek Mountains

south of Franschhoek and discharges into

the Atlantic Ocean near Velddrif, some

285 km away. (Berg River Baseline Monitoring

Programme Final Report: Volume 1, September

2007).

The Berg River drains the western slopes of

the Olifants River Mountains, the Winterhoek

Mountains and the Drakenstein Mountains as

well as the Swartland. The origin is at

Franschhoek in the Franschhoek Mountains.

Ref 2: STATE-OFF-RIVERS REPORT RIIVER HEALTH PROGRAMME BERG RIVER SYSTEM – 2004

Ref 3: Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, South Africa. 2004. Berg Water Management Area: Internal Strategic Perspective.

Prepared by Ninham Shand (Pty) Ltd in association with Jakoet and Associates, Umvoto Africa and Tlou and Matji, on behalf of the

Directorate: National Water Resource Planning. DWAF Report No P WMA19/000/00/0304.

Topography

The Berg River rises in the Franschhoek and Drakenstein mountains at an altitude of 1500 m. It

flows northwards past Paarl, Wellington, Hermon and Gouda, where it is joined by the Klein Berg

and Vier-en-Twintig rivers. The Berg River Catchment covers an area of almost 9 000km2 and is

the largest catchment in the Western Cape Province. Berg River Baseline Monitoring Programme

Final Report: Volume 1, September 2007

The river then flows westwards past Porterville,

Piketberg and Velddrif where it finally discharges into

St. Helena Bay on the west coast. Based on geographic

and topographic characteristics, the catchment can be

divided into three distinct areas, namely the broad, flat

extensive western portion west of Moorreesburg and

Koringberg, the river valley portion east of Koringberg

to just south of Paarl, and the upper mountainous

source area south of Paarl.

Major towns in the western portion include Saldanha, Vredenburg and Hopefield while key

towns in the central river valley area include Piketberg, Porterville, Paarl and Wellington.

Franschhoek is found at the base of the Franschhoek Mountains some 6 km north east of the

proposed Berg River Dam site. The total population of the catchment is in the order of 200 000,

most of whom live in the urban areas.

Much of the catchment area is flat, with an average topographical gradient between Paarl and

the mouth of the Berg River at Laaiplek of 0.001. Topographically, a north-trending ridge of

mountains (Piketberg, Swartberg) divides the catchment in two, with the Berg River flowing

through a poort between Koringberg and De Hoek. Mountains that reach in excess of 1 000 m

elevation flank the north trending valley in the eastern part of the catchment, including the

Groot Winterhoek Mountains, Kasteelberg, Perdeberg, Paarl Mountain and the Wemmershoek

Mountains.

The profile of the Berg River (from the origin near Franschhoek to the mouth at Velddrif)

is illustrated below:

Geology

The Berg River Catchment comprises sequences of

rocks of the Malmesbury Group, the Cape Granite

Suite, the Klipheuwel Group, the Table Mountain

Group and younger Cenozoic sediments in the western

part of the catchment. The Malmesbury Group and

Klipheuwel Group essentially comprise soft, erodible

rocks that form flat plains in low lying areas. In general,

these areas have moderate to high agricultural

potential. The Malmesbury Group is steeply folded

along a north west striking axis (Visser 1989). Berg

River Baseline Monitoring Programme Final Report:

Volume1, September 2007

These metasediments form part of the Saldania Subprovince and have been subdivided into three

tectono-stratigraphic domains, i.e. the Tygerberg, Swartland and Boland domains. These domains are

separated by two major north-northwesterly striking fault systems, namely the Franschhoek- Saldanha

(Colenso Fault) and Wellington-Piketberg Faults (Visser 1989)

Outcrops of Cape Granite Suite rocks occur in the west,

south and south east of the catchment. This series of

granitic plutons, of late Precambrian to early Cambrian

age, intruded into Malmesbury Group. Older intrusions

occurred between 610 and 560 Ma, while the younger

phase occurred between 540 and 500 Ma (Timmerman

1988). In places they form prominent features like the

Paarl Mountain.

The Table Mountain Group comprises hard resistant quartzitic sandstones that form the mountain

ranges that flank the north-trending river valley in the east. The rocks have been folded and faulted,

giving them their secondary water-bearing features.

Upper Berg River: Table Mountain Group (quartzitic sandstone), Sandy sediments

Upper Middle Berg River: Table Mountain Group (quartzitic sandstone), Malmesbury Group

(shale), Cape Granite Suite, Sandy sediments

Lower Middle Berg River: Table Mountain Group (quartzitic sandstone), Malmesbury Group

(shale), Klipheuwel Group, Sandy sediments

Lower Berg River: Table Mountain Group (quartzitic sandstone), Malmesbury Group (shale),

Cape Granite Suite, Sandy sediments

Soils

The siliceous Table Mountain Group (TMG) produces soils that are acidic and infertile.

Soils derived from the Cape Granite are also more fertile and finer textured than those derived from the

Table Mountain Group

Hydrology

The Berg River has its source in the Drakenstein and

Franschhoek Mountains south of Franschhoek and

discharges into the Atlantic Ocean near Velddrif, some

285 km away. Major tributaries of the Berg River

include the Franschhoek, Wemmershoek, Dwars,

Kompagnies, Klein Berg, and Twenty-four Rivers. A

striking characteristic of the catchment is the low

density of drainage channels in the western parts of

the catchment underlain by unconsolidated sandy

recent deposits. Significantly higher drainage densities

are observed in the central and eastern parts underlain

by weathered and fractured rocks, mostly of the

Malmesbury and Table Mountain Group.

Two major dams have been built in the catchment. The Wemmershoek Dam south east of Paarl has a

surface area of 3 km2 and a storage capacity of 66 million m3. The Voëlvlei Dam west of Tulbagh

covers an area of 15 km2 and has a storage capacity of 170 million m3. Numerous smaller farm dams

are found throughout the east part of the catchment. Total natural runoff from the Berg River

Catchment amounts to 931 million m3/a. These three catchments make up only 7% of the total area of

the Berg River catchment. The estimated size of the catchment area of the Berg River Dam is about 70

km2, which is less than 0.8% of the total area of the Berg River Catchment. DWAF (1993) estimated

present-day annual runoff of the Berg River amounted to 682 million m3/a, with the modified flow

attributed to direct abstraction from the river for irrigation, storage and abstraction for urban water

supply, development of forestry within the basin, irrigation return flow, and releases from the Voëlvlei,

Wemmershoek and Theewaterskloof Dams (the latter via the Berg River Syphon).

Flow and quality characteristics of the Berg River have

been severely modified by abstraction from the river

and the release of some 17 million m3/a of summer

irrigation water from the Theewaterskloof Dam into the

upper Berg River at the Berg River Syphon upstream of

the proposed Berg River Dam site (1993 data; current

releases amount to between 50 and 60 million m3/a).

This water is used to supply irrigators downstream as

far as Zonquasdrift. Downstream of Zonquasdrift,

irrigation water is released from Voëlvlei Dam.

It is of interest to note that in the geological past, the Berg River flowed from Assegaaibos past the

position of the present tunnel siphon, straight past Robertsvlei camp and northeast down the

Roberts River into the Franschhoek River. A mountain landslide resulted in blocking the upper

reaches of the Robertsvlei gap, thereby causing the river to change its course to the present course

through the proposed Berg River Dam site (Forbes, Dick and Associates 2001).

The Berg River catchment falls within the winter rainfall region of the south-western Cape. Rainfall

in the catchment increases from west to east.

Ref 2: STATE-OFF-RIVERS REPORT RIIVER HEALTH PROGRAMME BERG RIVER SYSTEM – 2004

Ref 3: Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, South Africa. 2004. Berg Water Management Area: Internal Strategic Perspective. Prepared by

Ninham Shand (Pty) Ltd in association with Jakoet and Associates, Umvoto Africa and Tlou and Matji, on behalf of the Directorate: National Water

Resource Planning. DWAF Report No P WMA19/000/00/0304.

Ecology

Overview

UPPER BERG RIVER and TRIBUTARIES - Habitat integrity and water quality in the Berg

River deteriorate downstream as a result of alien vegetation encroachment (Acacia sp.), the

interbasin transfer of water and river modification. Urban and agricultural development

affect the water quality at Franschhoek (municipal and wine farm effluent). The lack of

environmental flow releases from Wemmershoek Dam results in a severely altered flow

regime and habitat downstream.

UPPER MIDDLE BERG RIVER and TRIBUTARIES -River health is reduced in the

tributaries as a result of alien vegetation infestation and agricultural development (river

modification, water abstraction, runoff). Water quality and habitat integrity in the Berg

River and lower reaches of these tributaries are reduced due to urban development.

LOWER MIDDLE BERG RIVER and TRIBUTARIES- Diversion weirs in the Klein Berg and

Vieren-Twintig rivers have altered flow patterns. Alien fish (bass and banded tilapia) are

widespread and have led to the disappearance of indigenous fish (Berg River redfin and

whitefish). River health is also reduced by the effects of agriculture (levees and pesticide

residues). Water quality and habitat integrity near Tulbagh are poor.

LOWER BERG RIVER and TRIBUTARIES- Farming practices (riparian vegetation removal,

bed modification, water abstraction) and alien vegetation (black wattle, river gum) impact

on the habitat integrity and flow of the rivers. Flow releases are made from the bottom of

Misverstand Dam and reduce water quality. Alien fish (banded tilapia and carp) prey on or

compete with indigenous fish.

Vegetation

Spatial distribution and variation of vegetation is strongly correlated with geology, and to a

lesser extent rainfall and other climatic variables. The siliceous Table Mountain Group

(TMG) produces soils that are acidic and infertile, resulting in areas with low agricultural

potential (Schloms et al. 1983). In general, fynbos is prominent in these areas, but forest can

develop in moist sheltered ravines (Cowling and Holmes 1992).

Rocks of the Malmesbury Group are regarded as being moderately high in nutrients. These

rocks are generally finer textured than those of the TMG and include phyllite, schist,

greywacke and shales. Soils derived from the Cape Granite are also more fertile and finer

textured than those derived from the TMG. Renosterveld dominates the vegetation on

these soils, but may give way to fynbos in areas with higher rainfall (Rebelo 1996). Along

the West Coast, soils derived largely from coastal processes can broadly be divided into

calcareous sands and limestones, and non-calcareous (neutral to acidic) sands. These soils

support a number of coastal vegetation types such as Strandveld and Sand Fynbos. Much

of the natural vegetation in the catchment has been destroyed to make way for

urbanisation and agriculture. It is only in the higher lying areas and areas with low

agricultural potential that natural vegetation prevails. The vegetation coverage was

obtained from the National Botanical Institute (Mucina and Rutherford 2005.). Berg River

Baseline Monitoring Programme Final Report: Volume 1, September 2007

UPPER BERG RIVER: Fynbos (Sandstone, Alluvium, Afromontane Mires)

UPPER MIDDLE BERG RIVER: Fynbos (Alluvium, Afromontane Mires, Sand, Sandstone),

Renosterveld (Shale, Granite)

LOWER MIDDLE BERG RIVER: Fynbos (Sandstone, Shale, Alluvium), Shale Renosterveld

LOWER BERG RIVER: Fynbos (Sand, Sandstone, Alluvium), Renosterveld (Shale, Granite,

Silcrete, Alluvium)

Climate

Temperature

The mean annual temperature varies between 16°C in

the east to 18°C along the West Coast, with an average

of 16°C. Maximum temperatures are experienced in

January (average daily max = 29,4°C) and minimum

temperatures usually occur in July (average daily min =

4,5°C). Temperatures along the coast are a few degrees

cooler than in the interior.

Rainfall

The majority of the rainfall occurs between the months of May and September and hence it

is referred to as a winter rainfall region. Rainfall is of a frontal nature, generally moving

from the Atlantic Ocean to the north-west over

the Western Cape. The orographical influence

of the high mountain ranges in the Cape

Peninsula and on the eastern side of the water

management area, introduces a large spatial

variability in the mean annual precipitation

(MAP). In the high lying areas of the Upper

Berg River, the upper reaches of the Eerste

River and the Steenbras River, the maximum

mean annual precipitation exceeds 3 000mm

per annum.

In the lowlands, the precipitation is between 600mm

and 400mm per annum, being greater in the small

mountain outcrops and hills and reducing to 300mm

per annum in the north-west , where the Berg River

flows into the sea. The average potential mean annual

evaporation (measured by S-pan) ranges from 1

400mm in the south to 1 700mm in the north.

The Berg River Catchment experiences a

Mediterranean climate with warm dry summers and

cool wet winters. Rainfall is of a cyclonic nature,

extending normally over a few days with significant

periods of clear weather in between. Little rain falls

during summer, with the rainy season extending from

April through to October.

Land-use

Agricultural

Wine grapes: Viticulture is an important agricultural activity practice in the southern part of

the Berg River catchment and centered around Paarl, Wellington and Franschhoek.

Wheat: The Swartland is one of the major wheat producing areas in South-Africa. The main

centres are Malmesbury, Moorreesburg and Piketberg.

Other: Deciduous fruit is the backbone of

the economy in the Berg River catchment.

North of Wellington, dryland grain farming

and sheep farming predominate. Commercial

pine forests occur near the headwaters,

around Franschhoek. The major industries in

the Berg River basin are agriculturally based

and include wineries, canneries and other

food processing factories.

Nature Conservation, Reserves, Tourism

Industries

Fishing: Velddrif, St Helena Bay

KWV Industry

Populated places

Velddrif:

•West Coast District Municipality

•Bergrivier Local Municipality

Velddrif is located approximately

145 kilometres (90 mi) north

of Cape Town, and is connected

to Cape Town by the R27

road.[ The R27 joins the R399 at

Velddrif. It is situated near the

point that the meandering Berg

River flows into the sea at St.

Helena Bay. This estuary is an

important bird habitat, home to

around 30,000 birds, including up

to 80 species which are endemic

to the Cape coast.[ Well over 350

different species of birds can be

seen here as it is a habitat for

sea, river and land birds.

The name Velddrif is derived

from a local farmer, Theunis Smit,

who took his stock through a

drift in the field (Afrikaans: veld),

to find grazing across the river.

In 1899, a pont (pontoon ferry)

was built to cross the Berg River

(Wikipedia)

Laaiplek:

West Coast District Municipality

Bergrivier Local Municipality

The heart of Laaiplek lies on the

Berg River, its pier a hive of

activity, particularly last thing in

the afternoon as fishing boats

sail alongside, and proceed to

throw out their catch of the day

where it is weighed and then

picked up by whatever market

has bought today's catch.

Hopefield:

West Coast District Municipality

Saldanha Bay Local Municipality

Hopefield is a settlement in West Coast District Municipality in the Western Cape province

of South Africa on the R27 between Malmesbury and Vredenburg.The town is east

of Saldanha Bay and Langebaan, 40 km southeast of Vredenburg and 120 km north of Cape

Town. The Dutch Reformed congregation (Zoutrivier) was established December 1851 and

the town was founded in 1852 on the farm Langekuil, it became a municipality in 1914.

Named after two people who laid it out, Major William Hope, Auditor-General, and a Mr Field.

The Air Force Base Langebaanweg,[ 22km west from town, as well as the West Coast Fossil

park 25km west from town, falls within town limits. There are two schools in town, Hopefield

Primary, presenting Gr1-7, a fully state sponsored school and Hopefield High,presenting Gr1-

12, a semi-state school with minimal sponsorship from government. The pre-1994 coloured

area of the town is called Oudekraalfontein with a population of 2903 (2001 census). In

earlier years this, now small, town was considered the capital of the West Coast. With banks,

filling stations and multiple other shops and businesses. The only access to the towns of

Vredenburg, Langebaan and Saldanha was through Hopefield. With the re-routing of the R27,

passing the town on the outside and the construction of the R45 (West Coast Road) the infra-

structure of the down gradually shrunk till the point were the town is today.

Paarl:

Cape Winelands District

Municipality

Drakenstein Local Municipality

Paarl is a town with 191,013

inhabitants in the Western

Cape province of South Africa. It is

the third oldest town

and European settlement in the

Republic of South Africa (after Cape

Town and Stellenbosch) and the

largest town in the Cape Winelands.

Due to the growth of the Mbekweni

township, it is now a de facto urban

unit with Wellington. It is situated

about 60 kilometres (37 mi)

northeast of Cape Town in

the Western Cape Province and is

renowned for its haunting scenic

beauty and deep viticulture and

fruit growing heritage.

Paarl is the seat of the Drakenstein

Local Municipality; although not

part of the Cape Town metropolitan

area, it falls within its economic

catchment. Paarl is unusual in

South Africa in that the name of the

place is pronounced differently in

English and Afrikaans. An unusual

feature of the name of the town is

that Afrikaners customarily attach

the definite article to it: people

say in die Paarl ("in the Paarl"),

rather than in Paarl.

Other populated places along the Berg River

Moorreesburg

Piketberg

Riebeeck West

Gouda

Porterville

Wellington

Simondium

Tulbagh

Franschoek

Pniel

De Hoek

Franschoek

Tributary Tributaries

Notes

Klein Berg River (from the Voelvlei Dam)

Twenty Four Rivers Draining the Groot Winterhoek Mountains

Krom River Draining the Swartland between Piketberg and

the Olifants River Mountains

Boesmans River Draining the Piketberg Mountains

Soutrivier Draining the Swartland west of Moorreesburg

Franschoek River

Wemmershoek River

Kompagnies River

Dwars River

Dams

WEMMERSHOEK DAM

Max. Capacity: 58.7 mil.cub.m.

Comments: The dam wall was completed in 1957, and

is in the Wemmershoek River.

VOELVLEI DAM

Max. Capacity: 158.6mil.cub.m.

Comments: The dam is supplied by diversion works

from the Klein Berg, Vier-en-twintig and Leeu Rivers

MISVERSTAND DAM

Max. Capacity: 6.4mil.cub.m.

Comments: East of Piketberg

BERG RIVER DAM

Max. Capacity: 126.4mil.cub.m.

Comments: The construction of the Berg River Dam

(Berg Water Project) commenced in 2005. The dam is

situated near Franschhoek in the upper catchment of

the Berg River.

Water Treatment Works

Wastewater Treatment Works

References

STATE-OF-RIVERS REPORT- RIVER HEALTH PROGRAMME BERG RIVER

SYSTEM - 2004

Department of Water Affairs and Forestry, South Africa. 2004. Berg

Water Management Area: Internal Strategic Perspective. Prepared by

Ninham Shand (Pty) Ltd in association with Jakoet and Associates,

Umvoto Africa and Tlou and Matji, on behalf of the Directorate: National

Water Resource Planning. DWAF Report No P WMA19/000/00/0304

Berg River Baseline Monitoring Programme - Introduction to the Berg River

Catchment; Groundwater and Hydrology DWAF Report No. P WMA

19/G10/00/1807 Edited by: GEORDIE RACTLIFFE

This e-book may be copied and distributed to others, but may not be sold.

This e-book must be fully referenced wherever it may be used.

Copyright ©WAMTechnology CC. All Rights Reserved

WAMTechnology, DeWagenweg, Stellentia Rd. Stellenbosch, 021 887 7161

www.wamsys.co.za