Charles J. “Hack” Schumann was an American Major League Baseball pitcher. He played for the Philadelphia Athletics during the 1906 season.

Hack Schumann was born on August 13, 1884, in Buffalo, New York, United States. His birth geographical coordinates are 42° 53’ 11” North latitude and 78° 52’ 42” West longitude, with an altitude of 183 meters above sea level. Hack Schumann passed away at the age of 61 in 1946.

Astrologically, Hack Schumann falls under the Sun sign of Leo, with Scorpio as his Ascendant, Taurus as his Moon sign, and Sagittarius as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Leo Moon Taurus Ascendant Scorpio Midheaven Leo Mercury Virgo Venus Cancer Mars Libra Jupiter Leo Saturn Gemini Uranus Virgo Neptune Taurus Pluto Gemini Ceres Leo Chiron Gemini Eros Pisces Hygiea Pisces Juno Virgo Pallas Leo Vesta Aquarius Black Moon Lilith Sagittarius North Node Libra South Node Aries Part of Fortune Leo Vertex Gemini

Sunin Leo21° 16’ 46”

The Sun in Leo in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for assertiveness and charm. You are passionate and dynamic, using your strengths to […] Read more »

Moonin Taurus14° 50’ 60”

The Taurus Moon in the Natal Chart makes you sensual and reasonable. You are empathetic and can be rational and down to earth. You are […] Read more »

Ascendantin Scorpio7° 34’ 31”

Scorpio Ascendant makes you eager to use your image and appearance to convey authority and power. You are determined to show your influence by speaking […] Read more »

Midheavenin Leo16° 11’ 33”

Leo Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you encouraging and enthusiastic. You are determined to succeed, and your optimistic and playful nature will help you […] Read more »

Mercuryin Virgo16° 36’ 14”

Virgo Mercury in the Natal Chart makes you rational and logical. You are thoughtful and intelligent. You use your intellectual gifts primarily and often ignore […] Read more »

Venusin Cancer13° 55’ 42”

Cancer Venus in the Natal Chart makes you generous and affectionate. You are compassionate and can be empathetic and loving. You are sincere and can […] Read more »

Marsin Libra10° 25’ 15”

Libra Mars in the Natal Chart makes you long for balance. You are motivated to express your unique fantasies and find the passion and motivation […] Read more »

Jupiterin Leo16° 53’ 11”

Leo Jupiter in the Natal Chart makes you open about your ideals. You pursue your desires and can be creative and expressive. You are charming, […] Read more »

Saturnin Gemini21° 47’ 12”

Gemini Saturn in the Natal Chart makes you part of a group born within the same three years who share a collective responsibility. You are […] Read more »

Uranusin Virgo26° 14’ 12”

Virgo Uranus in the Natal Chart makes you part of a generation that redefined health standards. You are part of a movement to challenge traditions […] Read more »

Neptunein Taurus23° 18’ 16”

Taurus Neptune in the Natal Chart is a generational placement. You are part of a generation born to create stability and beauty. Your generation helps […] Read more »

Plutoin Gemini2° 6’ 40”

Gemini Pluto in the Natal Chart makes you part of a generation born to change how people communicate. Your generation shifts the power and helps […] Read more »

Ceresin Leo16° 30’ 54”

Ceres in Leo in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a generation obsessed with comforting others. You bring excitement and passion into others’ […] Read more »

Chironin Gemini9° 8’ 53”

Chiron in Gemini in the Natal Chart indicates a generation committed to helping others understand their past wounds. You find healing and release when you […] Read more »

Erosin Pisces20° 12’ 55”

Eros in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes it easy for you to explore your fantasies. You are attuned to your lover’s subconscious desires, and […] Read more »

Hygieain Pisces3° 0’ 50”

Hygiea in Pisces in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for an intuitive healer. You can be a spiritual guide who encourages others to […] Read more »

Junoin Virgo7° 51’ 33”

Juno in Virgo in the Natal Chart makes you reserved and traditional. You take a cautious approach to settling down and are slow to fall […] Read more »

Pallasin Leo0° 17’ 13”

Pallas in Leo in the Natal Chart makes you persuasive and influential. You are charismatic and can be encouraging and supportive. Wondering, what is my […] Read more »

Vestain Aquarius13° 34’ 15”

Vesta in Aquarius in the Natal Chart indicates a unique perspective. You can be rebellious and devoted to breaking tradition. You are passionate about your […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Sagittarius8° 22’ 24”

Sagittarius Black Moon Lilith makes you daring and indepenent. You are willful and can be creative. You channel inner frustrations and fears to help you […] Read more »

North Nodein Libra16° 40’ 7”

Libra North Node in the Natal Chart makes you eager to heal wounds through partnerships. Your relationships are critical to fulfilling your destiny. You use […] Read more »

South Nodein Aries16° 40’ 7”

Aries South Node in the Natal Chart makes you a leader with a passionate personality. You are driven by a desire to learn from others. […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Leo1° 8’ 45”

The Part of Fortune in Leo in the Natal Chart makes you prosperous. You are attracted to wealth and attain status. You can manifest your […] Read more »

Vertexin Gemini16° 41’ 32”

Gemini Vertex in the Natal Chart indicates a gift for communication, writing, and the arts. Unexpected changes help you gain recognition and accomplish your desires. […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon Seventh House Mercury Tenth House Venus Ninth House Mars Eleventh House Jupiter Tenth House Saturn Eighth House Uranus Eleventh House Neptune Seventh House Pluto Seventh House Ceres Tenth House Chiron Eighth House Eros Fifth House Hygiea Fourth House Juno Tenth House Pallas Ninth House Vesta Third House Black Moon Lilith Second House North Node Twelfth House South Node Sixth House Part of Fortune Ninth House Vertex Eighth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 24 major aspects, alongside 19 minor aspects, as well as 9 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Sun Sextile Saturn Moon Square Midheaven Moon Sextile Venus Jupiter Conjunct Midheaven Sun Square Neptune Moon Trine Mercury Moon Square Jupiter Mercury Sextile Venus Uranus Trine Neptune Sun Conjunct Jupiter Moon Quincunx Mars Venus Square Mars Saturn Square Uranus Sun Conjunct Midheaven Mercury Square Saturn Jupiter Sextile Saturn Sun Square Moon Venus Trine Ascendant Mars Sextile Midheaven Saturn Sextile Midheaven Jupiter Square Neptune Uranus Trine Pluto Moon Opposite Ascendant Mercury Trine Neptune

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Hack Schumann’s life journey.

Sun Sextile Saturnorb: 1°

The Sun sextile Saturn in the Natal Chart makes you sober and mature. Even as a child, you have uncanny wisdom and seem older than […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Venusorb: 1°

When the Moon is sextile Venus in a Natal Chart, this typically means that a person is a kind and loving person. They tend to […] Read more »

Jupiter Conjunct Midheavenorb: 1°

Jupiter conjunct the Midheaven in a chart can give a person an open mind and a desire to learn as much as possible to succeed. […] Read more »

Sun Square Neptuneorb: 2°

The Sun square Neptune in the Natal Chart makes you dreamy and mystical. Yet you aren’t open to expressing your unique traits because you are […] Read more »

Moon Trine Mercuryorb: 2°

When the Moon trines Mercury, there is a strong connection between the mind and the heart. It is not difficult for a person with this […] Read more »

Moon Square Jupiterorb: 2°

The Moon square Jupiter in a chart can initially seem like a happy and positive influence. It might feel good for someone experiencing it, even […] Read more »

Mercury Sextile Venusorb: 3°

Mercury sextile Venus in a Natal Chart typically indicates a person is friendly, personable, and social. They are likely affectionate and have no problem communicating […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Jupiterorb: 4°

The Sun conjunct Jupiter in the Natal Chart amplifies your greatest strengths. You are generous and compassionate toward people in need. You can be the […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Marsorb: 4°

When the Moon is quincunx Mars in a Natal Chart, there will be many inconsistencies in how this person expresses their emotions. Emotional outbursts are […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Midheavenorb: 5°

The Sun conjunct Midheaven makes you outspoken and authentic. You openly share your talents and align your unique abilities with your public status. You are […] Read more »

Mercury Square Saturnorb: 5°

Mercury square Saturn in a Natal Chart can be an incredibly challenging square to work through. Many lessons can be learned from this aspect, but […] Read more »

Sun Square Moonorb: 6°

The Sun square Moon in a Natal Chart is more potent than this aspect in a Transiting Chart. You inhibit your growth and block yourself […] Read more »

Moon Opposite Ascendantorb: 7°

The Moon opposite the Ascendant in a chart often results in someone mirroring the emotional expression they learned from caregivers growing up. This could lead […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Juno Sextile Ascendant Ceres Conjunct Midheaven Midheaven Sextile North Node Midheaven Trine South Node Midheaven Sextile Vertex Mercury Quincunx South Node Mercury Square Vertex Venus Quincunx Vesta Jupiter Conjunct Ceres Jupiter Sextile North Node Jupiter Trine South Node Jupiter Sextile Vertex Sun Quincunx Eros Moon Square Vesta Mars Trine Chiron Pluto Square Hygiea Pluto Sextile Part of Fortune Moon Square Ceres Saturn Square Eros

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Hack Schumann’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Ceres Conjunct Midheavenorb: 0°

Ceres conjunct the Midheaven in a chart can create a caring public image and align professional purpose with compassion and nurturing. People with this conjunction […] Read more »

Midheaven Sextile North Nodeorb: 0°

The Midheaven sextile, the North Node in the Natal Chart, makes you eager to fulfill your destiny. Your career helps you open up to pursuing […] Read more »

Midheaven Trine South Nodeorb: 0°

The Midheaven trine the South Node in the Natal Chart makes you passionate about your higher mission. You are comfortable pursuing your material ambitions and […] Read more »

Midheaven Sextile Vertexorb: 0°

The Midheaven sextile the Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you open to adapting to unusual circumstances. Changes help you embrace your higher mission. You […] Read more »

Mercury Quincunx South Nodeorb: 0°

Mercury quincunx South Node in a chart typically indicates a disconnect between a person’s rational, intellectual mind and the karmic lessons they are meant to […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Ceres Sextile North Node Ceres Trine South Node Ceres Sextile Vertex North Node Trine Vertex South Node Sextile Vertex Chiron Square Juno Chiron Opposite Black Moon Lilith Juno Square Black Moon Lilith Pallas Conjunct Part of Fortune

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Hack Schumann’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

North Node Trine Vertexorb: 0°

The North Node trine the Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you successful and charming. You attract new opportunities easily and embrace opportunities to thrive. […] Read more »

South Node Sextile Vertexorb: 0°

The South Node sextile of the Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you intuitive and open to unique opportunities. Your past life wisdom helps you […] Read more »

Pallas Conjunct Part of Fortuneorb: 1°

Pallas conjunct the Part of Fortune in a chart aligns strategy and success. Leaning into Pallas’ intellect, perception, and decision-making skills will increase the chance […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.