Service Information

Kenneth L. Schumann, age 85, Husband of Ann, of Hutchinson, Minnesota, passed away on Friday, March 26, 2021, at Harmony River Living Center in Hutchinson.

Funeral Service will be held on Wednesday, March 31, 2021, at 11:00 A.M., at Christ The King Lutheran Church in Hutchinson with interment in the Minnesota State Veterans Cemetery in Little Falls, Minnesota.

Visitation will be held on Tuesday, March 30, 2021, from 4:00 – 7:00 P.M., at the Dobratz-Hantge Funeral Chapel in Hutchinson and will continue one hour prior to the service at church.

Military Honors by the Hutchinson Memorial Rifle Squad.

Masks are required and social distancing guidelines will be followed.

Memorials are preferred to Christ The King Lutheran Church or the National Elks Foundation.

Obituary

Kenneth “Ken” Louis Schumann was born on October 6, 1935, in Collinwood Township, Meeker County, Minnesota. He was the son of Oscar and Marie (Schroeder) Schumann. Ken was baptized as an infant on October 27, 1935, and was later confirmed in his faith as a youth on April 10, 1949. He received his education in Dassel, Minnesota, and was a graduate of the Dassel High School Class of 1954.

Ken joined the Army National Guard on December 10, 1953, in Hutchinson, Minnesota. He received an Honorable Discharge on February 14, 1984, achieving the rank of Sargent First Class. He accepted a direct appointment as a Warrant Officer, where he continued to serve until his retirement on October 31, 1995, in Roseville, Minnesota, achieving the rank of Chief Warrant Officer 3, after nearly 42 years of military service during the Korean, Vietnam, and Persian Gulf War Eras.

On February 14, 1975, Ken was united in marriage to Carolyn “Ann” Sell at Christ The King Lutheran Church in Hutchinson, Minnesota. This marriage was blessed with five children, Richard, Vickie, Michelle, Kristine, and Kari. Ken and Ann resided in Hutchinson and shared 46 years of marriage.

Ken was employed as a conservation officer for the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) for 36 years until he retired on September 30, 1991. He was a member of Christ The King Lutheran Church in Hutchinson. He was also a member of the Hutchinson American Legion Post 96, the Hutchinson Kiwanis Club, and the Hutchinson Elks Lodge #2427.

Ken enjoyed traveling, watching TV shows, and keeping his yard. He especially enjoyed spending time with his family, grandchildren, great-grandchildren, and friends.

Ken became a resident at Harmony River Living Center on January 8, 2021. He passed away there on Friday, March 26, 2021, at the age of 85 years.

Blessed be his memory.

Ken is survived by his:

Wife, Carolyn “Ann” Schumann of Hutchinson, MN;

Children, Richard Schumann and his wife, Kimberley, of Hutchinson, MN,

Vickie Shoutz and her husband, Mark, of Dassel, MN,

Michelle Molin of Carmel, IN,

Kristine Malmberg and her husband, Scott, of Verona, WI,

Kari Burg of Peoria, IL;

Grandchildren, Adam Schumann and his wife, Lacey, Chase Coleman and her husband, Eddie, Karyn Braddock and her husband, Topher, Kate Schenk and her husband, Kyler, Amie Langenfeld and her husband, Tim, Dorie Jessen and her husband, Jeremiah, Casey Shoutz and his wife, Angela, Sean Molin, Connor Molin, Riley Molin, Alexandra Wallach and her husband, Ian;

15 Great Grandchildren;

Sister, Donna Koehler and her husband, Walter, of Hector, MN;

Many other relatives and friends.

Ken is preceded in death by his Parents, Oscar and Marie Schumann; Mother and Father-in-law, Wilbert and Malinda Sell; Great-grandson, Grey Braddock.