2. WHEN AND WHERE THE PERSON WAS BORN Clara Schumann was born on September 13,1819 in Leipzig, Germany

3. EARLY LIFE Clara’s early life was quite magnificent. To start, she was a famous piano player by the age of 9 and went on tour to Paris at age 11. Clara Schumann’s parents (Marianne Wieck and Friedrich Wieck) got divorced when Clara was only 4. Clara’s mother took her to live with her. Then her father took her back a few weeks later because: first, Clara’s father was her piano teacher and he knew that she could become a professional player. Second, back then in the 1800’s kids belonged to there father. There was nothing Clara’s mother could do about it. Clara still loved her mother dearly and being taken away from her broke her heart. Also Clara at age 9 was a better pianist then a lot of adults. Clara also grew up with three older brothers and one little brother who lived with her mom.

4. EDUCATION Clara Schumann was educated by her father around the house. You might think that someone like Clara Schumann would be practicing twenty-four seven, but she was only aloud to practice three hours a day. She spent the rest of her time learning math, reading, and writing. Clara Schumann did go to college at the University of Leipzig.

5. ADULT LIFE/CAREER Clara Wietz married Robert Schumann and that is how she got her last name as Schumann. Clara and Robert Schumann had 8 children: Felix, Ludwig, Emil, Eugenie, Julie, Ferdinand, Elise, and Marie. Clara’s husband Robert had a serious illness and Clara filled in and took his students and taught them the piano as Robert would have taught them. She also continued to perform concerts to earn money for her family. Another thing about Clara Schumann’s career is it lasted SIXTY years long! But after sixty years she stopped touring and became a music teacher. Some of Clara’s famous composer friends were Brahms and Mendelssohn

6. ACCOMPLISHMENTS Some of Clara Schumann’s accomplishments are at only age 9 Clara could play the piano without reading sheets of music which most adults couldn’t even do . The emperor and empress awarded her with a medal and highest honors with the title of “Royal and Imperial chamber Virtuoso”. After Robert died Clara wanted the world to know his music so she finished his compositions played his music to the world when touring.

7. IMPACT ON THE WORLD! Clara Schumann was the first pianist to perform from memory which is in the standard today. Clara Schumann’s teaching style was based from singing tone and expression. Clara Schumann was responsible playing Robert’s compositions in her concerts, therefore introducing the world to his music.