The thousands of visitors and residents who hike, walk and run on the land trust’s 30 miles of woodland trails lost a pal last week.

I did too.

I am speaking of Wolf Schumann, the man who laid out the trails, helped hack them out of the woods, and managed the forests for the Boothbay Region Land Trust.

He was 82.

For years, Wolf was the land steward. “He was our most valuable player,” said Calvin Carr, a former board member.

“In the early years, Wolf was the key figure who held BRLT together,” said Stewart Bither, a longtime volunteer.

Wolf was born in Thuringia, Germany in the turbulent time leading up to World War II. His father was a strict teacher. His mother died when he was 11.

As the war ended, and it was clear the Soviet Union was going to turn his homeland into a separate country called East Germany, his father took his five children to Hamburg where they lived in a tiny apartment.

Somehow, his father made contact with a Nevada rancher and Wolf, then 17, who spoke no English, was sent to America. For two years, he worked as a ranch hand punching cows.

Then he joined the U.S. Army and attended Michigan State University where he studied forestry. An internship with the U.S. Forest Service led to a career that took him all over the nation.

After retirement, Wolf and his wife, Constance, looked to settle on the West Coast, but those communities seemed to be copies of New England villages.

“So we drove east and settled in Boothbay,” she said.

It didn’t take long for the professional forester to get involved with the land trust.

“When I went on the board in 1996, he was president. Then he stepped down and became the part-time land steward. He was supposed to work only a few hours a week, but of course, he always worked many more hours and never billed us for them,” said Carr.

While the land trust has always had supporters who want to protect trees, Wolf was a pro who understood a forest has to be worked if it is to stay healthy. This means you have to cut some trees to give others a chance to survive.

“He was right, of course, but it didn’t sit well with some supporters,” said Nancy Bither, a former president.

Carr remembers walking the trails with Wolf, marveling at his knowledge as he could just look at a tree and tell it was infested with some sort of beetle. “He knew trees and understood the forest.”

Dr. Paulding Phelps, a former board member, remembered how Wolf and his friend Alan Lewis provided an extraordinary link between the land trust and the community. “He helped open property to provide shore access to clam diggers and lobstermen,” said Phelps.

One snowy winter, he arranged a demonstration to show youngsters and their parents how loggers used to cut wood.

It featured a team of huge horses that dragged trees out of the woods to a portable saw mill.

After the sawyer cut the logs into slabs, the audience was treated to hot dogs and marshmallows. It was a big hit.

Years ago, Wolf was in the land trust office when a woman came in seeking information about the Maine state tree growth program, Carr said.

In order to encourage forest preservation, the state gives a special tax break to landowners who meet certain conditions.

The woman asked Wolf what she had to do to comply with the law.

“Wolf had never seen her before, but he was very kind to her, took a long time to answer all her questions. Before she left, the woman thanked Wolf and said one day, she might give us some land. And she did,” said Carr.

Several years later, the women donated a 144-acre parcel to the land trust that is now the Pine Tree Preserve off Route 96.

“I was the contact person, but it was all made possible because of Wolf’s kindness,” said Carr.

As the years went on, as Wolf’s health started to fail, his wife became his primary caregiver. While some would call that a chore, she called it a blessing.

Last week, surrounded by his wife and daughter, Ursula, he died with a smile on his face.

“Wolf was raised in a strict environment that did not have a lot of love in it. He was always looking for love, and I believe he found it in his friends and in the land trust,” said his wife.

“It was his legacy.”

A memorial service for Wolf Schumann will be held at Roberts Wharf on Barter’s Island on Sunday, April 17 at 2 p.m.