Ask founder Jill Bird what led her and her husband E.J. to the Carolina foothills to start Blue Ridge Christian Academy and the short answer is, “My dog chewed a couch cushion.”

The story really started when the couple decided to move back south from Connecticut, where she was a full-time mom and homemaker and he was chief financial officer of an investment firm working 60-70 hour weeks.

A 2001 vacation in the Canadian Rockies and “just a lot of praying” was the springboard event. “We came back from that trip knowing we were supposed to go south to the mountains and start a family camp,” she said. “We did some research online … flew down here, got a rental car in Atlanta and started driving.”

After searching for real estate in North Carolina and being uncertain that was the right location for their plans, the dog ripped a hole in the couch. The repairman told the Birds about his home at the Cliffs at Glassy.

Six years later the Birds are underwriters and the driving force of what’s grown from a non-denominational private Christian school with only 24 students to an anticipated 130 minimum scheduled to start Sept. 4, the third year BRCA has been in operation.

Tuition includes the cost of books, art, computer, drama and music and ranges from $1,950 for a K4 student to $4,875 annually for a student in ninth grade. The school is not yet self-sufficient, relying on donations and the financial support of its founders.

“My husband and I have been blessed,” Bird said. “We underwrite the school and are committed to supporting it.”

The school is located in Landrum on Hwy. 101 on 30 acres of nearly 300 originally purchased for a wilderness camp the board of directors envisions will one day consist of family cabins for church and organizational retreats featuring prayer and bible study. The burgeoning school, though, has taken precedence to that original plan, Bird said.

Final construction of a third school building last week was underway. It houses 20 classrooms, a library, recess room, science and computer labs, chapel and a cafeteria. Groundbreaking is to start soon after on a fourth facility to include a gymnasium and facilities for art, music and movement along with six more classrooms.

The 2008-2009 school year will include a tenth grade, keeping up with the Bird’s oldest son, Zach, 14, who this year will be a ninth grader. Mason, 11, is in seventh grade at BRCA.

Sixteen full-time and four part-time teachers were to begin last Monday, joining an administrative staff of five, including the Birds. More than 125 students in grades K4-9 were enrolled as of Aug. 20 and new prospective students were being tested daily.

The newest administrative member, Development Director Billy Barnett, started Aug. 1 primarily to use experience gained during 20 years as a procurement forester for Georgia Pacific to help develop the wilderness acreage as the school grows and the campground is created.

Barnett said he abandoned searching for a corporate job when his position was eliminated at Georgia Pacific after spending a day hearing of the Bird’s vision of a setting in which blessings the Lord had given them could overflow through their ministering to other families through the school and future family camp.

“I latched onto that vision,” Barnett said. “I told Bill and E.J. both that I have no idea what exactly I’m supposed to do here. There will be a lot of on the job training.”

He said in addition to helping grow the facilities and programs he hopes to spearhead an athletic program.

“One of the avenues of successful growth is participation in team sports,” said Barnett, who first met the Birds several years ago because their children play baseball together.

“I want to see that here. I want them to learn to win with humility and lose with grace. The thought of a Christ-centered education and to add (team sports) to it – we’re building strong folks for the next generation.”

Barnett lives in Landrum with his wife Mary Lynne, a cosmetologist at Greer’s Cuttin Loose for 13 years. Son McKinley is 14 and still plays baseball with Zach. The couple’s older son, Taylor, is in his second year at Clemson majoring in Forest Management.

BRCA’s core curriculum includes Bible study, reading, math, English, science, social studies and history. In addition, students are instructed in music, physical education, art, drama, keyboarding, logic, and languages, including sign language for the kindergartners.

The school is not yet accredited. It’s an interim member of the Association of Christian Schools International and Christian Schools International while completing a two-year co-accreditation process started this summer. ACSI teachers and administrators are certified through the organization and CSI member schools are staffed by state-certified personnel.

A 26-page handbook outlines expectations and policies, but discipline is non-traditional, Bird said. There are no demerits; rather, parents and staff members work together to help students make Christian behavior decisions.

“It would be a tragedy if their behavior was just to please parents or teachers,” Bird said. “We want them to please the Lord and their changes to be from the heart, not just an outward change to get by.”

Bird said the disciplinary beliefs stem from the school motto, 2 Corinthians 10: 3-5, about weapons of knowledge demolishing arguments and pretensions against God and becoming obedient to Christ. “We really see that from a lot of different perspectives, not just academic excellence, but also shepherding students’ hearts.”