In this blog, we will discuss all details about Adam Cheng, his date of birth, profession, religion, zodiac sign, nationality, ethnicity, parents and siblings, wife and children’s details, his height and weight, educational qualifications, and career details, and much more.

Adam Cheng is an actor from Hong Kong who is also a Cantopop singer. He was the ex-husband of well-known comedian and actor Lydia Shum who died on 19th February 2008 due to liver cancer aged 62.

Adam Cheng is in news recently as the search engine Goggle gave tribute to his ex-wife, Lydia Shum on her 77th birthday on Thursday, 21st July 2022 by creating a Google doodle for her.

Adam Cheng Net Worth, Wiki, Biography, Age, Parents, Wife, Daughter, Movies & TV Shows & More

Adam Cheng was born on 24th February 1947 in British Hong Kong. He celebrated his 75th birthday this year in 2022. His parents’ names are not known but they were university lecturers.

Adam Cheng began his career in the 1970s and gained recognition after appearing in historical dramas such as “The Heaven Sword and Dragon Saber”, “The New Adventures of Chor Lau Heung”, etc. His latest drama was “Ever Night: Season 2” released in 2020 in which he played a supporting role. Apart from these, he has also starred in several films as well.

Adam Cheng has the eldest daughter named Cheng On-yee from his first marriage. He was married for the second time to actress and comedian Lydia Shum in 1985 after being together for 14 years. They had a daughter named Joyce Cheng born in 1987. However, the couple got divorced in 1988.

Adam, later in 1989, got married to Taiwanese actress Koon Jing-wah, together they have two daughters named Winnie Cheng Wing-yan, and Cecily Cheng Wing-hei.

Adam Cheng Personal Information, Parents, Personal Relationships, Physical Appearance, Educational Qualifications, Social Media

Personal Information Full Name Adam Cheng Siu-chow Also Known As Adam Cheng, Jeng Siu Chau, Cheng Siu Chau Date Of Birth 24th February 1947 Place Of Birth British Hong Kong Age( As Of 2022) 75 years old Hometown British Hong Kong Profession Actor, Singer Religion Not Known Sun / Zodiac Sign Not Known Nationality Hong Konger Ethnicity Not Known Parents & Siblings Father Not Known Mother Not Known Personal Relationships, Wife, Children Marital Status Married Wife Ex: Lydia Shum, Present: Koon Jing-wah Girlfriend NA Children

Son NA Daughter Cheng On-yee, Joyce Cheng, Winnie Cheng Wing-yan, Cecily Cheng Wing-hei

Physical Appearance, Weight, Height Height 5’11” (182 cm) Weight 60 kg Eye Color Not Known Hair Color Not Known Educational Qualifications High School Not Known College / University Hong Kong Academy for Performing Arts Net Worth (As Of 2022) Net Worth (As Of 2022) $1-$5 million Social Media Handles Facebook

NA Twitter NA Instagram NA YouTube NA

Frequently Asked Questions About Adam Cheng:

Q1. Who is Adam Cheng?

Ans: Adam Cheng is an actor from Hong Kong who is also a Cantopop singer.

Q2. What is Adam Cheng’s age?

Ans: Adam Cheng’s age as of 2022 is 75 years old.

Q3. Who is Adam Cheng’s wife?

Ans: Adam Cheng’s present wife’s name is Koon Jing-wah.

Q4. What is the net worth of Adam Cheng?

Ans: Adam Cheng’s net worth is expected to be between $1-$5 million.

Q5. What is Adam Cheng’s nationality?

Ans: Adam Cheng’s nationality is Hong Konger.

Also Read: Shonka Dukureh Net Worth

We hope that by the end of this article, our readers must have got enough information about Adam Cheng, his date of birth, profession, religion, zodiac sign, nationality, ethnicity, parents and siblings, wife and children’s details, his height and weight, educational qualifications, and career details.