Today marks the 105th Anniversary of the Birth of Princess Anne of Denmark, who was born on this day in 1917! The niece of Queen Elizabeth, The Queen Mother, she married and divorced Viscount Anson before marrying Prince George Valdemar of Denmark, who was closely related to the Swedish, Danish, Norwegian, Belgian, and Luxembourg Royal Families, so Princess Anne wore a variety of splendid jewels, which included this spectacular Diamond Necklace!

Diamond Tiara | Turquoise Star Tiara | Garnet Kokoshnik Tiara | Lava Parure | Diamond Necklace

When Anne Bowes-Lyon, a granddaughter of the 14th Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne and a niece of Queen Elizabeth, The Queen Mother married Viscount Anson, Heir to the Earl of Lichfield, in 1938, she reportedly received a Diamond Necklace as a wedding gift from King George VI and Queen Elizabeth, which she retained after her divorce in 1948 and it became a trademark jewel after her marriage to Prince George Valdemar of Denmark in 1950.

One of the earliest appearances of the Diamond Necklace with her Diamond Tiara was at the Wedding of Princess Ragnhild of Norway, a first cousin of Prince George, in 1953, and it was also worn with Princess Ingeborg’s Turquoise Star Tiara for a portrait, as well as with Princess Viggo’s Garnet Kokoshnik Tiara for the British State Visit to Denmark in 1957.

Embed from Getty Images

Princess Anne also wore the Diamond Tiara and Necklace at the Wedding Ball of King Baudouin of Belgium, another first cousin of Prince George, and Doña Fabiola de Mora y Aragón in 1960 and the Wedding of his cousin, Princess Astrid of Norway, in 1961.

Embed from Getty Images

The Prince served as the Danish defence attaché to London and military, naval and air attaché at Paris, and the couple were quite active in British and Danish Society during the 1950s and 1960s, wearing the Tiara during the British State Visit to Paris in 1957. Princess Anne often wore the Tiara when she attended the annual Anglo-Danish Dinner at the Dorchester Hotel, like she did with Princess Benedikte in 1962, and the Anglo-Danish Society Dinner in London in 1966.

Embed from Getty ImagesEmbed from Getty Images

Princess Anne continued to wear the Diamond Tiara and her Diamond Necklace for Royal Events at home and abroad, like Crown Princess Margrethe’s Pre-Wedding Galas at Christiansborg Palace and Crown Princess Margrethe’s Wedding a few days later, as well as for King Frederik IX’s 70th Birthday in 1969.

One of the last major appearances of the Diamond Necklace came during the Danish State Visit to the Netherlands in 1975. The current whereabouts of the Necklace, like the Tiara, are unknown. It is possible that it was sold after Princess Anne’s death, like Princess Margaretha’s Floral Tiara, or it could have been inherited by her children, the famous photographer Lord Lichfield and the Royal Party Planner Lady Elizabeth Anson, but it was not among the Tiaras worn by her daughter-in-law or the Tiara (another Danish Royal Heirloom) worn by Lady Elizabeth.

Diamond Tiara | Turquoise Star Tiara | Garnet Kokoshnik Tiara | Lava Parure | Diamond Necklace

Share this:

Like this:

Like Loading...