PORT EDWARDS, Wis. — Taylor Martin knows her coach has high expectations for her. The senior took over point guard duties for the Port Edwards Blackhawks as a sophomore.

“Mostly everything that I mess up on, anything, she always gets on my case,” said Taylor Martin.

Her coach demands pushups after a missed layup, sometimes orders chores around her house and even assigns calculus homework.

The coach is a triple threat. She’s also her mother and math teacher. Deb Martin said her roles may bring added pressure to her daughter, who she called mentally tough.

“She’s a very strong, independent young lady and has a mind of her own,” said Deb Martin. “We clash sometimes, but she handles that pressure quite well. She enjoys being in that moment and being that go-to player.”

Taylor Martin’s favorite sport is basketball. Her favorite class, pre-calculus, happens to be taught by her mother as well. As a teenager, she’s spending a lot of time with her mom but appreciates their unique relationship.

“I would say I find it rewarding. Also, it drives me too,” said Taylor Martin. “I think that’s a big part of why I’m so competitive and why I want to do the best in everything because my parents pushed me that way.”

She’s a four-sport athlete. Besides basketball, Taylor Martin participates in volleyball, cross country and track.

Carla Leonhardt teaches English and had Taylor Martin as an 8th-grade student and again as a senior. Leonhardt said Martin’s work ethic stands out.

“Taylor works incredibly hard. Whether it’s school, sports, extracurriculars, she wants to be involved in everything and be perfect at everything,” said Leonhardt. “Taylor’s just grown into an awesome young woman, and she’ll achieve great things.”

About 140 students attend Port Edwards high school. The small size didn’t stop Taylor Martin from thinking big when she planned a 42-float homecoming parade.

“I got to call all the businesses and plan all the routes and have them come in,” explained Taylor Martin. “It was the biggest parade we’ve ever had in school history. It was really fun.”

She’s put in over 100 volunteer hours including a craft sale for a golf course and volunteering to help with the youth basketball program.

Taylor Martin will continue her own basketball journey well beyond her high school years. She recently signed on to play at the University of Dubuque next year.

“Basketball-wise, I think she’ll do very well,” said Deb Martin. “I think it will be good for her to move on from me and head to another coach. I think she’ll respond very well. She’s going to have to earn her playing time there, and I know she’s ready and up for that challenge.”

In Iowa, she’ll work toward a sports-entertainment management degree. But she does want to return to Wisconsin when she’s finished with college.

“My dream job is to go to UW-Madison and then work for the UW Badgers,” said Taylor Martin.

She hopes to get involved with coaching. Luckily, she already knows someone who will give her some pointers.