Reflecting on my journey, it's hard to fathom that this little girl from Atlantic City would grow up to be a leader at the most prominent trade association, representing the tech industry. The disbelief lingers, but so does the truth. Without the foundation laid by ASAE – the education, the tight-knit community – this reality might have been but a distant dream. My professional circle, a relentless force, has raised me to new heights, instilled in me the vigor to stand unflinching, and dared me to surpass my own limits. Today, I hold a graduate degree and professional certification in association management. This is not merely a tale of personal triumph; it's a testament to the might of associations. Associations like ASAE wield the power to propel ordinary individuals into extraordinary leaders, to nurture ambitions until they gleam as achievements. Gratitude fills my heart as I look back, knowing that ASAE's guidance, unwavering and profound, lit my path and paved the way for this remarkable journey (and it's only the beginning). Here's to the undeniable, unparalleled power of associations. Here's to you, ASAE. #ASAE #PowerOfAssociations #ASAE23 #Associationmanagement #careergoals ASAE: The Center for Association Leadership ASAE Young Professionals

The Power of Clarity! I had the honor of delivering the keynote speech entitled, “The Power of Clarity” at Lambda Kappa Mu Sorority’s Regional Conference. I underscored moments in which we achieve goals in the face of adversity through clarity about who we are, what we want and why. Clarity involves having the courage to collectively and accurately assess the circumstances and risks from all viewpoints to 1) gain perspective on potential benefits and consequences, 2) make hard collective choices aligned with mission, values, priorities and capacities, and 3) operate in good faith to accurately assess capacity to actually fulfill the goal. Clarity takes longer to achieve when deeply-rooted, value-driven, diametrically-opposed perspectives are involved and the process we use to solve problems and implement goals in the face of disagreement matters as much as the outcomes. Every decision and action today will contribute to your institution’s destiny for decades. There’s no substitute for the time, preparation, and dedication needed to achieve the clarity and capacity to solve problems, innovate and achieve academic, research and service goals together in a manner that builds--rather than destroys--a culture of trust, community and effectiveness in the face of unrelenting change.

Delighted to host this wonderful IMCA (Ireland) Lunch and Learn with Professor Simon Haslam CDir who shared some deep insights and predictions on Corporate Governance and where the profession of Management Consulting is at and going to. Well worth a watch and some of the subjects covered: + Corporate Board Trends and Succession Planning + Embracing Sustainability and Equity in Strategy + AI's Impact on Consulting and Organisations + Innovation, Disruption, and Organisational Survival + Leadership in the Complex and Evolving Crisis + Leadership, Adaptability, and Carbon Neutrality