Intro

Therese of Saxe-Hildburghausen (1792 – 1854) was the daughter of Frederick, Duke of Saxe-Altenburg, and Duchess Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz. She was Queen of Bavaria and wife of King Ludwig I.

The Oktoberfest was created in honour of their wedding and is still celebrated every year on the Theresienwiese in Munich.

Therese was very popular among the Bavarians and heavily involved in her husband’s politics, as well as in various charitable works.

She proved tenacious and patient during the king’s many love affairs but their relationship was, nevertheless, one of great mutual respect and love.

Key Points

In this article about Therese of Saxe-Hildburghausen, Queen Consort of Bavaria, we will analyse the following key points:

Crown Prince Ludwig of Bavaria chose to take Therese of Saxe-Hildburghausen as his wife to avoid the latter’s marriage to Napoleon. Ludwig had in mind the marriage his sister Augusta Amalia had been forced into with Eugène Beauharnais.

The wedding celebrations between Ludwig and Therese in 1810 were spectacular and lasted five days. They were repeated the following year to become the still famous Oktoberfest, held in the area called Theresienwiese in honour of the then crown princess.

Therese maintained her Protestant faith and became queen consort in 1825. Remarkable was the political influence on her husband and her social commitment to the needy, which made her the ideal image of queen, wife and mother.

Therese and Ludwig I of Bavaria had nine children. Two of them became Bavarian sovereigns and one became king of Greece.

Ludwig I had many love affairs that Therese deplored but tolerated. In the meantime, dissatisfaction with the king had been growing for years among the population, both because of his amorality and because of the continuous rise in prices.

In 1846, the king fell in love with the dancer Lola Montez, whose thirst for power was evident. There were violent riots and Therese managed to convince her husband to remove his mistress and abdicate to her son.

When Ludwig abdicated in 1848, Therese also lost her status as queen and lived her last years withdrawn from public view, finally dying of cholera in 1854.

The choice of Prince Ludwig of Bavaria

In 1809, Therese was on Napoleon’s list of possible brides but the Bavarian crown prince Ludwig came first, choosing her as his wife precisely to avoid the dreaded marriage desired by the French emperor. Ludwig undoubtedly had his sister Augusta Amalia in mind as an example of danger. She was forced to marry Napoleon’s stepson, Eugène Beauharnais, viceroy of Italy. Although this marriage was a happy one, Ludwig’s aversion to Napoleon and everything French went so far that he was unwilling to give in to a marriage arranged by the emperor.

King Maximilian I Joseph was delighted when the heir to the throne decided in favour of Therese of Saxe-Hildburghausen: ‘Of course‘, the king wrote to his son, ‘she will not be able to bring much money and property into the marriage, but the small size of the country forced into the Confederation of the Rhine makes this marriage politically unobjectionable‘.

The wedding and the birth of Oktoberfest

On the evening of 12 October 1810, Therese and Ludwig were married in the court chapel in Munich, celebrating the first royal wedding in Munich since 1722. The Kingdom of Bavaria was then only four years old and showed its splendour during a five-day wedding ceremony. The festivities began the next day at Max-Joseph-Platz. The city was illuminated and a folk festival, a free opera, a play, a ball and lots of music were held there.

On the last day of the festivities, 17 October, the National Guard Cavalry organised a big horse race on the square in front of the Sendlinger Tor. The newlyweds were welcomed by nine peasant couples from the new administrative districts of the Bavarian Kingdom dressed in traditional clothes. Therese wore a dress in the Bavarian national colours and the area was then named Theresienwiese in honour of the crown princess. Due to her popularity among the people, the celebrations were repeated the following year to become the still famous Oktoberfest.

The festivities were not only held in Munich, but also in other cities of the kingdom, e.g. Salzburg, Bamberg and Ansbach. These festive occasions, like the numerous trips that the crown prince and later the royal couple made throughout the country, also served to strengthen the bond between the people and the dynasty.

A Protestant princess at the Bavarian court

An early issue was the bride’s religious affiliation: like her future mother-in-law, the Bavarian Queen Caroline, Therese was a Protestant and remained so. She did not give in even when Ludwig threatened to annul the marriage: when he asked her to abandon her Protestant faith and become a Catholic. Despite her husband’s repeated attempts, Therese remained faithful to her faith until her death.

In fact, her choice also made her an integrating figure for the many Protestant subjects who had come to Bavaria only a few years earlier with the territories of Franconia and Swabia. This almost seems to have become a principle in the Bavarian ruling dynasty: the first three Bavarian queens were Protestants.

Queen Therese of Bavaria – political influence

The crown prince and princess initially lived in Innsbruck and Salzburg, as Ludwig had been appointed governor-general of the Inn and Salzach districts. When Salzburg returned under Austrian control in 1816, they settled in Aschaffenburg and then Würzburg. Only when Ludwig succeeded his father in October 1825 did the family move to Munich.

Therese became queen in 1825 and often collaborated in the administration of the kingdom of Bavaria, especially when Ludwig was absent from Munich during his many travels, and had a certain political influence. Therese kept her husband informed about events at court and in the country. She believed that the king should know everything that was going on in his homeland.

The queen also kept her son Otto informed about political events at home. When Otto was elected king of Greece in 1832, she urged her husband to consult and listen to him. She also warned Ludwig I against the scholar Friedrich Thiersch, whom she considered too liberal, and the painter Karl Wilhelm von Heydeck, whom she considered unpopular in Greece.

The archives of the Wittelbach house contain many political letters written by the queen to Ludwig I, the contents of which have yet to be carefully evaluated.

Children of Therese and Ludwig of Bavaria

Therese bore Ludwig nine children (five girls and four boys), of whom only one, Theodolinda, died in infancy. All the others lived to adulthood.

Two of them became Bavarian rulers: the heir to the throne Maximilian (Maximilian II Joseph from 1848) was born in Munich in 1811, while his brother Luitpold, born in 1821, became Prince Regent of Bavaria in 1886. He reigned on behalf of his nephew Otto, who was unable to reign. Another son of Therese and Ludwig, Otto, born in 1815, reigned as King of Greece from 1832 to 1862 (Otto married Duchess Amalia of Oldenburg in 1836).

Queen Therese of Bavaria – social commitment

Therese was very popular in Bavaria and was considered an ideal image of a queen, wife and mother. This is also evident in the naming of streets, squares, schools, bridges, buildings and places after her.

In 1827, the queen founded the ‘Order of Therese‘, which had the ‘purpose of granting a fixed number of unmarried daughters of the nobility an annual pension to improve their economic conditions, as well as an honour award‘. In concrete terms, this meant that each of the twelve women was awarded an annual sum of 300 florins. It was the most distinguished women’s order in Bavaria and was only dissolved in 1986.

Therese was involved in a large number of charitable organisations for widows, orphans and the poor. She saw her main task as social commitment.

She also took on various protectorates of social institutions, such as the ‘child care centres’ run by the Hungarian Countess Korompa, where children from poor families were welcomed and educated and could also learn the basics of reading and writing. Therese insisted that children of both Christian faiths be accepted.

She dealt with numerous citizens’ petitions and took part in charity concerts, for which she not only raised awareness with a donation but above all with her participation as Queen, thus helping to raise more revenue.

As we read in many of Therese’s letters, the Queen had a great sense of duty, gentleness, modesty: these were to her the pillars of a virtuous life that women should lead.

The bad reputation of Ludwig I of Bavaria

The relationship between Therese and Ludwig was characterised by mutual love and respect, despite the regular affairs of the heir to the throne and later king. Therese suffered but tolerated the situation. She did not, however, refrain from discreetly expressing her disapproval; in 1831, she left the city during one of her husband’s affairs and strictly refused to associate with his mistresses.

On the other hand, dissatisfaction with the king had been growing for years among the population. While Ludwig spent frightening sums on the purchase of ancient works of art, on the construction of prestigious buildings and on his mistresses, he imposed strict austerity rules in all other areas and the price of food was repeatedly and drastically increased.

The king’s personal reputation was at an all-time low: a Catholic Bavarian king who pretended to be pious but trampled all moral precepts, who humiliated his wife and whose behaviour became a scandal throughout Europe and beyond – the people no longer wanted such a king.

The affair with Lola Montez

At the end of 1846, Ludwig fell in love with the dancer Lola Montez, whom he made countess demanding that Therese organise a reception in her honour. But Lola’s plan went further: ‘She (Therese) is the queen, but I have the power‘. And that is how Lola behaved. She provoked, ignored the laws and got away with it, while those who protested were punished.

Therese was even advised by the Church to get a divorce but that was out of the question to her. Instead, she steadfastly refused to receive Lola and even made passive resistance, fighting with the means her position as queen allowed her. She boycotted the events, deliberately exposed Ludwig to embarrassment and dragged the rest of society along with her.

After a further increase in prices in February 1848 and the revelation of Lola’s boast: ‘There are only two eyes between me and the throne‘, coupled with death threats against the queen, the most violent riots to date occurred. The people demanded Lola’s expulsion, Ludwig had soldiers deployed to Munich and a bloody confrontation seemed inevitable. Therese then decided to confront her husband directly.

Abdication of Ludwig I of Bavaria

The same evening, Ludwig wrote to Lola that she had to leave the country. The queen had ‘saved her country from a great catastrophe’, the Prussian ambassador wrote. A few weeks later, Ludwig resigned in favour of his son.

When her husband abdicated, Therese lost her status as queen, but wrote to her son Otto in 1848: ‘It is not the crown to which my heart is attached, … but above all definitions, the name Mother of the Country was dear to me, blessed was the feeling of being the mother of people with whom all my heart grew together.’

Death of Therese of Bavaria

Therese spent her last years withdrawn from the public eye, surrounded by her children and grandchildren.

She died of cholera in Munich on 26 October 1854.

Her husband Ludwig I of Bavaria wrote to his son Otto: ‘Dear Otto, you have lost the best of mothers and me the best of brides! […] She was in good health just 12 hours before and now she is dead! […] Thanks to her pious existence, her death was as sweet as her life, she fell asleep without any pain […] after 44 years of living together and always lovely day by day‘.