Prince Paul of Württemberg (1785-1852)

Prince Paul of Württemberg (1785-1852) was married first time to Princess Charlotte of Saxe-Hildburghausen (1787-1847). This marriage was ended in 1818. Is it true it was a secretly dissolvement? And when and where/what city did it end exactly?

Pauls second marriage was with Magdalena/Madeleine Creux y Ximénes. She is probably born around 1790, but does anyone know when and where exactly she was born?

The Württemberg Family at the annual reception in the gallery of the palace on 19 January

https://www.gettyimages.es/search/2...n=true&uiloc=view_all_more_search_results_adp

The Link doesn't work. Found another article Duke Carl announced that he will now longer be involved in the daily Work of the Hofkammer and that his son Duke Michael will become part of the direction of it and lead the Hofkammer together with its President

https://www.stuttgarter-zeitung.de/...ohn.34f0ec45-8a00-4302-83e4-c2612c62d2b8.html

The wonderful blog of Régine Saelens posted a photo of the 60th wedding anniversary of the Duke and Duchess of Württemberg, celebrated in Althausen. More photos will follow later:

Premières photos des 60 ans de mariage du duc et de la duchesse de Wurtemberg – Noblesse & Royautés

Thanks. There was an article in the Schwäbische Zeitung wit a pic of the couple in the Church bit iwas only readable for subscriper's.

Wonder who the woman next to Duke Eberhard is.

Who will be the next Duke of Württemberg?

All male members of the Family are Duke's of Württemberg. But if you mean with the Duke who will be the next Head of The House then the Heir to Duke Carl is his grandson Duke Wilhelm the only son of the late Duke Friedrich.

Who will be the next Duke of Württemberg?

Carl, Duke of Wurrtemberg, the current head of the house will remain so. But yes his eldest son died in a car accident two years ago, so Carl will be succeeded his grandson Willhelm.

The gentleman who died was his cousin. Their fathers Philip Albrecht and Albrecht Eugen were brothers, the sons of Albrecht, Duke of Wurttemberg. Carl inherited his father's position as the head of the royal house, as his elder brother abdicated his place.

Ferdinand was a maternal grandson of Ferdinand I of Bulgaria, his mother was Ferdinand's daughter Nadezhda. He is the maternal first cousin of Simeon II.

What is everybody talking about? I had thought that the head of the family is Duke Carl. I do not know who Duke Ferdinand Eugen was.

Everybody is talking about Carl's cousin who passed away at the age of 95 and seems to have been a beloved member of the Württemberg family.

It seems that one member was probably confused by the title of 'duke' assuming that the title would be reserved for the head of the family but that was quickly clarified by Stefan.

According to wikipedia the late Dss Margarethe (Css de Chevigny) had an illegitemate son in 1962 named Patrick de la Lanne. Supposedly the father was Robin de la Lanne-Mirrlees, a Scotsman who was an inspiration for the character of James Bond. Mr. de la Lanne was raised by his foster parents in Oldenburg.

https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patrick_de_La_Lanne

The 2012 obituary of Robin de la Lanne-Mirrlees in Scottish newspaper The Herald says the following:

Count Robin, Prince of Coronata, died in Stornoway after a long period of ill-health, and is survived by 50-year-old Patrick de la Lanne, mayor of the north German town of Delmenhort, his natural son through his long-term relationship with Margarethe, Duchess of Wurttemberg, and three grandchildren.

https://www.heraldscotland.com/opinion/13063097.count-robin-de-la-lanne-mirrlees/

Marlene Koenig mentioned it on her blog as well:

https://royalmusingsblogspotcom.blogspot.com/2008/10/german-mayor-has-royal-connections.html

Mr. de la Lanne was not included in the death advertisement in Le Figaro that appeared after the death of Dss Margarethe:

https://coronanachrichten.files.wordpress.com/2017/06/herzogin-margrethe-louise-von-wc3bcrtte

Duke Carl is the Head of the Royal House , the second Heir passed away in a car crash and it will be his Grandson who will take over.

Why do you call Friedrich the second heir?did I miss something? thanks.

He was their firstborn son.Carl himself was the second son and became head after his brother had "abdicated" due to his marriage. Now Philipp who is the only son of Friedrich was named to take over, due to Carls's bad health possibly very soon.