One hopes that Sunak will deal with the rising terrorist activity on the British soil evenhandedly.

Author

Jagdish Batra, Professor of English, O.P. Jindal Global University, Sonipat, Haryana, India.

Summary

Rishi Sunak’s elevation as Prime Minister of Britain has warmed the cockles of Indians all over the world for various reasons. Of course, there have been many others of Indian origin who have occupied such high office. Not long back, Leo Varadkar was the Prime Minister of neighbouring Ireland. Kamala Harris is the reigning Vice President of USA and so is Pravind Jugnauth the Prime Minister of Mauritius whose father Anerood Jugnauth was also the P.M.

In Canada, we have seen many ministers in the cabinet including the important defence portfolio. In many other countries too, PIOs have held or are holding such high offices, all of which helps boost the image of Indians as competent and law-abiding people. What is different about Rishi is that he is heading the government in a country that ruled over India for around two centuries. It is not just the empire writing back but looks like ruling back as well.

Apart from his Indian identity, Rishi’s Hindu credentials which he proudly flaunts makes Hindu community overjoyed as his appointment comes close on heels of the Leicester violence which was the result of Hinduphobia orchestrated by vested interests. In some other parts of world too, such incidents have been noticed. Pakistan’s role in fomenting trouble is evident and bespeaks its ability to play the religious card, funnel huge funds for maintaining terrorists and buying lobbyists, even as itself is in dire economic straits.

Apart from this sense of pride in having one of our own as the British PM, experience shows it may not mean much of change in policies. Despite having Kamala Harris as Vice President, US has gone ahead to supply defence system to Pakistan, forgetting that it hosted Osama Bin Laden, the arch enemy of America and is still the nursery of terrorists. Every country has its own approach to serve its interests and ethnicity of the leadership does not count for much.

However, one hopes that Sunak will deal with the rising terrorist activity on the British soil even-handedly. India needs effective extradition of economic offenders and terrorists. Extraditing criminals would be as much in the interest of Britain as of India because these elements not only vitiate social atmosphere but also hinder friendly links needed for mutual development.

Published in: The Times of India