It took courage for the Prime Minister Sir Anerood Jugnauth to give an ultimatum to the British and US Governments on the issue of the return of Chagos to Mauritius. Will his firm stand lead to a major diplomatic breakthrough or will matters get worse?

In reply to the Private Notice Question (PNQ) of the Leader of the Opposition Mr. Paul Bérenger, at the National Assembly on Tuesday 5 July,2016, the Prime Minister Sir Anerood Jugnauth has confirmed that at the request of the British High Commissioner, he has agreed to extend the deadline (of end of June 2016) by another week. “I had asked for a response to my request by the end of June 2016, otherwise Mauritius would take appropriate action at the international level including at the United Nations. Further, at the request of the British High Commissioner, I have agreed to extend the deadline by another week”, stated Sir Anerood Jugnauth.

PRIVATE CONVERSATION

This information was published in L’Express, issue of Friday 1 July, 2016. The daily reported a private conversation between the Prime Minister Sir Anerood Jugnauth and his Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade Mr. Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo during an official function which was held to celebrate the 240th anniversary of the Independence of the USA at McCarthy House, Vacoas on Thursday 30 June, 2016. Soon after the function was over, neither Sir Anerood Jugnauth nor Mr. Vishnu Lutchmeenaraidoo agreed to comment on what they had discussed earlier. But both the new “chargé d’affaires” at the US Embassy Mr. Mark Asquino and the British High Commissioner Mr. Jonathan Drew accepted to comment on the issue of the Chagos to the press. Mr. Asquino told the media that he had nothing more to add to what had already been mentioned in the joint press release by the British High Commission and the Embassy of the United States on the Chagos issue. “Our position has not changed. We share strong relations on so many aspects. I have conveyed the views of the Government of Mauritius to the United States and they have acknowledged receipt with much respect. At the moment we still have a disagreement on the issue of the Chagos. I think that we have to consider these disagreements with our good relations as backdrop”, said Mr. Asquino. Mr. Drew, for his part, confirmed having requested the Prime Minister Sir Anerood Jugnauth to allow the British government another week, given the situation that has occurred following Brexit. “I repeat it. A friend does not take another friend to court. I know that your Prime Minister has taken very strongly what was mentioned in the joint communiqué but you should put yourself in the place of the British who felt threatened. I hope that the Mauritian Prime Minister will reply to us regarding the extension of the deadline”, said Mr. Drew.

“ In spite of the fact that Sir Anerood Jugnauth finds no objection in meeting Mr. Bancoult, he gives the impression of being “confused” with the various press statements made by the leader of the Groupe Refugiés Chagos."