Rishi Sunak’s elevation as Prime Minister of Britain has warmed the cockles of Indians all over the world for various reasons. Of course, there have been many others of Indian origin who have occupied such high office. Not long back, Leo Varadkar was the Prime Minister of neighbouring Ireland. Kamala Harris is the reigning Vice President of USA and so is Pravind Jugnauth the Prime Minister of Mauritius whose father Anerood Jugnauth was also the P.M. In Canada, we have seen many ministers in the cabinet including the important defence portfolio. In many other countries too, PIOs have held or are holding such high offices, all of which helps boost the image of Indians as competent and law-abiding people. What is different about Rishi is that he is heading the government in a country that ruled over India for around two centuries. It is not just the empire writing back but looks like ruling back as well.

Apart from his Indian identity, Rishi’s Hindu credentials which he proudly flaunts makes Hindu community overjoyed as his appointment comes close on heels of the Leicester violence which was the result of Hinduphobia orchestrated by vested interests. In some other parts of world too, such incidents have been noticed. Pakistan’s role in fomenting trouble is evident and bespeaks its ability to play the religious card, funnel huge funds for maintaining terrorists and buying lobbyists, even as itself is in dire economic straits.

Apart from this sense of pride in having one of our own as the British PM, experience shows it may not mean much of change in policies. Despite having Kamala Harris as Vice President, US has gone ahead to supply defence system to Pakistan, forgetting that it hosted Osama Bin Laden, the arch enemy of America and is still the nursery of terrorists. Every country has its own approach to serve its interests and ethnicity of the leadership does not count for much. However, one hopes that Sunak will deal with the rising terrorist activity on the British soil evenhandedly. India needs effective extradition of economic offenders and terrorists. Extraditing criminals would be as much in the interest of Britain as of India because these elements not only vitiate social atmosphere but also hinder friendly links needed for mutual development.

In India, as expected, the opposition parties have found a weak stick to beat the government with. They would rather have a person from minority community as Prime Minister of India. The BJP leader Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi rightly named the former Presidents of India many of whom represented minorities including Muslim and Dalit segments of society. How the opposition forgets them, if not to find an alibi for criticizing the past governments, in which many of these parties including the Congress were partners. They also forget the current President who comes from the Dalit community which has never had such an opportunity.

But why only Prime Ministership for a Muslim (or a hijb-wearing woman, as Akbaruddin Owaisi wants) will satisfy them is puzzling. Had the Congress seen in Sunak’s appointment the opportunity to push for Sonia Gandhi, it would have carried some logic, but she is in poor health and so cannot be considered for such a job. The problem is that the opposition parties in India consider it their dharma to oppose even if the confrontation is based on weak grounds. But the moot question is: how do they conclude that Sunak was appointed simply because he came from a minority community, i.e., Hindus in the UK. Unlike Indian politics, it is the merit that counts there, as it should here, but probably we have to wait for that mindset to develop in India. One wishes Sunak all good luck in dealing with the multiple problems that have arisen post-Brexit England. His experience as Finance Minister and his image as a devout Hindu believing in lofty values will be of a great help.