SonicWALL, Inc. (NASDAQ: SNWL), a leading provider of integrated security, productivity and mobility solutions, today added dynamic spyware detection and elimination capabilities to its gateway threat protection product. The technology will be delivered within SonicWALLs Gateway Anti-Virus, Anti-Spyware and Intrusion Prevention subscription service, enabling businesses of all sizes to maintain secure and productive networks. Spyware is considered one of todays most pressing and time-consuming network issues. Sources such as Webroot and Earthlink Spy Audit programs estimate that 90% of all computers contain some form of spyware.

The SonicWALL technology uses a deep packet inspection engine that delivers virus protection, intrusion prevention and anti-spyware capabilities directly on the security gateway. This is the first solution on the market utilising a per packet scanning engine, making SonicWALLs solution unique in its ability to handle unlimited file sizes and unlimited concurrent downloads, offering ultimate scalability and performance for todays networked environment. Additional anti-spyware features allow SonicWALL to disrupt background communications from spyware already present on the desktop and prevent e-mailed threats by scanning and then blocking Spyware infected e-mails.

"With the addition of anti-spyware features to its gateway anti-virus and intrusion prevention offering, SonicWALL has created a comprehensive level of capability for its entire product set," said Brian Burke, research manager at IDC. Coupled with the price-performance features, this confirms SonicWALL a compelling player in the emerging United Threat Management security appliance market.

Our goal is to keep businesses of all sizes productive and in control of their proprietary information, said Douglas Brockett, general manager and vice president at SonicWALL. Solving spyware, intrusion prevention and virus problems at the gateway provides an important line of defense and frees up network administrators time. Our enhanced service gives our channel partners an even more compelling proposition for their customers, with new levels of affordability and price-performance.

The Gateway Anti-Virus, Anti-Spyware and Intrusion Prevention subscription service from SonicWALL will be available in Q1, 2005. Pricing of the enhanced service, starting at 125 per annum, will be unchanged, and current subscribers to the Gateway Anti-Virus/Intrusion Prevention service will receive the anti-spyware component through an automatic download at no additional cost. The service is available on the entire range of SonicWALLs latest TZ and PRO series devices running SonicWALLs SonicOS 3.1 operating system.

Key features of SonicWALLs anti-spyware protection include:

Blocks spyware delivered through auto-installed ActiveX components, the most common vehicle for distributing malicious spyware programs

Scans and logs spyware threats transmitted through the network and alerts administrators when new spyware is detected and/or blocked

Stops existing spyware programs from communicating in the background with hackers and servers on the Internet, preventing the transfer of confidential information

Provides granular control over networked applications by enabling administrators to selectively permit or deny the installation of individual spyware programs

Prevents e-mailed spyware threats by scanning and then blocking infected e-mails transmitted either through SMTP, IMAP or Web-based e-mail

Features of SonicWALLs Gateway Anti-virus protection include:

real-time anti-virus scanning

a reassembly-free deep packet inspection engine

concurrent scanning of unlimited numbers of files of unlimited size for viruses, support for a variety of protocol types

a constantly updated database.

Features of SonicWALLs Intrusion Prevention protection include:

a constantly-updated signatures database (more than 2,000 signatures)

deep packet inspection engine

protection against buffer overflows, worms, Trojans and backdoor exploits

prevention of IM and P2P applications

protection from threats originating in the internal as well as the external network .