SonicWall Enforced Client Anti-Virus & Anti-Spyware McAfee.

The SonicWall Enforced Client Anti-Virus and Anti-Spyware service automatically enforces anti-virus and anti-spyware policies on every client, reducing administrative overhead. It combines client-based scanning and remediation capabilities with centralized management and reporting capabilities.

Features and benefits.

Automated installation and deployment.

Anti-virus and anti-spyware clients are automatically installed machine-by-machine across the network, minimizing administrative overhead.

Automated enforcement.

SonicWall firewalls ensure that every computer accessing the network has the most recent version of anti-virus and anti-spyware signatures installed and active, eliminating the costs commonly associated with desktop anti-virus and anti-spyware management.

Multi-layered protection.

A firewall’s gateway anti-virus solution provides the first layer of defense at the perimeter, stopping most attacks before they enter the network. But viruses can still enter the network through multiple entry points, including laptops, thumb drives or other unprotected systems. SonicWall’s layered approach to anti-virus and anti-spyware protection starts at the gateway and extends to both client and server. Malware threats provide an additional challenge, since they often originate inside the network, bypassing perimeter protection entirely. For example, an employee or contractor may plug into the network with an infected notebook running out-of-date anti-virus software. With the last line of defense—Endpoint Security delivered through the SonicWall Enforced Client Anti-Virus & Anti-Spyware engine—this final vulnerability is eliminated.

Always on, automatic virus protection.

Frequent anti-virus and anti-spyware updates are delivered transparently to all desktop and file servers to keep end user productivity high and security management low.

Spyware protection.

Powerful spyware protection scans and blocks the installation of a comprehensive array of spyware programs on desktops and laptops before they transmit confidential data, providing greater desktop security and performance.

On-demand and scheduled scanning.

Administrators have the flexibility to choose when additional scans are performed and how frequently the software checks for anti-virus and anti-spyware signature updates.

Premium anti-virus technology.

With included McAfee® anti-virus technology, you can protect every endpoint against the most sophisticated virus threats, dangerous spyware and productivity-draining adware.

License sharing.

Organizations with distributed networks of multiple SonicWall firewall appliances can allocate Enforced Client Anti-Virus and Anti-Spyware licenses to meet changing conditions.

Automatic updates.

SonicWall automates deployment of anti-virus signature and software updates for all client products, ensuring that every client has the latest software and signatures as soon as they are available. There is no time-consuming manual intervention required, no software to download, no websites to check. It all happens automatically, day or night. Protection is delivered faster, so there’s less chance of a new, "zero-day" virus getting through because a client’s virus signatures or software are not up-to-date.

Policy-based Management & Reporting.

Compliance with both internal policies and external regulations requires visibility and reporting. SonicWall Anti-Virus Policy Management and Reporting can be accessed through the web interface of the SonicWall firewall appliance. Centralized reporting provides information about the state of each user, historical data on past infection detections, and information on each computer’s operating system. The policy engine allows the IT administrator to centrally manage network wide endpoint deployments easily by allowing the creation and management of multiple policies and/or groups.

Policy-based management:

Scheduled and manual scan settings

Configurable spyware protection mode

Excluded files and folders

Manage approved programs list

Granularly configurable virus and spyware protection settings

Top Reports:

Systems out-of-date

Systems up-to-date

Viruses found and spyware detected

Most-infected machines

Detailed system reporting of each machine

Additional service: SonicWall Server Anti-Virus McAfee.

The SonicWall Server Anti-Virus McAfee suite provides best-in-class server protection, with McAfee's VirusScan Enterprise for Windows servers, NetShield® for Novell servers, and GroupShield™ for Exchange servers. These server-based products provide anti-virus protection for Windows-based file, print and Exchange servers. This product is available as part of Client/Server Anti-Virus Suite McAfee which includes SonicWall Enforced Client Anti-Virus and Spyware McAfee.