PANEL_antispywareEnforcement

Security Services > Anti-Spyware Service

SonicWALL Anti-Spyware is part of the SonicWALL Gateway Anti-Virus, Anti-Virus and Intrusion Prevention Service solution that provides comprehensive, real-time protection against viruses, worms, Trojans, spyware, and software vulnerabilities.

The SonicWALL Anti-Spyware Service protects networks from intrusive spyware by cutting off spyware installations and delivery at the gateway and denying previously installed spyware from communicating collected information outbound. SonicWALL Anti-Spyware works with other anti-spyware program, such as programs that remove existing spyware applications from hosts. You are encouraged to use or install host-based anti-spyware software as an added measure of defense against spyware.

SonicWALL Anti-Spyware analyzes inbound connections for the most common method of spyware delivery, ActiveX-based component installations. It also examines inbound setup executables and cabinet files crossing the gateway, and resets the connections that are streaming spyware setup files to the LAN. These file packages may be freeware bundled with adware, keyloggers, or other spyware. If spyware has been installed on a LAN workstation prior to the SonicWALL Anti-Spyware solution install, the service will examine outbound traffic for streams originating at spyware infected clients and reset those connections. For example, when spyware has been profiling a user's browsing habits and attempts to send the profile information home, the SonicWALL security appliance identifies that traffic and resets the connection.

The SonicWALL Anti-Spyware Service provides the following protection:

SonicWALL Gateway Anti-Virus, Anti-Spyware, and IPS Activation

If you do not have SonicWALL Gateway Anti-Virus, Anti-Spyware, and Intrusion Prevention Service installed on your SonicWALL security appliance, the Security Services > Anti- Spyware page indicates an upgrade is required and includes a link to activate it from your SonicWALL security appliance management interface.

Because SonicWALL Intrusion Prevention Service is part of the unified SonicWALL Gateway Anti-Virus, Anti-Spyware, and Intrusion Prevention Service, you will have a single License Key to activate all three services on your SonicWALL security appliance.

You must activate the SonicWALL Gateway Anti-Virus, Anti-Spyware, and Intrusion Prevention Service license from the Security Services > Intrusion Prevention page first. Once you have activated Intrusion Prevention Service, you can then activate SonicWALL Gateway Anti-Virus and SonicWALL Anti-Spyware.

To activate a SonicWALL Gateway Anti-Virus, Anit-Spyware, and Intrusion Prevention Service on your SonicWALL security appliance, you need the following:

Creating a mysonicwall.com Account

Creating a mysonicwall.com account is fast, simple, and FREE. Simply complete an online registration form in the SonicWALL security appliance management interface.

Congratulations . Your mysonicwall.com account is activated.

Now you need to log into mysonicwall.com to register your SonicWALL security appliance.

Registering Your SonicWALL Security Appliance

Click Continue on each page.

Activating FREE TRIALs

You can try FREE TRIAL versions of SonicWALL Gateway Anti-Virus, SonicWALL Anti- Spyware, and SonicWALL Intrusion Prevention Service. You must activate each service separately from the Manage Services Online table on the System > Licenses page or by clicking the FREE TRIAL link on the respective Security Services page (i.e. Security Services > Gateway Anti-Virus ).

To try a FREE TRIAL of SonicWALL Gateway Anti-Virus, SonicWALL Anti-Spyware, or SonicWALL Intrusion Prevention Service, perform these steps:

Activating the Gateway Anti-Virus, Anti-Spyware, and IPS License

Because SonicWALL Intrusion Prevention Service is part of SonicWALL Gateway Anti-Virus, Anti-Spyware, and Intrusion Prevention Service. The Activation Key you receive is for all three services on your SonicWALL security appliance.

If you do not have a SonicWALL Gateway Anti-Virus, Anti-Spyware, and Intrusion Prevention Service. license activated on your SonicWALL security appliance, you must purchase it from a SonicWALL reseller or through your mysonicwall.com account (limited to customers in the USA and Canada).

If you have an Activation Key for SonicWALL Gateway Anti-Virus, Anti-Spyware, and Intrusion Prevention Service, perform these steps to activate the combined services:

Congratulations! You have activated the SonicWALL Gateway Anti-Virus, Anti-Spyware, and Intrusion Prevention Service.

If you activate the SonicWALL Gateway Anti-Virus, Anti-Spyware, and Intrusion Prevention Service subscription on mysonicwall.com, the activation is automatically enabled on your SonicWALL security appliance within 24-hours or you can click the Synchronize button on the

Security Services > Summary page to immediately update your SonicWALL security appliance.

Setting Up SonicWALL Anti-Spyware Service Protection

After activating SonicWALL Anti-Spyware, the Security Services > Anti-Spyware page displays the configuration settings for managing the service on your SonicWALL security appliance.

Refer to the SonicWALL Anti-Spyware Administrator’s Guide on the SonicWALL Web site:

http://www.sonicwall.com/us/Support.html for complete configuration instructions.

Applying SonicWALL Anti-Spyware Protection on Zones

If your SonicWALL security appliance is running SonicOS Enhanced, you can apply SonicWALL Anti-Spyware to zones on the Network > Zones page to enforce SonicWALL Anti-Spyware not only between each network zone and the WAN, but also between internal zones. For example, enabling SonicWALL Anti-Spyware on the LAN zone enforces SonicWALL Anti-Spyware on all incoming and outgoing LAN traffic.

In the Anti-Spyware Status section of the Security Services> Anti-Spyware Service page, click the Network > Zones link to access the Network > Zones page. You apply SonicWALL Anti-Spyware to a zone listed on the Network > Zones page.

To enable SonicWALL on a zone, perform these steps: