Workforce broke the track record with a blistering turn of foot as he won the 231st running of the Derby by seven lengths at Epsom.

The breathtaking victory in baking sunshine sealed a Classic double for champion jockey Ryan Moore after his Oaks win on Snow Fairy.

It was the fifth victory in the race for Newmarket trainer Sir Michael Stoute as Workforce finished ahead of 100-1 shot At First Sight with Frankie Dettori third on 9-2 chance Rewilding.

Pacemaker At First Sight, the outsider of Aidan O'Brien's three runners, tried to steal the race but was reeled in by Dante Stakes runner-up Workforce.

Moore was delighted with his mount and told BBC Sport: "We had a really clean run. He quickened up really well and he kept extending. He's a really good horse and I'm delighted.

"He was awesome. He travelled beautifully. It's a very special day. I was delighted to win the Oaks but this is the most important race for me and to win it for the boss (Stoute) too is even more special."

The horse is owned by Prince Khalid Abdulla, a first cousin to King Abdullah of Saudia Arabia, who has won the Derby before with Quest for Fame (1990) and Commander in Chief (1993).

Stoute has won the Derby with Shergar (1981), Shahrastani (1986), Kris Kin (2003) and North Light (2004).

The 64-year-old trainer added: "He was seriously good today. I think he has won one of the great Derbies in terms of the performance. I'm thrilled for Ryan.

606: DEBATE

"He's gone bang bang and the horse has answered his call. Ryan has a great temperament.

"After a poor ride in the St Leger for me with the favourite (Conduit two years ago) I wanted him to get a monkey off his back. He has done that today."

In the process, the winner rewrote the history books as no beaten Dante winner had ever gone on to land the premier Classic.

O'Brien's favourite Jan Vermeer finished fourth, with stablemate Midas Touch in fifth in a race watched by a crowd of more than 100,000 on the Epsom Downs.

Workforce's time of two minutes 31.33 seconds over the undulating mile-and-a-half trip smashed the previous track record set by Lammtarra, who won the 1995 Derby in a time of 2min 32.31s.