Churchill Downs, Kentucky: Sir Michael Stoute was at the centre of a storm at Churchill Downs on Wednesday night after he left Workforce's run in tomorrow's $3-million (Dh11 million) Breeders' Cup Turf in the balance.

A decision on whether the Arc and Derby winner runs will go down to the wire with pressure being exerted on local officials to step up watering on the firm ground.

But should the 7-5 favourite be withdrawn in the next 24 hours, Stoute faces a fierce backlash from his American hosts.

Tom Amoss, a local trainer who is an analyst on the TVG racing channel, accused the Workforce team of "bad sportsmanship" with their prevarication.

Arguing that it was known there would be firm ground before Workforce was flown from Britain, Amoss compared the scenario facing the horse with the US Ryder Cup team who came to Britain and played golf despite unfavourable monsoon conditions at Celtic Manor last month.

Stoute, who arrived in Louisville without his luggage after missing his intended flight from Heathrow, walked the track with jockey Ryan Moore and Lord Grimthorpe, racing manager to owner Khalid Abdullah.

Stoute said: ‘The track is in wonderful shape but they have had no rain and it is a bit faster than we would like.

"We will just have to hope that they will put a bit more water on. We are going to monitor it each day," he added.

Latest odds

Breeders' Cup Turf: Workforce (6/4) , Behkabad (3) , Dangerous Midge (6) , Debussy (11) , Winchester (14) , Al Khali (16) , Champ Pegasus (22) , Telling (40)

Capsules: Breeders' Cup races

Marathon, 1-3/4 miles, Purse $500,000, Grade III

The Marathon is the longest race of the Breeders' Cup and was created to attract more European runners with its distance. American gelding Awesome Gem is the early favourite at 7-2.

Juvenile Fillies Turf, 1 mile, $1,000,000, Grade II

A wide-open race this year for horses with limited experience, led by Winter Memories, who in her last stakes race won by five lengths at Belmont Park.

Filly and Mare Sprint, 7 furlongs, $1,000,000, Grade I

A full field of female sprinters will reach the starting gate, led by Rightly So and defending champion Informed Decision, ridden by Julien Leparoux.

Juvenile Fillies, 1-1/16 miles, $2,000,000, Grade I

This race often determines the top two-year-old filly of the year. Zayat has the favourite in this one as well with A Z Warrior, who is trained by Bob Baffert.

Filly and Mare Turf, 1-3/8 miles, $2,000,000, Grade I

An excellent international cast featuring defending champion Midday, owned by Prince Khalid Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, and Japanese-based Red Desire. American filly Harmonious, trained by John Shirreffs, could be a factor.

Ladies' Classic, 1-1/8 miles, Purse $2,000,000, Grade I

This race will be the first ever Breeders' Cup race to finish under the lights. Blind Luck is favoured at 9-5 but should receive a stiff challenge from Life At Ten.

— Reuters