Even by his own high standards, Sir Michael Stoute's one-two-three with Conduit, Tartan Bearer and Ask in last year's King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Stakes was a remarkable achievement.

But it is more than likely the trainer will once again dominate next Saturday's Ascot showpiece.

Workforce, winner of the Derby by seven lengths and the chosen mount of stable jockey Ryan Moore, can show the way home to stablemate Harbinger.

Comparisons with Shergar, Stoute's Derby hero of 1981 by 10 lengths, were inevitable after Workforce bolted up at Epsom.

Shergar went on to beat the older horses in the King George and Workforce can show he is in the same mould.

Classic winners have shunned the King George in recent years, with Alamshar the last three-year-old to score in 2003.

On that occasion, Stoute's Derby winner Kris Kin could only finish third at Ascot but Workforce looks a vastly superior colt.

He is certainly a different horse from the one brushed aside by Cape Blanco in the Dante Stakes at York in May.

Cape Blanco put a poor run in France behind him when winning the Irish Derby, but it will be a surprise if Aidan OBrien's colt is a match for Workforce this time.

Judging by his impressive display in the Hardwicke Stakes at Royal Ascot, Stoute's progressive four-year-old Harbinger is ready for the step up to Group One company.

The mount of Olivier Peslier, Harbinger will make his younger rivals fight every inch of the way.

But Ryan Moore got it right when he chose Conduit 12 months ago, and his decision to remain loyal to Workforce looks the right call.

Prize money for the International Stakes on the Ascot card is well down on last year, but this is still a fiercely competitive seven-furlong handicap.

Crown Choice looks sure to be on the premises. Walter Swinburn's five-year-old ran a blinder from a poor draw to dead-heat for fourth spot behind St Moritz at Newmarket.

The Princess Margaret Stakes should be a valuable consolation prize for Margot Did, after Michael Bells filly was touched off by Memory in the Albany Stakes at the Royal meeting.

Sixth home in that contest was Crying Lightening.

Look out for Peter Chapple-Hyams youngster when she steps up to seven furlongs in Thursday's Star Stakes at Sandown.