An onslaught of shape-shifting Hare krishna berserker splatter from the bloke who brought us the critically acclaimed all-timer classic Chainsaw Scumfuck.

Leather and lager. Backyard BBQ in average weather gone array leading to a procession of limb ripping, arse chainsawing, face/fan meat grinding and council flat brothel high pressure bloodletting, not to mention the cock savagery.

Cheapo BDSM bondage averagehero, Mr. Whippy. Meshes of teeth and cardboard. On the dole squalor with blood and graffiti combining and making art. Plate Frisbee indoor pyro dinge in tiny kitchen poverty. Smoke on the Water cheek hidden in jazz and spy flick music, bluegrass twang and uzi redneck pork-parody jelly. I bet the neighbours hated these cunts.

The very essence of me blended…

I love a good garden party, and I can't say I've ever had one where Hare Krishnas showed up at the door. Not saying this is a bad thing, but in this instance it's not a good thing. We have a shape shifting story here with gore galore shot on video. The acting has the friends and family recruitment vibe, this is cheap but they truly tried really really hard to pull off some ambitious things, and it's far from the worst I've seen (I dig the "creature" mask). It's a short flick from punk director Alex Chandon that is super violent and DIY in a creative and fun way. I had no idea it was proper to go to…

HORRORx52 (2020) (18/52)

A Short film (Under 40 minutes)

I honestly never heard of this movie until earlier this year. I loved the cover art of this movie and it's also a shot on video movie. I'm a sucker for shot on video movies because they have that home video authenticity feeling to them. Not to mention, I grew up with those types of movies too. After watching this movie on Youtube, I had a blast watching it. Bad Karma is not a good movie at all, but it's still a lot of fun for what it is.

This movie has little to no plot at all whatsoever. Bad Karma deals with a group of mutants that start killing everybody…

Alex Chandon should probably be more well known. He's able to do a lot with no budget, and does some incredible practical effects. This is short but starts out with a WTF bang. A woman answers the door to two Hare Krishnas. One of them sprouts claws like Wolverine from X-Men and and turns into a crazy monster that you'll have to see to believe, the one on the cover art; kind of looks like an crocodile skull in the film.

The other tries to kill a woman in the shower but gets a pole shoved through his face. There's a point in this where Hare Krishnas, a dude with a chainsaw, a cross dressing S&M dude, and a giant…