Diversity

Delaware's unique diversity gives companies a unique range of potential products. Unlike settlements in the Southern Colonies, companies are not tied down to agriculture or farming. Our population consists of people from the Netherlands, people from Sweden, people from the British Isles, slaves from Africa, some Germans, and a few remaining Native Americans. Delaware's diverse group of people, industries, and geographical features serve as an advantage to companies whom move to our colony.

Population

Delaware is neither a 100% urban colony nor a rural agricultural settlement that only relates to specific companies such as farming, ranching, trade businesses. Delaware has many urban centers including Wilmington, Dover, Newark, Elsmere, Milford, and Rehoboth Beach. How ever its flat fertile land also gives way for agricultural plantations, etc. As proven by our large of urban centers, Delaware certainly cannot be described as a rural colony. On the other hand, Delaware still has a lot of room for growth and change. Companies that move to to Delaware will be given a chance to make their mark on our colony, and others around us. Our diverse population allows various types of companies to come and grow.

Trade

As represented in the image above, Delaware has access to the Delaware Bay with eventually leads to the Atlantic Ocean. It serves as a major trade port to many other colonies, with potential to become a large overseas trading port. Wilmington is Delaware's largest trading city and serves as a connection between many colonies. With Philadelphia as our largest trade partner, companies that come to Delaware can be given a chance to grow and expand.

As mentioned before in the mission statement, the more companies that move here, the more taxes we receive from them. We will then be able to fund more services for our citizens. This is a benefit to people already living here, and families of workers in the colony, also! One factor of colony "superiority" is wealth, and having more companies move here will only help us achieve that goal.

Companies that move to the colony of Delaware will need people to hire. Agricultural businesses such as Delaware's thriving tobacco plantations require large amounts of land with people on the farms tending to the crops. This will lead to new jobs created, and a thriving economy. Businesses such as trading, also a major part of Delaware's economy require people to travel across oceans for resources to trade, and therefore will expand job creation. Businesses that come to Delaware will aid our lower class individuals, and increase our economy.

If a wide variety of companies decide to move their businesses here, then it will help decrease the risk of economic shock. For example, if the tobacco market is doing poorly, not all hope is lost for Delaware. The colony can still generate income from our other economic bases. Delaware's unique geographical features allow Delaware to have diverse markets. If different companies come to our colony, then our economy will expand and grow, with different industries to fall back on.

Bringing businesses to our colony will expand Delaware's diversity and population. New companies will bring new jobs, which require people. Agricultural businesses require vasts amounts of both land and people. Much like how people use the headright system- a system in which people are granted a certain amount of land for each traveler that migrates to the Americas- to promote immigration to North America, new businesses will attract people to the colony of Delaware.

New businesses that come to Delaware need many people for different jobs, i.e. farming, trading, fishing, etc. New job opportunities means a larger population because of the new people brought over. As industries in Delaware increase, the economy as well as trade and wealth will also increase. Delaware's prospering economy and lifestyle will then attract more people to our growing colony.

Delaware's cultural diversity, economic diversity, and unique ethnic and religious makeup is a large part of who we are. New businesses to come to our colony are given the advantage to try new things and are not limited by set boundaries. The diverse new businesses will also aid in cultural differences i.e. food, clothing, wealth, etc. They will also increase cultural blending- when two or more cultures combine together- because of the limitless boundaries put down for the company and Delaware's diverse ethnic makeup with immigrants from all over the world such as places like the Netherlands, Sweden, the British Isles, Africa, Germany, etc.

To expand our colony and implement the business plan, advertisements for our colony will be put on newspapers in Europe. The ad will list the benefits of coming to Delaware, and the advantages the business as well as the colony would gain.

The image above, a 1694 "The London Gazette" newspaper, is an example as to what type of newspapers would be used for the advertisement of our colony. Other newspapers include the Oxford Gazette and The London Chronicle.