Remember the McDonald's coffee lawsuit? The elderly woman who got millions from McDonald's because she burned herself on coffee while driving? Pretty outrageous, huh? Everybody from David Letterman to "Seinfeld" had a field day making fun of that, while the case became the poster child for the so-called "tort reform" movement.

The only problem? The story everybody "knows" wasn't at all what happened.

Susan Salodoff's documentary "Hot Coffee," is, to put it mildly, an eye-opener, entertaining and fast-moving but also infuriating. The film, which debuts at 8 tonight on HBO as part of its summer documentary film series (and will replay many times throughout the month) is an expertly-argued documentary about how tort reform proponents used (and distorted) high-profile cases like the McDonald's one to sway public opinion into supporting changes to the law that weakened consumer protections.

The movie starts, as it has to, with the case of Stella Liebeck vs. McDonald's in 1994. Liebeck did spill coffee on herself, but she was sitting idle in the parking lot, not driving. And the coffee was heated at 180 degrees Fahrenheit (212 degrees is boiling), hot enough for her to suffer third degree burns and require skin grafts. (The pictures of the burns are just horrific.)

And Liebeck initially didn't want to sue, and just asked McDonald's to cover the thousands of dollars in medical care she required. When the company offered up a paltry $800, she sued, and her attorney found out about over 700 other incidents where customers got severely burned by the coffee. And that initial $2.7 million judgment was reduced to $428,000. But $428,000 doesn't make as good a punch line as "millions."

Salodoff goes on to show how the distorted media accounts of the Liebeck case were just what corporate interests needed to push tort reforms, including caps on punitive damages, at the federal level in the mid-1990s. When President Clinton vetoed the reforms, they refocused on the state level, and were much more successful, not only in getting Republican-controlled legislatures to pass the measures, but in bankrolling business-friendly conservative judges to run for state Supreme Courts.

Yeah, that last one hits home right about now, doesn't it?

But, in fact, so much of "Hot Coffee" hits home, showing how the legal rights of average Americans have been quietly whittled away over the last 15 years, without most of us even realizing it. (Do you know that when you signed up for your cell phone contract, in the small print you probably signed away your right to sue the company?)

Salodoff is an attorney turned first-time filmmaker, and "Hot Coffee" comes from a distinct point of view. But in addition to interviewing supporters from John Grisham to Sen. Al Franken, any good lawyer knows to anticipate opposing arguments, so she does give substantial time to reform proponents like the general counsel of the American Tort Reform Association.

Can the tide against consumer protections be reversed? It doesn't look optimistic, but "Hot Coffee" at least makes viewers aware of what's going on in the name of "tort reform," and why cases like the McDonald's suit really are no laughing matter.

In addition to tonight's premiere, "Hot Coffee" airs on HBO on Saturday at 9 a.m., July 5 at 9:30 a.m., July 10 at 3 p.m. and July 13 at 11:30 p.m. with other showings on HBO2.

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.