The Phoenix Suns have suspended swingman Jason Richardson for one game without pay as the result of his arrest on allegations he was driving 88 kilometres an hour above the limit with his unrestrained three-year-old son in the car.

In a brief statement late Monday afternoon, the Suns said Richardson would miss Tuesday night's home game against the Los Angeles Clippers "for conduct detrimental to the team."

A Scottsdale, Ariz., police officer first saw Richardson driving 108 km/h in a 64 km/h zone Sunday night and followed him, police said Monday.

That's when the officer clocked him at 145 km/h in a 56 km/h zone and pulled him over.

Police said Richardson admitted to speeding and identified himself as a Suns player.

The officer saw Richardson's son in the back seat of the car and that he was not in a child seat.

Richardson said he had taken his son to dinner and was on his way home.

Richardson was arrested and charged with reckless driving, excessive speeding and failure to use a child seat.

He was released from jail after a few hours.

Police said Richardson's fiancée came to the scene of the stop to get the boy.

Richardson spoke briefly to reporters after the Suns practised on Monday.

"I just want to apologize to everybody — my teammates, my family, especially my fiancée," he said. "It's a tough time for me.

"I've been questioned as a basketball player, questioned as a person. But my fatherhood in question is tough because I try to be the best father I can be and try to keep my kids out of harm's way."

The Suns announced the suspension about two hours later.

It was Richardson's second run-in with the law since the Dec. 12 trade that brought him to Phoenix from Charlotte in exchange for Raja Bell, Boris Diaw and Sean Singletary.

Richardson was cited Dec. 21 on suspicion of driving under the influence of alcohol.

He was stopped by a Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community police officer and accused of having a blood alcohol level above 0.08 per cent and of failure to drive in one lane.

At the time, Richardson called the incident "one stupid mistake I made," and he said he hoped it wouldn't change the public's perception of him.

Richardson is averaging 15.6 points, third-highest on the team behind Amare Stoudemire and Shaquille O'Neal, in 28 games since joining the Suns.