Frederick was the son of King Christian V of Denmark and Norway and Charlotte Amalie of Hesse-Kassel, and was born a prince in 1671. At the age of 28, he succeeded his father to the throne; on account of his ruling he was deemed a man of responsibility and industry — often regarded as the most intelligent of Denmark’s absolute monarchs. He seems to have mastered the art of remaining independent of his ministers. Lacking all interest in academic knowledge, he was nevertheless a patron of culture, especially in art and architecture. His main weaknesses were probably pleasure-seeking and womanizing, which sometimes distracted him.

He married his first wife, Louise of Mecklenburg-Güstrow, in 1695. The bride was 28 years old, 4 older than the groom, but her impressive family tree had secured her position as future Queen. She had 6 children, but only two would reach maturity: the future King Christian VI of Denmark and Princess Charlotte Amalie of Denmark.

She was expected to accept his affairs without protests, as all wives were. Louise lived quietly at the Danish Court and unlike Frederick IV she never gained popularity with the population. Louise figured in her role as queen at official ceremonies, but was otherwise ignored at court, and her isolated and quiet life has made her less known in history. Apparently, she had a bad temperament and suffered because of her husband’s infidelity, which caused embarrassing scenes at the Court.

Frederick even entered two morganatic marriages; in 1703, he committed bigamy with Elisabeth Helene von Vieregg, and in 1712 with Anna Sophie Reventlow. Despite his bigamous relationships, the queen, ever mindful of duty, continued to bear him children. She was strongly influenced by Pietism and she sought solace in religion. Her main interest was reading religious books. Her collection of 400 books, which was donated to the royal library after her death, was mainly composed of ascetic religious literature in German.

Elisabeth Helene von Vieregg was a Danish noblewoman and was made lady-in-waiting to Princess Sophie Hedevig of Denmark in 1699 and entered in to a relationship with Frederick, who became King the same year.

The relationship was initially a secret, but was discovered in 1701 after a letter from her father, defending their relationship, was made public. On 6 September 1703, she was given the estate Antvorskov and the title Countess of Antvorskov and secretly married to Frederick, who thereby committed bigamy. The church authorities had not forbidden the king to engage in polygamy, as there were doctrines based on biblical polygamy of Hebrew patriarchs. She gave birth to a son, Frederik Gyldenløve, and died in childbirth. She was given an elaborate public funeral by Frederick. After her death, she was replaced as royal mistress by her lady in waiting, Charlotte Helene von Schindel.

Anne Sophie Reventlow was daughter of Conrad, Count Reventlow who served Frederick as Chancellor of Denmark between 1699 and 1708. In 1711, the King fell in love with her at a Masquerade Ball and wanted her as his mistress. Her mother refused to allow this. Nonetheless, Frederick carried off the 19 year-old from her home in Clausholm near Randers on 26 June 1712 and secretly wed her at Skanderborg. At that time he accorded her the title “Duchess of Schleswig”, derived from one of his own subsidiary titles.

Three weeks after Queen Louise’s death in Copenhagen on 4 April 1721, he married Anne Sophie again. This time, the wedding was formal and conducted under grand ceremonies. He declined to make this marriage morganatic, although it was regarded as highly scandalous by the noble subjects and foreign rulers alike, as it flouted the era’s standards that royals marry regular noblewomen, their own subjects (the requirements of so-called Ebenbuertigkeit). The King had Anne Sophie recognized as Queen, and had her crowned in May 1721. She has been referred to as the first non-royal to be Queen of Denmark: she was in reality the first since Ulvhild Håkansdotter. Three children were born of this marriage, but each of them died at or before one year of age. This was seen by the royal court as punishment for the bigamy they had committed.

Crown Prince Christian, who had been very close to his mother, detested her strongly. Her brother-in-law, Prince Charles, and sister-in-law, Princess Sophia Hedwig, left the court in protest, although her stepdaughter Charlotte Amalia showed her kindness. In 1725, the King made a will where he ensured the right of Anne Sophie after his death and made his son sign it.

Anne Sophie’s relatives, popularly known as the “Reventlow Gang”, people from the Reventlow and Holstein families, were placed in high positions. Her sister, the Salonist Countess Christine Sophie Holstein, who was called Madame Chancellor, exerted influence over the affairs of state. Anne was blamed for the nepotism, but it is not known whether she actually affected him politically, or if it was he who wanted to assure her position this way. Her recommendation was important for anyone who wished something from the King. Due to her donations to widows and the poor, she was called The protector of the poor classes, but there is no information about whether she was popular or unpopular with the public.

After Frederick IV’s death in 1730, she was expelled from Copenhagen to her birth place, the manor house Klausholm near Randers. She was styled “Queen Anne Sophie”, not Queen Anne Sophie of Denmark and Norway or Queen Dowager. She was placed virtually under house arrest on her estate the rest of her life, not allowed to leave it without permission from the king. She spent the rest of her life in strict religion. Upon her death, King Christian VI allowed for public mourning, and arranged to have her buried in Roskilde Cathedral, although to keep her from being buried with her husband in the retroquire, he purchased the Trolle family chapel in the west end of the cathedral, and arranged for her and her children to be buried there.

In Frederick’s times, marrying the royal mistress was a bold move, let alone doing so while there still was a Queen! I guess he simply wasn’t afraid of the example history provided him with (Henry VIII and the end of the Tudor dynasty) and carried on with his own plans. That’s courage, is it not?