The increased demand for foods that provide nutritional and health benefits increased research in probiotic microorganisms applied to dairy products. Probiotics are affected by several factors that decrease their action on the gastrointestinal system, making it vital to protect them using encapsulation techniques that allow their incorporation into various food products. The study herein aimed to evaluate the best way to incorporate Lactobacillus acidophilus (free and encapsulated) to Requeijão cremoso processed cheese varieties. The microorganism was applied to different curd formulations using green banana biomass as a partial fat substitute. The pH, probiotic viability during shelf life and throughout the simulated gastrointestinal conditions, and capsules produced were assessed. While applying free Lactobacillus acidophilus to Requeijão cremoso varieties proved functionally ineffective, the encapsulated formulations presented satisfactory probiotic counts in all treatments (8–10...

Background and objective: Growth of beneficial probiotics is attributed to their tolerance to stress factors while most probiotics have a relatively short and unstable shelf life. Bacillus coagulans , an economically important spore-forming species, is becoming increasingly remarkable in field of probiotics for the decrease of harmful effects of processing and environment conditions on the survival of bacterial cells and to assure their functionality in the human body. The aim of this review was to explore scientific research on therapeutic, functional and biosafety properties of Bacillus coagulans as a novel probiotic. Results and conclusion: Many scientific literatures have been published on the use of health promoting Bacillus spores in foods. Bacillus coagulans mostly includes several health benefits of non-spore forming probiotics and is able to tolerate heat and stressful requirements of food processing as well as gastrointestinal tract conditions. Considering specific charact...