From informational towards transformational advertising strategies? A content analysis of Belgian food magazine advertisements

Gudrun Roose, Maggie Geuens, Iris Vermeir

The purpose of this paper is to perform a preliminary examination of informational and transformational advertising appeals in contemporary advertisements for healthy and…

Determining how packaging and labeling of Requeijão cheese affects the purchase behavior of consumers of different age groups

Ana Paula Lima Ribeiro, João de Deus Souza Carneiro, Thaís De Melo Ramos, Laura Patterson, Sandra Maria Pinto

The buying process is affected by many aspects, in which consumer’s age is certainly an important feature to be considered. The purpose of this paper is to evaluate the influence…

Factors influencing consumers’ willingness to participate in new food product development activities

Alexia Hoppe, Marcia Dutra De Barcellos, Marcelo Gattermann Perin, Lina Fogt Jacobsen, Liisa Lähteenmäki

Consumers can be an interesting source of knowledge if companies manage to attract them to an interactive process of new product development (NPD). The purpose of this paper is to…

Understanding customer satisfaction in the UK quick service restaurant industry: The influence of the tangible attributes of perceived service quality

Quang Nguyen, Tahir M. Nisar, Dan Knox, Guru Prakash Prabhakar

The purpose of this paper is to examine the impact of the five dimensions of service quality on customer satisfaction in the UK fast food market and to indicate which factors…

Is it the staff or is it the food? How the attire of restaurant employees affects customer judgments of food quality

Yen-Cheng Daniel Chen, Ching-Sung Lee

The purpose of this paper is to investigate how the appearances of Chinese restaurant employees, including gender and the style and color of dress, influence the appetites and…

Household food providers’ attitudes to the regulation of food marketing and government promotion of healthy foods in five countries in the Asia Pacific region

Anthony Worsley, Wei Chun Wang, Rani Sarmugam, Quynh Pham, Judhiastuty Februhartanty, Stacey Ridley

The purpose of this paper is to understand middle class household food providers’ attitudes to the regulation of food marketing and the promotion of healthy food practices.

Beverage capsule consumption: a laddering study

Rodrigo Marçal Gandia, Joel Yutaka Sugano, Luiz Henrique de Barros Vilas Boas, Daniel Leite Mesquita

The purpose of this paper is to analyze consumer behavior based on the structures of attributes, consequences, and values identified by consumers of beverages obtained from…

The country of origin effect: a hedonic price analysis of the Chinese wine market

Lala Hu, Andrea Baldin

The purpose of this paper is to analyse the country of origin (COO) effect on wine purchase in China by considering a sample from an e-commerce website. The paper contribute to…

A clustered-based segmentation of beer consumers: from “beer lovers” to “beer to fuddle”

Cristina Calvo-Porral, Javier Orosa-González, Felix Blazquez-Lozano

New trends are emerging in the brewery sector; but to date beer consumer segmentations are scarce. In this context, the present study addresses the following questions: “Are beer…

Innovation and tradition-based firms: a multiple case study in the agro-food sector

Valentina Della Corte, Giovanna Del Gaudio, Fabiana Sepe

Over the past few years, several scholars have focused on innovation strategies with specific regard to family food firms. In line with this research stream, the purpose of this…

Is innovation needed in the Old World wine market? The perception of Italian stakeholders

Rungsaran Wongprawmas, Roberta Spadoni

The wine market in Italy has been through several changes in the last decade. Actors in the supply chain need to find new strategies or tools in order to remain competitive in…

Halal food standard implementation: are Malaysian firms proactive or reactive?

Mohamed Syazwan Ab Talib, Thoo Ai Chin

The purpose of this paper is to investigate the reasons behind halal food standard (HFS) implementation among food manufacturers in Malaysia. Additionally, it examines whether…

Food safety knowledge, self-reported practices and attitude of poultry meat handling among Slovenian consumers

Meta Sterniša, Sonja Smole Možina, Sonja Levstek, Andreja Kukec, Peter Raspor, Mojca Jevšnik

The purpose of this paper is to investigate Slovenian consumers’ knowledge and self-reported practices in poultry meat handling during purchase, transport, and preparation in home…

Polymicrobial multidrug-resistant bacteria isolated from street vended fresh fruit juices in Pakistan: A preliminary study

Muhammad Hussnain Siddique, Muhammad Usman Qamar, Sumreen Hayat, Bilal Aslam, Habibullah Nadeem, Sabir Hussain, Muhammad Saqalein, Javeria Saeed, Saima Muzammil

The purpose of this paper is to evaluate the prevalence and antibiograms of bacteria isolated from various fresh fruit juices at a local market in Faisalabad.