This study evaluated the effects of the addition of encapsulated Lactobacillus acidophilus and green banana biomass on the characteristics of requeijão cremoso processed cheese during the storage period of 45 days under refrigeration. The elaborated requeijões cremosos processed cheeses included addition of encapsulated Lactobacillus acidophilus as probiotic source, and green banana biomass as partial fat substitute, in a total of five treatments. Analyses were performed to evaluate probiotic viability, microbiological conditions, centesimal composition (moisture, fat, fat in dry extract, protein, ashes, carbohydrates), water activity, resistant starch, colour, texture, lipid profile and sensory acceptability. The addition of green banana biomass and fat reduction resulted in changes in the centesimal composition of the cheeses, with their moisture indexes increased and protein decreased, the F1 formulation was the only one that can be considered as low fat content and was also the one that presented higher moisture. The yellowish white coloration of the formulations was altered as a function of the composition as well as the texture parameters, F1 and F3 treatments presented the greatest changes. Probiotic viability did not differ between formulations, it only changed over time.

Despite the growing demand for green banana (GB) products, there is no review study regarding their potential health benefits. We aimed to compare the health benefits among different GB products by a systematic review. We researched six electronic databases (PubMed, EMBASE, Scopus, Science Direct, Web of Science, and Google Scholar) from inception to March 2019. We found 1009 articles in these databases. After duplicate removal, we screened 732 articles’ titles and abstracts, and selected 18 potentially relevant studies for full-text reading. We added five records from the reference list of the fully-read articles and seven suggested by the expert. Twelve articles were excluded. In the end, 18 studies were considered for this systematic review. Ten studies were conducted with green banana flour and eight with the green banana pulp/biomass. Most of the GB health benefits studied were related to the gastrointestinal symptoms/diseases, followed by the glycemic/insulin metabolism, weight control, and renal and liver complications associated to diabetes. Only one study did not confirm the health benefit proposed. It is necessary to standardize the GB dose/effect to different age groups and different health effects considering the GB variety and ripeness level. Further studies are necessary to present better detailing of GB product and their health effects considering all the raw-material characteristics.

The objective of this study was to develop a frozen probiotic fermented milk enriched with Green Banana Biomass (GBB). L. paracasei LBC81 survival in frozen fermented milk was determined at on the 3, 7, 14, 21 and 28 days of storage at −18°C. The survival of L. paracasei LBC81 was also evaluated during the application of successive freezing and thawing cycles, and also when exposed to acid stress (pH 3.0) and bile salts (0.3%). In terms of L. paracasei LBC81 survival, the incorporation of GBB in fermented milk did not significantly compromise (p > .05) the viability of this strain over the 28 days of storage, exposure to freezing and thawing cycles and during exposure to acid stress conditions and by the presence of bile salts. We have concluded that it is possible to develop a frozen probiotic fermented milk enriched with GBB. Practical applications The shelf life of fermented milk is of only 28 days, because the microorganism continues to grow under refrigerated conditions and, consequently, the acidity of the product increases. In addition to affecting sensory acceptance, acidity also compromises the survival of potential probiotic culture. Thus, the development of frozen fermented milk enriched with green banana biomass is an alternative to extending the product shelf life during the storage period. This extension of the shelf life of frozen fermented milk enriched with GBB will also be subject to maintenance of the population of L. paracasei between 106 to 108 CFU/g of the product, in order to ensure consumer health benefits.