Norodom Sihanouk, the charismatic Cambodian leader whose skills of political adaptation personified for the world the tiny, troubled kingdom where he was a towering figure through six decades, died early today in Beijing. He was 89.

The death was announced by Deputy Prime Minister Nhiek Bunchhay, quoted by news services. The former king had been dogged by ill health for years and regularly traveled to China for treatment.

Sihanouk was crowned king in 1941 and held on to some form of power for the next 60-plus years. He served as monarch, prime minister, figurehead of the communist revolution, leader in exile and again as monarch until he abdicated in 2004, after which he was known as the retired king, or the king-father.

He survived colonial wars, the Khmer Rouge and Cold War intrigues, but his last years were marked by expressions of melancholy.

Alternately charming and ruthless, he dazzled world leaders with his political wit and, in the process, raised the stature of his small Southeast Asian nation. He won independence for Cambodia from the French colonial rulers in 1953, using diplomacy and repression to outmaneuver his domestic rivals but without resorting to war, as his neighbors in Vietnam had done.

He put his nation on a modern footing in the 1960s, especially bolstering the education system, but his Buddhist socialist agenda produced economic stagnation.

When the Vietnam War threatened to engulf the region, he tried to carve out a neutral role for Cambodia, siding with neither the communists nor the United States. But when the Vietnamese communists began using the port of Sihanoukville and Cambodia’s eastern border to ship military supplies, he tried to repair relations with the United States.

He turned a blind eye when the Nixon administration undertook a secret bombing campaign in 1969 against the border area of Cambodia. But this only further unsettled his country and led to a coup that ousted him the next year.

Convinced that the United States had been behind the overthrow, Sihanouk allied himself with the Khmer Rouge at the urging of his Chinese patrons, giving the Cambodian communists his prestige and enormous popularity. Their victory in 1975 brought the ruthless Pol Pot to power, with Sihanouk serving, for the first year, as the figurehead president until he was placed under house arrest and fell into a deep depression.

Over the next four years, the Khmer Rouge regime led to the death of 1.7 million people and nearly destroyed the country.

Criticized throughout his life for these dramatic shifts in allegiance, Sihanouk said he followed only one course in politics: “the defense of the independence, the territorial integrity and the dignity of my country and my people.”

Even in his darkest moments, the king never lost his flair for flamboyance or his taste for the finer things.