Suva - A member of Fiji's post-coup government, Ratu Tevita Momoedonu, was appointed prime minister on Wednesday in a move by the acting president that threw the Pacific nation into renewed confusion.

News of the appointment came after deposed prime minister Mahendra Chaudhry was formally dismissed in the first move by newly re-appointed President Josefa Iloilo to return the country to constitutional rule.

Momoedonu was sworn in, apparently in a caretaker role, but acting Prime Minister Laisenia Qarase appeared to think he still held the office.

Momoedonu was the labour minister in Qarase's interim government installed after last year's coup, but ruled illegal by the Court of Appeal decision on March 1.

The swearing-in ceremony took place at Iloilo's home in Vuda, on the west of the main island of Veti Levu, a three-hour drive from the capital Suva, where Qarase remained in the prime ministerial office.

A reporter from the Fiji News told AFP Qarase was still issuing press statements in the belief that he remained acting prime minister.

Chaudhry told AFP he had received a letter from Iloilo notifying him of his sacking.

The decision came after the Fiji's Appeals Court declared the interim administration illegal and gave the Great Council of Chiefs until March 15 to formally confirm Iloilo's appointment or replace him.

The powerful 55-strong council Fiji's supreme indigenous authority said it had also agreed parliament should be dissolved and the interim government formally appointed in a caretaker role pending new elections.

Why Qarase was replaced as acting prime minister remained unclear late on Wednesday.

Chaudhry, who became Fiji's first Indian prime minister in May 1999 elections only to be ousted in last year's coup, called a news conference to say he regarded his dismissal as unconstitutional and had written to Iloilo asking him to reconsider.

He believed he was still the legal prime minister despite the position of Momoedonu and Qarase.

"They are all bungling their way through and this will have very grave consequences for the country," Chaudhry told reporters. "I am quite astounded at the way things are being handled."

Radio Fiji reported earlier that Chaudhry had been dismissed because in Iloilo's opinion he no longer commanded majority support in the parliament.

The chiefs also appointed Iloilo as president because his acting term of office legally expires on Thursday, three months after the formal resignation on December 15 of the former president, Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara, who was also forced out in the coup.

In a six-point proposal to the president, the chiefs accepted the ruling that parliament had not been dissolved on May 29 when army Commander Frank Bainimarama assumed executive control of the country.

But it said the president has reserve powers which he could exercise if he thought the decisions he made would resolve Fiji's constitutional and political crisis "and bring prosperity and freedom to the indigenous Fijians and other ethnic communities".

Fiji has been in a state of political limbo since last May's racially-motivated coup plunged the country into turmoil.

Sanctions imposed in reaction to the purported abrogation of the 1997 multi-racial constitution and a withdrawal of foreign investment have devastated the economy of the country, which has a population of 800 000 people, some 44 percent of whom are ethnic Indians. - Sapa-AFP