Welcome to our comprehensive and meticulously curated list of car brands from all around the globe. Expertly arranged in alphabetical order and sorted by country, this is your ultimate resource for exploring the vast automotive landscape.

Delve into our detailed guide of car companies by clicking on the country links below, and embark on a journey through the world of car manufacturers and automotive history.

In this article, you will find the most popular automakers from every single country, other active auto manufacturers and even the non active car makes. We have sorted the list from A to Z and included all auto manufacturers worldwide.

All Car Brands List by Country

A

America

Argentina

Armenia

Australia

Austria

Azerbaijan

B

Belarus

Belgium

Brazil

Bulgaria

C

Cambodia

Canada

China

Croatia

Czech Republic

D

Denmark

E

Egypt

Ethiopia

F

Finland

France

G

Germany

Ghana

Greece

H

Hungary

I

India

Iran

Ireland

Israel

Italy

J

Jamaica

Japan

K

Kenya

Korea

L

Latvia

Lebanon

Libya

Liechtenstein

M

Malaysia

Mexico

Monaco

Morocco

N

Netherlands

New Zealand

Norway

P

Pakistan

Peru

Phillipines

Poland

Portgual

R

Romania

Russia

S

Serbia

Slovakia

South Africa

Spain

Sudan

Sweden

Switzerland

Sri Lanka

T

Taiwan

Thailand

Tunisia

Turkey

U

UAE

Ukraine

UK

USA

V

Vietnam

Argentina

Argentina has by far one of the most interesting love/hate relationships with their automotive industry and local car brands, and that all stems from their overabundant success in the past.

In case you didn’t know by now, Argentina has always been at the top of the game when it comes to their car industry, to the point where for the past a hundred years or so they’ve always hovered around the top 15 countries in the world in terms of quality and quantity.

In 2019 they even became the third largest motor vehicle manufacturers in all of Latin America, but sadly, their growth streak has ended quite abruptly soon after.

They have placed their whole economy on the 12 automotive plants that they’ve had going for the better side of the past hundred years or so, but because of recent developments they’ve been surpassed by other countries, leaving Argentina in the backseat for now.

List of Car Brands in Argentina:

Anasagasti

Andino

Hispano Argentina

IAME

IKA

Siam Di Tella

Armenia

Armenia only has one local car brand we know about:

ErAZ

Australia

Australia definitely has seen better days in terms of worldwide recognition for its automotive industry. Australian cars used to be all the rage back in the day, but sadly this reign ended shortly after because of some less-than-ideal updates that killed the mood for a lot of car producers out there.

The Australian car manufacturing industry used to be the 10th most productive on the planet, it even surpassed most of the current day titans back in the 70s. 2007 was their last peak year and soon after they started shutting down a lot of their factories and car brand names including Holden amongst many others.

The weird thing is though that even with this rapid decline in terms of quantity, we have seen a resurgence in terms of the classic Aussie cars which has definitely helped brighten up the future for them.

After the year 2017 rolled around it pretty much became obvious that we have not seen the last of the Aussie car industry, although the odds of returning back to their past fame and glory may never happen again.

List of Australian car brands:

Alpha Sports

Amuza

Australian Six

Australian Motor Industries

Birchfield Motor Company

Birrana

Bolwell

Buckle Motors

Bulant

Bullet

Daytona Motors

Cheetah Racing

Devaux Pty Ltd

DRB

Elfin

Giocattolo Motori

Hammer

Highland

Holden

HSV

Ilinga

JOSS

Kaditcha

Lucalia Clubman

Minetti

N H Buchanan Motor Co

Nota Sports and Racing

OKA Australia

Pender-Hertel

PRB

Purvis Eureka

Python

Shrike

The Roo Motor

Rootes Australia

Southern Cross

Tarrant Automobile

Trackson

Trevethan

Zeta

For more information on Aussie cars, check out our page about Australian car companies.

Austria

Austria is one of those countries that appears to be getting better and better when it comes to every market that they wish to enter or cater to. For example, the automotive industry has been thriving for them for a very long time now thanks to their innovative approach to it.

Most countries have tried to follow through with the current demands on the market, trying to offer the best products that the community would enjoy purchasing, but that’s not what Austria has been doing. Instead, Austria have decided to take what is popular and completely discard it for what they figured would be more popular down the line.

This was a very dangerous move that could have resulted in a complete flop, but luckily thanks to their ingeniousness, Austria has now become one of the best in terms of its production line, becoming the world’s best sellers in terms of its lightweight and efficient high-performance batteries.

List of Austrian car brands:

Custoca

Denzel

Eurostar Automobilwerk GesmbH & Co. KG

Felber Autoroller

Gräf & Stift

Grofri

KTM

Laurin and Klement

Ledl

Libelle

Magna Steyr AG & Co KG

Möve 101

Österreichische Austro-Fiat

Puch

Rosenbauer

Steyr

Tushek & Spigel Supercars GmbH

For a detailed look at the Austrian automotive industry, check out this article on Austrian car brands.

Azerbaijan

NAZ is the only car brand we found from Azerbaijan, but there aren’t too many details out there about this company.

NAZ

Belarus

As a country that was part of the former Soviet Union, people from Belarus don’t have too many car brands of their own. Russian car brands used to be very popular here, for good reason, and now European car makes have started to gain more ground.

Belkommunmash

MZKT / Volat

Lida Buses Neman

Belgium

Belgium has always tried its hardest to get to the very top of the leaderboard of the automotive industry and for the most part they’ve done a great job so far. They have gone as far as to base their whole country’s economy on the automotive business, literally spreading assembly plants all across the country.

With car brand names such as Ford Genk, Van Hool, Ghent Volvo Europe and Audi Forest/Brussels backing them up, let’s just say that they’ve had a pretty good time so far on the open market. In fact, before the First World War Belgium was actually considered to be one of the titans of the industry.

While the market may have changed over the past couple of years, what hasn’t changed is their disposition towards bringing us some of the best cars in the world.

Sure, they’re no longer the leaders in terms of sales or quality, but that doesn’t mean that they’re not well worth the investment in the first place. They still have a ton of car parts manufacturers and they will continue to be a part of the major bracket for a very long time onwards.

List of car brands from Belgium:

Apal

ADK

Alatac

ALP

Antoine

Astra

Alteliers Germain

Belga Rise

Compagnie Nationale Excelsior

De Wandre

Delecroix

Edran

Exelsior

Nagant & Cie, Liège

Fabrique Nationale

Imperia Automobiles

Gillet

Jeecy-Vea

Juwel

Meeussen

Métallurgique

Minerva

Pieper

Pipe

Springuel

Van Hool NV

Vivinus

For a closer look at some of the native Belgian car brands you can check out this article.

Brazil

Have you ever heard the name Henry Ford before? Well, believe it or not, the renowned American industrialist was also responsible for starting Brazil’s automotive industry. Between 1919 and 1921 Ford Motor Company decided to start up their own production facility in Brazil, which soon led to the assembly of other car names here as well.

Skip forward to 1956 in Sao Paulo, when Romi-Isetta, one of the first true Brazilian cars was produced. This was a monumental moment in Ford’s history, and this would soon attract other car brands to the country, leading to the creation of the first Volkswagen factory later on down the line around 1959.

Nowadays, the most successful Brazilian auto company is Troller, and that’s all thanks to their T4 and Pantanal models. They are currently being sold off everywhere around the globe and their popularity is certainly on the rise.

List of Brazilian car brands:

Agrale

Bernardini

Brasinca

Dacon

DKW-Vemag

Emme

Engesa

Fábrica Nacional de Motores

Gurgel Motores

Hofstetter Turbo

JPX do Brasil Ltda.

Lobini

Obvio

Pag

Puma

Santa Matilde

Simca do Brasil

Sta Milde

Tecnologia Automotiva Catarinense

Troller

Bulgaria

In Eastern Europe Moskvitch used to be a pretty popular car name back in the day, but we haven’t heard much about them or any other car brands from Bulgaria in these last couple of years. The country seems to focus more on the car parts industry right now.

Bulgaralpine

Litex Motors

Moskvitch

Pirin-Fiat

Sofia

Cambodia

From Cambodia there’s only one car brand to mention:

Heng

Canada

When it comes to Canadian car companies, for the most part, they never actually tried their hardest to become the automakers themselves, instead opting to work for foreign car brands for the sake of convenience and less stress.

Even so, they are currently the 13th auto-producing countries in the world, and that’s not all. They’re also the 7th largest auto exporter when it comes to the general value of their automotive market, and that all stems from the fact that they produced over 1.4 million cars in total and exported $32 billion worth of vehicles as of 2020.

Although they still prefer to keep their work offshore for the most part, they have definitely also done a decent job at carving a nice spot for themselves out there. So regardless of whether we’re talking about their uprise back in 1918 or their current avenues, Canada is still a force to be reckoned with in the auto industry.

Their main manufacturers stem from Japan and America, and as far as Canadian car brands go, while definitely not their main source of income, they still do exist and thrive as far as we can tell.

List of Canadian car brands:

67X

1893 Shamrock

1867 Henry Seth Taylor Steam Buggy

Acadian

Amherst

Asuna

Bourassa

Bricklin SV-1

Brock Motors

Brooks Steam Motors

Canadian Motor

Cambli International Thunder 1

Campagna Corporation

Clinton

Colonial Motors Ltd

Derby

Dominion

Duplex

Dynasty Electric

Enterra Vipre

Fleetwood-Knight

Gareau

Gaselle

Gray-Dort Motors

HTT Pléthore

The Knight XV

LeRoy

London Motors

Manic GT

McLaughlin Carriage Company

Moose Jaw Standard

Plymouth

Queen

Russell Motor

Studebaker of Canada Ltd

Timmis Motor Company

Winnipeg

If you want detailed information, check the page dedicated for Canadian automakers.

China

China always made it their goal to become the very best regardless at what industry they’re aiming for. For the most part, they are amongst the top distributers all around the globe for the automotive market, and their production capabilities and revenues continue to rise with every single year.

As of 2009, they have managed to overtake the European Union, the United States and Japan’s annual production of automobiles by a longshot, becoming the absolute largest producer and distributor in the world.

Sure, most of the cars that they have made from scratch only sell in China, but as of 2019 they did export around 295,000 commercial vehicles and 725,000 passenger cars abroad so there’s always the possibility that this will change in the near future.

As far as automakers go, they have the Changan Automobile Group, the FAW group, Dongfeng Motor and of course, SAIC Motor. Together they are known as the Big Four car companies that rule over the Chinese automobile industry.

List of Car Brands in China:

Arcfox

Beiqi

BAW

Brilliance Auto Group

BYD

Byton

Chang’an Automobile Group

Changhe

Hafei

Chery Automobile Co

Dadi Auto

Dongfeng Motor Corporation

Everus (Li Nian)

FAW Group Corporation

HAIMA

FAW Tianjin

Foton Motor

Huali

Hongqi

Geely

Gonow

Great Wall Motors Company Limited

GAIG

GAC Group

GAC Changfeng Motor

Geometry

Hawtai

ZX Auto

Huayang

JAC Motors

Jiangling Motors Corporation

Li Auto

Lifan

NIO

Qoros Auto Co

Roewe

Shaanxi Automobile Group

Shanghai Maple Guorun Automobile Co

SAIC Motor Corporation

Sichuan Tengzhong

Singulato

Shuanghuan Auto

SG Automotive Group

Soueast

Weltmeister

Xinkai

XPENG

Youngman

Yue Lo0ng

Yutong

Polarsun Automobile

Zhonghua

Zinoro

Zotye Auto

For detailed information, click here to see the page about Chinese auto manufacturers

Croatia

From Croatia there’s only one car brand to mention, but Rimac was responsible for creating some of the world’s fastest and most exciting hypecars out there. They took the world by storm with their electric powertrain solutions and other renowned car makes like Porsche, Hyundai, Renault, Jaguar or Aston Martin started working with them for creating the next best cars.

Rimac Automobili

Czech Republic

Sure, the Czech Republic isn’t exactly the largest country in the world, quite the opposite actually, but that doesn’t mean that they haven’t had quite the influence over the worldwide automotive industry.

In fact, we would argue that thanks to their incredibly proficient geographical location, their top-of-the-line infrastructure and tireless labor they have managed to change the world as we know it in a lot more ways than you’d think.

They currently have a total of three major automakers producing their vehicles here, and they are the following: Skoda Motors, Hyundai Motor Manufacturing Czech and of course, Toyota Peugeot Citroen Automobile. Out of all of these however the most important one historically is Skoda Auto as this was actually one of the oldest car brands in the world.

Overall, the Czech Republic or Czechia has more than earned its spot at the top of the food chain, literally becoming a jack of all trades in terms of the car industry. Their car industry has also been a huge part of their influence overseas, as without it we would definitely see and hear a lot less from them nowadays.

List of Czech car brands:

Aero

Aspa

Avia

JAWA

Kaipan

Karosa

LIAZ

MTX aka Metalex

Praga

Škoda Auto

Tatra

Zbrojovka Brno

For more information on the Czech automotive industry, check out this article on Czech car brands.

Denmark

Most people out there could be excused for making the mistake of believing that Denmark doesn’t have any cars made by a native producer when in fact there are quite a lot of Danish car brands to choose from here.

Although there are no car assembly plants in the country that are worth mentioning, they have one of the most proficient hypercar manufacturers of all time stirring the crowds from within and that is none other than Zenvo Automotive themselves.

On top of that they also have Hydrema, yet another incredible automotive brand that continues to rise up in the ranks as we speak. Sure, it mainly focuses on dumb trucks, truck cranes and all sorts of stuff from that niche, but that doesn’t mean that they’re any less worth mentioning.

So, while they may not be at the top of the food chain in terms of the automobile market, let’s just say that they’re not exactly doing all that badly either. They’re on the uprise, and while they do work their magic on specialized machines for the most part, they’ve done an excellent job at it so far without a doubt.

List of all Danish car brands:

Anglo-Dane

Brems

Bukh & Gry

CityEl

Danish Automobile Building

Dansk

Hydrema

Zenvo Automotive

For a closer look at the Danish automotive history, check out this article on Danish cars.

Egypt

The automotive industry in Egypt is also pretty big, but their mostly focused on car parts and accessories and don’t have too many local car brands to mention:

Arab American Vehicles

Bavarian Auto Group

EGA

Egy-Tech Engineering

Ghabbour Group

MCV

Nasr

Seoudi Group

Speranza Motors, Ltd

Ethiopia

Ethiopia only had three local car brands:

Holland Car PLC

AMCE

Lifan Ethiopia

Finland

Compared to other Nordic countries that have a pretty big automotive industry and several well known car brands, the Fins aren’t doing that great. They had a few local car brands, but their automotive business is mostly focused on working for foreign car companies, especially for supplies and accessories.

List of Finnish car brands:

Sisu Auto

Elcat Automotive

Finlandia

Korvensuu

Valmet Automotive

Wiima

France

If you currently live in the US then chances are that you didn’t know that there was even a huge market for French cars. This is because for the most part, they have actually marketed their vehicles towards the European market. Has this been a good choice for them? Absolutely.

In fact, the French car industry is so prominent in the European market that they currently provide over 25% of the vehicles that are driven on a day-to-day basis in Europe. Amongst their top car brands, we have incredible names such as Peugeot, Citroen and of course, Renault.

But the list doesn’t stop there as they also have a ton of other names including Venturi, Monaco and we can’t possibly forget about Bugatti. Each of these are popular for being incredible luxury cars and on top of that they also have Alpine to cover the race and sports car niche.

Overall, the French have pretty much given the car industry all that they had to offer, to the point where they’re considered to be amongst the top 3 most successful in the world.

List of all French car brands:

Aixam-Mega

Alma

Alpine

Amilcar

Arista

Arola SARL

Autobleu

Autovia

Auverland

Ballot

Bollée

Bolloré

Bucciali

Bugatti

CG

Chenard-Walcker

Citroën

Claveau

Cottin-Desgouttes

Darracq

Darracq Lago

DB

De Dietrich

De Dion Bouton

Delage

Delahaye

DeLaChapelle

Exagon Engineering

Facel Vega

Gregoire

Heuliez

Hotchkiss

Hurtu

Isatis

La Buire

Léon Bollée

Le Zebre

Licorne

Ligier

Lombard

Lorraine

Lorraine Dietrich

Matra

Matra Bonnet

Matra-Simca

Matra-Talbot

Mécanique Aviation Traction

Mega

Monica

MDI

MVS

Microcar

Panhard

Peugeot

PGO Automobiles

Renault

Rochet-Schneider

Salmson

Simca

Simca Vedette

Sovam

Talbot

Th. Schneider

Tracta

Turcat-Méry

Unic

Vaillante

Venturi

Vermorel

Vernon-Derby

Vespa

Voisin

Zédel

For detailed information, click here to see the page about French automakers

Germany

Believe it or not, Germany was actually the birthplace of the automotive industry as we know it and we all have to thank Karl Benz for that. Without him, the world as we know it might have been a lot different to say the least. They were the first producers of the heat engine and this is where the prototype for the modern machine first appeared.

Not only that, but they quickly took advantage of this by becoming one of the top car producers in the world, even though they’re now ranking fourth globally, lagging behind the United States, Japan and China by only a speck.

There are SO many German car brands out there that it’s pretty much impossible to only mention one or two. You have the greats: Porsche, Mercedes-Benz, BMW, Audi, Volkswagen or Opel, but that’s just the tip of the iceberg.

They produce as many as 6 million vehicles every year, and on top of that they own a total of 35.6% of the automotive industry in the European Union with around 800,000 workers giving it their all every minute of the clock.

List of all German car brands:

Adler

Amphicar

Artega

Audi

Auto-Union

Apal

Artega Automobil GmbH

AWZ-Zwickau

BUS

B+B

Bitter

BMW

Borgward

Brennabor-Werke

Brütsch

Champion

Daimler

Dauer

Dürkopp

Dixi

DKW

Espenlaub

Fafnir

Fuldamobil

Glas

Goggomobil

Goliath

Gumpert

Gutbrod

Hanomag

Heinkel

Horch

Irmscher

Isdera

Karmann

Kleinschnittger

Koenig

Lloyd

Lotec

Lutzmann

Magna Steyr

Maico

Maybach

MCC

Melkus

Mercedes-Benz

Messerschmitt

Markranstädter Automobilfabrik

NAG

NSU

Opel

Pinguin

Porsche

Ruf Automobile GmbH

Rumpler

Smart

Stoewer

Trabant

Treser

Vauxhall

Victoria

Volkswagen

Wanderer

Wartburg

Wendax

Wiesmann

Yes!

Zender

Zundapp

Want to learn more about German automakers? Here is an article dedicated only to German automobile production companies

Ghana

From Ghana we only found one car brand to mention:

Kantanka

Greece

While Greece may be extremely famous all across the globe for its dream destinations and its incredible culture and history, when it comes to its car selection it does appear to be lacking to say the least.

In the past, there were quite a few Greek car brands, with the oldest of them actually dating back to the 1920s when a man by the name of Nikos Theologou ended up founding his own business constructing and even designing buses, trucks and everyday cars.

The problem here lies with the fact that although he did find moderate success in his country, there was no real market that would accept him and his ideas overseas, which is why his brand of cars didn’t really last all that long after his passing.

There were some other names that tried to make it big in the country, including Namco, Mevea, Biamax, Addica, Scavas and others, but as you can tell, none actually managed to stick well enough to actually represent their country.

List of all Greek car brands:

Alta

Attica

Autokinitoviomihania Ellados

Automeccanica

Biotechnia Ellinikon Trikyklon

AR aka ARCO

DIM Motor Company

Dinap

Emporiki Autokiniton

ELVO

MAVA

NAMCO

Neorion

Pan-Car

Scavas

Theologou

Hungary

Another country from Europe that’s mostly focused on the car parts-making industry, Hungary is doing pretty well in this field, but they don’t have too many local car brands to mention:

Balaton

Csonka

Fejes

Puli

India

Although many have yet to notice this, India has actually managed to become one of the world’s fastest growing car industries and this has been happening right under our noses the whole time. They actually managed to surpass South Korea and take its place in terms of the production and selling of commercial and passenger cars.

On top of that, the Indian auto industry has already become one of the country’s top sources of income, literally reaching a total of 7.1 percent of its gross income practically overnight. Let’s not forget the fact that India also has some of the top car manufacturers in the world in it, and on too of that they did manage to tackle both the two wheeled and the four wheeled industries at once.

You also have Indian car brands such as Hindustan Motors, Force, Tata and Mahindra all fighting amongst each other to become the leaders in the country, and while they do so they are also actively improving the country’s value on the market and of course, its popularity as well.

List of all car brands in India:

Chinkara Motors

Force Motors

IPML

Hindustan Motors

Mahindra & Mahindra

Mahindra Reva Electric Vehicles

Maruti Suzuki India

Opel India

Premier Ltd

San Storm

SML Isuzu

Standard

Tara International

Tata Motor

Want to learn more about Indian auto industry? Find more information on the Indian automobiles page.

Iran

From Iran we found several car brands, but unfortunately there’s not too much information about them out there:

Diar

IKCO

Kish Khodro

Morattab

SAIPA

Zagross Khodro

Ireland

Despite its small size, Ireland’s automotive industry has a long and interesting, with several well known car companies like Fiat, Ford and Renault producing some of their models here. But there aren’t too many Irish car brands to mention:

Alesbury

Heinkel Kabine

Shamrock

TMC Costin

Israel

There are numerous companies in Israel focused on producing OEM and aftermarket parts using various high-end solutions to manufacture some of the best car components and accessories, but they haven’t had any active local car brands for years. Only Automotive Industries Ltd. seems to keep going, a company that’s actually the major supplier for the Israeli Security Forces.

Autocars Co. Ltd.

Automotive Industries Ltd.

AIL

Qoros Auto Co

Italy

Back in the 1880s, Enrico Zeno Bernardi made history when he invented the internal combustion engine. He did it at the exact same time as Karl Benz did, but the difference between the two is that Enrico actually used this engine on his own son’s tricycle and his daughter’s sewing machine, so Karl Benz got more credit for it.

Soon after however, he realized the potential of the engine which led to the creation of motor vehicles. This led to the creation of FIAT and Itala later down the line. But that’s not the end of the story, in fact, it’s just the beginning, because SO many brands of cars were launched ever since. Now the country’s GDP based around the automotive industry is of around 8.5%, which just comes to show you how much of a difference a single man can do to a country’s future.

Of course, the current day market is controlled by the FIAT Group because they own some of the most famous brands in the world, including Maserati, Lancia and Alfa Romeo. They have won multiple World Car of the Year awards thanks to these brands and they even managed to qualify for the European Car of the Year title almost every year since.

Did we say anything about Ferrari, Lamborghini or Pagani? Those are some of the world’s most popular sports car brands.

List of all Italian car brands:

Abarth

Ansaldo

Alfa Romeo Automobiles

ASA

ATS

Autobianchi

B Engineering

Bandini Automobili

Bertone

Bizzarrini

Casalini

Castagna

Centenari

Chiribiri

Cisitalia

Cizeta

Covini Engineering

De Tomaso

DR Motor Company

Faralli and Mazzanti

Ferrari

Fiat

Fioravanti

Fornasari

Ghia

Giottiline

Innocenti

Intermeccanica

Iso

Isotta-Fraschini

Itala

Italdesign

Intermeccanica

Lamborghini

Lancia

LMX

Maserati

Momo

Moretti

Nardi

Nazzaro

OM

Osca

OSI

Pagani

Picchio

Pininfarina

Siata

SPA

Spadaconcept

Temperino

Vignale

Zagato

Zust

Here is a list of all automakers from Italy. If you want to learn more, click here to see all Italian auto manufacturers

Jamaica

From Jamaica we only found one local car company:

Excel Motors Limited

Japan

The Japanese have always been good at everything technology based. Regardless of whether you agree with their impressive work ethic or not, you do have to give props to them because when it comes to their car industry, they’re literally one step above the rest and that’s a fact.

They have some of the top car names in the industry today, including Toyota, Mazda and Honda which have pretty much overtaken most of their competitors by now. And if you are on the market for something more luxurious, they’ve got your back too. You have names such as Lexus and Infiniti for that and by God, they deserve every bit of the praise they receive.

Most of their automotive industry lies upon the foundation they have built for them all across the main cities of Ota, Yokosuka, Taeta, Shizuka, Hiroshima and Yokohama. With names such as Nissan, Mitsubishi, Mazda, Honda, Suzuki and Toyota behind their success, who can really say that they didn’t expect them to be at the top of the leaderboard by now?

List of all car brands from Japan:

Ales

Asahi

ASL

Central Motor Co., Ltd

Daihatsu

Datsun

Dome

Duesen Bayern

Hino

Honda Motor Company

Acura

Honda

Hope Motor Company

Isuzu

IHI Corporation

Jiotto

Lexus

Mazda

Mitsubishi

Mitsuoka Motors

Nissan Motor Company

Infiniti

Nissan

Ohta Jidosha

Otomo

Prince Motor Company

Scion

Subaru

Suminoe

Suzuki Motor Corporation

Tommykaira

Toyota Motor Corporation

Lexus

Scion

Toyota

Tsukuba

Vemac

Yamaha

For detailed information, click here to see our detailed article about Japanese car brands.

Kenya

Another African company with a small but decent presence in the automotive world, Kenya has two local car brands to mention:

Mobius Motors

Nyayo

Korea

We’ll mostly talk about South Korea here, because we don’t know too many things about the North Korean market. South Korea is famous for a lot of things to say the least, but when it comes to its automotive industry let’s just say that they’re pretty much amongst the leaders of the current worldwide market.

They are by car one of the most popular car producing countries in the Asian region, with over 4.5 million vehicles having been produced in the country alone this year. Out of these, 2 million have been exported abroad which means that they produced around 5 percent of the world’s purchases.

Although their industry got a big boost only back in the 1960s, they instantly adopted the first five-year plan which made them successful from the get go. Every year since they’ve improved upon their craft, literally becoming one of the leaders of the industry for sure.

They have a ton of different world-class manufacturers under their belt too, with Renault Samsung Motors, Kia Motors, Hyundai Motor and SsangYong Motor being at the top of the food chain as we speak. They are literally unstoppable on the open market, and on top of that they also continue to improve with every passing year which is no easy feat.

North Korea

Pyeonghwa Motors

South Korea

CT&T United

Daewoo Motors

Kia Motors

Hyundai

Proto Motors

Renault Samsung Motors

SsangYong Motor Company

For detailed information, click here to see the page about Korean automakers.

Latvia

Latvia might be a small country but their automotive industry is surprisingly big and varied. They don’t have too many local car brands though:

Dartz Motorz Company

Riga Autobus Factory

Lebanon

From Lebanon we only found information about W Motors. an Emirati-based supercar maker that was actually founded in this country back in 2002.

W Motors

Libya

Dictators have wacky ideas and the Libyan Rocket was the former leader’s intention to design and build a Libyan-made car. With a name like that, we’re surprised it didn’t lift off the ground.

Libyan Rocket

Liechtenstein

For a country as tiny as Liechtenstein we’re surprised they even have one local car brand, but some of the world’s richest people live there, so there’s no shortage of people with funds and ideas.

Orca Engineering

Malaysia

The automotive industry in Malaysia is actually the third largest in SE Asia and it ranks in the top 25 car producing countries worldwide. They’ve made more than 500,000 vehicles last year and even though they don’t have too many local brands of cars to mention, Proton and Perodua are pretty popular there.

Bufori

NAM

Perodua

Proton

Mexico

The Mexican car industry has shown everyone that you don’t need the largest budgets in the world to actually compete with some of the richest countries you could think of. They put a lot of heart and soul into their mechanical engineering industry and this clearly shows in the end product.

Instead of just focusing on passenger vehicles though they have also put a lot of emphasis on their trucks and specialized vehicles, which led to Mexico becoming one of the best producers in those niches. On top of that, they also have incredibly prestigious brands to back them up too, including Mercedes Benz, BMW, General Motors, FORD, Honda, VW, Toyota and Chrysler amongst others.

So, just to reemphasize, you don’t need to have the budget that some of the other countries on this list have to actually make it big out there. All that you need is a few good car brands and the rest is history. Let’s not forget the fact that they also have Mastretta MXT under their belt, aka one of the top supercars in the world. With names such as these backing them up who could ever ask for more?

Inferno Automobili

Mastretta

VAM

Zacua

DINA

Solana

MASA

S.R. Motors

Ron Automóviles

For a detailed look at Mexican car brands, check out this article.

Monaco

From Monaco we only have one car brand to mention:

Venturi

Morocco

Morocco has recently became the biggest passenger car manufacturer in Africa, surpassing South Africa as the biggest exporter on the continent too. They only have one local car brand to mention though:

SOMACA

Netherlands

World War II was devastating for most countries out there and that’s a fact. Regardless of whether they ended up on the winning side or not, every country had a lot of catching up to do in order to get back to the state they were in before.

Netherlands managed to take up their spot at the top of the leaderboard of the automotive world as soon as the war ended by tackling a niche that was, for the lack of a better word, empty. DAF Trucks hit the scene, completely replacing the bankrupt DAF company. Soon after this led to the creation of its first small passenger car around the middle of the 20th century.

Nowadays that place was actually overtaken by a brand known as MINI, and although DAF is still around, they were reduced to only manufacturing simple trucks these days. Netherlands do have Spyker supercars to boast with too, although they only really became known after they made it big in the Formula One races.

List of all car brands in the Netherlands:

Burton

Dakar

DAF

Donkervoort Automobielen BV

LandFighter

Ruska

Spyker N.V.

VDL Nedcar

Vandenbrink

Vencer

Waaijenberg

For an in-depth look at all car brands from the Netherlands, please check out our article on Dutch cars.

New Zealand

The saddest part about New Zealand is the fact that although they used to have some of the most reputable car names in the game, they actually no longer have a vehicle assembly industry for passenger cars these days, instead opting to get their cars from abroad.

They also ended up completely shutting down their assembly plants for the sake of their local industry simply because they could not compete with any of the overseas titans.

This is a real shame considering just how prominent they were back in the 80s. They actually had an annual output of over 100,000 cars back then, but as soon as the Asian market import started growing more and more popular, they just couldn’t keep up anymore.

They still have a few small companies that manufacture original kit and replica cars by using their local-made car bodies to sell across the seas. Hopefully they can get back to their former glory though as we would love to see what these brilliant minds could do these days if only they put a little more emphasis on their passenger car production.

List of all car brands in New Zealand:

Almac

Alternative Cars Limited

Anziel Nova

Beattie

Chevron Engineering Specialties

Fraser Clubman

Heron

Saker

Trekka

Norway

Think Global used to be a very promising electric car brand from Norway that might have been the next Tesla but unfortunately their story ended back in 2011. Today, the Norwegian auto industry is mostly focused on auto parts.

List of car brands from Norway:

Bjering

Buddy

Geijer & Co

FYK

Kewet

Norsk Automobil & Vagnfabrik AS

Think Global

Troll

Pakistan

We didn’t find too many things about car makers from Pakistan but there are two companies to mention:

Adam Motor Company, Ltd.

Habib Motors

Peru

From Peru there’s only one local car company, a Peruvian automobile that was built back in 1908.

Grieve

Phillipines

Despite the fact that motorcycles are the most common means of transportation in the Philippines, the country’s automotive industry is the 9th largest in the Asia-Pacific region. There’s only one local car brand to mention:

Chariot Motors

Poland

Not only is the automobile industry in Poland one of the best in the world, but it is also one of the main cogwheels that power up the country’s economy. More than 11 percent of the country’s industrial production is based around it, and it isn’t hard to see why this is.

They mostly focus on their light vehicles production, which is why they are the ones behind most of the passenger cars that are driven around in Central and Eastern Europe. They actually became the 23rd largest automakers in the world as of 2013 and they’ve been on the rise since.

Amongst their top car names you have Fiat, Opel, Toyota, Man, Volvo and of course, Volkswagen. Besides these they also have Solaris, one of the top bus and truck producers in the world.

It was created and it is currently owned by Polish investors, meaning that as far as we know, Poland may very well be one of the top up and comers of the 21st century. Only time will tell though whether they’ll rise to the top or have their success run cut short.

List of all car brands from Poland:

Arrinera

Bosmal

FSO

FSC Lublin

Nysa

Syrena

Warszawa

Żuk

Portugal

The automotive sector represents over 2% of Portugal’s economy with hundreds of companies that manufacture cars and components and over 150,000 direct jobs. There aren’t too many car brands that have been started in Portugal though, but we do have to mention:

Edfor

Marlei

PORTARO

UMM

Vinci

Romania

Romania is a perfect example of a country that has never given up on its market value, to the point where it almost seems like a joke to them. They started off during the communist regime quickly becoming one of the most advanced car industries in central Europe.

As soon as 1989 rolled around however, their auto industry pretty much fell apart in no time, mostly due to the many unsuccessful privatizations and the fact that although they had plenty of enterprises leading the market, most of them went bankrupt by the end of the century.

So, as soon as 1990 started they put their efforts all in the construction of passenger cars and heavy-duty vehicles as a last-ditch effort to resuscitate their market value. This led to the creation of some of their best brands of all time, including Igero (now El Car), Roman Brasov, Ford Romania and of course, Automobile Dacia.

This story does have a happy ending however, since as of 2014 they have become the fifth country in Central Europe when it comes to their car assembly volume alone.

ARO

Dacia

El Car

Ford Romania

Rocar

Roman

Russia

Believe it or not, the automobile industry in Russia is actually thriving as we speak, being in the top 20 globally. Although this is quite a remarkable feat, what’s even more impressive about it is the fact that this itself doesn’t actually hold that much leverage over the country’s economy overall.

Instead, what it does is it offers a ton of authentic models of cars and trucks which are meant to help the locals operate under their current conditions.

Amongst their top car brands we have names such as IZH, Lada, Niva, VAZ and of course, GAZ. Currently, their top passenger car manufacturer in Eastern Europe is none other than AvtoVAZ, and as far as their freight transport production goes, we can’t possibly forget about KAMAZ.

Needless to say, although Russia has seen better days in terms of its overall economy, they have done a pretty good job at keeping themselves at the top of the leaderboard for quite a long time now, and even with their current predicaments they keep on pushing themselves to better and better results as we speak.

List of all car brands in Russia:

Aton Impulse

AvtoVAZ

AZLK

Derways

Dragon

GAZor

IZh

Lada

Marussia Motors

ODA

Oka

Moskvitch

Russo-Balt

Spetsteh

Tchaika

TREKOL

UAZ

Volga

Yo-Mobil

ZiL

ZIS

For detailed information, click here to see the page about Russian automobile companies.

Serbia

From Serbia we have two local car brands to mention:

IDA-Opel

Zastava Special Vehicles

Slovakia

Compared to its neighbor, the Czech Republic, Slovakia isn’t doing too great when it comes to building their own cars but they do have a thriving automotive industry mostly focused on car parts. There were only two automakers that were originally from Slovakia:

Aeromobil

TAZ

South Africa

South Africa has actually been the leader in the African automotive industry for many years now as it currently produces well over 500,000 cars annually. They also rank up to the 21st position in the world thanks to how many cars they produce every year, and as far as the local car brand market goes, they’re on the 16th place.

For the most part though, they focus a lot of their resources on producing trucks and military vehicles, although they still have a lot of foreign brands running around in their country as well. As far as numbers go though, South Africa ranks third in the South African economic sector, which may not sound like much but it does quickly add up over time.

They have a ton of incredibly top-grade brands to brag with, including General Motors, Ford, FIAT, Dimian Chrysler, Volkswagen, Toyota and even BMW for that matter. Needless to say, while they are definitely not competing with the top dogs at the moment, we can definitely see a bright future ahead for South Africa as they’re quickly catching up to their competition as we speak.

List of all South African car brands:

AAD

Birkin

Basil Green Motors

GSM

LDS

Netuar

Perana Performance Group

Sri Lanka

For a small country like Sri Lanka they sure have found the right name for a car company started there:

Micro Cars

Sudan

There aren’t too many African car brands to mention, but Sudan’s Giad Auto is doing pretty well, even though it’s mostly building cars for other companies like Hyundai, Renault or Lada.

Giad Auto

Spain

International car brands are actively using Spain as a platform for the production of their machines. What you might not know about Spain though is that it is believed that the Italians laid the foundation for the car industry in this country back in 1919, when FIAT opened a branch near Barcelona.

Despite this, Spain has enough of its own models of cars and trucks. Domestic companies such as Advanced Design Tramontana, Sociedad Española de Automoviles de Turismo (SEAT) and others are widely represented globally and compete well with foreign brands.

SEAT is definitely not the only worthy Spanish car brand around and only a few really car-savvy people know that the history of automotive industry in the kingdom lasts more than a hundred years!

List of all car brands in Spain:

Abadal

Aspidis

Authi

Benimar

Cupra

IFR Aspid

Irizar

Hispano-Suiza

Hurtan Desarrollos S.L.

Pegaso

Santana Motor

Spania GTA

SEAT, S.A.

Tauro Sport Auto

Tramontana

For detailed information about Spanish automakers, check out our article on Spanish car brands.

Sweden

You may think that Sweden is mostly focused on its truck industry simply because they have at their disposal the two largest truck producers in the world, them being Volvo AB and Scania AB. Despite this however, they actually mostly focused on their passenger vehicles and this truly shows considering their recent developments.

Regardless of whether you’re talking about their cars or their buses, they have always strived to bring us unsurpassed quality and incredibly high-grade safety to make sure that we have the time of our life while riding around in their own creations.

But although they do sell a lot of their cars and buses in their own country, they actually sell off as much as 95% of their heavy vehicles and almost 85% of their passenger cars around the globe. If you’ve ever heard of a brand named Koenigsegg then you already know why that is, since this is a luxury car brand that only the top one percent in the world could ever dream of owning.

Other than that, however, they also have Volvo, NEVS, Polestar and Uniti Sweden AB. They used to have others in the mix too, but they were eventually consumed or overrun by these aforementioned brands.

List of all Swedish car brands:

AMG

Esther

Jösse

Koenigsegg

Saab

Scania

Volvo

To get more information on cars from Sweden, see this page about Swedish automakers.

Switzerland

Switzerland is world famous for its watches, cheese, finance and of course, we can’t possibly forget about their Toblerone. But besides these avenues they also have carved themselves a special place in the car industry, even getting a special nickname for their endeavors.

Commonly referred to as “Swiss Cars”, this umbrella term covers every single passenger car that they’ve released since the 1970s, as they all have one thing in common: They are incredibly sleek, fast and unique by all definitions of the word.

Many would argue that the Swiss auto industry actually peaked in the 70s and that it never got back to full force since, but what many people don’t realize is the fact that they changed from being main producers to creating and distributing auto component parts and accessories instead.

So, while they may not be the juggernauts that they used to be in the past, they are still amongst the top names in the world for sure.

List of car brands from Switzerland:

Ajax

Dufaux

Enzmann 506

Leblanc

Martini

Monteverdi

Rinspeed

Sbarro

Taiwan

In Taiwan there are apparently over 3,000 automotive-related car companies, with Hotar Motor accounting for almost a third of the total car sales in the country. But they only have two car brands that have been founded here:

CMC

Luxgen Motor Co., Ltd.

Thailand

From Thailand there’s only one local car brand to mention:

Thai Rung

Tunisia

Tunisia’s automotive industry is also pretty big, mostly because they’re working for European car brands. It’s one of the country’s major economic sectors that’s growing with every year that goes by. Despite that, there’s only one car local brand that have been started here.

Wallyscar

Turkey

When it comes to its automotive industry, Turkey has definitely not been messing around as it is one of the most important parts of their economy as we speak.

As a result, back in 2012 Turkey ended up producing as many as 1 million units on the market, literally inserting themselves into the industry and becoming a staple of the global network of production bases. Amongst their most reputable brands we have Tofas and Otosan/Anadol.

List of car brands in Turkey:

Anadol

Devrim

Diardi

Etox

Tofaş

UAE

The UAE started to establish itself as an international automotive hub with spectacular growth in these last couple of years. They’re a huge market for exotic cars and even though there aren’t too many car brands that have been originally started here we’re sure that’s all about to change in the next couple of years. These are the only local car brands from the UAE right now:

Al Araba Company

W Motors

Ukraine

Despite the fact that Ukraine is one of the Europe’s biggest countries, its automotive industry is relatively small. But we’re sure that it will be one of the fastest growing sectors in the next couple of years. There are only four Ukraine-based car brands to mention:

AvtoZAZ

LuAZ

Ukrainian Automobile Corporation JSC

ZAZor Zaporizhia Automobile Building Plant

United Kingdom

What started off as a distant dream in the 19th century Great Britain soon became one of their most prestigious avenues for the country as they were already considered to be the world’s second-largest transport producers.

They exported most of their vehicles as well, but sadly they couldn’t keep up with the United States, Germany, France or even with Asian automakers, which led to them losing a lot of their influence overseas.

They were even forced to sell off some of their big car names overseas, including Rolls-Royce, Bentley and Land Rover. Nowadays however, for the most part they focused their attention towards super luxury cars, and as of late they also started to put in the work regarding their armored vehicles.

List of all British car brands:

ABC

Aberdonia

AC Cars

Adams

AJS

Albion

Allard

Alldays

Alta

Alvis

Andre

Arash

Arab

Argyll

Ariel

Arrol-Johnston

Armstrong Siddeley

Ascari Cars Ltd.

Aster

Astra

Aston Martin

Austin

Batten

Belsize

Bentley

Berkeley

Bond

BAC

Bristol

Brooke

British Salmson

Brough Superior

BSA

Buckler

Calthorpe

Caparo

Caterham

Clan

Connaught

Cooper

Costin

Crossley

CSC

Daimler

David Brown Automotive

Davrian

De Lorean

Deep Sanderson

Dellow

Diva

Dutton

Ecosse

Elva

Eterniti Motors

Fairthorpe

Farbio

Farboud

FBS

Frisky

Gilbern

Ginetta

GKD

GKN

GN

Gnome

Gordon-Keeble

Grinnall

Guy

Healey

Hillman

HRG

Humber

Invicta

Iota

Jaguar

JBA Motors

Jensen Motors

Jowett

Kieft

Lagonda

Lammas-Graham

Lanchester

Land Rover

Lea-Francis

Leader

Leidart

Lightning

Lola

Lister

Lotus

LTI

Marauder

Marendaz

Maudslay

McLaren

Marcos Engineering

MG Motor

Mini

MK Sportscars

Morgan Motor Company

Morris Motors

Noble

Ogle

Panther

Paramount

Peel

Peerless

Perry

Prodrive

Radical

Railton

Rapier

Raymond Mays

Reliant

Riley

Rochdale

Rolls-Royce

Rover Company

Ruston-Hornsby

Scott

Sheffield-Simplex

Singer

Spectre

Squire

Strathcarron

Sunbeam

Swallow Doretti

Tamplin

Thames

Tornado

Trident Cars Ltd

Triking

Triumph Motor Company

Turner

Trojan

TVR

Ultima Sports Ltd.

Unicar

Unipower

Vale

Vanden Plas

Vauxhall Motors

Vegantune

Warren-Lambert

Warwick

Westfield Sportscar

Wolseley

For detailed information on cars from the UK, check out our article about British car companies.

United States

Of course that the United States’ auto industry is doing just fine nowadays, after all, they’ve been at the literal top of the leaderboard since they first decided to tackle the market. The US is currently second only to China when it comes to the number of cars that they’ve produced, but as time moves on the gap is getting smaller and smaller.

They have a ton of different brands to pick from, including Ford Motor Company, General Motors and of course, Stellantis North America. The Great Depression caused a lot of the top car brands to go bankrupt back in the days, but these managed to pull through regardless.

American car manufacturers were literally revolutionaries regardless of how you want to spin it. Tackling every market there is to tackle out there, they’ve changed up the game as we know it literally turning in a profit even when there was no market to appeal to in the first place.

Major Auto Manufacturers from the US:

Chrysler

Chrysler

Dodge

Jeep

Ram

Ford Motor Company

Ford

Lincoln

General Motors

Buick, formally the Buick Motor Division

Cadillac

Chevrolet

GMC

Tesla Motors

Hennessey

Other Automakers from US

AC Propulsion

Ajax

AM General

Ambassador

AMC

American

American Underslung

Anteros Coachworks

Apollo

Apperson

Arnolt

Auburn

Aurica Motors

Avanti

Brewster

Brisco

Brush

BXR

Carroll Shelby

Case

Chadwick

Chandler

Checker

Comet

Commuter

Continental

Cord

Cunningham

Dagmar

Davis

De Soto

DMC

Detroit Electric

Devon Motorworks

Diana

Dort

Du Pont

Duesenberg

Durant

Duryea

Eagle

Edsel

Elcar

EMF

Eshelman

Fageol

Falcon Motorsports

Firestone-Columbus

Fisker Automotive, Inc

Fitch

Flint

Franklin

Gardner

Geo

GEM

GM

Graham

Grant

Gray

Griffith

HAL

Hertz

Hudson

Imperial

Jordan

Kaiser

Keller

Kissel

Knox

La Fayette

La Salle

Lexington

Locomobile

Lozier

Marmon

Martin

Maxwell

Mercer

Mercury

Merkur

Mitchell

Mohs

Mosler Automotive

Muntz

Nash

Navistar

National

Oakland

Oldsmobile

Overland

Packard

Paige

Panoz

Paterson

Pennsylvania

Phantom Corsair

Pierce-Arrow

Piontek

Playboy

Plymouth

Polaris Industries

Pontiac

Qvale

Rambler

Rossion Automotive

RCH

Revere

Rickenbacker

Roamer

Rossion Automotive

Sainte Claire

Saleen

Saturn

Saxon

SSC North America

Scripps-Booth

Shelby

SRT

Stanley

Stearns Knight

Stephens

Studebaker

Stutz

Superformance

Tucker

Twombly

Vector Motors Corporation

Velie

Waltham

Wills

Willys

Willys-Overland

Woodill

Zimmer

For detailed information, click here to see the page about American car brands

Vietnam

Last but not least, we also have to mention two car brands from Vietnam:

Mekong Auto

Vinaxukior Xuan Kien

Car Brands FAQs

If you have burning questions about car brands, here are some of the most frequently asked questions and their answers.

What is the most reliable car brand?

According to recent Consumer Reports, Honda, Toyota, Kia, Nissan, Lexus or Hyundai are the most reliable car brands in the world. But big players such as Ford, GM or Fiat have also upped their game and started delivering more and more reliable cars.

What is the best car brand?

Of course, we all might have a different answer to this question. It really depends on what you want from a car. If want reliability, the answer is right up here. If you want an electric car the answer is Tesla, if you want a cool-looking car, built with speed and performance in mind the answer is probably Porsche and if you want a popular choice the answer could be Ford, BMW, Audi or Mercedes-Benz.

How many car brands are out there?

The exact number of active car makers is probably unknown right now but only in this list we’ve mentioned exactly 990 car brands, active or non active, which makes this article the most detailed post on car brands out there. But the real number is probably over 1,000 car makes, as more and more electric start-ups are founded every single month.

Who owns which car brands?

This question should have a dedicated article by itself, but it we could summarize it, this would be the answer:

Volkswagen AG owns: Audi, Bentley, Bugatti, Cupra, Ducati, Lamborghini, Porsche, SEAT, Skoda, and of course, Volkswagen.

Toyota Motor Corporation owns: Daihatsu, Lexus and Toyota.

General Motors owns: Buick, Cadillac, Chevrolet and GMC. Plus a few Chinese brands.

Honda Motor owns: Honda and Accura.

BMW Group owns: BMW, MINI and Rolls Royce.

Ford Motor Company owns: Ford, Lincoln, Mustang and Troller.

Daimler AG owns: Mercedes-Benz, AMG, and Smart.

Hyundai Motor Group owns: Hyundai, Genesis and Kia.

Renault-Nissan-Mitsubishi owns: Alpine, Dacia, Datsun, Infinity, Nissan, Mitsubishi, Venucia, Lada, and of course, Renault.

Stellantis (born from the merger between Fiat Chrysler and Peugeot Citroen) owns: Alfa Romeo, Citroen, Chrysler, Dodge, DS, FIAT, Jeep, Lancia, Maserati, Opel, Peugeot, RAM, and Vauxhall.

Tata Motors owns: Land Rover, Jaguar and of course, Tata.

Suzuki owns: Suzuki and Maruti Suzuki.

Geely Auto Group owns: Lotus Cars, Polestar and Volvo.

Independent car brands: Aston Martin, Ferrari, McLaren, Tesla Motors, Mazda, Subaru and many other less known companies.

What are the luxury car brands?

We’ve made a special article with the most expensive car brands in the world. We definitely have to mention Rolls-Royce, Bentley or Maybach as the most luxurious car brands, but we can also count exotic car makers such as Lamborghini, Ferrari, McLaren, Pagani, Aston Martin, Bugatti, Koenigsegg, SSC North America, and even Maserati, Jaguar, Porsche or Lotus Cars in here.

Some people also consider BMW, Mercedes-Benz, Audi, Cadillac, Genesis, Land Rover or even Tesla Motors as luxury car brands, but we think they’re mid-level cars.

What car brands last the longest?

Once again, if you’re looking for reliability the answer is probably Honda, Toyota, Kia, Nissan, Lexus or Hyundai. But if you’re wondering which is the oldest car in the world, the answer is La Marquise, an 1884 car made by Frenchmen De Dion, Bouton and Trépardoux.

Summary

This list was compiled by looking at the Wikipedia articles and our own research on other various sites.

If we missed out on any car companies from your country, please feel comment below to let us know.

So which car makes do you think are the best?