Jack Eckerd Corp.'s latest effort to acquire 1,150 Revco stores has been submitted to federal bankruptcy court in Ohio, where Revco D.S. Inc. has been languishing for three years. Successful completion of the deal would create the largest drugstore chain in the nation.

With 2,826 stores _ some operating under the name Eckerd and some Revco _ Eckerd would surpass the No. 1 Rite Aid drug chain, which has 2,378 stores, and challenge Walgreen's, which led the industry in sales with $6-billion in 1990.

As part of the acquisition, Eckerd would issue public stock in a new parent company formed to hold Eckerd and Revco. Clearwater-based Eckerd became a private company in 1986 through a $1.2-billion leveraged buyout.

The public stock offering, would raise between $300-million and $400-million, said spokesman Mike Zagorac. Proceeds from the offering would be used to retire some of Eckerd's $460-million in senior debt remaining from its LBO and to help finance the restructuring of Revco.

"Eckerd is breaking some new ground with this . . . going through the bankruptcy court with a public offering," said Gary Teblum of Trenam, Simmons, Kemker, Scharf, Barkin, Frye & O'Neill in Tampa. Trenam Simmons handles corporate mergers and acquisitions.

Eckerd's is the third reorganization proposal filed in bankruptcy court. In June, Revco's management filed a plan that would give stock in the reorganized company to creditors and shareholders and cash to some bond holders.

On Sept. 6, a committee of four Revco creditors filed reorganization plans that would give creditors 100 percent ownership of the reorganized company in exchange for agreeing to lighten the company's $1.5-billion debt.

Eckerd had made previous offers to acquire Revco, but Monday's filing was the first formal registering of a reorganization plan.

Revco has not been receptive to Eckerd's overtures and refused to provide financial information requested, Eckerd officials said. Eckerd's offer still hinges on the completion of due diligence, as well as regulatory, creditors' and bankruptcy court approvals.

In a prepared statement, Revco said it is reviewing Eckerd's plan. It noted that neither the Revco plan nor the creditors' plan "contemplate the sale of the company."

Nevertheless, Revco chairman Boake A. Sells said that with the filing of the Eckerd plan "our creditors now have a clear set of choices for the reorganization. . . . It is time for a decision to be made so Revco can leave bankruptcy as soon as possible."

Eckerd's proposed reorganization has the backing of one group of creditors, which filed jointly with Eckerd, according to the company.

Under Eckerd's plan, certain creditors, including banks, would receive notes issued by the reorganized Revco, which would be a subsidiary of Eckerd holding company.

Other creditors would receive debt convertible into stock in the holding company _ based on a percentage of the debt owed.

Details of the various reorganization plans are not entirely known. The group of creditors is expected to file disclosure statements by Monday, while Eckerd will have a month or more to file details of its offer.

Eckerd makes a grab at growth

The proposal by Eckerd to acquire 1,150 Revco stores would:

make Eckerd the largest drug store chain in the United States with 2,826 stores initially.

add $1.9-billion in sales and 43-million prescriptions annually to Eckerd.

give Eckerd a presence for the first time in Ohio, New York, Pennsylvania, Virginia and West Virginia, and more than double its presence in several other states.

make Eckerd a publicly held company for the first time since 1986.

Source: Eckerd