DURHAM, N.C. — A new and growing Durham company has three new executives, company officials said today.

Steve Gayheart, Chris Barbee, and Brad Rounding have joined Revco Solutions as its Chief Operating Officer, Chief Financial Officer, and Chief Information Officer, respectively.

Revco Solutions is a company resulting from the merger of former Durham entity Professional Recovery Consultants (PRC) into Revco Solutions formerly known as “CBCS”, founded in Columbus, Ohio in 1997. Revco Solutions performs first and third-party debt collections, and insurance follow-up, or other specialized accounts receivable and call center services for several industries, including healthcare, government, financial, commercial, and utilities.

Gayheart, the new COO, has been with Revco Solutions since May of 2020. He has been in collections for 29 years and held numerous roles in the industry.

Barbee, CFO, brings more than 20 years of financial leadership to Revco Solutions. Prior to joining the company last year, he served as CFO for Medfusion, Greenlight Health, and has also held senior leadership roles with Quintiles, SciQuest, and Pricewaterhouse.

Rounding, CIO, is an accomplished IT leader who has specialized in IT security over the past 18 years. Prior to joining Revco Solutions last year, he assisted in the development and execution of IT strategic plans for large organizations that have resulted in significant cost savings and improved IT service delivery.

Read more about each on the Meet the Team page.

“These three critical members of the team each bring expertise and energy that will advance the company in its next phases of growth,” said Chief Executive Officer Geoff Miller.

“Revenue Cycle Management is a specialized field with a lot of moving parts,” Miller said. “These three outstanding people will help us continue on the path of continuously improving our client services.”

About Revco Solutions

Revco Solutions is a fresh name in the collections industry, but a new brand with a long history of success for the industries it serves. The company launched in 2020 from a combined century performing collection services. With the acquisition of both Professional Recovery Consultants (PRC) and Credit Bureau Collection Services (CBCS) in 2019, under the ownership of Revco Management, LLC, these two organizations have integrated their considerable strengths to rebrand in 2020 as Revco Solutions, Inc.

###