Revco D.S. Inc., the drugstore chain that has been in bankruptcy since 1988, today was on the verge of emerging from Chapter 11 after nearly all its creditors agreed to back the retailer's reorganization plan.

Revco said creditors representing 99.74 percent of claims against it had voted to accept the plan. The company said it hoped the vote would clear the way for approval of its reorganization by Federal Bankruptcy Judge Harold White at a hearing set for Wednesday.

"We are very pleased that Revco's creditors have accepted our plan, with such a clear mandate to get Revco out of bankruptcy immediately," said Boake A. Sells, Revco's chairman and chief executive. "We hope Judge White will be able to confirm the plan without delay."

If the judge confirms the plan, as is expected, it will end more than three and a half years of a contentious reorganization under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Law.

Revco, one of the nation's largest drug chains, with 1,150 stores in nine states, was forced to seek protection from its creditors in July 1988, just two years after it was taken private in a $1.3 billion leveraged buyout that loaded it with debt. Under Chapter 11, a company is protected from creditors while it tries to work out a plan to repay its debts.

Since the filing, creditors, management and two competitors have battled for control of Revco, while the company paid out millions of dollars in legal fees and closed hundreds of stores to cut losses.

Until just a few weeks ago Revco was the subject of three competing plans to reorganize the company, two of them filed by rival drugstore chains that had hoped to acquire the retailer, which is based in Twinsburg, Ohio.

The Rite Aid Corporation, the nation's largest drugstore concern, halted its effort to buy Revco in January, saying the cost had risen too high. The Jack Eckerd Corporation, based in Clearwater, Fla., withdrew its plan last month, after reaching a pact under which Revco agreed to pay $7.5 million to cover Eckerd's costs.

That withdrawal left only Revco's plan, which is backed by the Chicago investment firm Zell/Chilmark Fund L.P. The firm agreed in January to provide up to $250 million in cash to creditors who would previously have received Revco stock.