Elio Vittorini (born July 23, 1908, Syracuse, Sicily, Italy—died Feb. 13, 1966, Milan) was a novelist, translator, and literary critic, the author of outstanding novels of Italian Neorealism mirroring his country’s experience of fascism and the social, political, and spiritual agonies of 20th-century man. With Cesare Pavese, he was also a pioneer in the translation into Italian of English and American writers.

The son of a railroad employee, Vittorini left school when he was 17, and six months later he became a road-construction worker in northern Italy. He then moved to Florence, learned English while working as a proofreader, and began to publish short stories in the journal Solaria. He made his living until 1941 by translating the works of such American and English writers as William Saroyan, D.H. Lawrence, Edgar Allan Poe, William Faulkner, Daniel Defoe, and Ernest Hemingway, in addition to the British poets T.S. Eliot, W.H. Auden, and Louis MacNeice.

Vittorini’s first major novel, Il garofano rosso (written 1933–35, published 1948; The Red Carnation), while overtly portraying the personal, scholastic, and sexual problems of an adolescent boy, also conveys the poisonous political atmosphere of fascism. In 1936 Vittorini began writing his most important novel, Conversazione in Sicilia (1941, rev. ed. 1965; Eng. trans., Conversation in Sicily; U.S. title In Sicily), the clearest expression of his anti-fascist feelings. The action of the book is less important than the emotional agony of its hero, brought on by his constant consciousness of fascism, war, and the plight of his brothers.

Recognizing the novel’s power, the fascist government censored its serialization in Letteratura in 1936–38 and even withdrew an entire issue of that periodical from circulation. In 1942, after publication of the book, Vittorini was called in for questioning and finally was imprisoned in 1943. Released after the German occupation, he continued to fight fascism through the Resistance movement.

After the war Vittorini published the influential politico-cultural periodical Il Politecnico (1945–47) and later edited the Milan literary quarterly Il Menabò with Italo Calvino. He then became head of the foreign-literature section of a major Italian publishing house.