Kairana

Kairana is a historical city and a municipal board in Shamli district. Shamli was declared as a district in September 2011 and was named Prabuddh Nagar by Mayawati, who was CM of UP (Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh) at that time. In July 2012, Shaml…

Kabru

Kabru is a mountain in the Himalayas on the border of eastern Nepal and India.

Jaitu

Jaitu (sometimes written as Jaito, also known as Gangsar Jaitu) is a historical city.There is many famous Hindu temples and 3 most historic Sikh Gurudwara.Jaitu is birth place of famous personalities sh. Gurdial Singh Rahi and famous kavishar sh.

Irikkur

Irikkur is a town in Kannur District of Kerala state, south India. It has historic and commercial importance, and is one of the largest Mappila Muslim majority towns (90%) in Kannur district and lies on the banks of the Irikkur River, locally known …

IPCL Sports Complex Ground

Reliance Stadium or Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd Sports Complex Ground also known as the IPCL Ground is located in Vadodara, Gujarat.

IIT Kanpur Airport

IIT Kanpur Airport, also called Kalyanpur Airport, is located at Kalyanpur near Kanpur, India. It is used by the Aerospace Engineering department of IIT Kanpur.

Holy Cross Convent High School, Thane

Holy Cross Convent High School is an all-girls school located in K'Villa, Thane, Maharashtra, India, which was founded in 1964 and celebrates its Golden Jubilee in 2014.

Hindu School, Kolkata

Hindu School is a Government administrated high profile school in Kolkata (Calcutta), India. It is located on College Street, in the vicinity of Hare School, College Square, Presidency College and the University of Calcutta. Hindu College, the schoo…

Hemis

Hemis is a town in India 40 km southeast of Leh in Ladakh, well known for the Hemis monastery that was established in 1672 AD by king Senge Nampar Gyalva. Hemis is best known to tourists for the colorful festival held in July. Hemis also could be as…

Harihareshwara Temple

The Harihareshwara Temple at Harihar in Karnataka state, India, was built in c. 1223–1224 CE by Polalva, a commander and minister of the Hoysala Empire King Vira Narasimha II. In 1268 CE, Soma, a commander of King Narasimha III of the same dynasty m…

Hariana

Hariana is a city and a municipal council in Hoshiarpur district in the Indian state of Punjab. Hariana is named after Guru Hari Sen; the guru of the singer Tansen. It was a famous music gharana once. Gujjar Mal Vasudev raagi & Pandit Telu Ram were …

Harangi Reservoir

The Harangi Reservoir is located near Hudgur village, Somwarpet taluk in Kodagu district in the Indian state of Karnataka. The reservoir is formed by a masonry dam built across the river Harangi, a tributary of the Kaveri.

Gyan Niketan

Gyan Niketan, Patna, India, was established on the Vasant Panchami of 1986 by the Manaviya Vibhav Vikas Trust, with assistance from Acharya Kishore Kunal who is Chairman of the Bihar State Board of Religious Trusts. The first principal of the school…

Gomoh

Gomoh is a census town in Dhanbad district in the Indian state of Jharkhand. It is a major railway junction (renamed Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose Gomoh railway station on 23 January 2009) situated on the Grand Chord Line under Dhanbad division of the …

Gomia

Gomia (also spelt as Gumia) is a census town in Bokaro district in the Indian state of Jharkhand. The modern name is a transformation of Gumia over the years. Though, till date, it is still Gumia for the South Eastern Railway (India) (station code G…

Gadiara

Gadiara is a village in Howrah District of West Bengal, India. This place is the point of convergence of the Damodar, the Rupnarayan and the Hoogli rivers.

Fakir Mohan University

Fakir Mohan University (abbreviated as F. M. University) is a university situated in Balasore, Odisha, India. It was carved out of the Utkal University in 1999 and acts as an affiliating university. The university has 60 colleges and 150,000 student…

Erattupetta

Erattupetta is a Municipality town in Kottayam district in the state of Kerala, India.It is 38 km east of Kottayam, the district Centre. Erattupetta was known as Erappili and Erappuzha before. The "Eraaru" part in all the variation of the names aros…

Entally

Entally (Bengali: এন্টালী) (also spelt Entali) is a neighbourhood in central Kolkata, earlier known as Calcutta, in the Indian state of West Bengal. It has a police station and is an assembly constituency.

Edappadi

Idappadi (also spelt as Edappadi or Edapadi) is a city and a municipality in Salem district in the state of Tamil Nadu, India. Idappadi was once known for its thriving powerloom industry. The economy is diversified. The main modes of income are agri…

Dwarahat

Dwarahat is a town and a nagar panchayat in Almora district in the state of Uttarakhand, India.

Donakonda

Donakonda is a town and a Mandal in Prakasam district, Andhra Pradesh, India. The name comes from a nearby hill.

Don Bosco High & Technical School, Liluah

Don Bosco School Liluah, or DBL, is an all-boys, English medium school located in Liluah, near the city of Kolkata, India. It operates under the Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations and takes students from the lower kindergarten th…

Dinhata

Dinhata is headquarters of Dinhata subdivision, and a municipality in Cooch Behar District in the state of West Bengal, India.

Dibai

Dibai (also spelt as Debai) is a city and a municipal board in Bulandshahr district. It is a tehsil town and also a constituency of legislative assembly in the state of Uttar Pradesh, India.