Holi, the festival of colors has a deeper, religious undertone, that’s rarely experienced by visitors. Here’s a short post with some photos to elaborate. I’ve not referred to anything while writing, and the photos were taken last evening here in Jaipur. (There’s enough copy paste on the interweb as such)

On the eve of the day when one plays with colors, is the festival of Holika dahan – burning of the demoness Holika. More appropriately, the day of playing with colors is known as ‘dhulendi’ – the root of the word is dhool or dust – for on this day colored dust (gulaal) is smeared on rich and poor, friend and foe, alike.

When I reached the venue, it was ten minutes to launch and pyre was all set. A circle was marked on the ground with chalk and the firewood tied together with string. Dried cow dung cakes hung as garlands complete the ensemble.

An interesting side note, in Jaipur, we also hang left over kites from makar sankranti day. This indicates there’d be no more kite flying till Diwali day.

Women and men take off their shoes and pray to Vishnu before the fire is lit. It is a beautiful moon lit night, phalguna purnima and I don’t have trouble with my phone cam.

Story goes that Holika was an evil demoness who’d eat children alive. One day, per mythological legend, she captured young prahalada – a devotee of Vishnu, the preserver. Prahlada was the son of king hiranyakashipu, who had barred anyone from praying to vishnu. Holika, his sister, had a shawl that would not burn and sat on a pyre with the boy so he would.

Vishnu, of course, promptly stepped in and blew a fierce wind , causing the shawl to wrap prahalada instead. The climax of this religious thriller has prahalad saved and Holika burnt. Later, as narasimha (man lion), Vishnu kills hiranyakashipu under the lintel of his palace entrance for he could not be killed under the sky nor under a roof, etc. There are several variations of this tale. What’s generally accepted is that the place of the events was mulsthana (or Multan, present day Pakistan Punjab). I was told a bit of this by a neighbor, herself daughter of emigrants from Multan and survivor of the partition of india.

Some women, more in tune with our traditions than most, offer water and circumambulate – they offer coconuts, turmeric and many other ingredients to bring prosperity to the home and hearth. They also would like to keep the children safe from the demoness.

The fire is lit using a piece of Kapoor (karpur, sp.) – camphor. It rises rapidly – I don’t smell kerosene so I suspect the innards of the unwieldy demoness were made of hay.

Holika and Holi were most likely harvest festivals – from a time when the great north of this land was getting rapidly cultivable. Today few elements remain, but the dung cakes – five are to be offered – are a hark back to the times when animals were an indispensable part of the economy.

People get closer to the rapidly burning wood, its flames now about fifteen feet high. Most are taking pictures of it. At least one tries a selfie with it, and is pulled back in good time.

The heat rises rapidly till I can feel my face turning warm. I go back several steps under the little beel tree. A couple of young men would like to carry a bit of the fire with them and foolhardily, try to pull a burning piece from the pyre, causing an imbalance – like a demon that’s been hit on her knee and is bending over.

The demon tries hard to stay alive but loses, collapsing and giving out one last dying breath of fire that rises to the moon….

Good prevails over evil, as often it happens in mythology.

A tradition I fondly remember is bringing a bouquet of fresh garbanzo beans pods along with the entire plant and singing it in the pyre. The pods turn a sootish black and the fresh gram, still green and young otherwise acquires a creamy cooked consistency within a minute or so. These green pods – called ‘choliye’ or young chole (chickpeas / garbanzo beans) have had freshly arrived in the market around this time – the official start of the summer in North India. This year I’m unprepared so just watch others do that…it makes me smile.