Summary

Giovanni Battista Piranesi (1720-1778) is one of the greatest eighteenth century Italian printmakers and one of the leading figures in the development of the neoclassical style. Venetian by birth, he settled in Rome in 1740. He was the son of a mason and master builder and had a wide ranging training in architecture, stage design and perspective composition. Piranesi had little success in his early years in Rome but once established there he became a well-known figure producing a vast number of etchings illustrating Roman architecture and antiquities until his death in 1778.

This print is from a series of etchings made by Piranesi documenting antiquities excavated in Italy in the 18th century many of which had passed through Piranesi’s restoration workshop which he had established in Rome.The plates that Piranesi produced included text with information on the circumstances of discovery of each object and their contemporary location. The prints also bore dedications to Piranesi’s patrons and influential friends. This etching was dedicated to His Excellency, Signor General Schouvaloff, the Russian connoisseur, although the text is missing from this example. The etchings were made between 1768 and 1778 when they were issued as separate plates. However in 1778 they were assembled and published as a collection in two volumes under the title Vasi, Candelabri, Cippi, Sarcofagi, Tripodi, Lucerne Ed Ornamenti Antichi.

The vase in this etching is known as the Medici vase and at the time of publication was in the Galleria delle Statue in the Villa Medici. It is now in the Uffizi Gallery in Florence. It is believed to have been made about AD 50 to 100 and shows in carved relief the sacrifice of Iphigenia, daughter of Agamemnon, King of Mycenae. Iphigenia is flanked by the figures of Ulysses and Agamemnon.

Alongside Piranesi’s other publications, the series of prints published in Vasi…had a major influence on the development of the neo-classical style and served as source material for many architects and designers. In particular Piranesi was well known among wealthy English visitors to Rome who were frequent visitors to his workshop and who used the Grand Tour to add to their collections of antiquities.