Giovanni Battista Piranesi (1720–1778) was an Italian artist famous for his etchings of Rome but his greatest work was a series of 16 etchings entitled Le Carceri d’Invenzione or ‘Imaginary Prisons’. He sketched these in wax on copper plate based on images that he recalled when he was in a state of delirium. They are, in the words of Marguerite Yourcenar, “one of the most secret works bequeathed us by a man of the eighteenth century”.

According to the Belgian writer these prints represent the “negation of time, incoherence of space, suggested levitation, intoxication of the impossible reconciled or transcended”. These plates show enormous dark and menacing subterranean vaults with stairs leading to no clear destination along with chains and gallows that instill a sense of fear and awe. They have the quality of dreams or more accurately nightmares.

These fantastical works stand alone in time in both their concept and construction.

Artistically Piranesi was innovative in that his perspective used more than one vanishing point and he manipulated the size of objects along the vanishing points. He compressed his views to bring the distant subjects forward, as if viewed at a distance through a telephoto lens. While the layouts of his compositions were more consistent with wide-angle views, the perspective he applied was consistent with longer focal lengths (Piranesi’s Perspective and Composition Re-explored in a Digital Age. Randolph Langenbach. Quebec City Canada Outside the Frame. ICOMOS General Assembly October 2008, 1-10). He also created horizons at a plane that emphasised the non-linear distortions that he created toward vanishing points (Notion of Forgetting And Remembering. In Piranesi: Fireplace As The Setting Of A Dionysian Play. Analecta Husserliana. G Kale. Memory in the Ontopoesis of Life. 2009. Volume 101 119-132)(A geometrical analysis of multiple viewpoint perspective in the work of Giovanni Battista Piranesi: an application of geometric restitution of perspective. JB Rapp. The Journal of Architecture, 2008, 13 (6) 701-736).

Piranesi’s work may possibly have stemmed in part from the horrors of the inquisition but his fantasy warned of humans’ capacity for brutality. Other artists whose imagination followed in a similar ilk include Goya, William Blake, Odilon Redon and more recently Anslem Kiefer or Jake and Dinos Chapman.

Piranesi was born in Mogliano Veneto, near Treviso, then part of the Republic of Venice. The son of a stonemason and master builder, he received practical training in structural and hydraulic engineering from a maternal uncle who was employed by the Venetian waterworks, while his brother, a Carthusian monk, fired the aspiring architect with enthusiasm for the history and achievements of the ancient Romans. From 1740 he studied in Rome under Giuseppe Vasi, who introduced him to the art of etching and engraving. Piranesi returned to Venice twice in the mid-1740s, the very years in which Canaletto was producing his luminous etched views of Venice and Tiepolo was at work on his novel series of etchings, theScherzi and the Capricci—long recognized as an inspiration for the sketchy improvisation of Piranesi’s Grotteschi. From 1743 to 1747 he returned to Venice where he visitedGiovanni Battista Tiepolo, a prolific painter and printmaker.

Piranesi then started to produce etchings with rich textures and bold contrasts of light and shadow by means of intricate, repeated acid biting of the copperplate. He then went back to Rome, where he opened a workshop in Via del Corso. In 1748–1774 he created a series of reconstructed structures of the city in an imaginary form before they had disintegrated to their then current state. Note that even the Colosseum was in a dilapidated state when he was alive. His ‘reconstructions’ have since, using digital imaging techniques, been shown to be remarkably accurate (The Building of a Symbolic Image: The Juxtaposition of Giambattista Piranesi’s Vedute Di Roma with Photographs Taken 250 Years Later. R Langenbach. 2008 openarchive.icomos.org 29 sept-4 oct 2008). His knowledge of ancient building methods allowed him to make a name for himself as an antiquarian—his Antichità Romane of 1756 won him election to the Society of Antiquarians of London. In 1761 he became a member of the Accademia di San Luca and opened a printing facility of his own. In 1762 theCampo Marzio dell’antica Roma collection of engravings was printed. In 1764 Piranesi started his sole architectural works of importance, the restoration of the church of Santa Maria del Priorato in the Villa of the Knights of Malta, on Rome’s Aventine Hill.

In 1767 he was made a knight of the Golden Spur. In 1769 his publication of a series of ingenious and sometimes bizarre designs for chimneypieces, as well as an original range of furniture pieces, established his place as a versatile and resourceful designer. In 1776 he created his best known work as a ‘restorer’ of ancient sculpture, the Piranesi Vase (2.71m) tall it was produced from a large number of Roman fragments from Hadrian’s Villa at Tivoli, where Gavin Hamilton was excavating in the 1770s.

Piranesi’s son and coadjutor, Francesco, collected and preserved his plates. Twenty-nine folio volumes containing about 2000 prints appeared in Paris (1835–1837).

The series Le Carceri d’Invenzione or ‘Imaginary Prisons’ was started in 1745. The first state prints were published in 1750 and consisted of 14 etchings, untitled and unnumbered, with a sketch-like look. For the second publishing in 1761, all the etchings were reworked and numbered I–XVI (1–16). Numbers II and V were new etchings to the series. Though untitled, their conventional titles are:

I – Title Plate

II – The Man on the Rack

III – The Round Tower

IV – The Grand Piazza

V – The Lion Bas-Reliefs

VI – The Smoking Fire

VII – The Drawbridge

VIII – The Staircase with Trophies

IX – The Giant Wheel

X – Prisoners on a Projecting Platform

XI – The Arch with a Shell Ornament

XII – The Sawhorse

XIII – The Well

XIV – The Gothic Arch

XV – The Pier with a Lamp

XVI – The Pier with Chains

He depicted vast dungeons in a Kafkaesque manner with fantastic labyrinthian structures but with staircases that lead nowhere or lack bannisters. Piranesi reportedly refused to rest: saying that repose was unworthy of a citizen of Rome. He spent his last hours busy among his drawings and copperplates.

Click here for a brilliant 3D interpretation that integrates his sixteen etchings

To Giovanni Battista Piranesi

Delirious you dreamt

an incarcerated mindscape

a metaphysical dungeon

where there’s no escape

no bird song or faint breeze

galleries rim dim halls

a menacing sense of unease

gallows’ shadows cling to walls

huge blocks of rock form

this stone sarcophagus

forbidding and forlorn

holding torment’s apparatus

vast arches span tall pillars

ramps crisscross dank space

no recess affords reprieve

chains and cables interlace

stairs sprawl erratically

girders jut out of reach

damp merges with decay

racks, levers, wooden teeth

shackled torsos stoop in gloom

unearthly, eerie, ominous

your envisaged catacomb

where selfhood is consumed

unsolicited custodian of

this nightmare of abyss

a macabre mausoleum

preserved it still exists

Ninian

April 2016

(About 10 years ago, I fulfilled an ambition I had held for most of my adult life by buying a house in France. My time there is mostly relaxed and trouble free. Except for dealing with French bureaucracy – a story for another day – and the inevitable problems of looking after a house first built in 1830.

One skill I had not thought I would have to learn was looking after a swimming pool. How hard can that be, I had thought? But it has been a new relationship in my life. I have had to tolerate the ways of a slightly grumpy and occasionally ungrateful friend. And I have come to look at swimming pools quite differently. Not as features, or even possessions; I now see beyond the easily visible to the subtle signs of good husbandry known to a band of brothers who have struggled with adversity and laughed in its face. Eventually. In hotels, spas, leisure centres and other friends’ homes, I find myself gazing in awe, admiration and, occasionally, admonishment. In the presence of a swimming pool I am an oenophile tasting a new vintage: cooing and murmuring, judging the water’s colour, clarity and nose. It has been an introduction to new skills, equipment, and a whole new subculture of fellow sufferers.

Outdoor pools are put to bed over the winter, protected under a strong, opaque cover, usually with a sigh of relief and anticipation of a few month’s respite from its hungry and jealous needs. But eventually the winter’s inattention comes to an end, and the spring cleaning has to be faced…)

Take off the cover;

Discover what needs to be done

Alright, it’s a fright, it needs work – but don’t mope

With a plan, You’re a man

who can cope.

From the floor scoop the poop

Now you’ve made thick pea soup

But shock it and floc it, and mix it up well

Your fears and concerns will soon start to quell

Then let it settle, don’t be anxious to fettle,

It needs a good weekend to silt

Now look: you are nearer –

All the algae are killed

and the water above is now clearer

So suck it and chuck it – but always to waste

Don’t backwash that paste

For the sand in the filter will get out of kilter

Then flushing just won’t clear that mud

No longer a green hue,

The water’s now clear blue

And the chemical balance – just right.

In daylight it shimmers, it’s great for the swimmers

And better at night with a bright in-pool light

Keeping it clean needs tabs of chlorine,

And others with cleverer bits

And with a refill of water

Once weekly, joy ought to persist

Coritanus

March 2016

My first memory of seeing blood flow was when my four-year-old brother’s ear was bitten by an Alsatian dog. We were just walking down the road from our bungalow to Botany Bay beach on the Isle of Thanet. When we arrived home my brother’s white shirt was red at the shoulder and had a strange ink-blot pattern running down the inside of the sleeve. After an anti-tetanus injection and no more than a day, he was running about normally, the only visible signs of the bite being two small puncture marks on the lobe of his ear.

My next bloody experience was the sight of someone (it turned out to be me) spitting blood into a stainless steel bowl. I was ten years old and had just had four teeth extracted under gas at the local dental surgery. In those days you had teeth out sitting up in a chair that was raised in fits and starts by a foot pedal. I remember wondering why it was that the gas seemed to smell of the colour yellow -it made no sense to me. Now I know this experience is recognised as synaesthesia. The bleeding soon stopped, and in any case my only real concern was whether the tooth fairy would be bringing me all four shillings.

My first contact with the surgeon’s knife followed soon afterwards. It was late one night when the doctor came to see me in my boarding school dormitory. The matron and headmaster looked concerned and this, on top of their assertion that my father was a physician, was enough to prompt the doctor to ring a local surgeon and arrange for my admission to hospital. Vomiting on the back seat on the way there should have alerted them to the probability that I didn’t have appendicitis, but I suppose I had got this far… and so I found myself being dispatched to the operating theatre, sliding, or that was what it felt like, on a wobbly-wheeled trolley. The next thing I knew I woke to a faecal smell emanating from the curtain surrounding my neighbour.

I was distracted from any pain following my appendicectomy by the appearance of the man sitting up in the bed opposite mine. He had red indentations across his abdomen, the result of a large vertical incision placed in the midline of his abdomen and multiple deep tension sutures. I am certain that the pitting in his skin from the pressure of the stitches made as lasting an impression on me as they did on him! He exposed his scar as a battle scar, and talked about injury as though it were part of life; he had survived two serious motorbike accidents before his present misadventure, a bleeding stomach ulcer which had resulted in the removal of part of his stomach. My appendix was lily- white and was presented to me in a bottle!

Worms, frogs and then rats were victims of dissection in my biology classes. Again it was only the smell that I found disgusting; dissecting a once-animate object caused me no problem. Curiosity about what lay beneath made cutting through the skin no more difficult for me than pulling the tag of a zipper.

Blood hardly entered my world during the few years after these episodes. I experienced the occasional nosebleed or graze, but nothing more, until a holiday job at seventeen as an auxiliary at a nearby cottage hospital provided useful experience. I cleaned, packed and sterilised sets of instruments. After only two weeks I was allowed to act as a runner in the operating theatre, fetching sutures or instruments as required. The fact that I perceived this as a great honour helped to overcome my anxiety on being let into the inner sanctum, although observing an operation was nevertheless a shock at first. It seemed such a brutal intrusion into another human being. The division of the skin and the meddling with the body’s contents seemed brutal. However, to my amazement, the application of a few sutures and a dressing seemed to reverse this process almost as quickly as it had been executed. I never saw patients on the ward after surgery, but there was always the expectation and promise of cure in the surgeon’s voice.

I was particularly struck by a dextrous surgeon who had worked in field hospitals during the First World War. I could barely believe how quickly he performed a below-knee amputation or removed part of a colon. He used a ‘no touch technique’, rare even in the 1960s, in which a surgeon does not wear sterile gloves, but simply avoids touching anything other than the handles of the instruments, which are left hanging over the side of the instrument trolley ready to be picked up again. I was impressed. I have not heard of anyone doing this since. I feel privileged to have seen this surgeon at work. He knew what he was doing and he set about his work with purpose and methodical haste. Blood was spilt, but that seemed necessary to the task, and I happily mopped the floor afterwards.

Then off to Guy’s Hospital, where anatomy classes meant a group of six standing around an anaemic cadaver. The person now the object of our attention had generously given their body to medicine having realised that, once dead, their remains would cease to be of use to them. There was fat in abundance, but no blood, as bodies were embalmed and drained of most of the blood before being perfused with formaldehyde. The rancid, slightly nauseating smell clung to our clothes, survived vigorous hand-washing and often prohibited any enjoyment of food that day.

Visiting the operating theatre as a medical student caused me no concern. I had already been exposed to the many ’ectomies – hysterectomy, oophorectomy, colectomy, adenoidectomy – during my holiday job and I felt quite positive about walking through those swing doors, as I knew better than many of my classmates what lay beyond. Perhaps it was this feeling that inspired me with the confidence to work as a surgeon.

Do I remembe r making my first incision? No. What followed my training at Guy’s was a graduated programme of surgical training that helped me progress to a stage at which I could cope with moderate, then even extreme, bleeding and trauma. In emergency situations I have had to open someones chest and suture the ruptured atrium of their heart, trephine a skull, remove a ruptured spleen; all tasks I would have never imagined that I could do as a young adult. Wonderful teachers helped me. Training and a gradual acquisition of skills and confidence were central to becoming competent. Making incisions and removing or rearranging people’s flesh became second nature.

Now that I have put down my scalpel, I wonder at my audacity in making legalised assaults on my fellow human beings and bemused by how it formed such a large part of my life in spite of the aforementioned narrative.

Ninian

February 2016

The Right Thing:

The Life, Travels and some Revelations of an English Doctor

by Richard Colman

Medical autobiographies fall into two categories: “Wasn’t I Clever?”, and “Weren’t My Patients Funny?” A good example of the first variety would be “One Life”, in which Christian Barnard describes his battles to deliver ground breaking cardiac surgery. Of the second, in “It’s a Doc’s Life”, the medical humourist David Delvin describes applying his common sense to the common man, a sort of All Patients Great and Small.

The job of every medical author is to deliver a credible balance between humility (“Oh, anyone could have done it”), and brilliance (“Oh no they couldn’t”). One trick they often use is to portray themselves as unconventional. And rightly so: years later, Barnard’s obituaries were to provide details of the considerably less orthodox aspects of his life but, hey, trust me, I’m a doctor. The positive spin seeks to paint them as lateral thinkers; such men (always men?) are able to overcome the tiresome constraints which hold back ordinary doctors – but always and only, of course, to the benefit of their patients. It is an attractive formula. As patients we expect competence in our doctors, but we do like a little charisma and élan. After all, we’re worth it.

The problem is that an audience likes a good read. It would be remarkable to find a medical autobiography subtitled “Actually, I wasn’t very good”, or “In my battles with the establishment, I now realise I was wrong”. Hardly books to fly off the shelves. So it is unsurprising to find medical memoirs dramatic and emphasising the extraordinary. That’s the territory.

And there have been many very good medical writers, so it’s quite brave to enter this pool. Colman’s book is not perfect and certainly not great literature. It is self published, and its lack of editing, and even proof reading, is clear. But don’t dismiss it. This is a gentle book about a thoughtful man – a bit of a square peg in a round hole. It tells us a lot about him, which is quite nice, but it does invite “so what?” The what is that it also tells us something about the changes in medical practice in the last generation, and prompts us to ask whether those changes they have improved or worsened medical care.

I should declare an interest. I knew Richard Colman when we were both members of the General Medical Council. Later to be shaken to its foundations by the scandals of Shipman, Bristol and others, it was a flawed organisation, then in its last incarnation of any meaningful self-regulation. As Colman describes, it was an imperfect mix of doctors elected by the profession, those appointed by the medical establishment and lay people appointed by government. We were both in the elected category; new boys with very little influence. It was difficult to make one’s way among the great and the good, and I for one found it very easy to keep my head down.

That was not Colman’s style. I knew he was a thorn in the side of the organisation’s High Command, but I had not realised just how dogged he had been in pursuing the injustices which he saw. Some readers may be turned off by the detail of the workings of the GMC, but that is a risk worth taking. The problems illustrate the faults of most large organisations and perhaps especially Quangos. There was a lot of ego and ambition around. All that needs to be said, I think, is that it took an unusual David to do battle with this particular Goliath, both at the GMC and in the highest courts of the land. This book is the story of a man who did that, his background and the career he carved for himself.

Colman had an inner confidence. Very much his own man, he never sought preferment, and I suspect he did not seek out the battles which subsequently occupied much of his professional life.

During that life in medicine, there have been many changes. A rejection of paternalism, and the encouragement of better team working have been understandable and necessary, but may have come at a price. It remains a paradox that at a time when advances in medical science make doctors ever more effective, we appear to have lost much of the trust which came with our role.

Traditionally patients had “their” doctors; doctors in turn had “their” patients. Medical training emphasised the central importance of this key responsibility. Colman’s book addresses some of these concerns. He is no hero, and makes no such claim. Certainly some readers will simply see a doctor trained in a different age, and who should now shuffle off, enjoy his pension, read books and play golf. But others will see a doctor who was one of many who wanted to do what he thought was right, but who, like very few, stood up for what he believed when challenged. Do we need more or less doctors like that?

This is a book written by an amateur. It will win no prizes. But it is stimulating, and I found it a good read.

Coritanus

February 2016

Back when I was eleven somebody in Oldham Town Hall had the effrontery to inform me, on the basis of a highly suspect exam, that I would be better suited to practical work outdoors. As a consequence of this I spent five years doing woodwork at a Secondary Modern school which was certainly designed to make one feel secondary and was not very modern and thus came to France never having been in a French lesson in my life. In an abortive attempt to learn to converse with my neighbours I started taking French lessons, only feeling any sense of self-worth when John joined the class. He was 10 years old, came with his mother and was frankly in need of a good hair wash. His mother was a psychologist from Sydney which tells you all you need to know about John. The benefit of having him in the class was that I was no longer bottom of it. There proved to be little benefit in learning French to converse with the neighbours as in this part of the country they don’t appear to speak French.

Learning about the French obsession with gender and how to use words such as le, la, son, sa, mon, ma, ton and ta remains a trial. Like any obsession it seems to be over the top and possibly wholly unnecessary. The most unbelievable aspect of it is that somebody or some body, and I suspect that they will be male and very left-brained, have to decide the gender of newly formed nouns.

Synaesthesia is now a well documented condition which has been enjoyed by some of the world’s greatest painters, musicians and mathematicians and endured by others insufficiently gifted to benefit from it. Its principal symptom is that the stimulus of one sense produces a response in another thus it becomes possible to hear colours and smell words. It has even been suggested that synaesthesia may be how words first got ascribed to objects. On this basis I can understand why ‘concombre’ is male even though it ends with an ‘e’, but who on earth decided, presumably within living memory, that a hi-fi system was female? One can gather from this that in my battle with the French language I am not yet on the winning side and certainly the problem with gender only gets worse. ‘Chemise’, a man’s shirt is a feminine noun whilst ‘chemisier’, a blouse, is masculine. I’m having a real problem making sense of this.

My lack of facility with the language became very apparent when I discovered I had capricorns. Monsieur Denax said so. He visited twice and invited me to dinner so I feel I can now call him Henri. The Hachette dictionary was not much help with capricorns as it simply defined them as ‘capricorns’. With the aid of diagrams Henri was able to show me that whatever they may be they were eating away at the inside of my beams. At least that information ruled out the possibility that they were goats. Apparently capricorns can turn the wood into something resembling brandy snaps which is exactly what the beams eventually do. As you can now well imagine I had to apologise to Henri for my poor French. Gallantly he apologised for his poor English telling me that after the war his family were very poor so he had to leave school early and thus learnt no foreign language. At least that is what I thought he said. Being an ex-history teacher I said I was very interested in learning about the war in this area. At this Henri’s face lit up and he rushed out to his car returning moments later with a map, a calendar and a rolled up umbrella. The last two items he ceremoniously presented to me. Apparently he gifts them to all who employ his company to clear capricorns. With the aid of the map he proceeded to tell me all the places you can get to from our local railway station. Clearly something was lost in pronunciation.

By the way did you know that the French for ‘cul-de-sac’ is ‘impasse’? Now how did that come about? At some point I must try to ascertain what the French is for ‘billet-doux’ and ‘piece de resistance’.

Brigantes