The list of countries or areas contains the names of countries or areas in alphabetical order, their three-digit numerical codes used for statistical processing purposes by the Statistics Division of the United Nations Secretariat, and their three-digit alphabetical codes assigned by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). In general, this list of countries or areas includes those countries or areas for which statistical data are compiled by the Statistics Division of the United Nations Secretariat.

The names of countries or areas refer to their short form used in day-to-day operations of the United Nations and not necessarily to their official name as used in formal documents. These names are based on the United Nations Terminology Database (UNTERM). The designations employed and the presentation of material at this site do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the United Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.

The list of geographic regions presents the composition of geographical regions used by the Statistics Division in its publications and databases. Each country or area is shown in one region only. These geographic regions are based on continental regions; which are further subdivided into sub-regions and intermediary regions drawn as to obtain greater homogeneity in sizes of population, demographic circumstances and accuracy of demographic statistics.

North America : The continent of North America (numerical code 003) comprises Northern America (numerical code 021), Caribbean (numerical code 029), and Central America (numerical code 013).

Kosovo : The status of Kosovo should be understood to be in the context of United Nations Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). As a result, within the "Standard country or area codes for statistical use (M49)", Kosovo is currently considered part of Serbia (numerical code 688). However, for strictly statistical purposes, the numerical code 412 can be used to represent this area.