RubyMine Reviews

JetBrains

Get Quote

Need help deciding?

Talk to one of our software experts for free. They will help you select the best software for your business.

Get A Quote

First Name *

Last Name *

Business E-mail *

z

Phone *

Company *

Job Title *

I understand by clicking on "GET QUOTE" below I am agreeing to the Slashdot Terms of Use and the Privacy Policy which describe how we use and share your data. I agree to receive quotes and related information from Slashdot.org and our partners via phone calls and e-mail to the contact information I entered above. I understand that I can withdraw my consent at anytime. Please refer to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy or Contact Us for more details.

JavaScript is required for this form.

Submitting...

Alternatives

Claim this page

RubyMine Description

You can take advantage of language-specific-aware syntax and error highlighting, code formatting and completion, as well as quick documentation. Smart search allows you to jump to any class or file, symbol, or any IDE action, tool window, using smart search. You only need one click to switch between the super method, declaration, test, usages and implementation. You can navigate in Rails projects with super-fast navigation thanks to an MVC-based view and model, class, gem dependencies diagrams, and a project view and model. Code inspections are a great way to follow community best practices. They check your code for any errors and offer quick fixes. Automated, but safe refactorings make your code cleaner and easier to maintain. Rails-aware Refactorings allow you to make project-wide changes. For example, renaming a controller will also rename views, helpers, and tests.

Pricing

Pricing Starts At:

$199 per user per year

Pricing Information:

Second year $159

Free Trial:

Yes

Integrations

Reviews

Total

ease

features

design

support

No User Reviews. Be the first to provide a review:

Write a Review

Company Details

Company:

JetBrains

Year Founded:

2000

Headquarters:

Czech Republic

Website:

www.jetbrains.com/ruby/

Recommended Products

Create and run cloud-based virtual machines.

Secure and customizable compute service that lets you create and run virtual machines on Google’s infrastructure.

Computing infrastructure in predefined or custom machine sizes to accelerate your cloud transformation. General purpose (E2, N1, N2, N2D) machines provide a good balance of price and performance. Compute optimized (C2) machines offer high-end vCPU performance for compute-intensive workloads. Memory optimized (M2) machines offer the highest memory and are great for in-memory databases. Accelerator optimized (A2) machines are based on the A100 GPU, for very demanding applications.

Product Details

Platforms

Windows

Mac

Linux

Type of Training

Documentation

Webinars

Videos

Customer Support

Phone Support

Online

RubyMine Features and Options

IDE Software

Code Completion

Compiler

Cross Platform Support

Debugger

Drag and Drop UI

Integrations and Plugins

Multi Language Support

Project Management

Text Editor / Code Editor