In the year 2013 much has changed in the world of web development: new languages, frameworks and libraries, and even test runners and frameworks. JetBrains continues to provide the best tools for all web developers, no matter what language or technology they’re using, and in today's post we'll fresh…

Flex is doing good! Apache Flex SDK 4.10 was released in August, and there have already been more than 7500 installations of 4.10 within two months since its release. Of course this SDK is supported by IntelliJ IDEA. Nevertheless, according to the feedback we get, many Flex developers still st…

IntelliJ IDEA 12.1 has complete support for the Adobe Gaming SDK, i.e. Adobe AIR SDK bundled together with Away3D, Starling and Feathers frameworks. For those who are interested in developing games using IntelliJ IDEA we have prepared a step-by-step tutorial with instructions on how to set up, buil…

Over the last year there have been many rumors about death of Flash, just as rumors about its second life, inspired by Apache and new Adobe AIR features. Since the release of IntelliJ IDEA 11.1 we gather Usage Statistics, which helps us understand better your real needs and allocate resources corres…

We are pleased to announce that IntelliJ IDEA 12 will support new features of Adobe AIR SDK 3.4. They are designed to simplify iOS apps development process: Run/debug AIR applications on iOS Simulator (Mac OS X only) Debug iOS apps on device both over USB or network Single-click iOS app deployme…

We are delighted to announce that JetBrains is supporting the try{harder} Level Up event this year. This is an annual collaborative learning conference aimed at advanced Flash developers. The event will take place next week, March 19-23, in Nottingham, UK. Every attendee will receive a Personal Lic…

Hi, Flash and Flex devs! We've been analyzing feedback from those of you who use IntelliJ IDEA for Flex and ActionScript development. A common problem turns out to be complicated project setup. To address this issue in IntelliJ IDEA 11.1, we have reworked the user interface, all the way from module…

At JetBrains we not only bring you new powerful features that make your life better, but also take care to polish the good old stuff to perfection. Let's take a look at the Move refactoring for ActionScript classes, Flex components and all other types of top-level declarations (namespaces, functions…

Hello guys! Just recently we've published an update to our Flash/Flex Profiler plugin that gives you a powerful and easy to use toolset for profiling of Flash-based applications in IntelliJ IDEA. Let us give you a brief overview of what you can do with it. (more…)…

Do you know how to navigate from a class to its test and back again or how to create a FlexUnit test quickly with IntelliJ IDEA 11? Let me tell you. First of all make sure that flexunit.swc is within your module dependencies: and just press Ctrl+Shift+T (Cmd+Shift+T on Mac) or select Navigate | T…

I'd like to highlight few useful features in ActionScript/Flex debugger, some of which are new in IntelliJ IDEA 11. Better members presentation in Variables view (informative icons, sorting) with ability to jump to source: Convenient collections view (size, Vector status, collection elements): …

Since IntelliJ IDEA 11 the Mark Object action, which was previously available in JVM-based debuggers only, is also supported in JavaScript debuggers for Firefox and Chrome browsers. To mark an object press F11 on the corresponding node in any debugger tree and specify the label: After that the lab…