GoLand Reviews

JetBrains

Get Quote

Need help deciding?

Talk to one of our software experts for free. They will help you select the best software for your business.

Get A Quote

First Name *

Last Name *

Business E-mail *

z

Phone *

Company *

Job Title *

I understand by clicking on "GET QUOTE" below I am agreeing to the Slashdot Terms of Use and the Privacy Policy which describe how we use and share your data. I agree to receive quotes and related information from Slashdot.org and our partners via phone calls and e-mail to the contact information I entered above. I understand that I can withdraw my consent at anytime. Please refer to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy or Contact Us for more details.

JavaScript is required for this form.

Submitting...

Alternatives

Claim this page

GoLand Description

All Go developers, whether they are newbies or professionals, can use the on-the-fly error identification and suggestions to fix it. One-step undo and intelligent code completion are all available. Documentation hints and dead code detection are also available. It takes a lot of effort and time to understand legacy, team, and foreign projects. GoLand code navigation allows you to quickly switch between shadowed methods, implementations and usages. You can jump between files, types, and other symbols. You can also find their usages, and examine them with a convenient grouping by type. You can run and debug your applications with powerful built-in tools. You can create and debug tests with no additional plugins or configuration work, and you can test your applications directly in the IDE. The IDE includes a built-in Code Coverage tool to ensure that your tests do not miss any important information.

Pricing

Pricing Starts At:

$199 per user per year

Pricing Information:

Second year $159

Free Trial:

Yes

Integrations

Reviews

Total

ease

features

design

support

No User Reviews. Be the first to provide a review:

Write a Review

Company Details

Company:

JetBrains

Year Founded:

2000

Headquarters:

Czech Republic

Website:

www.jetbrains.com/go/

Recommended Products

Visitor Management and Staff Sign In | Sign In App

Sign In App is a modern, enjoyable way to sign in visitors and staff, and book desks and meeting rooms.

Our visitor management system streamlines registration, check-in, and authorization processes, while our facility management tools streamline room booking, resource allocation, and asset management. We prioritize security with our advanced risk mitigation measures, including health and safety protocols, emergency messaging, and robust analytics for thorough auditing.

Product Details

Platforms

Windows

Mac

Linux

Type of Training

Documentation

Webinars

Videos

Customer Support

Phone Support

Online

GoLand Features and Options

IDE Software

Code Completion

Compiler

Cross Platform Support

Debugger

Drag and Drop UI

Integrations and Plugins

Multi Language Support

Project Management

Text Editor / Code Editor