About Lowell, Massachusetts

Located 27 miles northwest of Boston, Lowell is the fourth largest city in Massachusetts. Founded as the nation’s first planned manufacturing center for textiles, its strategic location at the intersections of routes 495, 93, and 3, along with its commuter rail link to Boston, makes Lowell an ideal location for businesses and residents alike. The Lowell National Historical Park was the country’s first urban national park and a tribute to the Industrial Revolution and textile industry that boomed in New England in the 19th Century.

Shopping, Dining, Art, History, And More

The city offers an eclectic mix of dining and shopping and a wide variety of cultural opportunities influenced by its many ethnic groups. There is an eclectic mixture of art and history in Lowell, MA, from its museums, art galleries, theatres, and the nationally renowned Lowell Folk Festival to its trolley tours, canal boat tours, and the working cotton mill exhibits it offers to visitors and locals alike.

Live Entertainment

The 2,800-seat Lowell Auditorium hosts many of the country’s best performers at affordable prices, while the Merrimack Repertory Theater is one of the few self-sustaining repertory theater groups in the northeast. The Tsongas Center at Umass Lowell is the host to many fabulous shows and special events.

Living In Lowell

This planned urban community is built along the Merrimack River and its diverse canal system, which provided power to early manufacturers. Today the city is a revitalized urban center offering residents a mix of urban downtown housing located in its refurbished mills and old-fashioned city neighborhoods made up of beautiful older homes.

The Last Pow-Wow Oak In New England

Lowell, MA, holds the last Pow-Wow Oak located in New England. The oak is over 300 years old and is the site of ancient Native American traditions. The original meaning of Pow-Wow is a practice of a religious or magical ritual, and it also represents a gathering for council or conference. The name for a Native American shaman or healer is Pauwau.

The Wamesit Indians met under this tree centuries ago to perform rituals and seek council. The oak has historical significance for the American Revolutionary War as well. Militia gathered under this tree before setting off for Concord and Lexington.