Afghan women resist and defy the Taliban government by continuing to study in secret.

They set up secret schools, offering online and live classes to those brave enough to attend.

Sana Safi, the BBC's Afghan-language journalist, takes us through several secret schools and into the hearts and minds of those who, despite the risks, refuse to be denied an education.

Tuesday, August 15, 2023 marks two years since the Taliban came to power.

"I feel like I'm stealing education. I'm stealing life."

The poignant words of a teenage girl from Afghanistan echo in the air as I sit glued to my laptop in my London flat, connected to a hidden world shrouded in secrecy.

"I can't think about the future anymore": Afghan girls without school next year

Women in Afghanistan: "I felt very nervous going back to the classroom"

Afghan dreamers - young scientists who had to leave because of the Taliban

"Can you stand in the back so I can see the whole class," I ask the young woman holding a laptop on the other side, panning the built-in camera around the room.

She shows me a ward with at least 30 young women.

They sit in rows of benches, wearing black, except for white or colorful scarves on their heads.

Their teacher, also dressed in all black, is next to the white board.

Based on the diagram she drew, I'm guessing it's a biology lesson.

And while the quiet murmur of the classroom fills the virtual space, a hidden reality opens before my eyes.

Not only was I allowed to attend this secret class, held at an undisclosed location in Afghanistan, but I am witnessing an act of resistance against the Taliban rulers, who have banned high school and university education for women and girls for the past year and a half.

My whirlwind of emotions

The trip to the hidden world of the Afghan secret schools caused a real whirlwind of emotions in me.

As I connected with these educators and students through a digital window into their lives, it reminded me of my own past in Kandahar, in the south of the country.

Born in Afghanistan, as a girl I also attended school in secret.

While I am talking to the teacher, I feel that dark and difficult memories have briefly taken over me.

Eventually I manage to ask her how long she has been working at the school.

"I've been here as a teacher for six months," she says.

But never without fear.

"My brother often tells me - 'please leave school'.

"No one knows about her, but he worries that one day the Taliban will come, but my parents are the ones who convinced me to stay and teach my sisters, because I feel their pain.

"My university is also closed. And that's why I want to help the girls here to learn", she explains to me.

The classroom is decorated with traditional wooden window frames, paintings on the walls and seems to be teeming with life.

In stark contrast to my memories of the mid-1990s.

At that time, when the Taliban were just coming to power, born in the bloodshed of a brutal civil war, overnight, education was denied to all women and girls.

"Under Taliban rule, being a woman is equal to death, they are breathing but dead"

Female judges from Afghanistan: "Women are imprisoned, but criminals are free"

The teacher resisted the Taliban by opening an online school for girls

I was sent home from the school gate

I will never forget the first day I tried to go to school under Taliban rule.

When I was only seven years old, I was met at the school gate by a woman who told me that no girl or woman was allowed to enter.

I had a black uniform that my mother had sewn for me with a yellow embroidered belt, also forbidden.

I remember how disappointed I was when I heard that I wasn't allowed in, because I was so excited about the new uniform.

But my parents, not giving up, immediately started looking for a secret school.

They found one couple, a husband and wife, who turned their own house into several classrooms.

Every morning my mother would take me to the green market before disappearing behind the stalls and entering a secret school in a mud house.

We learned to read and write from books we could get our hands on.

But the couple's efforts were, unfortunately, short-lived.

As soon as the Taliban found out about her, they stormed our school and imprisoned my teachers for 15 days.

After being released from prison, the two immediately fled Afghanistan.

Five years later, after the attacks of September 11, 2011, when the US and its allies toppled the Taliban regime, I was among the millions of teenage girls who were given back their right to education.

When the Taliban returned to power in August 2021, they again restricted women's and girls' access to education.

This time, girls are allowed to attend the lower grades of primary school, while they are banned from secondary education, high schools and colleges.

It is a cruel twist of fate that robs these young women of their dreams and stifles their potential.

At the heart of Afghanistan's secret school networks are fearless female educators who are forced to work in the shadows.

Pastana Durani is an activist who, since the entry into force of the most recent ban, has been leading the initiative to open as many new secret schools as possible in the country.

Her umbrella organization, Learn Afghanistan, currently has 230 female students, all over the age of 12.

Who are the Taliban?

Afghanistan in brief - chronology

The Taliban ordered harsher punishments, possible public executions, amputations and stonings

He was a Taliban sniper, now he has an office job

'Power over your own destiny'

The risk for all participants in this project is huge, she says.

But doing nothing, she believes, is simply not an option.

"If I hadn't been educated, they would have married me.

"My sister would be married off, my brother would be working somewhere as child labor, but because of my education, I became the matriarch in my own family and because of that I gained power over my own destiny," he adds.

As I watch Pastana's efforts come to fruition on the laptop screen, her students speak to me in flawless English.

They tell me that they study everything from biology, chemistry and physics to philosophy, right through to practical subjects like graphic design.

Several young women tell me they want to be diplomats, doctors and engineers.

And yet, while listening to them, I am reminded of the challenges of that feat.

The fear of discovering and closing schools is too great, but so is the determination of these young women to learn and progress.

The Taliban's official position on the new ban on education is that it is not permanent.

They claim that they are working on creating a "safe environment" and making "necessary changes to the school plan and curriculum."

We have yet to find out exactly what that means and when, if at all, they will lift the ban.

During this trip, I was overwhelmed by a real mixture of emotions: from hope, frustration, admiration to sadness.

The fight for girls' education in Afghanistan is far from over, but the determination of these women is a beacon of strength.

As one student told me: “We will continue to resist. Maybe one day there will be light at the end of the tunnel."

See also this story

Follow us on Facebook,Twitter i Viber. If you have a topic proposal for us, contact us at bbcnasrpskom@bbc.co.uk