I hold a PhD in German Literature from Ohio State University and a PhD in English Literature (Creative Writing and Literary Translation) from the University of Glasgow. I'm an HEA Senior Fellow and a member of CIOL, ITI, Scotnet, the Translators Association, and the Society of Authors. I am currently serving as Secretary of APTIS (the Association of Programmes in Translation and Interpreting Studies UK and Ireland).

In addition to teaching Translation Studies, I am a literary translator. My translations of poetry by the German poets Sarah Kirsch, Monika Rinck, and Else Lasker-Schüler highlight the work of German female poets. Sarah Kirsch,Ice Roses: Selected Poems (Carcanet, 2014), a bi-lingual edition featuring over 100 poems from Kirsch's ten collections, which I selected, translated, and introduced, was shortlisted for the Oxford-Weidenfeld Translation Prize and for the Popescu European Poetry Translation Prize in 2015. My translation of Monika Rinck's poem 'pfingstrosen' was commended in the open category of the Stephen Spender Poetry Translation Prize in the same year. I recently translated the influential German bestseller Altes Land by Doerte Hansen, which appeared in English as This House is Mine (St. Martin's Press, New York, 2016). This translation was nominated for the ATA's Ungar German Translation Prize 2017 and was long-listed for the 2018 International DUBLIN Literary Award.

I am currently conducting research on the role of translation in the internationalisation of German publishing after World War II.

Introduction to Ice Roses: Selected Poems (Carcanet, 2014), which was one of the seven shortlisted titles. . Weidenfeld Literary Translation Prize Award Ceremony

2015

http://www.st-annes.ox.ac.uk/…rize-2015-shortl

The award ceremony was part of the college's Oxford Translation Day.

Introduction to Sarah Kirsch's Poetry and Reading . Popescu European Poetry Translation Prize Awards Ceremony

2015

http://poetrysociety.org.uk/…cu-prize/2015-2/

Readings by shortlisted translators of the biennial Popescu European Poetry Translation Prize 2015. Sarah Kirsch, Ice Roses: Selected Poems (Carcanet, 2014), which I selected, introduced and translated, was one of the 6 shortlisted titles.

Past and Present Session . Stanza International Poetry Festival

http://stanzapoetry.org/festival/events/past-present-4

In the Past & Present sessions, contemporary speakers give a personal response to favourite past poets writing in English or other languages. Sarah Kirsch (1935–2013) is recognised as one of Germany’s most powerful poets of the post-war era. She wrote poems full of strange beauty and free-flowing syntax. In this session Anne Stokes, who translated and introduced a selection of Kirsch’s poems forIce Roses(Carcanet, 2014),will be reading some of her translations and talking about this remarkable German poet.

Weldon Kees (1914-1955) was an American poet, playwright and novelist, and also a critic, jazz pianist, and filmmaker. He is regarded as an important poet of his generation and his work has influenced later poets. His disappearance sixty years ago in 1955 remains a mystery. Brian Johnstone, whose narrative poem Robinson: A Journey was inspired by Kees’ character of that name, talks about Weldon Kees and reads some of his poems.

Poetry Translation and Creative Writing Workshop

This was an invited seminar, a contribution to the Translation Studies Graduate Programme

Poetry Translation Workshop . Invited Speaker at the BCLA Postgraduate Conference (arranged jointly by the University of Glasgow and the University of St Andrews)

Reading from translated book Ice Roses: Selected Poems by Sarah Kirsch (Carcanet, 2014) . Reading at St. Mungo's Mirrorball Glasgow

Invited to read at this poets' organisation from book of translations

Readings from translated book Ice Roses: Selected Poems by Sarah Kirsch (Carcanet, 2014) . Reading: Jan Wagner and Anne Stokes

This was a book launch.

Workshop Leader . Translation Workshop: German

http://www.scottishpoetrylibrary.org.uk/…-workshop-german

You will make English translations from 'bridge' versions with the help of Anne Stokes (University of Stirling), sharing the results and discussing the process. You will gain insights into German poetry and language, as well as the stimulating and challenging world of poetry translation. You do not need to speak/read German or to have translated previously to attend this event, although those with experiencein these areas are welcome.

German Poet Monika Rinck has received the 2015 Kleist Prize, Ann Stokes is translating her selected poems

https://www.pnreview.co.uk/…e=Monika%20Rinck

German Poet MONIKA RINCK has received the 2015 Kleist Prize, an award bestowed annually for a writer’s work to date. The Heinrich von Kleist Society highlighted the 46-year-old Berlin-resident poet’s linguistic versatility: ‘Rinck’s tonal range is as amazing as her wit. Her texts are […] moving yet pack a punch, amusing und melancholy.’ Rinck established her reputation with the poetry volumes Helle Verwirrung (2009) and Honigprotokolle (2012). She also writes prose and essays. In 2013 she was awarded the Peter Huchel Prize for Poetry. Her work is available in English in 16 Poems, translated by Alistair Noon, Barque Press, 2009, and in to refrain from embracing, translated by Nicholas Grindell, Burning Deck, 2011. Grindell is currently working on a translation of Honigprotokolle, and Ann Stokes is translating her selected poems. (News and Notes, PN Review 224 (2015), 41:6)