Description

Reviews

Description

Sarah Kirsch (1935 - 2013) is recognised as one of Germany's most powerful poets of the post-war era. She lived and worked first in East Germany, then (after political persecution) in the West, making her home finally in rural Schleswig-Holstein. Her poetry's free-flowing syntax and fluid sound patterning reflect her lifelong resistance to constraint and convention. Anne Stokes' translations above all capture the living sounds and rhythms of Kirsch's writing. In Ice Roses Anglophone readers experience the full range of Kirsch's poetry, from her early work to her last books, full of the strange beauty of her chosen landscapes.

About the Author

Sarah Kirsch was born Ingrid Bernstein in 1935 in the East German region of the Harz Mountains, Prussian Saxony. She later changed her first name in order to protest against her father's anti-Semitism. During the 1960s Kirsch studied biology and literature at the universities of Halle and Leipzig and married the poet Rainer Kirsch, from whom she later separated. She published her first poetry collection, Landpartie (Country Outing), in 1967 and went on to publish numerous others. She was openly critical of the East German socialist regime, which led to her exclusion in 1976 from the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED). One year later she left East Germany. Her work has been translated into many languages, including Japanese. Kirsch is also an acclaimed prose-writer and a translator of children's books into German. In 1976 she was awarded the German international literary Petrarca-Preis prize. Anne Stokes holds a PhD in German Literature from Ohio State University. She teaches Translation at the University of Stirling and translates from German.

Reviews

'Sarah Kirsch is a poet of rare power and invention, who - rather like Akhmatova - can evoke a relationship in crisis with a few lines of dialogue. Direct and lucid, always lyrical, she finds music in the cadence of speech and the hesitations between words. It is a great fortune that these German poems have found a translator who can honour the shape of the originals, while writing them afresh in English.' -Elaine Feinstein

Awards

Short-listed for Corneliu M Popescu Prize for European Poetry in Translation 2015.

Book Information

ISBN 9781847771513

Author Sarah Kirsch

Format Paperback

Page Count 267

Imprint Carcanet Press Ltd

Publisher Carcanet Press Ltd

Reviews

No reviews yet Write a Review