Sarah Kirsch’s 1982 poem “Naturschutzgebiet” (Nature Reserve) textually excavates the geographical space upon which a portion of the Berlin Wall stood. Through the use of metonymical references to features of the past and present landscape, the fifteen-line poem is dense with words that seem to simultaneously index multiple moments in the history of this place. For readers privy to these references, this potentially creates a poetic texture (Stockwell, 2009) characterized by the layering of text worlds (Gavins, 2007) corresponding to actual worlds, which overlap in space but not in historical time. A key pragmatic effect for many readers is a range of stronger and weaker socially critical implicatures related to the Berlin Wall and the East German regime that built it. [...] Kirsch’s poem provides an ideal case study for how cognitive-pragmatic theories of metonymy can help us to understand how readers’ experiences of poetic texts are connected to their conceptualization of past and present social and physical realities and how this in turn can result in socially critical implicatures...

Olga Kirsch’s life and work was dominated by three men: her father Schmuel M. Kirsch, her youth lover Ellis, and her husband Joseph Gillis. Their presence can be felt throughout her oeuvre, both in her published Afrikaans and in her unpublished English poetry culminating in a collection of seventy-seven poems written in the months that followed the death of her husband. Through these poems the reader is introduced to a passionate side of Kirsch’s personality that was rarely seen by those who knew her in the normal course of her life. These three relationships resulted in some of Kirsch’s most beautiful poetry, of which her “Vyf sonnette vir my vader” is probably the best known.

This paper traces the peculiar literary reception of L. M. Montgomery's "Anne of Green Gables" in the life and texts of Swedish author Astrid Lindgren, with a special focus on her "Madicken" stories. Apart from lots of minor parallels between the main characters of both narrative worlds, there is a remarkable similarity between a number of episodes which show the protagonists literally interacting with different form and genres of literature, by transforming poems and biblical narrations into games and incorporating themselves into them. This merging process reflects Lindgren’s own childhood experiences with "Anne of Green Gables" and stimulates similar acts of active, transtextual reception. Dieser Aufsatz geht einigen Spuren nach, die Lucy Maud Montgomerys "Anne auf Green Gables" in Leben und Werk Astrid Lindgrens hinterlassen hat. Der Schwerpunkt liegt dabei auf den "Madita"-Bänden. Abgesehen von etlichen kleineren Parallelen zwischen den Hauptfiguren der beiden Erzählwelten fallen bei Lindgren wie Montgomery einige Episoden auf, in denen die Protagonisten im wahrsten Sinn des Wortes mit Literatur interagieren und dabei Gedichte und Erzählungen in ihre Lebenswirklichkeit übertragen - bzw. sich selbst in diese Texte hineinspielen. Solche poetischen Spiele spiegeln Lindgrens eigene frühe Beschäftigung mit ihrem Lieblingsbuch und stimulieren ähnliche Formen transtextueller Rezeption, die die Texte über die papierenen Grenzen des Buches hinaus ins Leben ihrer Leser eindringen läßt.