Dr. Zijlstra’s A Series of Unfortunate Monetary Events

On this webpage you can read a selection of translated and English writings of the late Dutch central banker, President of the Bank for International Settlements, renowned Dutch economic scholar, former minister of Economic Affairs, minister of Finance, Prime Minister, and last but not least, member of the European Advisory Board on Economic and Monetary Integration (since August 1991), Dr. Jelle Zijlstra (1918-2001). Also a minister of State after his active career, Jelle Zijlstra was one of the Netherlands’ finest Statesmen.

What Jelle Zijlstra shares in his analyses will be (entirely) new for some, while for others it underlines what they have explained years ago, and that others do nowadays. Either way, Zijlstra’s unique and lucid clarification of the monetary events as they occurred during his time in office is one of which I think, we can be in awe of.

I translated three passages from “Gematigd Monetarisme” (1985), or “Moderate Monetarism”. This book is a bundle of his fourteen analyses as published in the annual reports of DNB from 1967 to 1980. Beside these three translations, I also translated the whole section from his 1992 autobiography, “Per slot van rekening“, about which I wrote last year, “Gold as the Monetary Cosmos’ Sun”.

Starting with 1967, I translated his account of the problems with which Zijlstra was confronted while he became President of De Nederlandsche Bank and the Bank of International Settlements. Then his account of events of 1971 and a passage from 1978. Along with two retrieved transcripts of two English lectures that Zijlstra gave in 1974 and in 1981, this selection provides a historic account on the evolution of the international monetary framework as written by Zijlstra in 1967, 1971, 1974, 1978, 1981, and at last, 1992.

The first lecture, “Reflections on international economic and monetary problems“, is a retrieved transcript of Zijlstra’s lecture delivered to the Zürcher Volkswirtschaftliche Gesellschaft on Wednesday, March 13 1974, in Zürich. This lecture is a literal translation of Zijlstra’s 1973 analysis as published in DNB’s annual report. This analysis contains some real eye-openers in my opinion. The second lecture is one Zijlstra held on Sunday, September 27, 1981 for the Per Jacobsson Foundation in Washington and is titled, “Central banking with the benefit of hindsight“. This lecture reflects on the disparity between theoretical ideas on monetary affairs and real world monetary problems.

Translating the selected texts was time consuming and not easy. Notwithstanding, I feel confident that my efforts have generated a readable text, one that reflects Zijlstra’s precise choice for words accurately. Notwithstanding, if any errors were made, I appreciate it very much if you forward these to me. The Dutch language cannot always be translated to English literally, therefore words in between squared brackets […] reflect editorial choices. Words in between parentheses (…) are Zijlstra’s own and reflect his use of parentheses. Also, I feel that I should note that I spend much time examining my use of English words that can be translated in more than one way. Hereby the objective was to prevent exaggerations all together. Zijlstra’s exposition of monetary problems is a series of tragic events in and by itself, yet his exact phrasing, despite it is formal, old-fashioned and ultimately erudite, it remained neutral conscientiously throughout.

As noted, I am no expert translator; I hold a Master’s degree in international economics and economic geography. This explains my interest in his work. Also, in 1974 Zijlstra noted: “I hope that one day somebody will write the history of the monetary role of gold and also of the various views held on that role, particularly those expressed since the early 1960s.” To sum up my motive to translate Zijlstra’s analyses with a question: Why not help Zijlstra posthumously, and allow him to tell this story himself, albeit now through the Internet and in English?

My role is thus one of a very humble translator as well as an admirer of his analytical skills, and one of an economist who recognizes the gravity and the importance of Zijlstra’s wish. In this regard, I consider my efforts a great honour that was well worth my time. Unemployment – ironically – helped a great deal too.

Although I have my thoughts on Zijlstra’s series of analyses in connection with the financial and ultimately, the international monetary crisis we witness today, I decided to publish these texts without any further commenting. Notwithstanding, I invite anyone interested to reflect on Zijlstra’s analyses to do so. I have intentions to share my thoughts, however not here and now. There is one element I did add here and that concerns the title for these English Zijlstra-analyses: “Dr. Zijlstra’s A Series of Unfortunate Monetary Events“. I think Dr. Zijlstra would have appreciated the wit as much as I hope you will too.

Sincerely,

Jaco Schipper

* * *

1967: A Prelude to Monetary Change

From Jelle Zijlstra’s book “Moderate Monetarism”, a translation of pages 50-62 covering Zijlstra’s views of the events preceding the collapse of Bretton Woods, his account on the London Gold Pool and the devaluation of pound sterling. On a note aside, Zijlstra’s complete 1967 analysis in the annual report of De Nederlandsche Bank starts on page 33 and focuses on domestic financial issues; it ends on page 62.

International liquidities

In respect to the international context, the reporting year has been rich considering the events. One could say that after the end of World War II, during a long period, important successes were achieved in regard to freeing up international trade and payments; one almost could say these were spectacular. Discontinuance of quantitative restrictions to trade, lowering import duties, discontinuance of ever more restrictions in regard to payments, crowned with the restoration of external convertibility of the most important currencies, they all contributed to growth of production and global trade that in almost all respects contrasted the period between the two world wars. Then, after all, difficulties already started to show up on the horizon in 1925 that ultimately led to the collapse in the 1930s. As opposed to those sad developments, the world after 1945 witnessed an at least 20-year period of increasing international cooperation in [regard to] flows of trade and payments without which economic growth, and its consequent rise of wealth, would have not been conceivable.

However, the last years it became clear that it was no longer sure we could count on such a fortunate development. Problems loom up for which solutions [within a reasonably short time frame] have to be found.

In the first place, the already yearlong discussion on the question if shortages of international liquidity loomed – that is, reserves held by central banks – have led to the currently generally [accepted] insight it is time to come to a deliberate creation of reserves to complement [existing] reserves, that – in multiple forms – are part of the official reserves of monetary authorities, [and that now] have to be faced.

After four years of studies and negotiations whereby mainly the Group of Ten had a leading role – in the last phase closely cooperating with the International Monetary Fund – it was in the annual meeting of the IMF in Rio de Janeiro during the week of 25 to 30 September 1967 that a preliminary decision was taken for the creation of new, unconditional extension of drawing rights on the IMF.

Secondly, [in] the last years it has been established that the so-called reserve countries, namely Great Britain and the United States, face great difficulties, albeit that the nature and scope of the problems [in question] are by no means identical in both countries. Anyway, for years both countries struggle with persistent balance of payment deficits. These difficulties have led to a devaluation of the pound sterling in Great Britain on November 18, 1967. However, it proved that the devaluation called forth new problems that for the time being have been concluded with the decision taken in Washington on March 17 1968 in regard to suspending interventions on the gold market in London.

The two mentioned problems, namely the necessity to deliberate reserve creation and the balance of payment deficits in both countries are partially related. After all, albeit it that on one hand balance of payment deficits are inconceivable without the implemented domestic policies in both countries, [while] on the other hand it cannot possibly be seen how, without a reasonable solution for the question of complementing existing reserves through deliberate creation, the problems of the reserve currency countries can be solved [so that it is beneficiary to] the entire international monetary framework in a way that is orderly and satisfactory.

Now, the decision in Rio de Janeiro in regard to special drawing rights is of a far reaching meaning. In this resolution, [there is this phrasing] talking about the arrangement: ‘… to meet the need, as and when it arises, for a supplement to existing reserve assets … ‘. The system gives every participating country the unconditional right to use the drawing rights, albeit according to certain rules. Chiefly, this system will constitute to the right to convert the drawing rights in currencies.

Currently it is clear that this new portion of currency reserves is fundamentally different from the current reserves typically held by central banks. The gold reserves held for monetary purposes was only until recently depending on the gold production – and thus mainly by the profitability of gold mines – as well as the demand by private parties including pure speculative demand. After the decision taken in Washington on March 17 1968, everything that one can claim with a particular degree of certainty in this matter, is that the monetary gold reserves will no longer decrease, assuming that all central banks stick to the rules of Washington, and that it is not considered necessary to buy gold for monetary objectives. The size of the total gold reserves for the time being has with this [decision] become frozen.

Further, reserves of central banks consist partially of dollars and (in some countries) pound sterling. The creation of these reserve [assets] depends on balance of payment deficits of these reserve currency countries. These dollars and pounds sterling are, besides being used by central banks for reserve purposes, in economic life generally also used for transactions. Partially because a transition between these two zones is in principle relatively easy, it must be said that the amount of the dollars and pounds used for monetary purposes, can be subject to great variations. There is however a significant decreasing willingness to hold pounds sterling as medium of reserve. In regard to the dollar, it seems that this threshold is also gradually approaching.

At last, in this context the claims on the IMF in the so called super gold tranche must be mentioned, which can be received through conditional withdrawals. Multiplications of the total amount of reserves assets that thus come into existence will however be [retired] after a country that is withdrawing, repays in due course.

The special drawing rights as foreseen in the agreement of Rio de Janeiro differ from each of the mentioned components of reserves in one or more respects. They are created through decisions [taken] by the IMF whereby the assessed demand for increasing the total amount of reserves will be the foundation for a periodically to be created amount of these drawing rights. Secondly, these created amounts of reserves are to be a permanent addition to official international reserves. And at last, these special drawing rights are exclusively intended to function as a means of settlement among monetary authorities. Summed up: the new drawing right shall be created in a rational manner, is intended as a permanent complement [of reserves], and is exclusively intended for international means of settlement.

It speaks almost for itself, [but] this new medium of reserve, certainly in its [introductory] phase, should be used cautiously; in the decision of Rio de Janeiro, rules that the IMF has to apply were indeed foreseen [as to] guarantee an orderly use. The main stipulations may be mentioned here. In the first place, the new drawing rights can only be used for balance of payment deficits. Using [drawing rights] exclusively intended for altering the reserve components is not permitted. In this regard, it is important that in general, it should be more pursued – although this is not a formal instruction – that there is a certain harmonisation of proportions in the possession of drawing rights and other components of [currency] reserves. It is clear that such a behavioural [instruction] is more than anything else benefited by giving this new component of reserves the quality of a full-fledged reserve like the other reserves, especially in regard to gold. Secondly, there is a so called creditor limit. No country is obligated to hold more drawing rights than three times its cumulative allotment. At last, there is [a] reimbursement or repayment duty. For the initial five years, it is currently formulated that each participant must hold on average, 30% of its net accumulated average allotment during this period.

An extensive discussion took place on this last stipulation. Mainly, the French persistently insisted strongly that this new drawing right was regarded not as ‘money’, but as ‘credit’. The reimbursement duty in this line of reasoning is a logical consequence of the credit nature of this new facility. Also in case one holds a different point of view on the nature and character of this new special drawing right, one can however be in favour of such a duty of repayment – certainly in its initial phase – both in promotion of the credibility of this new medium of reserve as well as [a means] for liquidity of the whole system. In the long run, a more enforcing application of the mentioned harmonisation rule can [help establish] a most effective rule of the repayment duty.

Now that the creation of special drawing rights has come within reach of practical application, it is of the utmost importance to realize fully what this new application is and what it is not. Before everything, one needs to realize that it will take years before the international monetary framework clearly and tangibly undergo the influence of the new system. Firstly, the framework must be shaped into Law [as to] allow legislative approval. At the conference held by the Group of Ten on March 29 and 30 1968 in Stockholm, the needed agreement was established; although France did not come to terms with it. Before parliamentary procedures in a sufficient number of countries are finished, a year will probably have passed. Probably, it will take 1968 entirely. After that, the decision shall have to be taken on the size of the creation, and the length of the term for which this decision applies (the so called activation). In this regard, the voting procedure demands a (weighed) majority of 85%. These decisions should be founded on considerations in regard to the need of the new reserve instrument, thereby relating the necessity to decrease the balance of payment deficits of currency reserve countries, especially the United States. At last, after a sufficient quantum of drawing rights has come into circulation, only then its influence on the functioning of the international monetary framework can be assessed. All together, one must think of year-end 1970 in the earliest. From this, it inevitably arises that it may not be expected of the new drawing rights that they help solve the current problems that need to be addressed in the immediate future.

May it be expected for the future, somewhat further down the road, that the new reserve component complements the current reserves and especially gold, and even partially replacing it; in enthusiastic [intellectual] reflections on this new system it is at times claimed that according to deliberate and rational considerations the myth (sometimes it is also referred to as tyranny) of gold shall be replaced. This however is a misconception. Certainly, for the distant future one must hope for an international monetary framework that is built up likewise rationally and able to function as a money framework within any orderly states. Special drawing rights however, like they are currently foreseen, can only function because of the link between it and gold; this link is enfolded by the stipulation that the unit of account in which the special drawing rights are expressed is equal to 0.888671 grams of gold. Without a fixed price of monetary gold, the special drawing rights as they were conceptualized as a system in Rio de Janeiro, are [indeed] inconceivable. The claim that is argued once in a while, that these drawing rights will lead to a demonetisation of gold [cannot be maintained]; on the contrary, such a demonetisation of gold would be the end of the special drawing rights [as they currently, are in character proposed]. If it is desired to make this new framework a success, then [all] have to do [their] best to have gold maintain its important role in the international monetary framework. A full replacement of gold by deliberately created reserve [assets] assumes political stability in the world and a general trust in a global authority of the issuing institution, of which one (unfortunately) must say, that will require substantial time [that we must await]. Because of this, the currently foreseen drawing rights shall remain for a long time being, a complementing [one] and thus cannot be [considered] a full replacement of gold.

Exchange rates

The resolution of Rio de Janeiro got hardly through to the world and a dramatic event called forth all attention. On November 18, pound sterling devalued with 14.3%. For a long time and with an increasing degree, the balance of payments of the United Kingdom was in a weak position. In 1964, the pound sterling was only saved because of a quick reaction of the main central banks who [came to the rescue] with £3 billion. Since then the situation actually deteriorated gradually; the multiple forms of credit extension to the United Kingdom increased gradually further. While in the spring of 1967 it seemed that, also because of domestic policy measures, things turned around, in autumn of the reporting year [read: 1968] it soon became clear that the current parity of pound sterling had become unsustainable; in November devaluation was inevitable. It can be questioned in hindsight, if it had not been better to come to this decision earlier. After all, it was already clear before 1967, that the United Kingdom was gradually sliding off to a fundamental disequilibrium, [one] that makes a balance of payments equilibrium and full employment incompatible, and since it is possible of being granted permission by the IMF for correcting the exchange rate. The causes for sliding off – like always – was a combination of income inflation, expenditure inflation and monetary inflation. Firstly, incomes rose faster in the United Kingdom than productivity, a development that was from time to time instigated by blasts of expenditure inflation and was not even stopped [after installed] limitations to expenditures. A persisting continuance of monetary inflation allowed creating a beneficial environment for both forms of inflation mentioned here.

That despite this the [British] Government resisted a devaluation of the currency for a long time can be understood already. Firstly, one must not act too readily [and] change the exchange rate. The struggle for maintaining the parity must be undertaken until it is firmly established that the fundamental disequilibrium cannot be overcome other than by changing the exchange rate. One could also conclude and say this differently [and that is] that in such a situation a policy that pursues a restoration of the balance of payments equilibrium must in an increasing degree prevail over the goals of employment and growth. With that it becomes also clear where the limitations of policies are that want to overcome a fundamental disequilibrium without a change in the exchange rate.

That it is better to try to postpone an exchange rate correction for a long time is [a consequence of] the consideration that a too readily abandonment of the struggle can lead to anticipations in regard to further exchange rate corrections that would make domestic policies aiming at stability an illusionary [mission]. But beside this general consideration, there was another special consideration for the United Kingdom. There was and there is the question of sterling-balances, the sterling deposits that are partially – as reserves – held by central banks, and partially – as transaction money – held and used outside England by banks and companies. [While] a correction of the exchange rate will be able to clean up the balance of payments through the current account by the influencing of the relation of [financial] means and expenditures, the influence [of this correction] on the sterling-balances held abroad could [very] well be the opposite. Whatever this all may be, the devaluation had become inevitable and in November 1967 a new situation came into existence.

With the devaluation of sterling, there was a remarkable valuable and intense consultation beforehand. For the first time in history of international monetary relations, the percentage of devaluation was largely established as a fruit of preceding consultation. A percentage of devaluation that is perceived as too low revives expectations of further devaluation by which the new rate can again be exposed to speculative attacks. However, when – partially on this basis – the percentage of devaluation is chosen too high, the chance increases to that degree so that more countries will follow, whereby beneficial effects that may be expected from [such] a devaluation will be nullified. It is rewarding that this time intense and confidential consultations reduced these dangers to the smallest possible proportions.

Whilst, with the devaluation of sterling unrest has not receded. Especially the London gold market endured strong pressures. For a proper understanding one must realize that the in 1961 introduced intervention policy supported by a number of important countries (forming the so called gold pool) [worked] through the London gold market [and] opened the possibility to transfer central bank gold to the private sector. The objective was to limit unrest-provoking gold price increases on the free market (this price reached heights in 1960 of $40.50). Through deliberate intervention, the price of gold for non-monetary purposes would be linked to the official price of gold. During a cycle of years, this intervention was not accompanied with substantial losses chargeable to monetary reserves. In the meanwhile, it did however become clear that increasing private demand would absorb an ever-larger part of annual gold production. The official gold price [that] had not been raised since January 1934 stimulated private demand (jewelery, industrial applications etc.) while it also put a brake on production. Calculations showed that – unless there was a fundamental change in this tendency – the entire annual production would become necessary to still private demand in the course of the 1970s. The emerging currency unrest in 1967 did however create a new demand, namely a purely speculative demand. After the devaluation of sterling, there were very substantial gold losses chargeable to monetary reserves on that account in both November and December. While it initially appeared in January and February 1968 that rest in this regard had returned, by March losses became that substantial that on insistence of the United States, the most important contributor to the gold pool, to temporary close the London gold market on March 15. The hastily convened conference in Washington (after France [withdrew from the gold pool] since July 1967) of seven gold pool countries, decided to stop the intervention all together, whereby the pre-1960 likewise situation of the gold market was restored.

The size of the mentioned gold losses has been especially substantial for the United States. After clearing the losses made during the month March, the American monetary gold reserves amounted to a net value of a little less than $10 billion.

While the decision taken in Washington ended the [speculative] assessment of the monetary gold reserves, in different areas the unrest remained. The program that the Government of the United Kingdom announced after the devaluation proved insufficient to restore confidence in sterling appropriately. First, the government program announced on March 19, touched the core of the problem. The standard of living of the population was too high and had to be reduced as to let it only increase in a very slow pace thereafter. After all, this is the only possibility to effectively restore competitiveness on foreign markets sufficiently. By the whole [body] of far-reaching budgetary measures, as well as measures in regard to income and price policy, it was hoped to achieve this result. This courageous program is by itself certainly sufficient to restore the balance between means and expenditures of the United Kingdom itself, and even to have it turn around in a surplus that is necessary in a long cycle of years for repayments of debt and a restoration of reserves. Outstanding sterling balances remain however, also when one justifiably regards the program intended for this of great importance, a substantial problem, both for the United Kingdom itself as well as for the stability of the entire international monetary framework. One of the most important tasks in the near future thereby is to find more permanent solutions for this so important question.

American Balance of Payments

Beside the events of sterling and gold, also – and in an increasing degree – the other reserve currency, namely the dollar, called forth attention. In 1967 the American balance of payment deficit again increased and indeed to $3.6 billion. While the increasing deficit of the balance of payments of the United States was initially caused in the last years as a fruit of monetary inflation leading to a substantial deficit on the whole of capital accounts of the balance of payments, in [1967] also the balance of trade was deteriorating without by any doubt a forceful, persistent [and] increasing expenditure-inflation in the sense that the surplus on the current account was decreasing. This expenditure inflation was caused by higher Defence expenditures that were not adequately met by increased taxes. Also this expenditure inflation [was a source for] causing income inflation that – after having been maintained stable over years in an almost admirable manner – was now indeed becoming clear. The program for improving the balance of payments position announced by the President of the United States around New Year, can indeed contribute to a restoration. In the first place, in the program [itself] the President points to earlier announced tax proposals. He deems these – very correctly – necessary for a fundamental restoration of the equilibrium. Beside this, [the program] consists of a range of measures that can lead to an improvement of the balance of payments [to the tune] of $3 billion. Half of this sum must be achieved by restricting capital movements with foreign countries, [a measure] that by itself can only provide some comfort temporarily.

Accepting the mentioned tax program is a necessary condition, not only for a restoration of balance of payments equilibrium in the United States, but also for the stability of the international monetary framework in general. After all, the willingness to hold dollars, whether by central banks, or by private parties, can no longer be burdened by allowing dollars to flow continuously out of the United States. When this is not [turned around] within a reasonable course of time, dollar-balances held by central banks will under the circumstances increase too strongly. Especially, this amount could grow to a dubious amount in case non-official holders turn to their central banks and offer dollars for conversion in local currencies. Moreover, such a move for conversion could have a very distorting effect on the Euro-dollar market, which has developed its own character and has to some degree become indispensable. Firstly, there is the possibility that these dollars will be held permanently by central banks. This would imply in so far a particular country would accept a dollar-standard for its own monetary policy. This could lead to an undesirable situation. Especially when this line of conduct is followed by the main central banks, [then] in general, the gold exchange standard would be replaced by a dollar standard, with which the possibility of having one’s own monetary and financial policies would become ever more narrow because this would become almost entirely dependent on the policies as they are pursued by the United States. The second possibility is that dollar balances are in a substantial degree offered in the United States for conversion. It is clear that this would again give rise to a gold problem. It is not necessary to mention all possible results of such a situation; [most probably and] in an increasingly degree, implementing restrictions to international payments and with that, probably also international trade would very well be an endpoint to this.

From the above, it should be clear that it is of great and urgent importance to readily restore the American balance of payments. It would nevertheless be incorrect to hold the United States exclusively accountable for this. Countries with a surplus on their balance of payments are jointly accountable as well. With an important surplus on the current account, and in case this is accompanied by a somewhat voluminous unemployment, it is necessary [to pursue] a policy to improve the capacity utilization of production [in order to] decrease the surplus of the current account. Since this situation has occurred in several surplus nations, the United States is [thus not] alone in its responsibility for their balance of payments equilibrium.

This does not mean however – as said [before] – there is not an essential task for [the United States]. It is perhaps good to call into memory in this context, as mentioned before [in this annual report, and] in regard to both domestic issues in the Netherlands and several issues in the United Kingdom, [where it became clear] that overcoming income inflation and expenditure inflation are important. When several forms of inflation are not sufficiently overcome, [then] unfavourable consequences in regard of a proper functioning of the international monetary framework cannot be held off, certainly not when it concerns countries with key currencies. Yet especially income policies (whereby one must think not in the last place of keeping incomes within the limits of labour-productivity) and spending policies (whereby it is mainly about budgetary politics) are entirely or partially political matters. It is necessary to understand that a proper functioning of the international monetary framework is not only a matter of system and technique, but is to an important extent also conditioned by political circumstances and political relations within the main countries. Mistakes in domestic policies may never be accounted to the international monetary framework; vice versa, the international monetary framework may never be used to allow or facilitate said problems.

After the decision in Washington whereby the price of gold for non-monetary gold was decontrolled, the question was raised how long such a two-tiered price for gold could last. It is better to rephrase this question more generally: in what way can the gold exchange standard be based on a gold price of $35, which proved a great service to the economic development in the world after the war, also remain the foundation for a properly functioning international monetary framework in the future? Which improvements must, and can be made; which conditions have to be met.

In regard to several problems related to these problems – as mentioned here before – important measures have been taken in the reported year, as well as in 1968. From the previous, it also becomes clear that important questions still await solutions. In case these solutions are reached within not all too long time, then there is reason to look forward to the future with confidence.

The gold exchange standard, like we know it today, will have to be gradually changed however. The key currencies as a part of reserves shall decrease in significance; the creation of new reserve [assets] like special drawing rights, can foresee in this. Also, the significance of gold, in a quantitative sense, will probably become slimmer. During a long cycle of years, the significance of gold as the core of the gold exchange standard in a qualitative sense will however remain. After all, it seems that the parts of reserves – other than gold – will remain linked to gold in some way or another, like this also will be the case with special drawing rights. By a careful policy, such a link between increasing amounts of other parts of reserves to a, in relative terms, falling gold-part of reserves, must be accomplished. It is clear that arranging the harmonisation of the proportions in which the various countries hold certain reserve [assets] must be considered indispensable.

Whether a monetary framework without gold – in the long-term – can replace a more rationally functioning gold exchange standard is a question of a much more far stretching meaning. This shall be only possible if and in so far peace and security in the world allows this, thereby including an almost supranational role of the International Monetary Fund. An eventual removal of gold from the international monetary framework is – again – not in first instance a matter of system and technique, but of – this time international – political relations.

* * *

1971: End of an Era

From Jelle Zijlstra’s book “Moderate Monetarism”, a translation of page 155-163 covering his personal account of the events preceding the collapse of Bretton Woods and those thereafter. Zijlstra’s 1971 analysis starts on page 145 and starts out focusing on domestic financial issues; it ends on page 163.

End of an Era

The measures made public by President Nixon on August 15 1971 mark the end of an era. The freedom of international trade and payments (on basis of fixed parities), personified by GATT and the IMF and that, to an important degree, was accomplished in the twenty five years after World War II, has protected the world from disasters like in the 1930s. It was a first large-scale attempt to what later became referred to as economic integration. After all, acceptance of free trade and free payments enforce the necessity in national policies to properly take into account the demands that unhindered preservation of these freedoms put forward. ‘Beggar-my-neighbour policies’ from the past were abandoned on principle; perhaps this is the ultimate characterisation of this post-war framework.

Especially during the second half of the 1960s, tensions arose in the international monetary system. Initially it seemed that only imbalances in certain countries – beside the United States of America – led to individual adjustments of parities, but eventually it became clear there was something wrong with the system. For a proper understanding one must be keenly conscious of the central role of the dollar in the postwar framework. Supported on the [sheer size] of the American economy – which becomes obvious from the fact that in the early 1950s the American national income was equal to half of the global income – the dollar had a dominating role. As trade currency, as reserve currency and as intervention currency the dollar was pivotal to the system. Formally other currencies were tied to gold, materially however to the dollar. The relatively decreasing dominance of the American economy, [and] the undermining of the strength of the dollar as a result of a deterioration in the American balance of payments in the 1960s, have led to difficulties for the dollar and as a result of this, [to a collapse of][1] the whole of the international monetary framework. When President Nixon on August 15 1971 postponed the convertibility of the dollar, as a result, also the functioning of the IMF was postponed. The task we currently are confronted with is no more and no less to put forward foundations on which – again for twenty to twenty five years – the international monetary framework can be build.

Reforming the International Monetary Framework

Reforming the international monetary framework will prove to be a difficult and time-consuming task. Before everything, it is necessary in the first year and a half to two years after the events of 15 August 1971 to see the American balance of payments restore its balance after the exchange rate adjustment has run its course without running into an accident. To the problems of this intermediary period some further attention should be given, before the most important aspects of a general reform of the system can be considered.

The question if the size of adjustments in exchange rates, agreed to in Washington on December 18 1971, suffice, is of utmost importance. The American authorities had initially postulated a £13 billion bending in the current account in order to support a genuine sustainable balance of payments. Translated in terms of exchange rate, this implies an adjustment in regard to the foremost currencies of 15% (on basis of May 1970). The Washington Agreement led to a change in value of the dollar in regard to those currencies and also on basis of May 1970, of about 11%. If this suffices has to be awaited; anyway in first instance it appeared this amount suggested by the Americans was too large. One must never forget the problems with answering the question which exchange rate adjustment is necessary and sufficient for a restoration of the balance in the balance of payments with the margins of uncertainty being great. An adjustment in exchange rate must of course within a wide range be accurate. But beside this, it is about the willingness of the authorities to defend this new exchange rate, not merely by maintaining the foreign exchange market on the basis of intervention points belonging to the new exchange rate, but foremost all, by policies that substantiate the support for this rate. Put differently, it is not about the question whether the new [exchange] rates are mathematically correct, but whether countries want to base their policies in support of new and sustainable rates. It is at least very desirable, that the form of the new exchange rates – the so called [central[2]] exchange rates (‘informal parities’) – as initially adopted, are as speedily as possible be transformed into formal parities as this is stipulated in the Statutes of the IMF. Immediate execution of the agreed to ratification of the United States Congress of the new agreed gold price of the dollar is urgently necessary.

Before and while the American balance of payments will have achieved a genuinely sustainable balance, there are especially short capital movements that can disrupt and undermine an initiated restoration of trust; also here an important problem for the intermediary period is found. In this regard central banks ought to be exceptionally reticent in placing dollars in the Eurodollar market. Therefore there should be sufficient facilities that allow investing dollars held by central banks within the United States. One possibility is to open dollar accounts in the United States with SDR’s as collateral and a reduced interest rate for dollar holding central banks. An open-market policy whereby the Bank for International Settlements could play a role, can contribute to the transfer of dollars from the Eurodollar market to the United States. Consequently, limitations on short capital movements probably are inevitable. Hereby one has to think of restrictions imposed on lending[3] on the Eurodollar market. Finally, it is very desirable that monetary policies are partially aimed at regulation of short capital movements. Divergences in monetary policies that may result from [countries] that almost solely aim for national policy objectives are important factors for giving rise to, or accelerate short capital movements.

Beside the problem of short-term capital movements, also the problem of convertibility shall have to be dealt with during this intermediary period. The dollar is currently inconvertible. The monetary authorities in the United States do not possess by approximation sufficient assets (‘ultimate assets’) to restore convertibility completely, let alone partially. In the reformed internationally monetary framework, the convertibility must be restored in one way or another; fixed parities without convertibility are unacceptable. During the intermediary period, further steps have to be taken to promote a restoration of convertibility in regard to the new international framework as much as possible. A restoration of the so called small convertibility on behalf of a full functioning of the IMF as much as possible, especially where it concerns redemptions that have to be paid back by debtors nations to the IMF, does not have to be forestalled because it only requires a well intended willingness of all relevant parties. The full convertibility can be prepared by agreements between the countries, belonging to the Group of Ten. The essence of these agreements may allow a possible restriction on the employment of dollars from the current reserves in case of a deficit towards the United States, with additional arrangements between countries (other than the United States), aimed at a certain harmonisation of the dollar component of their reserves. Hereby, the US could be able from the outset to earn gross reserves from their surpluses, which would promote a speedy restoration of convertibility. It is about breaking a vicious circle. So long as confidence in the dollar is not sufficiently re-established, resorting to these kind of measures will not be favored [by countries]. Without such agreements it is hard to see how the confidence can be restored. That is why in the intermediary term it is also necessary to start with speedy consultations in regard to a reformed international monetary framework with a certain priority given to the issue of convertibility. Only if legitimate perspectives exist, the problems of the intermediate period can be addressed and solved.

With the reform of the international monetary framework it must be recognized [by all] that fixed parities should again be the foundation on which the framework is based. It is currently too early to elaborate into more details how the future framework will be. An examination of the most important point can however be considered in place.

In the old framework, as said, the dollar had a central role. One could speak of an asymmetry between the dollar on the one hand, and other currencies on the other hand. In the new framework this asymmetry will largely disappear. How much the dollar will remain the most important currency, [the dollar] should, under the authority of the IMF, be treated on an equal footing as the other currencies. After all, it has become clear that the existence of reserve currencies can cause de-stability. Essential is that the meaning of national currencies as parts of reserves of central banks must be forced back as much as possible, while also the emergence of new reserve currencies must be prevented. Only in this way, creation and management of international liquidities can be rationally accomplished. A more specific clarification of this idea has in the meanwhile become far from simple. Of the current official reserves, dollar claims on the United States, per last known date, of $48,8 billion, can be reduced in various ways. First, with a return in confidence in the dollar, on basis of the Washington Agreement, a certain, not unsubstantial part, will flow back to the USA. Beside this, there should be more room for voluntary bilateral consolidation-agreements. Another option that has been mentioned here above is to transfer current dollar deposits to a special account with the American authorities against a low interest rate and a SDR guarantee. At last; recently, suggestions have been made to the IMF for convertibility of current dollar balances into SDRs that have to be specially created. The problems that such a conversion would bring along must not be underestimated; the whole of the SDR framework would therefore likely have to be fundamentally altered, while on the other hand the circulation of SDRs in such a way can undermine the confidence in this new reserve asset in a way like it happened with the dollar. Besides, difficulties with interest rates and redemption emerge.

Further, the question of flexible exchange rates will have to be dealt with. The Washington Agreement foresees a (temporary) wider margin of 2,25% in regard to intervention-currencies. It is likely that a margin of this order of magnitude will be implemented in the final framework. Whether a possibility beside this is created for easier adjustments of parities, is a disputed point. Undoubtedly it was considered in the past for too long whether to change parities. It is however not unlikely that recent events of the past years have contributed to the willingness with structural imbalance-disruptions not to wait too long with adjusting parities. Anyway, in this regard there is a profound difference with the past. Then one could assume the parity of the dollar could not be fixed. This aspect of the asymmetry of the dollar in the system led to revaluations elsewhere when the dollar got itself in a situation of fundamental imbalance. For the future it can thus be expected that parity adjustments will be more reasonably be both devaluations and revaluations.

The convertibility must again become an essential part of the framework; convertibility is the explicit sanction to an insufficient willingness to adjustment, this is to pursue national policies that contradict with the terms that international cooperation demand. Certainly, the convertibility – eventually – will have to be different from what it has been. Previously, convertibility was a right of each creditor nation to ask for redemption in gold any second. The new convertibility will have to be managed by the IMF. The Fund should take the position of the debtor nation (whereby mostly the US, assuming the dollar will remain an important degree an intervention-currency) as the creditor nation into consideration, thereby closely monitoring the configuration of their reserve assets, in order to stipulate in which asset (SDR’s, gold, Fund-deposit[4]) conversion must happen. The IMF could hereby strive for a gradual harmonisation of the configuration of assets. Put differently, the unrestricted right of a nation to convert into gold shall have to be replaced by a right on conversion under the supervision of the IMF.

With the revision of the system there will have to be a reflection on the role of gold. Gold is in the current framework the unit of account (numéraire) by which even the SDR is defined. There is a strong tendency to give the SDR this role. At first instance nothing changes thereby. The new unit of account is only the reciproque of the older. Materially, only a change would occur after the current relations are adjusted. The switch of the numéraire thereby would only have any meaning when it is thereby expressed that changing said relations can no longer be ruled out. Apart from that, it would be unwise to assume that gold has arrived at its first stage of demonetisation. Recent events have rather strengthened the role of gold than weakened it. The willingness of monetary authorities to sell gold was significantly less than their willingness to buy gold.

The attempts to come to a new international monetary framework will prove to be to no avail, when two (closely related) conditions are not met. First, the political willingness should be in place to adjust national policies to meet the preconditions that international monetary cooperation necessitates. Second, there must be willingness to give the IMF the authority that it will need to perform these more burdensome tasks, so that it can carry these out satisfactorily. It must not longer be possible that the Fund is paralyzed by the actions of member countries. The new policy demands a strong IMF; member states must want this and implement this.

Snake in the Tunnel

Because of events in May of the reporting year [1971], the decision by the members of the Board of Ministers of the EEG who met previously in February where they decided in principle to make preparations for the first step to a monetary union, had became uncertain. On May 5 1971, the official intervention on exchange markets of Germany, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Austria and Belgium were postponed. It meant that within the EEG serious problems emerged, especially with agricultural policies. The Board of Ministers of the EEG, who met on 8 and 9 May 1971, could, given the circumstances, do no other than accept the facts. Directly thereafter, the Swiss franc revalued and the Austrian Shilling; in Germany and the Netherlands the exchange markets reopened under a regime of floating exchange rates. In several countries new restrictions were implemented on incoming capital or existing restrictions were tightened. The calm on foreign exchange markets did however not return and on August 15 1971 the American measures decided the end of a monetary framework based on fixed parities. At the end of August, of all the important currencies only the French franc (for the better part of their balance of trade) maintained its old parity.

On August 23 1971, the Benelux-countries[5] took a far-reaching decision. They agreed to committing themselves to maintain exchange-differentials of maximally 1,5% on both sides of their old parities (one calculated on the basis of the old gold parity) [and do so] through interventions in terms of their own currencies. This decision was also of importance because the Benelux-countries hereby (again) set the example that, in context of a wider (EEG) relation, could be followed by others. The [Benelux] agreement in this regard went further than what had been agreed to by the Board of Ministers of the EEG in February. Then it was only decided in regard to the exchange rate differential with the dollar to narrow this margin from 0,75% to 0,6%. This created an “inner band” of 1,2% and “outer band” of 1,5%. A wider inner band would demand a conscious decision by the monetary authorities. Intervention would only be done in terms of dollars.

The Benelux-agreement introduced beside intervention in terms of dollars, intervention in terms of each other’s currencies. The maximum differential is not managed in terms of dollars, but in terms of guilders and francs[6]. Dollar interventions could initially be omitted, because the agreement started with floating rates against the dollar, while authorities saw no reason to influence the dollar intentionally. When the Washington Agreement was in place, new mandatory intervention points in regard to the dollar were determined, namely 2,25%.

By the decision of the Board of 6/7 March 1972, all EEG currencies will by 1 July 1972 have the same system like the Benelux-countries that adopted this in December [1971]. The maximum rate differential of EEG currencies however will be 2,25%, with an explicit addition to narrow this to 1,5% as soon as possible. Also here, an inner and outer band thus exists. The room for maneuvering and the movements within the inner band is however much greater than it was in the system foreseen in February 1971. The analogy has thereby changed [somewhat]; one now speaks of a “snake” in the “tunnel”. The objective is, certainly initially, to decide the place of the snake in the tunnel through joint operations in each of the five financial centers of the Community currencies, as to restrict the movements of the currencies against each other to a maximum of 2.25%.

The Benelux-agreement, despite its short existence, has already generated valuable insights and operational experiences. In the first weeks a debt of Belgium to the Netherlands came into existence, that after having reached a maximum of Fl. 460 million [guilders] was partially redeemed in gold and partially through the market. It became clear that consultations on monetary policies became very desirable; it is then not a surprise that lower discounts after the agreement of Belgium and the Netherlands that have since then been implemented are the result of [very] close consultations. Consultations on dollar policies took place as well.

Bringing into practice what the monetary agreement between the EEG countries, with whom four [EEG] candidate countries have already joined, and whereby other European counties shall participate in, will give rise to similar problems. In regard to redemptions of debt positions more and more arrangements were made. The configuration of the reserves of a debtor country will decide on the asset used for redemption. This formula in itself will, in the longer term, lead to a harmonisation of the configuration of the reserves of the member-countries.

However, this monetary agreement brings the EEG in a decisive phase. The decision of the Dutch Cabinet of February 1971 was of a much-limited order; it was a first experimental step. The far-reaching events on the international monetary stage have forced the EEG countries to take the first steps on a path that hardly allows a return. The narrowing of margins, in the manner currently foreseen, brings along the necessity to harmonise monetary policies and with that, also the basic ideas of financial politics. The EEG will burn the ships behind them, but after August 15 1971, it has no longer any other choice. Certainly, the Community may not forget for any moment, her increasing monetary strength may not undermine, but contrary to that, must provide further support to come to a renewed and effective international monetary framework.

* * *

1974: Reflections on International Economic and Monetary Problems

The below text is a transcript of Zijlstra’s lecture delivered to the Zürcher Volkswirtschaftliche Gesellschaft on Wednesday, 13th March 1974, in Zürich. This transcript is identical to his Dutch analysis as published in the annual report of DNB of 1974.

Had no oil crisis occurred, a talk such as this would have been easy to plan. I would have begun by running over the series of events which ultimately led to the virtual end of the Bretton Woods system in March 1973, when shortly after the 10 percent devaluation of the American dollar there was a general change-over to a system of floating exchange rates, albeit with a European island of fixed parities known as the snake arrangement. The end of the old international monetary system may perhaps even be dated back to the suspension of the convertibility of the dollar by President Nixon on 15th August 1971. But in any case, between 15th August 1971 and March 1973 it was still possible to hope that a new system could be built up on that part of the old system which had remained intact and which was based on fixed parities between a number of important currencies, even though the feature of convertibility that is vital to this system in the long run might initially have been lacking.

Carrying on from there – still assuming there had been no oil crisis – I should then certainly have looked in some detail at the progress made in the discussions of the Committee of Twenty which has been given the task of drawing up plans for a reform of the international monetary system.

And at the end of my talk I would most definitely have focused attention on the world-wide inflation rampant at the present time and urged that everything in our power be done to bring this pernicious state of affairs to an end.

The far-reaching developments in the closing months of 1973 – and more specifically the two-fold increase in the price of oil and its monetary consequences – compel me to adopt a completely different scheme.

I propose – and this time the oil crisis will be brought into the picture – to discuss in turn the following matters:

(a) the problems involved in international monetary reform;

(b) European monetary co-operation;

(c) the position of the American dollar;

(d) higher oil prices and their consequences.

There can be no doubt that the oil crisis has important implications for the prospects of reform of the international monetary system. At first the aim was seemingly to devise an entirely new system worked out down to the details, which was to be ready in broad outline by 31st July 1974 at the latest. In the uncertain conditions now prevailing, this is certainly out of the question. Even in the absence of an oil crisis that might well have been the case, because an international monetary system needs to be flexible and adaptable with a limited number of fundamental rules. After all, as time goes by new problems are bound to emerge, and these will have to be resolved by the International Monetary Fund on the basis of those rules. This was the position from 1944 onwards and it will continue to be so in the future. There are really only three basic rules:

(i) fixed parities;

(ii) convertibility; and

(iii) timely adjustment.

In point of fact, these three rules can be summed up in the single precept that a system resting on these foundations constitutes for all member countries an essential limiting condition for the conduct of their own national policies. This serves, as it were, to keep national policies in line with the requirements that are essential to the proper functioning of the system as a whole. In addition to this, I assume that the SDR will be the numéraire of the new system; from time to time it will be necessary to ascertain, on the basis of objective criteria, whether new SDRs need to be created to meet an impending shortage of international liquidity.

If I expect the SDR to be the basis of the new system, it stands to reason that I expect gold to have a different role from that assigned to it by the present Articles of Agreement of the IMF. To that extent I do not, therefore, expect a remonetisation of gold, but that by no means implies a demonetisation of the metal. However, we should perhaps not spend too much time playing with such words as remonetisation and demonetisation. For what is really the true issue? The more than spectacular events in the gold market compel us to give the gold problem very serious attention. I hope that one day somebody will write the history of the monetary role of gold and also of the various views held on that role, particularly those expressed since the early 1960s. I will, however, quote two examples to illustrate the degree of confusion that has been possible on this subject. After the Washington Agreement of March 1968 – recently terminated, as you know – which was viewed by some simply as the end of the working of the gold pool, and by others (mistakenly, to my mind) as the beginning of a deliberate demonetisation of gold, discussions started on the question of the application of the Articles of Agreement, which, after all, provide that gold may be purchased at the official price. These discussions led to an agreement between the United States and South Africa, the substance of which was also embodied in an agreement between South Africa and the IMF. The result was that South Africa was provided with what amounted to a guaranteed floor price for its gold – namely, the official gold price. In return, South Africa accepted certain obligations, particularly an undertaking to supply its current new gold production regularly to the free gold market. In fact, the whole matter was bound up in rather a complicated set of balance-of payments conditions.

While the discussions were going on I heard highly intelligent people maintain in all seriousness that it was wrong to give South Africa this guarantee because the price of gold on the free market was certain to fall below the official price. At that time (1968) even a price of US $ 20 was on some people’s lips. Another idea that seems somewhat farfetched today was that of selling gold to the IMF in exchange for SDRs on the basis of the official gold price, even when the price in the free market was already far higher than the official price.

Whatever we may think of such opinions, they are things of the past. Like many other fanciful notions, they have been swept away by the fierce tide of events. What we have to do now is look at the issue realistically and with open minds and consider in what way gold may contribute as efficiently as possible to resolving the many complicated monetary problems facing us. I do not see gold returning to its function as the pivot of the international monetary system in the way it has functioned over the past twenty-five years. That would mean having to maintain an official gold price in the IMF Articles of Agreement. The official price itself would, moreover, have to be increased drastically. I do not expect this to happen; nor am I in favour of such a step. There is now a broad measure of agreement that the SDR should serve as the basis of the new system. From this the conclusion may be drawn that central banks holding gold should be free in principle to use their gold as they think fit, that is buy and sell gold in the free market – perhaps regulating the price a little through a new-style gold pool – or, if necessary, use it in settlements between one another. In this latter context one might think in particular of regional groupings like the EEC. However that may be, it is to be regretted that up to now so little attention has been devoted to these matters by the Committee of Twenty, for that is the body where such problems should first of all be dealt with. At all events, the taboos surrounding gold are gradually breaking down; the time has come for solutions to be found.

I may perhaps pass on now to what may be regarded as the heart of the international monetary system: fixed parities, even if with more flexible adjustment procedures than hitherto. Without fixed parities, which are adjustable in accordance with certain definite procedures, it is impossible to conceive of an orderly international monetary system in the long run. Fixed parities form the foundation for the formulation of balance-of-payments objectives, and thus also for discussions on the compatibility or incompatibility of these objectives. They enable conclusions to be drawn about the financing of balance of-payments deficits: whether – where they are assumed to be temporary – they can be financed by means of IMF credit facilities, or whether they stem from fundamental disequilibria and can only be corrected by a change in parity. Only with a system of fixed parities is it possible to calculate the international liquidity needs both of individual countries and of the system as a whole. In short, no coherent policy is possible and there can be no consistency in balance of-payments objectives without fixed parities. This was the essence of the old Bretton Woods system and this must again be the essence of a new monetary system, at any rate in so far as countries are still prepared to accept some degree of subordination of their national policies to the demands of an international system working, in the longer run, for the good of all.

I feel that it is important to spell out these points quite explicitly, even though they are perhaps self-evident. Sometimes I get the impression that it is not always and not everywhere understood what is really at issue. If we were to abandon the basic rules I have just described, we should find ourselves in a completely new situation, which would have very little, or nothing in common with the one the founding fathers of Bretton Woods had in mind. It is true that even without this hard nucleus there would still be room for international discussions, and perhaps also for an International Monetary Fund as a centre for consultations on what is acceptable behaviour and what is not. But these discussions would necessarily only lead to conclusions that were not binding. It is also to be feared that if the international monetary system is allowed to wither, the other cornerstone of the post-war economic and financial structure – an orderly international trading system – will also be put in jeopardy.

The architects of Bretton Woods and of the GATT were profoundly conscious of the disasters of the 1930s and what had brought them to pass. I cannot resist adding that the 1930s provide the most graphic example of an economy without growth going hand in hand with a very high level of unemployment. I mention these things to remind you of the wise maxim that it is necessary to know history in order to prevent it from repeating itself.

I come now to my second subject – the state of monetary co-operation in Europe, and more particularly within the EEC. How did matters stand on the eve of the energy crisis? As you know, the member countries of the EEC have decided to create gradually an economic and monetary union, to be completed by 1st January 1980. One of the most important features of this plan consists of two closely related policy aims. The first is that fluctuations between any two EEC currencies in the foreign exchange markets should be contained within set limits, with the maximum spread around parity being put initially at 2.25 percent. In the course of time the margins – which are to be maintained by means of interventions in Community currencies – would be gradually narrowed until by about 1980 they would have been completely eliminated and one single European currency would have been ushered in. The second is that concurrently with this process there would be a pooling of central-bank reserves so that, again by 1980, the European central bank – or, if you prefer it, a European ‘Federal Reserve System’ – would have been created, having at its disposal the pooled reserves of the member countries. The snake venture, which opened with considerable political enthusiasm, has not so far been free of difficulties. On 23rd June 1972 the United Kingdom had to withdraw from it, and on 12th February 1973 Italy also backed out. These developments show quite clearly that without a sufficient degree of harmonisation and co-ordination of economic and monetary policies the road to full economic and monetary union cannot be travelled together. France, too, was recently forced to the conclusion that, particularly because of the uncertain situation since the oil crisis, it could no longer adhere to the rules of the snake arrangement.

What is the position now? The remaining countries have decided to continue with the snake arrangement. This group now consists of Germany, Belgium, Luxemburg, the Netherlands and Denmark, as EEC members, and of Sweden and Norway. These last two countries are not members of the EEC. They have joined in the afore-mentioned monetary agreement without participating in the European Monetary Co-operation Fund or in the mutual support arrangements agreed upon by the EEC countries.

The question may be asked what purpose such an arrangement still serves. It should first be said that this monetary agreement can contribute towards restoring and pushing ahead the movement towards economic and monetary union within the Community. The preserved agreement might be viewed primarily as a kind of platform offering countries that have withdrawn – only temporarily, it is to be hoped – from the snake arrangement the opportunity to return. But there is another important point. The former fixed parities have disappeared as pillars of the international monetary system. It is of paramount importance that in a world of floating rates a certain pattern of exchange rates be formed that not only contains an element of stability but also provides a starting-point for a return in due course to an orderly international monetary system, which – as already explained – will have to be based once more on a closely related system of fixed parities of at least the major currencies.

I should like to add one concluding remark, which serves as something of a link between the two subjects I have dealt with so far. I feel sure that in a reformed monetary system there will inevitably be a certain amount of splitting into groups. Perhaps it would be better to speak of categories of countries rather than groups, in order to avoid negative associations. Traditionally the world has tended to be divided into rich and poor countries. The rich countries have been primarily – though not exclusively – identified with the Group of Ten, that is those countries which in 1962 expressed readiness to provide funds to the GAB, a supplementary financing facility for the IMF. In the course of the discussions that have been taking place on reform of the international monetary system it was becoming clear that as far as, for instance, convertibility, adjustment and the maintenance of parities were concerned not all countries could be treated alike. After the drastic rise in oil prices, it has become quite evident that a third category has come into being. This is made up of those oil-producing countries which in the years ahead will find themselves unable to invest a large part of their oil earnings in their own national economies and will consequently experience a huge expansion of their reserves, with all the problems that this involves. There are thus three categories discernible now, which will have to be taken into account in reforming the international monetary system:

(a) the countries of the Group of Ten together with those countries which in the context of the current problems are to be regarded as belonging to this group;

(b) the oil-producing countries with heavy reserve accumulation;

(c) the non-oil-producing developing countries (in cases where it is not possible for them to improve their economic position sufficiently of their own accord through other primary products at their disposal).

With regard to these three categories, the following may be added. The first group will have to form the nucleus as regards obligations concerning fixed parities, convertibility and adjustment. I should not be surprised if, as discussions on this subject continue, the conclusion were arrived at that this group of countries should come to some sort of snake arrangement with procedures closely akin to those of the European snake. However, the maximum permissible spread between any two currencies in the market would have to be wider than the 2.25 percent under the European arrangement. The compatibility of these two elements does not present any problems. In Europe we already have a combination of the Benelux agreement – the ‘worm’ as it is sometimes called in the current jargon – with a spread of 1.5 percent and the wider arrangement with a band of 2.25 percent. Such a set-up would also offer a solution to the notorious problem of symmetrical intervention in the exchange markets.

As far as the second group is concerned, special arrangements will be necessary concerning the composition of reserves – arrangements which will have to be acceptable to the countries concerned and also fit in with the new system one is aiming to bring about.

The countries within the third group cannot have many obligations imposed upon them. It is they who should have first call on adequate aid. Into this design would also fit the ideas worked out by the IMF on the institution of a new GAB, with funds coming in particular from countries in the second group, thus enabling a special facility to be created for those countries which are in danger of running into insurmountable difficulties because of the oil crisis.

Since President Nixon suspended the convertibility of the dollar on 15th August 1971, the dollar has undergone three important falls in value. A formal devaluation of 7.89 percent took place in December 1971 under the Smithsonian Agreement, which together with simultaneous revaluations of other currencies meant an average devaluation of the dollar of 9 percent. On 12th February 1973 the dollar was again devalued, this time by 10 percent, and when on 19th March the leading currencies were allowed to float, the dollar depreciated further on the exchanges with its value falling again by up to about 10 percent against leading currencies. After this a turn-round occurred, however, which even before the oil crisis had practically recouped this latter depreciation. There are good reasons why this should have happened. The Smithsonian Agreement and the 10 percent devaluation in 1973 must certainly be regarded as sufficient to turn the US balance of payments round from deficit to substantial surplus. It is true that this took some time to come about, but adjustments on that kind of scale do take time; the turn-round in the US trade balance was assured. The oil crisis in itself is bound to lead to a further strengthening of the position of the dollar, since a considerable proportion of oil payments are made in dollars and there will thus be an extra demand for dollars for these transactions. That this has not yet made itself clearly felt is due to the fact that the large oil payments have yet to get under way. All things considered, it is now beginning to look as though the dollar is on the way to regaining the position in the international payments system which it had to relinquish in the 1960s.

I regard this development as being of the utmost importance for the reform of the international monetary system. A system like this can only be designed and made to function on the basis of a certain balance between countries in the position of debtors and countries in the position of creditors. Deficit countries are in favour of as much international liquidity as possible, want loans to be as large and as straightforward as possible, and wish to be secured against competitive non-revaluations. Surplus countries are more cautious about the creation of liquidity, they want clear-cut terms for loans they provide, and they are very much afraid of competitive devaluations. At Bretton Woods these two philosophies were personified in the representatives of the United Kingdom and the United States, Keynes and White respectively. They clashed, they came to compromises, and in so doing became the most important architects of the new system. In the current discussions on reform of the system one of the major difficulties has been the initial predominance of the debtor-country philosophy. I expect the recovery of the dollar to lead to a better balance between the points of view of debtor and creditor countries, and feel sure that thereby the chances of arriving at an acceptable new system will be greatly enhanced.

I shall now turn to the oil crisis itself and its economic and financial repercussions. The facts are well-known. The increases in the price of crude oil – assuming they remain unchanged (and I feel that the probability of a reduction is rather greater than the opposite) – will add $ 60–65 billion to the gross income of the oil-producing countries. Two adjustments need to be made to this figure to give a broad idea of the size of the net amounts with which we are due to be confronted. The first adjustment is for increases in imports. Some countries will soon spend much of their increased oil income on imported goods, but this will not be possible in the short run for some other countries. At the same time, it is to be assumed that the very sharp increases in oil prices will, once they have been fully passed on in the oil-consuming countries, lead to a cut-back in the use of oil. After allowing for these two factors, we are left for the moment with an amount of between $ 40 billion and $ 50 billion, expressed at an annual rate. It has been calculated that of this amount about $10 billion will fall onto the shoulders of the developing countries and the balance of $ 30 billion to $ 40 billion will have to be borne by the other countries. With regard to this latter group of countries, a distinction can be made between those countries which, as a result of this deterioration in the current account of their balance of payments, will show a deficit (or will increase their existing deficit), and those which, because of the surpluses they recorded in 1973, will be approximately in balance. This latter group includes, for example, the United States, Canada, Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium.

The increase in oil prices, which came so unexpectedly and was so unprecedented in scale, has given rise to two problems for the world economy:

(a) a problem of real resources;

(b) a financial/monetary problem.

The higher oil prices mean potentially that real resources are transferred from oil-consumers to oil-producers. This can be described as a redistribution of the real income of the world. In other words, we, the oil-consuming countries, must part with more goods in exchange for our oil imports, i.e. we are suffering a massive deterioration in our terms of trade. This, in itself, need not necessarily give rise to any problems. There is a danger of a problem arising, however, if and to the extent that the oil-producing countries, or some of them, cannot or cannot yet take in these extra imports because the absorptive capacity of their national economies cannot be adjusted in the short run to the scale of the money inflow resulting from the higher prices. It is important to get this point quite clear from the start, because it is this discrepancy between additional income and additional expenditure that gives rise to the specific problems I shall now briefly examine.

For the sake of simplicity I shall assume that this temporary non-spending is not, or is only very slightly, offset by long-term capital investments. As time goes by, such investments will certainly be made on an increasing scale, but for the time being the amount involved will be fairly small. For that matter, in the somewhat longer run expenditure will also increase on account of additional imports. The discrepancy to which I was referring is basically, therefore, only temporary. As I said, there are two aspects involved: a real resources aspect and a financial/monetary one. The temporary non-spending by the oil producing countries of their additional income means that the oil-consuming countries – also temporarily – must not cut down their expenditure to the level that the deterioration in the terms of trade resulting from the higher oil prices would in itself call forth. If they were to do so, this could mean a deflationary impulse for the whole world.

Application of this analysis to the policy actually conducted by any one country naturally requires caution. If – to take one example – a country was already suffering from serious overspending immediately before the oil crisis, it cannot use these arguments in order to avoid taking the necessary measures to put its economy on a sounder footing. More generally, a distinction has to be drawn between oil deficits and surpluses and non-oil deficits and surpluses. What I have said refers solely to oil deficits and surpluses.

Furthermore, the way in which this cut-back in spending due to the oil deficit is temporarily avoided is of prime importance. This rather unusual adjustment process – or to be more precise, non-adjustment process – must take place, as far as possible, at the stage of secondary, and not primary, income allocation. The question is how the non-reduction of real expenditure is to be attained. If this were to be done at the level of normally negotiated wage increases, with increases consequently being agreed to which were not adjusted for the deterioration in the terms of trade, a fresh and very strong impetus would be given to wage and price inflation – to cost-push inflation. The right way therefore is to adjust the normal wage increases for the deterioration in the terms of trade, but then to pull the net real increase gained by wage-earners up again by tax adjustments and changes in social insurance contributions paid out of wages. In this way it would be possible, in principle, to avoid the undesirable reduction in expenditure without fanning the flames of wage and price inflation. I say ‘in principle’ because there are many technical problems involved in carrying through such a policy which will certainly differ from country to country. To give just one example: the Treasury of one country will have less difficulty in financing the effects of this proposed policy than will the Treasury of another country. On the fundamentals, however, there is no room for disagreement.

These questions concerning the reallocation of real resources, both at national and at international level, have their counterparts in the financial and monetary sphere. The unspent part of the oil earnings that accrue will initially take the form of an accumulation of liquidity with the oil-producing countries – after all, the liquid funds have to be somewhere. This creates what can be described as a very large-scale recycling problem – recycling being called for because the accumulation of liquidity is mirrored by financing requirements on the part of the oil-consuming countries, at least in so far as they pursue the course I have just been advocating and keep expenditure for the time being at its existing level.

I do not propose to go into details of the various conceivable forms that this recycling could take. By way of summary, the possible recycling mechanisms might be listed as follows:

(a) the International Monetary Fund;

(b) the United States money market;

(c) the banks operating in the Euro-dollar market;

(d) (in all modesty) the Bank for International Settlements.

To this a few remarks may be added. First of all, it is clear that this recycling question contains within it a transformation problem: the transformation of short-term funds into long-term investments. This is so because the need for these funds stems from the fact that for the time being the oil-consuming countries will – as described earlier – be maintaining their expenditure at its existing level and thus face a financing problem that cannot be met adequately by means of short-term funds.

With regard to the International Monetary Fund, let me merely say that the Managing Director of the Fund has taken a laudable initiative, but that the main thing just now is to see that sufficient funds flow from the oil-producing countries to organise what might be called a second GAB.

As to the United States money market, a point worth noting is that the recent lifting of restrictions on outflows of capital from the United States is conducive to recycling. Nevertheless, the bulk of the transformation problem will fall onto the shoulders of the banks operating in the Euro-dollar market.

As far as the Bank for International Settlements is concerned, I will not do more than say that we are following and studying the relevant problems most carefully. If there is scope for action on the part of the BIS, and if it is deemed desirable, the Bank will be prepared to play its part.

I should like to conclude this brief consideration of the oil-price increase and its implications by returning to a point I made earlier about fixed and floating exchange rates.

If the analysis I have just presented is correct, it is of even greater importance than before that on balance-of-payments objectives and their compatibility. I have already pointed out that it would be quite wrong to try to make good the oil losses in the short run. If it attempted to do that, a country would only pass its problem on to other oil-consuming countries. Now, a meaningful discussion of balance-of-payments objectives and their compatibility presupposes the maintenance of a certain pattern of exchange rate relationships and thus, where rates are floating, a certain intervention policy on the part of national monetary authorities. For the moment, a formal return to fixed parities as they existed under the old system is impossible. But it is possible, and even necessary, for international consultations to be held on what could be, in a more general sense, a consistent pattern of exchange rates for the leading currencies, in order to open the way for meaningful discussion of the compatibility or incompatibility of balance-of-payments objectives in the very difficult period we now have ahead of us.

My time is running short. But I do not want to conclude without referring for a moment to the problem of inflation. Both in scale and in international spread, inflation has grown to unprecedented proportions. Immediately before the oil crisis the situation was already such that prices were rising in the major industrial countries at a rate of 7 or 8 percent or more. There can be no doubt at all that even without the oil crisis inflation would have continued moving in the direction of double figures. After the steep increase in oil prices it is now to be feared that the number of countries with inflation rates of 10 percent or more in 1974 will be quite large. In countries recording a price rise of less than l0 percent the authorities will probably regard this as a notable achievement and cite it as proof of the success of their policies.

Yet it must surely be possible to bring this senseless development to a halt. And in this context ‘senseless’ is the right word. For no one who obtains a wage increase of 14 percent with prices going up by 10 percent is better off – or worse off – than he would be with wages rising by 8 percent and prices by 4 percent. After all, what counts are real wages, or, taking into account taxes and social insurance contributions, net disposable real wages. Discussion on income distribution should consequently focus far more than hitherto on the distribution of real national income, as reflected for individuals and groups of individuals in net real income. If there is general agreement on that score, it is in everybody’s interest that these real figures should be accompanied by as small a purely nominal increase as possible.

Summing up, I would say that on the eve of the oil crisis the main features of the international monetary scene were these.

(1) Discussions on international monetary reform were making little headway. There was already reason to doubt the possibility of having a definite reform plan ready and approved by the agreed target date of 31st July 1974.

(2) The dollar was beginning to show a rapid recovery, which was making for a more balanced situation and in itself improved the prospects for a successful monetary reform.

(3) Monetary co-operation within the EEC was at a low ebb. The key date of 1st January 1980, the target date set for the attainment of full economic and monetary union, was looking distinctly optimistic.

(4) Inflation was gathering alarming speed.

After the oil crisis most problems have become even more difficult to solve. It is my belief, however, that the direct consequences of the oil crisis can be mastered, provided the problems are properly judged and tackled energetically. After all, as far as their price increases are concerned, even the oil-producing countries have to cut their coats according to the cloth afforded them by the free-market economy.

Fundamentally, therefore, it is not the oil crisis but the depreciation of money at its present intensity that constitutes the most serious problem. This threatens to have socially disruptive effects, which may have drastic consequences. Runaway inflation invariably leads ultimately to a dictatorship. A democracy is not able to bear an unlimited degree of monetary depreciation. But since my speech was not devoted specifically to inflation, I shall not go into this subject in any further detail. The only thing I will say is that I honestly feel that the problem of fighting inflation, of combating the depreciation of money, is not receiving from the politicians the priority it demands.

* * *

1978: “Defective Functioning International Monetary Framework”

A translation from Jelle Zijlstra, “Moderated Monetarism”, pages 275-279. Zijlstra’s 1978 analysis starts on page 273 and ends on page 288.

An autonomous wobbly factor in the world economy is the defective functioning of the international monetary framework. Since 1973 de facto, and currently, after the revision of the IMF statutes, also de jure, the world has to cope with a framework of floating exchange rates — not as some theoreticians wish and expect one of free and only market determined exchange rates — but one of floating exchange rates influenced by ad hoc interventions by the monetary authorities on the basis of considerations [given by] the moment. Beside this, the American balance of payments, more broadly the American monetary policy flooded the world with billions of dollars, so that drastic consequences for exchange rates could not have been [prevented]. The American dollar has also in these last years lost a substantial amount of its external value; viz. the [Dutch] guilder this loss amounted to 7% and in 1978 another 12%. Who at the end of the sixties would have foretold that the dollar in regard to the guilder would have become less valuable than before World War I — when the exchange rate was about f 2,50 — one would have been stared at compassionately. In regard to the German mark and the Swiss franc and the yen, the loss of external value of the dollar these last years was even greater than in regard to the guilder. Notwithstanding, the depreciation of the dollar as a weighted average against all currencies was considerably less, but this [can] for a large part [be explained] by the misfortunes of the two most important trade-partners of the United States, namely Canada and Mexico, something that can be considered a sober comfort.

On the causes for the depreciation of the dollar there has been much said and written. On this, a couple of broad points may be given attention to. Of course, a [prolonged and] deficient balance of payments has consequences for the exchange rate, certainly when deficits are voluminous and persistent. But while correction mechanisms normally kick in, this functions for a reserve currency nation not any differently. When a country has problems of deficits on its balance of payments, there are two fundamental limits to this process. There has to be sufficient internal liquidity for conversion of the offered foreign currencies, and the national currency reserves must be sufficient to supply the asked foreign currencies. In the United States, balance of payments deficits are in first instance financed through attaining dollars by non-American holders, whether private or official holders, or both. So long they hold these accumulated dollars because they trust the stability of its value, there are no problems yet. However, they create a potential source of disruptions. After all, a threat to the value of the dollar is not only enfolded in current account deficits, but also in the dollars accumulated from the deficits from the past. Especially the non-official dollar holders, the private holders can become worried. When they decide to sell (mostly with central banks as buyers against their own wishes), the exchange rate declines as a function of distrust, rather than as a function of the size of the deficit on the balance of payments in the running term. The scope of these phenomena can be established by looking at the amounts of dollars in the hands of non-Americans, including the investments of central banks. They increased in 1977 and 1978 all together with $90 billion (they increased from almost $160 billion to $250 billion), of which more than $65 billion found their way to monetary authorities. The problem of trust becomes extraordinary bigger by the existence of the Eurodollar market where dollar liabilities can be transformed in any currency at any moment if the holders wish so. This masse de manoeuvre is extremely significant; the meant dollar deposits outside the United States, within the Group of Ten amounted to $360 billion at the end of September, when one would include interbank deposits; and $230 billion without these interbank deposits. At last, one also has to consider investments with a dollar risk in a more general sense — for example equity portfolios — where in times of exchange unrest, cover can be found.

Against this background, the American program to accomplish a certain stability of the dollar on the foreign exchange markets must be seen as positive. Announced on November 1, this consists predominantly from an arsenal of resources to acquire strong currencies for the purpose of being able to intervene on the markets. It concerns a total of $30 billion, consisting of lines of credit for short and mid terms, as well as the employment of own reserves such as gold and SDR’s. It is good a thing to see that, after the insistence from many sides to the American authorities, an ear eventually was lend to. Beside a policy aimed at decreasing the balance of payments deficit, this intervention was the necessary oil on the waves of distrust. The initial success of this policy could justify a cautious optimism.

On the causes of the American balance of payments deficits, there are still a few other points to be made. This deficit consists not only or even predominantly from a deficit on the current account. Of the earlier mentioned $90 billion, two thirds were due to an outflow of dollars through the balance of payments, only a third emerged from a current account deficit. That this deficit on the current account could be presented as a result of oil-imports is an incorrect representation of affairs. This follows already, from a comparison with several other countries; Japan produces no oil and has a big surplus on its balance of payments, [and] the same applies to Switzerland and West Germany. The Netherlands has a significant energy production with natural gas reserves and notwithstanding, [we] accomplished successfully to create a balance of payments deficit. A balance of payments deficit (the same applies to a surplus) can principally never be explained from having been caused by only one component of the balance of payments. There must always be more general causes that determine the net position of payments received and paid for [to foreign parties] with which one will always find a monetary crux.

A deficit on the current account is a representation of national overconsumption that, in a certain way, is accompanied by monetary finance of one or several domestic [economic] sectors. This can be compensated through a positive balance of payments or can be increased through a negative balance of payments. Direct credit extensions by banks to non-residents are a special case among these [aspects]. In the United States, this component is very substantial: 1977 and 1978 together showed in this regard a creation of dollars of around $45 billion, thus practically almost half of the total dollar creation went through the balance of payments. The monetary policy in the United States could impossibly have been restrictive. This also follows from the development in interest rates by the way. The nominal interest rates for longer terms are, corrected for inflation, zero or negative. Even if at first sight the rate of expansion of the total money supply seems modest, a correction must be pursued. As it happens, the largest part of outgoing dollars have found their way to foreign central banks. These dollars are to a large extent invested so that they disappear from the registered money supply that thereby has become essentially [under-reflecte][7]. The conclusion must be that decreasing the American balance of payments deficit [can only result] from the implementation of restrictive monetary policies.

Earlier a point was made about the functioning of the Eurodollar market, namely with the explanation of the tendency of the dollar to depreciate on the foreign exchange markets. Recently, the discussion on this market, [or] more broadly defined, the Euro foreign exchange markets, was revived. Calls for some form of regulation of this market can again be heard, after it initially was stupefied when this market fulfilled an important role with sluicing back the oil revenues in the international payments circuit. With this question of regulation, one must discern macro-economic and micro-economic aspects. Banks that have subsidiaries or side offices in other nations, do not, in every instance, have to follow domestic rules [and regulations] in regard to solidity, in their offices elsewhere. Increasingly, awareness that this does not suffices, grows. The supervision on parent banking companies, through consolidation requirements, should be stretched in order to reach beyond national borders.

Beside this, there is the macro-economic aspect. When monetary authorities want to restrict extending credits in order to manage domestic circulation, this of course, is limited to domestic residents. Credit supply to non-residents remains unaddressed. Here, credit supply is possible outside of the control of monetary authorities, unless capital inflows in countries from where [dollar] loans are contracted can be sufficiently impeded. These possibilities would also exist without the institutionalized Euro foreign exchange markets, but it is clear that their presence has increased the volume of these transactions exceptionally. If with this an uncontrollable inflationary potential is created, a question then emerges. The answer cannot be simply given while it should first become clear if the result is a net creation of credit, [or] put differently, whether there would have been an even net credit expansion without this market. Whatever is the case, the discussions about the desirability and possibility of regulations of the Euro foreign exchange markets are intensified. Technically, this is a very complex problem. Under any circumstances, it may never be forgotten that from a monetary perspective, the objective of interest should be on the credit extensions to non-residents, in whatever currency of denomination.

At last, there is an additional question with and surrounding the dollar after the events of these last years. The international monetary framework is de facto more then ever based on the dollar. Practically speaking, we live under a dollar standard. This means that the fortunes of the dollar, its erosion of value and its instability, also feed back on the functioning of the framework. In and outside the United States the awareness grows that “something differently” is needed. One can say that a solution in first instance is found with the implementation of SDR’s in 1967. But the success of this alternative to the dollar as the pivot of this international monetary framework has thus far only proved itself limited. Especially, so long the SDR cannot be freely ex