1. Pierre Elliot Trudeau “ Reason over passion.” Pierre Elliot Trudeau

2. INTRODUCTION.... Pierre Elliott Trudeau was born in Quebec on October 18, 1919 to a French father and Scottish mother. He earned a law degree at the University of Montreal, a master's degree in political economy at Harvard University, then studied at Ecole des Sciences Politiques in Paris in 1946-47, followed by an academic year at the London School of Economics in 1947-48. Went backpacking in Eastern Europe, Middle East and Far East for one whole year Came back to Canada and worked in Ottawa as advisor to the Privy Counsel He returns to Montreal and works with labour unions defending union rights during the Asbestos strike in Quebec He fought the repressive system of government of the Union Nationale Was part of the ‘Three Wise Men’ and was appointed justice minister

3. What was he to Canada? Pierre Trudeau was a father to Canada in the way that he wanted a renewed federation in which French and English Canadians were full and equal partners His Political life started in 1965. The federal Liberal Party was looking for candidates from Quebec, and they recruited Pierre Trudeau, Jean Marchand, and Gerard Pelletier. They were known as the “Three wise men. All of them won seats in the House of Commons but Trudeau was the least popular of them. Trudeau was selected as Justice Minister by Prime Minister Pearson. The Prime Minister liked Trudeau and his ideas so when he resigned Trudeau signed up as the candidate for the new Liberal Party leader. TRUDEAUMANIA: Men, women, old, young, French, English, East, and West Canadians alike were infatuated with his personality and style. It really suited the Psychedelic and radical 60’s! Trudeau made Canadian politics from dull to exciting with his way of doing things.

4. TRUDEAUMANIA Continued... Notable changes in the Trudeau Era: -Official Languages Act, 1969; made English and French the official languages of the Canadian government. -War Measures Act, 1970; Trudeau introduced this in concern of the FLQ terrorist group. -Wage and Price controls, 1975. -Trudeau appoints the first female Speaker of the HOC, Jeanne Sauve (1980). -Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, 1982; a statement of the fundamental rights and freedoms of Canadian citizens that forms part of the Constitution Act signed by Queen Elizabeth II. -Partition of Canadian Constitution. -Trudeau appoints the first female Governor General, Jeanne Sauve (1984). Though his time in government was enjoyable, Trudeau did spend a lot of money in the government. The national debt went up 1200%; the initial debt when he came to be PM was $17 billion rose to $200 BILLION!!!

5. Political Affiliation Promoted world peace and understanding between nations Trudeau knew that Canada was dependent on the USA a bit too much: He wanted to make an era in history in which Canada becomes more independent of the USA He knew that Canada would still have to agree with American decisions to some extent Wanted Canada to back up a little from the Cold War in order to ease tensions IN RESPONSE: Nuclear missiles were removed from Canada’s NATO forces in Europe from 1970-1972. Bomarc missile sites that Pearson accepted in 1963 were dismantled. The last nuclear warheads were removed from Canada in 1984. OTHER ACTIONS TAKEN: - Trudeau cut down the national defence budget - Canada continued to participate in NATO and NORAD but Canada’s NATO contingent in Europe was reduced to half its strength Provided aid to poor countries. This also helped Canada because these countries would buy products manufactured in Canada - Canada was a member of the Commonwealth and la Francophonie - Created the CIDA (Canadian International Development Agency) in 1968

6. What was he to the World? Wanted to bridge gaps in the world created by the Cold War He was a smart leader and kept relations with nations on both sides of the Cold War. Showed the world that Canada was a peace keeping nation Allowed immigrants to come in Canada from different countries so that they could live an easier life and also support their families Accepted all types of people and improved laws on divorce, homosexuality and abortion Trudeau promoted trade with different countries Allowed sporting events with communist countries in order to make better relations with them Understood people of different cultures since his own background was Scottish and French

7. Interesting Facts! Interesting Facts!!! -He drove to work in a sports car -Dated famous celebrities -Slid down the banister in the House of Commons -Pirouetted (danced) behind the back of Queen Elizabeth II when she visited Canada. -Even with his “interesting” personality, he was actually a shy and private man, and really disliked the media.

8. Interesting Facts continued... -He once swung his fist at a reporter and shot back at an interviewer. -A famous quote by him is “The State has no business in the nation’s bedrooms”, in reference to him defending homosexuality rights. -Got a law degree at the University of Montreal, and a master’s degree in economy and Harvard. -When Trudeau had marriage problems with his wife Margaret, his wife was seen running off with Rolling Stones member Mick Jagger. -He had a daughter with Deborah Coyne, Sarah Coyne, though they were not married. -In the end, he worked for a law firm in Montreal, living alone in his mansion.