March 25, 2010 -- Coming off the breakup of his marriage to Sandra Bullock, Jesse James opens up about his relationship, his time in rehab and what he says made him cheat on his Oscar-winning wife, in an exclusive "Nightline" interview.

Days after Sandra Bullock took home an Oscar for her role in "The Blind Side," reports surfaced that her husband had cheated. When a string of women came forward claiming to have slept with James, the couple's marriage became tabloid fodder.

But from the beginning, James and Bullock seemed like an odd couple: "America's Sweetheart," Miss Congeniality, dating a tattooed, motorcycle builder.

Below is a timeline of the highs and lows of their relationship and public breakup:

December 2003: Bullock and James meet when she takes her godson, a fan of James' show "Monster Garage," to tour West Coast Choppers, the garage where James builds custom motorcycles that sell for as much as $300,000.

July 16, 2005: Bullock, 41, and James, 35, get married in a private ceremony in Santa Barbara, Calif. Bullock becomes a stepmom to James' three children -- daughter, Chandler, and son, Jesse Jr., whom he had with his first wife, Karla, and a daughter, Sunny, whom he had with his second wife, adult film star, Janine Lindemulder.

2006: James' show "Monster Garage" on the Discovery Channel goes off the air. In April, James opens up Cisco Burger restaurant down the street from West Coast Choppers.

April 2007: In a press conference promoting "Premonition," Bullock comments on being a stepmom: "Here's the thing, I have children. I married into children. I love those children. My concern and my love for those kids as a co-parent is no less than if I had that child biologically. I don't see the difference between that and having your own child biologically. My priorities are love, my want, my wishes for them, my discipline, my rules, my fun, is because of my children. I have them .. .I feel for the children I have in my life and I would not change that."

December 2009: James and Bullock get custody of James' daughter, Sunny, after months-long bitter custody dispute. Bullock has been helping her husband raise Sunny since James' ex-wife, Janine Lindemulder, was sentenced to six months of prison for tax evasion, Dec. 31, 2008.

Jan. 17, 2010: At the Golden Globes, Bullock scores an award for her role as Leigh Anne Tuohy in "The Blind Side." During her acceptance speech, she says, "and to my husband, there is no surprise that my work got better when I met you because I never knew what it felt like for someone to have my back. So thank you! "

March 7, 2010: Barbara Walters interviews Bullock on the final "Barbara Walters Oscar Special." Bullock opens up on affairs of the heart and says, " I hope the same people that are in my house today will be there 10 years from now."

March 7, 2010: Bullock wins for her role in "The Blind Side," propelling her into an elite circle of Oscar-winning actors. When she accepts the award for best actress, James whispers something in Bullock's ear and kisses her, but she doesn't react, gesturing toward Meryl Streep and heading to the stage. Bullock does not thank James by name, but does thank the "mothers who take care of the babies and the children no matter where they come from."