Sandra Bullock was previously in a scandalous marriage with motorcycle builder and Monster Garage host, Jesse James. The ex-couple tied the knot in 2005 and filed for divorce in 2010 following allegations by several women that James had engaged in extramarital affairs with them while he was married to Bullock.

Advertisement

Sandra Bullock is currently going through a tough time as she is mourning the loss of her boyfriend, photographer Bryan Randall. He passed away on August 5, 2023, after battling ALS for nearly 3 years.

Also Read: “He had the best of caretakers in my amazing sister”: Sandra Bullock Sacrificed Her Hollywood Career to Be With Bryan Randall After Boyfriend Kept His ALS Struggle a Secret for Years

Advertisement

Jesse James Confessed To Cheating On Sandra Bullock

In light of the allegations, Jesse James publicly apologized to Sandra Bullock. He took full responsibility for his actions and sought forgiveness from Bullock and their children. James discussed his “f*cked up choices” in an interview with Men’s Journal, admitting that it was unfair for him to even be in a relationship.

However, the reality TV star later revealed in an interview with Howard Stern that The Blind Side actress did not love him either. James attributed his infidelity to trust issues with Bullock. Reflecting on the Oscar-winning actress’s award acceptance speech, he said:

“Yeah, she could stand there in front of the world and say she loved me, but in my mind, I was thinking, yeah bullsh*t…’You don’t love me.’”

In 2010, Sandra Bullock filed for divorce, citing a “conflict of personalities.” The ex-couple had been in the process of adopting a son, who was living with them at the time. The Miss Congeniality actress proceeded with the adoption as a single parent.

Advertisement

Also Read: “It possibly was becoming my crutch”: Sandra Bullock Cried for Help With Cryptic Comment as Boyfriend Bryan Randall Passes Away at 57 After Keeping Incurable Disease a Secret

Sandra Bullock Moved On As A Single Mother of Two Adopted Children

Sandra Bullock had a glimpse of motherhood before adopting as the stepmother of Jesse James’s three children. After their split, James had multiple partners, but he eventually settled down with his current partner, Alexis Dejoria. As for the Bird Box actress, she went on to adopt another daughter and is now raising her two adopted children.

In an interview with CBS, Bullock mentioned that the initial year after the split was especially hard because of the newborn baby. The Gravity actress expressed concern about how the divorce might impact her son, Louis. She said:

Advertisement

“I mean, so much had happened. How do you process grief and not hurt your child in the process? It’s a newborn. They take on everything that you’re feeling. So my obligation was to him and not tainting the first year of his life with my grief.”

Also Read: “He’s not just another beautiful face”: Sandra Bullock Was Awestruck By Ex-Boyfriend After Being Laughed At For Trying To Play Lead Role With Speed Star

During the Red Table Talk, the Ocean’s 8 actress revealed her strong protective instinct for her children. Bullock hinted at taking a break from acting following the 2022 movie The Lost City, stating her desire to just be at home. Tragically, the reality was more devastating as Randall was battling the disease at the time.

Source: The Things