Sandra Bullock's ex-husband, Jesse James, was one of the most famous car show hosts. He ran a a success motorcycle business and was once almost on best of the global. However, after many cheating and awful behavior scandals, James went off the map. Here's what came about to the bad boy.

Where It All Started

Bullock and James' separation used to be one among the most scandalous breakups in Hollywood. America's sweetheart Sandra Bullock used to be stunned by way of husband Jesse James, who cheated on her with several ladies.

James is the former star of Monster Garage, but he's even more famous as the husband who cheated on Bullock, which turned into public after she'd gained the Oscar for her function in The Blind Side. At the time, James gave the look of one in every of the maximum hated males in America. He fled to a rehab facility for a month, where he handled adolescence and anger management issues.

Related: 15 Forgotten Facts About Kat Von D And Jesse James’ Relationship

In an interview with ABC News, when the journalist asked him, "you had a perfect life, you had a perfect wife, why did you throw it away?" he spoke back, "I knew I would get caught eventually, and I think I wanted to get caught. It was me trying to self-sabotage my life".

Packing His Bags

James shut down West Coast Choppers, his bike business in California, and began a brand new lifestyles in Austin, Texas, together with his three kids Chandler, Jesse, and Sunny. Sandra Bullock additionally has a home in Austin. He'd was hoping to stay a dating for the sake of the kids, together with Louis, the child Bullock ended up adopting as a single guardian.

In Austin, James started to jot down about his painful adventure. He wrote about his tricky early existence in Long Beach, his failed marriages, and about how a welder changed into one in all the most famous names in the global of motorcycles. He put it all in his guide American Outlaw.

The Picture Scandal

People suspected that James was a large fan of Nazi Germany's horrible chief. It all began again in 2019 when US Weekly released a photograph of James from 2004 that confirmed him dressed in a German soldier cap miming the dictator mustache in giving a Heil Hitler salute. The supply at the time said James simply posted for the picture to shock people while the motorcycle fanatic tried to close down any rumors that he used to be racist, claiming that it used to be a funny story.

However, links between James and the Nazi Party stored coming in. James launched a logo for his corporate West Coast Choppers and referred to it as the warbird, which resembles the Nazi imperial eagle that used to be used by the Party in 1935 to 1945.

More Cheating Scandals

After his marriage to Sandra Bullock ended, James and fellow truth celebrity Kat Von D announced they had been dating. His romance with the famous tattoo artist materialized somewhat temporarily after his split with Bullock, however it wasn't a happy ending for both of them. In a Facebook put up in 2011, Von D published that she'd been cheated on by James, just like his former spouse, however with 19 girls. LA Ink famous person would later describe their dating as poisonous. She wrote, "I think it just made me sad today to imagine him still in that dark place – where seeking validation through the attention of women takes precedence over being a good father, a sincere friend, a better coworker, and a happy individual."

Related: 15 Surprising Facts About Jesse James’ Motorcycles

A New Career Path

Jesse James came on to the gun scene a couple of years ago with the emblem Jesse James Firearms Unlimited with the acronym JJFU. This challenge follows a string of profitable businesses. Jesse isn't just managing a store, but he is also spending hours in entrance of his forge every day performing some beautiful complicated metalwork. He created one pistol with items of the Statue of Liberty. James told Fox Business, "I needed to take a break and figure out, so I moved to Texas, and just kind of the firearm industry found me, and it's like oh my god, this is what I'm supposed to be doing."

Another Marriage

In 2013, Jesse married racer Alexis DeJoria, the daughter of businessman billionaire John Paul DeJoria. Her father and James were old friends. Despite all the other paintings James has to do, he is in charge of checking the automotive on his wife's race crew. Both of them were staying out of the highlight and specializing in their career targets.

Jesse James is fifty one years outdated and went off the map because he sought after to are living a comfortable life surrounded by his 3 loves: bikes, guns, and races. By the second, new cheating scandals are out of sight, which is a reduction for a qualified and beautiful lady as Alexis DeJoria. The couple appears to be doing smartly and playing their time together.

Next: Who Are Will Ferrell’s Three Sons?

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7tbTErZ%2Bippeoe6S7zGifnqqVqHq4tNhmoZ6ro5p6q63Mnqpmr5WjwW67xZ9kraCVYrqivI4%3D