Out of all the iconic love stories in Hollywood, we can’t forget about Sandra Bullock and her ex-husband, Jesse James. A timeline of the former couple’s romance proves their relationship was filled with highs, lows and plenty of memories.

The Blind Side star and the Monster Garage host first met in 2003. After hitting it off, Sandra and Jesse started dating and quickly fell in love. The Hollywood stars were married by 2005.

Throughout the first few years of their marriage, Sandra and her handsome hunk looked happier than ever as they attended red carpet events together. Jesse also supported his successful spouse as she won countless awards thanks to her incredible talents as an actress.

It was Sandra, however, who praised her hubby for standing by her side as she accepted the Academy Award for Best Actress in 2010. “To my husband, there is no surprise that my work got better when I met you because I never knew what it felt like for someone to have my back,” she gushed on stage.

Sadly, the Speed alum and Jesse’s relationship started to crumble when reports of multiple alleged affairs surfaced that same year. After just months of public scrutiny, the Miss Congeniality actress filed for divorce. Around the same time, she adopted her eldest son, Louis.

Looking back, Sandra “never thought she’d get past the heartbreaking and humiliating breakup with Jesse,” a friend close to the Proposal star told Closer Weekly in December 2019. “Sandra has been through hell.”

Fortunately, that all changed when she crossed paths with her current beau, Bryan Randall, in 2015. “Meeting him was literally a godsend,” the insider sweetly added.

Aside from sharing one of the “most solid” bonds in Hollywood, Sandra and Bryan are also crushing it at raising the brunette beauty’s son, Louis, as well as her daughter, Laila, whom she adopted in 2015.

“The kids are growing up so fast and Bryan couldn’t be more involved in their upbringing,” a separate source told Closer. “The kids adore Bryan and of course, Sandra still pinches herself that she’s been so lucky finding Bryan.”

Fans can’t wait for the day the lovebirds finally tie the knot!