By JANET MASLIN

hen they finished shooting "Smoke," Paul Auster and Wayne Wang were in no hurry to pack up and go home. And Mr. Auster wasn't even far from home, since the Brooklyn Cigar Company, the Park Slope store in which much of "Smoke" was set, is part of the neighborhood in which he lives, the one "Smoke" observed so fondly. So they stayed in the store. They invited celebrities to drop by. They let the camera roll for long takes without interruption.

Showing the actors signs that read "Boring!" or "Get to the Point" or "2 Minute Warning" was as close as Mr. Wang and Mr. Auster came to directing "Blue in the Face," their new cinematic accessory to "Smoke." "Blue in the Face" got its title because the actors, it was said jokingly, were free to talk until they reached that point. Some joke: this thing could have been a nightmare. Instead, it's good-humored, try-anything fun.

"Blue in the Face" should not be confused with one of those films that has a beginning, middle and end or is in any great rush to move from one stage to the next. What it has instead is an easygoing, copacetic mood and a playfulness in which the audience can take part. The film winks broadly whenever improvisations start looking like outtakes ("Well?" "Well what?") or the occasional wild card appears. Among the latter are RuPaul giving a brief dancing lesson and Madonna dressed to deliver a singing telegram, not a minute too early for Halloween.

Harvey Keitel once again makes a fine master of ceremonies at the cigar store, presiding over the antics and looking genuinely amused by much of what he sees. Mr. Keitel's sportsmanship even extends to being grabbed in a hammerlock and kissed by Roseanne, who delivers one of the film's few dismal turns by straining instead of just letting things happen. Roseanne also screeches and chews gum furiously, neither of which suits the film's laid-back mood.

Most of the performers who come off to best effect here take the coolest possible approach to what they're doing. So Lou Reed, who sings about egg creams on the film's energetic soundtrack, stands behind the counter and explains his eyeglasses, also trying to recall an early smoking experience. ("It, along with most of my childhood memories, are not available to me," he says.) In the same mood, Jim Jarmusch shows up not only as the patron saint of this type of film making but also as someone about to smoke what he says is his last cigarette. "I never had a girlfriend who didn't smoke," he muses. "Maybe if I quit I'll never have sex again." He doesn't look worried.

Also here are Lily Tomlin, as a man with chest hair, talking about how badly she wants a Belgian waffle; John Lurie, lounging comfortably in the street and providing background music; Michael J. Fox, pleasantly asking rude personal questions; and Malik Yoba as a rapper who spars nicely with Mr. Keitel's lovable Augie.

Sometimes, as when Mr. Yoba starts delivering a kind of folk-rap, music breaks out spontaneously. Victor Argo, as the store owner, takes the cake for this with a song of his own invention. The store's hangers-on, including Giancarlo Esposito, join in to sing: "Girls like you are a dime a dozen, and I got a nickel to spend."

The occasional shrill note (Mel Gorham as a loud Latin spitfire) is more than offset by casual thoughts about Ebbets Field, plastic bags in Prospect Park (from the writer Ian Frazier), Jackie Robinson's ghost (played by Keith David) and the way Nazis in movies hold their cigarettes. There's also a claim that Brooklyn is the hippest borough. And if "Blue in the Face" is any indication, then it's true.