A local man is heading to the States to face protesters and his family at a rally in Washington D.C.

The Westboro Baptist Church, run by the Phelps family of Topeka, Kansas is known world wide for picketing at soldiers' funerals.

Its self-described doctrine of hate has gone all the way to the United States Supreme Court.

Nate Phelps is part of that famous family but he doesn't share their views.

As he taps out his speech on atheism, Phelps can hardly believe he'll present it to a crowd of 30,000 at an event called the Reason Rally on Saturday in Washington, D.C.

Phelps is the head of the Centre for Inquiry based in Calgary.

"It's an amalgamation of secular humanists, free thinkers, skeptics, atheists and agnostics," said Phelps.

His involvement with an atheist group is ironic, considering his family background.

Phelps' father Fred runs the Westboro Baptist Church which has become known for picketing the funerals of American soldiers and suggesting that tragedies like cancer and 9/11 are god's punishment.

"He basically treats people with cruelty and indifference because that's what this kind of thinking breeds and I couldn't square it in my mind," said Nate Phleps.

So he left, married a Canadian woman, and settled in Calgary.

As his family started to gain more notoriety, people started to understand what it was like for him to grow up in the Phelps family.

"The perception was that I was exaggerating and that if I just reached out, things would get better," said Phelps. "You can tell people, you don't understand, and they still think you could change it if you wanted to."

For the first time, he will face his family head on at one of their own protests.

"We put the plan to protest this thing months ago long before we had any information that another atheist named Nathan was going to be there," said Shirley Phelps Roper.

Phelps says he is prepared to see his family, but is not looking forward to it.

"Hopefully I won't have anything to do with that, get anywhere near it. But if I do, I won't run away from it either," said Phelps.

Phleps hopes his doctrine of acceptance is louder than the Westboro Baptist Church's self-described doctrine of hate.

Nate Phelps says part of his speech at The Reason Rally will focus on what he thinks should be limitations around freedom of speech and the first amendment. Something that he says has become clearer to him since moving to Canada.