Ugo Foscolo who was one of the most important poets of the European literature, lived between two centuries: the 18th and the 19th. Although he represents the current of neoclassicism he has been considered as an expressive voice of romanticism also. Actually he lived his life as an authentic romantic hero and his alter Ego was Jacopo Ortis the central figure in his epistolary romance entitled “le ultime lettere di Jacopo Ortis”. Notably, this famous romance introduces the romanticism in Italy. Foscolo also composed many other great poems until 1816 when he self-exiled in England. Although he was free to produce any kind of literary work, during his migration he didn’t compose any new poem or romance. In contrast he performed a great amount of literary review focused mainly on Dante, Petrarch and Boccaccio. Did this turn represent a lack of inspiration? Was migration -and the associated conditions- the main reason for this change?

The Orlando Furioso, a great sixteenth-century poem of the Italian literature, had undoubtedly fundamental importance in the development of the narrative poetics of the Italian writer Italo Calvino (1923-1985), as well as we can note in the case of The Nonexistent Knight (1959) or The castle of crossed destinies (1973). The first critical contribution about the Ariosto’s poem appears in 1966 and it is the introduction to the Einaudi’s edition of the Furioso, now re-published with the title “The Structure of the Orlando Furioso” in Why Read the Classics? (1991). Afterward, Calvino conducted some radiophonic broadcasts about the Orlando Furioso, from which he realized the editorial project of the Orlando furioso di Ludovico Ariosto raccontato da Italo Calvino (Orlando Furioso by Ludovico Ariosto told by Italo Calvino, 1970). In this book, Calvino interspersed comments and narrations in prose to the verses of the original text of the poem, without respecting the division in cantos, but following the errant movement of events of the poem’s characters. Therefore, the work of Calvino is not an anthology, but it is a reading path and a rewriting of the Ariosto’s poem. In this communication, by starting from the intertextual theory of the transpositional processes and of the serious transformations, I intend to analyze the rereading of the Orlando Furioso made by Calvino, considering it as the rewriting of a fundamental work of the Western canon, re-proposed to the modern reader through a new narrative sensibility.

Giuseppe Mazzini announced, but never actually wrote, a biography of the Italian patriot and poet, Ugo Foscolo. This article recounts Foscolo's last years in exile by means of available documents in order to explain why Mazzini renounced the writing of Foscolo's biography and decided instead to complete and publish, under the latter's name, an edition of Dante's Divine Comedy that Foscolo had merely begun to sketch. Once he arrived in London, Mazzini suddenly shied away from the proposition, and having retrieved Foscolo's manuscripts for an edition of the Divina Commedia under Foscolo's name, decided instead to effect one of the most influential forgeries of the history of Italian literature: he substituted himself for Foscolo, completing the latter's edition of the Divina Commedia, and had it published, preceded by a preface written in an unapolo-getically patriotic tone and signed 'Un Italiano.' Why did Mazzini renounce his intention of writing a biography of Foscolo and decide instead to attempt a philological operation, quite removed from his own interests, which he did not want to attribute to his own scholarly merit and which, in fact, would constrain him, when near death, to a full confession?

Jerónimo Pizarro & Rui Sousa Fernando Pessoa and Romanticism Serapion. Zweijahresschrift für europäische Romantik [Serapion. Yearbook for European Romanticism] Kaltërina Latifi (ed.); in cooperation with: Philipp Hubmann, Alexander Knopf. Heidelberg: Universitätsverlag Winter, 2022. pp. 7-35. ISBN: 978-3-8253-4972-1 Product: Book Edition: Hardcover ISBN: 978-3-8253-8589-7 Product: Ebook Edition: PDF Contributions by: Jerónimo Pizarro, Rui Sousa, Gary Wetz, Rüdiger Görner, Anna Kostner, Alexandra Rassidakis, Jorge Bastos da Silva, Eva Kocziszky, Peer Jürgens, Frederick Burwick Subject: Komparatistik Series: Serapion. Zweijahresschrift für europäische Romantik, Volume No.: 2 Available: 26.09.2022 Serapion is a peer reviewed, bilingual yearbook, which is published in English and German. Universitätsverlag WINTER is an academic publisher located in Heidelberg, Germany, who covers the whole field of Humanities with particular interest in literature and language studies. Founded already in 1822, the publishing house is closely associated with ‘Heidelberg Romanticism’. Keywords: Phantastische Literatur, Ästhetik, Philosophie, Poetologie, Rezeptionsgeschichte, Musikwissenschaft, Romantik, Barthes, Roland, Tieck, Ludwig, Kulturwissenschaft, Walser, Robert, Hoffmann, E.T.A., Literaturwissenschaft, Hölderlin, Friedrich, Gegenwartsliteratur, Kunstwissenschaft, Sebald, W.G., Neophantastik, Elliott, Ebenezer, griechischer Nationalaufstand 1821 https://www.winter-verlag.de/en/suche/?query=serapion https://www.winter-verlag.de/en/detail/978-3-8253-4972-1/Latifi_Hg_Serapion_2_2022/ https://www.winter-verlag.de/en/detail/978-3-8253-8589-7/Latifi_Hg_Serapion_2_2022_PDF/ Dieser zweite Band von ‚Serapion‘ eröffnet verschiedene Perspektiven auf ‚die Romantik‘ und darauf, was ‚das Romantische‘ sei und wie es bis in die Moderne hineinwirkt. Das Verhältnis Romantik/Moderne wird in mehreren Beiträgen thematisiert, so im Hinblick auf Fernando Pessoas Romantikbezug, die romantischen Opus- und Schreibphantasien bei Roland Barthes, W.G. Sebalds ‚skeptische Romantik‘ oder auch auf das Konzept des ‚neuen Sehens‘ betreffend Romantik und Neophantastik. Zudem werden die Friedrich Schlegel-Reminiszenzen bei Robert Walser und ein neuer Zugang zur romantischen Rezeption des griechischen Nationalaufstandes von 1821 thematisiert. Autorenspezifischer blicken weitere Beiträge auf Ebenezer Elliotts ‚Vision‘ von „Scottishness“ und „Englishness“, Hölderlins ‚Thränen‘, die Kindermärchen der ‚Serapionsbrüder‘ E.T.A. Hoffmann, Carl Wilhelm Contessa und Friedrich de la Motte Fouqué und präsentieren abschließend einen konzentrierten Einblick in Gustav von Schlabrendorfs Anti-Napoleon-Schrift von 1804 und Ludwig Tiecks literarische Auseinandersetzung mit dieser.