Northumbria University

Founded: 1880

Fully Founded: 2002

Type: Public University

Students: 26,450+

Location: Newcastle upon Tyne NE7 7YT, United Kingdom

Contact: (+44) 191 227 3094

Web: www.northumbria.ac.uk

Call Us: +44 (0) 208 1333 905

WhatsApp: +44 (0) 7939983493

Overview

Northumbria University, also known as Newcastle Polytechnic, was established in 1969 as an open university from the merger of three regional colleges; these were Rutherford College of Technology, the College of Art & Industrial Design, and the Municipal College of Commerce. The university was founded in 1992 and is affiliated with the Wallace Group.

The school’s emphasis is on academic study and business practice. The International Centre for Life, BINUS Design School, and the BALTIC Centre for Contemporary Art are among the prestigious organizations that collaborate on this project. The university is widely regarded as one of the best in the UK’s upper echelon.

City Campus and Coach Lane Campus are the two parts of the university. The City campus fosters an atmosphere conducive to learning and personal growth with its award-winning architecture, cutting-edge academic buildings, and world-class recreational amenities. There is also the University Library, which houses tens of thousands of volumes, periodicals, electronic books, dissertations, theses, and other scholarly works. In addition to state-of-the-art labs for disciplines like Life Sciences and Engineering and the Computer and Information Sciences, the campus also has a sports complex. The Faculty of Health and Life Sciences can be found on the other campus, Coach Lane, which features state-of-the-art sports facilities, a brand-new Students’ Union, and top-notch computing and library resources. Cafés, restaurants, and convenience stores can be found in close proximity to both campuses.

There are plenty of pharmacies, office supply stores, and ATMs in the neighborhood. The university is in close proximity to numerous public transportation options. Students can study in peace on the campuses. Students have access to all resources on campus. The school has both an undergraduate and graduate curriculum. Over 31,000 individuals are currently enrolled at this educational institution.

After 2015, enrollment at the university jumped significantly. Various disciplines are housed in the institution’s four primary faculties: the Faculty of Art, Design, and Social Sciences; the Faculty of Business and Law; the Faculty of Engineering and the Environment; and the Faculty of Health and Life Sciences. Thus, students can tailor their education to their specific interests. Additionally, there is a press that was founded at the university in 2002. It releases works in many genres, including nonfiction, fiction, photography, travel, music, and biographies.

Among the university’s notable alums are film director Neil Marshall, fashion designer Scott Henshall, Olympic cyclist Victoria Pendleton, former Sunderland AFC chairman Bob Murray, contemporary artist Bharti Kher, fitness expert Paul Winsper, renowned author Guy Mankowski, and actor Kevin Whately (Renowned actor).

Why the Northumbria University

The Northumbria University London campus offers new opportunities and additional options to students who value London’s added value over Northumbria’s academic credentials.Earning a living as a foreign student in the UK is one of the services they provided. Ranking of UK graduates in highly skilled jobs (Full-time undergrads. Graduate Outcomes 2018/19). Providing one-on-one advice on CV preparation and interviews, inviting graduate recruiters and employers for workshops/guest lectures, and identifying part-time work and internship opportunities.

Northumbria University enjoys an international reputation for its high level of education and research. We do innovative research that addresses local concerns in the areas of science and technology, medicine and health, economics and society, and the arts and humanities.

Facilities:

They’re doing everything we can to help students feel at home on campus, get involved in the community, and succeed academically so they can make the most of their time at UC Santa Cruz.

Please read on to find out more about the measures we’ve taken to make their campus a secure environment: Safety on Campus. They are constantly revising the site to conform to official regulations. Don’t forget to revisit this page throughout the school year to stay abreast of any updates.

You can take advantage of a myriad of amenities available at their facilities. There is a wide variety of study areas for students to utilize, including but not limited to classrooms, clinics, laboratories, and studios.

They have over 500,000 print books, over 900,000 electronic books, and over 85,000 electronic journals in their University Library, which makes it one of the best academic libraries in the UK. There’s no question that you’ll want to hang out there.

Their Digital Commons is just one of many study areas, computer labs, and gathering places spread throughout the campus.

Hot and cold food, both of which can be pre-ordered via their app, are available at their catering and retail outlets.

They have increased the number of outdoor seating areas for people who want to meet for coffee or drinks but maintain some degree of personal space while doing so.

In addition to the gym and pool at Sport Central, we also offer a variety of fitness videos for at-home use.

Services for International Students

International students have free access to dedicated Student Advisors, as well as the Student Services department. Student Services also offers a meet and greet service, with pickups from Newcastle International Airport to the university. Upon arrival, students receive an orientation and an introduction to staff and students. In a recent Financial Times survey, Northumbria came top for student support.

All of their international students are greeted with open arms when they arrive at Northumbria University. No matter how long or short your stay in the UK, they are prepared to assist you with a variety of problems that may arise.

Rankings

In the Times University Guide 2023, it is ranked 49th

The Guardian University Guide 2023 ranks 46th

According to the Times Higher Education Rankings 2021, They are ranked 81st among young universities.

Northumbria University has risen the most in research power rankings of any university in the UK according to the Research Excellence Framework (REF2021). Northumbria’s research power ranking rose from 80th in 2008 to 23rd in 2014, making it the sector’s largest riser for the second time in a row.

Accommodation

Campus Life

Job Prospect

Northumbria understands the importance of where you live as a student. That’s why they help you shape your experience from start to finish. With accommodation applications, you can choose a building, flat, or room based on actual availability online. In minutes, you can confirm your booking online once you’ve chosen the perfect room for you.

All new students at Northumbria University are guaranteed accommodation as soon as their offer is accepted. You can choose from over 5,000 self-catering or catered rooms, and all accommodations are only a few minutes’ walk from the main buildings or accessible by direct public transport.Student accommodation staff are available all year to provide information and advice on all aspects of student accommodation, including landlord/tenant issues.

Northumbria’s campuses offer great amenities to mould your future.The campus is also near many chemists, stationery shops, and ATMs. The university is easily accessible by public transportation. Their London Campus offers Computer, Cyber, Project Management, and Technology-focused programmes. Located just minutes away from Liverpool Street station, benefit from studying in the heart of London’s digital and technology sector in a location where the financial district meets the heart of London’s technology sector. Taking advantage of work experience and networking opportunities in one of the world’s leading cities is easy when you have a base like this.

Students at Northumbria University can compete at the highest levels or stay fit and healthy through Northumbria Sport.

Northumbria University London Campus students have the opportunity, upon completion of their modules, to undertake three short professional development courses through QA.

For eligible students, these Professional Pathways are free of charge. With this opportunity, you will be able to add further training, valued at more than £3,000, to your CV, enhancing your skills with highly sought-after ones.

Top Features

Top Rated Institute

Beautiful Location

Best Achievement

Residential Facility

Campus & Location

Interested in our services or need advice? Then please get in touch and we’ll be glad to help.

Map View

Location

Address: Newcastle upon Tyne NE7 7YT, United Kingdom

You Must Know

Interested in our services or need advice? Then please get in touch and we’ll be glad to help.

Discipline

Business & Management (63)

Computer Science & IT (22)

Social Sciences (19)

Arts, Design & Architecture (12)

Education & Training (9)

Humanities (9)

Natural Sciences & Mathematics (5)

Engineering & Technology (25)

Medicine & Health (21)

Applied Sciences & Professions (15)

Law (11)

Hospitality, Leisure & Sports (9)

Environmental Studies & Earth Sciences (8)

Entry Requirement

English Requirement Undergraduate Program

IELTS-Overall: 6.0 ,Each skill: 5.5

PTE Overall:54& above

TOEFL iBT-Overall score: 79,Listening: 17,Reading: 18,Speaking: 20,Writing : 17

English Requirement Undergraduate Program

IELTS-Overall: 6.5 ,Each skill: 5.5

PTEOverall: 62& above,Each skill: 59

TOEFL iBT-Overall score: 88,Listening: 17,Reading: 18,Speaking: 20,Writing : 17

Tuition Fee

Scholarship

The Northumbria Global Scholarship is offered to international students who plan to attend Northumbria University in September 2022. It is an opportunity for students outside the European Union to receive a £3,000 discount on the first year’s tuition fee for a three-year undergraduate program at Northumbria University.

To know more visit- https://www.northumbria.ac.uk/study-at-northumbria/fees-funding/international-fees-funding/international-ug-funding/

What You Like To Study

Interested in our services or need advice? Then please get in touch and we’ll be glad to help.

Course and Faculty

Foundation Program

Undergraduate Program

Post Graduate Program

Accounting, Finance and Economics

Applied Sciences

Architecture and Built Environment

Business and Management

Computing and Information Technology

Design

Drama

Film and Media

Fine Art

Geography and Environmental Sciences

Health, Education and Social Care

Humanities

Law

Mathematics, Physics, and Electrical Engineering

Mechanical and Civil Engineering

Music

Psychology

Social Science

Sport

Accounting

Accounting and Finance (2-Year Top Up)

Accounting and Finance (Top Up) (1 Year)

Accounting and Finance (Top Up) (2-Year Top Up)

American Studies

Animation

Architecture

Architecture (3 Years)

Automotive Engineering

Automotive Engineering (3 Years)

Biochemistry

Biology

Biomedical Science

Building Surveying

Business (Top Up Award)

Business (Top Up)

Business and Finance (Top Up Award)

Business and Human Resource Management

Business and International Management (Top Up Award)

Business and Management

Business and Management (Top Up)

Business and Marketing

Business and Supply Chain Management

Business Enterprise, Creation and Management (Top Up)

Business Management

Chemistry

Chemistry (3 Years)

Childhood and Early Years Studies

Civil Engineering

Civil Engineering (3 Years)

Computer and Digital Forensics

Computer Networks and Cyber Security

Computer Science

Computer Science with Artificial Intelligence

Computer Science with Games Development

Computer Science with Web Development

Construction Engineering Management

Criminology

Criminology and Forensic Science

Criminology and Sociology

Design for Industry

Economics

Economics and Finance

Electrical and Electronic Engineering

Electrical and Electronic Engineering (3 Years)

English Language and Literature

English Language Studies

English Literature

English Literature and American Studies

English Literature and Creative Writing

English Literature and History

Entrepreneurship

Environmental Science

Fashion

Fashion Communication

Fashion Design and Marketing

Film and TV Production

Finance and Investment Management

Fine Art

Food Science and Nutrition

Forensic Science

Geography

Geography (3 Years)

Global Business Management (Top Up)

Graphic Design

Guidance and Counselling

Health and Social Care

History

History and American Studies

History and Politics

Information Technology Management for Business

Interior Architecture

Interior Design

International Banking and Finance (Completion Award)

International Banking and Finance (Top Up)

International Business Management

International Business Management with French

International Business Management with Spanish

International Hospitality and Tourism Management (Top Up)

International Relations and Politics

Journalism and English Literature

Law

Logistics and Supply Chain Management

Marketing

Marketing Management and Business (Top Up)

Mass Communication

Mass Communication (Completion Award)

Mass Communication and Business

Mass Communication with Advertising

Mass Communication with Business

Mass Communication with Public Relations

Mathematics

Mathematics (3 Years)

Mechanical Engineering

Mechanical Engineering (3 Years)

Media and Journalism

Midwifery

Music

Nursing Science

Nursing Science Registered Nurse (Adult)

Nursing Science Registered Nurse (Child)

Nursing Science Registered Nurse (Learning Disabilities)

Nursing Science Registered Nurse (Mental Health)

Occupational Therapy

Operating Department Practice

Physical Geography

Physics

Physics (3 Years)

Physics with Astrophysics

Physics with Astrophysics (3 Years)

Physiotherapy

Primary Education

Professional Policing

Psychology

Psychology with Criminology

Quantity Surveying

Real Estate

Social Work

Sociology

Sport and Exercise Science

Sport Coaching

Sport Management

Sport, Exercise and Nutrition

Theatre and Performance

Tourism and Events Management

Academic Practice

Accounting and Finance

Advanced Computer Science

Advanced Computer Science (1 Year)

Advanced Computer Science with Advanced Practice

Advanced Computer Science with Study Abroad

Applied Economics

Applied Linguistics for TESOL

Architecture

Artificial Intelligence

Artificial Intelligence Technology

Artificial Intelligence Technology (with Advanced Practice)

Bar Course

Bar Course (1 Year)

Big Data and Data Science Technology

Big Data and Data Science Technology with Advanced Practice

Biotechnology

Business Analytics

Business Analytics (with Advanced Practice/Study Abroad)

Business and Management (16 Months)

Business and Management (Distance Learning)

Business and Management with Advanced Practice

Business and Management with Study Abroad

Business with Business Analytics

Business with Business Analytics (Amsterdam)

Business with Business Analytics (with Advanced Practice)

Business with Entrepreneurship with Advanced Practice

Business with Hospitality and Tourism Management

Business with Hospitality and Tourism Management (1 Year)

Business with Hospitality and Tourism Management (with Advanced Practice in Second Year)

Business with Hospitality and Tourism Management (with Study Abroad in Second Year)

Business with Human Resource Management

Business with Human Resource Management (with Advanced Practice in Second Year)

Business with Human Resource Management (with Study Abroad in Second Year)

Business with International Management (Amsterdam)

Clinical Exercise Physiology

Communication Design

Computer Science

Computer Science (16 Months)

Computer Science with Advanced Practice

Computer Science with Artificial Intelligence (Distance Learning)

Computer Science with Data Analytics

Conservation of Fine Art

Construction Project Management with BIM

Construction Project Management with BIM (16 Months)

Construction Project Management with BIM with Advanced Practice

Creative and Cultural Industries Management

Creative Writing

Criminology and Criminal Justice

Cyber Security Technology

Cyber Security with Advanced Practice

Data Protection Law and Information Governance

Data Science

Data Science (1 Year)

Data Science (16 Months)

Data Science (with Advanced Practice)

Design

Digital Marketing

Digital Marketing (Distance Learning)

Digital Marketing (with Advanced Practice in Second Year)

Digital Marketing (with Advanced Practice)

Digital Marketing (with Study Abroad in Second Year)

Disaster Management and Sustainable Development

Disaster Management and Sustainable Development (Advanced Practice in Second Year)

Economics and Sustainability

Economics and Sustainability (with Advanced Practice)

Economics and Sustainability (with Study Abroad)

Education

Education (12 Months)

Education (Leadership and Management)

Education (Leadership and Management) (18 Months)

Education (Send/Inclusion)

Education (Send/Inclusion) (18 Months)

Education (Teaching and Learning)

Education (Teaching and Learning) (18 Months)

Education Leadership in Learning (Teach First)

Electrical Power Engineering

Electrical Power Engineering (18 Months)

Electrical Power Engineering with Advanced Practice

Engineering Management

Engineering Management (1 Year)

Engineering Management with Advanced Practice

English Language and Linguistics

English Literature

English Literature (Distance Learning)

Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management

Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management (with Advanced Practice)

Environmental Monitoring, Modelling and Reconstruction

Fashion Design

Fashion Design (Menswear)

Fashion Design (Performancewear)

Fashion Design (Sustainable and Ethical)

Fashion Design (Womenswear)

Finance

Finance (16 Months)

Finance (with Advanced Practice in Second Year)

Fine Art

Forensic Accounting

Forensic Science

Global Logistics Operations and Supply Chain Management

Global Logistics Operations and Supply Chain Management (1 Year)

Global Logistics Operations and Supply Chain Management (with Advanced Practice)

Global Logistics, Operations and Supply Chain Management (with Advanced Practice)

Global Logistics, Operations and Supply Chain Management (with Study Abroad)

Global Sustainable Business Management – Amsterdam

Health Psychology

Healthcare Management

History

History (Distance Learning)

Information Rights Law and Practice

Information Science (Data Analytics)

Information Science (Data Analytics) (with Advanced Practice)

Interior Architecture

International Business Management

International Business Management (with Advanced Practice in Second Year)

International Business Management (with Study Abroad in Second Year)

International Development

International Finance and Investment

International Finance and Investment (with Advanced Practice in Second Year)

International Finance and Investment (with Study Abroad in Second Year)

International Project Management

International Project Management (with Advanced Practice)

International Relations, Conflict and Security

International Relations, Conflict and Security (18 Months)

International Sport Management

Law (Criminal Justice)

Law (Cyber Law)

Law (International Commercial Law)

Law (International Criminal Law and Practice)

Law (Space Law)

Law / Common Professional Examination

Laws Professional Legal Practice

Legal Practice

Legal Practice (1 Year)

Luxury Brand Management (Amsterdam)

Marketing

Marketing (1 Year)

Marketing with Advanced Practice

Masters in Healthcare Management

Mechanical Engineering

Mechanical Engineering (1 Year)

Mechanical Engineering with Advanced Practice

Microbiology

Microelectronic and Communications Engineering

Microelectronic and Communications Engineering (18 Months)

Microelectronic and Communications Engineering with Advanced Practice

Midwifery Studies

Multidisciplinary Innovation

Nursing

Nursing Science Registered Nurse (Adult)

Nursing Science Registered Nurse (Child)

Nursing Science Registered Nurse (Learning Disability)

Nursing Science Registered Nurse (Mental Health)

Nutritional Science

Occupational and Organisational Psychology

Occupational Therapy (Pre-registration)

Physiotherapy (Pre-Registration)

Preventive Conservation

Primary Education

Project Management

Project Management (18 Months)

Project Management with Advanced Practice

Psychology

Public Health

Public Health (18 Months)

Public Health (Nutrition)

Public Health (Nutrition) (1 Year)

Publishing

Real Estate

Real Estate (International)

Real Estate (International) (with Advanced Practice in Second Year)

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Technologies

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Technologies (16 Months)

Renewable and Sustainable Energy Technologies with Advanced Practice

Send and Inclusion (National Award for Sendco’s)

Social Work

Sport and Exercise Psychology

Sport Exercise and Nutrition

Sport Performance and Analysis

Strength and Conditioning

Surveying (Building Surveying) (Distance Learning)

Surveying (Quantity Surveying)

Surveying (Real Estate)

Technology for Sustainable Cities

Technology for Sustainable Cities (with Advanced Practice)

Theatre and Performance

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ):

The Complete University Guide UK Rankings 2021 placed Northumbria University at #52, while the Guardian University Rankings 2021 placed it at #27. Check out this page for information on the best colleges and the best majors.

In the QS Top 500, Northumbria is ranked between 650 and 700, while in the Times Higher Education Top 350 and 400, it is a top-500 institution (THE).

The acceptance rate at Northumbria University is between 60 and 63%. The exact percentage may change from one academic year to the next.

Northumbria’s academic offerings are well-known for their emphasis on business and their emphasis on research. It is widely recognized as a top-tier educational institution and a center for professional development.

Yes. In addition to submitting their national education credentials, international applicants are also required to submit an English proficiency score. Check out Northumbria University’s Frequently Asked Questions about Admissions for a thorough overview of the application process and admissions requirements.

Northumbria offers some of the best science and business programs in the UK. See Northumbria’s Courses and Fees page for more info.

Five years after graduating, Northumbria University’s Business and Administrative Studies students have the highest rates of either continued education or employment (or both) of any comparable degree program in the North East. In conclusion, the school’s business programs are among the best available.

There are seven residence halls and other types of housing available to Northumbria students. Based on up-to-the-minute online availability, students can choose their precise building, flat, and room. Prices for weekly rent range from an affordable GBP 86.03 to a whopping GBP 138.87, depending on the type of housing a student selects.

It is not possible for non-U.S. citizens to attend Northumbria University for free. The international student tuition rate listed on the university’s website must be paid.

Yes. However, opportunities are extremely restricted, and most scholarships and grants are awarded solely on the basis of academic achievement. Visit https://www.northumbria.ac.uk/study-at-northumbria/fees-funding/

The school will issue a CAS letter, which will allow you to apply for a student visa. Check out the UK Student Visa Guide for more information. For more information, see the section “UK Student Visa Rejections.”