Actor / Singer

Place Of Birth:

Dallas, Texas

Best Known As:

Teen star of the Disney movie Camp Rock

Name at birth: Demetria Devonne Lovato

Demi Lovato is the former teen star whose successful singing career has also been tangled up with their personal struggles with fame, eating disorders and drug use. Demi Lovato began acting at age six, when they landed a role as one of the friendly moppets on the TV show Barney and Friends. Lovato then starred alongside the Jonas Brothers in the 2008 Disney Channel movie Camp Rock. Lovato played Mitchie Torres, the shy underdog who blossoms at music camp while singing the signature tune "This is Me." (The duet with Joe Jonas was released as a single in 2008.) Disney used Camp Rock to launch Lovato into its standard orbit of stardom: Lovato toured with the Jonas Brothers in the summer of 2008, and was given their own Disney Channel TV series, Welcome to Mollywood (due in late 2008), and movie, Princess Protection Program (due in 2009, and co-starring their real-life friend Selena Gomez). Lovato was often compared to another Disney teen star, Miley Cyrus. Lovato sings and plays guitar and piano, and as an adult they toured the world in support of successful albums like Unbroken (2011), Demi (2013), Confident (2015) and Tell Me You Love Me (2017). Lovato has also been open about her personal troubles, including eating disorders, depression, and addictions to alcohol and cocaine. In 2011 Lovato announced that they had been diagnosed with bipolar disorder. In June of 2018 Lovato released the single "Sober," in which they said they had relapsed after six years of sobriety. The next month Lovato was hospitalized in Los Angeles after a reported drug overdose. Lovato announced in 2021 they identified as non-binary.

Extra Credit

Lovato met close friend Selena Gomez when both were in the cast of Barney and Friends… Lovato had a modest hit in 2008 with a jangly version of “That’s How You Know,” the theme first sung by Amy Adams in Disney’s 2007 movie Enchanted.