Night Club Girl Poster. 1944. 41 x 27" one sheet poster in fine condition. 1 1/2" of seams on top and bottom middle taped in back, dark stain in this area as well. Poster reads, "Cheating cheaters are

Please see all photographs to see what is included in this Lot. The Posters include the films "Pretty In Pink", "About Last Night", "The Breakfast Club", "Planes, Trains, and Automobiles", and "A Leag

One Mysterious Night is a 1944 crime film, the seventh in a Columbia Pictures series of fourteen starring Chester Morris as reformed crook Boston Blackie and Janis Carter. It was preceded by The Chanc

14" X 36", have folds and creases, numbering on the bottom right hand corner, Cattle Queen of Montana, The Night of the Iguana, The Girl Most Likely, Portrait in Black

380 Beale St. opened in 1975 as the Muhammad Ali Towne Two Cinema, a two-screen movie theater in which the heavyweight boxing legend was a part owner for a time. It quickly became a nightclub and noto

From its opening in 1929 until its closure in 2010, Globe Poster Company in Baltimore was the go-to place for musicians, circuses, drag races, and concert producers for bold, eye-catching letterpress

Original movie poster for the 1929 silent film, Diary of a Lost Girl. Poster is backed with linen and is in excellent condition with little to no signs of wear. Film Studio trademark is located on bor

This is titled Youth Runs Wild, copyright 1944 RKO Radio, Morgan Litho Corp. Cleveland O, produced by Val Lewton directed by Mark Robson. Screenplay by pictures inc. USA John Fante. Numbers in the cor

She was bad to begin with, but when doctors use an experimental serum to save her life, things get a whole lot worse. 27" x 41" one sheet movie poster. Century Guild is a Los Angeles art gallery found

This movie poster is titled: Forty Thieves featuring William Boyd, Harry Sherman Productions, copyright 1944 by United Artist Corporation, Morgan litho corporation Cleveland OH, there are numbers in t

This movie poster is titled: Our hearts were young and gay, also reads: From the best seller that stole Americas heart, starring Gail Russell and Diana Lynn, copyright 1944 Paramount pictures inc. the

Three psychotic murderers escape from a mental institution and stalk women in Los Angeles (from IMDb). 27" x 41" one sheet movie poster. Century Guild is a Los Angeles art gallery founded in 1999 and

A sexy and calculating young girl must contend with two escaped convicts on the run. 27" x 41" one sheet movie poster.