Early life and work

Boetticher attended the Ohio State University, where he played varsity football and boxed. While recuperating from a football injury in Mexico, he began to study bullfighting with Carlos Arruza, and in the late 1930s he became a professional matador. His experience in the ring led to him working as a technical consultant on Rouben Mamoulian’s epic Blood and Sand (1941).

Deciding to pursue a career in Hollywood, Boetticher became a messenger for Hal Roach Studios, and in 1943 he broke in as an assistant director at Columbia, eventually working on such movies as Destroyer (1943), The More the Merrier (1943), and Cover Girl (1944). That earned him a chance to helm B-films on his own, and his first solo-directing credit was One Mysterious Night (1944), an installment in the Boston Blackie mystery series. Boetticher made four more films before being drafted in 1946; he spent the next two years in the service. When he returned to Hollywood, he began working for various studios, and his films from this period include the crime dramas Assigned to Danger and Behind Locked Doors (both 1948).

After directing the low-budget action movie Killer Shark (1950) with Roddy McDowall, Boetticher made the semiautobiographical Bullfighter and the Lady (1951). The film—the first in which he was credited by his nickname, Budd—was produced by John Wayne and was a minor masterpiece. It centres on a young American (played by Robert Stack) visiting Mexico who is drawn to bullfighting and gets the top matador (Gilbert Roland) to teach him. Boetticher cowrote the film’s story, for which he received an Academy Award nomination.

Westerns

In 1952 Boetticher began working in the genre that would come to define his career: the western. That year he directed The Cimarron Kid, which starred Audie Murphy; Bronco Buster; and Horizons West, with Rock Hudson, Raymond Burr, and James Arness. Boetticher changed gears for Red Ball Express (1952), a solid World War II drama, and City Beneath the Sea (1953), which starred Robert Ryan and Anthony Quinn as divers searching for sunken gold. Adventure films were not Boetticher’s forte, however, and he returned to westerns with Seminole (1953), an atypically pro-Native American story set in Florida’s Everglades. Hudson starred as a cavalry officer who tries (unsuccessfully) to help his old friend Osceola (Quinn) resist the army’s efforts to wipe out the native Seminole population. The Man from the Alamo (1953) is a tale of redemption starring Glenn Ford as a man who, at the request of his fellow fighters, leaves before the Alamo attack in order to warn Texans about Mexican Gen. Antonio López de Santa Anna and is subsequently branded a deserter. Boetticher went back into the ring for The Magnificent Matador (1955), with Quinn as an aging bullfighter who wonders if his nerves are eroding along with his skills. He next helmed The Killer Is Loose (1956), a crime drama about a psychopathic ex-convict (Wendell Corey) swearing revenge on the policeman (Joseph Cotten) who sent him to prison and accidentally caused the death of his wife.

Get a Britannica Premium subscription and gain access to exclusive content. Subscribe Now

To this point in his career, Boetticher had demonstrated that he was a capable—though hardly extraordinary—action director with a taste for period material. However, he rose to a higher level when he aligned himself with writer Burt Kennedy and actor Randolph Scott for a series of taut, psychologically complex westerns. The first was Seven Men from Now (1956), with Scott as an ex-sheriff who methodically tracks down the seven criminals who killed his wife; Lee Marvin was impressive as an opportunistic villain. The Tall T (1957), which was based on an Elmore Leonard short story, was better still, a suspenseful tale about an outlaw trio holding several people for ransom. Scott portrayed a hostage who uses his wits to triumph over his kidnappers.

Decision at Sundown (1957) was more pedestrian, possibly because Kennedy was not involved with the script. However, Scott gave a memorable performance as a gunman seeking revenge against the man (John Carroll) who stole his wife. Buchanan Rides Alone (1958) had a semi-comical undertone, with a self-mocking Scott as a gunfighter who tries to save a young man convicted of murder, while the intelligent Ride Lonesome (1959) featured the actor as a bounty hunter searching for his wife’s killer (Lee Van Cleef). Kennedy’s absence was notable on Westbound (1959), which was one of the series’ lesser entries. In 1960 the last picture in the cycle, Comanche Station, was released. The solid western found Scott’s lone hero searching for a woman who has been kidnapped by Comanches.

Late work

Boetticher’s success continued with the crime classic The Rise and Fall of Legs Diamond (1960), which starred Ray Danton as the New York mobster. The director then began working on a documentary about Arruza’s life as a matador. As Boetticher related in his memoir, When in Disgrace (1989), financial and other problems plagued the production, and, as time dragged on, his personal life collapsed. He was divorced, was jailed for a week, was nearly bankrupted, and finally suffered a nervous breakdown. In the midst of this, Arruza and most of the film crew were killed in a car crash.

Boetticher took a break from directing, not returning until 1969 with A Time for Dying, an offbeat western starring Audie Murphy in his last role. It also proved to be Boetticher’s final feature film. He later wrote the story for Don Siegel’s Two Mules for Sister Sara (1970), which starred Clint Eastwood. Arruza was finally released in 1972. His last directorial credit was the documentary My Kingdom For… (1985), which focuses on horses. Boetticher also appeared as a judge in the 1988 crime drama Tequila Sunrise.

Michael Barson