Winter weather advisories are in effect for five U.S. states due to heavy snowfall forecast for this Sunday and into next week.

Bitter temperatures and snowfall are expected in numerous areas just ahead of the first official day of spring on Tuesday, March 19, with some states likely experiencing lake-effect snow, which is when cold air, usually originating in Canada, moves across the Great Lakes. As a result, the National Weather Service has issued a range of advisories for those living in Michigan, Minnesota, Colorado, New Mexico and Alaska.

According to the NWS, lake-effect snow happens as "the cold air passes over the unfrozen and relatively warm waters of the Great Lakes, warmth and moisture are transferred into the lowest portion of the atmosphere. The air rises, clouds form and grow into a narrow band that produces 2 to 3 inches of snow per hour or more."

Lake-effect snow is expected in Michigan starting on Sunday, with 3 to 9 inches expected to fall in several counties until early on Monday morning. The cold air will arrive in the state throughout Sunday and is expected to last through Sunday night, Monday and Tuesday.

Drivers are urged to slow down and use caution when driving as several roads are expected to be impacted in the northern counties of Ontonagon, Houghton, Baraga and Gogebic.

Lake-effect snow is also expected in Minnesota, with as much as 10 inches expected to fall in parts of Iron County by Monday midday. Commuters are warned that traveling on Monday morning and evening may be "very difficult."

Overnight snowfall is expected to have blanketed parts of Colorado, with residents waking up to as much as 3 inches of fresh powder on Sunday morning. Winter weather warnings will expire in affected cities, including Silverton, Rico, Hesperus, Telluride, Ouray, and Lake City, by 9 a.m. MDT (11 a.m. ET).

Some New Mexicans, especially those living in more mountainous areas, can expect as much as 6 inches of snow around the central and northeast Highlands, and west central mountains, the NWS has warned. Low visibility caused by snow, fog and mist could make driving difficult, with the service warning that tire traction is likely to be reduced.

In Alaska, temperatures are expected to become so bitter that the NWS has warned that "dangerously cold wind chills as low as 40 below zero could cause frostbite on exposed skin in as little as 10 minutes."

Motorists have been urged to slow down and use caution while driving as blowing snow could significantly reduce visibility.