Description /Buy link takes you to Amazon. As an Amazon Associate I earn money from qualifying purchases.

Author Richard K. Morgan was born in London in the year 1965 and he was raised in Hethersett, which is a village near Norwich. He studied the subject of history at Queens’s College, Cambridge. He graduated and taught English so that he could travel the world, which he did quite extensively. Morgan is also fluent in Spanish and lives in Norfolk with his Spaniard wife Virginia, and son Daniel. He worked at the University of Strathclyde and worked for fourteen years to get his first novel (called “Altered Carbon”) published in the year 2002; from there, his career as a full time writer began.

Richard K. Morgan has written the “Takeshi Kovacs” series, “A Land Fit For Heroes” series, and some stand alone novels. He has also written some graphic novels about the Marvel Comics character Black Widow (“Homecoming” and “The Things They Say About Her”) and one set in the “Crysis” universe. Morgan has written some story lines for video games, these include “Crysis 2” and “Syndicate”. His novels are from the hardboiled, fantasy, science fiction, and post-cyberpunk genres. They are usually set in a post-extropianist dystopian world.

RICHARD K. MORGAN AWARDS

“Altered Carbon” won the Philip K. Dick Award in the year 2003. “Market Forces” won the John W. Campbell award in the year 2005. “Black Man” won the Arthur C. Clarke Award in the year 2007. “The Steel Remains” was award the Gaylactic Spectrum award in the year 2010.

RICHARD K. MORGAN BOOKS INTO MOVIES/TV

His first novel “Altered Carbon” has been adapted into a television series on Netflix.

BEST RICHARD K. MORGAN BOOKS

For those looking to get into Richard K. Morgan’s work, this next section will help with that. It will look at the novels: “Altered Carbon”, “The Steel Remains”, and “Black Man”.

Altered Carbon: This is the first novel in the “Takeshi Kovacs” series that came out in the year 2002. Centuries in the future mankind is living all over a part of territory that has been inherited by an old civilization that was found on Mars. Colonies are linked by ship voyages and hyperspatial data-casting. Human consciousness is moved to where it is needed and downloaded into bodies when needed. Ex-envoy and convict Takeshi Kovacs has his mind and skills downloaded into the ex-thug who is addicted to nicotine. He is also not surprised by the catch-22 offer that is given to him. Takeshi is hired by a wealthy man to find out who killed the person who had the body he used to occupy.

The Steel Remains: This is the first novel in the “A Land Fit for Heroes” series that came out in the year 2008. A man named Ringil is a hero of a slaughter that took place at Gallows Gap is a degenerate to those that know who he is and a legend to those that have never met him. He makes a living off telling people about the wars that he fought in against the lizards. That is, until he is pulled out of that life and forced to be a slave by the Empire. Archeth is made to look into a demonic incursion that is happening at the borders of the Empire. She is the last of her kind, a cynic, and an engineer. Egar Dragonbane (ex-fighter for the Empire, steppe-nomad) winds up wrapped up in a small town fight between religious fervour and common sense. All three (who have poor social skills, are not heroes, and quite irritated) are about to be thrust into unknown territory by an Empire that has never paid them back for all that they have done, despite owing them quite a lot.

Black Man: This is a stand alone novel that came out in the year 2007. Carl Marsalis is many things. Bringer of death, genetic freak, and he is the reminder of all things that are dark and not liked about the human psyche. He is out of reach of the United Nations, in jail for bank rolling an illegal abortion. Police pay him a call, and he makes a deal. Thirteens, as they are called, are genetically engineered to be alpha males. They are made to fight the last conflicts of the century. They are dangerous to have around in peace time though, as they are designed and bred simply to fight. Most left for Mars, but one has returned, surviving the journey to Earth and has killed many in a brutal manner. Carl is the only one that can catch and stop this killer.

When Does The Next Richard K. Morgan book come out?

The next book by Richard K. Morgan is Gone Machine and will be released on November, 7th 2024. It is the newest book in the Hakan Veil Series.