Post by bbcgull on

Somerton Park : Newport County

Wiki states, Somerton Park was a football, greyhound and speedway stadium in Newport, Monmouthshire. It was purchased by the Cardiff Arms Park Company in 1932 and Newport County played their first football match there on 27 August against Clapton (Leyton) Orient. On 17 November 1932, the first greyhound meeting took place at the stadium.

The stadium remained the home of Newport County until the original club went bankrupt on 27 February 1989. County's 57 years at the stadium had brought many highs and lows, the most notable being the Welsh Cup and Fourth Division promotion triumph in 1980 and the European Cup Winners' Cup quarter-final appearance in 1981, but the final few years brought the trauma of two successive relegations which saw the club lose its Football League status after 68 years.

The club was reformed within four months and began the 1989-90 as a Hellenic League side. The new club's first season was spent in Moreton-in-Marsh, followed by two seasons at Somerton Park, the next two seasons were played in Gloucester before finally settling at Newport Stadium for the 1994-95 season, where the club have played their home matches ever since. By 1993 Somerton Park had been redeveloped as a housing estate.

The stadium's record attendance was 24,268 for a Football League Third Division South match between County and arch-rivals Cardiff City on 16 October 1937.

The stadium was home to the Newport Wasps speedway team between 1964 and 1977, attracting some the biggest names in the sport. The tight track meant that turf had to be brought on to make the corner flag area for football matches and removed once the match had finished

Post by Deleted on

Somerton Park is a ground which would have been visited by several generations of Torquay United supporters between the 1920s and 1980s. I believe there's an old song which begins "We took Newport in half-a-minute..." (but we'll not go into that one now).

In truth it was something of a dump. You can't see any trace of it now but, instinctively, whenever I'm travelling on the train to Newport I look out for Somerton. These days, travelling west, you'll just see a collection of early 1990s houses on the left-hand side a mile or so before the station.

You'll see the railway line in the map below. There's also some pictures of the old place:

The Wiki article mentions the European Cup-Winners Cup run of 1980-81. This was quite something - especially as Newport had a pretty hopeless record in the Welsh Cup.

After beating teams from Northern Ireland and Norway, Newport faced Carl Zeiss Jena of East Germany in the quarter finals. Carl Zeiss went on to lose to Dynamo Tibilisi in the final with Benfica and Feyenoord as beaten semi-finalists.

Newport v Carl Zeiss now seems like something out of pre-history. Newport went bust a few years later and, as a reformed club, soon found itself playing home matches at Moreton-in-Marsh. Carl Zeiss, from a country which no longer exists, has actually survived better than many of the former East German clubs and now occupies a relatively respectable place in the German pyramid.

This is how Rothmans recorded Newport's - and West Ham's - exit from Europe:

As Wiki reports, Newport County (Mark 1) petered out early in 1989. I didn't realise it at the time but I saw one of the old club's last games at Somerton, a Conference fixture against Weymouth in November 1988. Here's the programme cover together with the final table for that season. This still includes Newport's record even though their results have been removed from the rest of the table. The programme carried a message - full of hope and bold plans - about the club's major shareholder JLA, a company "specialising in providing venture capital for start-up businesses, restructuring, interim finance and corporate buy-outs".

Pictures from Simon Inglis, Tony Williams, Phil & Shirley Smith.

Post by bbcgull on

Great post and pics as always Barton. Just wondering as you seem to have a good memory of games you have been too etc. I know the info is in the Rothmans etc but how do you kep your stats regarding grounds or matches you have ben to. No doubt il sound a sad statto but i keep mine in tgh eold fashioned way - pen paper and in a binder. I have 12 seperate lists which i wont bore anyone with but my main two of course are Total (92) as seen in my signiture, although my total will not include any village recs ie Southsea Town etc but they are in a different list of the 12 lol!