“I’m a walking paradox,” this line, rapped by artist Tyler, The Creator, helps define the theme of the genre of Experimental Hip-Hop. Experimental Hip-Hop is what the name suggests, it’s experimental. There are unique characteristics of Experimental Hip-Hop and its artists that distinctly separate it as a genre set apart from mainstream hip-hop. Experimental Hip-Hop has been on the rise, steadily growing and garnering a following large enough to make it a prominent genre on the music scene, with several artists making projects that have become incredibly popular in the Hip-Hop scene. This genre is a genre with little to no limits, and influences from all sorts of sources.

A textbook definition of Experimental Hip-Hop is that it is, “a style

I probably started listening to his music far too young, however I think I’ve turned out alright. He began as an edgy skateboarding teenager that wanted to make a name for himself and his friends, the group he called Odd Future. (David Jeffries) He has made that name and more by establishing an incredibly successful Odd Future clothing line, and a chart-topping solo career as a rapper. The music he has made is true unparalleled even in Experimental Hip-Hop and he is at the forefront of the growth of the genre. Every song he releases seems to push the boundaries of music further and further. Originally his songs were created just to rub against the grain of popular Hip-Hop, by being edgy, rude, and wild he became a viral sensation with growth consistent since his emergence. His breakthrough song Yonkers is what made him famous. Not for the song itself though, but for the music video. The video consists of him sitting on a stool rapping, throughout the song he eats a cockroach, and ends the song by hanging himself. After seeing that video I’d like to invite anybody to dispute that he wasn’t pushing the boundaries of music. His style can be likened to the Slim Shady style of early Eminem. Music that worries parents, is rumored to be Satanic, revolves around suicidal thoughts and homophobic tendencies while having homosexual undertones, and uses a completely insane amount of curse words and slurs, that is the music that Tyler, The Creator makes. Lately he has evolved as an artist while still maintaining the Experimental traits to his music. Now that he has achieved fame his music has toned down the insensitivity and edginess and has been replaced with actual meaningful lyrics and unique lyrics and stories told by his songs. In his song, Fucking Young, he sings about his love for a girl too young for him, and the internal struggle that creates for them both. That is a