As we told you earlier this year, SoCal indie rockers The Neighbourhood are set to return to Nashville for the fourth time in just as many years tonight, May 25 at Marathon Music Works with buzzy up and comers JAHKOY and Kevin Abstract. Out in support of their fantastic sophomore LP, Wiped Out!, The Neighbourhood are a powerhouse live act, combining their soulful and progressive sensibilities with a ton of energy and unpredictably. Tickets for the group’s Nashville return are still available here, so grab yours now and read on for more!

THE NEIGHBOURHOOD

After exploding onto the scene three years ago with their acclaimed debut, I Love You, propelled by the massive success of inescapably catchy single “Sweater Weather,” Southern California indie pop/alt rockers The Neighbourhood (sometimes called The NBHD) took a decidedly more hip hop turn with their #000000 & #FFFFFF mixtape, before returning to form and expanding their sound with last year’s sophomore effort Wiped Out! Channeling the soulful, r&b-tinged, experimental and alternative flavor of hook-laden indie rock that sets them apart from their peers, the group are proving to be more than just a one-hit wonder, simultaneously honing an incredible live show and continuing to push forward with new music. Barely into their 20s, the young band have previously played Cannery Ballroom, Marathon Music Works, and The Ryman, all of which were excellent, and there’s no reason to expect their annual trip to Music City, their first since Wiped Out! properly arrived, will be any less spectacular; if anything, their road-worn experience and seasoned chops, coupled with long-awaited new tunes, will make this the best Neighbourhood experience yet. Don’t miss it!

JAHKOY

Hailing from Toronto, buzzy up and comer JAHKOY shares The Neighbourhood’s penchant for crafting soulful, sweeping, and unorthodox r&b tunes, however his overall sound could be compared to another big-name Canadian artist (and apparent fan): Drake. Combining hip hop and r&b with earnest delivery and contemporary flair, JAHKOY started writing raps a young age, producing some early releases and collaborations before getting scooped up by Def Jam Records earlier this year, after last year’s self-released Temptations EP found praise throughout the blogosphere. Clearly being groomed for big time success, it’s a pretty exciting time to catch this young artist on the cusp of stardom.

KEVIN ABSTRACT

19 year old Los Angeles transplant Kevin Abstract, like JAHKOY, seems to be on the precipice of breakthrough success. Perhaps the weirdest artist on the bill, he shares the hip hop, pop, indie, experimental rock and electronic elements of The Neighbourhood and JAHKOY, but funnels them into something wholly unique. Abstract released his debut album, MTV1987 in 2014, and is prepping a followup, They Shoot Horses, for this year.