Greg Bear: Darwin's Radio

Dicken could smell eight different kinds of disaster in the winds.

He had not heard from Mitch Rafelson in several days, but suspected the anthropologist was already in town. They had not met yet, but the conspiracy was on. Kaye had agreed to join them for a talk this evening or tomorrow, depending...

Darwin's Radio is set in the very near future, perhaps in 2001 under what sounds like a McCain presidency. All over the world a mysterious disease is striking pregnant women, causing miscarriages. But the victims immediately become pregnant again with strangely deformed embryos - and, it seems, they may not have conceived by the normal method. Add to this the discovery of a couple of Neanderthal bodies in the Alps, with their baby which appears to be far more similar to modern humans than it should be, and you have the makings of a crisis which will reshape the world.

This book appealed to several of my own past experiences. As a teenager I worked on a couple of archaeology sites, so I could relate to the thrill of discovering ancient corpses with which the book starts. The passages set in (ex-Soviet) Georgia, exploring mass graves, reminded me very much of my time in Bosnia for obvious reasons. The development of biological theory in the book brought me back to the days when I taught tutorials for a course on the history of evolution theories taught by Peter Bowler in Belfast.

The three main characters are Mitch Rafelson, a discredited anthropologist, Kaye Lang, a geneticist, and Christopher Dicken, a government-paid epidemiologist. All three are convincing and forced to make tough choices throughout. At the crucial moment when they meet, half way through the book, they realise that the mysterious disease may be more than an epidemic; it may in fact be the next step in human evolution.

The social and political reaction to the biological crisis is quite convincingly nightmarish. Bear portrays the religious right seizing the agenda in the US, and then not being able to produce anything more than repression. Rafelson and Lang, who have become lovers, flee for an Indian reservation (why not Canada?); Dicken guiltily sides with the government. A shadowy conspiracy involving an Austrian professor, an American millionaire and a reporter from the Economist seems to be offering hope for the future, but we don't hear much more about it.

I did wonder what was happening in the rest of the world all this time. This virus, supposedly triggered by overcrowding, is first picked up in Georgia, which is not a notably overcrowded country (indeed several parts of it have become distinctly underpopulated in recent years) and of course this goes even more so for the United States. Why did it not hit genuinely overcrowded parts of the world like sub-Saharan Africa? (I suppose the grim answer may be that AIDS has already done the job.)

At the end of the day I wasn't completely satisfied by Darwin's Radio. The "next step in human evolution" is an old, old science fiction storyline, with an honorable past including most works by Olaf Stapledon, and Arthur C Clarke's Childhood's End. But Darwin's Radio will I think be ranked with Frank Herbert's rather minor The Santaroga Barrier rather than at the level of Bear's own earlier work with the same theme, "Blood Music". I wondered a little why the author chose to tackle this theme again. And I felt that somehow the pacing of events was not so much science fiction as "technothriller", as New Scientist put it. I enjoyed this book but I don't rate it as highly as some of the others, and I suspect the Hugo voters will feel the same.

Tell me what you think!

Nicholas Whyte, 28 May 2000

Postscript, May 2001: I really can't believe that this won the Nebula Award, beating A Civil Campaign. But there you go.

Related pages on this site:

sf index page | sf thoughts and links | a check-list of sf and fantasy set in Ireland

list of joint Hugo and Nebula winners | meta-review of the 2006 Hugo nominees | meta-review of the 2005 Hugo nominees | meta-review of the 2004 Hugo nominees | meta-review of the 2003 Hugo nominees | reviews of the 2002 Hugo nominees | thoughts on the 2000 Hugo nominations | all Hugo and Nebula winners | analysis of winners by age and year of birth | first time winners and gender balance

Authors: Tepper / Bujold / Willis / Russell | Pratchett / Martin / Gentle | Simmons / Strugatsky / Lem / Wells / Brunner | Zelazny | Clarke / Aldiss / McDonald / MacLeod

Reviews:

Poul Anderson, "Goat Song"

Isaac Asimov, "The Bicentennial Man"

Isaac Asimov, "The Gods Themselves"

Greg Bear, "Blood Music"

Greg Bear, Darwin's Radio

Terry Bisson, "Bears Discover Fire"

Terry Bisson, "macs"

Lois McMaster Bujold, A Civil Campaign

Octavia Butler, "Bloodchild"

The Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction

Mark Campbell, Pocket Essentials: Doctor Who

Orson Scott Card, Ender's Game

Ted Chiang, Hell Is the Absence of God

Arthur C. Clarke, The Fountains of Paradise

Neil Gaiman, American Gods

Neil Gaiman, Coraline

Joe Haldeman, Forever Peace

Joe Haldeman, The Forever War

Frank Herbert, Dune Daniel Keyes, Flowers for Algernon

Nancy Kress, "Beggars in Spain"

Ursula Le Guin, The Dispossessed

Fritz Leiber, "Catch That Zeppelin"

Fritz Leiber, "Gonna Roll The Bones"

Kelly Link, "The Faery Handbag"

Barry B. Longyear, Enemy Mine

Vonda N. McIntyre, Dreamsnake

George Mann (ed.), The Mammoth Encyclopedia of Science Fiction

Frederik Pohl, Gateway

J.K. Rowling, Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban

Charles Sheffield, Georgia On My Mind

Clifford D. Simak, Grotto of the Dancing Deer

Neal Stephenson, Cryptonomicon

Vernor Vinge, A Deepness in the Sky

Connie Willis, Doomsday Book

Connie Willis, "Even the Queen"

Connie Willis, "Fire Watch"

David Wingrove (ed), The Science Fiction Source Book

brief reviews of the joint winners of the Hugo and Nebula awards, 1st page, 2nd page and 3rd page

Front page | About this site | My Weblog

Your comments, please! Send me an email or fill in this form.