Ex-husband Burt Reynolds invited Judy as his guest the first time he guest-hosted The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson (1962) in the early 70s. They hadn't spoken in six years.

While on a promotional tour for the TV series Fair Exchange (1962) Judy met Burt Reynolds. After a six-month courtship the two were married on June 28th 1963. The marriage lasted but two years. She never asked for alimony. Reynolds would be there for her in later years when she was dealing with financial woes amid her drug problems.

Judy auditioned for and won the lead role of Julie Willis in the sitcom called Teils heiter, teils wolkig (1966). She was paired with actor Pete Duel, someone she knew and had met when she did a one-episode stint on the "Gidget" TV series. She later guested on his "Alias Smith and Jones" TV series. Duel later committed suicide.

In July of 1969, during her "Laugh-In" heyday, Judy performed "American Moon" on the Ed Sullivan show. Sullivan, known for mispronouncing names, introduced her as "Judy Crane".

When she was nine she was accepted to the prestigious Bush-Davies Theatrical School for Girls, in East Grinstead, England near London. An instructor there began calling her "Judy" explaining that "Joyce" wasn't a good professional name. At sixteen she took her professional name Judy Carne. Carne comes from a character in the play "Sister Bonaventure.".

"Laugh-In" producer George Schlatter initially blamed her for trying to break up the Laugh-In "family" by leaving after only two seasons.

In 1978 she was in a car crash with her second husband, The car plunged into a ditch and hit a telegraph pole , She broke her neck and spent 5 months with her head in a steel halo.

Clint Eastwood, knowing that she longed to be in a western, offered her a part in his film, Pale Rider - Der namenlose Reiter (1985), but she had to turn it down as she was already working on a Danish film.

She was one of the actresses considered for the lead role of Eglantine Price in Disney's Die tollkühne Hexe in ihrem fliegenden Bett (1971). Her performance of one of the film's songs, "Subsititutiary Locomotion," ended up on a Disneyland LP record containing cover versions of the songs (catalog # STER-1326).

At the age of six she performed in a local concert and won the encouragement of her parents to continue.

She left school at 15 and worked in various jobs while trying to get into show business. She joined an amateur dramatic company which eventually led to her joining a repertory company by lying about her age and claiming that she had done lots of things.