Jean Paul Sartre is canonized as one of the main contributors to Existentialism along with Heidegger and Camus. And even though his philosophical treatise and manuscripts were exhaustive and prolific, his literature is what was able to solidify his genius. He created a bridge for his audience to understand the dry intelligence of his academic mind through his book, relying on imagination, philosophies of contingency, absurdity and the power which sets us unhinged to conventional religion as authentic beings that separates the two. The paper reviews the books Nausea, The Flies, No Exit and accounts for his life as it influenced his philosophy.

The article discusses rationalistic and existential approaches to the problem of existence. The comparison of Sartre&#39;s pre-reflective cogito and Descartes&#39; reflective cogito makes it possible to define how Sartre’s thought moves from the thing to consciousness and from consciousness to the thing. At the same time, in Being and Nothingness Sartre does not only define the existence of the thing in its passivity—which in many respects corresponds to Descartes&#39; philosophy, but also as an open orientation towards consciousness, the latter concept not being fully developed by him. This statement may be regarded as a hidden component of Sartre’s key thesis about the role of the Other in the verification of our existence. The most important factor in understanding this is the concept of the look. Detailed analysis of Sartre’s theses in Being and Nothingness enables us to demonstrate that the concept of the look makes it possible to consider the identity of being-in-itself and be...

This paper aims to explain the contributions of the famous Philosopher of 19th century Jean Paul Sartre. It will analyze the early life and his contribution in filed of philosophy and politics. Phenomenological terms like existentialism, morality and dialects are explained via Sartre’s critical approach. The last part of the paper will tend to highlight some crucial critiques on his writings by prominent scholars of 19th and 20th century.