EDITOR'S NOTE:

Opening night of Sister Act by the Aurora Theatre was filled with a "joyful noise" indeed! The superior acting and character development, fantastic vocals, spirited choreography, and fabulous costumes combined with laugh-out-loud comedy will make you clap your hands and shout hallelujah!! We LOVED it and think you and your teens will also! Grab your tickets before they sell out at www.lvilleartscenter.com/eventer/sister-act/

Lounge singer Deloris Van Cartier witnesses a murder and is in fear for her life. The cops answer her prayers, sort of…They put her in protective custody in the one place the police are sure she won’t be found — a convent! Disguised as a nun but not in the habit of attending church, Diva Deloris is at odds with the rigid lifestyle of the sisters. She finds her place turning the stoic choir into a heavenly chorus, but her joyful noise could prove deadly. Based on the hit 1992 film, this uplifting musical is reason to REJOICE!

Said Co-Founder and Producing Artistic Director, Ann-Carol Pence, “I had long harbored a desire to produce Sister Act, a vibrant show that will musically connect with our strong faith community in Gwinnett. I was thrilled to welcome Jasmine Renee’ Ellis, a distinguished Aurora Apprentice Alumni, back to our organization in 2022 as our esteemed Director of Education. Sister Act is a star vehicle and with Jasmine’s return to Aurora I knew we had the formidable artist that will take this musical to new heights with our original take on the beloved story.

Rounding out the principal cast is Atlanta favorite Shelly McCook as Mother Superior, Isa Martinez as Sister Mary Robert, BriAnne Knights as Sister Mary Patrick, Charlene Hong White as Sister Mary Lazarus, Jody Woodruff as Monsignor O’Hara, Marcus Hopkins-Turner as Curtis, and Jemarcus Kilgore as Eddie Souther.

The amazing production team of Sister Act will be led by director Justin Anderson, Aurora’s former Associate Artistic Director who makes a triumphant return. Co-Founder and Producing Artistic Director Ann-Carol Pence oversees Music Direction. Other members of the creative team include Choreographer Pytron Parker, Lighting Designer Kevin Frazier, Sound Designer Daniel Pope, Props Designer Kristin Talley, Costume Director Alice Neff, and Stage Manager Tyra Watkins.

PERFORMANCES:

Show times from May 23- June 23 are as follows:

Thursday & Friday: 8 p.m.

Saturday: 2:30 p.m., 8 p.m.

Sunday: 2:30 p.m.

*Special matinee performance at 10:00 a.m. on Wednesday, May 29.

NOTE: Recommended for teens and adults, Sister Act contains mild language, comedic violence, and innuendo.

TICKETS:

Tickets start at $31 and may be purchased online at https://www.auroratheatre.com or by calling the Box Office at 678.226.6222.

LOCATION:

The Aurora Theatre at the Lawrenceville Arts Center

Clyde and Sandra Strickland Grand Stage

125 N Clayton St

Lawrenceville, GA 30046