Richard Halsey, who won an Oscar and ACE Eddie Award for editing Rocky; and Robert C. Jones, who won an Oscar for writing Coming Home and earned three nominations for editing, will receive Career Achievement Awards at American Cinema Editors’ annual Eddie Awards, Feb. 7 at the Beverly Hilton. Also during the ceremony, the ACE Heritage Award will be presented to the organization’s past president, Randy Roberts.

Teri Schwartz, Dean of the UCLA School of Theater, Film and Television, will present the award to Halsey and Warren Beatty to Jones. ACE president Alan Heim will present the Heritage Award, which recognizes an individual’s unwavering commitment to advancing the image of the film editor, cultivating respect for the art and craft of the editing profession and tireless dedication to ACE.

PHOTOS: The Scene at Sundance Film Festival 2014

Halsey has had a longstanding collaboration with filmmaker Mazurzky, for whom he edited such films as Moscow on the Hudson, Harry & Tonto, Next Stop, Greenwich Village and Down and Out in Beverly Hills. In 2000, Halsey won an ACE Award and was nominated for an Emmy for editing Pirates of Silicon Valley. His credits also include Edward Scissorhands, American Gigolo, Sister Act and Dragnet.

Jones is a film editor, screenwriter, and educator. In addition to winning an Oscar as a screenwriter, Jones earned nominations for editing Bound for Glory, Guess Who’s Coming to Dinner, and It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad World. As a film editor, Jones often worked with directors Arthur Hiller, Hal Ashby and Beatty. His editing credits include Love Story, Shampoo, Heaven Can Wait and Bulworth.

PHOTOS: Oscar Nominees

Roberts is a director, producer and editor who served on the ACE board of directors since 1996, was vp from 2005-2008, and president from 2008-2012. He is one of the originators of the ACE EditFest events, as well as Tech Day. His editing credits include Chicago Hope,L.A. Law and Early Edition; He also served as a supervising producer on Law & Order: Special Victims Unit.

As previously announced, Captain Phillips director Paul Greengrass will receive the ACE Golden Eddie Award during the ceremony, which will be hosted by Bob Odenkirk. ACE will also honor the editors in categories for features, television and documentary productions.