PDF Playlist

The Greatest Man That Ever Lived (Variations on a Shaker Hymn)

Weezer

WeezerWeezer

Year:

2008

5:52

13 Views

Become A Better Singer In Only 30 Days, With Easy Video Lessons!

You try to play cool Like you just don't care But soon I'll be playin' in your Underwear I'm like the mage With the magic spell You come like a dog When I ring yo' bell I got the money And I got the fame You got the hots To ride on my plane You givin' me all That I desire 'Cause down with me I'm taking you higher I'm the baddest of the bad I'm the best that you've ever had I'm the tops, I'm the king All the girls get up when I sing, yeah I'm the meanest in the place Step up, I'll mess with your face I don't care where you are Look up and follow the star. I, I'm gonna tear down the wall I may not be here when you call So best be givin' me your all. After the havoc that I'm gonna wreak No more words will critics have to speak I've got to answers to the tangled knot Sleep tight in your cot. Oh baby, I've been told I'm goin' crazy. Oh baby, I can't be held down. Oh baby, Somehow I'm keeping it steady. Oh baby, I'm tearing up this town. Hey, this is what I like Cut my heart with a modern spike. Hey, this is nothing new I've got more than enough for you. I can take on anybody I can do my thing I don't wanna hurt nobody But a bee has gotta string I'ma fix it if you mix it up Talk smack, and I'ma gonna shut you up. I am the greatest man that ever lived I was born to give. (I was born to give.) I am the greatest man that ever lived, oh Radio a Dio Somebody said all the worlds is stage, And each of us is a player. That's what I've been tryin' to tell you. In Act 1 I was struggling to survive. Nobody wanted my action dead or alive. Act 2, I hit the big time. And bodies be all up on my behind. And I can't help myself because I was born to shine. And if you don't like it, you can shove it. But you don't like it, you love it. So I'll be up here in a rage, 'Til they bring the curtain down on the stage. I'm the greatest man that ever lived I'm the greatest man that ever lived I'm the greatest man that ever lived I am the greatest man that ever lived I was born to give and give and give. I am the greatest man that ever lived Radio a (Dio a) Dio a (Dio a) I am the greatest ever lived. I was born to give.

Become A Better Singer In Only 30 Days, With Easy Video Lessons!