T he AmericanRevolution began with Paul Reverebellowing about the British. The sports radio revolution started with Vinny from Queens moaning about the Mets.

America created a new, more democratic political system imitated around the world. WFAN in New York begat a new, more democratic sports forum that has been copied nationwide, creating an industry that reaps millions in revenue for stations while influencing teams and leagues in their decisions.

And while the revolution is over, the evolution continues.

There are more than 250 sports radio stations with hundreds more stations offering some sports programming, and more major players — like the upstart Fox Sports Radio Network, which debuts Aug. 28 — still entering the fray.

Advertisers trying to reach men, particularly those ages 25 to 54, often consider sports radio a crucial buy, said consultant Rick Scott of Rick Scott and Associates.

WFAN-AM (660) in New York still symbolizes the industry. From its humble beginnings, it has become the No. 1 billing radio station of any kind in the country, with annual revenue reportedly well beyond $50 million.

When WFAN made its debut July 4, 1987, it was derided by much of the media.

"We didn't have very good programming; we weren't very focused," acknowledged Joel Hollander, president of Westwood One Radio, who was previously at the helm of WFAN.

After airing everything from horse racing to auto racing shows, the station, Hollander said, learned sports radio's first lesson — "You can't be everything to everybody" — and zeroed in on baseball, basketball, football and hockey.

Of course, just as Revere's midnight ride is enshrouded in myth, so are sports radio's beginnings. Folks in Denver argue that KMVP-AM and KBYG-AM — both long gone from the sports radio field — were the first all-sports radio stations. The details are debatable, especially since their early programming included vitamin and bodybuilding shows, but it is clear that WFAN has influenced radio programmers nationwide.

After losing money for three years, WFAN was, by 1990, the top-rated station in New York with men 25-54, which swayed the skeptics. That year, the network sold $20 million in ads.

According to Scott, the timing was right for imitators because America was increasingly enthralled by sports and celebrity while radio was fragmenting, making a genre that attracted one coveted demographic a profitable business.

'It just got too mean'

Sports radio was also becoming influential.

When New York Mets infielder Gregg Jefferies wanted to respond to carping from teammates and fans, he went not to print journalists but to WFAN, reading an open letter on the air. WFAN is often credited with (or blamed for) getting former New York Giants coach Ray Handley fired, and former Mets manager Bud Harrelson's inability to handle the station's criticism was seen as contributing to the undermining of his credibility.

But in the rush to draw listeners, sports radio increasingly took a harsh tone.

"It just got too mean," said Tim Liotta, program director at KJR-AM (950) in Seattle. "Eventually people got tired of that."

At the same time, numerous national networks were entering the fledgling field, only to fold or merge, said Chris Brennan, president of One-on-One Sports. "Program directors were very parochial in the early 1990s, and it was tough to get national clearances."

But as the market kept growing — by 1995, there were about 130 full-time stations — opportunities opened for national networks like One-on-One and ESPN Radio.

Brennan touts One-on-One as having a strong draw for advertisers: 87 percent of its listeners are men, 54 percent earn more than $50,000 a year and 72 percent own a home.

Brennan credits ESPN with bringing credibility to network programming, but the major reason national programming worked was economics. Local programming requires paying salaries for local hosts.

The best strategy, said Don Martin, program director of KOA-AM (850) in Denver, is to put the strongest local talent on during the crucial — and potentially lucrative — evening drive time, another solid local host on in the mornings and an up-and-comer in the midday, plugging national programs into the other slots.

Scott Savage, who is heading the new Fox radio venture, said that stations today need not only programming but also national affiliation for credibility and for coverage of big or breaking stories.

Despite their growth, some industry observers claim One-on-One is for sale and ESPN Radio is losing money and that — with a few exceptions, like Jim Rome, whose show is syndicated by Premiere Radio Networks — national programs have ratings struggles, particularly in the main time slots.

One-on-One officials wouldn't comment about talk that the network is for sale, and T.J. Lambert, vice president of sports for ABC Radio Networks, said ESPN Radio is "very profitable." ABC Radio handles the sales, affiliations, marketing and promotion for ESPN Radio.

As the industry evolved, one of the changes on the programming side of operations was the trend toward two-host shows instead of one voice in the p.m. drive slot, copying WFAN's "Mike & the Mad Dog" model, in which the two hosts, Mike Francesa and Chris Russo, have sharply different opinions and personas. Each draws his own fan base.

Beyond sports talk

But the biggest, and most controversial, transformation has been the move from sports talk to "guy talk," which includes discussion of movies, beer, women and more of the type of crude banter typically associated with locker rooms.

"It's the great debate," said analyst Scott, one of the leading proponents of blending a heavy dose of repartee with sports talk. "It's all about entertainment."

How much guy talk is appropriate and how raunchy it should get varies by market, he added, but "it's the evolution of the format," in part because it draws more 18-34 listeners.

Hollander of Westwood One argues, however, that while guy talk provides a quick growth spurt, sports talk is steadier, across a broader demographic.

Some observers say the proliferation of sports information on the Internet and cable TV saturated the market with information and made guy talk a necessity. But the explosion of sports radio stations also played a part, diluting the talent pool of sports experts, producing a need for good conversationalists who can hang with the guys.

Martin of Denver's KOA said that in the heyday of sports radio, when there were only a few stations, it was possible for a Denver station to land interviews with Michael Jordan or Tiger Woods on the day he turned pro, or Tom Glavine on the day he was pitching in the World Series — to talk hockey, no less.

"Now there are so many microphones in their faces," Martin said. The result is the athletes often talk to no one rather than everyone.

Jimmy Shapiro, acting program director for KGME-AM (550) in Phoenix, adds that his market is not only saturated with three sports stations, but it also is a transient community, with few lifelong Phoenix fans who will talk for hours about the local team.

Even the newest network will talk about movies, beer and women.

"It won't muddle the Fox Sports image, it will extend the brand," said Savage, adding that people expect different styles from television and radio.

Lambert of ABC Radio Networks cautions that guy talk can go too far, and not just in seeking shock value.

"It can be difficult to find out what's going on," he said.

Lambert was listening to KTCK-AM (1310) in Dallas to hear about the British Open and it was never discussed. Instead, the hosts talked about Steely Dan, the WWF and other digressions.

KTCK does have 20-minute updates, but program director Bruce Gilbert said that "we worry about that balance every day, and sometimes we go too far. Audience feedback helps us."

Liotta of Seattle's KJR said the business runs in cycles and, ultimately, guy talk will recede somewhat.

Even with all the extraneous chatter, sports radio is still a key player in the sports world, with teams even leaking potential moves as trial balloons to radio stations to gauge fan reaction. And listeners are often quick to respond to anything they hear.

According to Brennan, One-on-One gets more than a million calls a month.

"Influence may be too strong a word," he said, "but we make officials think twice."

Continued evolution

Those in the industry say sports radio should continue to grow.

"Sports is such a huge driver in our economy," Brennan said, adding that new sports and leagues like the XFL and NFL Europe are providing more games to broadcast and more fodder for conversation.

The number of stations added each year is declining, but many stations continue growing in revenue. Gilbert said Dallas' KTCK had its highest ratings ever this past winter, finishing second in its market with a 6.8 share for men 25-54. It followed that effort with its second-best ratings ever in the spring.

Lambert predicts more consolidation and says sports radio will expand its boundaries. He said he's had inquiries at ABC Radio Networks from news stations interested in Dan Patrick's show, which ESPN Radio prefers placing on affiliate stations, and says FM stations are increasingly looking into guy talk and sports talk.

Bruce Heim, vice president of national broadcast for TN Media, said network hosts like Patrick and Rome are luring more national ad buyers to sports radio, while consolidation is leading to "unwired networks," where a company may sell the p.m. drive time in numerous markets to a national buyer even though each station has local programming.

One-on-One's Brennan promises that the future will bring continued evolution characterized by "convergence" — the buzzword for bringing together radio and television with the Internet and other interactive options. He said the day may come where fans can store a specific show and listen to it on demand.

"I continue to see sports radio's presence escalating, only with a better assemblage of content," he said.