No one at Camp Jened could’ve imagined that those summers in the woods together would be the beginnings of a revolution.

In the early 1970s, teenagers with disabilities faced a future shaped by isolation, discrimination and institutionalization. Camp Jened, a ramshackle camp “for the handicapped” (a term no longer used) in the Catskills, exploded those confines. Jened was their freewheeling Utopia, a place with summertime sports, smoking and make-out sessions awaiting everyone, and campers experienced liberation and full inclusion as human beings. Their bonds endured as many migrated West to Berkeley, California — a hotbed of activism where friends from Camp Jened realized that disruption, civil disobedience, and political participation could change the future for millions.

Crip Camp is the story of one group of people and captures one moment in time. There are hundreds, if not thousands, of other equally important stories from the Disability Rights Movement that have not yet received adequate attention. We are committed to using the film’s platform to amplify additional narratives in the disability rights and disability justice communities – with a particular emphasis on stories surrounding people of color and other intersectionally marginalized communities. We stand by the creed of nothing about us, without us. For too long, too many were excluded, and it is time to broaden the number of voices and share the mic.

In the summer of 2020, the Crip Camp Impact Campaign hosted a 15 week virtual camp experience that featured trailblazing speakers from the disability community. With nearly 10,000 participants, Crip Camp 2020 showed the power of committing to accessibility for all.

Crip Camp Impact Campaign

Crip Camp’s release in March 2020 marked the launch of the Crip Camp Impact Campaign. The impact campaign’s goal was to use the film as leverage to create change for people with disabilities. The impact campaign team used an intersectional lens to encourage people to think of disability as a social justice issue, develop emerging leaders, and create long-lasting partnerships with like-minded organizations.

Learn More

The Crip Camp Impact Campaign is honored to partner with Adobe in establishing a fellowship program for creatives and community organizers with disabilities interested in elevating their work to the next level of visibility.

Through a competitive application process, fellows receive a $5,000 grant to complete a passion project over a 7-month period. Fellows also participate in training classes with Adobe and Crip Camp lecturers and have direct access to a pool of mentors — well-established in their respective industries. All fellows receive a one year complimentary subscription to Adobe Creative Cloud.

The Crip Camp Educational Curriculum

Crip Camp shared with insight, clarity, humor, and beauty the experiences of one group of disabled young people and their journey to activism and adulthood, and in doing so, provides an opportunity for all to delve into the rich and complicated history of disability activism, culture, and history. The goal of this curriculum is to extend the knowledge and understanding of disability and of disabled people offered in the film Crip Camp.

Crip Camp Merch!

Sport your love for the pride and joy seen in Crip Camp with the official Crip Camp merchandise! From a 1970s-inspired tie-dye t-shirt to a durable canvas tote bag to a pocket reusable straw, there is something for everybody.

Join Our Email List

Sign up here to host your own screening and receive a screening toolkit, request educational materials or stay updated on our work.

First Name, Last Name and Email address are required fields.

What would you like to do?*

First Name**

Last Name*

Email*

Address

City State Zip Code Country

Organization

CAPTCHA

Official Trailer

Official Trailer with Audio Description

Credits

Directors

Nicole Newnham

Jim LeBrecht

Executive Producers

President Barack Obama

Michelle Obama

Tonia Davis

Priya Swaminathan

Howard Gertler

Produced By

Sara Bolder

Jim LeBrecht

Nicole Newnham

Edited By

Eileen Meyer

Andrew Gersh

Co-Editor

Mary Lampson

Director of Photography

Justin Schein

Associate Producer

Lauren Schwartzman

Music By

Bear McCreary

Music Supervisor

Amine Ramer

Additional Editor

Shane Hofeldt

Story Consultant

Denise Sherer Jacobson

Impact Producer

Andraéa LaVant