This chapter analyzes parallels between Michel Foucault’s research into disciplinary regimes in the nineteenth century and the sequestration of objectionable bodies in institutionalization practices of today. We focus upon those practices as recorded in a recent series of documentary films by Frederick Wiseman, taped on location at the Helen Keller Institute for the Deaf and Blind in Talladega, Alabama.

Abject Love examines the process by which bodies becomes labelled 'able-bodied' or 'disabled', and interrogates the constitution of these categories. Not all bodies are able-bodied, but all human beings have bodies that someday stop functioning. Inahara suggests that we cannot simply assume a natural division between the able-bodied and the disabled. This book explores the different ways in which we can theorise physical disability and argues, using the work of psychoanalytic and poststructuralist feminists, (including Judith Butler, Luce Irigaray, and Julia Kristeva), that the allocation of the category of disability is a process of abjection. The 'abject' is something that society constantly attempts to throw out because it unsettles carefully bounded conceptions of 'self'. Throughout the book the theoretical narrative is anchored in reading of cultural texts, particularly film, but also including art and performance.

Published, with Hahna Briggs and Motohide Miyahara, in Brolga: An Australian Journal about Dance 37, 16-30. Abstract: Integrated dance involves people both with and without disabilities. Influenced by postmodern dance and contact improvisation, it has the power to challenge classic aesthetics (which idealises specific dancing bodies and movement) by creating new and inclusive aesthetic forms. To overcome negative cultural representations and constructions of disability, choreographers have used different performance strategies, such as the framing of works, compiling multiple layers of narrative, and emphasising the viewer's gaze and expectations of a social encounter. Other tactics include shock and the exaggeration of (dis)abilities. An analysis of two dance pieces by the New Zealand-based Touch Compass, This Word Love (1999) and Picnic (2003), demonstrates the company’s development, revealing an increasing complexity of work especially with regard to how the disabled dancing body is represented and reconstructed on stage. Integrated dance offers a new progression in dance aesthetics by challenging and developing previous styles within the Western contemporary dance tradition, both in New Zealand and elsewhere.

People with dwarfism often encounter discrimination in their daily interactions with strangers. Staring, harassment and infantilization are some of the behaviours they have reported to encounter. Through two qualitative research studies conducted in 2013 and 2015/16 it was revealed that people with dwarfism also experience strangers taking unauthorized pictures of them. This article explores this phenomenon in depth, utilizing the perspective of individuals who have experienced it first hand and analysing the relevant socio-historical influences. These include the history of the photographic exploitation of ‘abnormal’ bodies, and the cultural construction of a ‘dwarf’ as an object of entertainment. This article engages gaze theories in gender and race and ethnicity studies as well as a discussion of Foucault’s interpretation of the ‘panopticon’, positing that the advent of the cell-phone camera in the twenty-first century has altered how ‘abnormal’ bodies are recorded within oppressive ideological beliefs.