Are you an EPFL student looking for a semester project?

Work with us on data science and visualisation projects, and deploy your project as an app on top of GraphSearch.

Learn more about Graph Apps.

S. E. Krupa Rao (born 8 August 1939; died 15 June 1993) was a Pastor of the Protestant Convention of Baptist Churches of Northern Circars where he held leadership positions in the Church society whose area of operation extended from Srikakulam District in the northern circars along the Bay of Bengal right through seven districts up to Guntur District. As an Administrator Krupa Rao contributed to the ministerial, technical and medical ministries of the Convention of Baptist Churches of Northern Circars, as Principal of the Baptist Theological Seminary, Kakinada and the Eva Rose York Bible Training and Technical School for Women, Tuni as well as to the Council of Christian Hospitals, Pithapuram. Krupa Rao headed the Major Seminary in Kakinada from 1977 through 1993, the longest ever in the history of the seminary till that point of time. In 1989, he also became Principal of the Eva Rose York Bible Training and Technical School for Women, Tuni succeeding Mildred H. Law. Krupa Rao underwent scholastic studies between 1945-1955 at the CBM-High School and the Zilla Parishad High School in Samalkota and moved to Kakinada for collegiate studies between 1955-1957 to the Pithapuram Raja College. Rao was an active Sunday School Teacher in one of the Churches of the Convention of Baptist Churches of Northern Circars. As a resident of Kakinada, Krupa Rao came under the influence of then Principal of the Baptist Theological Seminary, A. B. Masilamani who was acting as a Vocation Promoter leading youth towards Priesthood. Masilamani became Krupa Rao's Spiritual Confessor and was able to guide Krupa Rao towards Priesthood making him take up a propadeutic course during 1959-1961 at the Serampore College, Serampore {a constituent College of the Senate of Serampore College (University)} during the Principalship of William Stewart where Rao discerned his avocation towards priesthood and returned to Kakinada and joined the Baptist Theological Seminary, Kakinada during the Principalship of Waldo Penner to pursue licentiate studies in theology leading to L.