Why Comedy is a Genre for All

January 26, 2021

In a world with chaos all around, comedy is a saviour for all!

Scientifically, when we laugh, our body releases the chemical Endorphins – the body’s natural ‘feel-good’ chemical, and there’s truly nothing better than a hearty laugh to get these hormones activated.

Everyone enjoys a good comedy film from time to time, and here are four reasons why this genre is loved by all:

Stress-buster:

Be it a long day at work or school, the best way to unwind is by watching something light and funny. There is something about the punch lines, witty sense of humour and the extremely important timing and style of delivery by the actor/actors in question. There are so many facets to comedy, which makes us laugh and relax our nerves.

Develops a sense of humour:

Watching a comedy not only helps us feel relaxed and rejuvenated, but also supports in developing a sense of humour as our surroundings influence us and play a major role in our day-to-day interactions. Having a sense of humour is an essential life skill. Not only does it help us cope during difficult times in life, especially now with the outbreak of COVID-19, but also helps us increase productivity, leadership skills and even improve cardiovascular health!

Studies show that watching a movie of this genre can improve your blood pressure and keep it at an ideal level for up to 24 hours. In 2011, Oxford University conducted an experimental research with a sample set of candidates and concluded that those who watched comedy movies after experiencing painful stimuli had better pain tolerance as compared to those who did not watch comedy movies.

Makes us better people:

Comedy helps us keep our health in check, contributes to our personality and plays a big role in our day-to-day lives. Humour is a form of coping mechanism for many, while doing so it also adds to our wit, spontaneity and leadership skills. In a survey conducted by Robert Half International, 91% of executives believed that having a good sense of humor is important for one’s career advancement, while a majority of the respondents said that a good sense of humour and work ethic are two vital qualities they look for in a good leader.

A Great Pass Time:

One of the main reasons we watch movies of this genre is because it is a great way to pass time. They are highly entertaining but they also keep us occupied! As per research on Statista – Most popular movie genres in North America from 1995 to 2020, by total box office revenue, comedy is the fourth highest revenue-generating genre (34.38 billion dollars) in the US, behind Adventure, Action and Drama. Additionally, as per research conducted by Motivate Val Morgan in 2017 – Cinema 360, comedy is one of the highest watched genres in the UAE, with 82.5% inclined towards watching comedy at the cinema.

Below are the comedy titles set to release in 2021:

Tom & Jerry – February 2021, Barb and Star Go to Vista Del Mar – February 2021, Coming 2 America – March, 2021, Marry Me – May 2021, Rumble – May 2021, Free Guy – May 2021, Minions: The Rise of Gru – June 2021 and Boss Baby: Family Business – September 2021.

Please Note – Movie release dates are subject to change.

Contact a member of our sales team for more information on cinema advertising opportunities alongside these comedy blockbusters.

Sources: Scientific American, Motivate Val Morgan, Maps of India, Statista, IMDB, Movieweb, WeForum, QZ, Forbes, Seat42f and Moviefone.

Related Article: