Tim LaHaye is an American author of Christian fiction, apocalyptic fiction and science fiction. He is also an evangelical Christian minister. As an author, he is best known for his Left Behind series, which is co-authored by Jerry B. Jenkins. Tim is married to fellow Christian author Beverly LaHaye.

Tim LaHaye became a published author in 1995 with Left Behind. Below is a list of Tim LaHaye’s books in order of when they were originally released:

Publication Order of Babylon Rising Books

Publication Order of Before They Were Left Behind Books

(with Jerry B. Jenkins)

Publication Order of Left Behind Books

(with Jerry B. Jenkins)

Chronological Order of Left Behind Books

(with Jerry B. Jenkins)

Publication Order of Left Behind: The Kids Books

(with Jerry B. Jenkins, Chris Fabry)

Publication Order of Left Behind: The Kids Collection Books

(with Jerry B. Jenkins, Chris Fabry)

Publication Order of Soul Survivor Books

Publication Order of The End Books

(with Craig Parshall)

Publication Order of The Jesus Chronicles Books

(with Jerry B. Jenkins)

Publication Order of Standalone Novels

Publication Order of Non-Fiction Books

If You Like Tim LaHaye Books, You’ll Love…

Jerry B. Jenkins

Joel C. Rosenberg

Frank Peretti

Notes: The Left Behind series and the Jesus Chronicles series are co-authored by Jerry B. Jenkins. The novel Babylon Rising is co-authored by Gregory S. Dinallo, while the other Babylon Rising series books are co-authored by Bob Phillips. The Soul Survivor series is co-authored by Bob DeMoss. The Joshua Jordan series and The End series are co-authored by Craig Parshall. All the Raven is co-authored by Bob DeMoss. Come Spring, The Best Christmas Gift and Always Grace are co-authored by Gregory S. Dinallo.

Are We Living in the End Times? and Jesus and the Hope of His Coming were co-authored with Jerry B. Jenkins. These Will Not Be Left Behind was co-authored with Jerry B. Jenkins and Norman B. Rohrer. The Act of Marriage After 40 was co-authored with Beverly LaHaye. Anger is a Choice was co-authored with Bob Phillips. Global Warning: Are We on the Brink of World War III?, Seduction of the Heart, Exploring Bible Prophecy from Genesis to Revelation and The Essential Guide to Bible Prophecy were co-authored with Ed Hindson. Jesus: Why the World Is Still Fascinated by Him was co-authored with David Minasian. The Popular Handbook on the Rapture was co-authored with Ed Hindson and Thomas Ice. The Book Of Revelation Made Clear was co-authored with Timothy Parker. Target Israel was co-authored by Ed Hindson.