Tim LaHaye, evangelical pastor and co-author of the best-selling Left Behind novels, has died at the age of 90.

LaHaye was a prominent Christian leader, a successful megachurch pastor, the author of scores of nonfiction books and the founder of The Institute for Creation Research as well as several schools.

But he is best-known for Left Behind, the wildly popular series of novels imagining Jesus' return to Earth in the modern era. LaHaye conceived the idea for the series, which he co-wrote with novelist Jerry B. Jenkins.

The resulting books illustrated LaHaye's religious interpretations, NPR's Tom Gjelten reports:

Earlier this month, Alissa Wilkinson, an English professor and critic at large at Christianity Today, wrote that no other brand "has captured conservative American evangelicalism at the turn of the century as well."

In her piece for The Washington Post, Wilkinson notes that the books merged popular fiction with devoutly believed prediction:

Left Behind books have been adapted into multiple films, including three starring Kirk Cameron and one featuring Nicolas Cage and Chad Michael Murray. The brand also gave birth to video games and graphic novels.

The series prompted backlash, too. The theological underpinnings of the books have been criticized by both evangelical and nonevangelical Christians.

Other critics have objected to what evangelical writer Tyler Wigg Stevenson called the "macabre giddiness" of the books, which seem at times to revel in the doomsday suffering of the unsaved. Nicholas Kristof suggested that in scenes showing the death of all non-Christians, the series celebrates ethnic cleansing "as the height of piety."

But LaHaye, in an interview with BeliefNet, described his vision of the rapture as "a time of incredible mercy and grace."

"If you only look at the people who defy God, it's a negative time. But if you look at the whole population, it's a blessed time," he said.

In a separate interview, in 2007, LaHaye said he hoped the rapture would come during his lifetime. "It's going to happen to some generation. Why not ours?" he asked. "The best is yet to come, and I can't wait to get into this marvelous experience. It's going to be better than we ever dreamed."

In addition to his work on the rapture and prophecy, LaHaye advocated for creationism (he once described evolution as "the biggest fairy tale in our past two centuries"), authored books organizing personality traits along the four ancient temperaments and wrote about marriage, family and sex within the Christian family.

LaHaye was on the original board of directors of the Moral Majority and was well-known as a supporter of conservative political causes.