It was an article on news website Scroll that jogged memories in me of childhood, but also jolted me into the realising why Satyajit Ray, often considered one of the best filmmakers ever, is given that honour.

Ray, as it appears, was way ahead of his time when allegorically explaining problems through children’s films.

It could well have been a trait he inherited from his father Sukumar Ray, whose stories and even nonsensical poems often alluded to serious incidents around him.

The film

Goopy Gyne Bagha Byne was a tremendous achievement in filmmaking, in that not only did it employ visual effects that were way ahead of their time, but also that Ray managed to deliver an anti-war message through a film that is still enjoyable by youngsters today.

The 1969 film was based on a short story by Ray’s grandfather Upendrakishore Ray Chowdhury, and is about a singer named Goopy and a drum-player named Bagha, who go on an adventure after receiving boons from the king of ghosts.

The climax of the film shows them thwarting an invasion on one kingdom by another, where both kingdoms are ruled by brothers. The aggressor kingdom’s army is commanded by its cruel general who keeps the king drugged or under a spell. Meanwhile, the other country does not even want war! Quite the India-Pakistan allegory, right?

The message

Goopy has a boon wherein everyone will stand still when he sings. That boon also seems to break the spell the cruel general casts on anyone through a magician named Borfi.

Thus, when the general enlists Borfi’s help to get his army marching, Goopy starts singing and Bagha starts drumming to break the spell. They dissuade the army and add finality to it by calling for pots full of sweetmeats to otherwise engage a hungry and greedy bunch of soldiers.

And all of this happens in the course of a song, which Scroll managed to translate well.

You may also watch the video here:

The relevance

Given the current tensions between India and Pakistan, the anti-war message in the song seems apt, despite being 50 years old!

The song talks about the king and the ministers harrumphing about while the subjects get nothing out of warring, and are actually rendered weak by it.

It also talks about how a war between neighbouring kingdoms — and by extension, even nations — is rarely good news for countries.

Of course, this does not mean a nation should sit quietly when another nation attacks. However, it is equally true that the aggressor is better of doing trade than waging war, something that Pakistan is learning through its shortage of tomatoes since India withdrew the Most Favoured Nation status from it.

And all this message comes from a children’s film that was released 50 years ago! I guess what they say is true: The more things change, the more they stay the same!