Derek Fisher Biography

Derek Fisher played in the NBA for 18 seasons with the Los Angeles Lakers, Golden State Warriors, Utah Jazz, Oklahoma City Thunder, and Dallas Mavericks from 1996 to 2014 after earning Sun Belt Player of the Year honors while playing at the University of Arkansas Little Rock. After being selected in the first round of the 1996 NBA Draft by the Los Angeles Lakers he played eight seasons in L.A. and helped them to three consecutive NBA titles from 2000 to 2002. After playing for the Golden State Warriors and Utah Jazz from 2004 to 2007 he re-joined the Lakers and helped them to back-to-back NBA titles in 2009 and 2010. He’d go on to play with the Oklahoma City Thunder and Dallas Mavericks before retiring in 2014 and moving on as a head coach in the NBA. During his NBA career he served as the president of the National Basketball Players Association. Fisher went on to coach the New York Knicks for parts of two seasons and is currently a head coach in the WNBA with the Los Angeles Sparks.

Book Derek Fisher for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like Derek Fisher for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent Derek Fisher. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like Derek Fisher, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with Derek Fisher's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring Derek Fisher, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking Derek Fisher for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book Derek Fisher for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like Derek Fisher for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get Derek Fisher’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book Derek Fisher for your Virtual Meeting