"Savage!" is a 1973 action film directed by Cirio H. Santiago. This one easily holds the mentality of a blaxploitation central character in the film's main protagonist, but it also focuses its action mentality in an action military form. Notably, the central character named "Savage" himself, is a gun for hire mentality working for a local military militia in a tropical region of the world. Sick with himself that he helped the sadistic forces kidnap the enemy who would be unruly subjected to torture measures later, Savage turns the table and takes on the dictatorship government. The movie pretty much dissolves into an abundancy of exploitation action, easily a budget mentalitied feature that Santiago did for Roger Corman in repetition.…

I went into this with pretty low expectations, and that's paid off once again! Savage! is probably one of the better movies I've seen from Cirio H. Santiago, thanks to a pretty decent plot, some fun, low budget action and some good (as well as some really bad) acting.

James Iglehart, who should have been the lead in more movies, stars as Jim Heygood, a military man dispatched to South America to help defeat the rebels. After capturing the leader of the rebels, things take a turn and Heygood must quickly reassess which side he needs to be on. He hooks up with two circus performers along the way, and we also get to watch Vic Diaz have sex.

While…

'Just because you turned on your father don't make you no groovy dude!'

Oh, okay, I get it. Cirio Santiago was in the business of making movies perfectly suited to weekend afternoons on the couch. It's like he had a doctorate in the subject. This was sooooo satisfying, so watchable, such an exemplar of exploitation. It's so deeply camp on a cellular level that it almost seems like parody at times, because these are the beats that people in the modern day utilize as signifiers of the genre.

Soldier-for-hire Savage is helping to take down the rebels in an unnamed Central American country, but he's not about to take the blame for the death of an opposing general or countenance…

This Roger Corman produced, low-budget Filipino film from Cirio H. Santiago is pretty much what you'd expect from the two gentlement. No plot. PLenty of action and nudity.

I'll admit that my brain was hurting while trying to follow the "plot" of this movie. James Iglehart plays a soldier (I think) who is kidnapped by rebels and then there's a lot of naked ladies and fighting.

Again, I honestly gave up on the plot around the three-minute mark but as long as you know what you're getting into then you should have a decent time with it. At just 81-minutes the film certainly doesn't overstay its welcome as the director keeps it moving at a nice pace and we do…