Welcome to Reno’s EASY 104.1 FM

You’ve found Northern Nevada’s Musical Memories! Easy 104.1 is your hometown radio station. We are locally owned and operated by native Nevadans who’ve lived here for over 50 years! Our friendly on-air staff and behind-the-scenes folks are your friends and neighbors. We love this area and all it has to offer. You’ll find your easy favorites here from the 60’s all the way thru the 90’s. We play songs the other stations have forgotten about. We don’t see ourselves as a ‘format’ – we’re a ‘mood’ and that mood is good. Thanks for stopping by our website and please check back occasionally as we continue to update this page. Don’t forget you can also stream all this fantastic music right here by clicking “Listen Live”. Thanks for being part of the Easy 104.1 family!

To advertise with our station, visit our “Advertise With Us” page or contact us.

104.1 KUEZ is owned by Big Horn Media Inc. in Reno, NV. We are proudly an equal opportunity employer and conform to all EEO regulations.

Paul Spock

Paul Spock helps you wind down weeknights from 7pm – 12am.

Paul is a 12 year veteran of Reno radio and has been heard up and down the dial. He’s done it all in the radio business from running the board for sporting events, producing commercials, and he’s even swept the snow of a satellite dish a time or two. Paul is diabetic and does charity work for the local arm of the JDRF regularly. He can also be found doing stand up comedy around town! Paul plays YOUR favorites weeknights on Easy 104.1.

Elizabeth Rose

Elizabeth Rose keeps you company weekdays from 2pm – 7pm !

Elizabeth has been a part of the Northern Nevada radio landscape for over 20 years. She’s done everything from classic rock to news talk. When Easy 104.1 flipped the switch they knew they wanted Elizabeth as part of the team. Her friendly and funny approach make your afternoons EASY. When she’s not playing all your favorite songs, Elizabeth is spending time with her cats, enjoying Reno’s many great eateries, or taking advantage of all the great activities the area has to offer.