Star Soldier (スターソルジャー, Sutā Sorujā) is a series of shoot 'em up video games mainly developed by Hudson Soft. Konami has owned the rights to the series since their absorption of Hudson Soft in 2012.

Contents

Star soldier nes full playthrough no death

Classic game room super star soldier review for pc engine

Caravan gaming tournaments

Common elements

Games

Compilations remakes

Canceled games

Other media

References

The first game, named Star Soldier, appeared on the MSX and NES in 1986, and the series has continued on various gaming systems. Star Soldier itself has received enhanced remakes for both the GameCube and PlayStation 2 in 2003, and a different remake for the PlayStation Portable in 2005, while the latest installment of the series was released on the Wii as a WiiWare game in 2008. In addition, Super Star Soldier, Final Soldier, Soldier Blade and Star Parodier have been re-released on the Wii's Virtual Console and on the Japanese PC Engine's Best Collection lineup for the PSP.

Konami began releasing Star Soldier games in 2012 with the release of Star Soldier for GREE as a Japan-only release for iOS. In addition to new titles in the series, Konami has re-released other games in the series for the Wii U Virtual Console.

The Star Soldier games are best known for their distinctive music, unique weapon power-ups, and a special time attack high score mode called "Caravan Mode".

Caravan gaming tournaments

Star Soldier was developed as a spiritual successor to Tecmo's Star Force, from which it borrows most of its gameplay elements. The Star Force series, along with Hudson's Star Soldier, was often featured in the popular Japanese gaming tournament known as "Hudson All-Japan Caravan Festival". Home ports of Star Soldier games would sometimes feature "Caravan" modes in which the player would race through timed stages while trying to accumulate a high score.

Common elements

Being an arcade-style game, Star Soldier's objective is primarily based on achieving a high score. The series often makes use of hidden destructible tiles that offer bonus points when shot, but may occasionally power-up the player's ship instead. Bonus points will also be awarded for defeating sequences of enemy formations while they're within a certain proximity to the player's ship, or defeating mini bosses before they have a chance to attack.

Games

1986: Star Soldier - MSX, Famicom/NES, Game Boy Advance, iOS, Wii VC, 3DS VC

Star Soldier Special+ - Mobile Phone

Star Soldier SP Arcade - Mobile Phone

Star Soldier Fukkoku-Ban - Mobile Phone

1990: Super Star Soldier - PC Engine/TurboGrafx-16, Wii VC, Windows Store, Wii U VC

1991: Final Soldier - PC Engine, Wii VC, Wii U VC

1992: Soldier Blade - PC Engine/TurboGrafx-16, Wii VC, Wii U VC

1992: Star Parodier - PC Engine CD ROM, Wii VC

1998: Star Soldier: Vanishing Earth - Nintendo 64

2008: Star Soldier R - Wii (WiiWare)

2010: Star Soldier Mission Mode - Mobile Phone

2013: Star Soldier for GREE - iOS

Compilations & remakes

1995: Caravan Shooting Collection - SNES

2003: Star Soldier - GameCube, PS2

2005: Star Soldier - PSP

2008: PC Engine Best Collection: Soldier Collection - PSP

Canceled games

1995: Kuma Soldier - PC-FX

Other media

1985–1987: Famicom Rocky - Manga : Star Soldier is one of the Videogames based in the manga.

1986–1987: Nekketsu! Famicom Shounendan : Star Soldier is one of the Videogames based in the manga.

1991–1993: Cyber Boy - Manga : Soldier Blade and Star Parodier, two of the video games based in the manga

1986: Running Boy Star Soldier no Himitsu - Anime movie