There are two reasons why I’m writing this piece. The first is that I want some of the world’s most difficult problems solved. And I believe billion dollar Start-Ups have the potential to solve these problems. The second is that at Bharosa Club, we are trying to make billions by serving millions and if this article sparks off a discussion, then it increases Bharosa's chances of achieving its dream.

I have built and played a key role in three businesses that were market leaders. Two were for Citibank - Corporate Cash Management in India & Custodial Services in Thailand – and the third was at PayPal in USA.

The five I have picked are based on my learnings. Here they are, in no particular order.

Execute an Insane idea

Dreaming is easy. Executing at scale is very hard! Billion dollar Start-Ups work on hard problems that have high rewards, if solved. They go into areas where angels fear to tread and manage to convince fellow travellers that if they persevere, they will reach the ‘promised land’.

In some ways they are like Vasco Da Gama , Christopher Columbus or Captain Kirk of the Starship Enterprise – they boldly go where no man has gone before.

But remember, in order to make Billions, one MUST serve millions. Being the best at something and getting a large market share is hard. You have to delight your customers and solve many small things. In some cases you have to build capabilities that were not there. For example, in 1985 we needed couriers for Citibank's corporate cash management business in India. None existed, so we helped one grow. Citibank was 90% of that courier company’s revenue. You cannot get dominant market share without great execution.

Keeping it Simple and Focused

Which brings me to my next point. Make things simple for customers by hiding away the complexity it takes to deliver a beautiful, elegant and simple solution.

At PayPal, one of the big concerns was how to prevent Fraud. One approach could have been to create complicated processes to weed out the fraudsters. But this would have made the interface difficult for 99% of the audience - which was honest. Instead, we created simple processes which led to consumer delight and simultaneously built a very innovative fraud engine to check scalable fraud - that to this day gives PayPal an incredible competitive advantage.

Building Fellow Believers

It is difficult to find people who share the lead entrepreneur’s passion. But entrepreneurs who do build billion dollar businesses are able to find people who are better than themselves and get them to share the passion and the belief.

My final interview with Elon Musk started at around 8am in a diner and went on till about 3am the next day. Once he felt that I was the kind of person he was looking for, most of this time was spent by Elon on convincing me to join. His only reservation was that prior to PayPal I had only worked in large companies, and whether I would be able to deliver in a start-up environment. On my part, I had to take a very large pay cut, which was unsettling to say the least.

We finally decided on a 15 day trial period once Elon convinced me that we were going to build a rocket ship and he felt I should be one of the astronauts. Fortunately, the 15 days were enough for the two of us to realize that we had made the right decision. We did end up building a rocket ship.

Raise Capital

I have yet to see a billion dollar business built without substantial investment. Raising capital is never easy but there is a lot of capital available and investors are always looking for the next big thing. Billion dollar Start-Ups are very good at raising the capital they need.

The Right Nutrients

PayPal would have never succeeded if the regulators had asked it to get licensed in all the states as a money transmitter. In Start-Up friendly environments, the ecosystem supports billion dollar ideas. As if by magic, obstructions begin to disappear. This is what I think makes Silicon Valley special.

Maybe you are trying to build a billion dollar business as we are. Did this list help you? Will you be willing to share your list? There is no dearth of large problems that need solving; so learning from each other will not create a competitive disadvantage.In today’s world which is moving more and more towards open source maybe there is no need for a secret sauce.