Latest Update:

Chief Minister Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy credited the 1st installment of Rs.5,500 to 52.3 lakh eligible farmers under the YSR Rythu Bharosa scheme for the fifth consecutive year on 1 June 2023. Rs.2,000 contribution is yet to be distributed that is due from the Centre under the PM Kisan scheme. Together, the Centre's and state's contributions add up to Rs.7,500 for each eligible farmer under the 1st installment of this scheme.

The YSR Rythu Bharosa is one of the nine Navratna welfare schemes of the Andhra Pradesh (AP) government. It was announced and implemented on 15 October 2019 in AP. This scheme provides monetary assistance to the farmers, including tenant farmers across the State.

This scheme provides financial support to the cultivators for meeting their investments during the crop season. The benefits provided under this scheme will enable the farmers to obtain higher crop productivity and timely sourcing of quality inputs. The objectives of this scheme are to help farmers financially, increase crop production, develop the agriculture sector and reduce the debt burden on farmers.

Eligibility under YSR Rythu Bharosa

The eligibility criteria under the YSR Rythu Bharosa scheme are as follows:

Farmers enrolled under the PM-Kisan Scheme are also eligible.

Farmers cultivating under ROFR lands and D Patta lands.

Farmers cultivating on endowments or inam lands or temple lands.

Landless cultivators.

Farmers/ tenants cultivating the lands of owners of excluded categories.

Landless tenant farmers and ROFR cultivators belonging to BC, ST, SC and Minority categories.

Exclusions under YSR Rythu Bharosa

However, the following persons are not eligible and belong under the exclusion category:

Farmer families in which at least one member belongs to the following categories:

Former and present holder of constitutional posts.

Former and present state minister.

Former and present member of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha.

Former and present member of State Legislative Assemblies or State Legislative Council.

Former and present Mayors of Municipal Corporations.

Former and present Chairpersons of District Panchayats.

Every retired and serving employee and officer of State or Central PSEs and attached autonomous institution or offices under government and the regular employees of local bodies (excluding class 4/multi tasking staff/group D employees).

Persons serving or retired, employee or officer of the Central or State government Ministry or officers or departments and their fields.

Persons who receive a superannuation or retirement monthly pension of Rs.10,000 or more (excluding class 4/multi tasking staff/group D employees).

Individuals who paid income tax or professional tax or commercial tax or GST during the last assessment year.

Professionals like engineers, doctors, chartered accountants, lawyers, architects, etc., registered with professional bodies and carrying out their practices.

Persons owning farmlands that are converted into aquaculture, house sites or any other non-agricultural usage.

Farmers whose unmarried child is a government employee or income tax assessed are eligible and do not come under any exclusion categories.

Benefits of YSR Rythu Bharosa

The farmer families who collectively own cultivable land will get a benefit of Rs.13,500 per family per year, including Rs.6,000 from the PM-KISAN in three installments, irrespective of the size of land holdings.

The benefit of Rs.13,500 is given in 3 installments to the eligible land owner farmer as stated below:

1st instalment of Rs.7,500 in May (including Rs.2,000 from PM-KISAN)

2nd instalment of Rs.4,000 in October (including Rs.2,000 from PM-KISAN)

3rd instalment of Rs.2,000 in January (Exclusively of PM-KISAN scheme)

Financial assistance of Rs.13,500 per year is given to landless tenant farmers and ROFR cultivators belonging to BC, SC, ST and minority categories from the Government of Andhra Pradesh budget.

The benefit of Rs.13,500 is given in 3 installments for landless tenant farmers, including ROFR cultivators, from the State Government budget as stated below:

1st instalment of Rs.7,500 in May.

2nd instalment of Rs.4,000 in October.

3rd instalment of Rs.2,000 in January.

In case of the death of a farmer, the financial benefit is given to the deceased person’s spouse. However, from the next year of death, financial assistance will be provided to the legal heir as per the mutations made in the land.

The benefit amount under this scheme is directly transferred into the beneficiaries’ bank account through the Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) method.

Application Under YSR Rythu Bharosa

The existing land ownership database is used for identifying beneficiaries under this scheme.

The newly selected village volunteers will be responsible for identifying eligible farmers in the specified areas.

After the collection of the information, the village volunteers will send the report to the revenue officials.

The revenue officers will then prepare a final list of beneficiaries.

The final list of beneficiaries is submitted to the government.

The district-wise beneficiary list is uploaded online on the YSR Rythu Bharosa website.

Documents Required for YSR Rythu Bharosa

Valid identity proof and address proof.

Aadhaar card.

Bank details with IFSC code.

Andhra Pradesh domicile certificate.

Agriculture land ownership proof.

Tenant farmer certificate.

YSR Rythu Bharosa Payment Status