Obituary of Vilhelmina Ilona Szabo

Vilhelmina I Szabo, 86, of Forest Hills, New York, passed away on June 12th, 2024 in her home.

Funeral service will be held at The Fox Funeral Home, located at 98-07 Ascan Avenue,

Forest Hills, NY 11375 on June 18th, 2024 at 11:00 AM with Pastor Istvan Gergely of The First Hungarian Baptist Church of New York officiating. Burial will follow at The Maple Grove Cemetery, located at 83-15 Kew Gardens Road, at Liberty Mound, New York, NY 11415.

Visitation will be held at The Fox Funeral Home, located at 98-07 Ascan Avenue Forest Hills, NY 11375 on June 18th, 2024 at 11:00 AM. The Fox Funeral Home will be handling the funeral arrangements.

Vilhelmina I Szabo was born at home, in Transylvania, Romania to Lajos Toth and Erzsebet Jenei on December 4th, 1937. Although a single child she had a happy childhood surrounded by her loving parents and grandparents, however, sometimes marred by war. When she arrived in America in 1971, with her family, to fulfill the dream of a better life for her children, her first job was working with our father in his woodworking shop, Quality Woodcraft in Manhattan. Her next job was at Rigo Bakery and finally, her last job was at Orwashers Bakery. All the places she worked at were located in the so called little Hungary of New York, Yorkville, NY and never ventured outside of 78th St. between 1st and 2nd Avenues for work. She was the happiest serving her customers with love and a huge smile.

Her primary love were her children, and her now departed husband, Julius T, Szabo, master church organ builder. Vilhelmina enjoyed cooking/baking, sewing, antiquing, painting, admiring the beauty of nature, photography, embroidery, watching old movies and on occasion watching NINJA Warriors and Survivor. She was meticulously organized and had a sense of great pride in her children’s successes. She was modest yet stylish, often wearing clothes she made with great skill.

Vilhelmina I Szabo is survived by her daughter, Vilhelmina Guthrie and son, Laszlo G Szabo, who are grieving her loss.

In her honor, memorial donations may be made to any charitable organization of your choice or plant a memorial tree (available through Fox Funeral Home’s site).

The family wishes to extend their gratitude to The Hungarian Baptist Church, 24/7 Home Care Agency of NY and the many individuals who helped, guided and shaped our mother throughout her life (too many to list here).