Mabel Vilhelmina BELKA Passed away peacefully on January 7, 2004. She was born February 6, 1910 to Sofia and Ivar Husa, homesteaders in a new prairie settlement called Belden in northwestern North Dakota. She completed her first eight grades in Belden's one-room schoolhouse in the summers--because winters were too cold. Mabel attended high school in Stanley, ND and graduated in 1928. She married Ernest Kozlowski on November 8, 1940. After a few short years together, he was drafted into the service in World War II and killed soon after arriving on Leyte in the Philippine Islands on December 20, 1944. Mabel was devastated by the loss. Eventually, she met Walter Jennings Belka and became interested in life again. They married in 1950 when she was 40 and Walt was 43. Mabel and Walt spent many wonderful years together including a yearlong exploration of Europe after she retired in February 1972. They visited England, all the countries of Western Europe except Luxembourg, all the countries of Eastern Europe except Albania, and 28 days in the Soviet Union. As they learned about the health care, retirement and other social benefits provided by the various countries, they were dismayed to see that nearly all had more and better benefits than we had here. Subsequent travel took them to destinations all over the US and the world. Walt passed away June 12, 1996 of complications arising from Lou Gehrig's Disease. Having no children of her own, Mabel focused her attention on her 17 nieces and nephews about whom she cared enormously. She took a great interest and pride in their activities and accomplishments. She is survived by sisters Lillian Feist of Seattle and Norma Winkler of Rocklin, CA and brother V. Lennie Husa of Spokane, WA. She was preceded in death by sisters, Helen Bowman of Rochester, WA; Hazel Larson of Lacey, WA and brothers Leo Husa of Vancouver, WA and Emmett Husa of Rochester, WA. Mabel was always actively involved in her community-particularly with regard to her Finnish heritage and social issues. She was part of the organizing committee that envisioned and founded the Nordic Heritage Museum, serving as treasurer until her health no longer permitted her to continue. She was also a member of the Elder Citizens Coalition of Washington, which later became the Puget Sound Council of Senior Citizens and is now part of the Puget Sound Alliance for Retired Americans. She was also very active in the King County Democratic Party. A memorial celebration of her life will be held Sunday, February 1st beginning at 12:30 p.m. at the NORDIC HERITAGE MUSEUM, 3014 N.W. 67th in Seattle. The family notes that contributions in lieu of flowers be made in her name to the Nordic Heritage Museum or the Puget Sound Alliance for Retired Americans.