Table of Contents

Copyright Information

Also by Tony Rothman:

DEDICATION

Zero

One

Two

Three

Four

Five

Six

Seven

Eight

Nine

Ten

Eleven

Twelve

Thirteen

Fourteen

Fifteen

Sixteen

Seventeen

Eighteen

Nineteen

Twenty

Twenty-One

Twenty-Two

Twenty-Three

Twenty-Four

Twenty-Five

Twenty-Six

Twenty-Seven

Twenty-Eight

Twenty-Nine

Thirty

Thirty-One

Thirty-Two

Thirty-Three

Thirty-Four

Thirty-Five

Thirty-Six

Thirty-Seven

Thirty-Eight

Thirty-Nine

Forty

Forty-One

Forty-Two

Forty-Three

Forty-Four

Forty-Five

Forty-Six

Forty-Seven

Forty-Eight

Forty-Nine

Fifty

Fifty-One

Fifty-Two

Fifty-Three

Fifty-Four

Fifty-Five

Fifty-Six

Fifty-Seven

Fifty-Eight

Fifty-Nine

Sixty

Sixty-One

Sixty-Two

Sixty-Three

Acknowledgments

Copyright Information

Copyright © 2013 by Tony Rothman.

All rights reserved.

Published by Wildside Press LLC.

wildsidepress.com | bcmystery.com

Also by Tony Rothman:

Fiction

The Course of Fortune

Censored Tales

The World is Round

Nonfiction

Sacred Mathematics: Japanese Temple Geometry (with Fukagawa Hidetoshi)

Everything’s Relative and Other Fables from Science and Technology

Doubt and Certainty (with George Sudarshan)

Instant Physics

A Physicist on Madison Avenue

Science à la Mode

Frontiers of Modern Physics

DEDICATION

To the memory of my father, Milton Rothman,

with gratitude for the scientific life

Zero

You know this is mad. That’s how it began. That is how Nathaniel Machuzak remembered it began. With the wind blowing into the Texas hill country and the convoy snaking after it toward folly. With his half-incredulous, half-angry challenge to the bearded Russian sitting beside him in the jeep.

Yes, it’s mad. The parched gulches the procession crossed each moment were hardly drier than the Russian’s reply; his distant gaze, trained on a Brahman steer munching grass behind a barbed-wire fence, shrouded his desiccated response with fatality.

"Borisovich, there’s not a snowball’s chance in hell of it working. And if something fucks up…Jesus…"

Machine is conditioned. Should be okay.

Nathaniel scowled ferociously at Yaroslav Borisovich Archangelsky, but that one only continued to stare out the window, bearded chin resting on knuckles. Worthy of Rasputin, the great beard provided its pint-sized wearer with effective camouflage and his bedraggled hair lent Archangelsky more than a passing resemblance to the crazy monk, but Machuzak had known this Russian too long to be fooled. Slava was crazy, foxlike, and the barely perceptible purse of his lips assured Machuzak that he was far from blind.

Y–you’ve misunderstood something, Slava, Nathaniel persisted to the march-past of scrub and rock. This was supposed to be the dedication. The plan was to give them the c–cook’s tour, show them a routine pulse. That’s all.

"Plans change, moi drug."

I—wasn’t told.

For an instant the conversation lapsed; then Archangelsky chuckled with an unearthly rumble an octave lower than could possibly emerge from such a shrimp. Nat Edward’ich, you think we’ve been killing ourselves day and night for cook’s tour? Who was Cook anyway?

Managing a faint smile at the Archangelsky-ism, Machuzak did not at once reply. He recognized that he was slow in speech, to the point of hesitation, and he flattered himself that this was because he thought before he opened his mouth. But at this moment the welling anger soon overcame hesitation. What the hell does Rasmussen think he’s doing? he hit the steering wheel with the flat of his hand, even as he knew exactly what Slava would say:

Giving fire to the world.

* * * *

Machuzak’s jeep insisted on its own judgment. The video was off, permanently, but no one could mistake the voice: Leonard Rasmussen himself, CFRC’s director, online from the lab. Urgency shaded the famously boisterous tenor, one that had of late grown gravelly, but even in poor health Rasmussen did all to sound confident, sanguine. Mac, he said, I smell trouble brewing at the gate. Be prepared, like a good scout. What’s your ETA?

N–no problem, Len. Give us twenty minutes.

Thumbs up, Rasmussen said, and signed off.

A long sigh escaped Machuzak’s lips. His slowness, he conceded, was not limited to speech alone.

Be glad we don’t have implants, Slava remarked.

Machuzak nodded grimly. With forty the next milestone, both men were too old to want to have anything to do with the Apple Brainwave, which wired you to the Internet once and for all. Auto fatalities for 24/7 chatterers already exceeded deaths by GPS distraction. Smart cars could take over the thinking, but drive-thru Texans hadn’t exactly gone into paroxysms of ecstasy at the thought of handing over the sacred wheel to a superior intellect.

The world had changed, Machuzak shook his head with the now-permanent wonder, the geography no less. As the procession trailed the buzzards west and south out of Austin, Machuzak numbered the ranches covered with solar panels, some the older silicon and copper, more with photovoltaic nanopaint. He convinced himself that the lazy whoosh of blades turning in the wind made itself heard above the road noise.

Some things are frozen in time. A beet-red farmer perched atop his tractor stared down Machuzak and Archangelsky as the motorcade passed, leveled at them imaginary shotgun sights. The locals blamed the lab for the worsening of the water, for the annual freak snowstorms and any time their TV signal got lost. St. Cecilia and her talk-show cronies insisted that CFRC scientists were space aliens.

"We’re all aliens in this place," Slava spat out the window.

It was true. They all spoke with accents, hardly any of them Texas twangs.

The caravan snaked up and down more kilometers, past oak trees dripping with moss, clumps of prickly pears, more ranches, down, up and—suddenly it lay before them. Machuzak pulled off the road to give the dignitaries an opportunity to gaze upon it for the first time. But whether you came over this rise once in a lifetime or every morning for a decade, you remained unprepared. There below, sprawled over three or four square kilometers, the great complex—the water towers, cooling towers, the giant structures you’d mistake for aircraft hangars, the satellite dishes, the swans gliding over the artificial lake—each time it seemed less planned than dropped. From an alien planet.

The congress members and tycoons shielding their eyes in the Texas light made astonished noises. Aye they should, Machuzak nodded. The vista confronting you from this rise is so unexpected, so irreconcilable with the eyescape, that you cannot but be drawn toward it, downward, into the valley. And they descended.

* * * *

The scene at the gate was worse than Rasmussen had foreseen. What the—? Machuzak exclaimed, seeing the way blocked by a mass of cameramen and bots pointing headsets in every direction and, worst of all—Slava, he said, as he jammed on the brakes and the motorcade ground to a halt, who the hell’s been talking to the press?

Archangelsky didn’t need to say, I told you so as the journalists stampeded toward them.

Nathaniel’s perplexity was rising by the instant. On a normal day nothing much distinguished CFRC’s main gate from the entrance to the Ruby or L-Bar Ranch, nothing except the nearly invisible eyes that surmounted the modest brick fence and the buffalo roaming in the vast fields beyond. On a normal—Before him, several dozen protestors had braved the afternoon heat to prevent…what? Nathaniel shook his head; there hadn’t been a protest since the lab opened. The college students—well, that anyone could understand… The Buddhists surprised him and the hermits and dropouts of all sorts interspersed among the rest, people who had simply removed themselves from the pace of the current century. More than the numbers it was the agitation, the genuine fear written on their faces, that seized Nathaniel’s attention. As he stepped out of the jeep they pushed toward him angrily waving their placards. No radiation!

No bombs! a bearded twenty-year-old shouted silently in his face by flashing his phone screen at Machuzak. This place is hit and we all go up!

Whoa, said Machuzak, raising his hands. No one’s building bombs here.

What about the tritium? the kid insisted belligerently, punching his keys.

I’ve got to shoot you, Machuzak answered with a smile, which to the surprise of both of them disarmed his opponent.

At that moment, a portly businessman on the far side of fifty, shaded by a full-sized Stetson, stepped out of his long-horn-graced limo and waded into the fray. Nathaniel knew him by sight, of course, but their handshake at Bergstrom airport had been his first and only introduction to Richard Garrett, the billionaire chair of CFRC’s board of governors.

Excuse me, sir, just what is going on here?

Despite the confrontation unfolding about them, and that he towered over Garrett by a head, Machuzak deferred to the tone of voice of a man who not only expected to be, but was, listened to. M–Mr. Garrett, I suspect you know better than I. Rumor has it— he glanced at Archangelsky in the jeep—that Leonard has decided to use Prometheus to fire up the lab’s power grid.

First I’ve heard about it, er…Dr.—

—Machuzak, Nathaniel Machuzak.

And what’s wrong with that?

Nothing…everything.

Garrett looked up quizzically at the lanky, perturbed, perplexed scientist. These people seem to think it’s dangerous. Is it?

Nathaniel hesitated, glanced at the fevered crowd surrounding this surreal exchange. Hmm, probably not to us, if that’s what you mean. But Mr. Garrett, believe me, that machine was not ready, is not ready—

Ah, Garrett shrugged jovially, considering. Dr. Machuzak, where’s your sense of adventure? I say we give it a go. If it fizzles, well…

In spite of himself Machuzak was fast working up a sweat. They’d always known that the second-worst thing that could happen to the program was a fizzled demonstration and the worst thing was an accident. Today they were risking both. For what? He only dimly perceived the implications. On the verge of losing his temper altogether, Machuzak half spit out, It’s insane! but confronted by his own lack of imagination, he swallowed his tongue and faced the crowd. Why don’t you come watch? he announced to the protestors, badging open the gate.

For only an instant, shocked silence and baffled glances met the unexpected invitation, then one by one the young people nodded and moved toward the retreating fence.

Good move, remarked Garrett.

Welcome to the Controlled Fusion Research Center, Machuzak said, and the crowd streamed in.

* * * *

The motley guignol of grizzled recluses munching on home-baked pies, saffron-robed monks banging drums and Energy Star moms pushing their phone-charging strollers quickly engulfed the motorcade, and the limo-bound dignitaries might have walked the final kilometer to the guardhouse. Metalized balloons bobbed above everything.

That boy at the gate is like my daughter, observed Slava. She won’t speak to me except by texting.

Aye, the world was new. Machuzak vividly recollected that day nearly two decades ago when Americans awoke to pictures of cuddly polar bears drowning in the former Arctic ice cap. By now green had turned black. His jeep usually ran on algae, and long ago those fourteen-mpg Urban Assault Vehicles, which Texans believed were guaranteed them by the Second Amendment, had met the same fate as the dinosaurs, except in Crawford.

The one word you never heard amidst solar, wind and bio was fusion. The energy source of stars. If fusioneers, physicists like him and Slava, could do it, they would hand the world a new, virtually limitless supply of energy. The first problem, Machuzak conceded heavily, was that after eighty years of effort, the ultimate goal still lay just beyond their fingertips. The second problem was that to people like the kid at the gate, fusion meant bombs of the worst sort. Then there was the third problem: the future never had much of a constituency.

Leonard Rasmussen, CFRC’s director, was determined that their endeavor should succeed. Ten years after he’d rebuilt the old Austin National Fusion Research Laboratory into the Controlled Fusion Research Center, his troops had yet to produce a self-sustaining reaction, which would alter the history of the world, but if Slava was right, they were going to try today.

* * * *

Machuzak waved the crowd past the perplexed duty guard, who raised the boom in spite of himself, and everyone passed through the crumbling concrete barriers that had been ordained after 9/11. Nathaniel figured the odds of a terrorist attack on CFRC were about the same as a hit against the nearest Taco Bell, but when even university students thought they were building bombs…

The crowd passed along the wide arc of the lake until at last everyone stood before the main building, gawking, giggling at the majestic fountain that rose from the water and enveloped them all in a fine spray. Their childlike wonder prompted Machuzak to see the sculpture for the first time in years. Once, those irregular, artfully corroded bronze sheets soaring heavenward through rainbow mists had reminded him of angel wings, and now he remembered that. Afresh he contemplated the small sphere surmounting the whole, bronze, brass, intricately carved away such that inner labyrinths were suggested.

What do you suppose that sphere means? a guest asked.

The sun, Nathaniel answered and ducked inside, the crowd after him.

Each and every person was instantly transported outside again by the lobby, which had been designed with light. Once more transfixed, hermits and dignitaries stood together, smiling at the vaulting arches that touched skylights open to the heavens. For a second moment, the throng’s admiration of a visionary creation briefly rekindled in Nathaniel a cinder of boyhood wonder. In those two moments, he discovered again what his profession was about, what it should be about, and resolved to act.

Setting off, he ignored the exhibits and memorabilia and mountains of food, determined to confront Rasmussen. The director was nowhere to be found, but his eyes lit on Leonard’s wife, Theresa, surrounded by admirers. Machuzak took two steps toward that charmed circle and suddenly halted, lassoed by his damned indecision, and he foolishly stood frozen in the middle of the great lobby as Slava looked on with amusement.

Luckily, Theresa herself caught sight of him and motioned him over. What’s wrong, Mac? she said. You look troubled.

He’d bypass the obligatory pleasantries: Theresa, is Len up to anything?

Shh, she smiled. It’s supposed to be a secret.

Christ, Slava was exactly right. For a moment Nathaniel stared blankly at Theresa. They’d known each other a decade, since he’d first set foot in this miraculous space. A handsome woman, a strong one, Theresa sometimes remarked that she read history to be reminded of the beauty of ephemeral things, and with her husband’s health in decline, she had well crossed the threshold where life’s transitoriness ceases to be a surprise. Believe me, Mac, she said, casting on Nathaniel the indulgent gaze a mother reserves for the runt of the litter, everything will be fine. Leonard knows what he’s doing.

Nathaniel scowled. As splendid as Theresa was, she wasn’t a scientist.

"Theresa, this isn’t the sort of thing you try in public. It’s arrogant— He suddenly halted, seeing. This has something to do with ITER, doesn’t it?"

Theresa’s silence instantly told Nathaniel he’d hit the mark. ITER, the colossal twenty-billion-euro device that the EU and a half dozen other countries had built in southern France, had finally completed its shakedown last week.

Leonard would never allow the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor to beat CFRC in the race for fusion. When ITER’s construction was announced, years before climate change went mainstream, the United States’ first move was to pull out of the endeavor. In, out…America’s endless vacillations handed Leonard Rasmussen his opening. With legendary charm, boundless vigor, infinite patience, he sweet-talked and cajoled. I want ten billion dollars and fifteen years, he leveled his gaze on high-tech magnates and secretaries of energy. Eventually he got what he wanted, the Manhattan Project for energy.

From the ashes of the decaying Austin lab rose a glittering new entity, the Controlled Fusion Research Center. Construction began immediately on the consortium’s centerpiece, christened ASSET for Advanced Steady State Experimental Tokamak. Few words, Machuzak knew, could be more meaningless to outsiders. To insiders, it meant one thing: the future, and lab hands soon christened the device Prometheus, bringer of fire. Not fully ITER’s size, ASSET’s design was—they hoped—smarter, and with luck it would trump its rival. Today the competition had stepped out of the shadows.

Nathaniel walked away from Theresa and found Archangelsky hovering over the hors d’oeuvres. A tsar’s table, Slava mused, only obliquely glancing at Machuzak. Then he raised his beard, grinning. You look tortured, my friend, he said, thrusting a sparkling glass into the other’s hand.

You were right, friend, Machuzak answered, glancing at the improbable, expectant crowd now milling everywhere about them. They’re going to turn on the lights today—they’re going to try.

Of course I was right. I said it before. You think we’ve been busting our balls for a month now on cook’s tour?

Nathaniel nodded, belatedly as usual, he thought. When fully operational ASSET was meant to supply electricity for the entire laboratory. When. If. It had never been connected to the turbine. They’d been slowly putting the machine through its paces when suddenly the board decreed a commissioning, apparently more, and they threw Prometheus together with sealing wax and string. Oh, it was sputtering along all right—not with a torch but a match—and they’d have to dismantle the beast and spend weeks righting what they’d made wrong. Even with ITER suddenly breathing down their necks, something here did not add up. The idiots couldn’t believe that they’d turn on the lights in front of an audience.

Let them make fools of us all. Game isn’t worth candle. The higher-ups will get blame.

We all will. Tell me, Slava, weren’t scientists at one time supposed to be honest, dedicated to the truth? Wasn’t that the oath we took when we became physicists?

Archangelsky threw a bewildered expression at Machuzak. Nat Edward’ich, tell me on what strange and wonderful planet you grew up.

* * * *

With a resignation to futility, Nathaniel Machuzak again resolved to stop this lunacy. He took a step toward the lobby’s center and the lab’s deputy director, Cyrus Krieg-Zuber. Into whose hard hat were the alleged feces defecated? Zuber snarled as if offended by his phone itself. Yes, we shall investigate at once.

Cy, what are you on about? Machuzak said the moment Krieg-Zuber had signed off. I saw it myself this morning in the rf heating area. A tech was so stressed that he took a crap into his hard hat, that’s all. You would too if you had any idea of what was going on around here. Put an end to it.

The blond Krieg-Zuber, accent purposely falling on the final syllable, trained his laser stare momentarily on Nathaniel, stroked his chin. Then he turned without a word, straightened the trimmed lapels of his jacket and edged toward the cameras. For a moment Machuzak stared after him, openmouthed.

Nathaniel ducked into the men’s room only to be brought up short by Leonard Rasmussen turning toward him. The director hadn’t been much visible around the lab for a year, not since the day when that terrible thing happened. Until that day, he’d been a compact, vigorous fifty-five, with silvering hair, ruddy skin and a sly grin, and then he stumbled. Machuzak hadn’t set eyes on him at all for three months and the change was almost too much to endure. Leonard Rasmussen in a wheelchair.

The moment Rasmussen caught sight of him, he struggled to his feet.

L–Leonard, Nathaniel stuttered simultaneously, moving to help.

Rasmussen waved him off. It’s fine, he said with the effort of one whose muscles refuse to obey. I can make it. We have a demo to perform, don’t we, Mac?

Len, Nathaniel pressed, you can’t do this. How far is ITER from ignition? They can’t be close—

One day ahead is too close, Mac.

To hell with them. You know as well as I do what you’re risking. Overloads, disruptions, equipment damage—

ASSET was behaving during the pre-ops—

—reputation. What you’re planning isn’t a pre-op. Don’t do it.

For an instant Rasmussen glanced at Nathaniel with pleading eyes and steadied himself. In that space the last piece of the day’s puzzle fell into place. ITER may be breathing down our necks, but Leonard Rasmussen is determined to see Prometheus’torch set ablaze before he dies.

Machuzak fell silent and helped Leonard into the lobby.

* * * *

Cyrus Krieg-Zuber had reappeared and already begun herding the crowd across the three hundred meters of asphalt and grass that separated the main building from the great tokamak complex at CFRC. Cyrus the Great, striving with his corporate physique for every air of an acting director, if not presidential candidate, had invited the entire planet to watch. What a spectacle it would be, he assured the press, his sartorial splendor no less than his unplaceable accent convincing them that history itself was today in the making. For an instant Machuzak caught his eye, but the adder’s glare Zuber shot at him before he turned again to the cameras said one thing: don’t.

There was nothing for it. He passed Leonard on to Theresa and filed out with Slava and a hundred others toward what they called the pentagon. Not quite twice five miles of fertile ground, but six stories high, the immense complex consisted of five connected subunits arrayed around a central hub. Within that hub sat Prometheus. All told, the pentagon covered the area of two or three football fields. The size of the place alone filled visitors with a certain awe, and as they approached, Nathaniel could not doubt it, each one of them was wondering what on Earth could be inside.

What is inside is not quite on Earth.

Krieg-Zuber had stationed a few smiling bots at the nearest entrance to distribute hard hats, say, Have a wonderful day and break-dance. Flashing his badge and teeth to the crowd, he waved it over the electronic lock, a gesture that told everyone they were about to enter forbidden domains. With nearly comical bows, he ushered in the dignitaries, then the rest, and when Machuzak and Archangelsky passed him, his expression soured.

Inside, Nathaniel and Slava found themselves shoved up against Garrett again. Soon Machuzak became conscious of a hush descending on the crowd, the same hush that descended every time visitors entered the motor-generator room and understood they are dwarfed.

Size does matter, Archangelsky remarked.

Garrett looked askance at the Russian, not knowing what to make of him, but Slava was right. Above the persistent whir of the flywheels, Nathaniel explained that beneath their feet spun the four huge motor-generators that power CFRC’s experiments. Without them, every time they started up Prometheus they’d be in danger of draining greater Austin of electricity. He led Garrett to a chain surrounding one of the wells and the chairman caught his breath when he gazed onto the 700-ton giant resting in a pit the size of a small house. Two generators remained idle—spares—but for short periods the primaries alone could supply 700 megawatts of power: seven million lightbulbs, 700,000 microwave ovens, enough electricity for a small city. On the other hand, the purpose of these beasts was merely to put a match to Prometheus.

That’s hard to believe, remarked Garrett.

Machuzak lowered his gaze at the chairman and recounted how during their installation, a great crane was lowering one of the flywheels’ outer casing into the pit. Suddenly cables began straining, snapping. Within seconds the entire crane collapsed and the stator fell into place. Four hundred tons of steel crashed down around the workmen standing atop the flywheel. A cable whipped up, smashed through the crane-cabin window and broke the operator’s arm. Seismometers in Dallas and Houston registered the tremor, but no one died of a heart attack. One of the workmen did take the week off.

Dr. Machuzak! exclaimed Garrett, now in outright disbelief, surely you are making this all up.

In the realm of the gods, Mr. Garrett, Machuzak replied pointedly, even the extraordinary is ordinary. Nathaniel regretted the words even as they escaped his lips. He was attempting to make a perhaps-too-subtle hint and was certain that Garrett would hold the remark against him as a sign of the arrogance of physicists, but the businessman appeared oblivious, shrouded by the sense of personal insignificance the motor-generators produce.

Hurrying on, Zuber led the crowd directly to the tokamak test cell. He received voice and visual authorization from the guard to enter and ordered the massive door open. Soon the onlookers were rimming the central bay, streaming videos to friends worldwide. A hush fell, more palpable than the one that had come before.

Prometheus was the ultimate plumber’s nightmare and no matter how often Machuzak tried to describe it, he failed. His failure was not a matter of words, he reassured himself; the eye is simply incapable of taking in everything that confronts it. The device, all fifty thousand tons, stands nearly four stories high, but is buried by the hundreds of cables and microwave guides feeding it from all directions, by the diagnostic equipment that sprout from every crevice, by the massive particle accelerators that heat the fuel. You glimpse a ladder here, a girder there, two flags flying from the impossibly massive crane above, but Prometheus is too complex to allow you to make it into a sensible whole.

Peel away the cables and plumbing and girders and you discover a great cylindrical vessel, the full height of the machine, which contains a vacuum nearly as perfect as you’d find in deep space. Dismantle this cryostat and you reveal sixteen superconducting magnet coils cooled to 268 degrees below zero by the liquid helium flowing through their veins. Each coil reminds you of a pearish D, except this D is eight or nine meters tall, and all sixteen are arrayed around in the form of a giant doughnut. When pulsed, the magnets attempt to lurch toward each other with a force, well, several hundred thousand times what a hefty horseshoe magnet produces—but they don’t lurch; their superalloy casings and the machine’s massive titanium superstructure hold them fast. Finally, strip away the magnets and you peer into the heart of the tokamak itself: a D-shaped superalloy chamber, three times the height of a person, wrapped around in the shape of a doughnut.

Tokamak, Slava once explained, is a Russian acronym meaning toroidal chamber with magnetic coils. That says pretty much what a tokamak is: a giant doughnut wrapped with magnetic coils. What it doesn’t say is that inside this doughnut, fusioneers intended to create the center of the sun.

The naked eye is incapable of assembling Prometheus into a sensible whole because Prometheus was, barring perhaps ITER, the most complex device ever constructed. The product of fifteen thousand man-years of work, it was altogether too complicated. And now, Machuzak thought, as much as I am protesting, we are going to turn it on.

* * * *

By the time Krieg-Zuber steered everyone to the control room, located in a kind of underground bunker attached to the main building, 4:00 p.m. had come and gone. He directed the overflow crowd to spread out around the glass-walled visitors’ gallery while inviting a select few to take their places on the captain’s deck overlooking the command center floor.

Leonard merely waved to everyone and Zuber made his announcement. "Mesdames et messieurs, he said with his most sparkling affectation while running his finger along the scar of unknown provenance he wore with pride on his right cheek, Prometheus is the prototype of machines that will someday provide humankind with clean and virtually inexhaustible energy from ordinary water. This no person can doubt. The more modest goal of Prometheus itself is to bring fusion power to our lab. Although over the past months we have been testing the machine, we have yet to connect it CFRC’s grid. On the occasion of Prometheus’ commissioning, it seems fitting to make the experiment."

Machuzak fumed. The great goal of ignition—a self-sustaining reaction—yes, that was the dream, but no one knew whether ASSET—or ITER—would ever achieve it. One thing was certain: with the machine in its thrown-together condition they weren’t going to get it today.

Let us now dim the lights and wait for Prometheus to turn them back on. The room went dark, leaving the onlookers bathed only in the star-glow of panel lights and monitors. With a nod Krieg-Zuber signals the COE to commence. Chief Operating Engineer Larissa Davidson sits before the controls; she has trained two years for this moment. All safety interlocks are engaged; around the room the scientists take their stations at a few of the hundreds of terminals, one poised to measure temperature, another pressure…x-rays, optical radiation…dirt.

Two minutes, forty seconds, announces the electronic voice and the countdown has begun. Instinctively, everyone turns toward the steady tick of the clock, but then they catch sight of the flashing digits on the big screen. The collective breathing slows.

Magnet temperature, four-point-two degrees absolute, Larissa says over the intercom. Poloidal field magnetization commencing.

Even at that point the whine is audible, not the protest of the flywheels spinning down as the tokamak saps their energy, but a screeching from the machine itself caused by rapidly changing magnetic fields.

Ninety seconds…eighty-nine…eighty-eight…

Today, Cyrus announces, they are counting down toward full power; launch will be at t-minus-sixty. It makes sense. No roar of engines will greet them, no majestic liftoff of a giant spacecraft. Only a blaze of light, a miniature sun created in their midst, then…

Prepare for DT injection and current ramp-up.

Sixty-three…sixty-two…sixty-one…

Liftoff. A crack resounds throughout the room as the screen monitoring the interior of the tokamak flashes red. The guests are transfixed by that flickering, incandescent glow, displayed for all in the gallery to see. At the same time the loudspeakers pipe in a great metallic wrenching as Prometheus groans under the immense magnetic forces attempting to tear it apart. From the audience there is oohing and aahing, but the scientists remain silent. Liftoff is not what counts in this game. How hot. How long. How much power…

Beginning current ramp-up.

Nothing has fucked up. Ten seconds into the pulse and they’re still sailing. Slava turns to Nathaniel with astonishment written across his face. "Bozhe moi, he crosses himself, the thing may work."

My God, Nathaniel thinks, he may be right. As images fly to the corners of the world, he finds caution slipping away.

Tap thirteen. One hundred fifty thousand volts. Rf heating, lower-hybrid drives engaged. Larissa has begun walking the taps of the high-voltage transformers, engaging some of the auxiliary heating systems. Thirty seconds to full-power injection.

Tap fourteen. Three hundred thousand volts.

Twenty-five seconds…twenty-four…

Machuzak and Archangelsky both glance over to the display wall. Five million amps of electric current are circulating in that doughnut, some fusion reactions have begun. The main beams are on the ready, prepared to bring the process to fruition. God, let us not disrupt. The two men find themselves clenching their fists and urging Prometheus on. Theresa on the captain’s deck holds her hands to her face as she watches the digits mutate. Preparing for full-power injection at tap fifteen.

Ten, nine, eight…

Go! Go! Krieg-Zuber shouts while Leonard beams.

The audience is counting: Six, five, four…

Go! Nathaniel and Slava shout with the others. Go! the cry fills the air.

…zero.

Zuber jumps and punches the air in triumph. Yes! he cries, slapping Leonard on the back. The room explodes in wild, hysterical applause. But what’s this? Ten, twenty seconds go by and Nathaniel sees no lights, fails to hear the speakers broadcasting the roar of the turbine. From the corner of his eye he glances at the display wall and sees zero helium pressure in the heat exchanger. An operator’s finger points at a terminal and a flashing red bar. Indeed, anticipation has overtaken reality and everyone is cheering the emperor’s new clothes. Nathaniel and Slava finally nod to each other; something has indeed fucked up. As a minute passes without a spark or flicker, the applause turns to tweeting and the world is alerted that all is not right.

Ladies and gentlemen, Cy at last announces, there appears to be a difficulty. We will track it down presently. He turns and snarls something to Andy Lipman, one of the technicians, who runs out of the room. Machuzak sighs.

* * * *

Despite Leonard’s halting attempts to distract the crowd by explaining tokamak operations, before long everyone was back to video games. A half hour crept by. Finally Lipman reappeared and whispered something to the deputy director. As Rasmussen made another apology for the delay, assuring everyone the problem will be solved within minutes, Krieg-Zuber angrily stormed out of the room.

They forget first pancake is always flat, quipped Slava. Now Cy will prove he can do more than talk on phone. Nathaniel nodded. Cyrus the Great intended to show everyone that he could fix tokamaks.

What do you think’s wrong, Mac? asked Theresa, stepping down from the captain’s deck. You must be gloating, ‘I told you so.’

Hardly. Theresa, probably close to a million things needed to go right for this to work. I’m sorry, it must be embarrassing for you.

She shook her head and touched Nathaniel’s arm. We’ll survive.

Lipman seemed to be hesitating and Machuzak managed to catch him before he left the control room. What’s up, Lip?

The tech answered with a shrug of resignation. Dunno, Mac. Got a level-three fault in the neutral-beam system. Something down in the surge rooms. Maybe an old switch… You know how it is. With another shrug he ran out after Krieg-Zuber.

I wish we had a computer from 2020, even, one of the diagnostic team was growling as he pounded on a terminal.

Another fifteen minutes crawled by as the caterers began distributing refreshments and the visitors complained that ASSET operations lacked a music track. Suddenly an agitated Lipman reappeared and whispered to Leonard, who went wide-eyed and attempted to rise, only to collapse back onto his chair. Only after a few minutes did he manage to grope for the microphone, drop it, then, when his wife handed it to him, find enough composure to speak.

Ladies and gentlemen, he said slowly, there a…appears to have been— he stopped—an accident. The…ceremony is canceled.

As everyone rushed to the captain’s deck, Lipman waved Slava and Machuzak after him. Followed by others, they sprinted three hundred meters through the big tunnel to the neutral-beam power system. The safety door to one of the surge rooms was open. There on the floor amidst the maze of electrical equipment lay Cyrus Krieg-Zuber. Nathaniel guessed that he had accidentally hit one of the capacitor terminals, which sent his heart into fibrillation.

A technician straddled Zuber and was pumping his chest while another administered mouth-to-mouth through a pocket mask. Machuzak snapped on a mask as he and Slava relieved the other pair. The belated wail of the lab emergency medical team siren grew higher, louder.

I’ve never seen The Terminator so angry, Lipman was saying. When he opened the door the safety interlock should’ve discharged the capacitors. He must have slipped or something. Jesus…

Do you mean this stuff is still hot? Machuzak asked in disbelief, rows of high-voltage capacitor terminals not a foot from his head. What the hell!

Interlock failed? asked Slava, staring at Nathaniel for a moment before resuming mouth-to-mouth.

Screaming like a madman but he didn’t jump it, answered one of the techs. We even racked out the breakers.

You did? This was impossible.

In that breath the EMT arrived and took over with its defibrillator. Nathaniel got up, feeling dizzy and nauseated, and stumbled out of the surge room. To the incessant ring of phones, he made his way to his office and fell back into his chair. Mail was coming through.

One

Forty-five minutes after they’d left an inert deputy director in the surge room, Slava Archangelsky, hair bedraggled, eyes bloodshot, staggered through the labyrinthine corridors of CFRC toward Nathaniel’s office to see that half the lab’s thousand employees had beaten him there. No thought confusing his mind, he shoved his way to the door to find his colleague inside under journalistic siege.

Do you know what happened, Dr. Machuzak? N…no I don’t. Are you sure? Cyrus Krieg-Zuber seems to have been electrocuted in an accident. Do you know what caused it? Current.

Would you care to—

—speculate? No!

Resembling the mad Rasputin more than ever, Archangelsky grabbed the nearest reporter by the shoulders and herded him toward the door, just as that one huffed, Jesus, what a fool.

Go to hell, Slava said and booted him out. God, he needed a cigarette. What kind of country is this where it’s illegal to kill yourself? Riffling his pockets, he shoved a tattered stick into his mouth, took it out when he saw Machuzak painfully staring into the reporter’s wake. Slava cast at him a sympathetic glance. Like most Americans, Nat lacked a ready wit, but no scientist deserves to be called a fool because he says he doesn’t know. I don’t know is honest, more honorable by far than saying you know when you don’t. In an instantaneous world, Nat’s problem was that he was an old-fashioned romantic. He remembered that PhD meant doctor of philosophy. Forget it, Slava tried to beat it into his brain often enough. We are not natural philosophers pondering workings of the universe. We are here to build the tokamak. Save world from itself.

Now, having been sucked dry by parasites, Mac to most, Nat to Archangelsky, sat before the Russian with hazel eyes staring blankly ahead. You look like hell, Archangelsky offered, puffing on the unlit cigarette. Machuzak usually came across as young for his years. Wrinkles hadn’t intruded much yet, but tonight his face was all creases. You need a drink?

How could this have happened? was the physicist’s only reply.

"Stupidity. Idiot plays with high-voltage system he doesn’t know shit about. What do you expect? He saves Enterprise? Look, you predicted it yourself. Nobody listened."

Did the local emergency people show up? Nathaniel asked dumbly, still frozen.

"Da, everybody. The devil would break a leg over there."

Finally Nat exhaled and he scratched his gray-streaked temples as he did when stumped. So, friend, we’ve just had the most public accident in fusion history. Christ, half the world was watching. It’s already all over…everything. With one motion he brushed aside a mop of his lazy brown hair and waved across the images leaping from the monitor. Protestors, board members, reporters… We couldn’t have set it up better if we tried.

Seated on the edge of the desk, Archangelsky nodded heavily and they fell silent. He liked Nat because, unlike most CFRC grunts, he thought beyond physics. He didn’t need to say that today’s events had put the entire program in jeopardy; that was written all over his face. Pravda, Nat was a little slow. Slava briefly recollected their first meeting, six years ago when he’d come to CFRC after a previous existence at Dubna and the Kurchatov Institute. Maybe he was testing his new colleague—after all, the tokamak was invented by Andrei Sakharov himself. These Americans? Within a minute, the two