Explorer, Publisher, husband of Amelia Earhart. Although he was a publisher, explorer and author in his own right, G.P., as he was called, was probably best known as the husband of Amelia Earhart. He directed the flight that launched Earhart to fame as the first woman to span the Atlantic by air in April 1928, as well as her first solo transatlantic flight and other ground- breaking flights. Their marriage (his second of four marriages) ended when the aviatrix disappeared during her ill-fated attempt to fly around the world in 1937. Born into the family of publishing house G. P. Putnam's Sons, he was responsible for the publication of Charles Lindberg's autobiography "We." Putnam authored several books, including "Soaring Wings," a biography of his daring wife; "Wide Margins," an autobiography; "Smiting the Rock," "In the Oregon Country," "Hot Oil," "Death Valley and Its Country," and "Hickory Shirt." He served in both World Wars as a lieutenant of field artillery in World War I and as a major of intelligence in World War II. Perhaps his greatest personal achievement came from two expeditions he led to the Arctic in the mid-1920's. He died at Trona Hospital following four weeks' treatment for euremic poisoning.

Bio by: Shiver Name: George P Putnam

Birth Place: Rey, New York

Birth Date: 7 Sep 1887

Service Start Date: 21 Sep 1918

Service Start Place: Deschutes Co Oreg

Service Start Age: 31

RYE CHRONICLE

Copy and Search for: "George P. Putnam" Rye NY Chronicle - When searching, consider taking out middle initial, this can improve results in some cases.

(PLEASE READ THESE IMPORTANT INSTRUCTIONS BEFORE SEARCHING FULTON HISTORY FOR NEWPAPER ARTICLES)

Previous Search Results for this veteran may be listed below

Name: George Palmer Putnam

Birth Date: 7 Sep 1887

Birth Place: Rye, Westchester County, New York, United States of America

Death Date: 4 Jan 1950

Death Place: Trona, San Bernardino County, California, United States of America

Cemetery: Chapel Of The Pines Crematory

Burial or Cremation Place: Los Angeles, Los Angeles County, California, United States of America

Has Bio?: Y