« I am asking you to stop ! “Marseillais former Prime Minister Edouard Balladur? Hard to imagine! But yes in part, it's here at no 227 Boulevard Chave where he lived in his youth while attending the Thiers High School and the University of Aix-Marseille.

Édouard Balladur was born on May 2, 1929 in Izmir (Türkiye). A member of the main successive Gaullist parties, he was Prime Minister from March 29, 1993 to May 17, 1995. A State Councillor, in 1964 he joined the cabinet of Georges Pompidou, then head of government, and took part in the Grenelle agreements within the framework of May 68. Became Secretary General of the Presidency of the Republic in 1973, he was particularly influential due to the illness of President Pompidou, who died the following year. In 1986, he was elected deputy for Paris and immediately appointed Minister of State, Minister of the Economy, Finance and Privatization in the first cohabitation government, led by Jacques Chirac until 1988. In a context world of conservative revolution, it leads a liberal policy, launching a program of privatizations after five years of socialist power. François Mitterrand appointed him Prime Minister following the large victory of the Union for France (RPR-UDF) in the legislative elections of 1993, inaugurating the second cohabitation. Candidate for the presidential election of 1995, supported by the UDF and part of the RPR, for which Jacques Chirac is also running, Édouard Balladur is a long time favorite, before finishing in third position with 18,58% of the vote. Subsequently questioned for suspicions of occult financing of his campaign, he was acquitted by the Court of Justice of the Republic in 2021. He regained his seat as a deputy in 1995, plans to lead the right in the municipal elections from 2001 to Paris and chaired the Foreign Affairs Committee of the National Assembly from 2002 to 2007.

Close to Nicolas Sarkozy, he led the work of two advisory committees under the chairmanship of the latter (on institutions and then local authorities) and retired from public life in 2009, while remaining an informal adviser to many right-wing personalities. .

At the origins of this Smyrniote family of Armenian origin is André Balladur, who, in 1737, in the company of a few relatives, had fled his native Nakhitchevan. Converted by Dominican missionaries, the Balladurs had become Roman Catholics there, and the periodic persecutions of the Persians, who then disputed Nakhitchevan with the Ottoman Empire, explain the arrival of the family in Smyrna (currently called İzmir), where no longer lists the foreign European communities, which most often prosper in trade. Decisive turning point in the family, in 1795, by edict of Sultan Selim III, the Balladur, who belong to the group of "Persians", have the rank of "Frankish subjects". The practice was then common: the sultan, according to his goodwill, granted Western embassies a certain number of “capitulations” (“bérats” or “barats”). Trading with Livorno, Manchester, but above all Marseille, the Balladurs were "frank barataires", which facilitated their request for French naturalization in 1926. After the Armenian genocide, the action of the new republican government led to the definitive departure of more than million expelled Ottoman Greeks. In 1922, a fire ravaged the Christian quarters of Smyrna (until then preserved from massacres), following the defeat of the Greek army at the end of the Greco-Turkish war, and the Greeks of the city were drowned by thousands trying to flee by sea. During this period, the Balladur family continues to evolve. Through successive marriages, she allied herself with other Armenians, such as the Issaverdens, with Italians, rather Venetians, but even more so with French people and in particular Provençals. Youngest son of Pierre Balladur, banker, director of the Ottoman Bank branch in Smyrna, and Émilie Latour, Édouard Balladur was born in İzmir, Turkey, on May 2, 1929. Naturalized French in 1932, his parents took refuge in France, in Marseilles, in 1935, with their six children, in an apartment located at 227 boulevard Chave. All their close cousins ​​follow them.

At the age of six, Édouard Balladur entered the school of the Brothers of the Christian Schools, Jean-Baptiste de La Salle school, then, in 1942, at the Thiers high school. He will remain very attached to Provence, where many of his family roots can be found. He follows a first year of law degree at the University of Aix-Marseille, and obtains the mention "Pretty good", which allows him to be automatically admitted to the Institute of Political Studies of Paris ... and end with his Marseille period.

Read more about his journey