Lída Baarová was a Czech actress who for two years was the mistress of the Nazi propaganda minister of Germany, Joseph Goebbels.

Lída Baarová was born on September 7, 1914, in Prague, Prague, Czechia. Her birth geographical coordinates are 50° 5’ 17” North latitude and 14° 25’ 15” East longitude. Lída Baarová passed away at the age of 86 in 2000.

Astrologically, Lída Baarová falls under the Sun sign of Virgo, with Scorpio as her Ascendant, Aries as her Moon sign, and Taurus as her Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Virgo Moon Aries Mercury Virgo Venus Scorpio Mars Libra Jupiter Aquarius Saturn Cancer Uranus Aquarius Neptune Cancer Pluto Cancer Ceres Aquarius Chiron Pisces Eros Aries Hygiea Cancer Juno Leo Pallas Capricorn Vesta Gemini Ascendant Scorpio Black Moon Lilith Taurus Midheaven Virgo North Node Pisces South Node Virgo Part of Fortune Gemini Vertex Cancer

Sunin Virgo13° 58’ 23”

The Sun in Virgo in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for an assistant or researcher. You avoid the spotlight but love being helpful. […] Read more »

Moonin Aries15° 27’ 27”

The Moon in Aries in a Natal Chart makes you determined and focused. You are intense and can be passionate and optimistic. Your moods drive […] Read more »

Mercuryin Virgo20° 55’ 38”

Virgo Mercury in the Natal Chart makes you rational and logical. You are thoughtful and intelligent. You use your intellectual gifts primarily and often ignore […] Read more »

Venusin Scorpio0° 0’ 30”

Scorpio Venus in the Natal Chart makes you loving and sensitive. You are creative and relate to your loved ones emotionally and intellectually. You are […] Read more »

Marsin Libra15° 22’ 15”

Libra Mars in the Natal Chart makes you long for balance. You are motivated to express your unique fantasies and find the passion and motivation […] Read more »

Jupiterin Aquarius14° 4’ 4”

Aquarius Jupiter in the Natal Chart is less individualistic than the closer planets. Given Jupiter’s slow transit, the planet’s journey through Aquarius takes over a […] Read more »

Saturnin Cancer1° 2’ 27”

Cancer Saturn in the Natal Chart is a generational placement associated with a social mission to nurture others and create comfort and stability. You use […] Read more »

Uranusin Aquarius8° 20’ 13”

Aquarius Uranus in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation born to bring technological breakthroughs and social change. You are part of […] Read more »

Neptunein Cancer29° 35’ 32”

Cancer Neptune in the Natal Chart is a generational placement that impacts people born within fourteen years. You are born to help society awaken to […] Read more »

Plutoin Cancer2° 6’ 22”

Pluto in Cancer in the Natal Chart indicates a generation with powerful intuition and desires. You are part of a social group obsessed with re-evaluating […] Read more »

Ceresin Aquarius20° 4’ 52”

Aquarius Ceres in the Natal Chart indicates a generation dedicated to innovation and dramatic change. Your generation is comfortable being individualistic and independent. Your generation […] Read more »

Chironin Pisces16° 44’ 5”

Chiron in Pisces is an ideal placement for a generation committed to healing. You are passionate about showing others you care. You can be self-sacrificing […] Read more »

Erosin Aries10° 15’ 1”

Eros in Aries in the Natal Chart makes you passionate and strong. You are excitable and have a spicey and adventurous sex life. You are […] Read more »

Hygieain Cancer18° 54’ 38”

Hygiea in Cancer in the Natal Chart indicates a desire to help others fulfill their potential. You are compassionate and devoted to encouraging your family […] Read more »

Junoin Leo14° 1’ 58”

Juno in Leo in the Natal Chart indicates you are passionate about marriage and protecting your home. You are eager to pursue your love interests […] Read more »

Pallasin Capricorn19° 37’ 4”

Pallas in Capricorn in the Natal Chart gives you a broad perspective and gift for organizing plans to improve your business and career. You can […] Read more »

Vestain Gemini17° 33’ 52”

Vesta in Gemini in the Natal Chart makes you talkative and insightful. You are outgoing and can be playful. You find fulfillment by exercising your […] Read more »

Ascendantin Scorpio23° 37’ 47”

Scorpio Ascendant makes you eager to use your image and appearance to convey authority and power. You are determined to show your influence by speaking […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Taurus1° 40’ 49”

Taurus Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you daring and sincere. You are authentic and can be true to yourself, even when your […] Read more »

Midheavenin Virgo13° 49’ 30”

Virgo Midheaven in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for service and careers related to health and science. You are diligent and cautious in […] Read more »

North Nodein Pisces5° 11’ 44”

Pisces North Node in the Natal Chart makes you more open to your spiritual mission. You are influenced by your moods and can be prone […] Read more »

South Nodein Virgo5° 11’ 44”

Virgo South Node in the Natal Chart indicates you are a humble and comforting person. You have a grounded personality and can be gentle and […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Gemini25° 6’ 52”

Part of Fortune in Gemini in the Natal Chart makes you intellectual and talkative. You are chatty and can be friendly and outgoing. You thrive […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon Fifth House Mercury Tenth House Venus Eleventh House Mars Eleventh House Jupiter Third House Saturn Eighth House Uranus Third House Neptune Eighth House Pluto Eighth House Ceres Third House Chiron Fourth House Eros Fourth House Hygiea Eighth House Juno Ninth House Pallas Second House Vesta Seventh House Black Moon Lilith Fifth House North Node Third House South Node Ninth House Part of Fortune Eighth House Vertex Eighth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 12 major aspects, alongside 10 minor aspects, as well as 5 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Sun Quincunx Jupiter Moon Opposite Mars Venus Square Neptune Sun Quincunx Moon Moon Sextile Jupiter Venus Trine Saturn Mars Trine Jupiter Saturn Conjunct Pluto Venus Trine Pluto Jupiter Conjunct Uranus Sun Conjunct Mercury Mars Trine Uranus

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Lída Baarová’s life journey.

Sun Quincunx Jupiterorb: 0°

The Sun quincunx Jupiter in the Natal Chart gives you an optimistic view of your importance. You may assume too much authority and struggle to […] Read more »

Moon Opposite Marsorb: 0°

The Moon opposite Mars in a Natal Chart can indicate that a person is passionate, impulsive, and volatile. Their emotions can get out of control […] Read more »

Sun Quincunx Moonorb: 1°

The Sun quincunx Moon pulls you in conflicting directions. In the Natal Chart, this aspect can challenge you to be true to yourself. You have […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Jupiterorb: 1°

When the Moon is sextile Jupiter in a Natal Chart, this typically makes a person more generous and optimistic. The way they express their feelings […] Read more »

Saturn Conjunct Plutoorb: 1°

Saturn conjunct Pluto in a Natal Chart typically indicates that a person has faced, or will face, some intense hardships. These might be experienced while […] Read more »

Jupiter Conjunct Uranusorb: 6°

Jupiter conjunct Uranus in a chart typically indicates that someone craves freedom and needs to try new things constantly. There are both positive and negative […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Mercuryorb: 7°

Sun conjunct Mercury in the Natal Chart can make you bright, playful, and talkative. Your intellectual gifts are among your best characteristics. You can be […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Sun Conjunct Midheaven Jupiter Opposite Juno Jupiter Quincunx Midheaven Pluto Sextile Black Moon Lilith Moon Trine Juno Mercury Quincunx Ceres Mercury Trine Pallas Mars Sextile Juno Saturn Sextile Black Moon Lilith Venus Opposite Black Moon Lilith

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Lída Baarová’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Sun Conjunct Midheavenorb: 0°

The Sun conjunct Midheaven makes you outspoken and authentic. You openly share your talents and align your unique abilities with your public status. You are […] Read more »

Jupiter Quincunx Midheavenorb: 0°

Jupiter quincunx the Midheaven in a chart can energize a person and give them a strong desire to succeed. However, it can also lead to […] Read more »

Mercury Quincunx Ceresorb: 1°

Mercury quincunx Ceres in a chart creates conflict between someone’s rational mind and their inner desire to nurture and care for others and themselves. It […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Ceres Quincunx Hygiea Chiron Square Vesta Hygiea Opposite Pallas North Node Trine Vertex South Node Sextile Vertex

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Lída Baarová’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.