Kyles of the world — We Need Your Help!

We are asking you to once again answer the Call of the Kyle to break the GUINNESS WORLD RECORDS ™ for the largest same-name, first name only gathering at the Kyle Fair A Tex-Travaganza on Saturday, May 18 at Lake Kyle Park.

The Gathering of the Kyles will take place at 1 p.m. on Saturday, May 18. This year, we encourage all Kyles to pre-register for the Gathering of the Kyles. Kyles can pre-register online at KyleFair.com or in-person at the Kyle Fair A Tex-Travaganza during the following times:

Friday, May 17 from 4 p.m. - 8 p.m.

Saturday, May 18 from 8 a.m. - 12:30 p.m.

All Kyles that participate will be given a free Kyle Fair T-shirt while supplies last. Individuals of all ages are welcome to participate but proof of identification is required. For acceptable forms of identification see the ‘Kyle Verification Process’ section.

There is no cost to participate. Entry to the Kyle Fair is free, including attendance to live music performances. Learn more at KyleFair.com.

Schedule of Events:

Friday, May 17

4-8 p.m. - pre-registration check-in and on-site registration

Saturday, May 18

8 a.m. - 12:30 p.m. - Preregistration Check-in and On-Site Registration

11:30-12:45 p.m. - Kyle Arena Gates Open

Each Kyle will be given a bib and number during check-in/registration. Only Kyles that have checked in or registered on-site and are wearing a numbered bib will be allowed to enter the arena.

Kyles are required to either wear that bib or have it with them in the arena during the official record-breaking attempt.

12:45 p.m. - All Kyles must be in place

The numbered bibs Kyles are given upon registration/check-in will correspond with the group of 50 each Kyle will be assigned to inside the arena. Once inside the arena, Kyles are asked to go to the numbered pole their bib corresponds with.

1 p.m. - GUINNESS WORLD RECORDS ™ Official Attempt

Parking & Shuttle Information:

Free Parking and Shuttles with ADA accessibility will be available at Steeplechase Park, Lehman High School and Tobias Elementary. Limited ADA parking is available at Lake Kyle Park, 700 Lehman Road, as well as all shuttle locations. Shuttles services will begin on Friday, May 17 at 6 p.m. On Saturday, May 18 and Sunday, May 19 the free shuttles will run continuously during festival hours.

The City of Kyle also has a partnership with Uber – it is called Uber Kyle $3.14 and provides discounted rides to anywhere in Kyle that begins and ends within City limits. For more information on how to use the program, visit CityofKyle.com/UberKyle314.

For more information, CLICK HERE for the Kyle Fair Traffic Alert.

Kyle Qualifications

To qualify to be a part of the GUINNESS WORLD RECORDS ™ attempt, all participants must have the name ‘Kyle’ - spelled that way. Iterations of ‘Kyle’ such as Kyler, Kiel, or Kylee, are not accepted. Middle and last names will not be accepted.

All participants in the Gathering of the Kyles GUINNESS WORLD RECORDS ™ attempt must be positioned simultaneously and remain so for a minimum of 5 minutes.

For more information, check out the Gathering of the Kyles Participation Fact Sheet.

Kyle Verification Process

To qualify to be part of the GUINNESS WORLD RECORDS ™ attempt, all participants must have the first name ‘Kyle’ - spelled that way. Iterations of ‘Kyle’ such as Kyler, Kyal, or Kylee will not be accepted. Middle names, last names, and nicknames will not be accepted.

Kyles of all ages are welcome to attend but proof of identification is required. Kyles must show proof of first name during registration/check-in through one of the following ways (Legible digital and photocopies of these documents are allowed):

Valid photo driver’s license

Birth Certificate

Valid passport

Valid National ID cards

Marriage certificate clearly displaying a current first name

Official documents proving a change of name

Information for Kyle’s traveling from out of town:

The City of Kyle is along the I-35 corridor, situated between major metropolitan areas, Austin and San Antonio with airports, the Austin Bergstrom International Airport and the San Antonio International Airport.

For lodging, the City of Kyle has several hotels available as well as VRBO and AirBNB.

Hotels & RV Parks:

Quality Inn & Suites

Hampton Inn Hotel

Comfort Suites Kyle

La Quinta Inn & Suites

Old El Camino RV Resort

The City of Kyle is located near Buda, Tx and San Marcos, TX, both cities are about 15 minutes away from Kyle, TX and also have hotel accommodations.

History of the Gathering of the Kyles

This will be the City of Kyle’s fifth attempt at breaking the record. In 2023, Kyles from all over the country answered the call, making it our largest gathering yet with 1,490 Kyles in attendance.

Let’s make 2024 the Year of the Kyle and beat the current GUINNESS WORLD RECORDS ™ set by Ivans on July 30, 2017 in the city of Kupreski Kosci in Bosnia and Herzegovina with a total of 2,325.

For more information, check out the Gathering of the Kyles Participation Fact Sheet.