SAN FRANCISCO--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Pervasive Software® Inc. (NASDAQ: PVSW), a global leader in cloud-based and on-premises data innovation, today announced Pervasive Galaxy™ to fill a market void, providing simplification, ease of access and a public marketplace for data integration products, solutions, connectors, plug-ins and templates. Galaxy serves as a community platform for data integration ecosystems to enable simple, profitable convergence between business-to-business integration producers and consumers through faster market and social connection.

Pervasive Galaxy provides a combination of service marketplace, revenue sharing, integration store and community chat. Galaxy will allow users to request, build, buy, preview, and rate items, which might include data integration solutions, connectors, plug-ins or templates. In addition, users can post projects and participate in community project builds.

Ideal for independent software vendors (ISVs) and SaaS vendors, systems integrators, and end users, Pervasive Galaxy simplifies the vendor evaluation process, and speeds time to finding a data integration solution while containing costs through business-to-consumer reverse auctions, marketplaces and crowdsourced contests:

ISVs and SaaS partners can maximize their ability to on-ramp and integrate applications for new and existing customers

Systems integrator partners can maximize reach to new and existing customers and create new paths to monetization of integration intellectual property

End users can save money by sharing costs with other users for items within the integration store, and get needs met simply and quickly

“Partners seek ecosystems to share, deliver, and monetize innovation to customers,” said Ray Wang, principal analyst and CEO at Constellation Research Group. “As partners and vendors improve how they collaborate with customers, these ecosystems will provide demand driven force multipliers in delivering last mile solutions. Good gamification models can improve engagement and participation in the enterprise for all stakeholders (i.e., employees, customers, partners, and suppliers).”

“Nearly everyone needs data integration, but until now they haven’t had a simple way to express their needs and easily connect with the experts who can meet those needs,” said Lance Speck, senior director for Pervasive Integration. “With a strong portfolio of offerings from providers worldwide for any data management challenge, Pervasive has the solid infrastructure, technology, and partner base to make this a successful and vibrant integration ecosystem.”

“We are very excited to see how Pervasive Galaxy will help us collaborate with new customers who have data integration requirements. We think Galaxy will create a streamlined marketplace for suppliers of data integration solutions like us, and businesses who need specific connectors between disparate systems,” said Dave Weiss, director of data integration at Keystone Business Services. “It’s an opportunity to bring buyers and sellers of these services together in a mutually beneficial and efficient integration ecosystem.”

About Pervasive Software

Pervasive is a global data innovation leader, delivering software to manage, integrate and analyze data, in the cloud or on-premises, throughout the entire data lifecycle. Pervasive products deliver value to tens of thousands of customers worldwide, often embedded within partners’ software, with breakthrough performance, flexibility, reliability and return on investment. For additional information, go to www.pervasive.com.

Cautionary Statement

This release may contain forward-looking statements, which are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. All forward-looking statements included in this document are based upon information available to Pervasive as of the date hereof, and Pervasive assumes no obligation to update any such forward-looking statement.