AUSTIN, Texas--(BUSINESS WIRE)-- Pervasive Software® Inc. (Nasdaq: PVSW) , a global leader in cloud-based and on-premises data innovation, today announced it will participate inActuateOne Live! 2012, taking place November 8 at Hotel Nikko San Francisco in San Francisco, and November 14 at the Crowne Plaza Times Square in New York.

The presentation, titled: "Using Dashboards and Scorecards with Big Data" will discuss how organizations can turn big data into meaningful information with ActuateOne for performance analytics and Pervasive RushAnalytics. In San Francisco at 1:15 - 2:45 p.m. PST, David Inbar, senior director of business development and strategy of Pervasive Big Data and Analytics, will co-present with Mark Gamble, director of technical product marketing, and Ed Yu, project manager at Actuate. In New York at 1:15 - 2:45 p.m. EST, Mike Hoskins, Pervasive CTO and general manager of Pervasive Big Data and Analytics, will co-present with Gamble and Yu.

More information on ActuateOne Live! 2012 can be found at http://www.actuate.com/microsite/acdsf/overview/ and http://www.actuate.com/microsite/acdny/overview/.

About Pervasive Software

Pervasive is a global data innovation leader, delivering software to manage, integrate and analyze data, in the cloud or on-premises, throughout the entire data lifecycle. Pervasive products deliver value to tens of thousands of customers worldwide, often embedded within partners' software, with breakthrough performance, flexibility, reliability and return on investment. For additional information, go to www.pervasive.com.

Cautionary Statement

This release may contain forward-looking statements, which are made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. All forward-looking statements included in this document are based upon information available to Pervasive as of the date hereof, and Pervasive assumes no obligation to update any such forward-looking statement.

All Pervasive brand and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of Pervasive Software Inc. in the United States and other countries. All other marks are the property of their respective owners.

Pervasive Software

Lacy LaBorde, 512-231-6507

Lacy.LaBorde@pervasive.com

KEYWORDS: United States North America Texas

INDUSTRY KEYWORDS:

The article Pervasive Software Presents at ActuateOne Live! 2012 originally appeared on Fool.com.

Try any of our Foolish newsletter services free for 30 days. We Fools may not all hold the same opinions, but we all believe that considering a diverse range of insights makes us better investors. The Motley Fool has a disclosure policy.