This resource provides information regarding the data protection strategy for a CubeSat mission. Protecting ... the transmission of data over amateur frequency bands is essential to mission success.

This resource provides an example of the FCC's Experimental Radio Station Construction Permit and License ... completed by ASU. This license permits the ASU licensee to use and operate the radio transmitting facilities detailed in the FCC filing.

This resource provides an overview of the legal and regulatory issues related to small satellite missions ... and provides useful examples and processes on how to handle them. Section 4 of the document outlines launch services, space insurance, and in-orbit legal and policy issues.

This FCC Fact Sheet details the proposed change to the Commission's part 25 satellite licensing rules ... to create an alternative application process for small satellites. Previously, smallsats were subject to fees and regulatory requirements that were originally developed for expensive, long-lived missions. The requirements for the types of smallsats that would be affected by this change are detailed on the first page of this document.

An example form sent to the International Amateur Radio Union (IARU) requesting transmission frequencies ... for uplink and downlink of a CubeSat mission.

An example response from the International Amateur Radio Union (IARU) coordinating the frequencies for ... uplink and downlink for a CubeSat mission.

An example application sent to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for a 3U CubeSat ... mission remote sensing license.

An example waiver sent to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) requesting earth ... imaging permission for the Phoenix CubeSat. The waiver includes the questions and ASU's answers to obtain earth imaging permission for the cubesat mission.

This document provides advice and insight into frequency licensing from ASU's Phoenix CubeSat team. This ... includes significant detail and specific instructions for navigating the frequency licensing process with the FCC.

This document provides detailed policy information on smallsat compliance. It describes the separation ... of responsibilities between the launch provider and the satellite owner, and it provides the specific policies for various agencies and organizations such as the DoD, FCC, FAA, NASA, etc.

This website holds a variety of useful resources including forms, guides, specs, and examples pertaining ... to NOAA and the United States Department of Commerce. A license application example is provided outlining the information required to obtain a license to operate a remote sensing space system.

This NASA recommended document provides useful guidance on obtaining a license from the Federal Communications ... Commission (FCC). It answers important questions such as; who is eligible, how to apply for a license, and what information is required - including information related to orbital debris mitigation.

This introductory document outlines the basic concepts and processes involved in developing cubesats. ... Chapter 5, titled "Licensing Procedures", specifically discusses which licenses are necessary to obtain for cubesat missions. There are multiple agencies that require specific licenses and this document is a good starting point for an overview on obtaining the correct licenses.

"The Debris Assessment Software (DAS) utility provides data that can verify compliance of a spacecraft, ... upper stage, and/or payload with NASA's requirements for limiting debris generation, spacecraft vulnerability, postmission lifetime, and entry safety. Successful verification of a design in DAS demonstrates compliance with NASA debris mitigation requirements."

In Chapter 3, this handbook provides useful information on the responsibilities of organizations launching ... space missions. Chapters 1 and 2 provide valuable political, legal, policy, and regulatory context regarding these responsibilities. The content in Chapter 3 on licensing, operations, and end-of-life are particularly useful for smallsat developers.

"This guidebook provides basic information to help commercial space organizations, especially emerging ... entrepreneurial firms, considering business in the international market. It is intended to serve as a starting point in the preparation for the export control process." Given the international nature of the smallsat industry and the often complex, expensive, and time consuming nature of export control processes, this guidebook is a valuable resource for any US-based smallsat developer or commercial provider of smallsat products.

"This paper gives an overview of the licensing and authorization regimes in the United States as they ... apply to small satellite operations." The licensing requirements imposed on small satellite developers are constantly changing and this paper provides a thorough but concise description of them as of 2020.

When exporting a satellite outside of the U.S., there are many rules and regulations to follow prior ... to shipping. This resource details the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR) and Export Administration Regulations (EAR) procedures that must be followed to be in accordance with U.S. export regulations.

In this paper, Blake summarizes the primary Governmental regulations and licenses that need to be obtained ... by most satellite developers. From FCC registrations to launch and export licenses required for imaging satellites, this resource provides links and guidance on the processes for transporting and launching satellites.