Phoenix Budget & Eqipment Breakdown

Two of each component (an engineering model and a flight unit) was purchased to facilitate development and reduce risk. As this was ASU's first student-led CubeSat project, funds also had to be allocated to developing a dedicated lab space for CubeSats. The link below details all components and equipment used to support the design, integration, and tesitng of Phoenix. It also details the cost breakdown of our hardware as well as lead times. We hope this spreadsheet can be a useful resource for other teams looking to understand how a budget can be allocated for projects like Phoenix, as well as what resources one may need to facilitate prototyping & hardware testing phases.

https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1hGPc8BuBvRMRXDrzl2fZDWMx8ayXvWSn...

Phoenix Requirements Verification Matrix

Details all requirements which dictated the deisgn of the Phoenix CubeSat, along with the method for verifying each of them.

The Art of Space Engineering Podcast

The Art of Space Engineering (TASE) is a podcast which aims to explore the details behind how spacecraft and various payloads come together before launch, and the lessons learned along the way. It features a few episodes on the student team's experience in developing the Phoenix CubeSat

#3 - Phoenix Flight Software Part 1: Architecture, Software Development Lessons Learned

#4 - Phoenix Flight Software Part 2: Systems Level Testing, Team Structure

#5. - Phoenix Structures & Integration (Part 1): Structure Design & Integration Lessons Learned

#6. - Phoenix Structures & Integration (Part 2): Flight Integration & Delivery

Episodes of TASE can be found on rss.com, as well as on Spotify, Apple Podcasts, and Google Podcasts.

CubeSat101 Guide

Developed by NASA to provide guidance to teams on various aspects of the CubeSat development process, such as development process, licensing procedures, launch preparation, and more.

The most recent version of the CubeSat101 guidebook, as well as links to other resources for licensing and launch specifications can be found here

Successes, Failures, and Realities of Student CubeSat Development

Covers the team structure, scheduling/task tracking, successes, and failures and unexpected realities of developing the Phoenix CubeSat over the years. If you're interested in learning more about what working on CubeSat projects is like for other teams and what they have done to organize themselves and manage the project while being students, I hope you find this resource helpful.

Sierra Foothills ARC August 2020: Cubesats! The story of the ASU Phoenix Cubesat project

The Sierra Foothills ARC was privileged to have Devon and Trevor Bautista talk about their work on the Phoenix Cubesat as part of the Flight Software team. The two are graduate students at Arizona State University, and were involved with the program from shortly after conception, through deployment from the International Space Station, to operation afterward. In their talk, they review the objectives of the satellite, talk about its construction and their roles and challenges, and detail its current status. The video can be accessed here.

NASA's State of the Art Small Spacecraft Technology

NASA's state of the art report on small satellites goes into depth on the current capabilities of SmallSat/CubeSat hardware for a variety of spacecraft subsystems. It also describes what technology various hardware manufacturers offer and compares their capabilities between each of them. This document will be updated periodically by NASA, but the latest release as of October 2020 can be found here.

This is a really great read if you're just getting interested in SmallSats and want to know more about what the current capabilities and limitations are, or if you are working on hardware trade studies for a mission of your own.

Global Trends in Small Satellites Paper

Want to start a CubeSat project but have no idea what to do it on? If so, you may find this resource helpful. This paper highlights several areas that have been the focus of past mission concepts and describes scenarios of each. The paper covers topics such as optical communications, advances in propulsion, remote sensing, on orbit servicing, etc. It was published in 2017 and can be accessed here.

Jan King Link Budget Spreadsheets

Link budgets were calculated using the spreadsheets developed by Jan King. These were an excellent resource for the student team, and can be found here

The UHF link budget developed for Phoenix can be accessed here

The Phoenix link budget should be reviewed along with this report, which describes how losses are accounted for and why certain values were chosen.

The documents provided below were submitted to or provided by the IARU, FCC, and ITU in an effort to acquire a frequency license for Phoenix. Obtaining a frequency license takes several months. CubeSat teams wishing to obtain a frequency license should start this process as soon as possible. Note: all materials were submitted based on the original spacecraft design, before the S-Band transmitter was descoped.

Section 5 of the CubeSat101 guide offers a detailed explanation of the overall licensing process as well as what materials are required for obtaining a frequency license. Please refer to the FCC and IARU websites for application templates and specific instructions, as these materials may be refined over time. Links to resources can be found in the CubeSat101 guide as well.

The resources included below serve to provide an example on how ground station and spacecraft characteristics were described during the application process, in case it may be of help to other CubeSat teams. The licenses are included as well to demonstrate what teams can expect these documents to look like.

Phoenix SpaceCap File & Frequency Licensing Tips

The following file details the SpaceCap file that was submitted to the FCC to obtain a frequency license for Phoenix, along with explanations on how this was filled out. In addition, it includes tips on securing a frequency license, based on the experience of the student team. To understand the process of securing a freqeuncy license, please refer to Section 5 of the CubeSat101 guide linked above.

The following documents were submitted to NOAA to coordinate a remote sensing license, which allows Phoenix to image the Earth.

These resources serve to provide a reference to other CubeSat teams on how structured our application and on how Phoenix was designed. For teams developing a remote sensing application, please refer to the application templates provided by NOAA for the specific content you must provide, as application requirements may be refined over time.

Arathane 5750 - Conformal Coating Technical Datasheet

Technical datasheet for Arathane 5753, which Includes various technical specs, performance characteristics, and cure properties. If you don't want to dilute the conformal coating mixture, it is recommended that you follow the mix ratios outlined in this datasheet, rather than the above procedure.

Arathane 5750 (Parts A/B) is a common material used in the aerospace industry to prepare electronics boards for the space environment. Parts A and B are mixed together and applied to electronics as a coating to protect components from damage and mitigate outgassing. For tips on using Arathane 5750, have a look through the conformal coating & staking procedure posted above.

Arathane 5753 - Staking Compound Technical Datasheet

Technical datasheet for Arathane 5753, which Includes various technical specs, performance characteristics, and cure properties. If incorporating Cab-O-Sil (a hardening agent) into the staking mixture, it is better to follow the mix ratio outlined in the conformal coating/staking procedure document linked above. Not incorporating Cab-O-Sil will leave you with runny staking compound, which makes applying the compound more difficult.

Arathane 5753 is a common material used in the aerospace industry to solidify electrical and mechanical connections in spacecraft. It is typically applied on screw threads as a secondary locking feature, around wires to hold them together, and as a torque stripe on screw heads. For tips on applying Arathane 5753, please refer to the conformal coating and staking procedure posted above.

Design Reviews are meant to encompass the project after it has passed major milestones.There can be many forms of reviews, and projects normally have several of these throughout their development. Design reviews are formal reviews, moderated by a formal chair. Project teams hold these to prove they are meeting the requirements of the program, which is weighed and agreed upon by the review board

CDR Annoucement Memo

For design reviews, an annoucement memo was sent to all members of the review board to communicate the objective, scope, and structure of the review. In addition the annoucement memo indicates who is part of the review board and shares links for calling into the review the day of. This specific example is taken from the team's CDR. At this point in time, Phoenix was scheduled for a delivery date in Sept. 2018. This was later moved back to provide the team with more time for development.