Most of us have a weakness for a “so bad it’s good” film, something so cringey or badly written that you have no choice but to love it. Or, at least, snicker in wonder that those lines were left in, and that ludicrous plot twist was considered a good idea, and my gosh, why wasn’t that horrible special effect scrubbed entirely?

Could I pick a few silent films that fit the “so bad it’s good” bill? Other than a no-brainer like The Sheik (1921), it’s not an easy question–in my opinion, anyways. Silents tend to come in five flavors: Masterpieces of Cinematic Art, Really Good, Pretty Good, Dull, or Just Plain Awful. The Just Plain Awful also has multiple subcategories (one is “Italian Stage Divas Who Don’t Translate Well to Film”).

But as far as “so bad it’s good”? Here’s the deal: if a silent film’s bad, it’s usually just plain ol’ bad, if you get what I mean. It’s boring, or the story’s been done a zillion times, or the plot is preposterous and it’s a good half hour too long, etc. Instead, what tends to come to my mind is a film that’s quite good and well-made, but has preposterous things in it. And thus I come to a film like The Affairs of Anatol (1921).

One of Cecil B. DeMille’s delightful uppercrust soap operas, The Affairs of Anatol was based on a series of short plays by Arthur Schnitzler–basically a heavily-revamped mixture of about ten of them. It stars matinee idol Wallace Reid as the titular Anatol and Gloria Swanson as his wife Vivian, playing a High Society couple whose marriage becomes shaky when the bored Anatol decides to try and “rescue” fallen women who cross his path. No, the “rescuing” doesn’t turn into affairs–but it sounds odd nonetheless, doesn’t it?

The first girl, Emilie (Wanda Hawley), he recognizes as an old chum from his school days. To his alarm, the sweet, ringleted schoolgirl he remembered had morphed into the saucy sugar baby of a much (much) older man. Anatol decides he must intervene and save Emilie from herself–at the expense of paying attention to his poor wife Vivian.

Not too surprisingly, this turns into a disaster. But soon a new opportunity comes along to rescue another unfortunate woman who crosses his path–in this case, a (supposedly) distraught soul (played by Agnes Ayres) who throws herself from a bridge right by Anatol and Vivian. They both come to the rescue, but Vivian becomes suspicious of the woman, who sure enough ends up stealing Anatol’s wallet. Vivian’s none too pleased, to put it mildly, and Anatol decides in a huff that if she thinks he’s getting himself in trouble, then by gum he’ll find trouble.

And trouble he finds–or so it seems on the surface. His attempt to live it up in the city leads to meeting the vampy performer Satan Synne (played by Bebe Daniels, and yes, that’s her character’s name), wearing a spectacularly strange octopus-themed getup. Ah, but is she really the dangerous vamp that she seems? Will Anatol actually get himself into trouble? And will hypnosis be used at the last minute to not quite tie up loose ends?

Make no mistake, this is a good looking film, with pricey sets, lavish outfits, elegant lighting, and several great examples of what I call DeMille’s “rich people toys”–such as an electric door in Anatol and Vivian’s home that opens and closes with the push of a button. Is it necessary? Well, no–but what cutting-edge fanciness! The actors were major names of the time, especially Wallace Reid. No one knew at the time that morphine addiction would claim his life in just a couple short years–although Gloria would claim that she sensed something strange about him.

As a bonus, the film also features some exquisite title cards with tinted illustrations. Art was the norm for nice title cards, but tinting was one step beyond. It’s a cherry on top of this confection of a film.

So why would I edge it toward the “so bad it’s good” category? Well, if you chuckled at all when reading about the plot a couple paragraphs ago, you’ve probably already figured it out. It is, shall we say, a bit “of its time,” or perhaps it was a little out of date even then. (Not that “out of date” is always an automatic negative, in my opinion–I like seeing Woodrow Wilson references and organ grinder’s monkeys and other bits of Edwardian color like that.)

It’s a little uncomfortable when the married Anatol attempts to save attractive young women, especially since poor Vivian seems forgotten by the film half the time. But I can’t help feel a sense of glee in its melodramatic moments, like Anatol suddenly getting a vision of his own mortality, or the hilariously over-the-top scene of him smashing every piece of furniture in an apartment (you’ll have to see it to believe it). Even the cheesier scenes, involving Satan Synne (*chortle*) and her lair, are arguably some of the highlights of the movie. It’s a film that offers a fantasy of uppercrust spectacle, and clearly aims to please.

So honestly, if all this hasn’t sold you on The Affairs of Anatol yet, what are you waiting for? Whether you end up thinking it’s excellent or more in the so-bad-it’s-good territory, you’ll have a swell evening taking in all the tuxes, pearls, and “rich people toys”–and don’t forget that octopus cape.

—