Warriors committed to keeping Steph Curry for life, says GM Mike Dunleavy Jr.

The Golden State Warriors are dedicated to keeping Steph Curry in their uniform for the rest of his career. This, according to General Manager Mike Dunleavy Jr.

Warriors GM Mike Dunleavy Jr. Says Stephen Curry Will Never Leave The Franchise

In a chat with Kendra Andrews, Warriors GM Mike Dunleavy Jr. got real on the future of the team and its longtime star, Stephen Curry. Contrary to popular belief, the Warriors are committed to keeping Curry in their uniform for the rest of his career.

Warriors’ Klay Thompson situation gets ’emotional’ Mike Dunleavy Jr. admission

At the moment, one of the biggest storylines surrounding the Golden State Warriors is Klay Thompson’s extension talks. The sharpshooter is set to become a free agent on July 1 unless he and the team agree to a new contract beforehand.

Golden State Warriors GM Reveals Truth About Major Trade Rumors

Speaking with reporters on Monday, Golden State Warriors GM Mike Dunleavy was asked if making a trade is this team's best avenue to improving their roster.

Warriors’ Mike Dunleavy seen scouting intriguing 2024 NBA Draft prospect in France

What happens this offseason for the Golden State Warriors will dictate both their immediate and long-term futures. General manager Mike Dunleavy Jr. and his front office have their hands full with decisions to make about Klay Thompson, Chris Paul, Andrew Wiggins, and Jonathan Kuminga.

Warriors GM Gets Brutally Honest on Team's Championship Chances

Even though the Golden State Warriors didn't make any major moves at the trade deadline, it doesn't mean that Warriors GM Mike Dunleavy Jr. thinks the team is perfect.

Warriors GM Reveals Team’s Trade Deadline Plan

There's no way around it, the Golden State Warriors need to make a move at the trade deadline. The team just hasn't been able to put together a string of wins to be in the play-in, and right now they're on the outside looking in.

Golden State Warriors Rumors: General Manager Mike Dunleavy Jr. Believes Dubs Roster Has Championship Pedigree, But Changes Could Come

The Golden State Warriors have had a disappointing start to the 2023-24 campaign. Still, general manager Mike Dunleavy Jr. told Tim Kawakami of The Athletic that he still believes in the roster he helped build this year.

Warriors GM Mike Dunleavy Jr. Makes Concerning Admission About Draymond Green

Golden State Warriors general manager Mike Dunleavy Jr. can’t “guarantee” Draymond Green will never act out again. Green, who has been suspended by the NBA indefinitely, has been ejected three times this season.

Mike Dunleavy Jr: NBA Has ‘Targeted’ Warriors With New Rules

If there’s one thing the Warriors have proven over the last decade, it’s that they’re willing to pay a high price for success. Now, that price will get higher, with the NBA’s new second tax apron — which increases penalties for teams over the luxury tax line — and the new rules on when “star” players can be rested.

Warriors GM says Chris Paul trade 'came together quickly'

The trade that brought Chris Paul to the Warriors came to fruition in a short span of time, GM Mike Dunleavy told The Athletic duo of Sam Amick and Anthony Slater.

These overs are tasty, any way you slice them

We'll touch on the NBA Finals more in tomorrow's issue, but we'll pass the time with a bit more MLB. Before we know it, baseball will be running the show around here, so we may as well continue looking into a few angles.