Cruise Shipping and Tourism Strategy and Execution

CHART Management Consultants provides a comprehensive suite of management and consulting services. Ted Blamey/CHART has delivered successful projects for clients in the following key areas:

Strategic direction, business growth and feasibility studies

Market investigation, market analyses

Deployment, capacity and destination volume analyses

Mergers, acquisitions and equity investment

Establishing new businesses, business plans

Developing cruise destinations

Itineraries, operations and shipboard passenger services

Finance and administration

Executive development and training

Interim management

A summary of successful projects follows.

Strategic Direction

Strategic review of the viability and future direction of an established Australasian cruise line (including market position, product design, deployment, pricing, organisation, etc) resulting in a dramatic reversal of its fortunes and long-term success (Australia).

Global market and competitive assessment, then guiding the product positioning, marketing and distribution strategies to establish a new world-wide luxury line (USA and Europe).

Resolution of reservations systems issues, advising on partnership disputes and management concerns, implementing solutions and analysing outcomes for the above cruise line (USA & Europe).

Crafting the cruise tourism development strategy for the national tourism organisation of a prominent Southeast Asia nation (Philippines).

Mergers and

Acquisitions

As President and CEO of Sitmar International, at the end of the 1980s, Ted Blamey initiated the first significant cruise industry consolidation, leading to the merging of Sitmar’s and P&O/Princess’ worldwide interests through outright sale of the Sitmar companies. This move set the tone for the industry’s next decade.

He subsequently:

Effected the merging of two well-known Australasian brands into one dominant company. (Australia)

Represented one of the cruise lines in a multi-owner working group, examining the benefits of merging three competing brands to form a new company in the international (US/Europe-headquartered) cruise industry. (USA & Europe)

Evaluated the benefits and financial consequences of an established line taking over the operations of a struggling niche cruise business; brokered discussions between the owners. (Europe & South Pacific)

Establishing New Businesses

Research and development of the strategy and detailed business plan for an international cruise line to enter a complimentary tour/land programs business. (USA)

Business analysis, negotiation and legal documentation to establish a new international cruise line/third party joint venture. (USA)

Analysis of a new cruise market opportunity in North America and the development of a third-party partnership to exploit it. (USA)

Feasibility study, financial modelling and business plan for entry of an established international cruise line into a luxury river cruise operation in a new region of the world. (China)

Provision of access to personal and professional networks to create an upscale cruise line’s strategy of developing direct business. (Australia)

Developing Cruise Ports and

Destinations

Study to document the issues, regulations and costs facing cruise lines seeking to cruise Australian waters with a report on appropriate measures to deal with them. (Australia)

Engaged by a government tourism ministry to advise on the requirements and potential benefits of building cruise and yachting tourism throughout the nation and of running their own cruise line with a dedicated ship. (Middle East)

Research and analysis of the factors needed for an island nation to succeed in attracting a significant increase in the cruise business, including extensive stakeholder interviews and assessment of potential destinations, culminating in a five-year Cruise Shipping Development Strategy. (Papua New Guinea)

Market and operations assessment for a proposed new cruise port to be built in Asia. (China)

Detailed evaluation of and business strategy for a new cruise port development at a prominent Asian city. (Vietnam)

Market Investigation

and Market Analysis

Major study for a consortium of National Tourism Organisations on the regional impact of cruising in the South Pacific.

Detailed analysis and research of the international upscale segment of the cruise industry for one of its principal contenders. (USA)

Analysis and report on a potential new cruise line’s business plan for third-party investors. (Australia)

Detailed research, wide-ranging interviews, analysis and authoring of the first comprehensive review of the Asian cruise industry for the Asia Cruise Association. The White Paper ” Information, Intelligence, Insights” launched in October 2013 and discussed at Cruise Shipping Asia-Pacific, Singapore.

Initiation of the first comprehensive analysis of Asian source markets for CLIA’s Asia Cruise Trends reports 2014 to 2017.

Deployment, Capacity and

Destination Volume Analyses

Detailed analysis and research of deployment, capacity and call volumes throughout Asia for the annual Asia Cruise Trends reports published by CLIA (2014, 2016, 2017, 2018) and the Asia Deployment/Capacity Report (2019)

Itineraries, Operations and

Shipboard Passenger Services

Negotiation with vendors/ concessions/ suppliers and preparation of a complete range of onboard revenue programs for the start-up of a major new Australasian operator. (Australia)

Deployment and itinerary strategy for a unique new business offering luxury residences at sea, operating world-wide. (USA)

Finance and Administration

Assistance and advice on the preparation of a submission to refinance an established international cruise line and for obtaining new tax status. (UK)

Review of a cruise line’s worldwide organisation structure, including issues of location and remuneration; analysis of financial and personnel consequences; advice and recommendations for the way ahead. (USA & Europe)

Preparation of a company-wide performance compensation/incentive plan for a cruise line’s US and international employees at all levels. (USA & Europe)

Executive Development and Training

Ted Blamey has conducted exectuive development courses for current and aspiring cruise industry executives.

He led a component of the Executive MBA in Cruise for a major maritime university.

Interim Management

A CHART team member can be used effectively as an interim member of a client’s senior management team.

This is particularly beneficial when temporary vacancies occur through an executive leaving or being terminated, when downsizing is needed due to cost pressures, when the client is unsure of how to scope a new role, when a short-term boost to the executive ranks is useful or when a task or project is not expected to require a permanent hire.

For more information

Call us on +61 2 9909 1142 for a complete range of cruise industry consulting services.