Through the 1980s, Sitmar redefined cruising in the South Pacific and South-East Asia to become the dominant cruise line in that part of the world within 6 years. The innovations by Ted Blamey and his team in product, distribution and marketing continue to this day.

Then, as President and CEO of Sitmar International, Ted Blamey initiated the first significant cruise industry consolidation, leading to the merging of Sitmar’s and P&O/Princess’ worldwide interests through outright sale of the Sitmar companies. This move set the tone for the industry’s next decade.

He founded CHART Management Consultants in 1997 and has since served CEOs and senior executives of cruise lines, government bodies and destinations across the globe on a wide variety of consulting assignments, usually with a strategic focus.

Ted is a frequent speaker at global cruise industry events. He leads courses for government, port and tourism executives on the global cruise industry.

In recent years Ted has built additional expertise in Asia. CHART’s seminal White Paper for the Asia Cruise Association “The Cruise Industry in Asia 2013 and Beyond: Information, Intelligence, Insights” was launched at the major regional convention in October 2013. This led to CHART’s annual Asia Cruise Trends reports for CLIA from 2014 to 2018 and their 2019 Cruise Deployment & Capacity report.

The Cruise Shipping Development Strategy CHART undertook for Papua New Guinea has led to that nation becoming a hot new destination for large cruise ship lines. He and his team have since: worked closely with the Philippines Department of Tourism to craft its National Cruise Tourism Strategy; conducted a operational/market appraisal for a new cruise port in southern China; prepared the Pacific Cruise Market Research and Intelligence Report and a strategy for SPTO; advised a major bank on financing newbuilds for Asia; assisted a Private Equity firm to assess investing in an Asian cruise business; advised on a new cruise line destined for Asia; and undertook a detailed market and operations feasibility and forward plan for a new cruise port development in Vietnam.

Ted holds an Honours degree in Applied Science from the University of Melbourne and a Master of Business Administration from Harvard.

He was made Fellow of the Australian Marketing Institute in 1986 and Visiting Fellow of the Seatrade Academy in 2011. Ted was the 2017 honoree for CLIA Australasia’s Hall of Fame.

Ted / CHART is a long-term Executive Partner of CLIA and member of the Australia Cruise Association.

At various times resident of Los Angeles, San Francisco, New York, Boston, South Florida, London, Monte Carlo, Sydney, Melbourne and Auckland, Ted is now based in Sydney, Australia, but is regularly to be found with clients in other parts of the world.

In addition to his consulting work, Ted has taught as Adjunct Professor at Boston University’s Sydney program, served on boards of various non-profit organisations in Australia, including as Councillor of The Harvard Club of Australia, chairing its non-profit Fellowship Program and founding its Leaders’ Workshop. He is a Past President of The American Club in Sydney. He is a Life Member of the Harvard Club of Australia and of The American Club.