(Normally, I do the Stats numbers first, but for some reason, the program is giving me problems, so I am going to go with the TBR list first)

First: The books on the list.

1) Hit Parade- Lawrence Block

2) Inside Delta Force- Eric Haney

3) Lost Adventures of Sherlock Holmes- Ken Greenwald

4) ST:Voyager Spirit Walk Pt.1 & Pt. 2

5) ST:DS9 Mission Gamma- Twilight - David George III

6) SCE Omnibus #2 Miracle Workers- Various

7) ST:TOS Constellations

8) ST: Captain's Glory- William Shatner and Garfield Reeves-Stevens and Judith Reeves-Stevens

9) ST: Engines of Destiny- Gene DeWeese

10) The Red Box- Rex Stout

11) Rainmaker- John Grisham

12) Casino Royale (Novelization of the movie) Ok, since there was no novelization of the movie, I instead read SilverFin.

{#13 - 15 are books that I have packed up in storage, and am NOT going to dig around the unit for find 3 books, out of 6 thousand. I will make up these spots next month}

16) Three to get Deadly- Janet Evanovich

17) Hundred Dollar Baby- Robert Parker

18) - Santa Cruiseby Mary and Carol Higgins Clarke (My X-mas Related Book)

19) Duty First: A Year in the Life of West Point and the Making of American Leaders- Ed Ruggero

20) ST:Vanguard Summon the Thunder - Dayton Ward and Kevin Dilmore

21) ST: Mere Anarchy Book 1- Things Fall Apart- Dayton Ward and Kevin Dilmore

22) ST: Mere Anarchy Book 2- The Centre Can't Hold- Mike Barr

23) ST:TOS Crucible: McCoy- David George III (I have about 60 pages to go in this one, so I think by the end of the day, I will have finished this book)

24) ST:Titan Red King- Andy Mangels & Michael A. Martin

25) ST:Titan Orion's Hounds- Christopher L. Bennett

26) State of Fear- Michael Crighton

27) Mystery- Peter Straub

28) The Clothes they Stood Up In- Alan Bennet (this book honestly surprised me how good it was. The story involve a couple named the Ransomes who get robbed one night, while they are out I both related to the couple, having been recently robbed, and thrilled that someone named Ransom was down on their luck.... VBEG)

29) When Smart People Work for Dumb Bosses- William Lundin & Kathleen Lundin

30) The Secret Diary of God- Koos Kombuis

31) SCE Omnibus #3 Some Assembly Required- Various

32) SCE Omnibus #4 No Surrender- Various

33) SCE Omnibus #5 Foundations - Various

34) SCE Omnibus #6 Wildfire - Various

35) SCE Omnibus #7Breakdowns - Various

36) ST: Mere Anarchy #3 Shadows of the Indignant - Dave

37) Tales from the Captain's Table - Various

Books Read not included on the list:

1) BSG: Sagatrius is Bleeding - Peter David (I would say more about this novel, but since I have given it as a gift to a few people on my flist, I don't want to spoil it for them. I will say this much- only PAD would think to bring Boxy into a novel)

2) Star Trek: The Manga (decent, but not quite as good as the traditional Trek novel- although the idea of a enemy giving Kirk the Finger does bring a smile to my face).

3) Anonymous Lawyer- Jeremy Blachman (This is a GREAT novel; using the idea of e-mails and blog postings, the author tells the story of Anonymous Lawyer, a partner in a law firm who is trying his hardest to make it to Head of the Firm. It is both shocking and humorous the way he talks about what he does to the new associates and summer recruits. I highly recommend the book....and even the Blog that has been established. Read this book made me feel that there are worse bosses out there..)

4) Doonesbury: The Long Road Home (I have been a fan of Gary Trudeau for almost 20 years now; in many ways, I even got to meet him at Disney world one year- "Ross, look- It's Jane Palley." "Who cares- THERE'S GARY TRUDEAU!!!!" Could have been the first time that a person walked by Jane to shake hands with her Husband.

Anyway, back on topic- in 2004, Gary Trudeau had one of his characters, serving in Iraq, become the victim of a road side bombing. In the strip, you see B.D. has lost his leg in the attack.

In the book, the reader learns about the bombing, the efforts to stabilize B.D., and then his recovery and re-hab. It is a touching and powerful story, that illustrates how even fictional characters are not save in the war).

5) The Christmas Pig- Kinky Friedman. (He lost the election, and yet, still had time to write a holiday novel. It is ok; not great, but good for an afternoon's reading).

6) ST:Enterprise- By the Book- Dean Wesley Smith. (I had a sudden urge to read an Enterprise novel, and this was the unfortunately victim of this need.... Must make it a point to limit myself to one Enterprise Book a year- there are so few and and I have read most of them...)

7) ST:TOS The Case of the Colonist Corpse- I am not a HUGE Perry Mason Fan, but I am into a good legal mystery. Plus, it was Trek, so it was a definite MUST READ. (I sort of wish my grandmother was still alive; I would have given her this novel. She loved to read the old Nero Wolfe and Perry Mason novels...)

8) ST: Voyagers #15 Echoes- Ok, this is the SECOND Voyager novel that I read that was confusing, using different timelines/ universes, in the plot line. Plus, and I know this is going to sound strange, but this one was published during the years when Trek novels weren't interconnected that they are now- and it shows in the feel and tone of the novel. I guess I am just so use to having to know the events of one novel might have an influence on a different novel...