Real world article

(written from a Production point of view)

Summon the Thunder is a Star Trek: Vanguard novel – the second book in the series – written by Dayton Ward and Kevin Dilmore. Published by Pocket Books, it was first released in June 2006.

Summary[]

From the book jacket

The Taurus Reach: a remote interstellar expanse that holds a very old and potentially cataclysmic secret, the truth of which is feared by the Tholians, coveted by the Klingons, and dubiously guarded by the Federation. At the center of this intrigue is Vanguard, a Federation starbase populated by an eclectic mix of Starfleet officers and civilians, whose lives are forever altered as they explore the layers of mystery surrounding the Reach and steadily peel them away... one after another.

In the aftermath of Harbinger, Commodore Diego Reyes commands Vanguard while waging an intensely personal struggle, tasked to uncover the true significance of the Taurus Reach while simultaneously concealing that mission from his fellow officers – and even his closest friends. As the Daedalus-class USS Lovell brings some of Starfleet's keenest technical minds to help, the USS Endeavour makes a find that could shed further light on the enigmatic meta-genome that has captured the Federation's interest &ndash ;if its crew survives the discovery...

Deep within the Taurus Reach, an ancient and powerful alien mind has awakened prematurely from aeons of hibernation, alerted to the upstart civilizations now daring to encroach upon the worlds in her care. With the stakes for all sides escalating rapidly, the alien lashes out with deadly force against the interlopers, propelling the Vanguard crew on a desperate race to understand the nature of the attacker, and to prevent the Taurus Reach from becoming a war zone.

Excerpts of copyrighted sources are included for review purposes only, without any intention of infringement.

Background information[]

Erilon, a key system featured in the novel, is listed on the title page as the location of one of Pocket Books' offices.

Cover art by Doug Drexler. Station design by Masao Okazaki. Background image courtesy of NASA and the Hubble Heritage Team (STSci/AURA).

External link[]

Summon the Thunder at Memory Beta, the wiki for licensed Star Trek works