Original sleeve notes

Geoff was born in a small town in the heart of England, growing up in a house full of music from Opera to Mantovani.

Geoff’s first instrument was a wind powered organ from Woolworths and he spent many happy hours playing “Strangers in the night” and “Country gardens”.

At an early age he showed his talent for conducting, his grandmother gave him a number 10 knitting needle, his father showed him how to work the record player and he was off… slipping on his satin collared dressing gown and looking at himself in a darkened window, he was transported to the Royal Albert Hall, and was conducting the combined Joe Loss, Mantovani and the Boston Pops orchestra in A VAST REPERTOIRE OF MUSIC.

Immune to rock’n’roll he immersed himself in Burt Bacharach, Matt Monroe, Andy Williams and Perry Como music, watching avidly anything that had Liberace in it… the coolest man on the planet.

Showing of his conducting skills and arranging skills at school, Geoff quickly became the leader of a small band of fringe musicians, turning their backs on guitar and erring more to piano, woodblocks and chimes to set new standards in the performance of old standards.

As Geoff moved through his early manhood he was drawn to the sheer opulence of the Playboy lifestyle, the velvet clothes, the white shirt;bow tie and diamonds and of course the girls.

However, being short and spotty with a fatal greasy haircut syndrome did not help his chances much. So paralysed with angst he took up the guitar and played Satan’s music. Of course that did not lst and after joining an amateur operatic and drama group he soothed his need for throbbing violins and slippery saxes by buying a keyboard again and his easy listening roots took hold once again.

After drifting aimlessly in musical direction for years, the revelation came in an Essex shopping centre one day in May. The Love story theme was playing and people were smiling and humming the tune and looking meaningfully into their partners eye, this would be Geoff’s role in life, to make music that would stir people in gentle ways so they felt good about themselves.

Progressive easy listening was born. Progressive easy listening is being unashamed and proud of taking popular songs and rearranging them so more people will like them, pulling strands of beauty from them that the composer didn’t even know were there.

Geoff spent every penny he had putting together a state of the art studio to make his vision a reality and he finished his first album in record time, re-shaping the works of Radiohead, Oasis, Edwyn Collins, Bjork, Pulp and Blur.

Something was needed to go with such rich music, and of course, that was “The Look” and lifestyle of the easy listening gods. dress shirts, silk jackets, diamonds and cigars.

Geoff Parnell the wunderkind of progressive easy listening, the peoples’ antidote to dancing hit the scene!