Our June Special Subject samples the surviving silent cinema of Dave's favorite director (now revealed!), King Vidor. We tease Vidor's auteur preoccupations out of these four early films—The Sky Pilot (1921), Peg o' My Heart (1922), Wild Oranges (1924), and La Bohème (1926)—and find a common focus on the successful, frustrated, or warped self-realization of his heroines. We explore the way Vidor articulates this theme through sometimes eccentric versions of a variety of genres: Western, comedy, Gothic melodrama, woman's picture. And if that doesn't tempt you, there are graphic and brutal fist fights, random storks, demonic dogs, milk-loving dogs, dangerous stunts, and Lillian Gish going that extra 10 miles for her art long before De Niro and Day-Lewis. (10 miles, dragged along the cobblestones, in fact.)

Time Codes:

0h 0m 45s: King Vidor, Transcendentalist

0h 13m 05s: THE SKY PILOT (1921) [dir. King Vidor]

0h 34m 38s: PEG O’ MY HEART (1922) [dir. King Vidor]

0h 44m 03s: WILD ORANGES (1924) [dir. King Vidor]

1h 01m 29s: LA BOHEME (1926) [dir. King Vidor]

+++

* Listen to our guest episode on The Criterion Project – a discussion of Late Spring

* Marvel at our meticulously ridiculous Complete Viewing Schedule for the 2020s

* Intro Song: “Sunday” by Jean Goldkette Orchestra with the Keller Sisters (courtesy of The Internet Archive)

* Read Elise’s piece on Gangs of New York – “Making America Strange Again”

* Check out Dave’s Robert Benchley blog – an attempt to annotate and reflect upon as many of the master humorist’s 2000+ pieces as he can locate – Benchley Data: A Wayward Annotation Project!

Follow us on Twitter at @therebuggy

Write to us at therebuggy@gmail.com

We now have a Discord server - just drop us a line if you'd like to join!

Join Dave and Elise every week for a buggy-ride of cinematic exploration. A bilingual Montreal native and a Prairies hayseed gravitate to Toronto for the film culture, meet on OK Cupid, and spur on each other's movie-love, culminating in this podcast. Expect in-depth discussion of our old favourites (mostly studio-era Hollywood) and our latest frontiers. We like to bring attention to neglected figures and dig into little-known corners of film history and popular culture, and we hope that we can also bring new perspectives to the familiar. The podcast will be comprised of several potentially never-ending series: - Fear & Moviegoing in Toronto: Our Perspectives on Choice Local Retrospectives (PAUSED BY PANDEMIC) - Hollywood Studios – Year by Year: Deep-cut dishing on Paramount, MGM, Warner Brothers, RKO, Fox, and Universal items from 1930 to 1948. - Acteurist oeuvre-views/spotlights on worthy on-camera creatives, beginning with Jennifer Jones and Setsuko Hara. - And a big parade of special subjects hand-chosen by whichever of your hosts happens to have a handle on this buggy that week.