BOARDMAN Ohio – David “Dave” L. Fisher of North Lima Road, Boardman, Ohio, passed away Tuesday evening, March 24, 2015, in St. Elizabeth’s Hospital-Boardman. He was 80. Mr. Fisher was born Sept. 26, 1934, in New Castle to Arthur and Beatrice Shelar Fisher. Dave worked as a marketing manager for both the Quaker State and Ashland Oil companies. He was a member of Free and Accepted Masons Seneca Lodge 805 in Kittanning, Pa.; Coudersport Consistory; and New Life Church in Poland, Ohio. His wife of more than 62 years, the former Ada R. Cameron, survives at home. In addition to his wife, Ada, he is survived by his stepmother, Gertrude Fisher-Smith, Grand Junction, Colo.; his children, Diane Brothers, Salineville, Ohio; and David C. Fisher, Mercer; five grandchildren and four great-grandchildren; his brothers, James and Kenneth Wigton, New Castle; Benjamin Wigton, Mercer; and Frank and Wayne Fisher, Grand Junction, Colo.; and his sisters, Mary Leach, Edna Studebaker, Shirley Lee, Tammy Chamblee and Charlotte Sidanzy, all Grand Junction; and Lynn Cooke, Boulder, Colo. FISHER David “Dave” L., 80, North Lima Road, Boardman, Ohio. Service: A memorial service will be held at a later date. Online condolences and a virtual guestbook may be accessed at www.turnermyersfuneralhome.com Arrangements by TURNER-MYERS FUNERAL HOME, 208 N. Jefferson St., New Castle.

Published on March 26, 2015

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of DavidHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of David

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree