CAPE ELIZABETH – David Nichols Fisher, Jr., long-time Cape Elizabeth resident and Portland attorney, died peacefully on Tuesday, Dec. 5, 2023, surrounded by his family, at Mercy Hospital in Portland. He was 83.

Born March 27, 1940, in New York City, N.Y., David, or “Papa” to his 10 grandchildren, was the father of four and married for 41 years to Mary Susannah (Hannah) Fisher, who predeceased him.

He was an alumnus of Brunswick School in Greenwich, Conn., a proud Princeton Tiger (class of 1961), and a graduate of the Salmon P. Chase College of Law near Cincinnati, Ohio. He practiced law for 42 years at Drummond & Drummond in Portland, where he was known to his clients as a deliberate and empathetic lawyer with a calming, thoughtful demeanor.

David, a true bon vivant, was a lover of too many things to be listed here. A short list might include his tight-knit group of friends, all things Princeton, 47 years of singing in the St. Alban’s church choir, a good game of bridge, a great meal, and a Manhattan or two to be enjoyed with all of the above. Several local restaurants – The Good Table, Bridgeway, Nunan’s Lobster Hut, F. Parker Reidy’s and The Roma, to name but a few – probably should have appointed David honorary board member in light of his prolific patronage.

Known to spontaneously break out into a rendition of “Old Nassau”, David bled orange and black. He was a fourth-generation legacy at Princeton, and was proud to watch two children and one grandchild (so far) follow in his Tiger footsteps. He faithfully attended Princeton reunions for many years, and could be found rooting on Tiger athletics of all stripes at any time of year – be it field hockey, lacrosse, or the men’s basketball team, which he was spotted heartily cheering from his hospital room just two days before his passing.

David’s love of language, honed as an undergraduate English major, would be a hallmark of his personality. Put to productive use in his law practice, it is also the reason his children know the proper usage of “who” and “whom”, among other grammatical idiosyncrasies. His love of the written word was also made clear by the stacks of yellowing periodicals and correspondence which surrounded him both at home and at the office – indicative not only of his love of learning, but also of an indomitable optimism which would be a lifelong source of support during the inevitable difficult times.

To his children, grandchildren, and longtime partner and better half, Robyn Hooper, David was a patriarch of intense loyalty and boundless love. He will be deeply missed for his dedication to his family and a traditionalist’s sense of commitment and gentlemanliness.

He was a rock-solid support for his beloved wife Mary Sue during her decades-long battle with cancer. He traveled hundreds if not thousands of miles, often in questionable New England weather, to attend his children’s and grandchildren’s various athletic events. He passed on his love of the quiet delights of Kennebunkport, a longtime family getaway spot, to his descendants. And he delighted all of them with his locally famous rendition of “Happy Birthday”, delivered in his trademark deep-bass-with-flourishes to family and friends annually without fail.

David is survived by his loving partner of more than 12 years, Robyn Hooper of Cape Elizabeth; daughters Lisa Sutton Fisher of Winthrop and Wendy Fisher Westervelt of Cumberland and Venice, Fla., sons David Nichols Fisher, III of Riverside, Conn., and Andrew Beckett Fisher of Durham, N.C.; as well as 10 grandchildren spread across the country, all of whom carry a piece of David’s legacy wherever they may go.

A memorial service will be held at St. Alban’s Episcopal Church at 11 a.m. on Friday, Dec. 22. A service of remembrance will also be held this summer at St. Ann’s Episcopal Church in Kennebunkport, date and time forthcoming.

Condolences may be expressed online at http://www.hobbsfuneralhome.com.

In lieu of flowers, please consider a donation to the Dempsey Center,

a Maine-based cancer care and support organization.

http://www.dempseycenter.org.