Richard H. Fisher, 98, of Sidney, Ohio, was called home to heaven on March 12, 2023, at Fair Haven Nursing Home in Sidney, Ohio. He was born May 21, 1924, in Middletown, Ohio, the son of Wilbur and Gertrude (Behr) Fisher. They both are deceased. Richard was married to Mildred Enyart on April 9, 1988. He was preceded in death by his wife, Mildred on September 16, 2010.

Richard is survived by his daughter, Virginia (Ernest) Shaw of Sidney, Ohio, and son in-law, Henry Cordonnier of Russia, Ohio; three step children Robert (Donna) Enyart of Ozark, Alabama, Judy (David) Hill of Madison, Alabama, and Janice (Delmar) Elsner of Botkins, Ohio; 17 grandchildren, 44 great grandchildren, and one great great grandchild, and sister Marie Downing of Piqua, Ohio. Richard was preceded in death by both his parents, two sisters, Martha Poeppelman and Roberta Hoelscher, three daughters, Shirley and Doris Fisher and Ann Cordonnier and the mother of his children, Mary Louise Fisher.

Richard graduated from Sidney High School class of 1943. Richard retired from Baumfolder in 1988 after 39 years of service to the company. In Richards younger days he enjoyed roller skating, dancing, playing cards with family and friends, but he entire life Richard was an avid fisherman and hunter, but most of all he enjoyed spending time with his grandchildren, friends, especially his family.

He was a member of Holy Angels Catholic Church. Richard was loved by many and will be greatly missed. Richard was of the Catholic faith.

In keeping Richard’s wishes he will be cremated following his funeral services. Friends may call at Salm-McGill and Tangeman Funeral Home in Sidney, Ohio on Monday, March 20, 2023, from 9:00 AM – 10:00 AM. A Mass of Christian Burial will be held on Monday, March 20, 2023, at 10:30 AM at Holy Angels Catholic Church with Fr. Jarred Kohn. Richard’s final resting place will be at Graceland Cemetery in Sidney, OH. Online condolences may be left for the Fisher family at www.salm-mcgillandtangemanfh.com. Memorials may be made to Holy Angels Catholic Church in Sidney, Ohio. The family would like to extend a special thank you to Fair Haven Nursing Home for all their help and care with Richard. Salm-McGill and Tangeman Funeral Home is honored to be taking care of the Fisher family.