Defined by twin commitments to artistic integrity and creative responsibility, Klasky Csupo has emerged in the last two decades as the leading independent animation company in the industry. A boldly eccentric and privately owned entity, it was staffed by a who’s who of creative and production professionals. Klasky Csupo is much more than a 21st century cartoon factory, it turned out to be a multi-media enterprise devoted to film, TV, video, publishing and advertising.

During more than 20 years of operation, Klasky Csupo has created, developed, animated or produced era-defining television programming like “The Simpsons” and “Rugrats”, in addition, “Rocket Power”, “All Grown Up”, “Wild Thornberrys”, “Aaah! Real Monsters”, “As Told By Ginger”, “Stressed Eric”, “Duckman”, “Santa Bugito” and “Edith Ann” TV specials, voiced by Lily Tomlin.

Founded by graphic designer Arlene Klasky and Hungarian-born animator Gabor Csupo, in a spare room of their apartment in 1981, Klasky Csupo grew to 550 artists, creative workers and staff in a state-of-the–art animation facility located in the heart of Hollywood.

Artistic innovation and sound business results are the rule at Klasky Csupo, which is distinguished by having produced the first non-Disney animated feature to gross in excess of $100,000,000, the global box-office smash, “The Rugrats Movie.”

For its many contributions to the animation industry Klasky Csupo has received five Emmy Awards and two Cable Ace trophies, along with numerous honors in commercials, production and humanitarian awards.

“We have a particular taste. We have a commitment to do something different, fresh, new and not to imitate others,” co-founder Gabor Csupo summarized.

Fast forward to 2012. After Klasky Csupo left the folds of Nickelodeon, the two founders Arlene Klasky and Gabor Csupo embarked on new creative careers. Gabor Csupo pursued his life-long dream of directing live-action films with “Bridge to Terabithia” and a European produced film “Moon Acre”.

Arlene Klasky re-adapted the animation studio to digital media age continuing to develop a number of new fictional properties. Along with Craig Singer, a director of Horror Films she created “Ollie Mongo Adventures in the Apocalypse”, the story of a Teenage Skateboarding Zombie who lives 200 years in the future. Visit www.facebook.com/olliemongo to learn more. Expect to see the Ollie Mongo first edition digital comic book by the summer of 2012.