The Drowsy Chaperone

Music and Lyrics by Lisa Lambert and Greg Morrison

Book by Bob Martin and Don McKellar

August 22 – September 14, 2024

Musical | Mainstage | Thursday – Saturday |

The Drowsy Chaperone will be directed and choreographed by Jim Christian, music directed by Jonathan McDonald, and stage managed by Marci Piña.

A humorous and lovable homage to the 1920s Jazz Age of musical theatre, this show-within-a-show follows mistaken identities, dream sequences, thugs disguised as chefs, and an anxiety-riddled narrator whose love for the show at times causes even more confusion and chaos. Winner of 5 Tony awards, including best book and best original score, in addition to 7 Drama Desk Awards, including outstanding musical!

Audition Info

Auditions will be held on Saturday, June 22, 2024 from 10 a.m. – 4 p.m.

Vocal auditions will be 10 a.m. – 2 p.m. and Dance auditions will be 2 – 4 p.m.

Please sign up for Vocal auditions: Vocal Scheduling.

Please sign up for Dance auditions: Dance Scheduling.

Please prepare 32 bars of a song in the style of the show. Sheet music is required. An accompanist will be provided.

A current resume, headshot and sheet music are required. Prior to your audition, please download, complete and print the audition form to bring with you.

Auditions will be held in the Facilities and Arts Annex (far southeast corner of the parking lot) of Salt Lake Community College’s South City Campus, 1610 South 250 East, Salt Lake City, 84115. Parking is available at no charge in the southeast parking lot off 1700 South.

After Auditions

Callbacks will be from 6 to 10 p.m. on Monday, June 24, by invitation only.

The show will run nightly at 7:30 p.m. Thursdays – Saturdays from August 22 – September 14, with a preview performance on Wednesday, August 21, and Saturday matinee performances at 2 p.m. on August 31 and September 7.

Rehearsals will begin on Saturday, July 13 and will be held (apart from tech week) Mondays – Fridays from 6 – 10 p.m. and Saturdays from 10 a.m. – 4 p.m. See the audition form for more details.

Performance pick-up rehearsals (if needed) will be held from 6:30 – 9 p.m. on Wednesday, August 28, Wednesday, September 4, and Wednesday, September 11.

All hired actors are paid via a stipend. The Grand Theatre is committed to diverse, inclusive casting. We welcome all qualified performers, without regard to disability, race, color, gender, national origin or any other basis, unless otherwise specifically indicated.

Character Breakdown

Man In Chair

Musical theatre aficionado who mourns the end of the Golden Era. He narrates the show as he listens to the record on vinyl.

Gender: Male

Age: 30 to 50

Mrs. Tottendale

The air-headed, proper, and bossy host of the wedding.

Gender: Female

Age: 50 to 60

Vocal range top: Db5

Vocal range bottom: G3

Underling

Mrs. Tottendale’s savvy butler who is thrifty and stiff yet has an understated sense of humor.

Gender: Male

Age: 35 to 50

Vocal range top: G4

Vocal range bottom: Ab2

Robert Martin

The dashing, ever-cheerful groom; played by matinee idol Percy Hyman.

Gender: Male

Age: 25 to 35

Vocal range top: Ab4

Vocal range bottom: C3

George

Robert’s anxious, dim-witted best man who has Robert’s best interest always at heart.

Gender: Male

Age: 35 to 50

Vocal range top: Bb4

Vocal range bottom: F3

Feldzieg

Broadway producer who is desperate for his star to return to his show; played by Jack Adler.

Gender: Male

Age: 25 to 35

Vocal range top: Db4

Vocal range bottom: Db3

Kitty

Feldzieg’s dim-witted companion who has hopes of being a star; played by Sadie Adler.

Gender: Female

Age: 25 to 30

Vocal range top: F5

Vocal range bottom: Bb3

Gangsters

Posing as pastry chefs, this duo is intending to collect from Feldzieg; played by the vaudeville duo Tall Brothers.

Gender: Male

Age: 35 to 45

Vocal range top: Gb4

Vocal range bottom: Db3

Aldolpho

European self-proclaimed “ladies’ man”; played by former silent movie star Roman Bartelli.

Gender: Male

Age: 35 to 45

Vocal range top: G4

Vocal range bottom: A#2

Janet Van De Graaf

The famous bride. Glamorous and talented star of Feldzieg’s Follies; played by rising star Jane Roberts.

Gender: Female

Age: 25 to 35

Vocal range top: -1

Vocal range bottom: G3

The Drowsy Chaperone

Janet’s alcoholic confidante and friend; played by well-established stage actress Beatrice Stockwell.

Gender: Female

Age: 45 to 55

Vocal range top: D5

Vocal range bottom: F3

Trix

The brave and brash female aviator who, by chance, is recruited to perform the wedding.

Gender: Female

Age: 30 to 40

Vocal range top: Eb5

Vocal range bottom: Ab3

Ensemble

Staff, Reporters

Creative Team