JULY 14 – JULY 22, 2023 Winner! 2019 Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Musical The careers of four eccentric Broadway stars are struggling and they desperately need a new stage upon which to shine bright once more. Seeking out a cause, they head straight to small-town Indiana. Through social media, they have heard of trouble […]

What’s On Stage? In the Rehearsal Room with THE DROWSY CHAPERONE! Rehearsals for mad Theatre of Tampa Bay’s The Drowsy Chaperone are in full swing and our cast is hard at work whipping up a top-notch show! The Drowsy Chaperone first opened at the Rivoli Theater in Toronto in 1998. Nearly eight years later, in

OCTOBER 14 – 30, 2021 Shimberg Playhouse @ the Straz Center for the Performing ArtsCall the Straz Box Office for tickets – 813.229.STAR (7827) Based on Lloyd Kaufman’s cult film and winner of the Outer Critics Circle Award for Best Off-Broadway Musical, The Toxic Avenger is a charming love story and laugh-out-loud musical that has it all: an

MARCH 31 – APRIL 16, 2022 Synopsis A multiple Tony Award-winning theatrical tour-de-force, Assassins combines Sondheim’s signature blend of intelligently stunning lyrics and beautiful music with a panoramic story of our nation’s culture of celebrity and the violent means some will use to obtain it, embodied by America’s four successful and five would-be presidential assassins. Bold, original,

A NOTE FROM OUR PRESIDENT A REFLECTION DURING A PANDEMIC Back in 1999 my daughter auditioned for mad Theatre’s first production. She was auditioning for ‘Pippin’. Thankfully, Erin was cast as a dancer, ensemble member for this premiere production for mad. While I was happy that she was cast I was leery of her being

Artistic Directions CORNER OF THE SKY Everything has its season Everything has its time Show me a reason and I’ll soon show you a rhyme After closing It Shoulda Been You with mad Theatre of Tampa in July 2018, I took a break from the director’s chair. I continued in my board role of Vice-President and volunteered

FEBRUARY 03 – FEBRUARY 19, 2023 Winner! 1992 Tony Award for Best Book of a MusicalWinner! 1992 Tony Award for Best Score of a MusicalNominee: Seven 1992 Tony Awards, including Best MusicalNominee: Four 2017 Tony Awards, including Best Revival of a MusicalNominee: Three 2017 Drama Desk Awards, including Outstanding Revival of a Musical Both the

OCTOBER 14 – OCTOBER 30, 2022 Tickets Synopsis Winner of five Tony Awards, including Best Book and Best Original Score, The Drowsy Chaperone is a loving send-up of the Jazz Age musical, featuring one show-stopping song and dance number after another. With the houselights down, a man in a chair appears on stage and puts on his