Eurodance group Cascada burst onto the scene in the early 2000s and became known for hits including Everytime We Touch and Miracle.

However, some fans may not know DJ Manian, DJ Yanou and Natalie Horler founded the group as a trio, with the British-German star as the lead singer rather than a solo act called Cascada.

''We actually are a group. I work with two producers [Yanou and Manian] and the three of us make up Cascada," she previously explained in an old interview.

"They've always chosen to stay low-profile where I've always been the face of everything, that's why sometimes there's a misconception."

READ MORE: Oscar winner dies on fly-fishing trip in New Zealand

READ MORE: 'Series of lies': Sopranos star 'hid' diagnosis for years

Now, Horler, 42, has announced some new music, with the new singles Ain't No Mountain High Enough and Never Be Lonely out now.

9Honey Celebrity takes a look at where Cascada and Horler are now – and what happened to the music act.

Where does Cascada come from?

Cascada hails from Germany, with all members born in the European country.

Horler was born in Germany to English parents and her father, David Horler, is a jazz musician.

READ MORE: Céline Dion's rare update amid health battle

The group was originally called Cascade, but they changed their name as it was similar to DJ Kascade's name.

What is Cascada's biggest hit?

Despite releasing a number of hit songs, Everytime We Touch was one of their biggest hits and spent weeks at no.1 on the charts. It's also a fan-favourite, too!

The group is one of the most successful acts to come out of Germany.

Horler previously told Just Jared in an interview about having so many smash hits with Cascada that stand the test of time, that she "can't understand it either ".

She said she keeps fit to keep up her youthful performances on stage.

"I'm still really young spirited. I make sure I keep fit. I do a stage performance that I could easily have done 10, 15 years ago," she said.

She added: "I hope that no one feels that they have an older artist in front of them ."

Is Natalie Horler married?

Horler lives in Germany with husband Moritz Raffelberg, who she married in 2011, they share a daughter together.

The pair are notoriously private when it comes to their personal lives.

Net worth

Horler is said to have a networth of $US7 million, approximately $10.5 million.

Eurovision

In 2013, Cascada was the German entry for the Eurovision Song Contest.

"For me, it's a very, very big honour to be able to participate. Going on stage for an entire country is a lot of pressure. But it's also very, very special," Horler told DW.com.

At the time, there were rumours their entry song Glorious was plagiarised, which Horler said ''upset" her.

For a daily dose of 9Honey, subscribe to our newsletter here

"Anything negative upsets anyone, I think. After all, I'm just flesh and blood. But you just have to pull through," she said.

Germany placed 21st in the popular competition.

What does Cascada do now?

Horler just this week said she had completed her first TV performance for the new single, Ain't No Mountain High Enough.

She has spent plenty of time on the road recently putting on energetic performances for fans.

In April, Horler will be performing shows in the U.K before touring Norway and Iceland.

Lasy year, Horler thanked fans for their support in an Instagram post.

FOLLOW US ON WHATSAPP HERE: Stay across all the latest in celebrity, lifestyle and opinion via our WhatsApp channel. No one will be able to see your personal information, including your name, and there are no comments.

"Thank you for the endless support, the streaming, the listening, the partying to our music... I couldn't be more thankful," she wrote.

"I also couldn't be more aware that I'm here only because of YOU all. I never forget that. Time for new music, me thinks😉 Thank you for a great year and see you all front of stage in 2024."