Oracle presents Kalypso with two awards honoring the firm's excellence in delivering innovative, real-world solutions: Oracle North American Titan Award and Applications Partner of the Year

SAN FRANCISCO, California - October 13, 2009 - Kalypso, the world's premier innovation consulting firm, announced today that it has received the first Oracle® PartnerNetwork Global Award for Applications Partner of the Year. In addition to this honor, Kalypso also received the Oracle 2009 North American Titan Award for Specialty Applications Solution. The prestigious Oracle awards were presented on Sunday, October 11, at the Oracle OpenWorld Welcome Reception and North American Titan Awards ceremonies in San Francisco.

The Oracle PartnerNetwork Global Awards program, which is in its inaugural year, recognizes partner solution innovations worldwide that utilize Oracle products to solve real-world business challenges. The program highlights partner excellence in several categories, including Technology, Applications, Industry, Accelerate, and Midsize. Kalypso's solution-an Oracle Agile Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) implementation for a global provider of commercial cleaning and hygiene solutions JohnsonDiversey Inc.-was chosen from more than 250 nominations that were reviewed by a global panel of executives at research firm International Data Corporation. Kalypso's solution earned the panel's highest score to receive the Applications Partner of the Year Award.

"Kalypso is providing our joint clients with creative PLM solutions that are accelerating these companies' innovation and growth through enhanced collaboration," said Judson Althoff, senior vice president, worldwide alliances and channels, Oracle. "Behind this success is Kalypso's extensive knowledge of Oracle Agile PLM, deep industry experience, and a focus on business process design supported by technology that provides the marketplace with a true enterprise PLM perspective."

Additionally, Kalypso's solution for JohnsonDiversey was selected from among 144 submissions to receive the North America Oracle Titan Award for Specialty Applications Solution. The Titan awards are given by Oracle to its leading partners for excellence in a number of categories, including sales, marketing, and solution development.

"Kalypso is tremendously honored to receive both the first annual Oracle Global Award for Applications Partner of the Year and the Oracle Titan Award for Specialty Applications Solution," said George Young, Kalypso founding partner and Oracle alliance leader. "Oracle's recognition points to the power of Oracle Agile PLM software and Kalypso's proven implementation methodology to help our clients deliver on the promise of innovation."

Kalypso worked with JohnsonDiversey to globally consolidate its product development processes and provide visibility into development work across North America and Europe. Kalypso also assisted the company in designing and deploying a unique global design implementation process as part of its PLM initiative. By simplifying the maintenance of products, working capital and inventory through new efficiencies in product development, commercialization, and data quality and reporting, the PLM program has resulted in better decision-making capabilities and significant cost reductions for the organization.

About Oracle PartnerNetwork

Oracle PartnerNetwork is a global business network of more than 21,000 companies who deliver innovative software solutions based on Oracle software. Through access to Oracle's premier products, education, technical services, marketing and sales support, the Oracle PartnerNetwork program provides partners with the resources they need to be successful in today's global economy. Oracle partners are able to offer their customers leading-edge solutions backed by Oracle's position as the world's largest business software company. Partners who are able to demonstrate superior product knowledge, technical expertise and a commitment to doing business with Oracle qualify for the Certified Partner levels. http://oraclepartnernetwork.oracle.com

About Kalypso

Kalypso is the world's premier innovation consulting firm, helping clients improve profitability by delivering on the promise of innovation. Kalypso offers clients full service capabilities including Business and Innovation Strategy, Front End of Innovation, Portfolio and Pipeline Management, Development and New Product Introduction, Value Management, PLM Technology, Leadership and Learning, and Intellectual Property Services.

###