Originally published by JEDCO. Oracle Lighting received the prestigious Louisiana Lantern Award during a special reception at the Hilton Baton Rouge Capitol Center.

(METAIRIE, La) -- A Metairie-based manufacturer was awarded a 2021 Louisiana Lantern Award Wednesday evening. Oracle Lighting, which creates LED solutions for consumers in the automotive, marine, and powersports markets, received the prestigious award during a special reception at the Hilton Baton Rouge Capitol Center. The company is one of eight manufacturers across the state to be recognized this year.

The Louisiana Lantern Awards provide an opportunity for the State to celebrate manufacturers from across Louisiana. The winning company for each district displays a contribution to the Louisiana economy and their local business communities through employee growth, increased revenue, facility expansion and community engagement. The Jefferson Parish Economic Development Commission (JEDCO) nominated Oracle Lighting for the special distinction this year. The lighting manufacturer was selected from the Greater New Orleans region to receive the coveted award.

Born from humble beginnings in a Metairie garage, Oracle Lighting has grown into a global leader in the automotive lighting industry. The company was founded by Justin Hartenstein when he was just 18 years old. Now he and his wife, Tiffanie, run the business together, innovating in both product offerings and operations. Over the last 22 years, the manufacturer has experiences growth in both employment and sales annually. Today, Oracle employs more than 30 full-time team members and has made nine appearances on the Inc Magazine “Inc. 500/5000 List”, which highlights the nation’s fastest growing small businesses. Oracle plans to expand the company’s headquarters to double the size of the main facility in 2022, which will allow Oracle to create more jobs and significantly increase their production capabilities.

Oracle Lighting has served as a symbol of change and renewal in the Fat City area. The company located to Fat City in 2010, rehabilitating a 10,000 square foot building that would serve as the company’s headquarters. Since then, Oracle has purchased and renovated two additional properties in Fat City. The major improvements to these sites helped spur additional growth and investment in the area.

Not only has Oracle invented thousands of different products for the automobile lighting industry, but the team displayed adaptability and ingenuity in the face of a global pandemic. When COVID-19 threatened to shut down operations for many manufacturers, Oracle Lighting chose to focus its efforts on designing and developing a face mask that utilizes UV-lighting technology to eradicate bacteria and viruses. The company began manufacturing the Antimicrobial Irradiation Respirator, or A.I.R. Device, in 2022.

In November of 2021 Oracle also received an honor from their global trade organization SEMA, when they were named the 2021 Manufacturer of the Year. The SEMA Manufacturer of the Year Award recipient meets rigorous criteria, including demonstrating outstanding business practices, establishing innovative processes and products, investing in the well-being of employees, exhibiting a high degree of corporate responsibility, protecting company brand equity, and providing exceptional customer service to customers.

Oracle Lighting has won many local, national, and international awards for their work. The company gives back whenever possible. As an example, Oracle helped to donate thousands of PPEs to first responders and health care workers at the start of the pandemic. The founders also serve a number of local charitable organizations.

QUOTE FROM ORACLE LIGHTING

"We are honored and humbled to receive the 2021 Lantern Award” said Tiffanie Hartenstein, CEO of Oracle Lighting. “I truly appreciate the efforts JEDCO and all of the Jefferson Parish officials who nominated our company for this very special recognition. This acknowledgement would not be possible without the dedication and passion of our amazing team working behind the scenes. I also want to express our appreciation to the Louisiana Economic Development Foundation for their continued support."