James Stirling divides opinion: architects love him, while those who use his most notorious buildings loathe him. Or that's how it used to be. The abiding image is of young German and Japanese architects unloading from their coaches, peering in through the great glass wall of Cambridge's History Faculty Building and snapping away frenetically, while students and staff trapped in the cage froze or fried, according to the season. Later, the monumental Staatsgalerie in Stuttgart redeemed Stirling's reputation among the art-loving élite.

Nineteen years after his death, the forthcoming exhibition at the Tate will no doubt further redraw the balance in his favour. Stirling's thumbnail drawings, his doodles and overlays, his worm's-eye and bird's-eye views from queer angles, are works of art in themselves. Coupled with the usual photographs and models, they will confront a fresh generation with the guts and resourcefulness of this most controversial of British architects.

But architectural exhibitions, however comprehensive, are essentially a substitute. Slick presentation perspectives and preciously hoarded sketches can mislead. To get the true measure of any architect's work you have to see it, smell it, hear it, and walk around both inside and outside. Stirling, never a two-dimensional designer, is no exception.

The Clore Gallery addition to the Tate's Millbank building, where the show is to be, is hardly the place to start, as Stirling is at his most staid there. Better to begin in the scruffier back streets of Camberwell in London. Here squats an enigma of a building, four-square and raised up on a grass ramp to give its only storey force and presence. Three single-pitch roofs fly upwards in contrary directions, culminating in big windows. The fourth quarter of the square is flat-roofed, with a chimney poking up at the corner. No more than a humble dining hall and kitchen, it stands aloof from everything around, even the demure brick school which it serves. It is a jagged, angry little thing, probably impractical, yet once seen, never forgotten.

Brunswick Park School's dining hall dates from 1961–62. It is a rare early work of Stirling and Gowan, the firm where James Stirling made his reputation. Next came the commission that put the pair on the map, Leicester University's Engineering Building. Then the History Faculty Building at Cambridge, over which James Gowan parted from Stirling – the first of many troubles to overwhelm that project. Gowan's career stalled after the split. He has never been reconciled to Stirling's unwillingness to acknowledge his creative role in their architecture. Whatever the truth, there is no doubt that Stirling's strongest work – Brunswick Park, Leicester, and some early flats at Ham Common – was all done with the exacting Gowan. It's to be hoped he will get the full credit due him in the Tate show.

What were the two young Scotsmen trying to achieve in the 60s and what made their architecture angry? The answer lies in the tight rein restraining British architects in the immediate postwar years. The public sector, now a spent force in architecture, was dominant. Like almost everyone who had talent, even Stirling spent a short spell working for the London County Council. Architecture was meant to be about social service, producing the best housing and schools affordable in an age of austerity. It was a noble vision, democratic and modernist, but it was the vision of puritans.

Stirling was not a puritan. A hard-driving, hard-drinking womaniser, he was a mixture of brutal and sensitive, kindly and selfish, greedy and funny. He had all the charm and confidence that architects must have to win jobs, but lacked any grain of social sensibility. His goal was to be a great architect, and sod almost everything else. In short he was a charismatic monster, as artists often are. But the special thing about architecture is that it is a science as well as an art. If you treat it just as science, you will be ignored. If you treat it just as art, it may well pay you back.

Today when engineers can twist structures to any shape an architect likes, it's hard to recreate the impact made by the Leicester Engineering Building in 1962. Hitherto most modern British architecture had been dour, colourless and rectangular. Here it went wild. A pair of red-tiled lecture theatres barge outwards. The bigger one looks to be sitting on glass, with its end propped up on an odd pair of poles. A ramp climbs between them at a third, bewildering angle. Lopsided over the big auditorium rises a dainty office tower, glass-clad with canted corners. On the laboratories behind, the rooflights are skewed weirdly to catch the best daylight – a brainwave of the engineer Frank Newby, a force in the design along with Stirling and Gowan. It is a tumultuous, exuberant performance, sometimes comic, sometimes perverse.

Russian constructivism, Italian futurism, the Johnson Wax Building of Frank Lloyd Wright are all in there, along with the modernist idea that a building's different functions should all be seen. Stirling was always an eclectic, drawing from wherever he liked without respect for his sources. But Leicester's exact pedigree matters little. It is the outcome of the peculiarly British cultural rebellion of the early 60s, when the young called time on austerity and came out to play as wildly and brashly as they could.

Most experimental buildings have problems. Leicester's had to do with acoustics, and the performance of the cheap glazing then available. They paled into nothing compared with the débâcle of the Cambridge History Faculty Building. Stirling was on a roll after Leicester, keen to push the language of shock he and Gowan had just invented, and disinclined to investigate the brief or revisit the design when circumstances changed. A library, as the new commission largely was, offers more technical challenges than an engineering building. Stirling, no technician, was flushed with the ebullience of success. One of Gowan's reasons for breaking with his partner was the Stirling's determination to go on with a design in which the Gowan had no faith. There was a suspicion too that the truculent Stirling despised his donnish clients. Certainly he despised Hugh Casson, whose Raised Faculty Building adjoins the site. Asked why he ignored the context, he said "to fuck Casson", a remark that raced round the Cambridge common rooms.

The upshot was trouble from the moment work started on site. After years of bickering and some talk of demolition, it had to be almost entirely reconstructed. If all buildings that fail badly were to damage their architects' reputation, then that of Le Corbusier, always cavalier with technology, would be dead and buried today. Stirling's mistake was to build sloppily in Cambridge, and then to compound things with his Florey Building at Oxford, where impracticalities were again countenanced for the sake of form. Making enemies in places where opinion-formers chatter has consequences. After that there were no further bold red-tile-and-glass buildings. Indeed, for years there were no further Stirling buildings in Britain at all.

Stirling was too proud to admit his mistakes, but he felt the criticisms bitterly and he learnt. He mellowed, married and to a degree relaxed. From the 70s the practical side of his architecture was delegated to his associate and second partner, Michael Wilford. After that, his buildings usually worked. For first ideas he came to rely on the many talented assistants who flocked to his office just as the commissions dried up. The strongest of these, such as Leon Krier and John Tuomey, loved the fun, irreverence and eccentricity of working for Stirling. A born teacher through force of personality, he could pick up someone else's idea, make a deft improvement here or there, and give it his imprimatur. Despite the veneer of individualism which stars such as Stirling conjure up, that is how architectural design works. Nearly always it is a collective affair.

The style changed too. When post-modernism arrived, Stirling jumped on the bandwagon. His architecture stopped being clipped and wiry and grew monumental and fat (as Stirling did himself). But it was never quite pompous, as the rebellious streak was irrepressible. The building always held out as proof of his continued stature is the Stuttgart Staatsgalerie. Its completion in 1984 marked the end of Stirling's lean years and the start of a second, largely international career.

The Staatsgalerie is a building of sequences and effects: of ramps, a glass wall which switches for the hell of it from vertical to sloping, and a fine circular sculpture courtyard, followed by some ordinary, efficient toplit galleries. There are moments of grandeur and panache and naughtiness, but you cannot walk round and take in the strange juxtapositions together as you can at Leicester. The constructivist idea of letting everything hang out has been dropped, never to recur. While the early edginess has gone, it is not replaced by any sense of wholeness or repose, which is what monumental architecture calls for.

The most divisive aspect of Stuttgart and of Stirling's later architecture is the postmodern affectation of its stone cladding, in pseudo-Italian stripes. Some like it, others find it ponderous and tasteless. Stairs, spatial transitions, shocks and surprises were Stirling's forte. Textures were not, nor was colour, as the Clore Gallery curators discovered. Grisly purples and greens abound in his later work. Architects are colour-blind curiously often, and Stirling's rebarbative purple hosiery should have been a warning.

Through strength of character, Stirling had recovered from adversity. The hunger for success and recognition was still there, along with the focus and the energy. But despite the plaudits he never recaptured the freshness of his early designs. Take a look at his final major British building, No 1 Poultry, built as the last word in the notorious Mansion House Square saga and not completed till 1998, well after Stirling's death. It's certainly more suitable than the Mies van der Rohe glass box which Lord Palumbo long fought to erect on this sensitive site. It tries to respect its neighbours, and plays some post-modern tricks in an attempt to reduce its bulk. But it is miles from being a masterpiece. In some contexts only suavity and refinement are good enough; jokes and cranky touches will not do. One can only lament the pretty little Victorian buildings that gave way to this elephant.

In the last major exhibition in London to feature Stirling (in 1986), he was presented along with Norman Foster and Richard Rogers as one of three great symbols of a British architectural renaissance. Looking back now at the romantic bravura of Piano & Rogers' Pompidou Centre or the consummate control of Foster's Stansted Airport, it must be said that Stirling now looks much the smallest of the three. A fearless experimentalist, a memorable innovator in form and a pungent character, he lacked the inner maturity, the breadth of reflection and the depth of discipline required for the highest level of architectural achievement. The drawings may beguile, but the flawed buildings reveal the truth.

James Stirling: Notes from the Archive is at Tate Britain, London SW1, from 5 April to 21 August. www.tate.org.uk