Posted in Shakespeare On Film - Trailers

Henry V is a 1989 British historical drama film adapted for the screen and directed by Kenneth Branagh, based on William Shakespeare's play of the same name about King Henry V of England. The film stars Branagh in the title role with Paul Scofield, Derek Jacobi, Ian Holm, Emma Thompson, Alec McCowen, Judi Dench, Robbie Coltrane, Brian Blessed, and Christian Bale in supporting roles.

The film received worldwide critical acclaim and has been widely considered one of the best Shakespeare film adaptations ever made. For her work on the film, Phyllis Dalton won an Academy Award for Best Costume Design and Kenneth Branagh, in his directorial debut, received Oscar nominations for Best Actor and Best Director.

This recording is for educational purposes only and is covered under Fair Use doctrine - Copyright - All rights reserved to their respective owners.

Read the unabridged plays online: [ LINK ]

Support Us - Donate Now !

Enter Amount:

£

Why Donate?

Donations to Shakespeare Network help sustain free knowledge and educational programs on Shakespeare Network and our ecosystem of Shakespeare Network projects. Your contributions ensure these resources remain accessible and valuable for all. Thank you.

25% Direct support to website:

Keeping the Shakespeare Network websites online is about more than just servers. It also includes ongoing engineering improvements, product development, design and research, and legal support.

25% Administration and governance:

We manage funds and resources responsibly to recruit and support skilled, passionate staff who advance our communities and values.

Our operating budget:

Transparency is core to our organization. The Shakespeare Network develops our annual plan and operating budget through open processes, which are subject to feedback from our volunteers and

Board approval.

50% Direct support to communities:

Shakespeare Network projects exist thanks to the communities that create and maintain them. We strengthen these communities through grants, projects, and training programs.

Contact us for further info.