The War Zone (1999)

The Movie: A dark family secret rears its ugly head when Tom (Freddie Cunliffe) is forced to leave London and move to Devon with his family.

Winstone Grit: Winstone steals the show as the family’s patriarch, a gobby chatterbox who could be hiding something. Easily one of Winstone’s finest turns.

Our Boy (1997)

The Movie: Woody (Winstone) and his wife Sonia (Pauline Quirke) attempt to come to terms with the death of their son, who was killed in a hit-and-run accident.

Winstone Grit: Intense and brooding, Winstone brings shocking emotion to his role as a grieving father. No grit here, but you’ll probably find you’ve got something in your eye.

Ladybird Ladybird (1994)

The Movie: Docu-drama from Ken Loach, with Crissy Rock as (Maggie) a woman who fights Social Services for the right to keep her children after a string of abusive relationships.

Winstone Grit: As abusive Simon, Winstone’s terrifying, flying into violent rages that are unsettlingly convincing.

The Proposition (2005)

The Movie: Captain Stanley (Winstone) makes a deal with gang member Charlie (Guy Pearce) – he can earn his freedom and a pardon if he tracks down his gang leader brother and kills him.

Winstone Grit: At the top of his game, Winstone is ragged and unreasonable, and somebody you’d think twice about crossing. He dominates the entire film.

Great Expectations (2011)

The TV Series: The BBC’s most recent adaptation of Charles Dickens’ tome. Winstone appears as Magwitch, while Gillian Anderson is Miss. Havisham.

Winstone Grit: Emerging from the moors filthy and wild, Winstone makes for a fantastically imposing Magwitch. Ralph Fiennes will have quite a job to match him in this year’s new movie adap.

Scum (1977)

The Movie: Alan Clarke’s tough crime drama, which examined the lives of young offenders serving time at Borstal, where no attempt at reforming the inmates was made (at the time).

Winstone Grit: In his debut role, Winstone is effortlessly menacing as troublemaker Carlin, lending the film as much as grit as it demands – and then some.

Robin Of Sherwood (1984)

The TV Series: Richard Carpenter’s retelling of Robin Hood, with Michael Praed as the princely vagabond, and Winstone playing Will Scarlet.

Winstone Grit: Alternately haunted, vicious and stubborn, Winstone wears numerous hats as Scarlet, and creates a fully-rounded character that really shows off what he can do.

The Departed (2006)

The Movie: Martin Scorsese’s remake of 2002 Hong Kong film Infernal Affairs , starring Leonardo DiCaprio and Matt Damon. Winstone plays Arnold ‘Frenchy’ French.

Winstone Grit: Despite the likes of Jack Nicholson getting in on his gangster territory, Winstone practically steals the show here as a ruthless meanie.

Sexy Beast (2000)

The Movie: Retired safecracker Gal Dove (Winstone) is pulled out of retirement by callous gangster Don Logan (Ben Kingsley), leading to a mammoth heist.

Winstone Grit: Underplaying it to perfection, Winstone is the ideal counterpoint to Kingsley’s venomous villain – a cockney wideboy with real low-key brilliance.

Nil By Mouth (1997)