The most troubling events in ''The War Zone'' take place inside a cement bunker, but that's not what gives the film its name. The actual battlefield is the rural English home where a teenager named Tom (Freddie Cunliffe) looks at his own family with helpless rage and astonishment.

His mother (Tilda Swinton) is hugely pregnant as the film begins. Then she is preoccupied with the new baby and not eager to notice much else. Tom's older sister, Jessie (Lara Belmont), is sullen and uneasy, especially in the presence of their father (Ray Winstone). And Tom already senses what he will eventually know for sure: that sex between Dad and Jessie is a fact of this family's life.

The actor Tim Roth makes a fierce, disturbing directorial debut with a film that treats incest as something worse than a terrible secret. In this story, adapted by Alexander Stuart from his own novel, the father-daughter relationship is almost a given. It arises fearsomely from the sexual tensions in the household, which Mr. Roth underscores with many scenes in which the characters are unself-consciously naked, unsettling one another. He need not specify how explosive this atmosphere must be to a frustrated adolescent who often tussles angrily with his beautiful sister.

Raw as it is in spirit, ''The War Zone'' is filmed with cool blue-green tones and spare, painterly precision. (Seamus McGarvey's striking cinematography is mournfully expressive.) Similarly, the minimal dialogue often gives way to bitter, smoldering silence. Unlike Gary Oldman's voluble ''Nil by Mouth,'' which also starred Mr. Winstone as a frighteningly abusive father and had a watchful, tormented boy as its protagonist, Mr. Roth's film treats the pain in this household as literally unspeakable. So he favors extreme understatement.

One hauntingly effective shot finds Tom outside in the rain, with green landscape occupying most of the frame and a band of yellow light on its right-hand side. That light comes from a window through which Tom can see his father and sister. Just a hint of that image goes a monstrously long way.

''The War Zone'' first startles its audience with a violent automobile accident as the family is en route to the hospital, waiting for the baby's birth. That event has a stark, surreal quality that shows up in the rest of the story as well. The film concentrates on sexual currents to the dreamlike exclusion of anything else in the characters' lives, to the point where its most shocking events take place in a psychological vacuum. For all its dramatic power, ''The War Zone'' leaves much about its characters' urges and motives unexplored.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.