"253: War Zone with Jessica Ellis" is the 343rd overall episode of Podcast Like It's 1999 covering the films, television and pop culture of 1999, hosted by Phil Iscove and Kenny Neibart. The episode was released on November 25, 2022.

Description[]

"This Black Friday, we are talking about Tim Roth's The War Zone with Jessica Ellis!

A very difficult watch, we talk about the director's relationship to the subject matter, and why this movie appears on Roger Ebert's Best Films of 1999."

Kenny's Intro[]

"Hello, and welcome to Podcast Like It’s 1999, the podcast where we talk about the films of 1999, from the English countryside here in 2022."

Historical Information[]

"After his family relocates from London to rural Devon, sullen British teen Tom (Freddie Cunliffe) spends most of his time moping about the house. When he inadvertently discovers an incestuous relationship between his older sister, Jessie (Lara Belmont), and their father (Ray Winstone), the revelation threatens to have dire consequences. The mother of the family (Tilda Swinton), unaware of the dark secret, has recently given birth, and the siblings must contend with the harrowing situation."

The War Zone was released on 12/10/1999 in limited release against Toy Story 2, The Green Mile, Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo, and The World is Not Enough. It made $254K on an unknown budget.[1]. It has 84% on Rotten Tomatoes from critics and 83% from audiences[2]. Ebert gave the film 4 out of 4 stars.[3]

Quotes[]

“ I'm so glad to be here for a fun family adventure film, really a light hearted romp. ”

–Jessica

“ I left last night thinking that this movie was total dogshit and I finished this morning and think there are redeeming qualities to the movie, it is a full thought. ”

–Kenny

“ The main reason that I even thought we should do it, had to do it - any movie that's making Ebert's top 10 list in this particular year is an object of fascination for me. ”

–Kenny

“ This is just very upsetting to watch and I'm not entirely convinced a necessary movie. ”

–Phil

“ This is a pretty young guy working through this trauma ... but the minute he decided to shift the victim's point of view to a young girl and to do this to an underage, completely inexperienced actress, that felt exploitative to me, that felt like someone trying to reenact what happened to them in a way they could control, but not think about what that puts on the actress. ”

–Jessica

“ This is actually about the act and the ... the effect it has on all these people so I do think, to some extent, that depiction here is warranted, I think the way they did it is disastrous. ”

–Kenny

“ These are actually just two men warring over owning the women in an isolated location where there's no other society and there's no other options. ”

–Jessica

“ The second you project something onto a screen the size of a building you are immediately turning it into something else, right? It's not a person anymore, right? And I commend this film, probably the only thing I commend the film for, of really trying to dig into that idea of what a person like this might actually be. ”

–Phil

“ Just for those keeping count: that's two Tim Allens. ”

–Kenny, on Jessica's top 10

“ As someone who is the daughter of a Catholic deacon, [it] is the most profound movie about Catholicism that has ever been made, and yes, Scorsese can take a damn seat. ”

–Jessica, on Dogma

“ I don't know how to explain this - what just happened with your list because like its like you just flew us through a fucking asteroid field and somehow landed like right on ... the middle fucking landing pad. ”

–Kenny, on Jessica's top 10

“ This was harrowing and then a lot of fun. ”

–Phil

Jessica's 1999 Top 10[]

Main article: Top 10 Lists

The Insider

Dogma

Galaxy Quest

Fight Club

Toy Story 2

But I'm a Cheerleader

Cruel Intentions

Notting Hill

10 Things I Hate About You

Varsity Blues

American Beauty*

* Jessica didn't feel she could include American Beauty in her top 10 but gave it an asterisk and 11th place.

It's unclear to what degree this is ranked, the second half seemed to be less so than the top 5.

Ratings[]

The War Zone Host 1999 Score Before the Podcast After the Podcast Kenny N/A 45 45 Phil N/A 40 40 Jessica N/A - -

* Jessica did not finish the movie and did not provide a rating. The general consensus was "don't watch"

Gallery[]

Movies/TV Mentioned[]

It, Chinatown, Deuce Bigalow: Male Gigolo, The Green Mile, Irreversible, A Serbian Film, Last Tango in Paris, I Heart Huckabees, The Northman, Don't Worry Darling, Louie, The Cosby Show, Chappelle's Show, Eyes Wide Shut, Sex, Lies, and Videotape, The General's Daughter, Little Children, The Lovely Bones, Happiness, Heavenly Creatures, Out of Sight, Anna and the King, Entrapment, Do Revenge, Clueless, Gossip Girl, Six Feet Under, The West Wing, Being John Malkovich, Finding Nemo, The Matrix, Election, The Talented Mr. Ripley, The Sixth Sense, The Straight Story, Any Given Sunday, Downsizing