Employment

Entry & Intermediate, Full & Part Time Positions Available

HOSTS | WAIT STAFF | BUSSERS | BARTENDERS | FOOD RUNNERS

On Site Training • Advancement Opportunities

Health Care • Paid Vacation

Second Street American Bistro is a local, family run business of over 30 years. We are committed to great food and beverages, paired with efficient and friendly service, to create the best experience for our guests. We offer a family style work atmosphere with flexible hours, as well as the opportunity for people to gain experience working with others, meeting new people, and becoming active members in our community.

We encourage all applicants to have reliable transportation to and from work. We ask that only serious inquiries apply.

Apply in Person or by Telephone Interview. Submit your application Online here:

DOWNLOAD the PDF Employment Application using the download button below

FILL IT OUT electronically using Adobe Reader

SAVE it to your desktop and RENAME it by adding your full name

EMAIL it (along with your resume if you'd like) as follows:

Williamsburg Location: 757-220-2286, EMAIL

Newport News Location: 757-234-4448, EMAIL

Both Locations (to apply to both): EMAIL

Our Story

It was March of 1985 when we, two brothers, John and Mickey Chohany, born and raised in Williamsburg, took over Second Street Restaurant. Today, over twenty five years later, we still have the same commitment to food and friendly service as we did when we first started serving customers.

In 2007 Second Street went through an “Extreme Makeover” and emerged as a modern American Bistro in every sense of the word. From the rich and vibrant decor inside to the Al Fresco dining offered on our patio complete with fire pit, Koi pond, and relaxing water features we’ve created an upscale, casual, and very comfortable atmosphere for patrons.

We are personally very active in our restaurants, ensuring that everyone’s experience from the moment you walk through our doors is one that you will share with family, friends, and business associates. We believe that you, our guest, are the reason we are in business – and not ever an interruption in our day.

In 2010, 2011 and 2012 Second Street was the proud recipient of Wine Spectator magazine’s prestigious Award of Excellence. This award, from one of the world’s leading wine authorities, recognizes Second Street’s commitment to offering an outstanding selection of wine that pairs well with our menu and appeals to a wide range of wine lovers.

In 2010 we officially started selling our very own Napa Valley grown Petite Sirah. It was a labor of love, inspired by our Hungarian heritage, that paid us back tremendously with our first award for our wine – a Gold Medal win at the 2011San Francisco Chronicle wine competition (America’s largest wine competition) and a rating of “Outstanding, 94pts” from Wine Spectator, which was the second highest rating EVER for a Petite Sirah! Visit the Aratas page on our website for more details.

Fall of 2013 we opened our Newport News location featuring many of the same popular features as the Williamsburg location with a slightly different look and feel. Here you’ll find the same upbeat and modern decor, dedicated staff and fantastic menu as our flagship Williamsburg location.

Both locations feature tastefully appointed bars with large flat screen TV’s, a great wine list with over 100 reasonably priced bottles, micro brew beers, cocktails, martinis, Happy Hour specials and access to our full menu. It’s a great place to gather, unwind, and meet people in the Williamsburg and Newport News areas.

In 2014 we received the prestigious Certificate of Excellence from TripAdvisor. According to TripAdvisor, “The award celebrates hospitality excellence and is given only to establishments that consistently achieve outstanding traveler reviews on TripAdvisor. Winners of the Certificate of Excellence are located all over the world and represent the upper echelon of businesses listed on the website, with only the top 10 percent receiving the prestigious award.”

We are, as you can imagine, very proud of this distinction and celebrate it wholeheartedly with our fantastic staff who make it happen on a daily basis! We look forward to showing YOU an ‘excellent’ experience!

Though many things have changed in our community over the years we hope your experience at both Second Street, an American Bistro locations is welcoming, relaxing, and shows you what true Southern hospitality is all about. So sit back, relax, and enjoy your favorite food and drink. We’re here for you!

Thank you for being our guests. John and Mickey Chohany

Our Philosophy

Delighting Our Guests

We will strive to understand our guests’ needs by listening to their requirements and responding in a competent, accurate and timely fashion. We will design and deliver our services and products to address their needs. In fact, we are committed to exceeding their expectations by surprising them with our ability to anticipate and fulfill their wishes.

Working Together

We will emphasize the sharing of responsibility, accountability and recognition through a climate of teamwork. By working together as a team and by treating each other with mutual respect and trust, we will all contribute to the Group’s overall success more productively than if we worked alone.

Promoting a Climate of Enthusiasm

We are committed to everyone at Second Street by providing a caring, motivating and rewarding environment. We are committed to bringing out the best in our staff through effective training and meaningful career and personnel development, and by encouraging individuality and initiative.

Being the Best

We will strive to be an innovative leader in the restaurant industry and will continually improve our products and services. We will seek from our suppliers the highest quality products and services at the best value.

Playing by the Rules

We will maintain integrity, fairness and honesty in both our internal and external relationships and will consistently live up to our commitments. After all, “INTEGRITY IS DOING WHAT’S RIGHT WHEN NO ONE IS LOOKING.”

Acting with Responsibility

We will actively participate in the Williamsburg community and will be a responsible member by supporting the local community, businesses and charities.