YOUR EXPERIENCED YORKTOWN ORTHODONTIST

Dr. Parks is proudly providing orthodontic care in the Newport News/Yorktown area. Dr. Meredith Parks joined the practice in June 2006. She is a 1994 honors graduate of Hampton Roads Academy and a 1998 honors graduate of Wake Forest University. She received her Doctorate of Dental Surgery from the Medical College of Virginia and completed a three-year residency in Orthodontics at West Virginia University, where she earned a Master of Science in Dentistry.

As a Diamond+ Invisalign® Provider, Dr. Parks has achieved the highest level of Invisalign® case experience. It’s not something every orthodontist office achieves. Having this distinction helps patients find an Invisalign® provider they can trust – one that has the knowledge and experience to create healthier, straighter smiles. We have a proven track record of successfully treating patients of all ages.

Parks Orthodontics has been transforming smiles with Invisalign® clear aligners for over 22 years, and helping patients get the smile they want in as little as 6 months! Visit Parks Orthodontics to get a clear view of your Invisalign® treatment options with no goopy impressions.

When it comes to selecting a doctor for your family’s orthodontic care needs, we understand how difficult it can be to tell the difference from one practice to another. With so many options, which provider should you choose? Parks Orthodontics is proud to be a trusted orthodontic practice in Yorktown, VA.

Dr. Meredith Parks is proud to carry on her father’s legacy of transforming smiles in Yorktown, Virginia. She and her team are passionate about creating a fun and positive environment and building relationships with their patients. Dr. Parks’ favorite part about what she does is getting to give her patients the smiles they’ve always dreamed of.

We are thrilled to announce that Parks Orthodontics has been honored with the Best Orthodontic Practice Overall Gold award in the 2024 Coastal Virginia Magazine Best Of Readers’ Choice Awards.

Parks Orthodontics has also been recognized as a winner in the Coastal Virginia Magazine Best Of Readers’ Choice Awards in 2023, 2022, 2021 and 2020, in Virginia Media’s Best of 2021 as a Best Orthodontist Gold Winner in Yorktown/Poquoson, and as a winner in Virginia Living Magazine’s Best Of Virginia in 2021. Thank you to all of our incredible patients for your overwhelming support. We couldn’t do this without you!

Whether you’re a parent looking to give your child the gift of a straight smile or you are an adult interested in setting things straight, we would feel honored to be a part of your journey to a smile you’ll love! As an award-winning orthodontist in Yorktown, Dr. Parks is proud to help patients of all ages achieve their dream smile. Call today to get started and schedule a free orthodontic consultation.