Ismael Athuman

Ismael Said Athuman González (February 1, 1995) is a Kenyan footballer born in Maspalomas, who plays as a central defender. He currently plays for Real Murcia Football Club of the Second Division RFEF. He is international with the Kenyan national team. Athuman trained at the Unión Deportiva Vecindario, later moving to the youth team of the Unión Deportiva Las Palmas. With the yellow youth team, he played in the Honor Division of that category. He later moved up to the reserve team, participating in several Second Division B matches.

Pancho Guerra

Francisco Guerra Navarro (June 11, 1909-Madrid, August 3, 1961), known as Pancho Guerra, was a Spanish writer and journalist. He studied high school in Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, where he lived until 1947 when he moved to Madrid, where he remained until his death due to heart failure. Pancho Guerra was born in San Bartolomé de Tirajana, in Tunte. Very soon he was sent to Las Palmas de Gran Canaria to study high school. After finishing this, he began studying law, which he abandoned for journalism. He joined El Diario de Las Palmas when he was 21 years old. At the beginning of the Civil War he was mobilized, and upon his return from the front he returned to his law studies, which he abandoned again after only 3 months at the university, to dedicate himself definitively to journalism. In 1947 he moved to Madrid to develop his journalistic activity. His literary vocation manifested itself at the age of 18 and his first writings were born with a marked costumbrista atmosphere. Upon his death he left his work Léxico Popular de Gran Canaria unfinished. This was completed thanks to the efforts of his friends from the “Peña Pancho Guerra”, and in particular Miguel Santiago Rodríguez, to whom fell the task of compiling all the notes that the author had left and publishing it with the title Contribution to the popular lexicon of Gran Canaria.

Santiago Vargas

Vargas Jorge (San Bartolomé de Tirajana, Gran Canaria, July 23, 1942) is a sculptor born in the south of Gran Canaria. Some notable sculptures are: La Aparcería from 1993, located in La Era Park in Vecindario, Monument to Juan Rodríguez Doreste (1994, Calle Simón Bolívar, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria) or Monument to the Canarian Struggle (1973, Plaza de Los Juegos Olympic Games of Mexico, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria). His last works to date are a bust of the deceased tenor Suso Mariategui, installed in 2012 on Paseo de Las Canteras in Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, as well as another bust of the Canarian wrestler Santiago Ojeda in La Gallera.

Santiago Cazorla León

Historian and researcher born in Cercados de Araña. The director of the center pays for his Theology studies at the Conciliar Seminary of Las Palmas and, later, at the Gregorian University of Rome. In the 1930s, and at that same University, he received a doctorate in Moral Theology. Ordained priest in Saint John Lateran, he is named prelate of his Holiness. Returning to Gran Canaria, he works as a rural parish priest in various towns in the south of Gran Canaria, and as chaplain at the El Sabinal sanatorium and at the San Antonio boarding school, where he would also work as a teacher until his retirement. . He wins the competition for penitentiary canon of the Holy Cathedral Church of Las Palmas. He published various monographs on topics of religious history of Gran Canaria, among which stand out a History of the Cathedral of Canaria and La Virgen del Pino in the history of Gran Canaria, a work that he carried out in collaboration with Ignacio Quintana Marrero. Since 2013 he has been the favorite son of San Bartolomé de Tirajana.