Who We Are | Believe In Tomorrow Children’s Foundation provides exceptional hospital and respite housing services to critically ill children and their families. Our unique programs bring comfort, hope, and joy to children and their families, enabling them to renew their spirits mentally and physically.

What We Believe | We believe in keeping families together during a child’s medical crisis, and that the gentle cadence of normal family life has a powerful influence on the healing process. We believe the highest standards of service and unparalleled hospitality help create a unique healing environment, where families find hope and comfort.

Since 1986, Believe In Tomorrow has provided over 900,000 individual overnight accommodations, from every state in the U.S. and more than 90 countries worldwide. Our unique hospital housing and respite housing serve as a support system for when families need it most. Navigate through our programs below or continue reading to learn more about Believe In Tomorrow Children’s Foundation.

Our History

What began as a volunteer-led effort in 1982 has now grown to many programs serving families of critically ill children from all over the world.

Fiscal Responsibility

Believe In Tomorrow National Children’s Foundation, Inc. is a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization. All contributions are tax-deductible to the fullest extent allowed by law.

Believe In Tomorrow is proud to adhere to the highest standards of fiscal responsibility. Through rigorous independent annual reviews, Believe In Tomorrow has been certified to meet the highest standards of public accountability, program effectiveness, and fiscal responsibility.

Our Founder and Board

Brian Morrison, Founder and President of Believe In Tomorrow Children’s Foundation, strives to discover creative solutions to meet the needs of children and families undergoing treatment for life threatening illnesses. In 1982, Brian started a volunteer effort to help these children and families, which quickly grew and expanded into a nonprofit organization.

Brian’s vision led Believe In Tomorrow to develop the first and only pediatric respite facilities in the United States in 1986, followed closely by a hospital housing program for families of children receiving treatment at the world-renowned Johns Hopkins Children’s Center. Under Brian’s leadership, the organization also developed the first long-term residential facility for pediatric bone marrow transplant patients and their families.

Beyond the office, Brian is an avid hiker and enjoys hiking adventures in the Grand Canyon, often coupled with a fundraising effort to benefit Believe In Tomorrow programs. A father to five sons, Brian enjoys spending time with them.

Brian has served on a number of national, regional, and community non-profit boards, including the National Association of Hospital Hospitality Houses, Children First – America’s Charities, and Children’s Charities of America.

Officers:

Chairman Richard E. McCready

Vice Chairman David Reymann

President & Founder Brian Morrison

Treasurer Christie Hunter

Secretary Coard Simpler

Parent Representative Tom Delaney

Active Directors:

Linda Abell

David Amick, The Amick Company

Dorsey Baldwin, An Poitin Stil Irish Pub & Restaurant

Nancy Caplan

Jeffrey Elkin, Advance Business Systems

Mark Gaulin, Gaulin Properties, LLC

Wes Guckert, The Traffic Group, Inc.

Buck Mann, Mann Properties, Inc.

Cole Mangum, Bell Nursery

Yvonne Mrha, Live! Casino & Hotel

Michael R. Murphy

Howard Perlow, Residential Title

Dave Pruitt, Stanley Access Technologies/Allegion

Kim Reese, Cadence Enviromental Energy

Dave Seibert, T. Rowe Price

Michael Thompson, Edison Electric Company, Inc.

Judge Keith Truffer, Circuit Court for Baltimore County

Scott Vogt, Vogt Associates

Trent Waite, Cummings & Co. Realtors

Doug Widlake, Lakewood Manufacturing

Emeritus:

Peter G. Angelos Esq.

Leonard P. Berger, M.D.

Marylou Boyd

Benjamin Carson, M.D.

Steve Geppi

Nancy Kelleher

Brendan V. Sullivan Esq.

Professional Affiliations