PERK ALERT

30% Off a Sexy Wireless Speaker

We assume you need to buy someone a gift. So here are three great options: 1) A snow-globe-sized wireless speaker, 30% off. 2) Spending $25 and getting $50 worth of handsome gadgets and accessories from LA gadget shop Alpha. 3) Impossibly delicious, freshly baked cookies delivered directly from Brooklyn.

URBAN LEGENDS

A Dozen Days of Tamales

Just 12 days until Christmas, so let the countdown/tamale eating begin. Urban Taco is debuting new tamales each day from now until the 24th. Stop in for some husk-wrapped chicken with poblano mole today, then take home a dozen cochinita pibil tamales tomorrow. Now, to find some tamale-shaped stockings.

MESO HALL

Upscale Mexican and Walk-Up Tacos

You can’t eat tamales for every meal. Sometimes, you require tacos. Here to help, Meso Maya’s new Downtown location and the attached La Ventana taqueria. The first is your brisket-enchilada-and-margarita dinner spot. The other: a walk-up window for all your on-the-go pork taco needs. Of which you have many.

GRATUITOUS SAX

Strong Cocktails and Smooth Jazz

You’ve got a lot going on this month. Q4 deadlines, ski trip planning, self-gifting. So you deserve to kick back and relax. Preferably with a stiff cocktail and some brassy jazz. Good news: starting tonight, you can get both every Thursday at the People’s Last Stand. You go where the slide trombone goes.

GOING HAM

Here’s Where You Get Christmas Dinner

Those Pecan Lodge guys do some solid work with a smoker. Yup, real solid work that’s tough to duplicate/a potential fire hazard to try at home. Thankfully, they’ll do your cooking this holiday. Think huge slabs of smoked brisket, handmade sausage and a ham with molasses glaze. Your only job: placing the order.

LIFE OF BRYAN

A Bunch of Bryan Adams’s Photos

Turns out, Bryan Adams is quite the photographer. Over the years, he’s been snapping photos of friends and celebrities, and starting Tuesday, they go on display at the Goss-Michael Foundation. Expect some artsy shots of Jagger, Lohan and Queen Elizabeth II. Or as they like to be called, the “Super Friends.”