Luke Bryan and his wife Caroline have been major supporters of the Williamson Medical Center, which is south of Nashville, since the births of their two sons, Tate and Bo, 13 and 16.

Now, a new wing has been named after the country superstar, his wife, and the Brett Boyer Foundation. The couple served as co-chairs in constructing and renovating the new hospital wing.

The Brett Boyer Foundation was founded by Caroline’s sister, Ellen Boyer, and her husband, Bo, after they lost their baby, Sadie Brett, due to a congenital heart defect. The couple have since campaigned to raise awareness, increase education, and fund research into the condition.

The hospital posted a photo of the Bryan family in front of the new wing. They captioned the image on Instagram, “This time last week, we proudly unveiled a sign dedicating our new tower as the Boyer-Bryan West Tower on behalf of hospital supporters Luke and Caroline (Boyer) Bryan and The Brett Boyer Foundation!

RELATED: Luke Bryan: Getting Into His Country Boy Mind

They added, “The Boyer-Bryan West Tower is now officially open to patients, offering a variety of elevated healthcare services to the community. The expansion added three floors to the original West Tower footprint, plus a new north wing that encompasses all six floors for a total of nearly 175,000 new square feet and 134 new patient beds added to Williamson Medical Center.”

“This now includes a 35-bed ICU for critical care needs, 94 medical-surgical inpatient rooms, 33 obstetrics rooms, 10 pediatric inpatient rooms, and more. Our world-class Cardiac Center has also been expanded and updated to include two state-of-the-art cardiac catheterization labs and a brand-new electrophysiology lab.

They continued, “Other project components include an expanded and renovated Emergency Department, which will increase from 28 to 43 beds, a third C-section operating room, and a brand new Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) with nine private bays, which will be completed this fall.”

The hospital concluded, “Thank you to the Boyer and Bryan families for the generous support of Williamson Health through the years!”

Bryan told us in a recent interview that his new music video and song “Love You, Miss You, Mean It” was inspired by what he and his wife, Caroline, and many more young couples have gone through.

Luke offered, “‘Love You, Miss You, Mean It’ is obviously about kids falling in love and that was their saying to let each other know that they loved one another. It’s about young love. It’s about going off to college and trying to make that work and it not working and then going full circle.”

He added, “I’ve kind of lived that world with my relationship with my wife and I, and I know a lot of other people out there have too.”

Nancy Brooks has been working in the country music industry for almost 30 years. She has interviewed pretty much any country star you can think of. In the late 1990s, she started working with Dolly Parton. And yes, Nancy reports that Parton is as sweet as you would think. She loves her life in country music and has been backstage at every CMA Awards show since the late 1990s. Many of her stories are from her one-on-one interviews. She was there at the beginning of the incredible careers of many music superstars today, including Taylor Swift, Shania Twain, and Blake Shelton, and has interviewed them multiple times throughout the years.