Bryan Park Pool is open daily, 11 a.m.-7 p.m., from May 25-Aug. 4. Open weekends only, 11 a.m.-7 p.m., from Aug. 10-Sept. 2.

Admission

Daily admission: $6 per person. Children ages 3 yrs. and younger are admitted free.

Season Pass: $70. Good for admission for one individual to both Bryan Park Pool and Mills Pool during the 2023 season. Season passes are for sale only at Bryan Park Pool.

Economy Punch Pass: $90. Good for 20 total admissions (does not have to be for the same person, unlike Season Pass) to both Bryan Park Pool and Mills Pool. Economy Punch Passes are for sale at Bryan Park Pool and Mills Pool.

There are no admission refunds for unscheduled pool closings, including closings due to emergencies, contamination, or weather conditions. Season Passes and Economy Punch Passes are non-refundable.

Bryan Park Pool accepts cash, checks, and debit/credit card for the purchase of Season Passes and Economy Punch Passes, and for daily admission fees.

Use of the waterslides is included with the daily admission fee, or with the purchase of a Season Pass or Economy Punch Pass.

Apply for a waiver of admission fees for Bryan Park Pool and Mills Pool. For more information, call 812-349-3700 or email parks@bloomington.in.gov.

About Bryan Park Pool

Supervision: All children under age 14 yrs. must be supervised by an adult age 18 yrs. and up at all times.

Weather-Related Closings and Cancellations: Operating hours are subject to change. The pool, or portions of the pool, may close due to lifeguard shortages, low attendance, or threatening weather. For updates on hours of operation or the open status of Bryan Park Pool, call the Bloomington Parks and Recreation Aquatics Hotline at 812-349-3741.

Swim lessons will be cancelled in case of thunder, lightning or extremely cool temperatures, but will meet in the rain. For updates on the status of swim lessons or other classes at Bryan Park Pool, call the Bloomington Parks and Recreation Aquatics Hotline at 812-349-3741.

Bryan Park Pool has a zero-depth activity pool for children under age 10 yrs., two waterslides, diving board, 17' drop side, and a concessions area.

Accessibility: Designated accessible parking is available in the asphalt lot immediately south of the Bryan Park Pool bathhouse off Woodlawn Avenue. Accessible toilets and showers in both men's and women's side of the bathhouse. Accessible chair lift for persons needing assistance entering the pool.

Food and drink may be brought into Bryan Park Pool, but all food and drink must remain in the designated concessions area. No glass containers. Coolers may NOT be brought into the pool.

The following water toys are NOT permitted:

flotation tubes, mats, chairs, or loungers

squirt guns or Super Soakers

The below types of water toys ARE permitted: