This is the first in a two-volume series of books designed to facilitate discussion in Russian of Russian language films. Each chapter concentrates on one film and includes assignments for students training from Intermediate to Advanced Plus proficiency according to the ACTFL guidelines. The book has a modular structure that allows instructors to select the films according to the students' interests and goals of the class. The book can be used on its own as a textbook or as a supplemental material for classes at various levels. While the book's main purpose is the development of students' conversation skills, each chapter includes texts for reading comprehension and exercises that focus on the acquisition of written skills and grammatical accuracy.

Volume 1 Films (The films are not included with the purchase of the textbook but are readily available from numerous vendors, including Amazon.com. Click the film titles below to purchase the films on Amazon.com):

Tsirk (Circus)

Zolushka (Cinderella)

Letyat zhuravli (The Cranes Are Flying)

van Vasilevich menyaet professiyu (Ivan Vasiljevich: Back to the Future)

Ironiya sudby, ili S lyogkim parom! (Irony of Fate/Enjoy Your Bath)

Moskva Slezam Ne Verit (Moscow Does Not Believe in Tears)

Osenniy marafon (Autumn Marathon)

Reviews:

"As language instructors, we have all used film in our classes to improve the linguistic and cultural proficiency of our students. A few textbooks include clips from Russian cinema with some exercises fro comprehension and discussion; however, until now there has been no text which deals exclusively with film as a language and culture acquisition tool. Cinema for Russian Conversation has now filled this void with a two-volume series. . . . The choice of films is excellent: they are classics, dating from 1936-1979, seen and loved by Russian audiences, and they include a variety of genres (musical comedy, fairy tale, drama, comedy and melodrama) . . . the content of each exercise is varied so as not to become repetitive. All the directions for the exercises are given in clear and concise Russian (absolutely essential for students). The text is in modular form so that one need not cover all the films in the order in which they appear in the book. One could "pick and choose" the films to coincide with the content and focus of the course.

"Cinema for Russian Conversation is an excellent addition to available materials for use in the classroom of a language, culture, film, or conversation course."

—Slavic and East European Journal, Volume 49, #4, Winter 2005

About the Authors:

Olga Kagan is coordinator of the undergraduate Russian Program at UCLA. She is the author and co-author of numerous successful Russian textbooks, including the Focus edition Lidiya Chukovskaya’s Sofia Petrovna.

Mara Kashper teaches Russian at Barnard College/Columbia University and is the co-author of Focus Publishing's Lidiya Chukovskaya’s Sofia Petrovna and Reading and Speaking about Russian Newspapers.