NEW YORK, Sept. 4, 2012 /PRNewswire-iReach/ -- Tapulous Inc.'s Tap Tap Revenge franchise, the biggest music game series on iOS and Android platforms with more than 88 million players, has expanded its music collection by tapping into the independent music scene.

(Photo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20120904/CG64404)

With the release of Tap Tap Tour, Tapulous is featuring independent artists from cutting edge production music library MuseIQ, having licensed over 70 songs from the recently-launched online catalog. The new roster of independent artists' songs is a complement to Tap Tap's library featuring hundreds of songs from leading artists like Katy Perry, Lady Gaga, Linkin Park, Ke$ha, Bruno Mars and LMFAO.

Commenting on MuseIQ's catalog, Gwen Bethel Riley, Head of Business Affairs Music at Disney Mobile/Tapulous Inc. said "MuseIQ's curated catalog of indie artists, "Recordshop", features a diverse selection of killer international artists and genres that appeal broadly to our Tour mode of worldwide gameplay. The 'searchability' of the catalog is also really, really easy to work with".

Tap Tap Tour enjoyed immediate success at launch this summer going to #1 on the appstore in over 30 countries worldwide illustrating that both the gaming and the app industry are opening up new avenues for indie artists to dramatically expand their audience reach and grow their sales from new revenue streams. "This is a great vindication for MuseIQ in how we curate and make easily available the most relevant new independent music and it's a real boost to the artists represented in our library", said Augustus Skinner, co-founder and CEO of MuseIQ.

One of the songs licensed by MuseIQ to benefit from being featured in Tap Tap Revenge 4, that surged to #1 in the App store with 25,000 downloads within the first hour of its release, was Kat De Luna's "Drop It Low". Over a one week period of appearing in the game De Luna's tune jumped into the Billboard Dance Charts Top 20. "It's exciting to see our licensing efforts make such a tangible impact on our artists' sales", remarked MuseIQ's co-founder and COO, Ronan Coleman.

About Tapulous Inc.

Tapulous, Inc. is an American software and video game developer and publisher based in Palo Alto, California. It is a wholly owned subsidiary of The Walt Disney Company as part of the Disney Interactive Media Group. The company's most profitable product is the Tap Tap series of music games, which has surpassed over eighty-eight million downloads.

About C&S Media Inc.

MuseIQ® is a registered trademark of C&S Media Inc. a New York based media company serving major networks and studios, advertising agencies and production companies. MuseIQ®'s client list includes Amazon.com, Disney, Estée Lauder, IBM, Marriott Hotels, Timberland and many more leading global brands.

Media Contact: Ronan Coleman MuseIQ, +1 646 415 9210, [email protected]

News distributed by PR Newswire iReach: https://ireach.prnewswire.com

SOURCE MuseIQ