Amr Kashmiri – Lahore

Artist Amr Kashmiri Song Lahore A little blues track for the City of Gardens – Lahore. You can preview the song below:

Pakistan emerged on top at the London Asian Film Festival 2012

A night for Pakistan in London. Pakistani films were big winners at the London Asian Film Festival 2012 held at BAFTA. Shoaib Mansoor‘s Bol won three awards in the category of the Best Film, Best Female Actor award for Humaima Malick and best New Talent for Amr Kashmiri. Pakistan music icon Rahat Fateh Ali Khan […]

Amr Kashmiri – We are the people (Empire of the sun cover)

Artist: Amr Kashmiri Song: We are the people (Empire of the sun cover) Download Now! This is a cover to one Amr’s all time favorite tracks from Empire of the sun. The video is a montage of various clips that were shot while on a trip to the beautiful Lake Champlain Burlington VT. All of […]

Amr Kashmiri – Pumped Up Kicks (Acousitc Cover)

[ Download Audio ] Artist: Amr Kashmiri Song: Pumped up kicks Download Now! An Acoustic cover by Amr Kashmiri of the song Pumped up kicks, originally by Foster the people. The video stars Amr Kashmiri, and his roommate Ryan Shields. All music produced, composed and arranged by Amr Kashmiri – Join Amr’s Official Facebook Page

Amr Kashmiri – Mi amado (Download Audio)

Amr Kashmiri – mi amado (Download Audio) Artist: Amr Kashmiri Song: mi amado (My Beloved) Download Now! “mi amado” (My Beloved) is an original Spanish guitar instrumental by Amr Kashmiri. All music composed, arranged and produced by Amr Kashmiri. Take a listen to the song below:

Amr Kashmiri – Changing ways (Download Audio)

Amr Kashmiri – Changing ways (Download Audio) Artist: Amr Kashmiri Song: Changing Ways Download Now! Arranged/Produced/Composed by Amr Kashmiri Changing ways is a Blues Guitar Instrumental. Take a listen to the song below:

Making of Shoaib Mansoor’s ‘Bol’ (Videos)

Bol – Movie Review [Comic]

Disclaimer: Though the creator of the comic has tried to keep out as many spoilers as he could, there may still be few. [Via HamsterShorts]

Ali Zafar Goes Out of The Way to Promote Pakistani Film Industry

Although we know that Ali Zafar is busy shooting films in B-town, he is being more than supportive of his own film industry and seems to be going out of his way to do that. Recently at the Lahore premier of the film ‘Bol‘, Ali Zafar, despite his differences with Shoaib Mansoor in the past […]