National Review, the conservative weekly magazine, published yesterday, a selection of what it described as “highly classified documents” dealing with United States involvement in Vietnam, which it said had been leaked to the magazine.

National Review identified the material as “not published” by either The New York Times or The Washington Post in their series in June and July based on a Pentagon study of United States involvement in Indochina.

One of the documents in the magazine was said to have been written by Dr. Daniel J. Boorstin, director of the National Museum of History and Technology and a social historian noted for his sense of the ridiculous.

Dr. Boorstin denied last night that he had written the document but said with a chuckle that he believed the author to be Professor X, author of a 1970 sociological spoof entitled “The Sociology of the Absurd or: The Application of Professor X.”

In reviewing the spoof, manr book reviewers said that they believed that Professor X was, in fact, Dr. Boorstin.

The draft memorandum, saidl to have been written for President John F. Kennedy in June,1 1963, concluded that the American people were, by nature, unsuited to a protracted conflict. The paper was one of the documents described in the magazine's July 27 issue as “The Secret Papers They Didn't Publish” and “Top Secret Memoranda‐1962‐65.” In the case of most of them, independent verification of their authenticity could not be made yesterday.

William F. Buckley Jr., editor of National Review, could not be reached for comment. Through a spokesman, however, Mr. Buckley relayed a message that he was “hiding out where Daniel Ellsberg is.”

Another of those credited with authorship was Frank Trager, a scholar cited as the co‐author with Douglas Pike of a 1964 “confidential memorandum” on the National Liberation Front. Mr. Trager said yesterday that he could not be sure whether he and Mr. Pike might have written such a memorandum. But he said, after the article was read to him,1 that there was no classified information in it and that its contents had all been said or written publicly.

Dean Rusk, the former Secretary of State, asked about what was described as his handwritten memorandum, said: “I can't verify that I wrote any such memorandum. It's entirely possible that I did.”

The general impression given by the documents is one of the United States seeking to avoid any long‐term involvement in Southeast Asia.

The magazine, in a statement, said that the material had been published “in protest against what the informant held to be distorted impressions conveyed by the documents published in the New York Times.”

News accounts of the National Review publication were widely distributed by The Associated Press and United Press International and an article about the documents received front‐page display in The Washington Post this morning.