Take note of how to use memos.

KMJI Majic Radio, a station in Denver, celebrated the first National Memo Day on May 21, 1989.

There is no information on why the station or its DJs wanted a national day for memos. Were the on-air personalities tired of endless memorandums from management? Perhaps they were fed up with meetings that should have been a memo?

Memos have their place in business. They inform staff of policy changes, upcoming deadlines, and changes in human resources.

How people send them has changed since email became a thing. In 1989, no one had yet hit Reply All with "per my last email" in the text.

Instead, memos were circulated in offices while meeting specific writing and formatting standards. These rules of etiquette still apply to writing emails for business, and they also stick to those old written rules.

That etiquette includes reading them, Bob.

Memos: more than just business communication

Memos we write to ourselves can remind and motivate us. Those reminders might be to finish a project or wish someone a happy birthday or anniversary.

A well-placed memo to yourself on a sticky note can keep you organized. Think of a great idea? Write it on a sticky note or in a journal.

Want to share that idea or date with everyone in the office? Yes, you can send an email. But maybe a cinema box adds some humor and attention an email cannot generate.

During the Covid-19 lockdowns, it was easy to lose track of what day it was. Now life is getting closer to normal; we again use memos to remind family members and coworkers of upcoming dates and important information.

It's also a great idea to keep a journal around for writing your thoughts down right away. A bedside journal can record what you remember from dreams or that great idea you had in the middle of the night.

You can use a work journal in a similar way. Yes, your computer or phone probably has a note or a reminder app. But, when you write out ideas and information with a pen and paper, you connect to it more fully. It can help you develop that idea into the next steps for success.

Memo Day Promotional Ideas.

Take a look at our suggestions for Memo Day promotional products to stay on task and organized.

Customized Post-It and Sticky Notes

Whether you're a Sticky Notes or a Post-It person, these small pieces of paper can help you organize your daily life.

Need to make a reminder to book a dentist appointment, call your child's school, or take out the trash? Write yourself a memo and put it where you will see it, like on your bathroom mirror, computer monitor, or refrigerator.

Post-It notes come in many sizes for different uses. The flag style Sticky Notes work well for marking pages in the cookbooks for the recipe you use most. The small oblong ones even make a quick and easy-to-remove webcam cover.

Offices all over use Sticky Notes to track what projects people are working on, when they're due, and write each other inspirational notes.

We recommend giving Sticky Note books as an expo booth promotional product. These handy books will stay next to computers and desks, reminding visitors of your brand.

Personalized Journals

Journals are a popular corporate gift for staff and visitors at expo booths. So why do people love journals?

In our digital era, making a voice memo or a note in our phone apps is easy. But pen and paper -- and taking the time and effort to write out ideas -- shows that thought means something.

Writing with a pen (or pencil) on paper is a more visceral experience that can help spark new ideas in the future.

Promotional Magnet Memo Clips

For some families, the refrigerator is the center of family communication.

Magnetic memo clips can help busy families keep track of activities, appointments, receipts, and coupons.

What do you save on your refrigerator door? Memo clips can hold the pizza place reward coupons, a book of Forever Stamps, or tickets for the game next week.

These are popular giveaways for trade shows because families use them. Even with the magnet, they work as chip clips in emergency snacking situations!

Branded Letter Openers

Do you still get invoices and other important communication through the mail?

Letter openers are a low-cost promotional product many businesses appreciate. A magnetic letter opener stuck on the fridge can also open difficult boxes and chip bags. Keep one near the recycling bin to break down cardboard boxes.

Give one to your customers that's fully customized with your name, email, and phone numbers.

Personalized Cinema Light Up Boxes

How do you recognize office birthdays, remind staff of the office lunch, or celebrate work anniversaries?

A cinema light-up box is a billboard for offices and homes. You can change the lettering for special events or say "Hello!" every morning. Set it near the office front door, the water cooler, or the coffee machine.

You can also change the letters to let everyone know which "National Day" is happening today!

Custom Pens and Promotional Pencils

Educators say you remember information better when you are writing it by hand. Studies show students who took notes by hand retain information better than those who typed them.

Writing yourself a note and sticking it on your computer screen, next to your office phone, or by the bathroom mirror is a great way to keep yourself on track.

From our cell phone assistant to our home's smart speakers, electronic devices remind us of what we need to do throughout the day. But notes are personal and often a better reminder than a chime, especially if you forget what the reminder was even for.

Promotional Coffee Mugs

What do coffee mugs have to do with memos? Many people read and respond to emails in the morning while enjoying their coffee. What better place to put your logo than on their coffee mug?