Southwest Airlines Co. (NYSE: LUV) (the “Company”) today reported its second quarter 2022 financial results:

Strong quarterly net income of $760 million1

Record quarterly net income, excluding special items2, of $825 million

Record quarterly operating revenues of $6.7 billion

Cash provided by operations of $1.9 billion

Liquidity3 of $17.4 billion, well in excess of debt outstanding of $10.5 billion

Bob Jordan, Chief Executive Officer, stated, “We are very pleased to report all-time record quarterly revenues and net income, excluding special items, representing a significant milestone in our pandemic recovery. Travel demand surged in second quarter, and thus far, strong demand trends continue in third quarter 2022. As anticipated, we experienced inflationary pressures and headwinds from operating at suboptimal productivity levels in second quarter, which we expect will continue in second half 2022; however, our fuel hedge continues to provide significant protection against higher jet fuel prices. Barring significant unforeseen events and based on current trends, we expect to be solidly profitable for the remaining two quarters of this year, and for full year 2022.

“We are making meaningful progress against our 2022 priorities, and I am very proud of our People and their heroic efforts to fight against the pandemic. Since April, we have been delivering a more reliable product for our Customers with cancellations representing less than one percent of scheduled flights in May and June 2022, which is a completion factor of more than 99 percent. We have added flights in second half 2022—especially in short-haul business markets—to better support our operation and the restoration of our route network.

We reached another milestone, returning to overall pre-pandemic staffing levels in May 2022. We plan to continue our hiring and training efforts in specific areas—in particular, Pilots—to support further network restoration and future growth with plans to add over 10,000 Employees, net of attrition, this year. However, we plan to begin moderating overall hiring in second half 2022 as our focus shifts to 2023 planning and executing on our goals to better optimize staffing to flight schedules, reduce cost inefficiencies, and return to historic efficiency levels.

“We are experiencing delays in our aircraft deliveries from The Boeing Company (Boeing), and we now estimate 2022 deliveries to be 66 versus the previously expected 114, ending the year with 765 aircraft. Despite those delays, we are confident about our ability to fly our flight schedules as planned, which are currently published through March 8, 2023. We continue to invest in technologies, airports, and facilities to further modernize our operation and allow us to scale for future growth.

“We are also investing in the Southwest Customer Experience, and I am thrilled about today’s announcement introducing yet another exciting Customer benefit that sets Southwest even further apart from the competition: Flight credits don’t expire4. We are famous for offering industry-leading flexibility for Customers, and it is a key differentiator of our brand. Based on research and feedback, we believe flexibility has become even more important to Customers over the past few years. This further extension of flexibility for our Customers reinforces Southwest as industry-leading and builds on our low-fare brand with no fees to change or cancel plans5; two bags fly free®6; Rapid Rewards® points that don’t expire; and transferable flight credits7. With flight credits that don’t expire and the addition of our new Wanna Get Away PlusTM fare product—along with recently announced investments to enhance WiFi, install latest-technology onboard power ports, offer larger overhead bins, and enable new self-service capabilities—we are making travel even easier. We believe we have the strongest route network and value proposition for Customers in the domestic U.S., and also believe this policy change will both win new Customers and increase Customer loyalty.”