German Ralf Schumann's attempt to win a fourth gold medal in the rapid-fire pistol will be one of the highlights of an Olympic shooting tournament likely to be dominated by the Chinese.

Schumann, who won Olympic gold in 1992, 1996, and 2004, broke his own world record at the World Cup in May to show his rivals that, at 46, he remains at the peak of his powers.

Christian Reitz of Germany finished second while Russians Sergei Polyakov, who took the Olympic silver in 2004, and Sergei Alifrenko, who took the bronze, were well off the pace.

Another German, Sonja Pfeilschilter is fancied to capture her first Olympic medal in Beijing.

In the men's trap, Australian Michael Diamond, 36, goes for his third Olympic title in his fifth Games. He slipped to 35th at the 2006 Worlds but rebounded to take the 2007 crown, setting a world record.

The men's double trap promises to be an intriguing showdown as Sheikh Ahmed Al Maktoum returns to defend his gold medal, the first ever for the United Arab Emirates. India's Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore struggled at the 2006 and 2007 Worlds but took silver in Athens.

Mark Russell, who won gold in 1996 and silver in 2000, is also back, as is Sydney champion Richard Faulds of Great Britain. They will contend with Vitaly Fokeev of Russia, the 2006 world champion, and Francesco D'Aniello of Italy, the reigning world champ.

Australian Suzanne Balough hopes to clinch her second straight Olympic gold in the women's trap. She improved to fourth in last year's World Championship.

In the men's skeet, the last three Olympic champions - Ennio Falco of Italy, Mykola Milchev of Ukraine and Andrea Benelli of Italy - will each be hunting for a second gold. They'll face 2006 world champion Andrei Ineshin and 2007 champion George Achilleos.

In the women's skeet, defending champion Diana Igaly of Hungary is back, as is Athens bronze winner Zemfira Meftakhetdinova of Azerbaijan. Russian Svetlana Demina would like to improve on her 2000 silver medal, while 2004 runner-up Wei Ning of China also hopes to take a step up on the podium.