Description

Mid-City Community Advocacy Network (Mid-City CAN) is a community collaborative comprised of hundreds of partners and thousands of residents in San Diego’s communities of color. Centered in the City Heights Community, Mid-City CAN’s mission is to create a safe, productive, and healthy community through collaboration, advocacy, and organizing. In its 35th year Mid-City CAN plays an essential role in the San Diego Region by facilitating dialogue, identifying common issues, spearheading advocacy efforts, building power, and training residents to take leadership roles in affecting change. Campaign wins include $5.1 million towards two skate parks and the Halal school lunch program to name a few.

The Policy Advocate works as assigned, to proactively develop policy opportunities for the advancement of Mid-City CAN community organizing and advocacy campaigns. The Policy Advocate works with diverse and monolingual community members, their families, and organizational allies in the design and ongoing implementation of Mid-City CAN community organizing and advocacy campaigns. Duties include, and may not be limited to, tracking legislation at state and local levels, formulating policy solutions, analyzing polices, developing strategies, directly providing and preparing community members for public testimony, liaising with elected offices, and working in coalition with other nonprofits to advance a policy platform. The Policy Advocate reports to the Organizing Director or their designee. This position is full-time exempt and not eligible for overtime. Current policy work is focused, and may not be limited to, City budget equity, Parks and Recreation, Cannabis Equity, Housing, and Youth Policies.

Key Duties and Responsibilities

Support community organizers in advancing Momentum Team campaigns through public policy issue development, research, analysis, and education.

Serve as Mid-City CAN’s primary advocate and liaison at the federal, state, regional and local levels of government through coalition work, advocacy and education, and direct lobbying when applicable.

Effectively represent Mid-City CAN and its members before elected officials to advance campaigns.

Effectively communicate Mid-City CAN’s mission and vision.

Research, analyze, and write about policy opportunities in order to train and advise staff and members; in the form of internal memorandum, fact sheets, legislative language, and concept papers.

Craft potential policy solutions and generate political will among decision-makers.

Respond to developments at various governmental levels affecting community organizing campaigns (frequently with little or no advance notice due to governmental dockets).

Assist community organizers in developing a plan of action on various pieces of legislation, policy issues, and initiatives.

Research campaign targets, develop strategies, conduct power analysis, and assist staff in daily implementation.

Detailed tracking of policy through legislative process and of governmental contacts.

Strictly comply with lobbying regulations at various levels of government and with donor restrictions.

Track MCC advocacy hours and complete any requisite lobbying reports or registrations.

Track issue development and legislation at various governmental levels.

Establish and maintain effective working relations with coworkers, administrators, other agencies and various internal and external stakeholders.

Develop issue messaging and communications strategy in coordination with other staff.

Attend public hearings governmental meetings, conferences, and committees.

Prepare public comment on legislative issues.

Actively work with community members, partner organizations, and staff, to execute advocacy strategies.

Adapt strategically and proactively to changes in campaign environment.

Attend staff meetings, Organizing Team meetings, weekly data entry, and complete program reports (required).

Assist with canvassing, phone-banking and events as assigned.

Maintain governmental decision calendar, timeline, and proactively flag critical dates and deadlines to the team.

Vet and keep track of organizational endorsements

Other duties as assigned.

The duties listed above are intended only as illustrations of the various types of work that may be performed. The omission of specific statements of duties does not exclude them from the position if the work is similar, related or a logical assignment to the position.

Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities

Bachelors or Master's degree in public policy, political science, public administration, or related field, and 3-5 years commensurate professional experience in governmental affairs, elected offices, or political offices.

Community organizing or leadership training a plus, such as certificates from: Institute for Cultural Affairs, Gamaliel Foundation, PICO National Network, Center for Third World Organizing, Mid-West Academy, RePower, Yo!Cali, or comparable organizations is helpful.

Familiar with governmental decision-making processes and legislative research tools

Familiar with data bases such as; California Legislative Information LegInfo, Congress.gov, and Nation Builder.

Ability to interpret and build legislative language.

Ability to generate data-driven reports and briefs for informed decision-making.

Bilingual proficiency in Spanish, Somali, Swahili, Arabic, Vietnamese, or other language and a commitment to using bilingual language skills on a routine basis a plus.

Possess a passion for social justice that translates to daily interactions.

Ability to build consensus and effectively manage conflict.

Ability to perform under pressure in a fast-paced flexible environment and meet deadlines.

Ability to self-direct, take initiative, and work independently, while also being able to work as part of a team when assigned to do so.

Exceptional oral and written communication, facilitation, direct interpersonal workplace communication, and public speaking skills.

Ability to work with and maintain positive relationships with diverse constituencies and sensitivity in dealing with diversity issues including race, gender, sexual orientation, economic status.

Flexible and ability to adapt to learning new ideas and concepts, responding to changes and last-minute requests. · Access to reliable transportation and willing to use it for job-related tasks.

Commitment to personal professional growth and development.

Exude professionalism on the job and maintain emotional composure.

Excellent interpersonal skills, ability to maintain etiquette in a professional environment, and exude a positive attitude.

Access to transportation and willing to use for work purposes.

Access to cell phone and willing to use to work purposes.

Willing to conduct air, train, car, and overnight travel, as health orders and safety protocols permit, up to 30% of time.

Health, Safety and In-person Work

Strictly comply with all applicable public health orders and organizational safety protocols.

Work as part of a team among colleagues to assist with unforeseen health-related projects.

Conduct work in person as health orders allow (PPE provided as needed), most work is expected to be in-person with hybrid options.

Be flexible to adjust to changing safety protocols and health orders as needed.

Physical Requirements and Work Environment: Work is performed in an office or community setting; employee regularly sits at a computer station and operates electronic equipment 6 to 8 hours per day; occasionally lifts, carries and positions objects weighing up to 20 pounds. Position involves regular use of a computer and keyboard, telephone, and face-to-face communications; employee should be able to communicate clearly and professionally in all of these manners. Position works in community settings, may be standing at event table, and walks neighborhood for several hours on as needed basis. The employee may spend periods of time sitting, standing, or walking. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.

Compensation: The annual salary for this mid-career full-time, exempt position is $68,000, commensurate with work experience, skills and educational background.

Mid-City Community Advocacy Network provides equal employment opportunities to all employees and applicants without regard to race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, gender, sex, gender identity or expression, age, medical condition, sexual orientation, marital status, citizenship, pregnancy, physical or mental disability, genetic information, veteran status, military status, caregiver status or any other characteristic protected by federal, state or local laws.

MinSalary:58279