Description

Mid-City Community Advocacy Network (Mid-City CAN) is a community collaborative comprised of hundreds of partners and thousands of residents in San Diego’s communities of color. Centered in the City Heights Community, Mid-City CAN’s mission is to create a safe, productive, and healthy community through collaboration, advocacy, and organizing. In its 35th year MidCity CAN plays an essential role in the San Diego Region by facilitating dialogue, identifying common issues, spearheading advocacy efforts, building power, and training residents to take leadership roles in affecting change. Campaign wins include $5.1 million towards two skate parks and the Halal school lunch program to name a few.

Reporting to the Director of Organizing, the Youth Organizer works in partnership with youth and their families, and organizational allies, in the design and ongoing implementation of Mid-City CAN Youth Council community organizing and advocacy campaigns. The Youth Organizer will advance the goal of building youth power through leadership development, base-building, voter engagement, and supporting the Youth Council in identifying and building campaigns to advocate for change, executing strategies, and mobilizing for action. The current Youth Council campaign is focused on revitalizing a local park in City Heights.

Key Duties and Responsibilities

Identify, recruit, motivate, and retain, youth community members and adult allies with strong leadership qualities through one-on one meetings, canvassing, phone-banking, community events, voter engagement, and other activities.

Research campaign targets, develop strategies, conduct power analysis, and assist Youth Council members in advocating for institutional and social change.

Structure, coordinate, and execute campaign actions/events.

Facilitate leadership development for youth members around specific skills related to community organizing, grassroots advocacy and other relevant topics.

Develop Mid-City CAN Youth Council goals and objectives in the form of a campaign chart/plan.

Create and execute campaign plans, project plans, including timeline, roles, and resources needed, using Mid-City CAN planning tools. Analyze and revise as appropriate to meet changing needs and requirements.

Deliver custom program materials, modules, and simulations based on the Mid-City CAN tool kit and methodology, as well as training others in their application.

Design and facilitate community planning processes, meetings, and community capacity building workshops.

Conduct quarterly power analysis with Youth Council members. Exercise care and responsibility for youth development and wellbeing by adhering to Mid-City CAN youth worker protocols.

Complete weekly data entry and progress reporting.

Overnight travel for training and advocacy required 15% of time when County Health Orders allow.

Flexible hours, weekend and evening work every Friday required.

The Mid-City CAN Youth Council meets every Friday 3pm-6pm except on holidays and when high school academics take precedence. The Youth Organizer is expected to work regularly every Friday unless given approval in advance.

The Mid-City CAN Youth Council participates in group travel for camp or advocacy days several times a year that require the Youth Organizer to accompany youth for a 3-5 day period. The Youth Organizer is expected to work to accompany youth for a 3-5 day periods as needed unless given approval in advance.

The Mid-City CAN Youth Council may conduct activities on weekends, Saturday or Sunday as scheduled, that require the Youth Organizer to accompany youth for 4-8 hours on occasion. The Youth Organizer is expected to work on weekends, Saturday or Sunday as needed unless given approval in advance.

Attend all staff meetings, completely weekly data entry, and program reports.

Volunteer to assist with internal staff committees such as; holiday, summer planning, or other staff committees which may be active.

Establish and maintain effective working relationships with coworkers, administrators, and various internal and external stakeholders.

Assist with civic engagement and voter engagement work, by canvassing, phone/textbanking, lit drops, and events as needed.

Assist with MCC fundraising efforts and board of directors as assigned.

Other tasks as assigned.

Digital Organizing

Assist community members with digital platforms and internet access as needed.

Build a digital campaign and execute virtual actions and tactics.

Maintain campaign presence on MCC social media channels and comply with communications standards.

The duties listed above are intended only as illustrations of the various types of work that may be performed. The omission of specific statements of duties does not exclude them from the position if the work is similar, related or a logical assignment to the position.

Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities

Associate or bachelor degree in community development, youth development, sociology, public policy, social work, community organizing, ethnic studies, or other related field.

A minimum of 2 years continuous commensurate professional experience with one employer, or more than 2 years commensurate professional experience with multiple employers that demonstrate job commitment and retention.

Community organizing or leadership training a plus, such as certificates from: Institute for Cultural Affairs, Gamaliel Foundation, PICO National Network, Center for Third World Organizing, Mid-West Academy, RePower, Yo!Cali, or comparable organizations

Familiar with Community Development, Youth Development, Youth Organizing, Community Organizing Theories, policy development, voter engagement, or political advocacy.

Bilingual preferred (Spanish, Somali, Arabic, or Vietnamese).

Ability to generate data-driven reports and briefs for informed decision-making

Possess a passion for social justice that translates to daily interactions

Ability to build consensus and effectively manage conflict.

Ability to perform under pressure in a fast-paced flexible environment and meet deadlines.

Ability to self-direct, take initiative, and work independently, while also being able to work as part of a team when assigned to do so.

Exceptional oral and written communication, facilitation, and public speaking skills

Ability to balance conflicting demands

Ability to work with and maintain positive relationships with diverse constituencies and sensitivity in dealing with diversity issues including race, gender, sexual orientation, economic status

Flexible and ability to adapt to learning new ideas and concepts, responding to changes and last-minute requests from policy makers

Ability to conduct overnight travel for training and advocacy required 15% of time in accordance with public health orders.

Ability to work flexible hours, weekends and evening work required 30% of time in accordance with public health orders.

Access to reliable transportation and willing to use it for job-related tasks.

Access to cell phone and home internet for work purposes.

Exudes professionalism in a manner welcoming of religious, cultural, gender, and other or intersectional identities.

Excellent computer and digital skills.

Commitment to personal professional growth and development

Excellent interpersonal skills, ability to maintain etiquette in a professional environment, and exude a positive attitude.

Health, Safety and In-person Work

Strictly comply with all applicable public health orders and organizational safety protocols.

Work as part of a team among colleagues to assist with unforeseen health-related projects.

Conduct work in person as health orders allow (PPE provided as needed), most work is expected to be in-person with hybrid options.

Be flexible to adjust to changing safety protocols and health orders as needed.

Physical Requirements and Work Environment: Work is performed in an office or community setting; employee regularly sits at a computer station and operates electronic equipment 6 to 8 hours per day; occasionally lifts, carries and positions objects weighing up to 20 pounds. Position involves regular use of a computer and keyboard, telephone, and face-to-face communications; employee should be able to communicate clearly and professionally in all of these manners. Position works in community settings, may be standing at event table, and walks neighborhood for several hours on as needed basis. The employee may spend periods of time sitting, standing, or walking. Reasonable accommodations may be made to enable individuals with disabilities to perform the essential functions.

Compensation: The annual salary for this mid-career full-time, exempt position is $67,000, commensurate with work experience, skills and educational background.

Mid-City Community Advocacy Network provides equal employment opportunities to all employees and applicants without regard to race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, gender, sex, gender identity or expression, age, medical condition, sexual orientation, marital status, citizenship, pregnancy, physical or mental disability, genetic information, veteran status, military status, caregiver status or any other characteristic protected by federal, state or local laws.

Salary : $67,000