Ramprasad Sen Biography

Ramprasad Sen, also known as Sadhak Ramprasad Sen was a Shakta poet and saint of Bengal in 18th century. His bhakti poems, known as Ramprasadi addressing Hindu goddess Kali are very popular in Bengal. His stories are mixed with reality as well as a few mythological factors. Ramprasad was born into a Tantric family and was a disciple of Krishnananda Agamavagisha. He showed an inclination towards poetry from an early age. He was the court poet of the king Krishna Chandra of Nadia and was immensely popular for his devotional songs of Goddess Kali. His well known works are Vidyasundar, Kali-kirtana, Krishna-kirtana and Shaktigiti. Biographies of Ramprasad are a mixture of biography, metaphor, and legend.

Ramprasad was born in Halisahar, a village in the banks of Ganges near Kolkata. It’s widely believed that he was born in 1718 or 1723. His father, Ramram Sen was a Sanskrit scholar and Ayurveda physician. He learnt Sanskrit grammar, literature, Persian and Hindi from a school. He used to quote poems during those days. Though his father believed that Ram will follow his path of an Ayurvedic doctor, Ram followed spiritual path. He became a great follower of Goddess Kali and was inclined towards mantra and tantra. He later became the disciple of Krishnananda Agamavagisha, a Tantric yogi and scholar. Later he devoted his full time in sadhana.

After his father’s death, due to poverty and family responsibilities, he went to Kolkata and worked as an accountant under Durga Charan Mitra. But instead of concentrating on his work, he wrote poems praising goddess and after reading his poems, Mitra was impressed that he encouraged him to write poems. He sent him to his village and gave his monthly payment also. Ramprasad spent most of his time in sadhana, meditation, and prayer. Maharaja Krishna Chandra of Nadia, a landlord under Nawab Sirajuddaula of Bengal was a great devotee of Kali and hearing his songs, appointed Ramprasad as his court singer. Though he rarely appeared at the court, Nawab gave him 100 acres of tax free land. In return he dedicated his book Vidyasundar to the king. He was looked after by his son Ramdulal and daughter-in-law Bhagavati during his old age.

Published: N/A