It Ends With Us, the novel by Colleen Hoover, has taken the book world by storm in the past few years.

And, excitingly, the book is being adapted for the screen! Here’s everything you need to know about the upcoming It Ends With Us movie.

What is the plot of ‘It Ends With Us’?

It Ends With Us is classified under the “romance” genre, and explores themes of love and abuse.

The film is based on the book of the same name by author Colleen Hoover, which tells the story of Lily who is a recent college graduate who has just moved to a new city looking for a fresh start and then falls in love. You can purchase the book for $12 from Big W.

“Even as Lily finds herself becoming the exception to his ‘no dating’ rule, she can’t help but wonder what made him that way in the first place. As questions about her new relationship overwhelm her, so do thoughts of Atlas Corrigan — her first love and a link to the past she left behind. He was her kindred spirit, her protector. When Atlas suddenly reappears, everything Lily has built with Ryle is threatened,” the book’s description reads.

However, Colleen herself has confirmed the characters will be older in the movie than they are in the book to make the plot more realistic.

There was a little controversy regarding Blake Lively’s casting as Lily, as she is more than a decade older than her character Lily, who is 23.

Colleen defended the casting choice and admitted that it was actually to rectify a mistake she made when writing the novel.

“Back when I wrote It Ends With Us, the new adult [genre] was very popular,” Colleen said. “You were writing college-age characters. That’s what I was contracted to do.”

The author continued, “I didn’t know that neurosurgeons went to school for 50 years – there’s not a 20-something neurosurgeon. As I started making this movie, I’m like, ‘We need to age them out because I messed up,'” she said. “So that’s my fault.”

Who has been cast in ‘It Ends With Us’?

It Ends With Us will feature a relatively star-studded cast, spearheaded by Blake Lively who will be portraying the main character, as well as Justin Baldoni who is both directing and starring in the film.

The confirmed cast list includes:

Blake Lively as Lily Bloom

Justin Baldoni as Ryle Kincaid

Brandon Sklenar as Atlas Corrigan

Jenny Slate as Alyssa

Hasan Minhaj as Marshall

Isabela Ferrer as Young Lily Bloom

Alex Neustaedter as Young Atlas Corrigan

When will ‘It Ends With Us’ be released?

In July 2023, Sony Pictures announced that It Ends With Us would be released on 9 February 2024.

However, due to the SAG-AFTRA strikes, production was halted. Before the strike, they were last seen filming on 9 June 2023 and the movie was reportedly only about halfway through production at the time (having only started in May).

Production was confirmed to resume in January 2024 after the strike ended, and PEOPLE confirmed in early 2024 that the premiere had been pushed back a few months.

It has been confirmed that the It Ends With Us movie will now be released on 8 August 2024.

Where can you watch ‘It Ends With Us’?

As mentioned, it has been confirmed that the It Ends With Us film will be released in cinemas in August 2024.

As for streaming, we’re confident that once we get more details about its release, we’ll find out when and where It Ends With Us will be available to watch and stream in Australia.

Has ‘It Ends With Us’ started filming?

Yes! It Ends With Us began filming in May 2023 and reportedly wrapped production in January 2024.