Individually they’ve starred in some of the UK’s best-loved romantic comedies, including Love Actually, Mamma Mia: Here We Go Again, Yesterday and Bridget Jones’ Baby. And now Dame Emma Thompson and Lily James are teaming up to play mother and daughter alongside rising star Shazad Latif in what promises to be the must-see film of spring, What’s Love Got To Do With It?

From a screenplay by Jemima Khan, inspired by her own romance with cricketer and former Prime Minister of Pakistan Imran Khan, the romantic comedy drama takes a fresh look at the modern world of romance against a vibrant backdrop of London and Lahore.

Lily James plays documentary maker Zoe, exhausted from swiping to find her Mr Right and coping with the strong opinions voiced by her mother Cath (Emma Thompson). Zoe’s childhood friend Kazim (Shazad Latif) is a doctor who plans to follow his parents’ wishes for an assisted marriage with a bride from Pakistan.

WATCH: What's Love Got To Do With It? trailer

The pair ponder love, friendship and families as Zoe starts filming a documentary about Kazim’s upcoming nuptials. As their worlds collide, Zoe discovers she may need to adopt a new approach to her relationships… and there might just be a ‘will they won’t they’ storyline to keep us all guessing too!

The film is touted to become the next blockbuster hit from StudioCanal and Working Title, producers of some of the most iconic romantic comedies in history, including Bridget Jones’ Diary, Notting Hill, Four Weddings and a Funeral and About Time.

Promising vibrant costumes, a heartwarming story and lots of laughs along the way, What’s Love Got To Do With It? is a moving celebration of love in its many forms. Its cross-cultural approach and diverse ensemble cast adds a fresh spin to this much-loved genre, with a soundtrack that features Naughty Boy and Lily herself.

Expect hilarious one-liners from Kazim's older relatives, a love story that keeps you guessing and poignant moments as Cath and Zoe rediscover their bond despite the former's 'unique' approach to parenting. The film makes an entertaining night out for friends or a thoughtful experience to share on Mother's Day.