Michael Caine is one of the greatest film actors that Britain has ever produced. In a career spanning seven decades, he has acted in over 150 films and is known for his likeable personality. Also known for his versatility, he has played a variety of roles ranging from a fun-loving playboy to a cynical secret agent. Caine has been the recipient of numerous awards and accolades throughout his career, including a Knight of The Queen in 2000. Find out more about the movie icon here, including his age, height, net worth, facts about his wife, children and what they have.

Michael Caine Bio (Age)

Michael Caine (birth name – Maurice JosephMicklewhite) was born on March 14, 1933. His father’s name was Maurice while his mother’s name was Ellen Frances. He has a brother named Stanley and a maternal half-brother named David (late now). The actor spent his formative years in London, attending schools including Hackney Downs School and Wilson’s Grammar School in Camberwell, London.

Michael Caine came from a poor, working-class background and grew up in dangerous low-income neighborhoods. To avoid trouble on the streets, he joined the neighborhood youth club and got involved in acting classes. He then fell in love with acting and decided to pursue a career in that direction. Caine honed his skills by playing several club games and after graduating from high school, he joined a film company as a clerk and messenger.

Michael Caine was forced to temporarily put his acting ambitions on hold when he was drafted into national service at the age of 19. He spent two years abroad and returned to London in 1954. On his return he joined a repertory company and landed small parts in several of their productions. Caine endured a string of minor roles in film, television and repertory for the next decade, but did not despair. He worked hard and his persistence paid off in 1964 when he landed a supporting role in the popular film. Zulu . The film propelled him into the limelight and he soon landed lead roles in several blockbusters including The Ipcress File(1965), which made him a household name in the UK and England Alfie (1966), which made him popular in Hollywood.

His capital

Sir Michael Caine has a net worth of $75 million. His net worth stems from his successful acting career. Michael Caine hasn’t rested on his oars since his breakthrough in the ’60s. He has acted in numerous critically acclaimed films such as Funeral in Berlin, The Italian Job, Sleuth, Dress to Kill, Raising Rita, Mona Lisa, Hannah and Her Sisters, The Dark Knight Trilogy, Inception, Interstellar, and Now You See me . He has also received several awards, including the 1987 and 2000 Oscars for Best Supporting Actor.