The New Yorker, May 11, 1998 P. 62

CULTURAL POLITICS about Warren Beatty's new movie "Bulworth." ...In "Bulworth," which actor Warren Beatty directed, produced, co-wrote, and stars in, he plays a weary U.S. Senator named Jay Bulworth who contracts a hit on himself after taking out a $10-million life-insurance policy. With nothing to lose, Bulworth starts saying exactly what he thinks about politics, money, and race, and as he does, he immerses himself in black culture. The writer had lunch with Beatty, 61, recently in New York to discuss the film and its political message. Beatty first thought about doing a movie about race in the late '60s. During that time, Beatty became close to many black activists, and the era was clearly central to his political development. In the film, as he gets closer and closer to falling apart, Bulworth starts rapping, and soon, most of his dialogue is in the form of a rap. Beatty says that "the same people who are objecting to rap now would in the '60s have been objecting to Huey Newton or Bobby Seale or Eldridge Cleaver or Stokely Carmichael." The embrace of black America in the film is more than metaphorical; Beatty seems to be calling hip-hop an agent of social change. In "Bulworth," the sellout Senator reclaims his soul through an immersion in the putative authenticity of urban black culture. The writer describes a special "Bulworth" screening that a busload of black kids attended. One intriguing aspect of the movie is its bona-fide political content. Bulworth touts the public financing of elections, blasts the insurance industry for inflating health-care costs, and denounces the corrupting influence of corporate-owned networks. "Bulworth" sometimes plays as if Beatty had optioned the film rights to a month's worth of editorials in "The Nation." Beatty was able to make such a politically incorrect movie due to a deal he had made with Fox when they backed out of financing his earlier movie "Dick Tracy." As part of the deal, Fox agreed to give Beatty a $30-million budget and complete control over his next film. Without these unique circumstances, Beatty may not have been able to finance "Bulworth." The writer wonders if "Bulworth" is a Hollywood film about politics or a political film about Hollywood. Beatty's disenchantment with the Democratic Party--and with President Bill Clinton, in particular--mirrors his disenchantment with Hollywood. He claims that our new sophisticated knowledge of demographics has created politicians--and movies--that follow rather than lead. The golden era of American film, from the late '60s to the late '70s, Beatty says, was "a wonderful period in movies and politics. It was a period when you didn't know that you would lose, in the box office and in the voting booth, if you did the right thing...."