The Smooth Sixties: Beery Peak or Trough?

By 1965, Rainier Brewing in Seattle was in a post-Emil Sick era. The industrialist and sports executive had guided the brewery to exemplary post-Repeal success in American West Coast brewing.

Sick died in 1964, but Rainier would retain independence until 1977 when sold 100% to another brewery, G. Heilman. I should add that Molson Breweries took a stake, 42%, from Sick before he died. See details in Karen Molson’s history of Molson Breweries.

The Seattle brewery was finally closed in 1999, when Pabst Brewery bought the labels. Rainier Beer is still marketed by Pabst, made elsewhere in the country.

After 1945 Rainier’s drumbeat of light and smooth steps up. Sick’s Rainier Brewing periodically advertised changes in Rainier Beer formulation, I gave an instance in Part I. Product ads rarely give details of hopping and gravities, but there can be no doubt the beer got ever lighter in flavour and body due to the recipe changes.

In 1958 a Rainier ad, Lewiston Morning Tribune, June 6, posed a question:

Tried Rainier’s new taste? Join in the discovery of this wonderfully smooth naturally milder beer. Rainier’s new taste. Naturally milder.

This was a second formulation change advertised in the 1950s. Now on to May 24, 1960, in the Spokane Daily Chronicle:

The light touch of Rainier goes with your lighter moments. Exceedingly light, without being thin. Exceptionally smooth and easy going. Rainier has just the right touch of taste – a fine, delicate flavor that invites you to pour another…Add the light touch, make it Rainier, for life.

We are, here, at an apogee of the American adjunct lager style, a “touch” of flavor remains from a once assertively malty and bitter beverage, as all beer was in the 19th century.

At some point in the early 1960s, however, Rainier starts to wonder if it went too far in stressing the light and smooth angle. It starts to emphasize more, not that the beer has changed again, but still retains some beery characteristics.

It did this in two ways, first, by creating its “Rainier Brewmaster” persona, a stern, Germanic-looking fellow who remains preoccupied with smoothness but ensures also his beer is natural and traditionally made. Second, by listing exotically-named ingredients, in this case in an unusual detail.

I will return to the brewmaster and ingredients aspects, but for now draw attention to Rainier’s ad of August 11, 1965, in the Eugene Register-Guard. The advert lampoons the breathy, ingenuous style of the investigative reporter:

Informed sources have stated that despite all the fanfare and hurrahing, one fact is becoming clearly evident – that Rainier does have what is the smoothest beer in history.

These sources further indicate that the “smooth” Rainier beer has “no sharpness, harshness, roughness, gruffness, bitterness or sting”. Or, as Rainier’s beloved bald-pated brewmaster has stated himself, “Rainier is a joy simply to swallow”.

Continuing the arch tone, the advert quotes an executive that the brewmaster’s contribution is “by no means a drop in the bucket”. Yet, success has not “gone to his head” and he is hard at work, lights on late, working on smoothness still, is the implication.

In 1978 Frank Appleton in British Columbia, Canada was a general-purpose journalist, a former O’Keefe Brewery quality control supervisor in Vancouver. He had trained in biochemistry and brewing in his Manchester, UK homeland.

He left O’Keefe after a few years, proving a success at freelance journalism. He was a regular contributor to Harrowsmith magazine, and submitted in 1978 an item on homebrewing. The purport was, with a little effort one could improve on the bland product of the large brewers in Canada then, viz. Molson, Labatt, and Carling-O’Keefe.

He included a passage that in time would be recognized as a craft brewing manifesto. He quoted the famous words in his 2016 memoir Brewing Revolution: Pioneering the Craft Beer Revolution (Appleton later became a well-known brewing consultant, e.g. for Deschutes Brewery in Bend, Oregon):

The stage has been reached where all the big breweries are making virtually the same product, with different names and labels. Accompanying this trend is a shift in power from the brewmaster to the advertising, marketing and accounting men.

Like tasteless white bread and the cardboard hamburger, the new beer is produced for the tasteless common denominator. It must not offend anyone, anywhere. Corporate beer is not too heavy, not too bitter, not too alcoholic, not too malty, not too hoppy, not too gassy or yeasty. In other words, corporate beer reduces every characteristic that makes beer beer.

Appleton might have used Rainier’s very words of its August 1965 ad to make his point, and vice versa, for Appleton’s second-to-last sentence.

To every thing there is a season. Rainier played the light and smooth angle well and successfully for a long time, in tune lager trends then. And who is to say objectively that was wrong?

Frank Appleton, for his part, grew up in northern England in the 1950s and early ’60s. He knew characterful ale and stout for that reason. Without that context, it is doubtful he could have written the words he did. Everything is relative, but unwittingly Appleton tapped into a development that would become a beer renaissance, along with Camra, Michael Jackson, homebrewers, etc.*

Below is pictured the current Molson Dry, a modern successor to the corporate beer Appleton found wanting in 1978. On its own terms, it is exemplary, nonetheless

Continues in Part III.

…

*The article started to have an impact only from 1981, when Appleton’s first brewing client, Vancouver pub-owner John Mitchell, discussed an idea with him to set up a mini-brewery. Mitchell was also of English background, southern in this case.