Website: http://www.sentrigo.com

The company was founded in 2006 by Nathan Shuchami and Slavik Markovich, to address several key challenges in Database security. Specifically, the inability to monitor activity of privileged users and those who have established such credentials through nefarious means, and the difficulty in maintaining a DBMS at the most current patch level.

Cloud Computing World Series Awards (2010)

Associated sectors:

Software & Programming;

Similar Companies:

Silvaco Europe Limited

United Kingdom

Privately Held

Silvaco, Inc. is a privately owned provider of electronic design automation (EDA) software and TCAD process and device simulation software. Silvaco was founded in 1984 and is headquartered in Santa Clara, California, and in 2006 the company had about 250 employees worldwide.

Q Entertainment

Japan

Privately Held

Q Entertainment creates, produces, and publishes in digital entertainment content across multiple game consoles, PC broadband and mobile units. It was founded on October 10, 2003 by Tetsuya Mizuguchi, formerly of Sega (where he was best known for producing the Dreamcast games Space Channel 5 and Rez), and Shuji Utsumi, former founding member of Sony Computer Entertainment America, Senior VP of Sega Enterprises, Ltd., and head of Disney (Buena Vista Games) Asia.

Elysian Labs

USA

Privately Held

Developer of a software programming platform designed to revolutionize human-hardware interaction. The company’s software programming platform is used to elevate and create modular, programmable and networked wearable plugins, enabling users to combine and control input, display and sense nodes.

Solido Design Automation Inc.

Canada

Privately Held

Solido Design Automation Inc. is an electronic design automation (EDA) software company, headquartered in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. The company develops software for analog/mixed-signal and custom integrated circuits. Founded in 2005, the company is funded by BDC Venture Capital, Victoria Park Capital and Golden Opportunities Fund.

VeriSign, Inc.

USA

Publicly Traded

n/a