My first Denys Arcand and such a great film. Why haven't I checked him out until now?. I found myself deeply moved by the end. A group of five actors (3 men and 2 women) stage a provocative and iconoclastic version of the traditional Passion Play and gradually their stories merge into a contemporary rendering of the disciples and Jesus in his final days.

This is not the gentle reverent Jesus but the angry radical Jesus who decried the social hierarchies of his time. In some ways it's similar to Pasolini's "The Gospel According to St. Matthew" but in a contemporary setting. Arcand (who wrote as well as directed) cuts between extended sequences of the performance - which is frankly…

Just when I thought the films in my Film & Religion class were getting worse every week, we ended up viewing the second best movie of the semester.

Jesus of Montreal follows an acting troupe working on a play about the life of Jesus. The film not only works as a clever satire, but also a sharply brilliant commentary on religion, theater, and even advertising. Maybe it's because we studied this film intensively and that usually heightens a film for me, but I really loved some things about this movie. The humor was alright in parts and wildly funny in others and the acting is good (though the lead guy gives a really great turn in the end), but the writing…

A film with layers as it manages to provide one of the best portrayals of Jesus Christ ever in the form of a Passion Play being put on within the world of the film as well as a narrative rooted with palpable emotions and a social commentary. We kind of get a double narrative here, because while we watch the Passion Play unfold, you forget for a moment that you’re actually watching a film about the actors’ struggle and the complicated relationship we have with art form.

Not only do you get to see this battle in the artist of whether to pursue the kind of work you’re passionate about or the more mainstream less substantial work that gets you…

A gentle, quiet natured man comes to town. We find out he is an actor. His history is somewhat unclear. He is contracted by a priest to update a version of the passion play that the priest had written 20 years ago. The play will be preformed on the church grounds.

The man gathers a cast consisting of a man who was working as a voiceover guy in the porn industry. A man doing voiceover for science documentaries. A woman working at a homeless shelter, and a beautiful female model working in the advertising industry.

This troupe writes and performs an avant-garde "new theater" presentation of the play. The audience loves it, the priest does not.

The priest has been…