The first African forum on Social Solidarity Economy (SSE) was held physically in Yaoundé, Cameroon and virtually on 30th May 2024. This Pan African event brought together #SSE players, governments, international organisations and private sector. The aim of the forum was to provide a platform for exchanges with a view to promoting and consolidating the various models of SSE in Africa. Erick Obongo representing International Cooperative Alliance-Africa (ICA-Africa) participated in the plenary, ‘what a favorable ecosystem to enable the SSE to be able to contribute more to the achievement of the #SDGS.’ The objectives of the session was to show case success stories on the SSE, present perspectives by the organizations on SSE and share ideas on the conducive ecosystem for the SSE at local, national and continental levels. My intervention focused on the pivotal role of #cooperatives as a unit within the SSE space. Cooperatives are people-centred enterprises owned, controlled and run by and for their members to realize their common economic, social and cultural needs. They serve as vehicles for collective empowerment, self-determination and the realisation of shared aspirations. ICA and ICA-Africa takes cognisance of the critical contribution of SSE towards inclusive and sustainable development with a positive impact on people and the planet and emphasizes the unique role of cooperatives in this space. #Cooperatives are in all sectors of the economy and selected cases in these sectors exemplifies cooperative projects transforming lives in improving livelihoods, fostering sustainability, bridging the gender and income inequality gaps and enhancing peace and security. Crises are becoming prevalent and there is an urgent need for the SSE units to pull together in rebuilding communities, calling upon more African countries to adopt the SSE legislations and enhancing livelihoods and empowerment programs through proper data support, financing, market access and coordinated policy and regulatory support. International Labour OrganizationInternational Cooperative Alliance - AfricaInternational Cooperative Alliance