Worldbox Intelligence Risk Rating August 2023

LAOS

SUMMARY

Political Risk – Stable at 7

Prime Minister Phankham Viphavanh, who assumed office in March 2021, resigned in early January 2023 and was replaced by Sonexay Siphandone. Phankham has clearly paid the price for the economic woes that have beset the country in recent years. Sonexay’s premiership was widely anticipated within Laos. His father, Khamtay Siphandone, served for 14 years as the leader of the LPRP before stepping down in 2006.

Sonexay’s government has taken a number of measures to try and combat inflation, including ordering all currency exchange shops to close, and banning the import of meat and agricultural products that are produced domestically. However, a long economic struggle lies ahead.

Laos experienced relatively high levels of political stability for nearly 50 years, following the end of the Indochina conflict in 1975 and the takeover by the communist Pathet Lao movement. Laos remains a one-party state, under the control of the communist Lao People’s Revolutionary Party (LPRP). There is little opposition to the party’s rule. National Assembly elections are held every five years but are not free or fair, while protests are banned.

Since the late 1980s, the government has pursued a similar economic and political model to those of Vietnam and China. It has implemented market-based economic policies while maintaining a high degree of state control and welcoming foreign direct investment (FDI). This has proved highly successful in generating rapid economic growth. Over the decade prior to the pandemic, for example, annual growth averaged just under 8%, one of the highest levels in the world.

A party congress at the beginning of 2021 heralded modest changes at the top of the party and reaffirmed Laos’s economic strategy, including its growing reliance on China. However, a significant turnover of personnel took place at lower levels, with new technocratic officials taking over from wartime officials and party apparatchiks. The move seems to recognize criticism relating to corruption and economic mismanagement.

Economic Risk – Stable at 5

The Laotian economy had grown by nearly 8% a year over the decade leading up to the Covid pandemic. Accession into the World Trade Organization in 2013 and the creation of the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) in 2015 precipitated significant reforms designed to improve the business and investment environment. Rapid economic growth in neighbouring countries such as China, Vietnam and Thailand has also boosted trade and FDI.

China, Thailand and Vietnam are the country’s main trade and investment partners. Trade with China is growing particularly rapidly, aided by massive Chinese FDI and the China–Laos Railway project, which travels across Laos from the Chinese border to the capital Vientiane. Three Chinese-backed highway projects are also underway as part of China’s Belt and Road Initiative.

The railway project should have a significant impact on growth by encouraging FDI and attracting increasing tourism from China. It should also boost exports. The cost of shipments from Vientiane to Kunming, in the southern Chinese province of Yunnan, will be cut by 40–50%, along with a 20–40% cost reduction on domestic routes, according to a World Bank report. Exports from Laos to China were worth US$1.7 billion in 2019 and could expand by about 20% per year, according to the UN.

However, there are growing concerns about Laos foreign debt. The country’s official debts have grown rapidly in recent years and now equal 88% of GDP, with 60% owed by the public sector and the remainder comprising public–private partnerships such as the Boten-Vientiane railway. The risk associated with this debt, largely denominated in dollars, increases during periods when the kip is depreciating, as was the case in 2022.

Figures from the government and Fitch reveal that Laos has to make foreign-debt repayments of an average of $1.3 billion per year until 2026. That is around half of the government’s annual revenue, and the depreciating kip is undermining the country’s ability to make those debt repayments, since the foreign debt is priced in foreign currencies, such as the US dollar, the Thai baht, the Chinese yuan, the Japanese yen, the Korean won and the euro.

Half of the external debt is owed to China, following its numerous investments in the country, including the US$5.9bn loan for the China–Laos high-speed train line and US$17.8bn for three highways, as well as loans for hydroelectricity projects. However, Toshiro Nishizawa, a professor at The University of Tokyo’s Graduate School of Public Policy and fiscal advisor to the Laos government believes China will not allow Laos to default. Nishizawa wrote in August that China “does not want to become a creditor burdened with non-performing assets, nor does it want to look like an unreliable lender to developing Asia Pacific and indeed African nations”.

He added that:

“The Lao government could avoid default by seeking China’s support for deferrals and liquidity provision. On top of bilateral debt deferrals, China is inclined to accept equity investment, as seen in the power grid shareholding deal. (A reference to the March 2022 acquisition of a majority stake in Électricité du Laos for 25 years by China Southern Power Grid) This would help Laos secure foreign exchange for debt repayments and foreign capital for infrastructure development.”

Commercial Risk – Stable at 4

Corruption is a significant challenge. Laos ranks 126th out of 180 countries in Transparency International’s (TI) 2022 Corruption Perceptions Index, moving up eight positions from its 2021 score. Laos is considered to be the third most corrupt country in the ASEAN region, behind Myanmar and Cambodia.

The Laos Corruption Report by GAN also declares that corruption is a high risk for companies operating in Laos and deters foreign investment. GAN says that political patronage pervades all business sectors, and a culture of corruption has been perpetuated by senior LPRP leaders and by foreign investors willing to buy political support and pay off officials. It adds that companies are likely to encounter petty bribery when trading across borders, paying taxes or acquiring public services.

In terms of the rule of law, GAN says that a weak and inefficient judiciary impedes the proper enforcement of anti-corruption laws and officials are rarely prosecuted. It adds that bribery is widespread in both civil and commercial cases, and the legal system is subject to political interference.

August Bulletin

Political Risk – Stable at 7

Political tensions in Laos have increased markedly over the past year with increasing protests against the government. There has also been a massive upsurge of virulently angry criticism of the government on social media. The severity of Laos’ economic downturn, means that many Laotians are willing to ensure the consequences of provoking the government’s ire. However, police are also arresting activists as they attempt to silence dissenting voices.

However, a pickup in economic growth this year and declining inflationary pressures could bring some relief to the population this year, easing the potential for further public unrest. The May 2023 Lao Economic Monitor, published by the World Bank, reports, for example, that “household nominal incomes are expected to gradually improve, albeit undermined by high living costs.”

Moreover, the new prime minister Sonexay Siphandone “appears willing to implement several measures that, if they are effective, might cool public anger.” That, at least, is the view of the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR), an American think tank specializing in U.S. foreign policy and international relations.

Sonexay’s agenda should find support among ordinary Laotians, including a poverty reduction program, a bailout from the Asian Development Bank and a renegotiation of the country’s debt. The CFR added that Sonexay’s pedigree, as the son of a former leaders of the LPRP, may have more credibility than his predecessor, given his background. That “might make him better positioned to push through the tough but necessary choices needed to get the economy back on track”.

Economic Risk – Stable at 5

The economy grew by just 2.7% in 2022, the second-lowest level in over 30 years, while Laotians – already amongst the poorest people in Southeast Asia – are facing severe economic pressures. These include inflation, which amounted an annual pace of 40% in the year to April 2023. The soaring costs of energy and food stuffs are driving the hike in inflation, according to official figures. By the end of 2022, 64% of Lao families were living on the same or a lower budget than a year earlier, according to the Lao Economic Monitor.

The depreciation of the kip is one of the main factors behind the surge of inflation Driven by persistent external imbalances, the kip depreciated sharply in 2022 and fell by 32% and 43% against the Thai baht and US dollar respectively in the year to April 2023. The exchange rate has recently stabilized, supported by tighter monetary policy. However, limited exchange liquidity and low reserves have resulted in foreign exchange rationing by commercial banks, driving the parallel exchange market.

A loss of investor confidence that has sparked a sharp decline in the value of the kip has added to Laos’ woes, and undermined its ability to repay dollar denominated debt, and pay for imports.

The Lao Economic Monitor published in May 2023 states that:

“The economy is projected to grow at 3.9 percent in 2023 and accelerate to an average of 4.3 percent in the medium term, led by continued recovery in services and exports. External demand is expected to help sustain manufacturing and agriculture exports, while industry will benefit from investment in the power sector and special economic zones. However, growth is expected to remain below pre-COVID levels, weighed down by structural weaknesses. Inflation will remain elevated in 2023, partly due to high commodity prices and kip depreciation. If structural imbalances are addressed, the economy could recover faster.”

Commercial Risk – Stable at 4

Counterparty risk, already difficult to assess (corporate financial information is rarely available and, when available, is usually unreliable), has almost certainly risen during the pandemic. The legal system continues to make debt collection very unpredictable.

An official report into corruption published in April 2022 stated that the country has lost hundreds of millions of dollars to endemic corruption. The Lao State Inspection Authority said widespread graft had beset government-sponsored investment and development projects leading to a loss of US$767 million since 2016. A report by the Union of Catholic Asian News added, however, that locals are unimpressed by such government-sponsored reports, considering them to be part of an official whitewashing of rampant corruption. It added that numerous citizens who have voiced their concerns about corruption and malfeasance by communist officials have been arrested and tried in recent years.

In October 2022 Fitch Ratings affirmed Laos’ Long-Term Foreign-Currency Issuer Default Rating (IDR) at ‘CCC-‘, primarily, reflecting elevated external liquidity pressure from high commodity prices and tightening global financial conditions, as well as a challenging external debt repayment profile. The ratings agency also withdrew Laos’ Long- and Short-Term Foreign-Currency IDRs and Country Ceiling for commercial reasons.

Environmental, Social and Governance Risk (ESG) – 4/10 (Outlook – negative)

The United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are recognized as a beneficial framework for responsible investment. The Sustainable Development Report from Cambridge University Press assesses the progress of all 193 UN Member States on the SDGs. It provides a useful means of ranking Southeast Asian countries on their ESG progress.

Laos is ranked 115 out of 166 in the 2023 report with a score of 63.0.

Environment – Laos suffers from various significant environmental problems, the most important of which are related to deforestation. Over the period 2020 to 2022, Laos lost over 7% of its tree cover. In addition, the construction of dams along the Mekong for hydroelectric generation have long been a cause for concern not just for Laos but other neighbouring countries. In recent years, the lower half of the Mekong, which runs through Thailand, Myanmar, Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam, has experienced a number of serious droughts that have sent water levels to all-time lows. This is partly due to climate change and the El Nino but dam construction also has an impact, according to ecologists.

Social – Laos scores very lowly in this area. Key areas of concern include freedom of speech, association, and assembly; enforced disappearances; abusive drug detention centers; and repression of minority religious groups, according to Human Rights Watch. Workers have few rights and living standards are among the lowest in the world.

Governance – Laos also rates very poorly in terms of governance with high levels of corruption and very weak rule of law as outlined in the commercial risk section.

August Bulletin

Environmental, Social and Governance Risk (ESG) – 4/10 (Outlook – negative)

The myriad ESG challenges face Laos have been highlighted recently by high levels of air pollution and the building of dams on the Mekong. With the burning season (when farmers burn off crops, ready for the next planting season) in full spate, air quality in the country has deteriorated significantly in many areas. The government has recommended to avoid being outdoors and to the wearing of masks.

Meanwhile, a proposed cascade of nine dams on the mainstream of the Mekong River is causing concern. There are fears the dams could change the ecological functions of the river basin by altering seasonal flows of water and sediment. They threaten to block key fish migration routes and otherwise impacting the Mekong’s abundant natural fisheries. The economic case for the dams appears unclear. Thailand, potentially the key buyer of the energy generated by the planned dams, has a high energy surplus.

Latest economic data

https://www.amro-asia.org/

https://www.transparency.org/en/cpi/2021

https://www.imf.org/en/Countries/LAO

https://www.adb.org/countries/lao-pdr/main

https://asiatimes.com/

https://thediplomat.com/

https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/lao/publication/lao-economic-monitor-may-2023-addressing-economic-uncertainty-key-findings

About Worldbox Business Intelligence

Worldbox Business Intelligence, headquartered in Switzerland, is a Global API data solution provider of business intelligence and used in data analytics.

With the Global API solution Worldbox Business Intelligence enables clients and partners also a frictionless real time onboarding, KYC and compliance verification while rapid global investigations are provided, if needed.

Worldbox Business Intelligence provides global data in a standardised structure to more than 200 Million companies worldwide. The global network of subsidiaries, branches and desks allows to precisely and efficiently collect data and target key territories for clients and partners.”

“Worldbox Business Intelligence – Bringing Swiss Precision To Data“

Copyright (C) 2023 Worldbox Business Intelligence. All rights reserved.

Our mailing address is: