Horoscope and chart of Khamtay Siphandon

Astrological portrait of Khamtay Siphandon (excerpt)

Disclaimer: these short excerpts of astrological charts are computer processed. They are, by no means, of a personal nature. This principle is valid for the 68,179 celebrities included in our database. These texts provide the meanings of planets, or combination of planets, in signs and in houses, as well as the interpretations of planetary dominants in line with modern Western astrology rules. Moreover, since Astrotheme is not a polemic website, no negative aspect which may damage the good reputation of a celebrity is posted here, unlike in the comprehensive astrological portrait.

Introduction

Here are some character traits from Khamtay Siphandon's birth chart. This description is far from being comprehensive but it can shed light on his/her personality, which is still interesting for professional astrologers or astrology lovers.

In a matter of minutes, you can get at your email address your astrological portrait (approximately 32 pages), a much more comprehensive report than this portrait of Khamtay Siphandon.

N.B.: as this celebrity's birth time is unknown, the chart is arbitrarily calculated for 12:00 PM - the legal time for his/her place of birth; since astrological houses are not taken into account, this astrological profile excerpt is less detailed than those for which the birth time is known.

The dominant planets of Khamtay Siphandon

When interpreting a natal chart, the best method is to start gradually from general features to specific ones. Thus, there is usually a plan to be followed, from the overall analysis of the chart and its structure, to the description of its different character traits.

In the first part, an overall analysis of the chart enables us to figure out the personality's main features and to emphasize several points that are confirmed or not in the detailed analysis: in any case, those general traits are taken into account. Human personality is an infinitely intricate entity and describing it is a complex task. Claiming to rapidly summarize it is illusory, although it does not mean that it is an impossible challenge. It is essential to read a natal chart several times in order to absorb all its different meanings and to grasp all this complexity. But the exercise is worthwhile.

In brief, a natal chart is composed of ten planets: two luminaries, the Sun and the Moon, three fast-moving or individual planets, Mercury, Venus and Mars, two slow-moving planets, Jupiter and Saturn, and three very slow-moving planets, Uranus, Neptune and Pluto. Additional secondary elements are: the Lunar Nodes, the Dark Moon or Lilith, Chiron and other minor objects. They are all posited on the Zodiac wheel consisting of twelve signs, from Aries to Pisces, and divided into twelve astrological houses.

The first step is to evaluate the importance of each planet. This is what we call identifying the dominant planets. This process obeys rules that depend on the astrologer's sensitivity and experience but it also has precise and steady bases: thus, we can take into account the parameters of a planet's activity (the number of active aspects a planet forms, the importance of each aspect according to its nature and its exactness), angularity parameters; (proximity to the four angles, Ascendant, Midheaven, Descendant and Imum Coeli or Nadir, all of them being evaluated numerically, according to the kind of angle and the planet-angle distance) and quality parameters (rulership, exaltation, exile and fall). Finally, other criteria such as the rulership of the Ascendant and the Midheaven etc. are important.

These different criteria allow a planet to be highlighted and lead to useful conclusions when interpreting the chart.

The overall chart analysis begins with the observation of three sorts of planetary distributions in the chart: Eastern or Western hemisphere, Northern or Southern hemisphere, and quadrants (North-eastern, North-western, South-eastern and South-western). These three distributions give a general tone in terms of introversion and extraversion, willpower, sociability, and behavioural predispositions.

Then, there are three additional distributions: elements (called triplicity since there are three groups of signs for each one) - Fire, Air, Earth and Water - corresponding to a character typology, modality (or quadruplicity with four groups of signs for each one) - Cardinal, Fixed and Mutable - and polarity (Yin and Yang).

There are three types of dominants: dominant planets, dominant signs and dominant houses. The novice thinks astrology means only "to be Aries" or sometimes, for example, "to be Aries Ascendant Virgo". It is actually far more complex. Although the Sun and the Ascendant alone may reveal a large part of the character - approximately a third or a half of your psychological signature, a person is neither "just the Sun" (called the sign) nor just "the first house" (the Ascendant). Thus, a particular planet's influence may be significantly increased; a particular sign or house may contain a group of planets that will bring nuances and sometimes weaken the role of the Ascendant, of the Sun sign etc.

Lastly, there are two other criteria: accentuations (angular, succedent and cadent) which are a classification of astrological houses and types of decanates that are occupied (each sign is divided into three decanates of ten degrees each). They provide some additional informations.

These general character traits must not be taken literally; they are, somehow, preparing for the chart reading. They allow to understand the second part of the analysis, which is more detailed and precise. It focuses on every area of the personality and provides a synthesis of all the above-mentioned parameters according to sound hierarchical rules.

Warning: when the birth time is unknown, which is the case for Khamtay Siphandon, a few paragraphs become irrelevant; distributions in hemispheres and quadrants are meaningless, so are dominant houses and houses' accentuations. Therefore, some chapters are removed from this part.

For all paragraphs, the criteria for valuation are calculated without taking into account angles and rulerships of the Ascendant and of the Midheaven. The methodology retains its validity, but it is less precise without a time of birth.

Elements and Modes for Khamtay Siphandon

The predominance of Water signs indicates high sensitivity and elevation through feelings, Khamtay Siphandon. Your heart and your emotions are your driving forces, and you can't do anything on Earth if you don't feel a strong affective charge (as a matter of fact, the word "feeling" is essential in your psychology). You need to love in order to understand, and to feel in order to take action, which causes a certain vulnerability which you should fight against.

Khamtay Siphandon, Fire is dominant in your natal chart and endows you with intuition, energy, courage, self-confidence, and enthusiasm! You are inclined to be passionate, you assert your willpower, you move forward, and come hell or high water, you achieve your dreams and your goals. The relative weakness of this element is the difficulty to step back or a kind of boldness that may prompt you to do foolish things.

Earth qualities are under-represented in your chart, with only 8.68% instead of the average 25%. Deficiency in Earth may indicate that you have no interest in material and concrete values. It is likely that you live too much in your heart or in your mind, or even in your enthusiasm! The fact remains that you may end up in tricky situations, due to your lack of good sense or forethought: material life is unavoidable even if you are rather idealistic, dreamy, or easily content. You must tackle concrete life necessities, for fear of... being forced to cope with them, later, in much more unpleasant ways!

Air is under-represented in your natal chart, with only 9.92% instead of the average 25%. Air symbolizes the values of communication, exchanges with others, but also adaptability and flexibility abilities: if you don't get out of your cocoon to talk, to show interest in others, and to socialize, you may have problems understanding others. Because of your lack of flexibility or of your refusal to adapt yourself, you may be suddenly overwhelmed by events. You should get into the habit of talking, of phoning, and of thinking in terms of "mobility, flexibility, adaptability, change" in every circumstance. It will spare you so many troubles!

The twelve zodiacal signs are split up into three groups or modes, called quadruplicities, a learned word meaning only that these three groups include four signs. The Cardinal, Fixed and Mutable modes are more or less represented in your natal chart, depending on planets' positions and importance, and on angles in the twelve signs.

The Mutable mode is the most emphasized one in your natal chart, Khamtay Siphandon, which indicates a mobile character that is curious and thirsty for new experiences and evolution. You are lively and flexible, and you like to react quickly to solicitations, but don't confuse mobility with agitation, since this is the danger with this configuration - and with you, stagnation is out of the question. Security doesn't matter as long as you are not bored. You optimize, you change things, you change yourself... all this in a speedy way.

Dominants: Planets, Signs and Houses for Khamtay Siphandon

The issue of dominant planets has existed since the mists of time in astrology: how nice it would be if a person could be described with a few words and one or several planets that would represent their character, without having to analyse such elements as rulerships, angularities, houses, etc!

The ten planets - the Sun throughout Pluto - are a bit like ten characters in a role-play, each one has its own personality, its own way of acting, its own strengths and weaknesses. They actually represent a classification into ten distinct personalities, and astrologers have always tried to associate one or several dominant planets to a natal chart as well as dominant signs and houses.

Indeed, it is quite the same situation with signs and houses. If planets symbolize characters, signs represent hues - the mental, emotional and physical structures of an individual. The sign in which a planet is posited is like a character whose features are modified according to the place where he lives. In a chart, there are usually one, two or three highlighted signs that allow to rapidly describe its owner.

Regarding astrological houses, the principle is even simpler: the twelve houses correspond to twelve fields of life, and planets tenanting any given house increase that house's importance and highlight all relevant life departments: it may be marriage, work, friendship etc.

In your natal chart, Khamtay Siphandon, the ten main planets are distributed as follows:

The three most important planets in your chart are Neptune, Jupiter and Uranus.

With Neptune as one of your three dominant planets, you are a secretive and ambiguous person, often confused or unclear about your own motivations! Indeed, you are endowed with unlimited imagination and inspiration, as well as with an extreme sensibility that may turn you into a psychic or a clairvoyant. On the other hand, your impressionability is such that you may have difficulties in separating what is concrete and solid from illusions or dreams.

A mystic, a visionary or a poet, you daydream, like any Neptunian, and you see what few people only can see, all of this being shrouded in aesthetic mists when you are fired with enthusiasm.

A boundless, infinity-loving man like you is inevitably likely to be more vulnerable and easily hurt because of your acute perception of events. In such cases, you are hit full in the face, and you may sink into gloomy daydreamings and dark melancholy.

That said, this mysterious aura definitely gives you an indefinable charm in the eyes of your close friends who are often fascinated by your unique ability to feel and to see what ordinary people can never see!

Jupiter, the planet of expansion, organization, power and benevolence, is quite emphasized in your chart. Like any Jupiterian, you are warm, open, sociable, consensual, active and optimistic. You can use your self-confidence to erase differences of opinion, and you leave the task of analyzing and perfecting things to specialists. Your role, and you know it since you were young, is to gather, to demonstrate your synthesizing and conciliatory mind, and to naturally reap its fruits - power.

You appreciate legality, social order but also order in general. With you as a leader, every plan or human entity can be organized and structured. You excel at supervising. The Jupiterian type is indeed the politician par excellence, and a positive Jupiter in your chart is synonymous with good integration into society, whatever the chosen path.

Is this idyllic picture really perfect? Certainly not: each planet's typology has its own weaknesses. One of yours is pride, like the Solarian, but your will of expansion at all costs may generate a form of exaggeration in everything, endless pleasure, inappropriate self-confidence that could lead you to rough materialism and the thirst for absurd material comfort - in the worst cases, of course.

Uranus is among your dominant planets: just like Neptune and Pluto, Uranian typology is less clearly defined than the so-called classical seven planets that are visible to the naked eye, from the Sun to Saturn. However, it is possible to associate your Uranian nature with a few clear characteristics: Uranus rhymes with independence, freedom, originality, or even rebelliousness and marginality, when things go wrong...

Uranus is Mercury's higher octave and as such, he borrows some of its traits of character; namely, a tendency to intellectualize situations and emotions with affective detachment, or at least jagged affectivity.

Therefore, you are certainly a passionate man who is on the lookout for any kind of action or revolutionary idea, and you are keen on new things. Uranians are never predictable, and it is especially when they are believed to be stable and well settled that... they change everything - their life, partner, and job! In fact, you are allergic to any kind of routine, although avoiding it must give way to many risks.

In your natal chart, the three most important signs - according to criteria mentioned above - are in decreasing order of strength Pisces, Sagittarius and Leo. In general, these signs are important because your Ascendant or your Sun is located there. But this is not always the case: there may be a cluster of planets, or a planet may be near an angle other than the Midheaven or Ascendant. It may also be because two or three planets are considered to be very active because they form numerous aspects from these signs.

Thus, you display some of the three signs' characteristics, a bit like a superposition of features on the rest of your chart, and it is all the more so if the sign is emphasized.

Pisces is among your dominant signs and endows your personality with unlimited sources of emotions, dreams, imagination, and sensitivity, to the extent that you literally swim in a cloudy ocean of delightful impressions. These impressions are so intense and overwhelming that you don't really need to take action concretely, to show your dynamism or your willpower, since you already live so intensely with your feelings - you are as keen as a radar, always on the alert! That is why some people may not like your carelessness, and the lack of clarity in your opinions or actions; however they quickly notice your artistic talents, your poetic or artistic side, and your total lack of wickedness. Besides, you feel compassion for people in pain - empathy is one of your great qualities. Thanks to your flexibility, your intuition, and your generosity, you may spend an important part of your life helping others. And if you are creative or if you have well-known artistic talents, everybody will forgive your little flaws: absent-mindedness, lack of energy or of will, too dreamy temperament...

Sagittarius, an adventurous and conquering fire sign, is dominant in your chart: you are enthusiastic, enterprising, optimistic, very sociable, and mobile - you have itchy feet, both physically and mentally. Nobody gets bored with you because you are always planning things and suggesting excursions, at least... when you are around and not already gone on a trip! Obviously, so many movements for one man may scare people off, and some of them may even criticize your brutality or your tendency to loose your temper, but you are so warm and genuine, so expansive, isn't this a good thing? And all the more so, since your sense of humour is overwhelming...

With Leo as a dominant sign, you naturally shine brightly. Your dignity, your sense of honour, and your generosity can almost turn you into a solar mythological hero, a knight or a lord from the ancient times. People may blame you for your selfishness, your pride or your somewhat loud authority, but if you are self-confident, kind-hearted and strong-willed, it surely makes up for your little flaws, as long as they remain moderate...

After this paragraph about dominant planets, of Khamtay Siphandon, here are the character traits that you must read more carefully than the previous texts since they are very specific: the texts about dominant planets only give background information about the personality and remain quite general: they emphasize or, on the contrary, mitigate different particularities or facets of a personality. A human being is a complex whole and only bodies of texts can attempt to successfully figure out all the finer points.

The Moon in Pisces: his sensitivity

Your sensitivity is all on edge, Khamtay Siphandon, and your emotions so deep, your imagination, so lively, that you are often found in the sweet realm of dreams. You create your own fantastical world with entangled fragments of current reality, romantic souvenirs and hidden hopes. Your receptiveness is so intense that it may border on mediumship or, more disturbing and rare, you may have hallucinations. Your character fluctuates according to the stimulation of the moment but in general, you are a nice person, full of gentleness and romanticism, always ready to understand and to dedicate yourself. You have real healing powers, would it be only through your ability to instinctively understand other people's sufferings. Your affective structures can be likened to a roving radar. You are vulnerable, hurt by the slightest aggression and easily influenced because you are unable to step back from people and events; therefore, you may start to be doubtful and lose the self-confidence that you so badly need to progress.

Mercury in Capricorn: his intellect and social life

You need to concentrate on a subject, Khamtay Siphandon, to deepen your research and to follow your reasoning through with persistence and determination. You are the very type of the thinker who needs time and isolation to meditate at length and allow his serious, methodical and rigorous mind to show its worth. Your feet are firmly planted on the ground and to get your attention, ideas must be followed by implementation, for instance as in the case of mathematics applied to physics. You focus on the essential and you look at the world around you with clear-sightedness. You are not very talkative and you act with caution. You may come across as cold and ambitious even though your comments are always sincere and practical. However, be careful not to isolate yourself and to appear as a lofty and intolerant person.

Venus in Pisces and the Sun in Aquarius: his affectivity and seductiveness

In your chart, the Sun is in Aquarius and Venus, in Pisces. Aquarius' ability to be amazed and enthused faces the peculiar sensitivity and the detachment of Venus in Pisces. Two antinomical modes are confronting: Aquarius' optimism and idealism versus Pisces' strange lucidity. Your Venusian sign highlights the extreme subtlety of your desires and emotions. Your sensitivity is elusive and you are not interested in basic and coarse relationships. You reject or you accept according to your intuition and not to the logic of a given situation. Aquarius is filled with amazement and displays a commendable idealism but Pisces quickly reminds of the fragile nature of all relationships. Love hangs by a thread. You must not forget that love is precarious because it may be detrimental to your balance. More than anyone, you refuse conventions. You are not interested in loves that offer no risk, no challenge and no future. The complexity of your affective behaviours may disconcert. They range from distance to amazement, from enthusiasm to refusal. You handle the art of paradoxes very skilfully. Love is never simple, unless it is drawing to its end. This zodiacal duet draws its strength from its ability to transform, to reinvent the rules of the game and to never let the current norms hamper the free flow of your sensitivity.

Compassion and self-sacrifice: you are fond of this romantic mode and you are willing to express your feelings, the intensity of which is unlimited, Khamtay Siphandon. With excitement and imagination, you dream your amorous relationships as much as you actually live through them. The line between the concrete world and your huge hopes is so tenuous that you don't know anymore where it is, although your particularly rich sensuality prompts you to experience your feelings concretely. You want to share communion and passion with your partner. The lyrical flights of your feelings break from your heart as waves that you do not attempt to control because they give you a real, almost voluptuous and carnal joy. You give a lot – sometimes too much - without reservation, almost without propriety, totally revealing your vulnerability during your amorous exchanges because you are sure of the quality and the might of your feelings: they are so powerful and overwhelming that you are aware that nothing can resist them.

The Sun in Aquarius: his will and inner motivations

In the sentimental sphere, you are particularly sensitive to the values of friendship, in the sense that you see yourself as a link within a chain, certainly a different and original one, but with no will to flatter your ego or to individually assert yourself. On the contrary, your aim is to immerge yourself in your friendly relations and to participate in projects and ideals of the whole human community.

As you are born under this sign, you are idealistic, altruistic, detached, independent, original, surprising, gifted, contradictory, innovative, humanistic, likeable, friendly, self-confident, impassive, quiet, intuitive, creative, charitable, elusive, disconcerting, generous, tolerant, paradoxical, and you cannot stand any kind of constraint. But you may also be marginal, resigned, distant, utopian, maladjusted, eccentric and cold.

In love, Sir, you are totally elusive. The human warmth you show in your group meetings quickly turns into a distant and sober attitude as soon as you are alone together. It is obvious that it may cause some problems if you were thought to be different. Your reluctance to talk about yourself, although not disturbing under other circumstances, is quite inappropriate in the private sphere.

The distance you maintain, as well as your lack of emotionalism, may suddenly disappear to give room for a real relationship, since you are prone to mood swings. The necessary condition is that you have centres of interest to share with your partner. Converging passions will ensure that the magic of your relationship can develop. Ideally, a deep friendship should be the basis of your initial relationship, because friendship is a feeling that particularly suits you; in such a case, imperceptibly, conducive closeness may transform friendship into the true love you give yourself up to eventually.

You are loyal, faithful and surprising. Once you find your soul mate, you feel more comfortable and, if the harmony with your partner is rich enough, you may stay with her your whole life through. You certainly have moments that seem strange to your partner, for instance when you are impersonal or even cold. But your natural magnetism, your communication skills and your shrewdness as you play with words, work wonders for patching things up.

You avoid problems that may cause emotional or sentimental complications. Because you are often disconcerting, your partner may need some time to adjust: you disappear suddenly when you do not want to deal too closely with your individuality. And you reappear as quickly with excuses and a charming casualness, and again, you are disconcerting!

You are interested in things that are out of the ordinary. Your erotic imagination may be immense and inexhaustible. You belong to the cerebral type and you cannot separate physical and sentimental aspects from your imagination’s intense activity. As a result, you explore with lucidity all the possibilities that may suit you best.

Mars in Sagittarius: his ability to take action

Khamtay Siphandon, you are a real Goliath and you often excel in sport; your thirst for conquests prompts you to constantly launch new challenges. The enthusiasm you put in your undertakings is perfectly well supported by your moral concepts and an idealism compatible with the values of the society you live in. You are pragmatic, enterprising and sometimes, naive. You do not pay attention to details and you launch various great adventurous projects that are all doomed to success. In a few rare cases, you can funnel your huge energy into more philosophical, even spiritual or religious enterprises, where your entire fieriness works wonders. On the sexual plane, your ardour and your spontaneity are your main assets. The danger is that you may spread yourself too thin in the sense that you may forget about faithfulness, particularly during the extensive faraway travels you are so fond of.

Conclusion

This text is only an excerpt from of Khamtay Siphandon's portrait. If you want to get your own astrological portrait, much more comprehensive that this present excerpt, you can order it at this page. Do you belong to the Jupiterian type, benevolent and generous? The Martian type, active and a go-getter? The Venusian type, charming and seductive? The Lunar type, imaginative and sensitive? The Solar type, noble and charismatic? The Uranian type, original, uncompromising and a freedom-lover? The Plutonian type, domineering and secretive? The Mercurian type, cerebral, inquiring and quick? The Neptunian type, visionary, capable of empathy and impressionable? The Saturnian type, profound, persevering and responsible? Are you more of the Fire type, energetic and intuitive? The Water type, sentimental and receptive? The Earth type, realistic and efficient? Or the Air type, gifted in communication and highly intellectual? 11 planetary dominants and 57 characteristics are reviewed, quantified, and interpreted; then, your psychological portrait is described in detail, in a comprehensive document of approximately 32-36 pages, full of engrossing and original pieces of information about yourself.

Astrological reports describe many of the character traits and they sometimes go deeper into the understanding of a personality. Please, always keep in mind that human beings are continuously evolving and that many parts of our psychological structures are likely to be expressed later, after having undergone significant life's experiences. It is advised to read a portrait with hindsight in order to appreciate its astrological content. Under this condition, you will be able to take full advantage of this type of study.

The analysis of an astrological portrait consists in understanding four types of elements which interact with one another: ten planets, twelve zodiacal signs, twelve houses, and what are called aspects between planets (the 11 aspects most commonly used are: conjunction, opposition, square, trine, sextile, quincunx, semi-sextile, sesqui-quadrate, quintile and bi-quintile. The first 5 aspects enumerated are called major aspects).

Planets represent typologies of our human psychology: sensitivity, affectivity, ability to undertake, will-power, mental process, aptitude, and taste for communication etc., all independent character facets are divided here for practical reasons. The twelve signs forming the space where planets move will "colour", so to speak, these typologies with each planet being located in its particular sign. They will then enrich the quality of these typologies, as expressed by the planets. The Zodiac is also divided into twelve astrological houses. This makes sense only if the birth time is known because within a few minutes, the twelve houses (including the 1st one, the Ascendant) change significantly. They correspond to twelve specific spheres of life: external behaviour, material, social and family life, relationship, home, love life, daily work, partnership, etc. Each planet located in any given house will then act according to the meaning of its house, and a second colouration again enriches those active forces that the planets symbolize. Finally, relations will settle among planets, creating a third structure, which completes the planets' basic meanings. A set of ancient rules, which has stood the test of experience over hundreds of years (although astrology is in evolution, only reliable elements are integrated into classical studies), are applied to organize the whole chart into a hierarchy and to allow your personality to be interpreted by texts. The planets usually analysed are the Sun, the Moon, Mercury, Venus, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune and Pluto, which means two luminaries (the Sun and the Moon) and 8 planets, a total of 10 planets. Additional secondary elements may be taken into account, such as asteroids Chiron, Vesta, Pallas, Ceres (especially Chiron, more well-known), the Lunar nodes, the Dark Moon or Lilith, and even other bodies: astrology is a discipline on the move. Astrological studies, including astrological portrait, compatibility of couples, predictive work, and horoscopes evolve and become more accurate or deeper, as time goes by.

Precision: concerning the horoscopes with a known time of birth, according to the Tradition, we consider that a planet near the beginning (called cuspide) of the next house (less than 2 degrees for the Ascendant and the Midheaven, and less than 1 degree for all other houses) belongs to this house: our texts and dominants take this rule into account. You can also choose not to take this shift into account in the form, and also tick the option Koch or Equal houses system instead of Placidus, the default houses system.

Warning: In order to avoid any confusion and any possible controversy, we want to draw your attention upon the fact that this sample of celebrities is very complete and therefore, it also includes undesirable people, since every category is represented: beside artists, musicians, politicians, lawyers, professional soldiers, poets, writers, singers, explorers, scientists, academics, religious figures, saints, philosophers, sages, astrologers, mediums, sportsmen, chess champions, famous victims, historical characters, members of royal families, models, painters, sculptors, and comics authors or other actual celebrities, there are also famous murderers, tyrants and dictators, serial-killers, or other characters whose image is very negative, often rightly so.

Regarding the latter, it must be remembered that even a monster or at least a person who perpetrated odious crimes, has some human qualities, often noticed by his/her close entourage: these excerpts come from computer programmes devoid of polemical intentions and may seem too soft or lenient. The positive side of each personality is deliberately stressed. Negative sides have been erased here - it is not the same in our comprehensive reports on sale - because it could hurt the families of such people. We are hoping that it will not rebound on the victims' side.

Numerology: Birth Path of Khamtay Siphandon

Testimonies to numerology are found in the most ancient civilizations and show that numerology pre-dates astrology. This discipline considers the name, the surname, and the date of birth, and ascribes a meaning to alphabetic letters according to the numbers which symbolise them.

The path of life, based on the date of birth, provides indications on the kind of destiny which one is meant to experience. It is one of the elements that must reckoned with, along with the expression number, the active number, the intimacy number, the achievement number, the hereditary number, the dominant numbers or the lacking numbers, or also the area of expression, etc.

Your Life Path is influenced by the number 8, Khamtay, which indicates that your destiny hinges on financial successes, material undertakings, and power seizing. It is a path full of successes and failures, fortune and reversals of fortune. You must strive to control your thirst for material goods, and try to practice tolerance. Great achievements are possible if you choose a career in any sort of trade or business. This is how your qualities are likely to be best expressed: management abilities and above-average commercial sense. Traditionally, the number 8 is believed to favour material and financial matters such as asset management, investments, commercial negotiations, as well as social power. All these elements are most likely to be found at the centre of your life. Your thirst for power, added to some degree of bad luck, constitutes one of the major hurdles blocking your way. However, your determination, added to a deep spirit of conciliation, turns the number 8 into a very fulfilling one, that of extraordinary successes.

Khamtay Siphandon was born under the sign of the Rat, element Wood

Chinese astrology is brought to us as a legacy of age-old wisdom and invites us to develop an awareness of our inner potential. It is believed that the wise man is not subjected to stellar influences. However, we must gain the lucidity and the distance without which we remain locked up in an implacable destiny. According to the legend of the Circle of Animals, Buddha summoned all the animals to bid them farewell before he left our world. Only twelve species answered Buddha's call. They form the Chinese Zodiac and symbolize the twelve paths of wisdom that are still valid nowadays.

The Asian wise man considers that a path is neither good nor bad. One can and must develop one's potentialities. The first step is to thoroughly know oneself.

Your personality is secretive and mysterious and you prefer to take action behind the scenes rather than to reveal your plans and ambitions. You are sensitive to the slightest interpersonal flaw and you display a great deal of caution in your affairs.

Besides, you do not like the crowd and the hustle and bustle. You prefer a more intimist atmosphere where your qualities can be fully expressed. Better than anyone, you know how to face adversity, subtly getting round obstacles and manipulating your entourage, if necessary. You are awesome in situations of crisis: thanks to your perspicacity, you avoid tricks with disconcerting ease and you also happen to be Machiavellian and scheming.

You never totally open up because you believe that it would give other people the means to act against you! On the other hand, you have mastered the art of making your interlocutors reveal what they wanted to conceal. Actually, you only need a word to guess the underlying stakes of any situation.

On the chapter of your flaws, a weak moral sense is to be mentioned: you do not hesitate to show perfidy. However, your advices prove very judicious most of the time. This is the reason why your influence is considered beneficial.

Chinese astrology has five elements, which are referred to as agents: Wood, Fire, Earth, Metal and Water.

You have a deep affinity with the agent Wood. In China, this element corresponds to the planet Jupiter, the green colour and the number 8.

You are sensitive to the harmony of your life setting and you come across as an accommodating person. Indeed, you deem useless to hurt your close friends without a sound reason. On the contrary, you strive to maintain a good balance around you.

The agent Wood implies some creative abilities: the liveliness of your imagination goes hand in hand with a sense of realities that prevents you from pursuing chimerical objectives. Your numerous projects can be successfully carried out, all the more so because, better than anyone, you are able to convince your interlocutors and forge the supports required by your plans and your ambitions.

The diplomacy you use when your interests are at stake can but favour the success of your endeavours. The only risk may be that you scatter your energy and reach saturation point because you try too hard to create, design, compose... Therefore, it is important that you limit the scope of some of your investigation fields.

N. B.: when the birth time is unknown, (12:00 PM (unknown)), these portrait excerpts do not take into account the parameters derived from the time, which means, the domification (Ascendant, astrological houses, etc.). Nonetheless, these analyses remain accurate in any case. Regarding the sources of the birth data in our possession, kindly note that the pages we publish constitute a starting point for more detailed research, even though they seem useful to us. When the sources are contradictory, which occurs rarely, after having analysed them, we choose the most reliable one. Sometimes, we publish a birth date just because it is made available, but we do not claim that is it the best one, by no means.