Not to be confused with The New Adventures of Mighty Mouse.

Quick facts for kids

Mighty Mouse: The New Adventures

Mighty Mouse in Ralph Bakshi's adaptation

Genre Action

Adventure

Comedy Directed by Ralph Bakshi (supervising director)

John Kricfalusi (senior director, series 1)

Kent Butterworth (senior director, series 2) Starring Patrick Pinney

Maggie Roswell

Dana Hill

Charlie Adler

Michael Pataki Country of origin United States No. of seasons 2 No. of episodes 19 (38 segments) Production Executive producer(s) John W. Hyde (Season 1)

Tom Klein (Season 2) Producer(s) Ralph Bakshi Running time 30 minutes Production company(s) Bakshi-Hyde Ventures Terrytoons Distributor CBS Television Distribution Release Original network CBS Picture format 4:3 Audio format Stereo Original release September 19, 1987 ( ) – October 22, 1988 (1988-10-22)

Mighty Mouse: The New Adventures is an American animated television series. It is a revival of the Mighty Mouse cartoon character. Produced by Bakshi-Hyde Ventures (a joint venture of animator Ralph Bakshi and producer John W. Hyde) and Terrytoons, it aired on CBS on Saturday mornings from fall 1987 through the 1988–89 season. It was briefly rerun on Saturday mornings on Fox Kids in November 1992.

The quality of Mighty Mouse as compared with other 1980s animated television series is considered by animation historian Jerry Beck to "foreshadow the higher quality [animation] boom coming in the next decade." It was one of the first Saturday morning cartoons on CBS to be broadcast in stereo.

Format

The series was a commercial half-hour format (22 minutes plus commercials), and each episode consisted of two self-contained 11-minute cartoon segments. It differed from the earlier incarnations of Mighty Mouse in many ways. It gave Mighty Mouse the secret identity of Mike Mouse, a sidekick in the form of the orphan Scrappy Mouse (who knows the hero's secret identity), heroic colleagues such as Bat-Bat and his sidekick Tick the Bug Wonder and the League of Super-Rodents, as well as introduced antagonists like Petey Pate, Big Murray, Madame Marsupial and the Cow (actually a bull, because he is Madame Marsupial's boyfriend and he possesses male traits). The original Mighty Mouse villain Oil Can Harry made a couple of appearances. Pearl Pureheart was not always the damsel in distress and many episodes did not feature her at all. Mighty Mouse's light-operatic singing was eliminated except for his trademark, "Here I come to save the day!", which was sometimes interrupted.

Unlike other American animated TV shows of the time (and even Mighty Mouse's past theatrical shorts) the show's format was loose and episodes did not follow a particular formula. Episodes varied from superhero-type stories to parodies of shows like The Honeymooners ("Mighty's Wedlock Whimsy") and the 1960s Batman series ("Night of the Bat-Bat" and "Bat With a Golden Tongue"), movies like Fantastic Voyage ("Mundane Voyage") and Japanese monster films (the opening of "Mighty's Wedlock Whimsy"), comic books ("See You in the Funny Papers"), and even lampooned other cartoons ("Don't Touch That Dial!") and specifically Alvin and the Chipmunks ("Mighty's Benefit Plan").

The series resurrected other Terrytoons characters, but acknowledged the passage of time: perennial menace Oil Can Harry returns to chase Pearl Pureheart once more ("Still Oily After All These Years"), 1940s characters Gandy Goose and Sourpuss and 1960s character Deputy Dawg are revived (Gandy and Dawg frozen in time in blocks of ice) in "The Ice Goose Cometh", "Gaston Le Crayon" has a cameo ("Still Oily After All These Years") and Bakshi's own 1960 creations—the Mighty Heroes—appear, aged, in the episode "Heroes and Zeroes". Fellow Terrytoons characters Heckle and Jeckle also appear in "Mighty's Wedlock Whimsy".

Cast

Patrick Pinney – Mighty Mouse (Mike Mouse) / Gandy Goose / Petey Pate

Maggie Roswell – Pearl Pureheart / Additional Voices

Dana Hill – Scrappy Mouse

Charlie Adler – Bat-Bat (Bruce Vein) / Additional Voices

Joe Alaskey – Sourpuss / Additional Voices

Michael Pataki – The Cow / Additional Voices

Beau Weaver – Fractured Narrator / Additional Voices

Crew

Producer/Supervising Director/Story Direction: Ralph Bakshi

Executive Producer: John Hyde

Executive in charge of production: Tom Klein

Senior Director: John Kricfalusi (season 1), Kent Butterworth (season 2)

Directors: John Kricfalusi, John Sparey, Bruce Woodside, Bob Jaques, Kent Butterworth

Writers (Season 1): Tom Minton, Doug Moench, Nate Kanfer, Jim Reardon, Eddie Fitzgerald, Rich Moore, Andrew Stanton

Writers (Season 2): Jim Reardon, Tom Minton

Layout artists: Ken Boyer, Mike Kazaleh, Kathleen Castillo, William Recinos, Jim Gomez, Lynne Naylor, Dave Concepcion, Bruce Timm

Episodes

Season 1 (1987)

No.

overall No. in

season Title Original air date 1 1 "Night on Bald Pate" / "Mouse from Another House" September 19, 1987 ( )

Night on Bald Pate: Ostracised for having a bald scalp, Petey Pate turns to villainy and kidnaps Pearl to make Mouseville take him seriously.

Mouse from Another House: Lonely orphan Scrappy listens as Pearl describes Mighty Mouse's beginnings.

2 2 "Me-Yowww!" / "Witch Tricks" September 26, 1987 ( )

Me-Yowww!: Mighty's new pal Durf tries to fit in with mouse society but is rejected, forcing them to go to Cat Town where Durf finds a new friend.

Witch Tricks: Scrappy helps a sick tooth fairy, but is pursued by a wicked witch. Mighty Mouse comes to the rescue and calms the witch down.

3 3 "Night of the Bat-Bat" / "Scrap-Happy" October 3, 1987 ( )

Night of the Bat-Bat: While Mighty Mouse is away on vacation, Bat-Bat (a parody of Batman) and his sidekick, Tick the Bug Wonder, step in to save Vermin City from some dairy food changes caused by the Cow.

Scrap-Happy: Scrappy tries to fit in with a shady gang, but he and the gang are sold to the carnival. When the going gets tough, Mighty Mouse is summoned to the rescue.

4 4 "Catastrophe Cat" / "Scrappy's Field Day" October 10, 1987 ( )

Catastrophe Cat: After a long and exhausting aversion of disasters, Mighty Mouse discovers that a hiccupping cat is the culprit.

Scrappy's Field Day: Mighty Mouse takes Scrappy on a field trip to prehistoric times, braving much danger throughout.

5 5 "The Bagmouse" / "The First Deadly Cheese" October 17, 1987 ( )

The Bagmouse: Scrappy is captured by Mr. Maxie, who intends to commercialise mouse burgers. Mighty Mouse finds out about this and puts a stop to it.

The First Deadly Cheese: The Cow finds a cosmic cheese and uses it to beat Mighty Mouse. Despite multiple contacts with it, Mighty is able to avoid letting it overwhelm him.

6 6 "This Island Mouseville" / "Mighty's Musical Classics" October 24, 1987 ( )

This Island Mouseville: An alien cat is claiming Mouseville, but he does not prove to be a major threat and his conquest is short-lived.

Mighty's Musical Classics: In this episode, footage from vintage Terrytoons cartoons play in time to "The Loco-Motion" and "Why Do Fools Fall in Love".

7 7 "The Littlest Tramp" / "Puffy Goes Berserk" October 31, 1987 ( )

The Littlest Tramp: Polly Pineblossom is refusing Mighty's help, so he solves minor problems until he finds out that Big Murray is upsetting Polly (a parody of City Lights and the Color Rhapsody short The Little Match Girl).

Puffy Goes Berserk: The mutated giant kitten Puffy is terrorising Mouseville. After a brief fight with Mighty, some aliens take Puffy to a place where he will be welcomed and accepted.

8 8 "The League of Super-Rodents" / "Scrappy's Playhouse" November 7, 1987 ( )

The League of Super-Rodents: The Cow defeats the League of Super-Rodents to impress Madame Marsupial, but is beaten by the Rampaging Sloth.

Scrappy's Playhouse: The shady gang sneak into the Mouseville Cinema and combine old Terrytoons Mighty Mouse clips.

9 9 "All You Need Is Glove" / "It's Scrappy's Birthday" November 14, 1987 ( )

All You Need Is Glove: The Glove imprisons Mike and Pearl and they and Scrappy head off to his brother Lefty for help. Mighty takes care not to compromise his secret identity.

It's Scrappy's Birthday: Thinking no one remembers his birthday, Scrappy moves away with a hobo named Slappy. After Mighty Mouse rescues them, they are surprised with a birthday celebration.

10 10 "Aqua-Guppy" / "Animation Concerto" November 21, 1987 ( )

Aqua-Guppy: A. Crab mistakes Pearl Pureheart for his fiancee and kidnaps her. Mighty's friend Aqua-Guppy brings A. Crab's real fiancee to him.

Animation Concerto: Old Terrytoons cartoons play in sequence to a jazz concerto song about Mighty Mouse.

11 11 "The Ice Goose Cometh" / "Pirates with Dirty Faces" November 28, 1987 ( )

The Ice Goose Cometh: Gandy Goose thaws from an iceberg, but he is lost without Sour Puss. Mighty is overwhelmed by Gandy's antics, but he manages to reunite him with Sour Puss.

Pirates with Dirty Faces: The shady gang are abducted on a pirate ship and, after a mutiny, are deceived by the pirates. They wake up from this staged nightmare ready to reform.

12 12 "Mighty's Benefit Plan" / "See You in the Funny Papers" December 5, 1987 ( )

Mighty's Benefit Plan: Mighty takes Scrappy to meet Elwie and the Tree Weasels. At the concert that night, Mighty saves the Mouseville Orphans' benefit from going to ruin.

See You in the Funny Papers: Mighty must defeat villains from Crimebusters Comics that have come to life, while an alien force invades Mouseville.

13 13 "Heroes and Zeroes" / "Stress for Success" December 12, 1987 ( )

Heroes and Zeroes: After Big Murray's ransom scheme backfires, Mighty Mouse and the Mighty Heroes are out to capture rampaging stolen numbers.

Stress for Success: An overworked Mighty Mouse tries to recuperate, but old Terrytoons adventures make him restless. However, he gains his needed strength.

Season 2 (1988)

No.

overall No. in

season Title Original air date 14 1 "Day of the Mice" / "Still Oily After All These Years" September 17, 1988 ( )

Day of the Mice: Petey Pate forms a rebellion to overwhelm cats. Shocked by the mice's bullying, Pearl protests and Mighty comes to the rescue and restores order.

Still Oily After All These Years: The Cow bails out Oil Can Harry, who wastes no time pursuing Pearl, but his visit to Pearl becomes stressful and he wishes to go back to prison.

15 2 "Mighty's Wedlock Whimsy" / "Anatomy of a Milquetoast" September 24, 1988 ( )

Mighty's Wedlock Whimsy: Gandy Goose and Sour Puss try to bring Pearl and Mighty together for marriage. After a long hesitation, Mighty reconsiders about the marriage.

Anatomy of a Milquetoast: Mighty Mouse is charged with Scrappy's disappearance. As the case nears to an end, a monster Scrappy approaches. All this time Scrappy was having a nightmare.

16 3 "Bat with a Golden Tongue" / "Mundane Voyage" October 1, 1988 ( )

Bat with a Golden Tongue: Bat-Bat is sent to stop Ski Nose's numerous thefts of golden awards, all with Mighty Mouse's assistance. Ski Nose is a caricature of Bob Hope.

Mundane Voyage: Mighty Mouse and Pearl go inside the President's body to cure his cardiac ailment within one hour.

17 4 "Snow White & the Motor City Dwarfs" / "Don't Touch That Dial!" October 8, 1988 ( )

Snow White & the Motor City Dwarfs: Mighty Mouse pitches out his retelling of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs.

Don't Touch That Dial!: A little boy switches Mighty Mouse from channel to channel, until Mighty Mouse breaks out and convinces him to do something different.

18 5 "Mouse and Supermouse" / "The Bride of Mighty Mouse" October 15, 1988 ( )

Mouse and Supermouse: Petey Pate builds Supermouse robots to replace Mighty Mouse, but they become corrupted, so Mighty terminates them.

The Bride of Mighty Mouse: 20 years later Mighty is married to Pearl, running a motel and raising their son, but is threatened by Howard Hack (a parody of Howard Roark from Ayn Rand's The Fountainhead) rivaling with his own motel.

19 6 "A Star Is Milked" / "Mighty's Tone Poem" October 22, 1988 ( )

A Star Is Milked: Mighty heads to Hollywood to become a star, but the Cow seeks to sabotage his position. Mighty co-stars with him instead.

Mighty's Tone Poem: Mighty Mouse has the villains watch some previous episodes of Mighty Mouse, with many interruptions throughout.

International broadcast

Australia

Nine Network (1987-1988)

Fox Kids Australia (1995–2003)

United Kingdom

CBBC

Hong Kong

The Children’s Channel (1991-1998)

Home media

On January 5, 2010, CBS Home Entertainment (distributed by Paramount) released the complete series on three DVDs, with every installment of the Saturday morning cartoon uncut and presented in the original full screen video format. The collection includes the uncut version of "The Littlest Tramp," in which the controversial scene begins at 9:41 in the episode, but features an error in the version of "Mighty's Wedlock Whimsy" included on the set, where the penultimate live action shot of layout artist Ed Bell is substituted with an animatic version of the shot. The actual shot as aired appears in the included documentary.

Among the extras are the documentary “Breaking the Mold: The Re-Making of Mighty Mouse” and commentary tracks for several episodes. Also included are three original Terrytoons theatrical Mighty Mouse cartoon shorts, as taken from Paramount's vaults, which are the first-ever official release of Terrytoons material on DVD.

Influence and legacy

The show was considered revolutionary at the time and, along with 1988's Who Framed Roger Rabbit, inspired a wave of animated shows that were much zanier than those that had dominated children's animation in the previous two decades. It is credited by some as the impetus for the ‘creator-driven’ animation revolution of the 1990s.

It was a huge springboard for many cartoonists and animators who would later become famous, among them John Kricfalusi (creator of Nickelodeon's The Ren and Stimpy Show), Bruce W. Timm (producer of Warner Bros. Batman: The Animated Series), Jim Reardon (writer for Warner Bros. Tiny Toon Adventures and Disney/Pixar's WALL-E and director for Fox's The Simpsons), Tom Minton (writer and producer for many Warner Bros. television cartoons, including Tiny Toons, Animaniacs, The Sylvester and Tweety Mysteries, Baby Looney Tunes and Duck Dodgers), Lynne Naylor (co-founder of Spümcø, character designer for Batman: The Animated Series and storyboard artist for Cartoon Network's The Powerpuff Girls and Cow and Chicken), Rich Moore (animation director for Fox/Comedy Central's Futurama, director for The Simpsons and director of Disney's Wreck-It Ralph, Zootopia and Ralph Breaks the Internet), and Andrew Stanton (director of Disney/Pixar's Finding Nemo, WALL-E and Finding Dory) and others. The Loud House creator Chris Savino says the show's classic cartoon style, which contrasted with the dominant style of TV animation at the time, spurred him to become an animator.

Kricfalusi supervised the production for the first season and directed eight of its 26 segments. Kent Butterworth supervised the second season, after John Kricfalusi's departure to work on the similarly short-lived 1988 animated series The New Adventures of Beany and Cecil. The show was licensed as a comic book series published by Marvel Comics in 1990 and 1991, which ran for 10 issues.

Comic book spin-off

From 1990 to 1991, a Mighty Mouse comic book series was published by Marvel Comics. It lasted for 10 issues and took place after the Bakshi television series. Shortly after the events of Mighty Mouse: The New Adventures, Scrappy abandons Mighty and Pearl to spend all his time at the Four Fingers Video Arcade. When the Four Fingers Video Arcade closes down, Scrappy vanishes.

It is revealed that Mighty Mouse's enemy, the Glove, was behind the Four Fingers Video Arcade. Mighty saves Scrappy in the end, but Scrappy is still "zapped" into playing video games. Scrappy is then sent to rehab and is back to normal a few issues later. In the 10th and final issue of the comic, Scrappy substitutes for Pearl Pureheart when she gives up her role in the comic.