Mighty Mouse: The New Adventures is an American animated television series. It's a revival of the Mighty Mouse cartoon character. Produced by Bakshi-Hyde Ventures (a joint venture between animator Ralph Bakshi and producer John W. Hyde) and Terrytoons, it aired on CBS on Saturday mornings from the fall of 1987 to the 1988-1989 season. [1] It was briefly rerun on Saturday morning on Fox Kids in November 1992.

The quality of Mighty Mouse compared to other 80s animated television series is considered by animation historian Jerry Beck to "foreshadow the boom [of animation] in higher quality coming in the next decade". It was one of the first Saturday morning cartoons on CBS to be broadcast in stereo.

History

The series was a half-hour commercial format (22 minutes plus commercials) and each episode consisted of two stand-alone 11-minute cartoon segments. It differed in many ways from previous Mighty Mouse incarnations. He gave Mighty Mouse the secret identity of Mike Mouse, a companion in the form of the orphan Scrappy Mouse (who knows the hero's secret identity), heroic colleagues such as Bat-Bat and his companion Tick the Bug Wonder and the League of Super-Rodents, as well as introduced antagonists such as Petey Pate, Big Murray, Madame Marsupial and the Cow (actually a bull, because he is Madame Marsupial's boyfriend and possesses masculine traits). Mighty Mouse original villain Oil Can Harry has made a couple of appearances. Pearl Pureheart wasn't always the damsel in distress and many episodes didn't see her at all. Mighty Mouse's opera singing was dropped except for his trademark, “Here I Am Coming to Save the Day!”, Which was sometimes interrupted.

Unlike other American animated TV shows of the time (and even earlier Mighty Mouse theatrical shorts), the show's format was loose and the episodes didn't follow a particular formula. Episodes ranged from superhero-type stories to parodies of shows such as The Honeymooners ("Mighty's Wedlock Whimsy") and the 60s Batman series ("Night of the Bat" and "The Bat with the Golden Tongue"), films such as Fantastic Voyage ("Mundane Voyage") and Japanese monster movies (the opening of "Mighty's Wedlock Whimsy"), comics ("See You in Funny Newspapers") and even other mocked cartoons ("Don't Touch That Dial ! ”) And in particular Alvin and the Chipmunks (“ Mighty's Benefit Plan ”).

The series resurrected other Terrytoons characters, but recognized the passage of time: the perennial threat Oil Can Harry returns to chase Pearl Pureheart once again ("Still Oily After All These Years"), 40s characters Gandy Goose and Sourpuss and 60s character Deputy Dawg are revived (Gandy and Dawg frozen in time in blocks of ice) in "The Ice Goose Cometh", "Gaston Le Crayon" has a cameo ("Still Oily After All These Years ”) And Bakshi's 1960s creations Mighty Heroes appear, aged, in the episode“ Heroes and Zeroes ”. The characters of fellow Terrytoons Heckle and Jeckle also appear in "Mighty's Wedlock Whimsy".

Characters

Mighty Mouse

Pearl Pureheart

Scrappy Mouse

Bat-Bat

Sour Puss

The cow

Episodes

Season 1 (1987)

Night on the bald pate / Rat from another house

I-Yowww! / Witch Tricks

Night of the Bat / Scrap-Happy

Catastrophe Cat / Scrappy's country day

The bagmouse / The first deadly cheese

This Island Mouseville / The Mighty Music Classics

The Littlest Tramp / Puffy goes on a rampage

The League of Super Rodents / Scrappy's Theater

All you need is a glove / It's Scrappy's birthday

Aqua-Guppy / Animation concert

Here comes the ice goose / Pirates with dirty faces

Mighty Benefits Plan / See you in funny docs

Heroes and zeros / Stress for success

Season 2 (1988)

Day of the Mice / Still oily after all these years

The Whim of Mighty's Marriage / Anatomy of a Milquetoast

Bat with the Golden Tongue / Worldly Journey

Snow White and the Dwarfs of Motor City / Don't Touch That Dial

Mouse and Supermouse / Mighty Mouse's Bride

A Star is Milked / Poetry with a powerful tone

Technical data

Original language English

Country United States

Author Ralph Bakshi

Studio Bakshi-Hyde Ventures, Terrytoons

Network CBS

1st TV September 19, 1987 - October 22, 1988

Episodes 19 (complete)

Relationship 4:3

Episode duration 24 min