by Brian Kunde

Today’s de Camp highlight is The Incorporated Knight. It’s one of his later fantasy novels, and one of his weirdest ones, in that it’s not really a novel at all, but a collection of previously published short stories. Except that it isn’t really that, either, since those stories make up just the first five chapters, with the remaining thirteen being new material, published for the first time in the book. The new stuff really does read like a novel, albeit an episodic one, and there’s enough thematic and plot connection between the old stuff and the new stuff that the whole really reads like a novel as well, albeit, again, an episodic one.

Just to complicate things, the short stories were all originally credited to L. Sprague de Camp alone, while the book is credited to L. Sprague and Catherine Crook de Camp. Why? Well, the book straddles the line between de Camp’s middle speculative fiction of the 1960s and 1970s and the late ones of the 1980s and 1990s. The late period is when Catherine finally gained recognition as full co-author in their fiction (an admission that had come in their non-fiction in the early sixties). She was not so credited in every case, just in those instances her contribution was regarded as pivotal. One wonders what she brought to this one. Whatever it was, literary improvement or simply kick-starting the thing into completion, I’m glad we have it. It’s a good one!

Here’s the bibliographical stuff. Chapters I and II first appeared as the story “Two Yards of Dragon” in the anthology Flashing Swords! #3: Warriors and Wizards, edited by Lin Carter (Aug. 1976). It also got into the de Camp collections The Best of L. Sprague de Camp (May 1978) and Aristotle and the Gun and Others Stories (Aug. 2002), as well as the anthologies Dragon Tales, edited by Asimov, Greenberg and Waugh (Jul. 1982), Dragons!, edited by Dann and Dozois (Aug. 1993), A Dragon-Lover’s Treasury of the Fantastic, edited by Margaret Weis (Oct. 1994), and Dragons: The Greatest Stories, edited by Martin H. Greenberg (1997), as well as German translations of at least three of these. So it’s quite well-traveled as an independent piece.

Chapter III first appeared as “The Coronet” in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, v. 51, no. 5, Nov. 1976, and … nowhere else but the present book, aside from a French magazine, in French translation.

Chapter IV first appeared as “Spider Love” in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, v. 53, no. 5, Nov. 1977, and … again, nowhere else but the present book, this time at all.

Chapter V first appeared as “Eudoric’s Unicorn” in the anthology The Year’s Best Fantasy Stories: 3, edited by Lin Carter (Nov. 1977). Odd place for it to start; one expects “bests” to be published somewhere else before they’re recognized as bests. But Carter could be precipitate, and may have figured anything new by de Camp would automatically qualify. No argument from me. This story also got into the de Camp collection Footprints on Sand (Jun. 1981) and the anthology Unicorns!, edited by Dann and Dozois (May 1982), and is well represented in other languages, having appeared in German, Dutch, French, German, and Italian translation.

The lesson here would seem to be that stories with dragons and unicorns in them are popular, and stories centering on magic crowns and giant spiders, not so much. That, or debuting in a Carter anthology is golden, while initial publication in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction is the kiss of death.

We are informed that all these stories were revised for their appearances in The Incorporated Knight. Which there was certainly enough time to do, as there was quite a gap between the short stories and the book. Ten years, in fact; enough time for the former to qualify as Middle de Camp and the latter as Late de Camp. Why the long interruption? Well, possibly because de Camp shifted his focus to the contemporary Willy Newbury stories (1975-1979), and then the mammoth undertaking of researching the Robert E. Howard bio, Dark Valley Destiny (1983). The Conan and Krishna series were coming back to life right around then as well. Or maybe the market just dried up for poor Eudoric. The eventual book may have benefited from the delay, by allowing the remainder of the tale to be told as a more unified narrative.

In its complete form, The Incorporated Knight was first issued in hardcover by Phantasia Press in August 1987, in a luscious Victoria Poyser wrap-around dustcover showing hero Eudoric Damberton and his shotgun-bride Princess Yolanda facing off against the Orthodox Ogre. Yolanda, a practicing sorceress, looks quite up to the challenge, cutting a commanding figure, and she’s taller than hubby Eudoric to boot! Eudoric, for his part, seems quite content to shelter in her shadow. The ogre, hidden around the spine on the back of the jacket, has his back to us, and, while menacing, appears a bit scrawny for an ogre. And naked. All of this is unusually true to the text, as I recall. Poyser did the art for a number of de Camp covers around this time, and was a favorite of his for the task; her attention to such details makes it easy to understand why. On the downside, both Yolanda and Eudoric are rather bland in appearance, which doesn’t exactly pull the reader in. This reader, anyway.

In common with other 1980s specialty press editions, Phantasia’s production came in two states; a signed and numbered slipcased version limited to 275 copies with the then-whopping price tag of $40.00, and a more reasonable trade edition of 1000 copies for $17.00. That would be the one I would have, if I had the Phantasia at all, which I don’t. Because even today $40.00 seems a whopping price, and while I’m sure copies can be hand for less, ones in decent condition likely command significantly more. Fortunately for mere mortals, the book was reissued in paperback by Baen Books a bit over a year later, in September 1988 for $3.50. That’s more like it! It’s the one I have. Baen put out a simultaneous Canadian edition and a reprint in 1991 with a cost creep-up to $3.95. Not bad for a late de Camp.

The Baen version also chose the confrontation with the ogre as its cover scene, this time omitting Yolanda. The ogre is seated, beefy, mad-eyed, and scary-creepy, dwarfing and nearly engulfing Eudoric, who nonetheless appears simultaneously irritated and nonchalant in regard to his peril, which is tonally straight on, even if not quite as faithful to what goes on in the story. Both are rather lavishly dressed, which is pretty if not altogether likely, given that the ogre has been living a hermit-like existence off in the wilderness, while Eudoric is a fugitive on the lam from the forces of Armoria. Still, a better, more dynamic image than the Poyser, in my view. Dan Horne is the artist on this one.

There’s one more edition I know of, the UK Gateway/Orion ebook issued in September 2011. It has the usual crappy Gateway cover, nonpictorial, with title and credits in black and red type over a plain yellow background. The Gateways are good because they keep de Camp in print (eprint, anyway), even if only overseas. Admitting that, however, is to admit their sole merit.

Before the book came out, I had only read the two stories in the Carter anthologies. I was not a great reader of spec fic magazines back in the 70s, preferring to spend my money on stories I knew I wanted, not wheat mixed with the chaff of what some editor thought I might want. Yes, I know, that describes anthologies as well as magazines, but I was young, foolish, and reckless, and I trusted Lin Carter’s judgment. Since my tastes were simple and those were the days before he went completely off the deep end, I was rarely disappointed.

No, I take that back. I was disappointed by the first Eudoric story, “Two Yards of Dragon.” De Camp’s previous appearance in the Flashing Swords! series had been a new Pusadian tale; “The Rug and the Bull,” the first of that series I had ever read up to that point, in fact. My appetite for the Pusads had been whetted by things Carter had previously written about them—in a period when none remained in print—so it was timely for me. Having enjoyed it, I was looking forward to another one. What I got instead was the first entry in a completely new series at a stage in my life when I was more into sequels. That said, I did like this new thing, in spite of myself. I was intrigued by the idea of a would-be knight having to earn his spurs hunting an endangered species, amid perils rooted as much in local game law as the intrinsic danger of the enterprise. I also bought into the premise, touted by Carter, of a fantasy world whose geography was based on a fabulous Medieval travelogue (Mandeville’s Travels). Good thing I didn’t realize the Mandeville angle was bunk.

That’s right, bunk! Here’s the –in-advertising Carter (and later, when he wrote about it, de Camp himself) failed to provide. Eudoric’s world is not that of Sir John Mandeville. Mandeville, a 13th century romance writer, purported to describe the world he himself lived in, or at least the Europe and Levant he knew—just getting, shall us say, a little imaginative as he got further from the regions familiar to his readers. What this meant was filling the eastern Mediterranean with mythical, Arabian Nights-style islands, full of marvels. De Camp borrowed the names of a couple of these (along with a few trivial details like one having giant snails amid its fauna), and then pasted those names onto the eastern European steppe as whole countries. And that. Is. All. The. Mandeville. In. Eudoric’s. Whole. Setting. WTF?

What happened here, I believe, marks a rare lapse in de Camp’s erudition. I strongly doubt he ever read Mandeville. I don’t even blame him; when I myself, much later, on the strength of these de Campian borrowings, came to The Travels of Sir John Mandeville, I found the work practically unreadable, despite it being rendered into modern English courtesy of Dr. C. W. R. D. Moseley and Penguin Classics. Still, one expects de Camp to have read it. It was a worthy entry in the wonder travel-tale genre of its era that gave rise to such later, more truthful works as Marco Polo. De Camp ate that sort of thing up, and passed it on to us in several his nonfiction works. Mandeville figures in one of these, Lands Beyond, which he wrote in collaboration with Willy Ley. Ley, a literate and well-read European, was doubtless more familiar with Mandeville than was de Camp, and I suspect he’s the one responsible for the material therefrom that made it into their book. Much later, when de Camp was seeking color with which to infuse his latest story, he must have returned to Lands Beyond and lifted it directly from there. So while the ultimate source was indeed Mandeville, it was as mediated by Ley, uncritically adopted by de Camp, and gushingly retailed by Carter, who (rightly) thought it a neat idea on which to base a fantasy world.

Only, as noted above, Eudoric’s world isn’t. It merely borrows a few snippets, transplants them to the wrong spots, and goes off on its own merry way. It’s a fine way, it just has almost nothing to do with Mandeville. Here’s what Eudoric’s world really is. It’s a parallel Earth that developed along historical lines similar, but not identical, to those of our own world. It has a stronger component of magic in its makeup than science. In de Camp’s stories, the region that in our world constitutes Europe has reached a level of development comparable to our own High Middle Ages, though some areas are more primitive. It had a Mediterranean empire that fell and was replaced by a feudal central European one, just as our own world did—though their versions were a Napolitanian Empire (centered on Naples) rather than a Roman one, and a “New Napolitanian Empire” in place of our Holy Roman Empire.

Politically, the map is reasonably familiar. Combining information gleaned from both The Incorporated Knight and The Pixilated Peeress, a follow-up novel set in the same world, we find the New Napolitanian Empire roughly corresponds to Germany, Franconia to France, Armoria to Brittany, Rhaetia to Switzerland, and Tyrrhenia to Italy, while Eastern Europe has Avaria in place of Poland, Pathenia (the main Mandeville borrowing) where one would expect Belarus, and Pantorozia where one would expect Russia. Farther east still is Serica, a China analog, and to the south, Saracens inhabit what to us are North Africa and the Middle East. In a fun wrinkle, the high Alps are home to “trolls” (remnant Neanderthals).

Other than the supernatural element, the most significant difference is religious. Eudoric’s Europe, like ours, transitioned from polytheism to monotheism, but with no unifying authority. Each country has its own version, so religious boundaries correspond to political ones. And they’re … odd. The deity is often envisioned as being constituted as more than one “person.” Franconia reveres a Holy Trinity (not the Christian one), and the Empire a Divine Pair with names derived from Germanic paganism, while eastern lands embrace a unitary godhead. A holy land is recognized in the analog of Palestine, but its contribution to these varied faiths is unclear.

And the adventures this setting gives a home to? Entertaining in the grand de Camp tradition, and full of ironic twists and reverses. Eudoric, our protagonist, is heir to an imperial fief, an aspirant knight, and unlucky in love. Setting out to win his spurs and a bride, his interest is diverted into establishing and extending a stagecoach line, inspired by an example encountered in his eastern travels. Not that his attention is ever far from his initial goals. He gains his knighthood fairly early, but as women find him cold and overly practical, the bride proves not so simple. He pursues a succession of potentials, undertaking several quests to win over them, their parents, or both. Hence his trip east to hunt dragon, his campaign to rid a neighboring barony of a giant spider, and his effort to capture a live unicorn for the Emperor. (There are the usual de Campic ironies; the dragon’s a protected species, the spider is love-lorn, and the unicorn, as always, is a rhinoceros.) All for naught. His original intended elopes with a minstrel, the next sends him packing due to the underhanded way he gains his knighthood, and so on, culminating with the Emperor’s own daughter, who throws him over for the Cham of Pantorozia. C’est la vie. She had a mustache, anyway.

The preliminaries are over, and the pattern set. Then Eudoric seeks to extend his stage line into Franconia, and things really take off. His reputation for tackling difficult challenges has preceded him, and he finds the deal contingent on him rescuing King Clothar’s sister Yolanda, imprisoned in neighboring Armoria. That proves complicated. There, Yolanda, denounced as a sorceress, is to be sacrificed to a sea monster (actually a beaked whale). Cue de Campian twist on Perseus and Andromeda! Typically, Eudoric saves her in a manner not straightforwardly heroic, finessing things in a way that does not entail actually killing the monster. Unfazed, Yolanda’s captors forcibly wed him to her, marriage being another traditional way to neutralize a sorceress. So, yay, he’s a husband at last! (Be careful what you wish for…)

Two problems. First, Yolanda, a princess accustomed to having her own way, is a complete harridan. Second, she really is a sorceress. Moreover, not only is her magic not neutralized by sex, she’s—ahem!—already well experienced in that regard. Hardly the virginal blushing bride!

Well, first things first. With Yolanda’s head about to be back on the figurative (perhaps literal) chopping block, it’s time to cut and run. Our uncongenial mates take flight together back to Franconia just ahead of the posse. More episodic adventures ensue, overcome by Eudoric’s smarts, Yolanda’s spells, or occasional dumb luck. They’re successively trapped in an ancient cyclopean tomb by its spectral, company-starved occupant, run afoul of an “orthodox” ogre who kills and eats non-adherents to his own persuasion, and, oh yes, the soldiers of the Franconian border duchy of Dorellia, who just happen to have it in for Yolanda.

At length they reach Letitia, the Franconian capital! But—not safe! Eudoric is promptly mewed up in Yolanda’s mansion, imprisoned by her magical servants, marids from the Saracen lands. He’s to be her boy-toy and nothing more. Worse, he learns he’s but the latest in a series of husbands the princess has espoused; she turned the others into statues as she tired of them. Cue de Campian twist on the Bluebeard tale! Ever resourceful, our hero beats this doom as well, even unfreezing the other husbands. True, the original one, resentful of his successors, tries to kill him, but hey, you can’t make everyone happy.

So Eudoric returns home, older, wiser, and once more unwed, spurning Yolanda’s letters entreating him to come back (too late, she decides he is the only one of her husbands whose loss she regrets). Alas for her, Franconia’s marriage laws are not recognized in the Empire. As for our hero, he is last seen scheming to incorporate his coach line, as they do in far Serica, and paying court to his original fiancé, who has also returned home, disillusioned with her minstrel lover. (Who had left her for Yolanda and her husband statuary gallery before being freed by Eudoric.) So all’s well that ends on, hmm, well, a promising note, at least. Let us wish ultimate happiness for our Eudoric and his Lusina!

A longish plot description, but perhaps befitting the complicated text, originating as it did in so many component stories. I suspect the saga of Eudoric and Yolanda was first projected as a series of additional shorts, and only gelled into one mass after they either failed to find a market or were temporarily set aside in favor of other projects. Perhaps it was Catherine who at last swept them all together, tied them up with a bow, and presented them to her husband in triumph, saying “Now we’ve got a novel!” Or it may have just been another instance of Sprague’s late career impulse to tidy up all the loose ends of his then uncompleted series(es).

Whatever it may have been, The de Camps would go on to pen the previously mentioned second novel set in Eudoric’s world, The Pixilated Peeress (Del Rey Books, 1991), featuring a different locale and new characters. Unlike the first, it’s a true novel, though just as delightful. But that’s a highlight for some other time.

The Incorporated Knight is dedicated “To Jeanne and Paul Maguire, whose lively imagination gave us our title.” A cursory check through the index of de Camp’s autobiography Time & Chance fails to turn up these names, or the story behind the acknowledgement. Elsewhere, I find references to a Paul Carl Maguire (1921-2000) who in 1945 married a Jeanne M. Nickelson (1921-2014) in Norristown, Pennsylvania, where they afterwards lived. She married again, in 2003, Joseph S. DiLucca. These Maguires operated a dance school over four decades out of their home, as well as teaching at the Mainline Night School at Conestoga and Harriton. I presume they are the dedicatees. If so, they must have been friends from the de Camps’ long period of residence in the keystone state. Anyone have elucidatory information relative to this point? If so, you may contact the undersigned. Or just post a follow-up, that works too.

# # #