by Brian Kunde

Today’s de Camp highlight is The Stones of Nomuru (The Donning Company, Norfolk, VA, 1988), by L. Sprague de Camp and Catherine Crook de Camp, one of their later novels, and an unusual one. (I’ll get to that.) Most late de Camp novels carry both Sprague’s and Catherine’s bylines, and The Stones of Nomuru is no exception (though its sequel bears Sprague’s alone). L. Sprague de Camp is on record as saying that Catherine had some authorial or editorial input in most of his later writings, and was credited when that input was substantial. I have previously profiled its sequel, The Venom Trees of Sunga (Ballantine, New York, 1992), which holds the distinction of being the last new de Camp novel published in either author’s lifetime, and, currently at least, the last new one, as well. Given the existence in manuscript of other novels of varying states of completeness, that distinction may not hold forever, but for now, at least, it does.

Publication histories for late de Camp works tend to be straightforward, not having had the time and opportunity to develop the fiendish complexity of the early ones. A blessing to the bibliographer, if not necessarily to the collector. Stones was first published as a trade paperback by the Donning Company as one of its Starblaze books in September, 1988. The scan used here is of my personal copy. A mass market paperback duly followed (Baen Books, Riverdale, NY) in May 1991. Again, the scan of it here is of my own copy, though as it is marred by an odd bleached area, a web capture is also provided. The remaining cover images used here are also web captures. There was also an Italian version, Le pietre di Nomuru; (Milano, Monadori; Paola Andreaus was the translator), issued as #1198 of Urania magazine in February 1993. Monadori’s Urania is a unique publication devoting each issue to translating and presenting a single foreign novel (or occasional collection and anthology) to the Italian market, almost always as the first Italian edition (it does occasionally feature original Italian SF as well). The only other edition I know of for certain is the usual Gateway/Orion ebook, issued in September 2011 as part of that that firm’s mass release for the British market. There also appears to be an audiobook out there, but I have yet to fully confirm its existence.

The covers of these editions are all variations on a theme, in this instance that of a dinosaur-riding adventurer situated in a dramatic landscape. Donning’s version, artist uncredited, set the example. The artist is uncredited, though he or she signed the work with a little undecipherable symbol that appears on the back cover. To me it looks rather like Victoria Poyser’s work (at least that in which she clothes her subjects), though the signed covers of hers I’ve seen use her full first name. Anyway, it’s a decent job, a wrap-around cover presenting adventurous protagonist Keith Salazar as an ungainly, ill-at-ease rider on the title side. Some of the awkwardness may come from the lack of stirrups; in the book, the riding beast compensates for this by grabbing the rider’s ankles with its forelimbs, and the beast pictured does indeed have the requisite grasping limbs—though they’re not currently so employed. A ruined city looms behind, representing the archaeological dig central to the book’s plot (not entirely faithful to it, though, being mostly-intact rather than largely buried). A second figure, one of the so-called “Kooks,” or intelligent natives of the planet Kukulkan, is relegated to the back side. The overall color scheme is tan for the landscape with a grey overcast over a blue sky. This is the edition I own.

Baen’s version, painted by Tom Kidd, ups the drama with a more relaxed but frontier-ready Keith on a larger mount; the “Kook,” given its own mount, now shares the front cover, though in the background. A pink sunset lights the foreground figures and colors the sky pink; two moons emphasize the extraterrestrial setting. On the downside, we lose the ruined city.

The Monadori cover, again uncredited, puts everything in bright daylight, before a green jungle and a tiny red moon in the sky, with a volcano smoking in the distance. Keith is dismounted, his place on the riding-dinosaur taken by a svelte lady in body stocking and boots, doubtless meant to represent female lead Kara Sheffield. Again, there’s no ruined city.

The Gateway cover, regrettably, is its standard dull, non-pictorial go-to of red and black lettering over a plain yellow field. It also commits the cardinal sin of dropping Catherine de Camp’s name from the cover, though the Internet Speculative Fiction Database says she is properly credited on the title page. Of all four covers, the Donning gets points for originality, the Baen is the most striking, the Monadori is adequate, and the Gateway’s crap. Just to get that out of the way.

The book sports a rare but welcome map showing the region of the planet Kukulkan in which the action takes place. It too is uncredited, but presumably drawn by de Camp himself; it looks like others he did or had a hand in. There’s also a pronunciation guide to Kukulkanian names at the end. De Camp was an accomplished linguist and amateur phoneticist. When he came up with names, he generally had a consistent scheme and/or linguistic models in mind, and he wanted readers to know there was a right way to pronounce things, and a logic behind it. So we find these little guides inserted here and there in many of his novels. This annoyed some (P. Schuyler Miller, for one), but perhaps gratified others. Count me among the latter.

Okay, you’re asking, but didn’t you say this book was unusual? Yes. Yes, I did. There were a number of things that struck me when it first came out, all of which boil down to “Why?” At this stage in his career, L. Sprague de Camp was putting out mostly series stuff, adding to or starting to wrap up sequences begun long before. This was a singleton. And … why was it a singleton? It read like a Viagens Interplanetarias book; moreover, a Krishna book, but … no mention of the Viagens. Not set on Krishna. It had the feel, but the details were wrong. Still, so much of it seemed familiar, so, why? It just seemed a waste, somehow, like an opportunity missed. Why the heck write a Krishna-like novel and not set it on Krishna? I was miffed. As I got into the story I got over it; it’s a good, action-filled story, with engaging characters and real stakes. But … still miffed.

Oddly, de Camp himself also seems to have come around to the idea that this ought to be a Viagens novel, and in the sequel, The Venom Trees of Sunga (which, right there, made Stones not a singleton after all), he adopted it into the series by name-dropping Krishna and its inhabitants on page 11. Which, you would think, would make me happy.

It didn’t. I had already resigned myself to the fact that these novels weren’t, couldn’t be Viagens books. For instance, the planet, Kukulkan, was a planet of Epsilon Eridani. Strike One. In the Viagens series, Epsilon Eridani had planets named after Norse gods, and the inhabited one, Thor, had bird-like natives. Kukulkan, of course, is named for a Central American deity, and its natives are dinosaur-like. Strike Two: the future Terran colonists of Kukulkan are drawn from the present-day superpowers, America, Russia, and China. In the Viagens universe at least two of these three are secondary powers, having been eclipsed by Brazil—a country without any colonists on Kukulkan. Strike Three: the Kukulkan novels contain nary a hint of any Viagens references, whether events, plants, or alien races. or planets, and, in fact, actually contradict some of the established lore.

Scratch all that. Krishna was mentioned. These are Viagens novels. By adoption, if not by birth. I’ve rationalized all this on Wikipedia, and in my piece on The Venom Trees of Sunga. But it’s still a bad fit.

Otherwise, this is a perfectly fine late de Camp novel, and typical of the late Sprague-Catherine collaborations. (Their early ones were in non-fiction.) The most marked feature of their joint efforts in fiction is to present strong male and female protagonists in unusual romantic relationships—relationships which may or may not endure. It’s true that even Sprague’s solo efforts, early and late, sometimes stray from the boy-and-girl-meet-and-marry formula common to much adventure fiction, but the Sprague-and-Catherine corpus so strays more often then not. Here we find incompatibles thrown together in adventure and never quite coupling, people with marriage agendas that go spectacularly wrong, divorcees warily contemplating remarriage, and even pairings of out-and-out antagonists. Endings other than the traditional happy ending actually predominate.

The protagonists of Stones are a case in point. Archaeologist Keith Salazar’s marriage to journalist Kara Sheffield came unglued in the aftermath of their son’s suicide, and he abandoned her for a sympathetic pretty young thing who also happened to be one of his students. That disaster also ended in divorce, and he has regretted leaving Kara ever since. Circumstances keep throwing them together, giving the authors plenty of opportunity to explore Keith’s heartache and Kara’s mingled hurt and caution. Meanwhile, a much bigger plot plays out in the foreground, showing us Keith in a more sympathetic light as a man of professional integrity and heroic potential. We see why Kara might be tempted to give him another chance, particularly since the other man in her life, entrepreneur Conrad Bergen, is a swaggering, possessive bully she is desperately trying to get quit of.

Keith thinks he’s found the site of ancient Nomuru, a sort of Kukulkanian Alexandria, complete with a storied lost library. (Spoiler: he has.) To Bergen, the site is perfect for redevelopment, and nothing gets between Bergen and the opportunity for profit. The local native civilized states don’t really care about any of this; they’re ceremonious (to a fault!), unemotional, and practical, willing to entertain the best proposal, or neither, if they think the Terran interlopers are just trying to seize more land or take advantage of them. Meanwhile, less local native barbarous nomads are planning an invasion of the whole area. Keith’s mission is to preserve his dig, thwart Bergen, forestall the nomads, and, if possible, win Kara back as well. This, as it happens, will involve him in some less-than-honorable shenanigans compromising some of his ostensible ethics and values. Good thing a de Camp hero can rationalize what he feels he needs to do almost as well as a de Camp villain!

This is a thumping good, humdinger of a tale, with well drawn characters, a thoughtfully portrayed alien culture, and a plot that snowballs personal motivations into world-changing events. It’s fun, it satisfies, and it pays off. I’ll leave the details to your own perusal, if you haven’t already read this one—because despite all spoilers you see here, I haven’t told you the half of it. What I will say is, this is one of those late de Camp books in which the romantic couple does get back together in the end, though it is evident the road ahead is not completely cleared of rocks. Keith is abject and grateful, Kara conditional and cautious, and will plainly have the whip hand in the relationship from here on out. (Still, we know from the sequel, whose protagonist is born of this remarriage, that they will successfully make a go of it.)

The book is dedicated “To Wendy Bacon, Marshall Becker, and Susan Johnson, the supervisors on the Printzhof dig at Essington, Pennsylvania, in the summer of 1985, where we learned our field archaeology.” Which, aside from the experience, de Camp got involved in specifically as research for the book. He had previously attached himself to a paleontological dig as preparation for writing the Krishna novel The Bones of Zora, and many of his earlier travels were also undertaken with books in mind. Being writers gives you good excuses to do fun stuff!

Who were the dedicatees? Good question! With one exception, theses three are rather more obscure than most we run across in the de Camp corpus. There is a Wendy Jane Bacon, born in 1956, who graduated from the University of Pennsylvania’s Department of Anthropology in 2007; her dissertation, The Dwarf Motif in Classic Maya Monumental Iconography: A Spatial Analysis, was submitted in January of that year. She would certainly have been old enough to help head the Printzhof dig. But why would it have taken her so long (about twenty-two more years) to write her dissertation? Could she truly have been the same Wendy Bacon? The jury’s out on this one. Still, her interest in the Maya, shared, as we will see in a moment, with Marshall Becker, could be indicative.

About Marshall Becker there’s no mystery at all. He must be Marshall Joseph Becker, born in 1938, Professor Emeritus of Anthropology at West Chester University in West Chester, Pennsylvania, and a Senior Fellow in the University of Pennsylvania’s Department of Anthropology. As a graduate student at the University of Pennsylvania in the early 1960s, he researched settlement patterns around the ancient Maya city of Tikal in Guatemala, which became the basis of his own thesis in 1971. He went on to teach anthropology at the University of Toledo, Ohio, and West Chester University. He has published extensively on the Maya, the Etruscans, and the Lenape Indians of the Delaware Valley area. In fact, now in his eighties, he is still publishing, at least as recently as 2019.

I have nothing on a Susan Johnson with any connection to archaeology in the southeastern area of Pennsylvania. But then, hers is quite a common name.

# # #