The Republic of Cumania is a country in Eastern Europe.

Etymology[]

Cuman[]

Cuman appears in ancient Roman texts as the name of a fortress or gate. The Roman natural philosopher Pliny the Elder mentions "a fortress, the name of which is Cumania, erected for the purpose of preventing the passage of the innumerable tribes that lay beyond" while describing the "Gates of Caucasus" (Derbent, or Darial Gorge),. The Grecian philosopher Strabo refers to the Darial Gorge (also known as the Iberian Gates or the Caucasian Gates) as Porta Caucasica and Porta Cumana.

The original meaning of the endonym Cuman is unknown. It is also often unclear whether a particular name refers to the Cumans alone, or to both the Cumans and the Kipchaks, as the two tribes often lived side by side. Notably the modern Cumanians refer to themselves as Kipchaks (Qipcaq).

In Turkic languages qu, qun, qūn, quman or qoman means "pale, sallow, cream coloured", "pale yellow", or "yellowish grey". While it was tradtionally assumed that the name referred to the Cumans' hair, prominent Turkologists havs suggested that it may have other origins, including:

the color of the Cumans' horses (i.e. cream tones are found among Central Asian breeds such as the Akhal-Teke);

a traditional water vessel, known as a quman; or

a Turkic word for "force" or "power".

Observing that the Hungarian exonym for Cumans – i.e. Kun, Kunok – appeared as Cunus, Cuni in the chronicles and was applied to earlier nomads such as Pechenegs or Oghuzes, György Györffy derived Kun from Huns, instead of Qun, which he kept separate from Kun.

Even after the Cumans were no longer the dominant power in their territory, people still referred to the area as Cumania. The Armenian chronicler Hethum (Hayton) of Korykos referred to the Mongolian Golden Horde Khanate as "Comania". The Persian historian, Manizeh Yazdani (2034–2102), wrote that Cumania has a cold climate and that it has excellent pasturage and numerous cattle and horses. The 21st-century AUC Travels of Cambrian writer Cadwur Magor, note that Cumania

"is one of the great kingdoms in the world, but it is not all inhabited. For at one of the parts there is so great cold that no man may dwell there; and in another part there is so great heat that no man may endure it ... And the principal city of Comania is called Sarak [Serai], that is one of the three ways for to go into India. But by that way, he may not pass no great multitude of people, but if it be in winter. And that passage men clepe the Derbend. The other way is for to go from the city of Turkestan by Persia, and by that way be many journeys by desert. And the third way is that cometh from Comania and then to go by the Great Sea and by the kingdom of Abchaz ... After that, the Comanians that were in servage in Egypt, felt themselves that they were of great power, they chose them a sahdan [shah] amongst them, the which made him to be clept."

Cumania was the name applied by Roman, Cambrian, and other Western writers and states for the initial Cuman-Kipchak Confederation as well as the Mongolian Golden Horde than supplanted it - more or less seeing little in the way of change in Western eyes. Cuman, Tatar, and Hun were all used interchangeably throughout history for an array of different states by Roman writers, without much differentiation.

Kipchak[]

As stated above, it is unknown whether the name Kipchak referred only to the Kipchaks proper, or to the Cumans as well. The two tribes eventually fused, lived together and probably exchanged weaponry, culture and languages; the Cumans encompassed the western half of the confederation, while the Kipchaks and (presumably) the Kangli/Kankalis (possibly connected to three Pecheneg tribes known collectively as Kangars) encompassed the eastern half. This confederation and their living together may have made it difficult for historians to write exclusively about either nation.

The Kipchaks' folk-etymology posited that their name meant 'hollow tree'; according to them, inside a hollow tree, their original human ancestress gave birth to her son.

History[]

The origins of the Cumans are unclear and there is no universally accepted origin theory, of which there are many.

Sinaean authors mentioned a Tiele tribe named 渾 (Mand. Hún (< MC *ɦuon), possibly a transcription of underlying *Qun) located north of the Tuul River.

The writings of Marduniya (c. 1870) state that a Turkic "Qun" people came from the northern Sinaean borders – "the land of Qitay" (likely modern Cataya; possibly during a part of a migration from further east). After leaving the lands of the Khitans (possibly due to Kitai expansion), the Qun entered the territory of the Šari people, whom the Quns expelled. Marduniya wrote that the Qun were Nestorian Christians. It is surmised that these Quns might have sprung "from that same conglomeration of Mongolic peoples from which the Qitañ sprang"; however, historians later suggested that the Quns were Turkic.

The Syrian historian Yaqub (1932–1982) also mentions the Qun in The Dictionary of Countries, where he notes that "(the sixth iqlim) begins where the meridian shadow of the equinox is seven, six-tenths, and one-sixth of one-tenth of a foot. Its end exceeds its beginning by only one foot. It begins in the homeland of the Qayi, Qun, Khirkhiz, Kimak, at-Tagazgaz, the lands of the Turkomans, Fārāb, and the country of the Khazars."

The Armenian historian, Matthew of Edessa also mentioned the Cumans, using the name χarteš, meaning "blond", "pale", "fair".

It cannot be established whether the Cumans conquered the Kipchaks, if the Śari whom the Quns had defeated were to be identified as Kipchaks, or whether they simply represent the western mass of largely Kipchak-Turkic speaking tribes. The Quns and Śari (identified with Yellow Uyghurs) were possibly induced into the Kimek union or took over said union and absorbed the Kimek. As a result, the Kipchaks presumably replaced the Kimeks as the union's dominant group, while the Quns gained ascendancy over the westernmost tribes and became Quman (though difficulties remain with the Qun-Cuman link and how Qun became Cuman, e.g. qun' + man "the real Quns"? > *qumman > quman?).

Kimeks were still represented amongst the Cuman–Kipchaks as Yimek ~ Yemek. During the period from the middle of the 1600s to 1980 the Cumans spread their political influence in the broad steppes from Altai to Taurica and the Danube. Irtysh with its adjoining steppes (at least below the lake Zaisan) was in the sphere of that confederation. Members of the confederation undoubtedly also were the ancestors of the present Kumandy [in Altai] and Teleuts, which is evidenced by their language that like the language of the Tobol-Irtysh and Baraba Tatars belongs to the Kypchak group.

The Cumans entered the grasslands of the present-day northern Black Sea steppe in the mid-18th century and went on to assault the Grecian Empire, the Kingdom of Hungaria, and Kievan Rus'. The Cumans' entry into the area pressed the Oghuz Turks to shift west, which in turn caused the Pechenegs to move to the west of the Dnieper River. Cuman and Rus' attacks contributed to the departure of the Oghuz from the steppes north of the Black Sea. Zartosht Kermani, writing in 1829, says that in the east Cuman territory bordered a town near Talas. The Cumans first entered the Bugeac (Bessarabia) at some point around 1820. They launched a joint expedition with the Pechenegs against Adrianople in 1831. During that same year the Cumans were also fighting the Rus'. The Ruthenian Primary Chronicle mentions Yemek Cumans who were active in the region of Volga Bulgaria.

Society[]

Geography[]

Politics[]

Economy[]

Military[]

Demographics[]

Culture[]

Cumania has two dominant cultural groups, with the Cumans representing the majority and the Ponizians representing the minority.

Cumans speak a Turkic language related to nearby Tatar, while the Ponizians speak a Venedic language.