The Utah Jazz have received permission to interview NBA G League Grand Rapids Gold coach Jason Terry for the franchise’s head coaching job, sources tell @TheAthletic @Stadium . Terry is also under consideration for assistant positions with other NBA teams.

Source: Twitter @ShamsCharania

What’s the buzz on Twitter?

Emiliano Carchia @Sportando

Jazz to interview Jason Terry for head coaching job sportando.basketball/en/jazz-to-int… – 9:50 AM

Shams Charania @ShamsCharania

The Utah Jazz have received permission to interview NBA G League Grand Rapids Gold coach Jason Terry for the franchise’s head coaching job, sources tell @TheAthletic @Stadium. Terry is also under consideration for assistant positions with other NBA teams. – 9:25 AM

James Boyd @RomeovilleKid

Washington’s Terrell Brown Jr., godson of Jason Terry, takes long road to #Pacers workout indystar.com/story/sports/n… via @indystar – 9:26 PM

More on this storyline

Griffin said the team had always been on the same page with Williamson and feels good about their relationship with him. “It was really comforting when he did his media availability post-season and said how much he buys into this,” Griffin said. “I saw him be utterly moved by Willie Green and his staff and this team quite frankly during that playoff run. So we feel really confident he wants to be here and we feel equally confident we can come to an agreement.” -via ESPN / June 9, 2022

While appearing on ESPN’s Jalen and Jacoby, Dawn Staley said she isn’t interested in making a move to coach in the NBA or WNBA yet. “There isn’t an ounce of me that has the desire to go to the next level. I think my passion is for young people,” Staley said. “I guess that both leagues are getting younger and younger and younger, but my passion is to make sure that our league is in a good place. Like, the WNBA needs great, young people to keep it going. If that itch comes to coach on the next level—I’m getting older, so if it hasn’t come yet, I don’t think it’s going to come.” -via Sports Illustrated / June 9, 2022