Jason Terry is in his first season as a Utah Jazz assistant, but to Mavericks fans he’ll always be the guy who scored a team-high 27 points in the series-clinching Game 6 of the 2011 NBA Finals.

All-Star weekend was a home game of sorts for Terry. When we caught up with him, he was in the Panini Prizm Lounge, hosted by Irving-based Panini America, the NBA’s exclusive trading-card partner.

Do NBA players actually collect trading cards once they become NBA players?

Terry: “Well, I’ve been collecting since about second grade. So it’s been an ongoing process for me. I mean, I’ve got old three-ring binder notebooks with sleeves in them. Baseball, basketball, football, you name it, I used to collect it. Nothing’s has changed now. More now I’m looking for exclusive items.

“The card game is ever-evolving. Panini has done a great job of putting together packs. It’s really like a lottery. You open up a pack, you don’t know what you’re gonna get in there. You may find some gold.”

What’s the most valuable Jason Terry card?

“Probably the most valuable thing for me is my rookie card. We did a crazy photo shoot when I got drafted. I remember every single one of those, but the draft-night card, I’m in a Mavericks-blue suit. I think that’s the most memorable one for me.”

You know I’ve got to ask you some Mavs questions because fans are always interested in what you have to say. What was your reaction to the Kyrie Irving acquisition?

“How can you deny the talent? The talent is there. Pair him with Luka in that backcourt and you’re gonna have a dynamic situation. The Mavs are already a contender with Luka obviously being one of the best players in our league and that now has been elevated.

“But with talent goes expectation, so I know all the Mavs are all-in on winning now and we’ll see how it plays out. I don’t want to give them too much props because they’re still a little budding rivalry there with us. But I wish all the best to J-Kidd, his staff and Cuban, obviously. We’re all still good friends.”

RELATED: What 12 NBA All-Stars think about Luka Doncic, Kyrie Irving and Mavericks’ ‘scary’ outlook

Another Mavs-related question that I get all the time, and I’m sure you get: Do you ever think back and wonder what would have happened if the 2011 championship team had been kept together a little longer?

“Always. I always kid myself and say, like LeBron, ‘Not one, not two, not three, not four.’ You never know. Now, we were older in our careers, but I thought that was one of our biggest advantages. Our experience, our toughness, our collective will to win as a group was something that, if we could have kept everything together, could have definitely won another one, maybe two or three championships.”

And why do you think that? As you said, some of your guys were pushing it in age.

“I just think the experience. And the hunger and drive for greatness. When you have Dirk when he was right in the middle of his prime, he’s still playing at the highest level. He was one of the best players in the league. And if you surround him with role players like ourselves, you have a very, very explosive situation. Not to mention Rick Carlisle as the coach. He was the right fit. He was the perfect tactician for that group of guys.”

Speaking of Dirk, I guess you saw he’s a Hall of Fame finalist. Not a huge surprise. Do you think you’ll be in Springfield?

“I hope I am. I think it’d be a tremendous honor to watch my teammate go in the Hall of Fame. I’ve had guys go — Gary Payton, K.G, Kobe — I wasn’t able to be there for those guys, and so it’d be my first time to be a part of it. I think it would just be honor to do so.”

How are you enjoying life as a Jazz assistant coach?

“I love it. I’m born and bred for coaching. Part of me just loves the opportunity to be able to work with the next generation of guys, to be able to inspire and motivate them and teach them on a day-to-day basis. But it’s all about connecting with people and managing personalities, but doing it in a way that is fun.

“We’ve created a great culture here in Utah. Will Hardy has done an outstanding job – management, ownership. Everybody’s aligned and on the same page of the future and what we’re gonna do with this Utah Jazz organization.”

When you were head coach at Grand Rapids last season, it seemed like every couple of weeks one of your players was getting elevated to the NBA. What were you guys doing there to be successful?

“I’ve got to give a lot of credit to the staff that I had down there. I had some experienced staff members that helped with player development. But also management. I mean, Scott Howard was a great GM. He allowed me to have freedom of putting guys that I believed could help us out there on the floor.

“And those guys went out and played. They made baskets. Nik Stauskas, Isaiah Thomas, Lance Stephenson, a lot of those guys were cast-offs by the NBA. But they come to Grand Rapids and I gave them an opportunity and they took full advantage of it.”

Where do you see your career going?

“Eventually I’ll become a head coach in this league, or in college. Right now I’m just continuing to learn the day-to-day nuances of coaching and just continuing to perfect my craft and adding on to the things that I’ve learned along the way. But I can definitely see myself here in the future, leading someone’s team or organization.”