This document, intended as a resource for researchers, is derived from the thesis "The Partisans’ Cemetery in Mostar, Bosnia & Herzegovina: Implications of the deterioration of a Monument and Site", defended at the Raymond Lemaire International Centre for Conservation, Faculty of Engineering Sciences, KU Leuven, Belgium, in September 2013. It discusses the architectural works of Bogdan Bogdanović (1922-2010) throughout the Former Yugoslavia, and gives an introduction to his opus by giving a brief description of each monument; its key architectural and landscape elements, history, and reason for construction. Alongside these details, the names given to the monuments (many lack an official name), both in various literature and colloquially are stated, and a summary of the protection laws currently covering the monument is given. The condition of the monument, and activities currently carried out at the site (both of a commemorative nature and otherwise) are also detailed. A copy of the full thesis can be obtained from the author upon request.

'Critical Memorial Practices and Their Forums. Reconfiguring Communities of Memory in Yugoslavia. On the Work of the Monument Group and Four Faces of Omarska Group' (2012) examines the tactics, methods and political potential of critical memorial practices in the new Yugoslav space. Not wishing to construct a rigid definition of ‘critical memorial practices’ I understand these as diverse artistic and intellectual procedures that confront the effects of dominant, nationalistic memorial cultures and work prospectively towards a different understanding of both collective memory and community. In analyzing their political potential in this particular socio-political context, I depart from a general understanding that conventional public monuments, rather than embodying memory, actually displace it, and, moreover, are in fact instrumental in either the production or suppression of specific memories through institutionalized forms of memory politics. While having this expanded version of Young’s premise in mind, I attempt to locate modalities through which the complex and challenging conjunctions of the concepts of embodiment, memory and the collective can be both politically and symbolically reclaimed. In the first part, aside from introducing a more general discussion on memorial cultures and counter-memorial drive, I delineate the specificities of the Yugoslav historical and political context. In the second part I move on to read the above-mentioned postulate by Young in order to argue that a process of reclamation is only possible through the re-situation of these concepts (of the monuments, collective memory and embodiment) outside the realm of singular artistic vision and visual representation and into the wider field of emancipatory politics. Such politics come to being thorough a collective reflection that not only involves an open and exploratory confrontation with the past, but also activates a radical reconstruction, reconfiguration and re-imagination of the idea of community. This reconfiguration, in turn, can only be achieved by forging new, non-essentialist communities of memory similar to “inoperative communities”, as elaborated by Jean Luc Nancy. In defining such an emancipatory idea of community in relation to memorial cultures I will have in mind some interrelated concepts developed by J-L. Nancy, as well as Maurice Blanchot and Giorgio Agamben. These theoretical configurations will be brought into relation with the idea of communism (understood in line with Alain Badiou) and its dissolution already in the Socialist State and brought to ultimate destruction through the genocidal politics of the 1990s. Finally, in the third part, I examine the multifaceted work of the Yugoslav art and theory platform - Monument Group as well as the work of the Four Faces of Omarska Group, by analysing the concrete case of the Omarska Concentration Camp. I contemplate the potential of a specific architectural remain on its as a 'becoming memorial'. In the conclusion, my central argument is that, in the face of a proliferation of monuments and cultures of ethnic and religious commemoration in the current transitional and post- conflict Yugoslav space, we should explore and seek to encourage those forms of the “embodiment of memory” which operate by way of instigating wider, continuous critical memorial forums consisting of different ‘voices’ and unresolvable conversations involving subjects and objects. Such forums reinvest with collective desire and radically politicize the political concepts and events from the past, such as the communist idea on which the Anti-fascist liberation struggle during WWII was based, and potentiate their effects in the present, simultaneously developing forms of memorialization that prefiguratively work towards a radically different, non- essentialist and “inoperative” community of the future.