If you’ve heard about Switzerland, you have heard about the chocolates, watches, and the Swiss Alps. So chances are, you know a lot about this place even if you haven’t visited it. While the brochures portray Switzerland as vast stretches of clean white ice sheets and snow-capped mountain tops or turquoise lakes and serene countryside, these are but only a small part of the many natural wonders Switzerland has to offer. We’re not denying that every part of this country is a beauty, but there are so many places to visit near Switzerland that you must not miss. Let’s find out some of the mesmerising places that will enhance your travel bucket list!

10 Places To Visit Near Switzerland

The bucolic countryside, imposing ancient castles, tranquil environment, sweeping mountains, and snow-capped glaciers of these surreal places to visit around Switzerland will make you fall in love with them.

1. Rhine Falls

Bewitching and imposing, Rhine falls, Europe’s largest waterfall will captivate anyone who visits one of the most famous places to visit near Switzerland. Separating the canton of Schaffhausen and Zürich, the Rhine stands at an elevation of 75 ft. Feel your senses come alive at the roar of this cascade and experience Europe’s most powerful waterfall descending the slopes of steep terrain.

Rhine Falls Basin, or even canoe to the massive rock that stands amidst the waterfall. Recently, a visitors’ center, a children’s playground and one of a kind “Historama” (interactive exhibition about the Rhine Falls) have been opened to inform the tourists about the history of this place. You can even watch a spectacular light and sound show here.

Best time to visit: April to October

Ideal for: Canoeing, boating

Must Read: Places To Visit In Basel

Europe Holiday Packages On TravelTriangle

2. Munich

Are you a big shopaholic? A fairy tale lover or a beer lover, well, if you are all these three then Munich is just the place for you. If you are in Switzerland then it will only take around 4 hours 12 minutes from Zurich. There are around 27 trains connecting Zurich and Munich, which is there at an interval of 36 minutes, so you board any one of them and you rich the place that is located at the foot of the Bavarian Alps.

It’s a city wrapped in history that never lets you forget and commit the same historical mistake. If you are in Munich don’t forget to visit Rathaus-Glockenspiel, which is located in more than 800 years-old Marienplatz. There you can get a chance to witness the giant clock with 32 figurines and 43 bells that narrates two different historical tales of Munich from a 260 feet long tower. The 15-minute long “tweet” show, with a golden bird and a crow at the center, is the main attraction of this place. Thus, it is one of the most magnificent places to visit near Zurich, Switzerland. You should not, thus, miss this opportunity of exploring the place.

Best time to visit: During the 16 days long Oktoberfest when the city turns into a giant keg party.

Ideal for: Historical landmarks, nightlife

3. Navigli

Image Source: Shutterstock

If you are looking for a place to have a retro-romantic affair then Navigli in Milan is just the place for you. The narrow alleys of this place, which have been into existence since the 18th and 19th century give you a pleasant and serene romantic walk. It is one of the important places to visit near Switzerland for couples. You can also have the best local cuisines of Milan here that will make your romantic holiday delicious and magnificent at the same time.

In order to visit this place, you have to first visit Milan and if you want your journey to be filled with the best panoramic view then you should board a train from Zurich, which takes approximately 3 hours 47 minutes to reach Milan. In this whole journey, you will find the best scenic beauty that will make your trip even more romantic.

Best time to visit: Year-round

Ideal for: Romantic holiday

Suggested Read: Honeymoon In Switzerland

4. Matterhorn, Zermatt

Image Source: Shutterstock

If you have seen pictures of mountains, you have definitely seen the Matterhorn. This legendary pyramid-shaped structure is arguably the most photographed mountain in the world. Sitting in the heart of the Swiss Alps, the imposing Matterhorn plays sentinel to the nearby peaks and separates Italy and Switzerland. A host of adventures can be found on this mountain, including skiing and snowboarding. If you are planning to visit this place from Italy then you can board a train from Milan, which will take you to Zermatt.

Other than the Matterhorn, Zermatt is also the winter sports capital of the Valais region. The green valley surrounded by imposing mountains is a place boasting of the most luxurious international resorts. Go for cable car rides, indulge in tantalizing foods, and have the best time of your life here at these top places to visit near Switzerland.

Best time to visit: Year-round

Ideal for: Adventure sports

5. Amsterdam

If you are a city person but crave relaxation during vacation then Amsterdam is just the place for you. It is one of the best places to visit near Switzerland, which is not only famous for its scenic beauty but the museums there also make this place historically significant place along with the canals that make this place romantically beautiful.

If you are looking for all the city amenities then you will find them all here, starting from the night clubs to restaurants with international cuisine. If you are craving for a relaxed holiday then the extensive canals in this Dutch city will lure you, along with the beautiful Tulips, small green parks, and the low road traffic.

Best time to visit: April to May and September to November

Ideal for: Nightlife and relaxation

Suggested Read: Indian Restaurants In Zurich

6. Paris

If you are looking for the ideal cities near Switzerland for kids then Paris is the best option that you have. The Disneyland in Paris here has two theme parks, one is, of course, the Walt Disney Studio and the other is Disneyland where your child will get to see the Sleeping Beauty Castle.

The most important attraction of this place is Space Mountain and Disneyland in Paris is just at a 32 km distance from center Paris. If you are in Switzerland, then you can take both the flight and the train to visit Paris, and you can also visit it by car. If you do not have much time in your hand then it is better to take the flight, as the distance between Paris and Zurich is just 600 miles. However, if you are a bit romantic and a nature lover then you will love the car or the train ride.

Best time to visit: Year-round

Ideal for: Couples and kids

7. Neuschwanstein

Image Source

The “Sleeping Beauty” castle is another name for the Neuschwanstein Castle built by King Ludwig II, who is also regarded as the “Mad King” and is one of the important attractions of Munich, Bavaria, where you will find all the marvelous castles by King Ludwig II. If you are at Bavaria then you can also visit the Linderhof Castle, however, it can be an optional tour as well.

If you have a liking towards the medieval culture and houses along with the bold murals then you can also spare some time from your schedule and make a visit to the small village of Hohenschwangau. If you are looking for magnificent places to visit near Switzerland for family then this destination should be in your bucket list.

Best time to visit: Summers

Ideal for: A fairy tale experience

Suggested Read: Paragliding In Switzerland

8. Grindelwald

Image Source: Shutterstock

Nestled in the heart of the Bernese Alps, the charming and tiny city of Grindelwald provides a suitable home in the middle of nature. The city offers a pleasant diversion from the hustle and bustle of the big city thanks to its alpine splendour and bright skies. Grindelwald is one of the most picturesque tourist spots in the nation, with towering mountains serving as a dramatic background.Grindelwald is most recognized for its distinctive experiences and activities, not for its well-known tourist attractions. Skiers from all over the world make the city their pilgrimage place in the winter, and summertime hikers from both domestic and international locations love coming here for the hiking routes. Moreover, Grindelwald is the home to several mountain carting, summer sledding. While you are here, don’t forget to visit Sphinx Observatory Deck and Lake Bachalpsee.

Best Time To Visit: The best time to visit is April to October.

Ideal For: Hiking, mountain biking, summer sledding

9. Bern

Image Source: Shutterstock

Bern, the capital city of Switzerland, looks straight out of your dreams. It is one of the picturesque places to see near Zurich, Switzerland. Bern’s Old Town area is a must-visit as it exudes stunning mediaeval-era beauty. The cobbled streets here are dotted with the majestic Parliament building, offices of some major Swiss banks, and grand hotels. In the nearby Kramgasse (market alley) you will pass century-old buildings that were wine cellars and granaries in ancient times. The city of Bern is also known as the city of fountains. Visitors will be quite surprised seeing the number of fountains sprawling all around this place, in almost every corner of the street. For history enthusiasts, there are many museums in Bern to choose from. Visit the Natural History Museum to see more than 200 ancient artefacts and the display of crystals and rare stones of the earth.

Best Time To Visit: The best time to visit is April to October.

Ideal For: Visiting the museums, visiting the waterfalls and more.

Suggested Read: Cities In Switzerland

10. Thun

Image Source: Shutterstock

The Bernese Oberland region contains the town of Thun. Its proximity to Lake Thun, one of Switzerland’s most beautiful lakes, contributes to its outstanding natural splendour. Enjoy a ride on the Ferris wheel while you’re here to get views of the Aare River and the entire city. Alternatively, take a ride on a vintage 19th-century streamer and sail the entire length of Lake Thun to witness this stunning city from a different angle. Visitors can take advantage of specialty beer tours that offer the best spirits to sample and visit some of the oldest watchmakers’ shops to witness and learn about the age-old craft of Swiss watchmaking.

Best Time To Visit: The best time to visit this place is January to June

Ideal For: Tasting beer, watching century old buildings

Further Read: Villages In Switzerland

If you’ve experienced all that Switzerland had to offer, then you should now be looking forward to exploring these pretty and exciting destinations near it. Make sure you craft your trip to Switzerland holiday itinerary in such a way that you have enough time to see these places to visit near Switzerland as well.

For our editorial codes of conduct and copyright disclaimer, please click here.

Cover Image Source: Shutterstock

Frequently Asked Questions About Places To Visit Near Switzerland

What languages are spoken in Switzerland?

French and German are widely spoken in Switzerland. But mostly English is spoken in all parts of this country, and communication is not a problem.

What countries are close to Switzerland?

Switzerland is a landlocked country that is bordered by nations like Italy, France, Germany, and Austria.

How to reach Matterhorn?

Matterhorn is in Zermatt, which is a car-free town, so the only means to get there is by train. You can either choose to ride in the Glacier Express or the Gornergrat Bahn to get there from Switzerland.

Which month is best to visit Switzerland?

The best time to visit Switzerland are the months between April to October.

Which month is coldest in Switzerland?

The months between December to January are the coldest months in Switzerland.