by Tom Cunha

Director Alan Rudolph’s roots in filmmaking go back a couple of decades,

working as an assistant director under the wing of Robert Altman on films

like “The Long Goodbye” (1973), “California Split” (1974) and the highly

acclaimed “Nashville” (1975). Venturing on to direct his own films in the

late seventies, Rudolph made his debut with “Welcome to L.A.“.(1977),

followed by “Remember My Name” (1978), both of which were produced by

Altman. He went on to receive critical praise for “Choose Me“(1984) and

“Trouble in Mind” (1985) and has remained consistent in the theme and scope

of his modestly produced, character driven features, usually dealing with

individuals whose lives intersect and drastically change as a result.

A pioneer of independent American cinema, Rudolph’s latest project is

“Afterglow“, a marital drama in which two dissatisfied couples unknowingly

exchange partners. The film stars Nick Nolte, Lara Flynn Boyle, Johnny Lee

Miller and Julie Christie, who has picked up best actress honors from the

New York Film Critics Circle, National Society of Film Critics and the San

Sebastian International Film Festival.

indieWIRE: You’ve worked primarily in the independent film arena. . .?

Alan Rudolph: That title has been so co-opted and marginalized. I think

that we should strive to be original and true. You can make a case that the

most independent American director only works for major studios and that’s

Stanley Kubrick. And you can name a dozen movies you saw last year or this

year that were so-called independents that were totally recut by the

studios, the “independent” studios that released them. The reason I’m

trying to debunk this myth is because its become a sales pitch or

something. If there is any meaning behind it, it’s seducing a lot of people

to give up their independence so they can call themselves independent. A

lot of these really talented young people are being taught that vision is

what you see through a lens. The thing that’s different from when I started

is that film used to be a sharp elbow in society’s ribs. But now it’s like

a style.

iW: It seems that many of the studio films of the ’70’s placed a stronger

emphasis on “creativity.” Would you agree with this?

Rudolph: Absolutely. And John Cassavetes is probably the most prominent

independent filmmaker because he acted to finance his own films. He made

them in a way no one else could make them. I would say he, Altman and

Scorsese are maybe the only American filmmakers where if you miss the

opening credits, you still know whose film it is.

My film school was going down to the theater and watching Truffaut, Fellini

and Bergman. I thought wow, I’m learning about life and film. The great

films to me are the ones where you walk out and you’re still in them. You

can’t shake them. And I thought it would go on forever like this. Now I

look back and it was just a golden age. Now it’s much more a business than

an art. Movies have become merchandising and they’ve also become a

currency. Basic Hollywood movies are corporate propaganda and the

corporation is really attacking our souls and trying to get each of our

identities. People are going to movies to learn how to behave as human

beings because they’re so confused now. It would be great if it were Frank

Capra, but instead it’s imitators and imitators of imitators and suddenly

people are confused.

iW: Let’s talk about “Afterglow”. What attracted you to the idea of marital

partner exchange, particularly with such a large age difference?

Rudolph: Somehow I got an idea about two couples who didn’t know each other

where each meets their opposite. That was the clothes line I could start

hanging things on. You can make a case that this is really about one

couple. It’s really just a page out of the diary of marriage in general.

The ups-and-downs, the ins-and-outs, the circles. It’s about love. Where

does love exist? Our lives are really more emotional reality than anything

else, but we’re denied to be able to indulge in that because there’s no

tangibility. I thought I’d make an emotional movie about four people in

different emotional time zones.

iW: There are similarities between this film and one of your earlier films,

like “Choose Me”.

Rudolph: This film is intentionally a grown-up cousin of “Choose Me”. It’s

on purpose. I didn’t know it at the time, but when I started writing I

said, “Wow, I can feel that this is dusting off an old car and getting a

new paint job.” The thing I wanted to do that is different is I didn’t want

the film to wink at itself. I wanted to keep the surface realistic. And

that might have been the influence of working with new actors primarily.

iW: This film is a great showcase for Julie Christie.

Rudolph: The world would be a better place if there were more Julies in it,

but thankfully she’s an original. Truly one of the handful of great

actresses ever to work in cinema. She’s got the look, the intelligence, the

depth and she doesn’t compromise. She doesn’t do anything superficially.

She’s honest.

iW: A prevalent theme in many of your films is the idea of random

encounters leading to unpredictable situations.

Rudolph: You can follow anybody around, I don’t care who they are, and

their lives are much more like my films than what we perceive to be

realistic films. The problem with all of this is that we’re taught life the

wrong way. We’re taught that life is what you can control, what you can

define, what exists. Life is in the mystery is the way I look at it.

iW: How did you like working with the distributor of “Afterglow”, Sony

Classics?

Rudolph: I think Sony Classics might be the best distributor I’ve ever

dealt with and they really loved the film. Their releases are modest, but

so is the film. It’s great to work with somebody who gets it and they

appreciate the performers. These guys at Sony Classics, [co-presidents] Tom

Bernard, Michael Barker and Marcie Bloom, they basically started what is

the classics division. They did it originally at United Artists and then at

Orion. They seem to have made a profession out of carving a niche out and

getting films that are original. And they don’t have a genre they fall back

on. It’s not like they also do “Scream” movies or something. Every movie

they do is an individual film.

iW: You’ve always been able to attract relatively big name actors to you

projects where they’re undoubtedly working for a fraction of what they

normally make. That says a lot about you as a director. Do you like working

with actors?

Rudolph: Actors are the artists. Their madness is their art. They bring

their truth into someone else’s fiction. But actors are the only reason

I’ve been able to survive.

iW: Do you mean that by having certain actors attached to your film, you’ve

been able to get financing?

Rudolph: You can analyze the films I’ve made, not as films, but how they

got made. They’re all fringe. They were new companies that were just

starting out or companies right before they went out of business. I’ve

tried to buy into Hollywood a few times. I never sold out, I hope, but

I tried to buy in. In Hollywood, if you’re not a commercial success, you’re

a failure. To me, I feel very successful because in the fifteen movies I’ve

done, on ten or eleven of them no one has told me what to do. I could do

exactly what I wanted. The actors are all the key. One of the skills I’ve

honed is how to write things that I think actors might like. But it’s the

very thing that attracts the actor that repels the financial side. That

being the layers, the emotions, the dialogue and the fact that there is not

a heavy plot. I find that actors get paid a lot of money to react. So

they’ll work for very little if they like the part.

iW: How is it directing the films you’ve written vs. projects that have

been handed to you?

Rudolph: Well, nobody has ever handed me too many things. I was always the

one they called because they couldn’t find anyone and they were in trouble.

The scripts [for “Songwriter” and “Mortal Thoughts”] were a mess. Not that

they were bad, it’s just that they had so many hands in them. When I read

“Mortal Thoughts” it didn’t even have the last twenty pages. I said,

“Where’s the end?” They said, “Well, we haven’t gotten around to that.”

iW: Didn’t you come on board “Mortal Thoughts” at the very last minute?

Rudolph: Yes. The day before shooting. I loved it. I hate preparation. They

were all in trouble so I knew they wouldn’t bother me for awhile. I knew

I’d get a couple of weeks before anybody got the nerve to even say, “Excuse

me, what if we did this,” because they were so afraid the thing was going

to collapse, on both pictures. I said to both of them, “Just leave me alone

and you’ll get something. We’ll finish on schedule and on budget and there

will be no problem.” And we did. I had no rights on “Mortal Thoughts”, but

Demi Moore and Bruce Willis stood by me. “Ghost” and “Die Hard 2” came out

while we were shooting, so instead of a little six million dollar movie,

which we were making, suddenly it was Hollywood’s hottest couple. When they

gave the film to the studio, the head of the studio said, “You did a really

nice job, but we want to reshoot most of this movie and make it romance

between Bruce and Demi. She can still kill him in the end, but we want to

take advantage of who they are.” I said, “You can do what you want but not

with me” and Demi stood by it. I still think it’s her best performance.

iW: Tell me about your next project.

Rudolph: I’m going to be shooting Kurt Vonnegut’s story, “Breakfast of

Champions” in February. It only took me about 25 years to get it made.

Bruce Willis’s company is going to produce and he’s going to star in it.

It’s not an opulent production, but it’s something Bruce wants to do.