Since he made ''Welcome to L.A.'' in 1974, Alan Rudolph has been demonstrating that a modest amount of talent and money, and a lot of nerve, can buy a certain degree of credibility and visual style.

''Remember My Name'' and ''Choose Me,'' among the other Rudolph works, are so pretty, so fey, so sincere and sometimes so simple-minded that they disarm criticism by appearing to take themselves far less seriously than audiences do. It's difficult to swat a comedy - even one that's not funny - that announces in every frame, ''I'm just a sweet, small, inconsequential, loving movie about Life.''

There are even some people who would praise him as a film maker of original and possibly profound sensibility.

To preserve this illusion, Mr. Rudolph should never have made ''The Moderns,'' a project he nurtured for 12 years and describes, apparently with pride, as ''the most rejected screenplay in Hollywood.'' The new film, used as a key to all that has gone before, unlocks the door to a room with nothing in it.

''The Moderns,'' opening today at the Plaza, is another Rudolph fable, this time set in Paris in the late 1920's, about artists, writers, art-forgers, collectors and, as set-dressing, characters labeled Ernest Hemingway, Gertrude Stein, Alice B. Toklas and, in what might be called an off-screen cameo, Maurice Ravel.

In the foreground are fictitious characters named Hart (Keith Carradine), a struggling painter who dabbles in unauthorized reproductions; Stone (John Lone), a nouveau riche collector who, we are told, made his vast fortune manufacturing condoms, and Oiseau (Wallace Shawn), a gossip columnist who dreams of flying off to become a columnist in Hollywood, which, in this film's view of the world, is the Paris of the future.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.