Constitution Party presidential candidate Chuck Baldwin is scouring South Carolina this week looking for voters who are scared of Democrat Barack Obama or distrustful of Republican John McCain.

Baldwin, speaking in front of about 30 people at The Beacon Drive-In, lashed out at both of the major party candidates, calling them "globalists" and saying he couldn't get behind the Republican nominee because "the lesser of two evils is still evil."

His platform touched on controversial matters that speak to both major parties, but also includes topics rarely talked about in the presidential race - topics such as the creation of a North American Union, imposing a 10 percent tariff on all goods imported into the United States and how the Federal Reserve has made this country "subjugated to foreign influence."

Baldwin has been excluded from most major national polls and has scored very low on the ones that have included his name. He's hoping to change that.

Spartanburg County Republican Party Chairman Rick Beltram, who attended most of Tuesday's event, predicted Baldwin would win less than 1 percent of the vote in South Carolina come November.

"That party has never shown up as more than an asterisk," he said.

Baldwin, a 56-year-old pastor, was last in Spartanburg in January, speaking on behalf of Republican Ron Paul, the libertarian-leaning Texas congressman who developed a small but devoted following during the primary season. Baldwin said that if Paul had won the GOP nomination, Baldwin would not be running for president.

Baldwin was especially critical of the years Republicans controlled both houses of Congress and the White House.

He said President Bush should have used the bully pulpit to move Paul's Sanctity of Life Act through Congress. That act would define life as beginning at conception, remove the courts' jurisdiction over the matter and in general outlaw abortion.

He called out the "audacity" of using the National Guard to defend Iraq's borders - in an undeclared war by Congress - rather than the borders of the United States.

And he attacked both parties as being weak on immigration, saying this country is in the midst of an "invasion," and that under the Constitution, "We have the responsibility to repel that invasion." Democrats wanted illegal immigrants in this country to garner votes among Hispanics, and Republicans wanted them here for cheap labor, he said.

He didn't stop there.

After criticizing former President Bill Clinton and former Sen. Bob Dole for ushering in the North American Free Trade Agreement, or NAFTA, Baldwin took aim at the North American Union.

The North American Union is regarded as a myth in many political circles - if it's acknowledged at all - though commentators like Lou Dobbs press the matter. The idea is that the United States, Canada and Mexico will one day share a common currency and be joined by what's commonly called the "NAFTA superhighway."

"Our Founding Fathers did not pledge their support to - I'm sorry Mr. McCain - a 'Declaration of Interdependence,' " Baldwin said. "And when we lose our independence, we lose our freedoms, and we lose our sovereignty."

Baldwin labeled the Patriot Act unconstitutional, said domestic drilling could make this country energy independent in four years, and called the United Nations "a sinister organization run by Marxists, socialists and communists."

The candidate proposed abolishing the Department of Education, the Department of Energy, the IRS and the federal income tax. He pledged to do what Newt Gingrich tried to do in 1994 with his "Contract with America."

"We need to slash spending," Baldwin said. "The only difference between Democrats and Republicans is Democrats want to tax and spend and Republicans want to borrow and spend."

Beltram admitted that "the Republican Congress prior to 2006 left that impression."

"I went to listen to the attacks against Republicans and McCain," Beltram said. "My job is to make sure people know McCain is the real deal. They realize since 2006 that the Republican president is going to have to be trusted."

Others went simply to learn.

Jared Stubblefield and his wife, Debra, first became familiar with the Constitution Party while campaigning for Paul during the primary, but they didn't know much about Baldwin. After listening to his speech, Debra Stubblefield called it "fabulous."

Jerry Blanton of Boiling Springs has been involved in the Constitution Party for years.

"They've shredded the Constitution," he said. "We need to take it back."

Baldwin said he is on the ballot in more than 40 states, including South Carolina.