Presidential Candidates Audio & Video Resource for Election Day 2008

With only one week left until the United States Presidential Election, we wanted to feature our updated Presidential Candidates Audio & Video Resource page. This page features resources from all the presidential candidates that are on enough ballots to theoretically win the election, along with the Democratic & Republican running mates. So we’ve not only included pages for Barack Obama & John McCain, but also for four other presidential candidates. Listen to and watch audio & video of the 2008 U.S. Presidential Candidates featuring podcasts, speeches, debates, interviews, and more:

Presidential Candidates Audio & Video Resource Page

Here are the individual candidate pages:

Republican Presidential Candidate John McCain (featuring 21 resources)

Republican Vice Presidential Candidate Sarah Palin (featuring 6 resources)

Democratic Presidential Candidate Barack Obama (featuring 23 resources)

Democratic Vice Presidential Candidate Joe Biden (featuring 12 resources)

Independent Presidential Candidate Ralph Nader (featuring 11 resources)

Constitution Party Presidential Candidate Chuck Baldwin (featuring 3 resources)

Green Party Presidential Candidate Cynthia McKinney (featuring 3 resources)

Libertarian Party Presidential Candidate Bob Barr (featuring 3 resources)

Here are some highlights of specific titles which you may want to check out before election day:

Ron Paul Hosts Third Party Press Conference – Features candidates Ralph Nader, Cynthia McKinney, and Chuck Baldwin stating their positions and all agreeing on the principles of withdrawing all troops from Iraq and other foreign countries, stopping the increase of the national debt, and opposing taxpayer bailouts of corporations.

John McCain on Charlie Rose: 1997-2007 – Senator John McCain has been interviewed over a dozen times by Charlie Rose since 1997. We selected the 10 most significant interviews and featured them here. This set of videos provides an excellent portrait of McCain over the past 10 years.

2008 Presidential Race Debates Podcast – CBS News presents the three full debates between candidates Barack Obama and John McCain and the one debate between their running mates Sarah Palin and Joe Biden. Available audio & video podcasts through iTunes.

FRONTLINE: The Choice 2008 – PBS FRONTLINE documentary on the presidential candidates Barack Obama and John McCain. This two hour documentary is available on streaming video through YouTube and free video download through iTunes.

U.S. Senator Barack Obama Podcast – Senator Barack Obama was an early adopter of podcasting as a medium for addressing his constituents. He began podcasting in early 2006 and this is his original podcast before he began his presidential bid. These podcasts provide a more intimate platform to hear Obama address the issues.

If you like these presidential resources and you have a Digg.com account, please Digg them here:

Presidential Candidates Audio & Video Resource on Digg.com

Enjoy these resources and if you’re a U.S. citizen, be sure to vote Tuesday, November 4th!

John McCain on Charlie Rose: 1997-2007

NOTE: Google Video is no longer and neither are these interviews. Oh well.

Senator John McCain has been interviewed over a dozen times by Charlie Rose since 1997. We’ve select the 10 most significant interviews and featured them here. This set of videos provides an excellent portrait of McCain over the past 10 years. Here are some of the key interviews:

-In the 06/03/1997 interview, McCain told a riveting story of his experiences as a soldier and POW in Vietnam.

-In the 07/28/1999 interview, McCain laid forth his 2000 presidential campaign platform addressing political cynicism and corruption, and how to rid Washington of the special interests that contribute to both Democratic & Republican parties and control the American political process.

-In the 09/17/2001 interview, McCain discussed preparations for a war with Afghanistan after the 9/11 attacks.

-In the 09/24/2002 interview, McCain gave his reasons for supporting the upcoming war with Iraq.

-In the 04/19/2004 interview, McCain spoke with Charlie Rose about the difficulties of the Iraq War.

-In the 08/20/2007 interview, McCain laid forth his platform for his 2008 presidential campaign, focusing on fighting Islamic terrorism, winning the war in Iraq, cutting government spending, and dealing with climate change.

These interviews provide an interesting history of the changes in American politics over the past 10 years and how Senator John McCain has confronted these changes. These streaming videos are made available through CharlieRose.com and Google Video.

A discussion with John McCain

06/03/1997

Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, speaks to Charlie about his experiences as a soldier in Vietnam and his support for the Head Start program, a federally funded program focusing on providing early stage education for children from low-income families.

A conversation with Senator John McCain

07/28/1999

Senator John McCain of Arizona discusses his run for the Republican nomination for president in the 2000 elections, his main Republican opposition, George W. Bush, and outlines his policy platform. McCain addresses political cynicism and corruption, and curbing the special interests that contribute to both Democratic & Republican parties.

An interview with John McCain

09/13/1999

Senator of Arizona and Presidential candidate John McCain talks about his new book “Faith of My Fathers”, about the significance of his time spent in the military and as a prisoner of war in Vietnam.

An interview with John McCain

12/13/1999

An hour with Republican senator from Arizona and presidential candidate, John McCain. McCain responds to the feedback about the recent debates among Republican candidates, discusses formative life experiences that have contributed to his desire to run for the presidency, and shares his policy platform.

A conversation about the preparation for war with Senator John McCain

09/17/2001

A conversation with Republican Senator John McCain of Arizona about preparations for war after the 9/11 attacks and President Bush’s plan of action.

An interview with John McCain

09/24/2002

Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona and author of the book “Worth Fighting For”, discusses America’s failure to keep the peace and rebuild in Afghanistan following the 2001 invasion. He also talks about mounting tensions with Iraq.

A conversation with Senator John McCain

04/19/2004

A conversation with Republican Senator John McCain of Arizona about his book “Why Courage Matters: The Way to a Braver Life”. McCain also discusses the war in Iraq.

An hour with Republican Senator John McCain

10/31/2005

An hour conversation with Senator John McCain about his views regarding President Bush, the platform and future of the Republican Party and his own possible run for the presidency in 2008.

A conversation with Sen. John McCain

08/20/2007

A conversation with Senator John McCain about his Presidential campaign. McCain talks about combatting Islamic extremism, the rise of China, and other foreign policy issues.

Charlie Rose Special Edition: The Candidate – John McCain

11/27/2007

Charlie Rose Special Edition: The Candidates featuring an hour with John McCain. McCain covers most of the platform upon which he is running in 2008 as he talks about Iraq, health care, education, immigration, and other issues.