Argentina is one of the biggest countries in South America and its market has become of great interest to manufacturers all over the world.

Taking this into consideration, we have decided to make a short guide with the most important information that you will need to be compliant with Argentina’s labeling regulations.

WHAT MUST BE SHOWN

The identification label of a registered product must contain the following information:

a) RAMATEL isologotype or isotype; and

b) Registration number issued by ENACOM for RAMATEL

The good news from Argentina is that this is one of the few countries where mandatory labeling is required that provides the registration number before the certificate is issued. Once the documentation (along with the in-country test report) is submitted to ENACOM, the entity will automatically assign a number that will be the same as the one that needs to be placed on the label.

ISOTYPE/ LOGOTYPE

The isotype and logotype typography are required to be in Montserrat Regular font and must be in the minimum size allowed by the entity. It is also important to mention that the proportions of the Isotype/logotype must be respected in any situations:

RAMATEL ISOLOGOTYPE / ISOTYPE SPECIFICATIONS

The use of the RAMATEL isologotype or isotope must be adopted based on the following options.

REGISTRATION NUMBER

Besides the RAMATEL logo, there are specific requirements for the RAMATEL ID number:

The RAMATEL registration number must be printed in Arial font.

The minimum height for the RAMATEL registration number is of 5 points.

The registration number must be located below the chosen isotype/isologotype, and must be centered just below it, it is also acceptable to put the number on the right in case the manufacturer choses to use the horizontal isologotype or isotype, examples can be found below:

WHAT HAPPENS IF I CERTIFIED A MODULE INSTEAD OF A FINAL PRODUCT?

We have good news, in case you have a module already certified in Argentina that will be used in several end products, you will be able to use it’s certificate to import all the end products that uses it, for this to be accepted and compliant, it is necessary to fulfill the following requirements:

The module will need its own RAMATEL Logo and registration number applied to it, using the examples shown in the previous point.

The end product that uses the certified module is required to have a similar label with the addition of the word “CONTIENE” in capital letters (in Arial and with a minimum size of 5 points), that in English means “contains,” adding also the RAMATEL isotype/isologotype along with the module registration number, to declare that the product contains an already certified module for its RF functions, as shown in the following examples:

In case the device has more than one module that was already certified in Argentina, the host product will need to include all corresponding registration numbers in its labeling.

WHAT HAPPENS IF MY PRODUCT IS TOO SMALL TO APPLY THE LOGO?

We have more good news!

If, because of the structural nature, the size of the device or the packaging is too small to add the isotype/isologotype along with the registration number directly on the device, you can add this in the user manual or if you prefer, on the package.

AND IF MY RF PRODUCT IS INSIDE A CAR?

Unfortunately, not everything can be good news! In case an RF product will be installed in a car, even though it may not be sold directly to the customer and will always be imported to the country inside of a vehicle, it will be mandatory to include the isotype/isologotype + the registration number assigned to the device on the product or within the car’s user manual.

MY DEVICE HAS AN SCREEN, CAN I AVOID ADDING THIS TO THE PRODUCT LABEL?

Well, the short answer to this is yes E-Labeling is allowed, but you will have to comply with some additional requirements for this to be accepted:

The electronic label must be readily available

The manual must include steps on how to access to the electronic label

You must add the isotype/isologotype + registration number to the user manual and or package

WHEN I RENEW A CERTIFICATE, DOES THE REGISTRATION NUMBER CHANGE?

As most of you are aware Argentina’s certificates are valid only for 3 years, but the good news is that if you request your renewal within the corresponding time period, the homologation code (registration number) assigned to the model will remain the same and no modification to your labels will be required.

Unfortunately, in case the renewal is requested after the certificate expiration date, it won’t be possible to renew the certificate and maintain the RAMATEL ID, and a new certificate will be required that will have a new homologation code for the product, requiring also that you modify your label. Due to this we highly suggest starting the renewal process of your product before the expiration date.

I HAVE ALREADY BEEN IMPORTING AND DECLARED THE PROPOSAL FOR THE RAMATEL LOGO LOCATION, BUT I WANT TO CHANGE ITS LOCATION, IS THERE ANYTHING I SHOULD DO?

In Argentina, we need to provide the proposal of the RAMATEL legend at the time of submission to ENACOM, so even before the certificate is issued, we are declaring where the registration number will be located on your product label.

In case you want to change the location of the legend in your label, a separate process is required to declare to the entity that the location has been modified. This process has the same lead time as a regular new product application submission.

With all this information, you should be able to expertly navigate Argentina’s regulatory compliance landscape.