SG 109/24

The Argentine Ministry of Economy has issued Resolution 49/2024 to streamline labelling requirements for imported textiles, garments and footwear. Specifically, it repeals Resolution No. 404/16 of the Ministry of Commerce and modifies articles in Resolutions No. 26/96 and No. 850/96.

Argentina has recently updated its labeling requirements for imported textiles, garments and footwear products. The revisions repeal and replace specific articles in previous regulations concerning labeling requirements. These changes are aimed at simplifying labeling practices and enhancing trade efficiency for these products in Argentina.

Here are the key updates:

Repeal and replacement

Labels or text shall present the corresponding information in Spanish

The identification of the exporter on the labels or text shall be optional

Unique Tax Identification Code (CUIT):

The name of the importer on labels for imported goods can be replaced with the corresponding Unique Tax Identification Code (CUIT)

Mercosur-wide requirements:

Textile products sold across Mercosur countries (Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay and Brazil) must carry labels with specific information as required by the Mercosur Technical Regulation on textile product labeling. This includes fiber composition, country of origin, care instructions, and details of the domestic producer or importer

Additionally, with the repeal of Resolution No. 404/16, the new resolution removes the requirement to submit a Declaration of Composition of Products (DJCP) as a prerequisite for commercialization. This resolution takes effect the day after its publication in the Official Gazette.

Reference:

Legislación y Avisos Oficiales

Proyecto de resolución IF-2024-14901848-APN-DGDMDP#MEC

SGS Global Softlines has an extensive network of over 40 laboratories worldwide, with a strong team of committed professionals from multi-disciplinary backgrounds. Our internationally accredited state-of-the-art testing laboratories offer a comprehensive range of physical, chemical and functional testing services for components, materials and finished products. We help your company ensure quality, performance and compliance with international, industrial and regulatory standards worldwide. Visit our website or contact us to discover more. In the end, it’s only trusted because it’s tested.

© SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA. This publication or website is a property of SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA. All contents including website designs, text, and graphics contained herein are owned by or licensed to SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA. The information provided is for technical and general information purposes only and offers no legal advice. The information is no substitute for professional legal advice to ensure compliance with the applicable laws and regulations. All information is provided in good faith “as is”, and SGS Société Générale de Surveillance SA makes no representation or warranty of any kind, express or implied, and does not warrant that the information will be error-free or meet any particular criteria of performance or quality.