After 17 years leading 1100 WHLI-AM, WKJY (K98.3), WBZO (B103), WWSK (94.3 The Shark) and most recently WALK 97.5, Dave Widmer has left his position as general manager and Long Island market manager of the radio stations.

Westport, Conn.-based Connoisseur Media in 2012 entered the Long Island market by acquiring a group of stations for $23 million, before adding WALK in September. Widmer led the group through the transition and as the company acquired WALK.

Jim Condron, who had been senior vice president of regional strategy after serving as WALK’s general manger, was named president and general manager of Connoisseur Media Long Island, based in Farmingdale, as of Feb. 20.

Widmer became one of the best known regional radio executives at a time when national firms often took over local operations.

He also created partnerships between the stations and News12 Long Island, which helped provide a steady stream of information during Hurricane Sandy. Widmer worked in Connecticut before working with Long Island radio for nearly 20 years.

“I am proud of the legacy and success that my team and I built over the last 17 years and our contribution to the community of Long Island,” Widmer said in a letter obtained by LIBN. “I wish them nothing but continued success in the future. Their passion and commitment to excellence has been inspirational and I will miss working with them all.”

Widmer remains vice chairman of radio for the New York State Broadcasters and co-chairman of the board of food bank Island Harvest. He also serves on the board of Autism Speaks and The Mentoring Partnership of Long Island.

“I will continue to support the dozens of charities and organizations I have worked with over the years as it is one of the most rewarding parts of my life,” Widmer said in the letter.

He said he’s “excited about my future and the many opportunities I have before me” as he moves forward after nearly 20 years helping build a large regional radio firm.

Jeffrey Warshaw, a Long Island native, founded Connoisseur Communications in 1992, growing it to 39 stations before it was sold in 2000. Warshaw in 2004 founded Connoisseur Media.

“I know thousands of people,” Widmer said of one result of years spent in local radio. “A number of opportunities and options are coming at me right now.”