By tradition, winners of the Nobel Peace Prize are given at least 30 minutes forewarning before the award is made public but, despite media speculation that he might be in the running, ElBaradei had heard nothing.

Assuming he had not won, he merely switched on the television to see who had.

The Egyptian-born diplomat was, therefore, “pleasantly shocked” to hear that the prestigious award for 2005 was to be awarded jointly to him and the United Nations’ International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) that he heads.

“When I heard the bureau’s name pronounced in Norwegian and then my name I jumped up and kissed and hugged my wife,” he said.

The award, named after the Swedish industrialist who invented dynamite, will be presented to ElBaradei in Oslo on 10 December.

He becomes the second Egyptian to win the peace prize after the late president Anwar Al Sadat in 1979.

The prize-giving committee arrived at their choice after reviewing a record 194 nominees. Although it was denied by prize committee chairman Ole Danbolt Mjøs, the choice of ElBaradei and the IAEA was seen by many as something of a snub to President George W. Bush.

ElBaradei, after all, is the man who, before the US-led invasion of Iraq, incensed the American administration with his insistence that Saddam Hussein had no weapons of mass destruction. More recently, he is the man the Americans have accused of being too “soft” on Iran’s nuclear programme.

But ElBaradei, described by the Nobel committee as a “fearless advocate” of measures to reinforce non-proliferation, has never been afraid of speaking his mind.

He says that, for him, the award sent out a strong message: “Keep doing what you are doing. I am here to further peace and that I will continue to do.”

Born in 1942, he is the son of the late Mostafa ElBaradei, a lawyer and former president of the Egyptian Bar Association. He grew up in the prosperous districts of Garden City and Giza in Cairo, when General Gamal Abdel Nasser was advancing his version of Arab nationalism. Nasser engineered a coup in 1952 and became Egypt’s second president in 1956.

ElBaradei’s mother is still alive and he has two brothers, Aly and Tarek, and two sisters, Mona and Laila. In a May 2004 interview with the Cairoagenda magazine, when asked what motivated him, he said: “It could be the legacy of my father, who spent many years of his life fighting to overcome oppression and advocate freedom and democracy at the perilous time of the Nasser era.

“I guess I grew up with the sense that you have to work hard if you want to get anywhere, particularly if you are in the public service and want to achieve common good,” he said.

ElBaradei, widely acknowledged as an austere and methodical diplomat, met his future wife at a wedding reception in 1974, while she was attending the American University of Cairo.

“We used to go dating at the Gezira Club every day in the afternoon,” he recalled. Aida now works as a nursery school teacher at the Vienna International School. The couple have been married 30 years and have two grown-up children, both working in London. Laila, 28, is a lawyer and 26-year-old Moustafa is a sound technician with CNN.

ElBaradei qualified in law from the University of Cairo and later studied for a doctorate in international law at New York University’s law school.

By then he had begun his career in the Egyptian diplomatic service. He worked in Egypt’s permanent mission to the UN both in New York and Geneva.

In 1984, he joined the IAEA, which was set up in 1957 to work with member states and partners worldwide to promote safe, secure and peaceful nuclear technologies.

He held a series of high-level policy positions in the organisation before becoming director-general 13 years later, taking over from his mentor, the Swedish diplomat Hans Blix (this despite objections by the Egyptian government which pushed the candidacy of Mohammed Al Shaker, their then ambassador to London).

ElBaradei has since piloted the Vienna-based, 139-nation agency, which employs 2,200 people, through several critical years and crises involving Iraq, North Korea and Iran.

In April 2003, he exasperated Washington by insisting that no evidence of weapons of mass destruction had been found in Iraq. More recently, he has declined to denounce a nuclear arms programme in Iran until he is sure one exists.

The US objected to his re-appointment this year as director-general. David Albright, president of the Washington-based Institute for Science and International Security, said that efforts to unseat him (it was alleged his phones were tapped in an effort to produce evidence of improper activity) almost became a “crusade” for John Bolton, who used to manage the nuclear file at the US State Department and was one of his severest critics. The US Secretary of State, Condoleezza Rice, it should be pointed out, has since congratulated him on his Nobel award.

ElBaradei is one of only four men who have headed the IAEA over the last 48 years. Although UN agency heads normally serve a maximum of two terms, there was no serious alternative candidate this year and, after the US formally dropped its objections, ElBaradei was re-appointed in September to a third four-year term.

As the New York Times magazine observed earlier this year, although the Bush administration insiders might regard him as a Third World-man or an Egyptian nationalist, he has spent more of his adult life in New York and Vienna than in Cairo.

German Liberal MEP Alexander Lambsdorff, his party’s representative on the European Parliament’s foreign affairs working group to the UN, says: “ElBaradei has got an exceedingly difficult job, essentially, to keep the genie in the bottle in preventing a nuclear holocaust. He does it in a very diplomatic and professional manner and has proved himself a master of balancing the different interest groups in the IAEA.”

Elbaradei winning the Nobel Peace Prize was met with something of a muted response by his fellow Egyptians, particularly compared with the ecstatic homecoming for the country’s medal winners in last year’s Olympics.

Mike Townsley, Amsterdam-based spokesman for Greenpeace International, has “mixed feelings” about him receiving the award, describing ElBaradei as a “Jekyll and Hyde” character and an “accomplice in hypocrisy”.

He says: “He is both nuclear policeman and nuclear salesman. He continues to undermine his own credibility by talking about non-proliferation while at the same time heading an agency whose main task is the promotion of nuclear technology.”

A source in his private office is more complimentary, describing him as a “visionary”.

When he isn’t upsetting US presidents, ElBaradei has a wide and eclectic range of hobbies, including baseball (he supports the New York Yankees) and basketball (New York Knicks).

He also enjoys golf, opera and classical music, particularly Bruckner, Sibelius and Schönberg, 20th century literature, modern painting and antique carpets.

“I try to switch off by focusing on one of these,” he says. “I’m proud that by now I write my own personal emails and regularly surf the net although I’m far from being a technology wiz. I do, however, have quite a good memory that compensates for being technologically challenged.”

ElBaradei has yet to decide to which charities he will donate his half of the €1 million Nobel prize money. One can safely assume that the current occupant of the White House will not be receiving a cheque.

Advertisement

The CV

1942: Born, Egypt

1962: Bachelor’s law degree, University of Cairo

1964: Joins Egyptian diplomatic service

1974: Doctorate in international law, New York University

1974-78: Special assistant to Egyptian foreign minister

Advertisement

1984: Joins International Atomic Energy Agency

1997: Appointed IAEA director-general

Oct. 2005: Wins Nobel Peace Prize