"Heaven Can Wait" was released in 1978. "Rules Don't Apply" is Warren Beatty's eighth movie since then, and it's sure to be his eighth straight commercial failure. Yet the list of producers for the film includes thirteen names, and most of them are among the biggest ones in Hollywood and some of the better known ones in the country. What they appear to have in common is a respectful fascination with Beatty's reputation as a the great seducer of the post-war era, the lothario of all lotharios, the Casanova of all Casanovas.

But the one-time star is seventy-nine now, and his acting, which was never more than marginally competent, has only gotten worse with the years. So how could he have gotten so many big names to back his film and so many famous actors -- including Alec Baldwin, Ed Harris, Candice Bergen, Paul Sorvino and Matthew Broderick -- to appear in it?

There's a story here. It's a much more compelling tale about sexism and male notions of privilege than the one that played out on Election Night.

Because I am not a friend of any of the producers, I can't catalog that. I have never met Bill Clinton pal and supermarket magnate Ron Burkle, nor real estate heir and socialite Steve Bing. But a documentary investigating the question of why and how they got involved with the self-indulgent and lugubrious motion picture that's opening today would surely be more interesting than the film they're putting out.

As we walked out of that movie, a female friend turned to me and said, "What was that about? Was it supposed to be a comedy?" No one knew what to say in response. Ostensibly, "Rules Don't Apply" is a comedy, a farce about the romantic intrigues of a pair of would-be lovers (Lily Collins and Alden Ehrenreich) who find themselves in the orbit of mad airline tycoon Howard Hughes (Beatty). Yet the movie is a laughless, self-indulgent dirge.

It isn't a valedictory or a capstone to Beatty's career any more than Waterloo was the happy end to Napoleon's.

Although it runs two hours, it feels more like six. Yes, its young romantic leads are appealing. Yet the story centers on its hyphenate star. While he is writer, director and producer, his performance is what Trump said about Jeb Bush: "low energy." And you believe that he's really Hughes for no two consecutive seconds at any point in the film.

Moreover, he manages to be something I have never seen before: much too old for the part of a man who is supposed to be much too old. The Hughes that Beatty is playing is a man who is in his mid to late fifties. In fact, the actor is close to eighty. "Rules Don't Apply" wants us to find a scene in which he seduces the twenty-something Collins to be amusing and off-beat. Actually, it's weird and creepy.

Below this review, you'll find the movie's trailer. Artfully cherry-picking and rearranging its sequences, it manages to make Beatty look spry and to suggest that the film is peppy and fun. In actuality, Beatty mostly resembles something out of Madame Tussaud's, and watching the movie is like being a Great Dane in an undersized cage at the dog pound. You spend a lot of time feeling like you're locked in and awaiting your own funeral.

The movie's unstated -- but real -- subject appears to be Beatty himself. Just like Hughes, Beatty lived in a hotel in Beverly Hills and spent most of his adult years as a rich, famous, self-centered and highly compulsive bachelor having meaningless affairs with beautiful movie actresses whom he deceived and manipulated. What seems not to have occurred to him is that this isn't the subject of frothy rom-com.

Nonetheless, with a younger and funnier star and a lot of cutting, this might have at least ended up as something watchable. As it is, it's just a waste of a lot of screen talent. Whenever Beatty appears, he's like a revenant: he drains the life out of the scenes.

Worse, his script is composed of dated jokes and obvious anachronisms. The big jest is that no one will tell Hughes that he's addled and out of touch. But plainly no one would tell Beatty this either. It's indicative that in a late scene of the movie the entourage around Beatty's Hughes is stocking up on rum raisin ice cream, a dessert that didn't exist in 1959, when the story is supposed to take place. In that case, the problem is that the time period is twenty years too early. But Beatty and his producers are actually thirty -- if not forty -- years too late.

To call a film that stars Warren Beatty a vanity project is obviously ironic. But, in this case, it's all too apt.