Labib Name Meaning in English

What does the name Labib mean? What is the meaning of the name Labib, lucky number, lucky stone, origin and religion.

The name Labib is a Muslim baby name. In Muslim the meaning of the name Labib is: Sensible. Intelligent.

Labib Name Meaning, Origin & Details

Meaning: Sensible, Intelligent, reasonable, rational, Wise Gender: Boy Origin: Arabic Religion: Muslim Suitable for: Boys / Male / Guys Hardness: Easy to pronounce, Labib is a short name Uniqueness: It is a common name Short & Easy: Yes Syllables: 5 Letters and 1 Words

Labib Name Meaning in Urdu ⟶

Related or Similar Names

If you like the meanings or synonyms of name Labib; we have created list of popular names that can be considered as alternative of the name Labib.

Below names are with similar meaning as Sensible, Intelligent, reasonable, rational, wise. Explore the list below for names that not only share a similar meaning to "Sensible, Intelligent, reasonable, rational, wise" but also encapsulate the essence and significance associated with the name "Labib."

Need Sibling Names For Labib?

Brothers sibling names for Labib can be chosen from the list below.

Labib Name Lucky Number 9

Labib Name Numerology And Personality

Labib has the numerology 9. The meaning of this name is Sensible, Intelligent, reasonable, rational, wise. People with numerology number 9 are the people who are thought to be very selfless and very kind towards the people and everyone around them. These are the people who are always thinking of others over themselves and they take care of everyone around them.

These people believe in creative expression and that is one reason why they are thought to be very humanitarian. The gender of this name Labib is Boy. They always think of what they can do for the humanity.

The religion is Muslim. These are the people who are very obligatory of everything and they also only believe in giving and you will definitely never find these people in takers because they are always the givers. They do not wait for others to do things for them so that they can do it in return rather they are first one to make a move.

Labib Ethnicity Distribution

Popular personalities with Labib Name.

Labib Name Wallpaper

Labib name 3D wallpaper and writing styles, Write Labib name on photo online, Labib name writing style online, Write Labib name on image online, Write Labib name pic & wallpaper, Labib 3D name wallpapers editing, Labib new wallpaper, Labib 3d name creator online, Labib name background maker, Create my name in style for Labib

See Labib Name Wallpaper ⟶

How People Search Labib