Cornelis Hulsman has been invited to present a paper on disputed population data of Christians in Egypt at an international conference of the International Association of Mission Studies in Sydney, Australia, July 7-11, 2022. Estimates range between 5,09 % of population to 21,9% of population. For...

In this article historian Mājid Kāmil, Senior Researcher at the Egyptian National Library and Archives, speaks about Dr. Bāhūr Labīb as one of the world leaders in Coptology. Dr. Pahor Labib [Bāhūr Labīb], one of the most famous scholars of Coptic Studies in Egypt and the world, was born on...

Christine Chaillotis the author of a number of books on Oriental Orthodox Churches. Her first visit to Egypt was in 1981 and since then she has visited the region countless times and feels that the Orthodox Church has become her spiritual home.

The ninth International Conference for Coptic Studies was held in Cairo recently. Over 150 Coptic scholars from different countries around the world participated in the conference, however the media was not allowed to attend the conference.

Held in Paris recently, the conference, which witnessed no official Egyptian participation for 30 years now, called for putting the Coptic antiquities on the Egyptian tourist map and recommended the establishment of independent departments of Coptology at Egyptian universities

This article describes the eighth conference of the St Shenouda the Archimandrite Coptic Society, held at the University of California Los Angeles (U.C.L.A.). The author says that this year’s conference was particularly successful, particularly because of the participation of Coptic youth this year...

The author explains the history of the discovery of the controversial Gospel of Judas and discusses its content, emphasizing its parallels with Gnostic thinking. He emphasizes that much of the publicity surrounding this gospel has been sensationalized.

A new book, The Secrets of Judas: The Story of the Misunderstood Disciple and His Gospel (Harper, San Francisco, 2006) examines the Judas event from biblical, historical and Gnostic perspectives and exposes the recent media hype about the betrayal story as altered in the Gnostic text known as “The...