Trevor Thompson currently is a reporter for FSN Detroit. He joined the network in the summer of 2000. He grew up in Dresden, Ontario where he grew up following the Detroit sports scene.

Fox Sports Detroit

He is a correspondent for the Detroit Sports Report on FSN Detroit. He also has a role as one of the anchor for the Detroit Sports Report. Along with being a correspondent, he blogs for the Detroit Red Wings in an article called "Wingman". During the NFL season, he also blogs on the Detroit Lions.

As part of his FSN work, he covers Detroit Pistons, Detroit Red Wings, Detroit Lions, and Detroit Tigers sports. Along with professional teams, he covers collegiate sports about the University of Michigan and Michigan State University.

Extended Coverage

Also at FSN Detroit he has had a lead role in the post-game coverage during the NHL playoffs. He hosts "Tigers Weekly"', "Tigers Live Pregame", "Red Wings Weekly" "Red Wings Live Pregame", and "Detroit Lions Postgame".

In June 2007 he won his first Emmy Award for his work hosting Red Wings Weekly.

Life before FSN Detroit

Before joining FSN in 2000, Thompson worked for TSN in Toronto, Ontario, and for Orca Bay Sports and Entertainment in Vancouver, BC as a sideline reporter for the Vancouver Grizzlies and the Vancouver Canucks. He was also one of the original reporters hired for CTV Sportsnet in Toronto in 1998, covering the Maple Leafs, Raptors and Argos before taking his first job in the U.S. with Fox Sports.

Recreation

Trevor plays senior league hockey at Troy Sports Arena and Hazel Parks' Viking Arena. Although his team, the Flames, were knocked out early in the 2007 playoffs by the Inn Place, where he straight walked around Patrick Lipa of St. Clair Shores on more than one occasion ,the Flames Fall League team did win the 'C' division and his Fox Sports Net team is a two-time Champion in Hazel Park.

Although quite a good skater, he is not quite as fast as Brett Lebda as of March 20,2008. Trevor is however, most likely a better skater than most honest "C" League hockey competitors.