Courage Calls to Courage Everywhere is a timely and inspiring call to arms by one of Britain’s most acclaimed and important writers. Whilst recognising how far women have come in the hundred years since getting the vote, Jeanette Winterson also insists that we must all do much more if we are to achieve true gender equality.

Examining recent women’s rights movements, the worlds of politics, technology and social media and changes in the law, Winterson calls out all the ways in which women still face discrimination and disadvantage. Like the women who won the right to vote, we need to shout up, reach out, be courageous and finish the job.

Also included in this volume is Emmeline Pankhurst’s landmark Suffragette speech, ‘Freedom or Death’, which she delivered in 1913.

“This slim volume by the award-winning novelist and memoirist addresses how far women have come since getting the vote and the work that is still needed for true equality”

observer

See more reviews

“A joyous read”

Stylist

“She is a master of her material, a writer in whom great talent abides”

vanity Fair

“Many consider her to be the best living writer in this language … In [Winterson’s hands], words are fluid, radiant, humming”

evening Standard

“Celebrates how far women have come in the past century, while issuing a wake-up call about why there’s a long way to go for women on equality … Powerful”

herald

Jeanette Winterson was born in Manchester and read English at Oxford, during which time she wrote her first novel, the Whitbread Award-winning Oranges Are Not The Only Fruit. Since then she has published many other novels – including The Passion, Sexing the Cherry, Written on the Body, The PowerBook and The Daylight Gate – a collection of short stories, a book of essays, books for children and a memoir, Why Be Happy When You Could Be Normal?. She has adapted her work for TV, film and stage, was awarded an OBE in 2006 and a CBE in 2018 for services to literature. Her books are published in 32 countries.

@Wintersonworld | jeanettewinterson.com