A.S. Sambenedettese S.r.l. is an Italian association football club, based in San Benedetto del Tronto, Marche. Sambenedettese currently plays in Serie D.

History

Foundation

The club was founded in 1923 as U.S. Sambenedettese.

In 1956, the club was first promoted to Serie B, a division where they spent a total of 21 seasons (the last time of which was in 1989). In the 1980s, they also had a young Walter Zenga as a goalkeeper in their stint in the Italian second division.

In 1994, the club went bankrupt and was successively forced to restart from Eccellenza. In 2000, the club was acquired by Luciano Gaucci and eventually won promotion back to professionalism in 2001 and then to Serie C1 just a year later.

In 2009, the club was forced to restart again from Eccellenza, this time as U.S. Sambenedettese 1923.

In 2012–13 season, Sambenedettese won Group F of Serie D, but it was not promoted to Lega Pro Seconda Divisione as it was excluded by Federal Council's decision for incomplete documentation of submission to the league. The company behind the club also changed the name to U.S. Sambenedettese 1923 S.r.l. at that time. Refounded as A.S.D. Sambenedettese Calcio, the club restarted from Eccellenza Marche and promptly won promotion to Serie D. On 4 August 2015, Franco Fedeli acquired the then-Serie D club, and in 2016 Sambenedettese were promoted back to Lega Pro as the Group F winner of 2015–16 Serie D. The club was known as S.S.D. Sambenedettese ARL at that time. At the start of 2016–17 season the company behind the club changed the name to S.S. Sambenedettese S.r.l. (P.IVA 02177180441), but marketing as S.S. Sambenedettese Calcio. In 2020, the club was sold by Franco Fedeli to Italian-Argentine entrepreneur and Bangor City F.C. owner Domenico Serafino. However, less than a year later, after Serafino failed to comply with several financial requirements, the club was declared bankrupt.

The club's naming rights were then acquired by entrepreneur Roberto Renzi and was refounded as A.S. Sambenedettese. After repaying all debts, the newly-reformed club was formally accepted by the Italian Football Federation, this way maintaining their spot in the Serie C league. The club was however excluded from Serie C due to financial irregularities and successively admitted to Serie D following a successful appeal and the payment of a league membership fee.

In 2023, Sambenedettese were also excluded from Serie D, and the club's naming rights were assigned to fellow Serie D club Porto d'Ascoli, who restarted under the new denomination of U.S. Sambenedettese.

Players

First team squad

Colors and badge

The team's colors are red and blue.

Rivalries

The main rivalry is with Ascoli. They are in the same province – Province of Ascoli Piceno.

Honours