Terry Allen Ford (1949-2021) Today on March 31, 2021 with a sad and heavy heart I have to say I lost my best friend and husband, he took his last breath and returned to heaven. (John 3:16). It is with great pleasure to say that Terry enriched my life in so many ways. He was affectionately called "Baby Ruth" for he was like a candy bar real soft on the inside and a hard shell on the out. It's never easy but it's like Kenny Rogers song "Goodbye."

Terry was born on July 05, 1949 in Chandler, OK, Lincoln County to Cecil and Bonnie (nee` Phelps) Ford. Terry was a Wellston Alumni 1968 and Spartan Grad in HVAC. Terry was a volunteer Firefighter and a Reserve Police Officer for the City of Wellston. A member of the First Baptist Church in Wellston. Owned a HVAC Company with State License #00366. He taught HVAC at Sooner Tech School to prisoners, worked part-time for the YORK plant in Norman, OK and started work at the U.S. Postal Training Center in Norman as a Mechanical Educator and Federal Inspector. Terry enjoyed fishing and competition shooting.

Terry worked for the Federal Government for 42 years and retiring as a U.S. Postmaster in 2017. Terry was very instrumental in getting the City of Tryon a new post office in 1997. In 2013 the the USPS consolidated post offices and Terry was the postmaster for Wellston, Tryon and Agra post offices at the time of his retirement.

Terry married Trisha (nee` Prough) Ford on March 19, 1999 they just celebrated their 22nd Anniversary. They made their home north of Wellston, OK and owned the Model-T Farm a cow/calf operation.

He was predeceased by his parents. Terry leaves behind his wife Trisha of the home; 2 grown children from a previous marriage and 2 brothers; along with many other family and friends.

Terry requested that no funeral service be held due to COVID-19 and he will be laid to rest at the Wellston Cemetery at a later date.

The family would like to thank the Lincoln County 911 dispatchers, Deputy Chapman, Fallis Fire Dept. Brandon Evans, Chandler EMS and Lehman Funeral Home for their professional and kind service. Arrangements were under the direction of Lehman Funeral Home in Wellston.