PHILADELPHIA – Andrew Bynum will finally play his first game at the Wells Fargo Center since the 76ers leveraged the future of the franchise to acquire the one-time All-Star center from the Los Angeles Lakers in a four-team trade in August 2012.

Unfortunately for the Sixers, it’ll be for the other team.

“It’s going to be a very interesting night,” Sixers forward Thaddeus Young said. “That’s all I’ll say.”

Bynum, 26, signed a two-year, $24.8 million contract with the Cleveland Cavaliers this summer after missing all of last season with bone bruises and cartilage damage in his knees. Only $6 million is guaranteed. The Cavs visit the Sixers on Friday.

“It's just another game,” Bynum told Jason Lloyd of the Akron Beacon Journal on Wednesday.

Bynum (7-0, 285) had appeared in three games this season before Wednesday night’s contest at Milwaukee. He was averaging 6.0 points, 3.3 rebounds and 1.7 blocks in 12.3 minutes, and had gradually increased his playing time in each game. He recently said he feels “little sharp pains” in his surgically-repaired knees, but intends to play through it.

The Sixers traded All-Star swingman Andre Iguodala, Nik Vucevic, Maurice Harkless and a first-round draft pick to acquire Bynum and Jason Richardson in August 2012, then paid Bynum $16.9 million last season before allowing him to leave in free agency.

Bynum was originally diagnosed with a bone bruise and damaged cartilage in his right knee in September 2012 and a “mirror issue” in his left knee last November, when it began to swell after going bowling.

Richardson also suffered a season-ending knee injury after appearing in just 33 games last season, and told reporters Wednesday that he’s on track to return to action by the All-Star break.

Bynum said he expects a hostile reception from Philadelphia fans.

“I think they’ll probably boo, but that’s their choice,” Bynum said. “It wasn’t my choice to get rid of me. I don’t feel bad at all [about last season]. ... If I was not hurt, I would’ve played. That’s really the end to that story.”

87ers coach hired

The 76ers have hired Rod Baker to coach their NBA Development League affiliate, the Delaware 87ers, according to a source close to the situation.

Baker was an assistant coach last season with the D-League’s Bakersfield Jam.

He spent the previous seven years as head coach of the Rochester RazorSharks, leading the team to a 147-36 record and four league championships – one in the American Basketball Association and three in the Premier Basketball League. He was named PBL coach of the year three times.

The Holy Cross graduate also has coaching experience with the Harlem Globetrotters, Grand Rapids Hoops of the Continental Basketball Association, Rutgers, Cincinnati, California-Irvine, Seton Hall, Tufts and Columbia.

The 87ers will play home games at the Bob Carpenter Center in Newark. They begin their inaugural season with five-game road trip, starting Nov. 23 at the Canton Charge. The home opener is against Canton at 7 p.m. Dec. 8.

Former GM Williams to be honored

Former 76ers general manager and Tower Hill School graduate Pat Williams will receive the Legacy of Excellence Award from the Philadelphia Sports Hall of Fame during its 10th induction ceremony today at the Sheraton Philadelphia Society Hill Hotel.

Others being inducted include former Sixers great Andrew Toney, former Phillies outfielder Greg Luzinski, former Flyers wing John LeClair, Heisman Trophy-winning running back Eddie George and Connecticut women’s basketball coach Geno Auriemma.

Moment of silence

The Sixers observed a moment of silence for former equipment manager and longtime employee Jeff Millman, who died of lung cancer Tuesday, and will wear a black stripe on the shoulder of both their home and road jerseys for the rest of November. He was 67.

Millman spent more than five decades with the Sixers, and the home locker room was dedicated in his honor Oct. 30. Millman was joined in the ceremony by his family and friends, including former Sixers Billy Cunningham, Julius Erving, Allen Iverson, Charles Barkley, Doug Collins, World B. Free and others.