Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Ilarion Ukrainian Orthodox Residence, 1972, 1978

Foundation, 1972

The Ilarion Ukrainian Orthodox Residence for seniors in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada, was founded effectively in 1972.

This came about as a consequence of a decision in that year of the Ukrainian Self-Reliance League to establish a residence for senior citizens in Saskatoon.

Formal decisions, 1973

On 15 April, 1973, there was a combined meeting in Saskatoon of both Holy Trinity Cathedral and All Saints Parish, and both branches of the Ukrainian Women's Association of Canada (U.W.A.C.). At this meeting, a resolution was made to approve the project to build a senior's home for persons of the Ukrainian Orthodox Faith. This complex was intended to provide low-cost rental units.

From that time, serious discussion and planning produced the construction of the initial stage of this project. This process required several years of work before there was visible fruit from the invisible labour.

The site chosen for this residence was 2509, Louise Street, Saskatoon, which was very near to the Parish of All Saints (in fact, directly across from the residence, on Louise Street).

Before the opening, it was decided to name the residence in honour and in memory of Metropolitan Ilarion (Ohienko), who had reposed in Christ in 1972.

Opening, 1978

Opening of Phase I, 1978

On 24 June, 1978, the Ilarion Ukrainian Orthodox Residence was opened officially. It consisted of 51 units.

On 20 August, 1978, the Board of Directors at Ilarion Residence began to investigate the possibility of building an addition to Phase I.

Opening of Phase II, 1984

On 30 September, 1984, the construction of the second stage of the development was completed. The second stage consisted in a continuation of the original building, which effectively doubled the size, and made one larger building.

On 26 October, 1984, the official ceremony of opening Phase II was held.

Phase II added another 51 units for senior citizen accommodation.

These units functioned and served well for many years. However, circumstances in society were changing, and other ways for meeting the needs of ageing persons were being developed. The directors of the Ilarion Ukrainian Orthodox Residence decided to work towards providing further accommodations which would provide a wider variety of means to support elderly persons in their fragility.

It was decided to name Phase III (the planning and design of which took 5 years) “Ilarion Residence/Village”. This phase added 30 Life Lease units, and 21 Assisted Living accommodations. The latter provision allowed residents to remain in their familiar residence with familiar friends for a longer period of time.

The official blessing of the beginning of Phase III took place on 27 June, 2003.

Opening of Phase III, 2003

The new facility opened its doors on 25 July, 2003. The facility was opened officially on 18 September, 2003.

From that time, the residence complex has been fulfilling its stated purposes. For some years, Metropolitan John (Stinka) was a resident after he retired from active service.

Entertainment beside Phase III

Description

The Ilarion Residence and Village is a seniors' complex located in the Nutana Suburban Centre neighbourhood of Saskatoon, one block east of Market Mall shopping centre. It is also located near the University Hospital.

The complex consists of 2 buildings : Ilarion Residence and Ilarion Village, which are physically joined together.

There are 3 housing options :

• “Independent Living” rental suites : 4 studio apartments ; 73 one-bedroom suites ; 15 two-bedroom suites in the Ilarion Residence, which is a two-storey building.

• “Assisted Living” rental suites : 25 studio apartments ; 3 one-bedroom suites ; 2 one-bedroom plus den suites (on the main floor of Ilarion Village).

• “Life Lease” Units : 3 one-bedroom and 27 two-bedroom suites on the second, third, and fourth floors of Ilarion Village.

Purposes

Ilarion Ukrainian Orthodox Seniors Residence and Village is dedicated to providing a spiritual community, respectful of all with an affordable range of residency, from fully independent to assisted living.

Ilarion Ukrainian Orthodox Seniors Residence provides quality of life for its residents through a well-maintained, accessible facility, with a secure and harmonious living environment to be shared with each other, family and friends.

Ilarion Residence and Village creates an environment for staff, where they feel respected, supported and valued. Teamwork and personal growth are promoted.

Appropriately, the Residence and Village contains a domestic chapel for the benefit of the residents.

Ilarion Residence Chapel of All Saints

Included in the operation of the Ilarion Residence and Village are the underlying principles of

- Respect for all, compassion, sense of community, integrity

- Quality relationships, a supportive environment

- Safety and security

- Accountability, fiscal responsibility

- Meeting the needs of the Ukrainian Orthodox Community

Main entrance to Ilarion Residence and Village

Particular Residence information

The Ilarion Residence and Village is an independent corporation which is associated with the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Canada (UOCC). It is within the Central Eparchy of the UOCC. The bishop is Metropolitan Ilarion (Rudyk).

Address :

Ilarion Residence

2509, Louise Street

Saskatoon, Saskatchewan

S7J 3L7

Telephone : (306) 373-7011

Web-site : https://www.ilarion.ca

Facebook

E-mail : info@ilarion.ca

Directions :

The Ilarion Residence is situated in the Eastview district of south-central Saskatoon.

From central Saskatoon, by car :

Drive eastwards on 25 Street East, and cross the South Saskatchewan River. Continue straight on, on College Avenue (Highway #5) until the Highway #16 Interchange. Keep to the right, and drive southwards on Highway #16. Follow the exit to the right for Taylor Street. Turn right (west) onto Taylor Street East. At the first intersection, turn left onto Arlington Avenue. Pass by the Nutana Suburban Centre. Turn right (west) at Louise Street. The Ilarion Residence is on the right.

From other parts of Saskatchewan, by car :

Approach Saskatoon by one of the various highways that approach the city. Follow Circle Drive towards the southeast part of the city, and Highway #16.

Approaching from the north, drive southwards on Highway #16. Follow the exit to the right for Taylor Street. Turn right (west) onto Taylor Street East. At the first intersection, turn left onto Arlington Avenue. Pass by the Nutana Suburban Centre. Turn right (west) at Louise Street. The Ilarion Residence is on the right.

Approaching from the south, drive on Circle Drive (Highway #11) until the Preston Avenue Interchange. Take the exit to the right for Preston Avenue. Turn left (north) onto Preston Avenue South. Drive northwards until Louise Avenue. Turn right (east) onto Louise Avenue. The Ilarion Residence is on the left.

By bus : Consult Saskatoon Transit.

Saskatoon may be accessed by various airlines through the John G Diefenbaker Saskatoon International Aeroport.

Saskatoon may be accessed by railway through VIARail.

There is interurban bus service available within Saskatchewan, and with service to Edmonton, Alberta.

References

A brief History of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Canada

Official History of the Ilarion Residence, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan

Yereniuk, Professor Roman, “Short Historical Outline of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Canada” (UOCC)

Additional information :

Ilarion Residence Retirement and Assisted Living Complex, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan listing

Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Canada (UOCC) web-site

Wikipedia article about the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Canada

Orthodoxwiki article about the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Canada

Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Canada Central Eparchy

Ilarion Residence Chapel

Church of Constantinople web-site

Orthodoxwiki article about the Church of Constantinople

Ukrainian Orthodox Church of All Saints, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan

Holy Trinity Ukrainian Orthodox Cathedral, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan

Saint Petro Mohyla Institute, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan

Patriarch Bartholomew (Archontonis)

Metropolitan Ilarion (Ohienko)

Metropolitan Michael (Khoroshy)

Metropolitan Andrew (Metiuk)

Metropolitan Wasyly (Fedak)

Metropolitan John (Stinka)

Metropolitan Yurij (Kalistchuk)

Metropolitan Ilarion (Rudnyk)

Archbishop Job (Getcha)

Bishop Andriy (Peshko)

Yevshan Ukrainian Folk Ballet Ensemble performs at the Ilarion Residence in Saskatoon (7 March, 2019)

Enthronement of Bishop Ilarion (Rudnyk) as Metropolitan of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Canada (19 November, 2022)

Lastwika Ukrainian Orthodox Choir's Visit to the Ilarion Ukrainian Orthodox Residence (22 January, 2023)