Majin Buu does his best work in the mid range where his jumping heavy attack will just barely hit the opponent. This way he can safely keep the opponent in check with a few different attacks that really excel in this range. Players who would do the best with Majin Buu are players who can be patient and wait for their openings, and then once they get that hit, making the opponent pay for their mistakes!

Jump To:

Special Moves

Super Moves

Special Move List

The following moves are classified special moves, read on to learn tips on how to use them effectively.

Mount Dive

QCF+ATK

Majin Buu does a front flip and lands, butt first on the opponent. This move has 2 active hits, the first during the rising animation, and the second during the butt slam. The medium version goes further than the light version, and the EX version will track the opponent. This move is relatively safe on block, but on whiff it is very punishable.

In order to combat this, if the move whiffs, but the opponent is on the ground near Majin Buu when this attack ends, then they will be stunned and unable to punish you. This stun isn’t enough to combo off of normally, but it can make you safe in an event where you wouldn’t otherwise be safe. This can very easily combo into either of his supers, making it Buu’s go to combo ender.

Cartwheel

QCB+ATK

A very simple retreating cartwheel that can be used to get out of pressure. If this move connects you can very easily combo into Majin Buu’s level 3. The medium version goes further back than the light version, and the EX jumps into the air as he is doing the cartwheel. This move can be used as an anti air, but you won’t get a lot off of it unless you want to spend 3 bars to combo into super.

Sweeping Breath

QCF+SP

Majin Buu’s most straight forward attack. This is a mid range projectile that covers about half of the screen. Use this to establish spacing and keep your opponent in check. On hit, you can cancel into a teleport and continue with a combo. Despite the animation looking like there is a hole in the hitbox right next to Buu, the attack actually covers that range as well.

Potbelly Attack

QCB+SP

Majin Buu throws a piece of himself at the opponent in an arc that tracks onto the opponent. If this attack hits, then the opponent will be stuck for a short period of time, allowing for a free follow up from Buu. This attack has decent tracking, but don’t expect it to catch somebody sprinting in at you at full speed.

This can be great to force the opponent to either block, or blindly charge in and get punished for it. This can also be used as a reset option to keep pressure on the opponent and force him to respect your options.

Super Move List

The following moves are classified as Super Moves, read on to learn tips on how to use them effectively.

You Know What...I Hate You (1 Bar)

QCF+Light+Medium(DR) or SP+Heavy(SD)

Majin Buu lets out a massive yell which causes an explosion that hits the entire screen. This makes it a fantastic multi-use super. It is a great combo ender out of Buu’s Mount Dive, It’s great for punishing unsafe approaches, and it’s great for keeping your opponents in check.

The only downside to this super is its need to be on the ground in order to activate. However, given the massive range on this move, as long as you can get yourself back to the ground in time, you shouldn’t have an issue landing this super.

You’re My Snack Now (3 Bars)

QCB+Light+Medium(DR) or SP+Heavy(SD)

This is one of the more thematic supers in the game. Majin Buu shoots out a small horizontal beam that travels across the screen at a decently fast rate. If the move hits, the opponent will be turned into a cookie and eaten by Buu. This will in turn restore a small amount of health to Buu as well as deal pretty decent damage to the opponent.

This is going to be your highest damage combo ender, with the obvious benefit of restoring health as well. This super also has to be performed on the ground, and as such is a little harder to combo into than it otherwise would be, but it’s still a solid level 3.