Major players like Gohan and Piccolo are shells of their former selves. Although this is to be expected, Krillin, Yamcha, and Tenshinhan are no longer Z Fighters during the Boo Saga. Lastly, and I think this gets overlooked... I think Vegeta degressed in character development when he transformed into Majin Vegeta. This leaves Goku as the only one I like during the Saga. Also, kid Goten and kid Trunks are the worst Z Fighters in the series, although I still like Teen Goten and Teen Trunks over Professor Gohan at the End Of Z.

I like almost every major villain in the series... Piccolo Daimao, Piccolo Junior, Saiyan Saga and Freeza Saga Vegeta, Freeza, and Cell are all a colorful cast of major villains. Boo is the only one I dislike in all of his forms. Fat Boo, Evil Boo, Super Boo, and Kid Boo all have no character depth. I tolerate Bootenks and Boohan because I take them more seriously, but they're still poor man versions of Perfect Cell.

This doesn't get mentioned enough, but I feel like it's wasted potential as a closing Saga as well. During the 25th Budokai, I could feel the hype and tension of the atmosphere. The literal god king of the story (Kaioshin) and the literal demon king of the story (Dabura) both get shafted just in the Babidi's Ship portion of the Saga. The fact that Kaioshin did nothing about Freeza or even Cell but wants to ally up against the strongest and most dangerous entity in the universe (Boo) says a lot about the potential of the Boo Saga.

The plot holes in the series are more apparent in the Boo Saga than any other Saga as well. I could literally make a separate post elaborating on all of the plot holes in the 25th Budokai and Babidi's Ship alone. The early Boo Saga was once a heavily discussed topic on other older DBZ Forums back in the day. It's been discussed multiple times in the past and fans have eventually come to the conclusion of ignoring that portion of the story as a whole when it comes to ridiculous implications like Base Saiyans > Piccolo.

These are just my thoughts on the subject.

Major players like Gohan and Piccolo are shells of their former selves. Although this is to be expected, Krillin, Yamcha, and Tenshinhan are no longer Z Fighters during the Boo Saga. Lastly, and I think this gets overlooked... I think Vegeta degressed in character development when he transformed into Majin Vegeta. This leaves Goku as the only one I like during the Saga. Also, kid Goten and kid Trunks are the worst Z Fighters in the series, although I still like Teen Goten and Teen Trunks over Professor Gohan at the End Of Z.

I like almost every major villain in the series... Piccolo Daimao, Piccolo Junior, Saiyan Saga and Freeza Saga Vegeta, Freeza, and Cell are all a colorful cast of major villains. Boo is the only one I dislike in all of his forms. Fat Boo, Evil Boo, Super Boo, and Kid Boo all have no character depth. I tolerate Bootenks and Boohan because I take them more seriously, but they're still poor man versions of Perfect Cell.

This doesn't get mentioned enough, but I feel like it's wasted potential as a closing Saga as well. During the 25th Budokai, I could feel the hype and tension of the atmosphere. The literal god king of the story (Kaioshin) and the literal demon king of the story (Dabura) both get shafted just in the Babidi's Ship portion of the Saga. The fact that Kaioshin did nothing about Freeza or even Cell but wants to ally up against the strongest and most dangerous entity in the universe (Boo) says a lot about the potential of the Boo Saga.

The plot holes in the series are more apparent in the Boo Saga than any other Saga as well. I could literally make a separate post elaborating on all of the plot holes in the 25th Budokai and Babidi's Ship alone. The early Boo Saga was once a heavily discussed topic on other older DBZ Forums back in the day. It's been discussed multiple times in the past and fans have eventually come to the conclusion of ignoring that portion of the story as a whole when it comes to ridiculous implications like Base Saiyans > Piccolo.

These are just my thoughts on the subject.

All of this plus the original dub had pretty crappy acting during this arc. Sure Schemmel screamed so hard that he passed out, but everything else was pretty meh.

One reason why I think a lot of Amercian fans turned on it was because the Buu Saga re-introduced comedy back into the series in a pronounced manner, which I think was off-putting to many American fans who were only familiar with Z and not Dragon Ball, and this included me when I was younger. It didn't help that a lot of it came from Buu or Goten and Trunks, characters I use to find more annoying than funny. Like, Goten and Trunks turning into a Super Saiyan so young is essentially a joke, and that use to rub me the wrong way. Now, I just find it funny, and works as a nice nod to how easily Goku use to pick up on sacred techniques like the Kamehameha (besides, the Super Saiyan legend was already kinda tarnished with how many characters achieved it during Cell and I can believe that Super Saiyan semen makes it easier for the offspring to achieve it). When I was younger, I remember really being disappointed with the arc. I loved most of the beginning bits, but felt the arc peaked with Vegeta's sacrifice, and the rest was a disappointing follow up with some cool moments like Candy Vegito or Gohan's "I'm here to kill you", though Gohan's poor performance further sullied the arc for me. Which is another problem most people had with Buu, it fails to follow up the passing of the torch moment in the Cell arc.

Having earlier this year read the manga fully for the first time, I came away with a much stronger appreciation for Buu. I think it's probably thematically the strongest arc in Dragon Ball, most of the humour really did work for me, the end of the arc is great. And despite how neutered the cast was at this point, there were still little things I appreciated, like showing that Tien survived the attack the wiped out humanity or Piccolo's biding time for Goten and Trunks with Super Buu. But yeah, I did have an issue with how neutered the cast was, and I also had a problem with how back and forth the action got against Buu. The good guys would get a power up and start dominating, things would change and Buu would start dominating, then the good guys again, then Buu, it just become a slog where dramatic weight was meaningless because this deck was full of Uno Reverse cards.

Gohan went from being the next protagonist to a joke of himself with the whole "GrEaT sAiYaNmAn", and pretty much made any character development in the Cell Arc redundant. As well several other "Z fighters" just became no one like Yoshi mentioned. Vegeta became the super embodiment of Work Effect, and became a archetype of a stale character. Goten and Trunks I found annoying as hell and Gotenks wasn't any better. There is also SS3 which was intorduced in this arc, but I ain't even touching on that.

Boo as a villain felt boring to me. He was just like Goku...a super powerful being with the mind of child. How I supposed to be more afraid of them compared to Cell, Frezia, Piccolo, etc? The different forms of Buu weren't anything special and in fact remind me of Jiren, who I hate a whole lot.

I don't mind the fact it went back to its roots of comedy, but it was done badly and sort of felt force because of how serious the Cell saga it just didn't feel like a natural evolution. I could give more detail, but I haven't watched the Buu saga since it aired on Toonami way back in the day.

Gohan went from being the next protagonist to a joke of himself with the whole "GrEaT sAiYaNmAn", and pretty much made any character development in the Cell Arc redundant. As well several other "Z fighters" just became no one like Yoshi mentioned.

Agree with all this.

Vegeta became the super embodiment of Work Effect, and became a archetype of a stale character.

Not sure what "Work Effect" means here. I really liked Veget'a character development in the Boo saga, particularly when he sacrificed everything to try and beat Boo. For me, there was nothing stale about him.

Goten and Trunks I found annoying as hell and Gotenks wasn't any better.

The only thing that really annoyed me was that Gotenks inherited Vegeta's arrogance, but didn't have his cerebral capacity.

There is also SS3 which was intorduced in this arc, but I ain't even touching on that.

Yeah...not worth getting into

Boo as a villain felt boring to me. He was just like Goku...a super powerful being with the mind of child.

I actually liked him in the Dub version (and even more when I read the manga). It was playful and fun and had my kids and I laughing at times.

How I supposed to be more afraid of them compared to Cell, Frezia, Piccolo, etc?

I think the thought of someone with that much power and a mind of a child can be terrifying. You can't always reason with a child and if they flip their lid, a melt down occurs. Then, his other forms made up for that with more strategy and finally, being pure evil and not caring about anyone or anything. But yeah, being pink didn't help.

The different forms of Buu weren't anything special and in fact remind me of Jiren, who I hate a whole lot.

Just curious...w

I don't mind the fact it went back to its roots of comedy, but it was done badly

Some of it wasn't great...but I don't think all of it was done badly. But yeah, it certainly didn't feel like Dragon Ball.

because of how serious the Cell saga it just didn't feel like a natural evolution

The Cell saga is hard to beat, IMO. I think the thing that was also kind of lacking in the Boo saga is that comparatively to Goku, Buu wasn't actually stronger...Goku said himself he could have beaten Fat Buu. Super Buu was more powerful, but he looked stupid with that banana on his head. I think Kid Buu lost a lot of power...but was pure evil, so I guess that makes a difference. He could destroy everything and survive and didn't mind doing that. He had nothing to prove.

hy do you hate Jiren so much?

Not sure what "Work Effect" means here. I really liked Veget'a character development in the Boo saga, particularly when he sacrificed everything to try and beat Boo. For me, there was nothing stale about him.

I actually liked him in the Dub version (and even more when I read the manga). It was playful and fun and had my kids and I laughing at times.

I think the thought of someone with that much power and a mind of a child can be terrifying. You can't always reason with a child and if they flip their lid, a melt down occurs. Then, his other forms made up for that with more strategy and finally, being pure evil and not caring about anyone or anything. But yeah, being pink didn't help.

Just curious...why do you hate Jiren so much?

Meant Worf Effect, and that is fine that you liked it, but to me he was just kind of stale. The sacrificial part was about the only one thing that was interesting, honestly.

I mean, that is fine. I just found him boring and annoying and not intimidating like how he "supposed" to be.

Unless we are talking politics, a villain with a mind of child will never be terrifying to me.

Explaining why I hate Jiren could be thread on its own.