Here’s what happened to James Lepp at his first PGA Merchandise Show in January.

The founder and face of alternative golf footwear brand Kikkor wanted to be in the vicinity of the Travis Matthew booth, the surging golf industry apparel brand founded by Lepp’s college buddy Travis Johnson. Lepp figured earshot proximity to Travis Matthew might guarantee foot traffic. Smart move, rookie.

The show organizer, PGA Exhibitions, was accommodating. It put Kikkor kitty corner to Matthew, maybe a 40-foot putt away. Perfect. One problem: Kikkor got buried. It was invisible. Even GPS might not have helped you locate it.

When I first saw where Lepp and Kikkor were on the floor I shook my head. In 15 years of covering the show I couldn’t remember too many worse cases of booth logistics. Be careful what you ask for, right?

But a funny thing happened. Not only did attendees find Kikkor, they brought friends. And friends brought friends. Every time I walked by for the next two days the booth was jammed with folks wanting to find out more about this fledgling Canadian golf footwear brand with the skateboard/street shoe mentality.

When I got together with Lepp for an interview he grinned, shrugged his shoulders and put the situation into context.

“People find good brands, I guess,” he said. “We’re boxed out but we’re having a good time here. It’s been great so far. It kind of speaks to what Kikkor is all about.”

“What’s that?” I asked.

“Fun,” Lepp told me. “It’s about having a good time on the golf course. It’s about not looking like my dad out there, not wearing something that isn’t me.

“Saddles are for horses. Fun is what guys my age are looking for in golf and we need to get back to that because participation levels are continuing to decline, especially in the younger guy and girl demographic. Golf isn’t cool like when Tiger came into the game in 1996. It’s expensive. It’s got a country club atmosphere at times. That doesn’t resonate with guys my age. What resonates with us is fun, having a good time and looking and feeling good while we do it. That’s Kikkor.”

Golf fans will recognize Lepp. The Abbotsford, B.C., native was the 2005 NCAA golf champion while attending the University of Washington and is a two-time Canadian Tour winner (one of those victories coming while competing as an amateur.) He picked up a business degree at Washington, something he’s made the most of as a burgeoning golf industry entrepreneur since his passion for professional tour golf diminished.

“People seem surprised the guy who started this project was a tour player and an NCAA champion,” Lepp said. “That might add legitimacy to the brand, but I never pitch it that way. Kikkor is what has to sell. The shoes are out front, not me.”

He’s not trying to make Kikkor into something it’s not. Lepp’s demographic target has been young associate and assistant professionals who share his footwear outlook and fashion sense. He’s also received support from friends playing the Canadian Tour and mini-tours to help validate Kikkor footwear as a legitimate equipment option.

“If I can get the product on those guys they’re going to enjoy it. Then other people are going to see it, start asking questions about it and want it,” Lepp said. “Associate pros are guys who can appreciate this line. It’s a cool guy’s shoe company. I’ll never sell out to the core golfer segment.

Sure, the over-40 crowd has the cash. They probably have 80 per cent of the money in golf. That’s who the golf footwear industry targets. But there is still this much smaller percentage of guys and girls out there who want what we have. That’s our focus. Kikkor is young and it’s going to stay young.”

Form plus style is clearly the message Lepp is trying to convey with his brand, but what about functionality and performance? That’s critical for consumer and tour support. Lepp admitted he might not be able to incorporate sophisticated technologies a la Nike or adidas into his product but he can provide a shoe that looks good, plays good and wears well.

“There’s no performance sacrifice. There can’t be. We’re utilizing the Champs spike system and there’s no question the shoes are solid and dependable. They have to be. At the end of the day it’s still a game and you want to play it well,” he said.

Lepp has enjoyed success with his Kikkor venture. He’s made inroads into Golf Town locations across Canada and is starting to firm up plans for a bigger push into the United States. He’s also hoping for more tour validation. Within a year or two he believes he can have Kikkor shoes on the feet of a young PGA Tour player.

“That’s one goal but I have lots of them,” he said. “In time I’d like Kikkor to be the go-to choice of young golfers everywhere. Growth gets me excited. We have big plans and we plan on staying ahead of the curve when it comes to styling. Like I said we’re not a sell out. Kikkor is going to remain true to young golfers.”

Just as I was leaving the Kikkor booth Canadian Tour player Stuart Anderson, a longtime friend of Lepp’s, showed up. Anderson and I have never met but we Tweet back and forth regularly on Twitter. It was good to meet him. In passing I asked what he thought of Kikkor shoes. Loved his response.

“They’re kickass, man.”