Earlier today we provided you with some first images from Alex Chandon’s Inbred, and now we’ve got a big batch of more photos, both behind-the-scenes and straight from the film, along with the trailer and a link to the official website.

Inbred is the twisted brainchild of UK writer/director Alex Chandon (official site here), who was responsible for the independent cult feature films Cradle of Fear (2001) and Pervirella (1997) as well as numerous award-winning shorts and music promos. It is a co-production of New Flesh Films and Split Second Films.

Synopsis:

A disparate group of young urban offenders and their care workers embark on a community service weekend in the strange, remote Yorkshire village of Mortlake, which prides on keeping itself to itself. A minor incident with some local inbred youths rapidly escalates into a blood-soaked, deliriously warped nightmare for all involved.

Cast:

Jo Hartley – Jo plays Kate, one of the care workers, who can relate to the young teens and whose loyalties are tested to the limit when things go bad.

James Doherty – James plays Jeff, the second care worker, a man who tries to do his best by always going by the book but in doing so alienates those around him, much to his dismay.

James Burrows – James plays Tim, the shy teen arsonist who finds it hard to relate to society and who finds friendship with Sam, the withdrawn girl bullied by the others. Tim will need to come out of his shell and grow as a man if he is to get through the dark turn of events.

Seamus O’Neill – Seamus plays Jim, the landlord of Mortlake’s only pub. He has a welcoming smile, but he’s not too fond of outsiders and likes to keep things very local.

Terry Haywood – Terry plays Zeb, one of the teens, a former gang member who hides his insecurities behind a thin veil of bravado and who is easily led astray by others.

Nadine Rose Mulkerrin – Nadine plays Sam, a shy introvert who avoids speaking to anyone but slowly opens up to Tim, whose loneliness she can relate to, and it proves to become an important bonding as the situations develop.

Neil Leiper – Neil plays Gris, the endearingly psychotic son of Jim, a very repressed young individual, and a very deranged one, who takes a dangerous fascination to the young teens.

Chris Waller – Chris plays Dwight, the hard lad, his tough background making him cold and cruel on occasion, but deep down he’s a lovable rogue and can be relied on in a spot of bother.

Crew:

Inbred was shot on the RED camera by Ollie Downey, the director of photography. This is Ollie’s third feature film as a DP. The film employed three make-up effects teams for the numerous and various blood and gore effects: Duncan Jarman designed and orchestrated the key make-up effects sequences; Linzi Foxcroft and her team at Trauma FX handled all the grisly wound work; and Graham Taylor at GTFX was Inbred‘s “gore man” as he and his crew supplied the copious amounts of blood, innards, and body parts required.

Inbred‘s stunning real locations are complemented and enhanced by production design and art direction from Melanie Light. Specialist masks were designed by acclaimed artist Dominic Hailstone and built by Jayne Flowers. The film is being edited by Olie Griffin, and the original soundtrack will be composed by Dave Andrews at Two13.

Dig on the trailer and new photos below (that’s director Chandon in the bottom pic and DP Downey above him). For more — yes, there is more! — visit the official Inbred website, and join Inbred‘s Facebook group.

Inbred – Trailer

Uploaded by dreadcentral. – Classic TV and last night's shows, online.

– Debi Moore

VISIT THE EVILSHOP @ AMAZON!

Got news? Click here to submit it!

Inbreed in the comments section below!

Image Type 1: