SageTV Releases $199.95 SageTV HD Theater for Full HD playback of home Video, Music & Photos

Networked Full HD Media Player also offers online video from YouTube and major networks

INGLEWOOD, Calif.–(BUSINESS WIRE)–SageTV, LLC, today released SageTV HD Theater, a $199.95 Full HD capable networked media player that lets you enjoy virtually any home video, music or photo from your home network in Full HD on your HDTV. Internet Video from YouTube and many other popular online video services can be browsed, searched and played on the SageTV HD Theater.

Setup with the SageTV HD Theater is really simple, connect the HD Theater to your HDTV and connect to your home network and you're ready to enjoy all your favorite digital entertainment. If you don't have a home network near the TV, any USB storage will work as well. Any NAS with Windows or Mac compatible networking or UPnP can also be used with the SageTV HD Theater.

The SageTV HD Theater can also work as a whole home HDTV DVR solution by running SageTV Media Center software on any PC, Mac or Linux computer with a HDTV Tuner on the home network. With SageTV Media Center the SageTV HD Theater works as a high performance HD Media Extender with providing a rich, animated whole home DVR and Media Center experience with full season recording. All the video, music and photos as well as TV Tuners and Internet video from the SageTV Media Center system are available when SageTV HD Theater is used as a HD Media Extender.

Other notable features in SageTV HD Theater include:

Search for any content from USB, home network or Internet video.

Works with flash or hard disk drive USB storage as well as UPnP, Windows and Mac compatible NAS or network storage.

Access current weather and forecast with a touch of a remote button.

Works with virtually any non-DRM video, music or photo format.

The SageTV HD Theater provides an easy to setup way to enjoy your favorite home videos, music and photos and Internet video in Full HD at an affordable price. SageTV has been adding more and more new content and services to SageTV HD Theater and SageTV Media Center and strives to deliver the best overall digital entertainment experience.

Specifications, Pricing and Availability

SageTV HD Theater and all accessories are available at www.sagetv.com and costs $199.95. SageTV Media Center software, the DVR/Media Center software for Windows, Mac or Linux, costs $79.95. SageTV Placeshifter an add-on to SageTV Media Center allows live and recorded TV to be watched at home or anywhere over the internet, costs $29.95. Minimum system requirements for recording HD include a 3 Ghz processor or a lower cost processor in combination with a video card and decoder that support DXVA; Windows 98SE through Windows XP including XP MCE; 256Mb of RAM; and 60GB of available hard drive space to store recorded content.

About SageTV:

SageTV, LLC is a pioneer in networked digital entertainment, dvr and home media center technologies that combine TV, video, music and related media into a complete, easy-to-use home media experience. The company was founded in 2002 and is based in Inglewood, CA. For more information, visit www.sagetv.com.