SageTV Enhances Media Center Software Package for Macintosh with Release of

Version 6.2

Adds Support for YouTube, iPod, and iTunes

INGLEWOOD, CA- SageTV announced today the release of SageTV Media Center

6.2 for Macintosh, an enhancement of its popular personal video recording

(PVR) and media center software package for Apple's Mac computers.

With over 5 years of development in the Windows market, SageTV Media Center

delivers many industry leading features for the TV screen. It includes an

easy-to-use integrated program guide plus the ability to pause and rewind

live TV, record a whole season of shows, search for favorite shows by name,

actor or subject, and record multiple shows at the same time with multiple

tuner support. It also offers parental control features, built-in

networking permitting live and/or recorded TV and music to stream to any

computer on the home network.

SageTV Media Center Version 6.2 for Mac brings online video to your TV with

a press of a remote control. Available for download at www.sagetv.com, the

product adds beta support for watching, browsing, and searching YouTube

videos. Using the remote control included in the package, YouTube and

Google video can now be browsed, searched and viewed on the TV. SageTV also

makes it easy to transfer TV recordings to iTunes for enjoying on iPod and

Apple TV.

Version 6.2 for Mac also extends the capabilities and convenience of

SageTV's Media Center:

* Anytime, Anywhere TV/PVR, Music and Photos: with the optional SageTV

Placeshifter client software, users can access their live or recorded TV,

Music, Photos or video from the home SageTV Media Center anytime, anywhere

on any Mac, Windows or Linux computer-at the office, on the road, in a

hotel room or in another room at home.

* With the optional SageTV Media Extender connected to the TV and a wired

or wireless home network any TV in the home can access the full PVR, Online

Video, Music and Photo capabilities of SageTV Media Center with the

included remote control. SageTV Media Extender makes it easy to enjoy DVD

libraries with full menus as well as watch, pause and rewind live TV on any

TV in your home. All TV recordings, online video, music, photos and DVD

library are the same on every TV, so there is no need to transfer

recordings or media around the home.

SageTV's mature technology is known for its ease, power, and expandability

that lets you add as many tuners, Placeshifters and Media Extenders as you

need to get TV/PVR, Online Video, Music and Photos on any TV, Mac or

Windows screen in the home or even away from home. The new Sage TV Media

Center 6.2 for Mac has enhanced its user interface, maximizing ease of

setup and operation. After downloading and installing the file from

SageTV's website, a wizard simplifies set up and configuration and within

minutes you can be watching or recording TV. Version 6.2 is also extremely

versatile. For example, Mac users can convert TV recordings to iPod

(video), AppleTV and RAZR format with a few button presses. In addition, it

is also possible to play iTunes Plus content (non-Digital Rights

Management) without restrictions.

The product provides subscription-free EPG service (U.S. & Canadian

Listings Only), providing up to a 14-day Integrated Programming Guide,

One-touch Recording, access to YouTube and Google Video, Favorites Manager,

Search, Music, Photos, DVD Playback and much more.

Sage TV Media Center Version 6.2 for Mac supports Mac OS 10.4 or later and

Mac computers with PowerPC G4 (500Mhz or faster), G5 or Intel processors.

Minimum system requirements are 256MB RAM (512MB Recommended) and an

internet connection is required to receive electronic program guide updates

More information and specifications are available at www.sagetv.com.

Version 6.2 of SageTV Media Center software for Mac sells for $79.95 or can

be purchased with the optional SageTV Placeshifter $99.95. SageTV Media

Center with a USB TV Tuner bundle can be purchased for $199.95. The SageTV

Media Extender is available for $109.95 (wired) or $169.95 (wireless). The

SageTV Placeshifter option is available separately for $29.95 at

www.sagetv.com.

About SageTV