Al Jefferson Biography

Al Jefferson was one of the most productive NBA big men of his era. He may have had his best season in 2014, lifting the Charlotte Bobcats, to the playoffs. Jefferson averaged 21.8 points and 10.8 rebounds per game on the way to All-NBA Third Team honors. Prior to his time in Charlotte, he spent three seasons each with the Boston Celtics, Minnesota Timberwolves, and Utah Jazz. Each season with the Jazz, Jefferson finished top ten in the league in double doubles. In the 2006-07 season, he had his breakout with the Celtics, finishing with averages of 16 points and 11 rebounds per game. That allowed him to be one of the main trade chips to Minnesota in a deal that would net Boston future Hall of Famer Kevin Garnett. The Celtics originally selected Jefferson out of high school with the 15th overall pick of the 2004 NBA Draft.

Book Al Jefferson for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like Al Jefferson for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent Al Jefferson. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like Al Jefferson, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with Al Jefferson's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring Al Jefferson, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking Al Jefferson for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book Al Jefferson for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like Al Jefferson for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get Al Jefferson’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book Al Jefferson for your Virtual Meeting