The Indiana Pacers, in the midst of the NBA’s wild first day of free agency, appear to have attracted another veteran player for an affordable price. The Pacers made their first move Friday afternoon by agreeing to a three-year, $30 million deal with free agent center Al Jefferson.

The 12-year veteran is expected to sign his contract July 7 after the the NBA’s moratorium period for salary-cap purposes is lifted, sources confirmed to IndyStar.

At 31, Jefferson is expected to be the Pacers’ top frontcourt reserve. He will serve as Myles Turner’s backup and possible mentor. The two could also play alongside one another in certain lineups.

Jefferson is known as a traditional and strong low-post scorer, but is more of a plodding player that does not fit within the up-tempo style that Pacers President Larry Bird has desired. He entered the NBA from high school in 2004 and has played for Boston, Minnesota, Utah and Charlotte. For his career, Jefferson has averaged 16.7 points and 8.9 rebounds a game.

Last season, he played just 47 games, including 18 starts, for the Hornets. He lost his starting spot in February to former Indiana University standout Cody Zeller. Jefferson's minutes and points scored were his lowest since 2006. He averaged 12.0 points and 6.4 rebounds for the Hornets last season and was suspended in December for five games for violating the terms of the NBA/NBPA Anti-Drug Program.

Jefferson did perform well in the playoffs. In the first-round series against the Miami Heat, Jefferson averaged 13.3 points and 6.1 rebounds per game and shot 50.6 percent from the field.

The addition of Jefferson continues a reshaping of the Pacers roster. He will join other newcomers in Jeff Teague and Thaddeus Young, both of whom were acquired in trades prior to last week's NBA draft.

By agreeing to sign Jefferson, the Pacers are likely to lose all four of their unrestricted free agents – Ty Lawson, Jordan Hill, Solomon Hill and Ian Mahinmi – to other teams.

The Pacers began free agency Friday morning by calling Mahinmi, who served as the team’s starting center last season. The Pacers tried to re-engage in contract talks with Mahinmi after they agreed to sign Jefferson. But the Pacers were informed Mahinmi would not re-sign with the team, a league source said.

Mahinmi, who averaged 9.3 points and 7.1 rebounds last season, is expected to receive offers from other teams that could be more than $10 million per year, which is what the Pacers have remaining before reaching the projected salary cap.

Jordan Hill appears to be lone unrestricted free agent who could re-sign with the Pacers. Hill is expected to meet with a number of teams in the next few days, although he did not have one scheduled with the Pacers at the start of free agency. A league source, however, said Hill is open to returning to Indiana because of his strong relationship with coach Nate McMillan.

Lawson, who joined the Pacers in March, is expected to sign with a team that will give him a chance to re-establish himself as a starting point guard.

Solomon Hill became the first of the four to land a lucrative deal with another team. Hill agreed to a four-year, $52 million deal with the New Orleans Pelicans just hours after Jefferson agreed to his contract with the Pacers.

Hill could have been with the Pacers next season at a fairly inexpensive price. In November, Bird declined to picked up the fourth-year option on Hill’s rookie contract, which would have cost the Pacers just $2.35 million. Hill was not in the rotation throughout the first half of last season, but was able to contribute later as one of the Pacers’ best wing defenders who could play multiple positions.

He excelled in the playoffs against the Toronto Raptors, averaging 7.7 points and 4.0 rebounds, a performance that convinced a number of teams to pursue him. After Hill agreed to his new contract with the Pelicans, he went to his Twitter account to announce his decision.

“Thank you to the city of Indianapolis, the Pacers & the Simon family for making my dream of being an NBA player come true!” Hill wrote.

Call IndyStar reporter Nate Taylor at (317) 444-6484. Follow him on Twitter:@ByNateTaylor.

Get all the insight on the Pacers by downloading our app: http://bit.ly/1BR4fDs