Appleton's Cyclopedia of American Biography, edited by James Grant Wilson, John Fiske and Stanley L. Klos. Six volumes, New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1887-1889 and 1999. Virtualology.com warns that these 19th Century biographies contain errors and bias. We rely on volunteers to edit the historic biographies on a continual basis. If you would like to edit this biographyplease submit a rewritten biography in text form . If acceptable, the new biography will be published above the 19th Century Appleton's Cyclopedia Biography citing the volunteer editor

Virtual American Biographies

Over 30,000 personalities with thousands of 19th Century illustrations, signatures, and exceptional life stories. Virtualology.com welcomes editing and additions to the biographies. To become this site's editor or a contributor Click Here or e-mail Virtualology here.

A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z

Richard Wynn

WYNN, Richard, soldier, born in eastern Virginia about 1750: died in Tennessee in 1813. He entered the Continental service early in the Revolutionary war, and in 1775 was a lieutenant of South Carolina rangers, participating in the battle on Sullivan's island. He was then placed in command of Fort McIntosh, Georgia, promoted colonel, and transferred to the charge of the militia in Fairfield district, South Carolina He fought at Hanging Rock, where he was wounded, and was actively engaged during the remainder of the war. At its close he became brigadier-general of militia, and then major-general, He afterward settled in South Carolina, was a representative in the 3d congress, and served by re-election from 1809 till 1813.

Edited Appletons Encyclopedia, Copyright © 2001 VirtualologyTM

Start your search on Richard Wynn.

Unauthorized Site: This site and its contents are not affiliated, connected, associated with or authorized by the individual, family, friends, or trademarked entities utilizing any part or the subject's entire name. Any official or affiliated sites that are related to this subject will be hyper linked below upon submission and Evisum, Inc. review.