Musical pioneer Bo Diddley died this morning (Monday) at the age of 79 from heart failure at his home in Archer, Florida, a family spokeswoman said.

The world-renowned guitarist’s signature beat — usually played on an equally distinctive rectangular-bodied guitar — laid the foundation for rock ‘n’ roll, and became so identified with him that it became known as the “Bo Diddley” beat. It was unlike anything else heard in pop music.

Among the artists who made use of the Bo Diddley beat were Buddy Holly (“Not Fade Away,” later covered by the Rolling Stones), Johnny Otis (“Willie and the Hand Jive”), the Yardbirds (covering Diddley’s “I’m a Man” and adding their own guitar stylings to the closing bars, which were later incorporated into the Count Five’s “Psychotic Reaction”), the Strangeloves (“I Want Candy”), Bruce Springsteen (“She’s the One”), U2 (“Desire”) and George Michael (“Faith”). Hundreds of artists have covered Diddley songs.

His debut single was his self-titled 1955 classic, with “I’m a Man” as its B-side. The songs were released on Chicago’s Chess-Checker Records label, also the home of Chuck Berry and Willie Dixon.

Diddley was born Ellas Otha Bates in McComb, Mississippi, later taking the name McDaniel after being adopted by his mother’s cousin. Diddley’s family moved to Chicago when he was 7, according to his Hall of Fame biography.

He played violin as a child, but said he was inspired to pick up the guitar after hearing John Lee Hooker’s 1949 rhythm and blues hit, “Boogie Chillen.”

He told many stories of how he got the name “Bo Diddley.” In a 1999 interview, he said it came from his childhood friends, according to AP. Other tales included a one-string instrument from traditional blues called a diddley bow, the AP notes.

Either way, it became his own — as did his music.

He continued to tour well into 2007, but suffered a stroke last May and a heart attack in August.

He was inducted into the Rock ‘n’ Roll Hall of Fame in January 1987.

Information from CNN and the Associated Press contributed to this report.