History Highlight:

In 2008, Amy Winehouse won five prizes at the Grammy Awards, including Song of the Year and Record of the Year (both for her single "Rehab"), and Best New Artist. She was not in attendance that night, but she did perform via satellite from London. In her acceptance speech for record of the year, she thanked her record label, her parents and "my Blake, my Blake incarcerated," referring to her husband. Winehouse died of alcohol poisoning in 2011 at age 27. Back to Black posthumously became, for a time, the U.K.'s best-selling album of the 21st century.

Also, Today In:

1942 - "Chattanooga Choo Choo" by Glenn Miller and his Orchestra became the first recording to be awarded a Gold Record. It was actually just a master copy of the disc sprayed with gold lacquer by RCA as a publicity stunt. The actual award recognized today as a Gold Record would not be initiated for another sixteen years when the Recording Industry Association of America borrowed the idea and trademarked the Gold Record. The first Gold single was awarded to Perry Como in 1958 for "Catch A Falling Star" and the first Gold album was given to Gordon McRae for the soundtrack to "Oklahoma".

1958 - Frank Sinatra started a five-week run at No. 1 on the U.S. album chart with Come Fly With Me.

1962 - Henry Mancini went to No. 1 on the U.S. album chart with the soundtrack to Breakfast At Tiffany's, its most recognizable song being "Moon River".

1971 - Carole King released her second studio album Tapestry. It is one of the best-selling albums of all time, with over 25 million copies sold worldwide. The lead singles from the album, "It's Too Late" and "I Feel the Earth Move", spent five weeks at No. 1 on both the Billboard Hot 100 and Easy Listening charts and in 2003, Tapestry was ranked No. 36 on Rolling Stone's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time. King wrote or co-wrote all of the songs on the album, several of which had already been hits for other artists such as Aretha Franklin's "(You Make Me Feel Like) A Natural Woman" and The Shirelles' "Will You Love Me Tomorrow", and James Taylor, who encouraged King to sing her own songs and who also played on Tapestry, would later have a No. 1 hit with "You've Got a Friend".

1973 - Elton John had his first U.K. No. 1 album when Don't Shoot Me I'm Only The Piano Player started a six-week run at the top of the charts.

1975 - Legendary record producer Phil Spector was injured seriously in a car crash, but the details on how the crash happened were kept secret from even his best friends.

1977 - The Clash began recording sessions in London for their first album, The Clash. The band was part of the original wave of British punk and they incorporated elements of reggae, dub, funk, and rockabilly into their sound. After forming in 1976, the band was quickly picked up by CBS Records after just 30 shows. Their debut album was a commercial and critical success and opened the door for wider acceptance of the punk music scene.

1978 - Van Halen release their self-titled debut album. The lead single is a cover of the Kinks classic "You Really Got Me."

1979 - Rod Stewart started a four-week run at No. 1 on the U.S. singles chart with "Do Ya Think I'm Sexy", his third U.S. No. 1.

1984 - Frankie Goes To Hollywood were at No. 1 on the U.K. singles chart for the third week with "Relax". Eurythmics had the U.K. No. 1 album with Touch.

1990 - Paula Abdul started a three-week run at No. 1 on the U.S. singles chart with "Opposites Attract". The rap portion at the beginning and in the lead break of the song was voiced by MC Skat Kat — or, as he's known at The Current, Production Manager Derrick Stevens.

1997 - Blur's eponymous fifth album is released. Although the band is huge in Europe, American success has proven elusive. The single "Song 2" becomes the band's biggest US hit, topping out at #55 on the Hot 100.

2004 - Rapper Kanye West released his debut studio album, The College Dropout.

2005 - Who singer Roger Daltrey was awarded the Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire by The Queen at Buckingham Palace for services to the music industry.

2011 - The video for Rebecca Black's song "Friday" is uploaded to YouTube, where it becomes a viral smash.

Birthdays:

Jerry Goldsmith, creator of the scores of "Star Trek", "Planet of the Apes", "The Man from U.N.C.L.E." and "Dr. Kildare", among others, was born today in 1929.

Don Wilson, guitarist with The Ventures, was born on this day in 1933.

Roberta Flack is 86.

Chris Ethridge, member of the International Submarine Band and The Flying Burrito Brothers, was born on this day in 1947.

Nigel Olsson, drummer for Elton John, is 74.

Cliff Burton, bass player with Metallica, was born today in 1962.

Vic Fuentes of Pierce The Veil is 40.