East Timor's Prime Minister Mari Alkatiri has told journalists in Dili he will not rule out resigning if the ruling Fretilin party asks him to.

Dr Alkatiri has reportedly told the Portuguese news agency Lusa, which has an office in Dili, that he would resign if asked, to avoid a possible bloodbath.

Lusa quotes Dr Alkatiri as saying "to say I have already resigned would go against my principles of leaving the decision to Fretilin. But I'm also at the disposal of Fretilin to take a decision to avoid a bloodbath".

The party's central committee was due to meet today to discuss the leadership crisis.

But thousands of protesters disrupted the meeting, making it too dangerous or difficult for the Prime Minister and other delegates to attend.

Demonstrators are demanding his resignation, saying they no longer trust him as their leader.

Organisers have rescheduled the meeting for tomorrow.

East Timorese President Xanana Gusmao threatened on Thursday to step down unless Dr Alkatiri took responsibility for a crisis which flared last month when unrest left 21 people dead.

The premier immediately refused, insisting this would complicate the crisis.

But President Gusmao did not resign by the Friday deadline either as his supporters massed on the streets.

Dr Alkatiri reportedly said the meeting may have been delayed to allow his possible successor, Minister for State Ana Pessoa, to fly to Dili from Indonesia's Bali, where she was on Saturday.

"If she's the chosen person, she must be heard," he said.

Ready to accept responsibilities

Ana Pessoa told Portuguese radio on Saturday that she was "ready to accept responsibilities" if Dr Alkatiri resigned as long as that decision was "shared by all organs of state".

East Timor was gripped by violence in May as rival factions of the country's security forces battled each other and gangs fought on the streets, which left at least 21 people dead and saw around 145,000 East Timorese flee their homes.

The unrest stemmed from Dr Alkatiri sacking some 600 soldiers in March.

Mr Gusmao was at his home in the hills on Dili's outskirts on Saturday, where he accepted seven rifles handed in from civilians.

"The priority of this government is to have all the weapons (that are) in the hands of civilians returned to government hands," he said.

He said he had visited people living in makeshift refugee camps and was told the presence of guns was their main fear.

"They are afraid," he said.

The president turned the weapons over to East Timor's prosecutor-general.

They were to be checked to see whether they were among those thought to have been given by sacked interior minister Rogerio Lobato to civilians allegedly tasked with assassinating Dr Alkatiri's political opponents.

A documentary that purported to show Dr Alkatiri's involvement in arming the hit squad with Lobato led to the president's initial demand that the prime minister step down earlier this week.

Lobato faces charges that carry a 15-year jail term.

Asked about the proposed Fretilin meeting, Mr Gusmao said: "I believe they are aware of the problem of the people and they will make a decision."

Asked when he believed the crisis would end, he said: "It takes time, but I'm very hopeful we will end it very soon."