The Batibo Health centre was born from the hospital in Nguti. Batibo is a town in the North West Region of

Cameroon, Archdiocese of Bamenda. In 1983, the Brothers were invited to the Archdiocese of Bamenda by

Archbishop Paul Verdzekov to extend their healing ministry to the people of Bamenda archdiocese.

The community in Nguti quickly arranged and dispatch Bro Jose Martinez (Postulant Master) and some junior

brothers to Batibo. On arrival, Bro Jose Martinez and some junior brothers stayed at Ekan quarters in Batibo

and started a health centre known today as the St John of God Integrated Health Centre. the Batbo Centre

was created in 1984.The St. John of God Health Centre In Batibo has a bad capacity of 75beds. Today our

outreach programmes in Batibo are taking us to Mbengok, Koano and most recently moving towards Efah,

Elum etc.

Batibo Village is southwest of Bamenda in the northwest region of Cameroon, along the Bamenda - Mamfe road; some 40 kilometers from the City of Bamenda. It is located between latitudes 575 and 590 north of the equator, longitudes 975 east of the Greenwich meridian and at the transition between the equatorial forest in the south and the savannah to the north.

Batibo is located along the Trans-African Highway, 27 miles west of Bamenda and about 100 miles east of Nigeria. Batibo is the economic, social, political and cultural heartbeat of Moghamo as well as the Greater Widikum tribe. Batibo, formerly referred to as Aghwi, is home to a people including farmers, traders, and craftsmen.

St. John of God Hearth Centre is a Medicalised Health Unit run by the Hospitaller Brothers of St. John of God. Created in 1984 by the hospitaller brothers from Nguti community under the invitation of late Archbishop Paul Vedzekov of the Archdiocese of Bamenda to take care of the poor, the needy and underprivileged. The health centre is located in Batibo town some 45km from Bamenda – the regional Capital City of the North West Region of Cameroon .

Batibo is a health district comprising of more than thirty (30) villages. St John of God Health centre is one of the main centres found in Batibo health District and has as one of its main objectives to give a greater value to health in its spiritual, physical, cultural and human domain.

Batibo health District has a population of about 15,925 of which majority of the population depends on subsistence farming for their livelihood. The health district is made up of 17 health institutions and 8 health Areas namely, Batibo urban, Tiben, Kulabei, Kugwe, Ewai, Guzane, Gwofon and Ashong. The health centre receives patients mostly from these health areas and beyond.