JAMES Rubin is a journalist and former diplomat who was married to Christiane Amanpour for two decades.

Amanpour announced on September 29, 2021 that after a 3-month battle with ovarian cancer, she is completing her chemotherapy treatment.

Who is Christiane Amanpour's ex-husband James Rubin?

James Rubin, a journalist who served as a diplomat in President Bill Clinton's administration, was married to Christiane Amanpour from 1998 until 2018.

The couple share a son, Darius.

Rubin has written for The New York Times, the Financial Times, the Washington Post and has appeared often as a commentator on CNN, BBC, Sky, and MSNBC.

Amanpour told Oprah Winfrey in an interview that Rubin was "the poster child for good husbands".

She said: "Jamie is a true hero. He was in the Clinton administration, and when that ended in 2000, my husband, a Democrat, didn't have an administration to work for.

"So he, my son, Darius, and I benefited from the fact that Jamie didn't have to travel much.

"He moved to London with me and went into private work. That's rare."

What did Amanpour say about her cancer diagnosis?

CNN journalist Amanpour revealed on the air in June 2021 that she was being treated for ovarian cancer.

But after a 3-month battle, she announced on Twitter that her final round of chemotherapy is September 30, 2021.

Her announcement brought solace for many individuals diagnosed with cancer, and they thanked her for giving them hope.

"I just watched this & you took my breath away!!" one comment said. "I’m facing thyroid cancer- confirming biopsy soon. It’s like you were speaking my thoughts and you gave me strength. Thank you. Praying for you."

Amanpour appeared on Good Morning America on September 29, 2021 to share her emotions now that the end is in sight.

"Tomorrow is my last session after 18 weeks of what you know ... is grueling, fatiguing, tiring and emotionally wearing as well, not to mention physically and can be scary," she said.

Amanpour, who is 63, added that she "feels so lucky" for the early diagnosis.

"I'm telling you this in the interest of transparency. But in truth really mostly as a shout out to early diagnosis," she said in an interview with Good Morning America in June.

"To urge women to educate themselves on this disease to get all the regular screenings and scans that you can, to always listen to your body, and of course, to ensure your legitimate medical concerns are not dismissed or diminished."

The star reporter is CNN's chief international anchor of the award-winning, flagship show Amanpour, which also airs on PBS in the US.

She has reported from the aftermath of many humanitarian crises including the devastating 2010 earthquake in Haiti, the 2011 Japanese tsunami, and Hurricane Katrina.

The accomplished journalist was off the air in May and June 2021 as part of her battle against cancer.