The Raja Muda of Perak, Raja Dr Nazrin Shah, is not only a true blue modern-day prince - he is also an exemplary one.

According to Perak Menteri Besar Tajol Rosli Ghazali, the Raja Muda has politely declined state allocation for his wedding with Zara Salim Davidson next week.

"As the chief executive of the state government, I really appreciate the concern of the Raja Muda of Perak not to permit the state government to spend money for his marriage," he said.

Tajol Rosli said Raja Nazrin conveyed his wishes when he had an audience with him recently.

"During the audience, Raja Nazrin politely thanked the state government for allocating funds for the royal wedding.

"Instead, he advised the state government to spend the money for development projects to meet the needs of the people," he said in a statement issued to Bernama .

Tajol Rosli also said Raja Nazrin had told him that he would pay for all his wedding expenses.

"Hence, if there are expenditures involving the state coffers, they are to repair and upgrade infrastructures that benefit the people in the long term," he said.

Simple royal wedding

Raja Nazrin also said expenses for the feast for the common folk would also be borne by him.

Some 5,000 ordinary folk, including orphans, would be feted in conjunction with the May 19 wedding reception.

"I'm deeply touched and appreciate his concern not to use government funds (for his wedding)," he said.

Tajol Rosli also said the Raja Muda wanted a simple royal wedding conducted on a moderate scale.

He said Raja Nazrin also advised companies and individuals against competing to buy advertisement space in newspapers on the occasion of his wedding.

"Instead, he advised them that he will be happier if the funds for the advertisements are channelled for charity, especially donating to places of worship, welfare bodies, old folks homes, orphanages and schools in Perak.

"His profound concern clearly showed Raja Nazrin is a prince who has the people's interests at heart," said the MB.

May 18 proclamation

Zara, the bride-to-be of Nazrin, is the daughter of prominent lawyer William Davidson. She is also the grandniece of first Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman.

Zara graduated with a First-Class honours in chemical engineering from the University of Nottingham and now heads an oil and gas consultancy firm based at KLCC.

Zara and Raja Nazrin, 50, the eldest child of Sultan Azlan Shah and Raja Permaisuri Tuanku Bainun, will marry on May 17 at Istana Iskandariah, Bukit Chandan in Kuala Kangsar.

Bernama also reported that Zara would be proclaimed the Raja Puan Besar in a special ceremony on May 18.

The position of Raja Puan Besar, last held by Raja Nor Izan Raja Abdul Rashid, has been vacant for two decades since the death of her husband, Raja Ahmad Siffuddin Sultan Iskandar Shah in 1987.

Raja Ahmad Siffuddin became Raja Muda after Sultan Azlan Shah ascended the Perak throne in 1984.

After Raja Ahmad Siffuddin's death, Raja Nazrin became the new Raja Muda of Perak. As he is unmarried, the post of Raja Puan Besar of Perak was left vacant.

Comments can reach Rentakini by emailing [email protected]