Serving homeowners, businesses, and government agencies in the Midwest since 1988, Techtron Engineering, Inc. offers site-specific industrial hygiene, environmental, and mobile and in-house laboratory services. Our professional team works with a broad range of clients, including insurance companies, safety directors, property managers, demolition contractors, business and home owners, realtors, and government agencies. We have earned our reputation for exceptional customer service by offering one-on-one contact throughout the duration of our working relationships with clients. Techtron’s Minnesota-licensed Professional Engineer (PE) and our Certified Industrial Hygienist (CIH) oversee and conduct ISO-accredited laboratory services at our headquarters in Anoka, Minnesota, including: -asbestos -mold -dust, soot, and particulates -lead and lead paint -drinking water -moisture testing Our ISO-compliant field analysts work daily from our locations in St. Cloud, Des Moines, Iowa City, Kansas City, and Denver. Our mobile laboratories can be present on-site for rapid testing. To work with Techtron Engineering, email us at info@techtronengineering.com or call 763-712-9502.

Read more

Serving homeowners, businesses, and government agencies in the Midwest since 1988, Techtron Engineering, Inc. offers site-specific industrial hygiene, environmental, and mobile and in-house laboratory services. Our professional team works with a broad range of clients, including insurance companies, safety directors, property managers, demolition contractors, business and home owners, realtors, and government agencies. We have earned our reputation for exceptional customer service by offering one-on-one contact throughout the duration of our working relationships with clients. Techtron’s Minnesota-licensed Professional Engineer (PE) and our Certified Industrial Hygienist (CIH) oversee and conduct ISO-accredited laboratory services at our headquarters in Anoka, Minnesota, including: -asbestos -mold -dust, soot, and particulates -lead and lead paint -drinking water -moisture testing Our ISO-compliant field analysts work daily from our locations in St. Cloud, Des Moines, Iowa City, Kansas City, and Denver. Our mobile laboratories can be present on-site for rapid testing. To work with Techtron Engineering, email us at info@techtronengineering.com or call 763-712-9502.

Read more

Reach More Decision-Makers with Scale Plans

Let us show you how our accurate B2B company and contact data can help you reach the right decision makers and close more deals.

What can you expect?

See how Lusha can speed up your workflow

Learn how to reach your ideal prospects

Discover the practices of the best performing sales teams

Trusted by 280,000+ revenue teams of all sizes