PHIL Binns worries that Australia no longer produces the kind of broadly based engineers and scientists that made names for themselves all over the world for their "can-do" ingenuity — the high-tech equivalent of the farm boys who could fix anything with fencing wire and a sheet of corrugated iron.

Binns is chief executive of the Australian arm of Varian Inc, a US-based global technology company. Its Melbourne facility, specialising in high-precision measuring instruments using light, is the largest, in terms of people, sales, research and development, of the American corporation's 20-odd sites around the world.

"It is often said that the best engineers for this sort of industry are those who have come off farms because they can fix things with chicken wire and string," he says. "A lot of the graduate engineers we see these days do not have that style of broad, cross-discipline skills.

"We value a mechanical engineer if that person has some knowledge of optics and electronics and can hang a few things together and know about the whole system. It is quite difficult now to find people with that outlook and breadth of approach."

So Varian is now working with the universities and CSIRO to establish some close research links to generate new ideas and get engineers and scientists flowing both ways, says Binns.

The synchrotron down the road at Monash University (Varian helped build it) will be a catalyst for scientific development, says Binns. "Over the next 30 years you will see develop here a precinct similar to that which surrounds Boston, Stanford and Basle in Switzerland."

Varian Australia is a house built on human genius and high-tech invention — one of the most specialised and successful facilities of its kind in the world — populated by more than 400 people ranging from skilled machinists and glassblowers to physicists and scientists.

Everything, from the original idea to the finished product shipped out of its four-hectare cream concrete campus on Springvale Road is done in-house.

"We tell our US headquarters what we are doing, but everything is done here," Binns says. "We devise (the instrument), we think about it, we design it, do the R&D; we make it, test it, market it and sell it around the world."

The company's latest product is an instrument so sensitive and precise that, Binns says, "if you placed a human hair somewhere between Melbourne and Sydney, this machine would find it".

The instrument is an inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer. "You turn the sample from a liquid into a vapour with the plasma and then you shove it down the mass spectrometer and analyse how many elements are there and their concentration," he says.

"It is used in environmental testing, for instance, looking for toxic elements in water, and in testing in microchip fabrication where they need to measure incredibly small amounts of impurities on the wafer of a semiconductor: Intel and people like that use it.

"Back around 1999-2000, when we were working on that instrument, we came within an ace of dropping it," he said. "We had tried several times to get it right and it was within a month of being buried.

"And then a couple of very inventive researchers here came up with a different way of making the technology work and today it is the fastest-growing sector of our business. In 10 years it will be our biggest single business here.

"We have had a few of those Eureka moments over the years."

So successful has the Australian division been that head office is closing two of its American businesses and moving them to Melbourne.

Phil Binns was born in Sydney but grew up in Glen Waverley. He took a degree in industrial chemistry at the University of Melbourne and went into the mining industry, which took him to a gold, silver and copper mine in Houston, in the frozen tundra of British Columbia.

"There was the mine and a timber mill, and that was it," he says. "It snowed for eight months of the year, with temperatures sometimes down to 50 degrees below zero."

In the mine laboratory, measuring the concentration of metals in the ore, he used Varian instruments.

"The guy who serviced the equipment knew I was Australian and told me they were made in Melbourne," he says. "So when I came back from Canada in 1994 I rang them up and, happily, they were recruiting."

He started in the spectroscopy group, moved through various sections of the company, gained post-graduate qualifications in marketing and an MBA from the University of Melbourne and was appointed CEO for Australia in 2004. The following year he was also made general manager of Varian's Pacific Rim operations, overseeing operations in Japan, Korea, China, Taiwan and South-East Asia.

Over the past three years, Varian's Australian business has grown more than 15% a year, and this year the total value of its exports since it began passed $2 billion. On Binns' watch, profits have increased more than 30% a year.

"We export about 98% of our products, which means a lot of us on the commercial side are always on planes going somewhere," says Binns.

Constant travel is often seen as a downside of being an exporter from Australia. "But the upside is that you do not have an allegiance to any one large market," he says.

"If you are based in Australia you must be able to serve everybody and that is a benefit that our competitors in the US, Japan and Europe do not have. Europeans are very Euro-centric but don't do much outside; same with the US. But we are always out there; Qantas is very happy with us.

"I find that the more you travel the more you have to see and do something different in the places you visit to get into the culture," he says.

"Looking after Varian's Pacific Rim business, I have been trying to understand Chinese, Korean and Japanese culture. Previously that area of the world was almost an amorphous mass in my mind. Now I can see the mosaic and am coming to understand the fascinating differences.

"The Chinese want to negotiate everything," Binns says. "The Japanese want everything perfect and the Koreans want the latest and the best. Those cultural differences are in everything, even in restaurants.

"In China it takes as long to pay the bill as it does to eat the meal. In Japan you go in and everything is just perfect and in Korea it is more communal and relaxed."

Melbourne, he says, is a world-class centre for science and engineering. The company began in 1938 as Techtron, making moisture meters, and in the late 1950s won a licence from CSIRO to commercialise the atomic absorption method of chemical analysis developed by Sir Alan Walsh.

Techtron was so successful that Varian bought it in 1968 for $6 million, as Binns says, "a lot of brass in those days." Clearly, a lot more brass is being made there today.

CV PHIL BINNS

Born Sydney, 1961.

Family Married to Jenny. Three children: Aaron, 15, Hayley, 9, and Alyssa ("call me Lyssie"), 8.

Moves Worked in Canada as industrial chemist in silver mine in 1983. Returned to Australia in 1994.

Spare time With family and friends, mostly watching the kids at their activities. Try to find time for skiing, tennis, golf ("now I'm dreaming") and reading ("mostly bedtime stories!").

Dislike Long plane flights and jet lag. "I still haven't figured out a solution to this after all these years."

Guiding principle in life Never stop learning; continue to set challenges for oneself, in both professional and personal life.

The best holiday In Australia, a place called Sussex Inlet on the NSW coast. Overseas: Tuscany for the food, the wine and the weather.

Favourite restaurant Jumbo's seafood restaurant in Singapore. It has the best Black Pepper Crab in the world, a great view over the harbour, and you can eat with your fingers!