Auteur Steve McQueen creates a devastating portrayal of sex addiction and emotional isolation in his 2011 film Shame. Shame tells the story of a successful New York business man hiding his sex addiction until his sister shows up at his apartment for an indefinite stay. McQueen explores the theme of emotional isolation in his film through manipulation of aspects of film form including cinematography, mise en scene and editing. Like the rest of the films I have written about, the opening sequence of the film is crucial to setting up the tone and themes of what is to come. The opening shot of Shame is a minute long birds-eye angle shot of Brandon laying in his bed, surrounded by blue sheets, his right arm across the empty bed beside him, his left hand sitting just above his groin (these hand positions are windows into the character’s turmoil). The shot is composed so that Brandon occupies the upper half of the frame, while the lower half of the frame is empty. McQueen has manipulated the space within the frame in order to communicate the content of the film. Placing Brandon in the upper half of the frame and leaving the lower half empty creates an imbalance in the shot, and reveals the idea that Brandon is alone and isolated. Not only is this imbalance displayed in the opening shot of the film, it is seen in almost every shot that contains Brandon within it.

Another aspect of the opening shot, and again a continuous aspect throughout the film, is the length of the shot. This absence of a cut forces the audience to sit, looking down on Brandon laying motionless, for a very long time and highlights the quiet and empty isolation within Brandon’s world. Had McQueen chosen to show Brandon lying in his bed from two or three different angles, this effect would have been lost. We see other long takes like this throughout the film, such as Brandon’s run and Sissy’s performance. Clearly, this lack of cutting is a stylistic choice designed to immerse the viewer within the isolated world and understand the theme. The last aspect of film form that McQueen uses to communicate theme is mise-en-scene, and in this case particularly, setting. Most of Brandon’s life is spent in his highrise apartment, where he lives alone. This choice of setting naturally emphasises Brandon’s isolation, as such an enclosed space with white walls comes to feel imprisoning. This imprisoning sense of location doubly highlights Brandon’s isolation as, for the first third of the film, he is shown mostly alone within it. McQueen manages to throw the viewer head first into Brandon’s isolated world through his use of film form to express film content.

Shame. Dir. Steve McQueen. Film 4, 2011. Film.