Hwalipon (フワリポン, Fuwaripon?)[1] was an Executive who was assigned the code name "Horse".

Appearance[]

In their small form, they looked like a small cone with horse-like ears. They had four blocky legs, two eyes facing inwards, and bushy hair in the back.

While taking over and using a human body, Hwalipon typically wears a damaged potato sack on their head, with the damage differing per body. Though almost every body we've seen them take over had a potato sack, it's not a necessary component.[2]

Personality[]

Unlike the other Executives, Hwalipon was infatuated with the human mind, often wondering why they do things. Thus, they did an array of things out of curiosity, streaming, killing humans to see how other humans felt, and the like.

Background[]

About 12 years before the main story, the Dragon Keepers lied to the Dusters and told them that Hwalipon had died.

Plot[]

Monster Zoo Arc[]

When Hwalipon first showed up, they gained lots of traction from the public as a live streamer. They pretty quickly said that the Sunday Showdowns were never against the real Executives, and that they were all shams. They also gained popularity due to the fact that they said the Executives wanted peace with humans.[3] After revealing that the culprit behind the release of the monsters was them, they demanded that the Rangers be disbanded, and only then would they stop.

Invader Rights Association Arc[]

During the Ranger-IRA Round Table, the Invader Rights Association board members are invited to talk. The first half is a live streamed conversation between the two parties, and then once that finishes they were scheduled to leave. During this round table the four rangers who had yet to show their faces all unmask, revealing their identities to gain the public's trust. Once the first half is over, Yakushi continues to talk to Sōsei Akabane, calling him "trash". This severely angers Sōsei, who immediately tears Yakushi's hand right off his arm. Right after he does so, the new Red Junior First Class Shōchiku Umezawa is revealed to have been taken over by Hwalipon as their newest vessel, and has been livestreaming the whole debacle.[4]

During the Invader Rights Association conference soon later, Hwalipon makes a surprise appearance, killing and enslaving two men who try questioning. In a panic, all the lower members start trying to rush out, as they're all transformed into monsters. Later during the battle, one of Hwalipon's fake bodies ran into Pink Keeper, who was easily beheaded. Ready to claim their new puppet, Hwalipon was shocked to see her still alive, but was immediately killed by her.[5]

A little while later the real body ends up stumbling upon Pink Keeper. After beheading her a few times, Hwalipon notices a pattern with her healing/regeneration. Just as they're fighting, Aran Hekiru falls from atop the wall to their side, with Hibiki Sakurama running down to see if he's okay. Before he dies, Hibiki begs Pink Keeper to heal him with her Divine Tool. He tells her he'll let her and/or Hwalipon do whatever they want with his body if they stop fighting until Aran's at least been treated. Hwalipon agrees and so does Pink Keeper, but before starting the actual treatment, she makes sure to slice Hwalipon in half, leaving only their parasite form and mask.

After treating Aran, Pink Keeper and Hwalipon start fighting again. Hwalipon starts using their string weapon, slicing their mask revealing his parasite form, while beheading Hibiki in the process. As his head falls, Pink Keeper sees it and finally recognizes her brother. Despite the damage she's sustained from Hwalipon's string, Pink Keeper uses her Divine Tool to heal Hibiki instead. Seeing this, Hwalipon begins to celebrate his defeat of a Dragon Keeper,[6] until they're surprised by the appearance of Tsukasa Shippō, who breaks Hwalipon's strings with ease.

After being chase for a little bit, Hwalipon manages to lose Tsukasa and climb atop the wall Aran fell from. They spot Hibiki at the top, along with Ruuna and Kīsu who teleported him there. Excited for the chance at a new vessel, Hwalipon hears them discussing teaming up. They immediately chime in asking if they can also join up with them, when they're all interrupted by Tsukasa making his way atop the wall. After being helplessly grabbed Hwalipon begins to beg for their life, but after getting confirmation from Hibiki, Tsukasa crushes them without hesitation, killing them instantly.[7]

Relationships[]

Villainous Army[]

As an Executive, Hwalipon is one of the bosses in charge of all the Dusters.

Yakushi Usukubo[]

Yakushi and Hwalipon agree on a lot of things, mainly that Invaders should rule the world. Because of that they get along well, and worked together to try getting rid of all humans, by either killing or transforming them into monsters.

Abilities[]

Controlling Multiple Bodies[]

Hwalipon has the ability to make alternate bodies from people they've beheaded. The bodies are considered completely separate entities, to the point where Hwalipon doesn't even know when they've been defeated, implying they doesn't have full control over them.

Body Takeover[]

After beheading someone, Hwalipon can take control of their body. The blood that would be spurting out of their neck hardens and spirals, and they become obedient slaves he can use for combat.

Vessel Takeover[]

As an Executive, Hwalipon has the ability to take over human bodies to use as vessels.[8]

References[]