Hwali Map — Satellite Images of Hwali

original name: Hwali

geographical location: Gwanda, Matabeleland South, Zimbabwe, Africa

geographical coordinates: 21° 42' 0" South, 29° 12' 0" East

detailed map of Hwali and near places

Welcome to the Hwali google satellite map! This place is situated in Gwanda, Matabeleland South, Zimbabwe, its geographical coordinates are 21° 42' 0" South, 29° 12' 0" East and its original name (with diacritics) is Hwali. See Hwali photos and images from satellite below, explore the aerial photographs of Hwali in Zimbabwe. Hwali hotels map is available on the target page linked above.

Do you like this map? Link to it or recommend it!

Register at Hwali or add new placemark for Hwali.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Hwali hotel reservations

Book hotel in Hwali online and save money

Browse & Book hotels – low rates, no booking & cancelation fees »

Hwali hotels – Hwali hotel guide »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Hwali hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Hwali, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Hwali, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included.

Hwali hotels map

The location of each Hwali hotel listed is shown on the detailed zoomable map. Moreover, Hwali hotel map is available where all hotels in Hwali are marked. You can easily choose your hotel by location.

Hwali hotel reviews

Many photos and unbiased Hwali hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision.

Hwali hotel deals

Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Hwali hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Hotels nearest to the centre of Hwali

Mashovhela Lodge *** (in Louis Trichardt, distanced approximately 160 km)

Madi a Thavha Mountain Lodge **** (in Louis Trichardt, distanced approximately 160 km)

Journeys Inn Africa Limpopo Lodge (in Tolwe, distanced approximately 160 km)

The Ultimate Guesthouse *** (in Louis Trichardt, distanced approximately 160 km)

Mount Azimbo Lodge *** (in Louis Trichardt, distanced approximately 160 km)

Metcourt at Khoroni *** (in Thohoyandou, distanced approximately 190 km)

Copacopa Lodge and Conference Centre (in Ha-Lambani, distanced approximately 210 km)

more Hwali hotels »

Hwali car rental

Compare Hwali car rental offers of 500+ suppliers

We search over 500 approved car hire suppliers to find you the very best Hwali rental prices available. You can compare offers from leading car hire suppliers like Avis, Europcar, Sixt or Thrifty as well as budget rental deals from Holiday Autos, Budget, Economy, EasyCar, or 121 carhire. Choose Hwali car hire supplier according to your preferences. The booking process is secured and is made as simple as possible. You don't have to browse through several websites and compare prices to find cheap car rental in Hwali — we will do it for you!

Car hire Hwali and neighbourhood

Car rental offices nearest to Hwali the city centre. Compare Hwali car rental offers by various suppliers.

Musina car rental (distanced approximately 110 km)

Makhado (Louis Trichardt) car rental (distanced approximately 170 km)

Bulawayo - Downtown car rental (distanced approximately 180 km)

Francistown - Airport car rental (distanced approximately 190 km)

Bulawayo Airport car rental (distanced approximately 200 km)

more offers and Hwali car hiring guide »

Flights from airports close to Hwali

Search and compare flights

Flights to nearby airports to Hwali »

Overview of flights to and from Zimbabwe »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Hwali. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Airports in Hwali and in the neighbourhood

Airports nearest to Hwali are sorted by the distance to the airport from the city centre. Follow relate airport hotel guides for accommodation booking.

Tuli Airport (distanced approximately 26 km) – airport hotels

Tuli Lodge Airport (distanced approximately 54 km) – airport hotels

Sun Yet Sen Airport (distanced approximately 82 km) – airport hotels

Venetia Mine Airport (distanced approximately 84 km) – airport hotels

Gwanda Airport (distanced approximately 91 km) – airport hotels

Hwali 3D map in Google Earth

3D map of Hwali in Zimbabwe

You can also dive right into Hwali on unique 3D satellite map provided by Google Earth. With new GoogLe Earth plugin you can enjoy the interactive Hwali 3D map within your web browser.

See the 3D map of Hwali, Zimbabwe in Google Earth »

Get more out of Hwali map

Add placemark to Hwali

No placemark has been added to this place yet. You can add the first.

users registered in this area

No users is registered to this place. You can be the first.

recommend this page

If you would like to recommend this Hwali map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is the easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

Hwali google map link options

link to us:

small Hwali google map image link

medium Hwali google map image link

large Hwali google map image link