I read The Last Book in the Universe by Rodman Philbrick for a class assignment in Ms. Maria’s Humanities class. It is a science fiction book set in a future dystopia. The main character is Spaz, a teenage boy who suffers from epilepsy. He meets an old man named Ryter who changes his life, and together they change the world for better. They do this by ending a horrible practice called probing, which makes people get addicted to it, and it can even make people die from it. Probing ruins society because it ruins people’s memories and their lives, and when all the probes are deactivated it has giant impact on the world. There is a huge rebellion and Ryter is killed, but the world seems to be destined to be improved.

My favorite characters are Lanaya and Spaz. Lanaya and Spaz are about the same age, fourteen or fifteen. Lanaya is one of my favorites because she is different than most Proovs. She helps Normals because she has a kind personality, and gets special privileges because she was made to be a leader. She is Proov, which is a person who is genetically improved to be perfect. She can leave Eden, unlike most Proovs. I like Spaz because he is unique. He has epilepsy and is allergic to probing needles. He has suffered more than the ordinary Normal because of his epilepsy. His mother was a Proov, his father was a Normal, and I think the reason he has epilepsy is because of his half and half blood. Spaz is strong and is loving to his foster sister Bean. He even breaks an important rule and puts himself in danger to save her. Spaz and Lanaya are the kind of characters I tend to like because they are kind and unique.

The book didn’t turn out the way I expected or wanted. I expected Spaz to be able to stay in Eden at the end, not be taken out of Eden. I thought that he would marry Lanaya; like father like son. His father Billy Bizmo is a Normal and married a Proov, even though he is a latchboss. I expected Lanaya to make a law allowing Normals to have contact with Proovs and enter Eden and even marry Proovs. Lanaya is going to be a master one day. The masters are the leaders of Eden and can make new laws. I didn’t expect Ryter to die at the end of the book. I expected him to live because he was one of the main heros and some of his information is priceless and all of it gets eaten and/or torn up or burnt in the rebellion. I liked how Little Face gets adopted by Lanaya’s mother at the end. He would grow up to be like an animal without her. In the end Lanaya also gave a message from Eden to Spaz with a latch runner, talking about Little Face. The runner said, “Someone you know says “Chox!” and “Don’t forget me!” and “Thank you!” and a whole lot more. He grows a little every day and we love him as our own. Do not despair, my friend. Today is theirs, but the future is ours.” Even with Ryter’s unexpected death, I think the ending was happy.

I think that the plot was actually quite creative, and I liked the book so much that I read ahead and finished prematurely. I liked the main protagonists. I want to go in the book and meet Spaz. I would like to meet him so I could help him on his journey. The basic dystopian societal structure was also quite interesting to me, with all of those horrible latchbosses that don’t care about anyone but themselves. And those evil Proovs that only care about each other and don’t care about Normals. One setting I liked was a place called Eden, because it was was the one spot on earth that still had grass and trees. It was beautiful and the Proovs lived entertaining, interesting lives that were extended by their genetic improvement. The whole plot was really wonderful, and started with Spaz going on a journey to save his sister before it was too late. The journey took him to Eden, a place that most Normals could only dream of seeing.

There was only one thing I didn’t like about the plot and that I would choose not to include. It really grossed me out. It was the part about Mongo the Magnificent, who is a latchboss (a latchboss is like a king) who is addicted to probing so much that he dies from it. It grossed me out because of the description of him. “Lying on the bed is a shriveled starving creature soaked in his own filth. Most of his hair has fallen out and lies in a fuzzy pile by his head. His teeth are gone and his eyes are milky blind.” It continues, “…and you can see where veins pulse weakly in his scrawny neck.” I would have taken out the excerpt above because it scared me and made me feel tense for quite awhile.

I think I have excavated two excellent themes from the archaeological dig of The Last Book in the Universe. The first theme is “Never forget history.” Information from the past was lost in the Big Shake. Because it was lost, the Proovs of Eden have forgotten about discrimination that the people of the past had suffered, so they discriminated against Normals. It affects people like Spaz because they are Normals, and they have to face the wrath of the Proovs. One word, probing. The second theme is “Always be ethical”. The genetic engineers, or the people who created Proovs, weren’t very ethical after the Big Shake. What they created, perfect people, altered the future world for bad when they thought it would be for good. It’s not ethical to try and create a perfect being, because altering someone’s genome is a horrible thing to do. It also affected the Normals because, they again, had to face the discrimination and bullying of the Proovs. I think that the themes I found are quite good, and they have an impact on the book because they make the book interesting. Themes that come out of a fortune cookie would make a pretty boring book. Something like “Don’t be hasty”, “Prosperity is knocking at your door”, or “One man’s trash is another man’s treasure” would make you want to put the book down immediately.

I would recommend the book, it is great. I know it is a good book, since it makes you enter another world. I read continuously and therefore have read a lot of books. Because of that I’m a pretty good judge of what’s good and what’s bad. I tend to read slower when things are boring. I read The Last Book in the Universe fast because none of it was boring. I most recommend it people who liked reading The Hunger Games, because it’s another book about a dystopia. I might not recommend it to people who like non-fiction and history, because they might not like dystopia fiction stories. If you are looking for a good book to read, this is the one I would suggest.

References

I got the first two fortune cookie fortunes from actual fortune cookies, the third one came from Phineas and Ferb.