Scott Tupper Origin/Culture/Country: American

Scott Tupper: is a male field hockey player, who played for the Canada national field hockey team as a midfielder. Tupper made his international debut at the Junior Pan American Championships in Cuba in 2005. He started playing at age seven, and studied political scien

Sir Charles Hibbert Tupper Origin/Culture/Country: American

Sir Charles Hibbert Tupper: was a Canadian lawyer and politician. He was elected as a Conservative MP in 1882. He was appointed Minister of Marine and Fisheries by Sir John A. Macdonald in 1888, and kept that position in subsequent Conservative cabinets until 1894, under PMs Sir John Abbott and Sir John Sparrow David Thompson. He then became Minister of Justice in the government of Sir Mackenzie Bowell and attempted, unsuccessfully, to resolve the Manitoba Schools Question by drafting a bill to restore Separate School education for Catholics in Manitoba. Tupper resigned in January 1896 to protest Bowell's leadership, which had largely failed on this question, among others. He returned as Solicitor General of Canada in the short-lived government of his father, who became prime minister later in 1896, when Bowell stepped down. Tupper Sr. was defeated in the Canadian federal election, 1896, by Liberal Wilfrid Laurier, who became prime minister. Tupper remained an MP until his retirement from politics in 1904.

William Tupper Origin/Culture/Country: American

William Tupper: was a Progressive Conservative party member of the Canadian House of Commons. He was a businessman, geologist and professor of geology by career. He was elected at Nepean—Carleton electoral district in the 1984 federal election, thus he served in the 33rd Canadian Parliament. In the 1988 federal election, he ran in the Nepean riding but was defeated by Beryl Gaffney of the Liberal party.

Nathan Tupper Origin/Culture/Country: American

Nathan Tupper: was a farmer, merchant and political figure in Nova Scotia. He represented Liverpool township in the Nova Scotia House of Assembly from 1761 to 1764.

William Johnston Tupper Origin/Culture/Country: American

William Johnston Tupper: was a politician and office holder in Manitoba, Canada. He served as the province's 12th Lieutenant Governor from 1934 to 1940. Tupper entered political life in the 1914 provincial election, running as a Conservative in the rural provincial riding of Morden and Rhineland. He lost to incumbent Liberal Valentine Winkler, 1,073 votes to 971. Tupper ran against Winkler again in the 1915 election, and lost again by an increased margin amid a disastrous provincial defeat for his party. In 1931, Tupper was elected president of the Law Society of Manitoba, holding the position for three years.