By of the

It was a laugher Saturday night for the Milwaukee Bucks.

After absorbing a painful defeat in Toronto on Friday, the Bucks showed energy and efficiency in a 127-94 rout of the Minnesota Timberwolves at the Bradley Center.

All 12 Bucks players scored in a crisp effort that featured 36 assists on 49 baskets and a near triple-double by forward Carlos Delfino, who finished with 24 points, eight rebounds and eight assists.

Delfino left the game with 7 minutes, 4 seconds remaining and the Bucks ahead, 106-81, but he said he wasn't worried about missing the chance for the rare triple-double.

"In my last 2 minutes I was on the floor, my legs were gone," Delfino said. "So I'm not going to complain."

Coach Scott Skiles wasn't complaining about his team's effort, either, as it bolted to an early lead and asserted control again early in the third quarter.

"We played a very unselfish game like we normally we do, and we were able to carry it through the whole game," Skiles said. "We've had quarters and halves similar to this but, for whatever reason, not been able to carry it through, and tonight we did."

Point guard Brandon Jennings posted his second double-double of the season with 18 points and 13 assists, and his assist total beat his top previous mark of 11. Center Andrew Bogut added 14 points, six rebounds and four blocked shots and didn't play a minute in the final quarter.

"We finally got a win where we blow someone out and let the starters get a little bit of rest," Bogut said. "It was good. I needed that because I was a little sore from yesterday.

"(Carlos) played huge for us. He'd probably get a triple-double if it was a close game. Coach kind of iced him a little bit, taking him out. He was distributing the ball, rebounding the ball, hitting open shots, and that's what we need for him."

The Bucks (18-24) faced a must-win situation as they battled a Minnesota team coming off a pair of two-point losses last week.

"We're on a bit of an uptick," Skiles said. "It's not necessarily shown in our record yet. We played well at Golden State, were a layup away from maybe beating Phoenix, played well in Houston, played well against Toronto at home. Last night, we had 40 minutes of good basketball (at Toronto) but unfortunately didn't get the win.

"We're starting to piece together longer moments of the game where we're playing very well."

Point guard Jonny Flynn led the Timberwolves (9-36) with 20 points, while Corey Brewer added 18 and Kevin Love 17.

"I just think we weren't able to sustain the focus and the energy, especially after a couple of tough losses," Timberwolves coach Kurt Rambis said.

The Bucks got a solid performance from backup power forward Hakim Warrick, who had 18 points in just 17 minutes of action. Warrick scored 10 points in the first half to give the Bucks a jolt after not playing a minute in Toronto on Friday.

Bogut and Jennings inspired the crowd with a highlight-reel play in the first quarter. After the 7-foot center blocked a shot, he picked up the ball and threw a left-handed, behind-the-back pass to Jennings, who started upcourt.

Bogut kept running and threw down a tip dunk off a lob from Jennings, who started a shimmy at midcourt to celebrate the big play.

"I knew as soon as I outlet it to Brandon to just sprint up the floor," Bogut said. "You get easy baskets to start the game, it really helps you."

Jennings had eight assists when he went to the bench with 2:28 left in the first quarter.

"We just wanted to come out and get the win," Jennings said.

"Tonight, everybody was clicking. I was getting assists early, and it just opened up the whole game for everybody."

The Bucks led by as many as 15 points in the first half and settled for a 55-45 margin at halftime after shooting 52.3%, hitting 23 of 44 attempts.

Milwaukee started quickly in the third quarter with three-pointers by Delfino, and Jennings sandwiched around two free throws by Bogut for an 8-0 burst.

The Bucks extended their lead to 85-67 after three quarters as Delfino contributed nine points in the period and Milwaukee outscored Minnesota, 30-22.

Substitutes entered for much of the final quarter, and newcomer Jerry Stackhouse played 28 minutes and contributed 14 points and five assists.

Luke Ridnour had nine points and six assists, and Ersan Ilyasova had eight points and eight rebounds.

The Bucks finished a gaudy 57.6% from the field on 49 of 85 attempts.