ENGLEWOOD, N.J. -- A funeral for Thelonious Monk, the innovative jazz musician who dominated the postwar period, will be Monday at New York City's St. Peter's Church, a chapel that caters to the jazz community.

Monk, a self-taught and unpredictable musician who dominated the postwar modern jazz movement, died Wednesday of a stroke at age 64. He suffered the stroke two weeks ago and never regained consciousness.

He died at Englewood Hospital's Coronary Intensive Care Unit, where he had been undergoing treatment for a brain hemorrhage since Feb. 5, officials said.

A funeral was scheduled for Monday at St. Peter's Church, which holds jazz vespers on Sunday evenings and is a favorite of the jazz community.

The body will be waked at the Walter B. Cooke Funeral Home in New York on Saturday and Sunday.

Monk's innovative style became widely celebrated in the mid-1950s.

One of his boyhood idols was Louis Armstrong and the major influences on his work were music greats such as Earl 'Fatha' Hines, Art Tatum, Fats Waller and Duke Ellington.

'He was definitely one of the best modern jazz musicians,' said jazz historian George Simon. 'He was a great innovator and very much ahead of his time. But he still stuck to the roots of jazz.'

The composer of 'Round Midnight' was a distinguished-looking man who wore a black Van Dyke beard that sometimes gave him a ferocious appearance. Yet he was known to be a gentle man who gave wise counsel. He was also the most imaginative pianist in the postwar modern jazz movement.

He was temperamental and controversial. Sometimes he would arrive late for a performance or would stop playing in the middle of a composition and walk off the concert stage.

Despite his unpredictable behavior, Monk was admired by his contemporaries and hailed as one of the finest musicians in modern jazzdom.

Monk was fortunate in being asked to play in bands headed by the giants of the new jazz -- Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gillespie and Kenny Clarke -- and by such veterans of traditional band music as Coleman Hawkins and Lucky Millinder. But it was not until the mid-1950s that he won recognition on his own.

The first Monk compositions that enjoyed moderate success, 'Ruby, My Dear' and 'Round Midnight,' were ballads. His later works were more complicated musically, especially 'Epistrophy,' 'Blue Monk' and 'Off Minor.' He composed more than 70 numbers for records.

He preferred to work with small combos, leading a trio. In 1959, however, he led a large band in a concert at New York's Town Hall. He played with and led a quartet that included John Coltrane at the Five Spot Cafe in New York.

Monk recorded with outstanding musicians of the modern jazz era - Gerry Mulligan, Clark Terry, Sonny Rollins, Gillespie, Miles Davis, Charlie Christian and Milt Jackson.

He lived in Weehawken and was born Oct. 10, 1917, in rural Rocky Mount, N.C. His survivors include his wife, Nellie, a son, Thelonious Jr., who is a drummer; and a daughter Barbara.