Viewers of Nashville Season 3 might be wondering how many episodes are in the series and when each new episode comes out. Nashville is a musical drama television show which first premiered on October 10, 2012. It follows Rayna Jaymes and Juliette Barnes as they navigate through several challenges in their personal and professional lives. The two women try to stay at the top of their industry while handling the issues in their personal lives.

Here’s how many episodes are in Nashville season 3 and on what day new episodes come out.

How many episodes are in Nashville season 3?

Nashville season 3 has 22 episodes.

The episode list is as follows:

Episode 1: That’s Me Without You

Episode 2: How Far Down Can I Go?

Episode 3: I Can’t Get Over You to Save My Life

Episode 4: I Feel Sorry for Me

Episode 5: Road Happy

Episode 6: Nobody Said It Was Going to Be Easy

Episode 7: I’m Coming Home to You

Episode 8: You’re Lookin’ at Country

Episode 9: Two Sides to Every Story

Episode 10: First to Have a Second Chance

Episode 11: I’m Not That Good at Goodbye

Episode 12: I’ve Got Reasons to Hate You

Episode 13: I’m Lost Between Right and Wrong

Episode 14: Somebody Pick Up My Pieces

Episode 15: That’s the Way Love Goes

Episode 16: I Can’t Keep Away From You

Episode 17: This Just Ain’t a Good Day for Leavin’

Episode 18: Nobody Knows But Me

Episode 19: The Storm Has Just Begun

Episode 20: Time Changes Things

Episode 21: Is the Better Part Over?

Episode 22: Before You Go Make Sure You Know

Produced by R. J. Cutler, Khouri, Dee Johnson, and Steve Buchanan, Season 3 originally aired from September 24, 2014 to May 13, 2015.

The cast of Nashville season 3 includes Connie Britton as Rayna Jaymes, Hayden Panettiere as Juliette Barnes, Clare Bowen as Scarlett O’Connor, Eric Close as Teddy Conrad, Charles Esten as Deacon Claybourne, Jonathan Jackson as Avery Barkley, Sam Palladio as Gunnar Scott, Will Chase as Luke Wheeler, Aubrey Peeples as Layla Grant, and more.

When do new Nashville episodes come out?

All episodes of Nashville season 3 are currently available to watch. There are no new episodes.

The official synopsis for the series reads:

“Rayna Jaymes and Juliette Barnes face personal and professional challenges as they navigate their paths as artists and individuals. Surrounding them, and often complicating their lives, are their family, friends and, in some cases, lovers, as well as the up-and-coming performers and songwriters trying to get ahead in the business.“

Gran Turismo Interview: Jann Mardenborough on Having a Movie Made About You

ComingSoon Editor-in-Chief Tyler Treese spoke with professional racing driver Jann Mardenborough about Gran Turismo — the movie based on his… Movies Tyler Treese 15 mins ago

The Marsh King’s Daughter Release Date Delayed to Avoid Taylor Swift Box Office Clash

According to Deadline, Lionsgate has officially delayed the release date for STX Films and Roadside Attractions’ upcoming thriller drama The… Movies Maggie Dela Paz 47 mins ago

The Simpsons Season 35 Trailer Reveals Upcoming Episodes

The trailer for The Simpsons season 35 reveals the show’s upcoming episodes, previewing what’s in store. TV Abdullah Al-Ghamdi 1 hour ago

Exclusive Barbie: A Touch of Magic Clip Features a Magical Singing Performance

ComingSoon is debuting an exclusive Barbie: A Touch of Magic clip from the upcoming Netflix animated series based on the… Movies Spencer Legacy 1 hour ago