After six seasons, 124 episodes and 13 albums of original songs, the impressive run of TV’s “Nashville” ultimately had one last scene to shoot.

In case you’re avoiding spoilers, know that what we’re about to describe isn’t the last shot you’ll see on Thursday night’s series finale (airing at 8 p.m. CT on CMT), as “Nashville” doesn’t film its scenes in sequence.

Clare Bowen and Charles Esten – stars of the show ever since it premiered on ABC in October of 2012 – were once again in a backstage dressing room, saying their final lines as “Scarlett” and “Deacon,” with a just a handful of remaining crew members watching. Before they knew it, it was a wrap.

“Everybody else had gone home and said their goodbyes,” Bowen recalls. “It was this weird thing where everyone was standing there, waiting for us to say something. And I didn't know what to say except ‘Thank you. I love you all.’ Because they're my family.”

As “Nashville” airs its final episode on Thursday, it marks the end of an era, and one that’s not easily summed up.

Over the last six years, the TV drama – shot on location in Nashville and centered around the country music industry – has been a transformative force.

That goes for the fans who fell in love with its characters and songs, the cast and crew who uprooted their lives to make it, and the city that scored an incredible marketing coup through the show’s success.

And that success was often hard-won. Though “Nashville” premiered to glowing reviews and decent ratings, viewership gradually declined over the years. At the end of season four, ABC canceled the show, but thanks in part to the rallying of fans (known as “Nashies,”) cable network CMT picked it up and kept it alive for two more seasons.

When season six was announced, it was made clear from the start that it would be “Nashville’s” last – a decision that showrunner Marshall Herskovitz calls “a gift.”

“We could really plan a final season, and a finale that would do justice to the characters,” he says. “I think the whole season was about preparing for that.”

Of course, few were prepared for the surprise “farewell” episode “Nashville” aired last year – with the sudden death of lead protagonist “Rayna Jaymes,” played by series star Connie Britton.

But Herskovitz says that in its final years, the show’s mission was to lean away from its soap opera side, and focus on “the human drama that people could relate to in their own lives.”

'Nashville' helped make the Opry an international stage

“Nashville’s” characters and initial story sprang from the mind of creator Callie Khouri, a longtime Music City resident who also wrote the Oscar-winning script for “Thelma and Louise.” But the show also grew out of a simple concept — and a brilliant one it turns out — by executive producer Steve Buchanan.

The president of Opry Entertainment Group wanted to make a show that could raise awareness of Nashville’s “Grand Ole Opry,” and in turn, the city’s greater music community.

Buchanan always envisioned the show would have a musically gifted cast that would perform live, but the scale of it all has occasionally surprised him. Last weekend, star Charles Esten performed on the “Grand Ole Opry” stage for the 100th time. He made his “Opry” debut shortly after “Nashville” premiered.

But perhaps nothing has exceeded his expectations like the show’s international following. “Nashville” airs in 225 territories worldwide, and cast members embarked on another successful tour of the United Kingdom in April, including a show at London’s O2 Arena. Slipping ratings aside, “Nashville” might appear to be saying farewell too soon.

“There certainly are more stories that we could tell, but I look at it differently,” Buchanan says. “It's pretty amazing that we got to do this show for six seasons. That's a rare milestone in television. I always reflect on the fact that we were one of 12 drama pilots for ABC (that year). Five of those shows were picked up, and we were the only one that got a second season.”

'We couldn't have bought what we got'

As “Nashville” survived, the real Music City thrived. It’s no secret that the reign of “Nashville” coincided with an incredible wave of growth, media attention and tourism for its namesake city. Still, Butch Spyridon – CEO of the Nashville Convention and Visitors Corporation – asserts that the wave started building a good two years before “Nashville” hit the air.

“In 2012, we realized it wasn't luck,” he says. “It wasn't a passing fancy. We were on to something.”

“Nashville” arrived at the perfect time for the real city, but two other factors were just as crucial. One, obviously, was its title. Aside from “Dallas,” no other city had its name standing on its own in the primetime lineup for years on end.

The other factor was its treatment of the city. Where movies like “A Thing Called Love” and “Country Strong” missed the mark in capturing Music City, “Nashville” mostly got it right. And unlike those films, “Nashville” was an early hit with critics.

“We couldn't have bought what we got,” Spyridon says. “We couldn't have asked for any better treatment of Nashville.”

Show left a lasting impact on Music City

While several of the show’s stars have bought homes in Nashville and plan to stay, new acting gigs are beginning to pull them elsewhere.

Music City on the small screen: Nashville bachelorette parties coming to a TV near you

'Nashville' star: Charles Esten sets Guinness World Record

Esten has landed a role on the upcoming TNT drama “Tell Me Your Secrets,” which films in New Orleans. Bowen is spending time in Los Angeles, reconnecting with an industry community she’d just started to get to know before “Nashville” changed her life.

But whether the departures are temporary or permanent, “Nashville” isn’t leaving this city the way they found it. Bowen and her castmates were once the outsiders that had to earn residents’ trust — now she’s a six-year resident who’s watched the city transform first-hand.

And that, ultimately, is where she found the words to share with the crew after they finished that final shot. She thought of something “Nashville” songwriter Jake Etheridge told her just hours before at the Ryman Auditorium.

“Look where we are,” she said. “They can never take this away. They can never tear it down. This is forever, and we did it.”

Contact Dave Paulson at dnpaulson@tennessean.com or on Twitter at @ItsDavePaulson