It’s hard to navigate horror shelves and not accidentally stumble on a Stephen King novel. After all, if you look up prolific in the dictionary, King’s picture will grin his ghoulish smile back at you.

But horror has seen a resurgence lately, and new readers might find King’s enormous catalog a bit intimidating.

Whether you want to find a good place to start, or just want to learn more about the King of Horror, we did a deep dive into Stephen King’s life and career.

From his birthday to his net worth and the cameo appearance you never saw coming, here’s everything you ever wanted to know about Stephen King.

Where is Stephen King from?

It should come as no surprise that not only does Stephen King live in Maine, but he was born there.

Born in Portland, Maine, on September 21, 1947, King actually moved quite often as a young child after his father left the family. His mother relied on relatives to help support King and his older brother, living in Chicago, Fort Wayne, and Stratford to name a few locations.

The small family moved back to Maine, settling in Durham when King was eleven.

How many books did Stephen King write?

Whether you’ve read King for decades or are new to his work, at some point every fan has asked this question: exactly how many books has Stephen King written?

The short answer is a lot. The long answer is a little more complicated.

In total, King has written 66 novels and novellas, several under various pen names. But he’s also published 12 short story collections housing a decent chunk of the over 200 short stories he’s published throughout his career.

He’s written five books on the nonfiction side, including his beloved writing craft memoir, On Writing.

Many of his books have been made into various adaptations and King has written twenty-one screenplays, several of which were entirely original stories or adaptations of other author’s works.

King has also contributed his thoughts in the form of essays and interviews, many of which are part of different publications over the years.

Let's take a deeper look at Stephen King's impressive and iconic career.

Related

8 Underrated Stephen King Books

Searching for chills? Sign up for The Lineup's newsletter to get terrifying recommendations delivered straight to your inbox.

How old was Stephen King when Carrie was published?

King has talked extensively about his writing journey. Many fans know about his infamous nail in the wall, where he would skewer his rejections as they came in.

They also know that if it wasn’t for King’s wife, Tabitha King, his debut novel may have never launched his spectacular career.

King was a teacher living with his wife and two children in a trailer in Herman, Maine when he wrote Carrie. By this time, he was writing short stories for various magazines and wanted to try to write longer fiction.

It wasn’t an easy process. With encouragement from Tabitha, King kept at it, eventually selling the novel at twenty-six years old to Doubleday.

How many pages in the book IT by Stephen King?

Depending on which edition you purchase, IT by Stephen King is a whopper of a book.

The lowest page count in older editions runs around 1,089 pages, most standard editions these days come in at 1,184 pages. Even more surprising, IT isn’t even King’s longest book, though it is a close second.

That honor goes to The Stand, which has almost half a million words with most new editions landing 1,440 pages long.

Related

Which Stephen King Book Are You Based on Your Zodiac Sign?

Best Stephen King Books

With over 66 novels and dozens of short story collections, knowing where to start can be a daunting task.

We went through his body of work to find the best Stephen King books, according to his readers.

The Shining

By Stephen King

Coming in at over 1.5 million ratings and holding a solid 4-star rank, The Shining is King at his best. The Overlook Hotel isn’t just creepy and atmospheric.

It’s an entire character that devours. As Jack unravels and Wendy tries to protect her family, the only one who can see the terrible forces descending on their isolation is five-year-old Danny Torrance, a little boy with a strange gift.

It

By Stephen King

Monsters are real. The kids in Derry, Maine know it.

There’s something wrong with the town. Something that twists the people and eats their children.

Seven friends confronted that evil when they were teens. But they didn’t defeat it.

Now, it’s back. And they have no choice but to return to Derry and face their nightmares once and for all.

The Stand

By Stephen King

At half a million words, The Stand is King’s longest book, which is why the first editions were an edited version.

But fans demanded more of the end of the world, and they got it. It starts with a cough and descends into chaos. This isn’t just an apocalypse.

It’s the end of the world. And for the survivors, the fate of the future rests in the hands of one dealer of death—and those who stand to defeat him.

Related

UPDATES: Everything We Know So Far About ‘The Stand: The Miniseries’

Misery

By Stephen King

Paul Sheldon is a bestselling author with a rabid fanbase. When his car crashes in a remote mountain, a woman rescues him and takes him back to her cabin.

But this isn’t just any woman. It’s Annie Wilkes. And she’s Paul’s biggest fan

Who wouldn’t want the chance to read your favorite series ending before anyone else? Who wouldn’t demand justice for the character you love?

As Annie demands Paul rewrite his final book to meet her approval, Paul realizes that if he doesn’t escape soon, he may never be able to leave.

Carrie

By Stephen King

Carrie is more than King’s debut; it’s become a modern classic. This violent coming-of-age story follows a young girl, Carrie White, who just wants to fit in.

But things happen around Carrie. Things move, doors lock, and objects fall. It’s a curse and a gift.

Only, maybe things are turning around. Tommy Ross asked Carrie to prom. It’s a dream come true—until a cruel prank turns the night into a bloody nightmare.

Pet Semetary

By Stephen King

The Creeds have it all. A gorgeous family, a friendly cat, and now that they’ve moved to a beautiful house in rural Maine, the perfect home.

But when unthinkable tragedy strikes, the Creeds learn that the woods their house is surrounded by holds more than wildlife. It harbors ancient evil and unfathomable powers.

The temptation to use that power to heal a terrible tragedy proves too great to resist. Unfortunately, they’re going to learn the hard way that sometimes dead is better.

Related

TheHouse That Inspired Stephen King's Pet Sematary Is Up for Sale

The Gunslinger

By Stephen King

The first book in the Dark Tower Series introduces us to Roland of Gilead, the last gunslinger.

Haunted and haunting, Roland treks across his desolate world, pursuing The Man in Black. Along the way he meets friends and foes, each one taking him both closer to and farther from defeating this enigmatic evil.

And hanging in the balance is not just his world, but all worlds, which is why nothing—and no one—can stand in his way.

The Outsider

By Stephen King

Terry Maitland is an average, ordinary guy. He coaches Little League, teaches English, is a loving father to two beautiful daughters, and is a devoted husband.

But when a little boy is brutally violated, his body discarded, Terry Maitland’s fingerprints are on the murder weapon. Only Terry has an alibi, an impossible one given the physical evidence stacking against him.

Detective Ralph Anderson believes he’s got his guy, but why aren’t things adding up? As he investigates, the truth is more horrifying than Detective Anderson ever imagined.

Cujo

By Stephen King

Cujo was always a friendly dog. But when he chases a rabbit into an underground cave, everything changes.

There’s an evil sleeping in those caves, and now it’s awake. Vic Trenton moved his family to Castle Rock to enjoy the peace and quiet of rural Maine.

But things in the small town aren’t exactly what they seem. It’s the small things they notice.

The things they can explain away and ignore. But the family has no idea what is lurking in the shadows. A monster named Cujo.

Related

12 Scariest Stephen King Books

Doctor Sleep

By Stephen King

Winner of the Goodreads Choice Award for Best Horror in 2013, Doctor Sleep revisits Danny Torrance, now grown up and living far away from the Overlook Hotel.

His gift of “shine” helps him provide comfort to the dying and earns him the nickname, Doctor Sleep, as he helps people slip into their final rest.

But when he meets Abra Stone, a little girl with the same gift he has, he knows he has to help her. It’s a war between good and evil, and he won’t evil win.

Different Seasons

By Stephen King

King has written over two hundred short stories, so we had to include one of his short story collections.

“Different Seasons” includes the novella, Rita Hayward and the Shawshank Redemption, along with The Body and Apt Pupil.

All three stories were adapted into film and are some of his most popular works of short fiction.

Searching for chills? Sign up for The Lineup's newsletter to get terrifying recommendations delivered straight to your inbox.

Most Controversial Stephen King Book

Stephen King is no stranger to controversy in his books. Some range from fan outrage over character treatment to ill-advised sexual activities.

But only one book has been so controversial that King himself pulled it from publication and won’t allow it to be reprinted—ever.

Rage follows the story of a violent student who shoots his teacher and holds his class hostage at gunpoint. Though the novel was written well before school shootings were anywhere near as prolific as they are today, many critics cited the novel as playing a role in their prevalence.

After the novel was either referred to or found in the possession of several school shooters, King wrote the essay, “Guns”, and pulled the novel from publication.

You can read more about Rage and its controversy, here.

Related

Stephen King Books That Have Been Banned the Most

Stephen King Movies

It should come as no surprise that King has a whopping forty-one adaptations based on his work.

He also has three scheduled for upcoming release with an additional ten in development. Here are the top ten Stephen King adaptations based on critic and fan response.

Carrie

A movie steeped in nostalgia for so many reasons, Carrie is considered one of King’s most popular adaptation by both critics and fans alike.

Sissy Spacek shines in the titular role under Brian De Palma’s direction, and seeing a young John Travolta get his comeuppance as the terrible Billy Nolan is a delightful treat.

Stand By Me

Is there anything more terrifying than the daunting prospect of leaving your childhood behind? King doesn’t seem to think so. This group of boys starts with nothing but summer adventures on their minds.

But as they face obstacles on their journey, they learn the truth of their private lives and are forced to grow up in a way that strikes home no matter what stage of life they’re in.

The Shawshank Redemption

Adapted from the novella, Rita Hayworth and the Shawshank Redemption, this adaptation focuses on the friendship between two men in prison.

The reality of prison showcases a nest of horrors without bringing in any supernatural elements, and yet Tim Robbins and Morgan Freeman bring depth and humanity to a story that embraces the redeeming power of hope.

Related

22 Best Stephen King Movies for a Night of Terror

The Green Mile

The all-star cast alone makes this an adaptation worth watching. Though it does tend to run a bit long, the emotional resonance of these profound performances pushes The Green Mile into a must-watch film.

It’s a journey that highlights the horror of what people are capable of, not by the deeds they do, but by the compassion and love one man has for life.

Misery

Kathy Bates makes this movie one of the best adaptations of all time. Her performance as the terrifying Annie Wilkes tormenting her favorite author (James Caan) is one of her most terrifying to date.

And listen, none of us enjoy it when an author kills our favorite character. But Annie Wilkes takes her unhappiness to a whole new level.

It’s a must-watch for any King fan.

The Shining

Though King himself wasn’t a fan of Kubrick’s adaptation and the movie deviates fairly significantly from the novel, fans and critics couldn’t turn away.

With an unforgettable performance by Jack Nicholson and Shelley Duvall, The Shining is a terrifying glimpse into one man’s descent into insanity.

Related

Every Stephen King Movie, Ranked

The Dead Zone

Noted by critics as one of the best King adaptations, The Dead Zone sees Johnny Smith (Christopher Walken) as he struggles to reconcile his current present with his not-so-distant past after he wakes from a coma.

IT

There will always be a place in our hearts for the first adaptation, but the 2017 version takes the original to the next level.

The superb performances balance the terror of supernatural horrors with the heartbreaking and emotional journey six children must take to overcome the various hurts of their childhood.

Dolores Claiborne

Jennifer Jason Leigh and Kathy Bates create a delicious tension as they face off in this layered thriller. Leigh accuses Bates of killing her mother, but the truth is far more complicated.

As she investigates, she circles deeper into her childhood and is forced to face some dark truths.

1408

Not all adaptations have to be entirely faithful to the original story to gain King’s approval.

1408 deviates from the source material but manages to capture what King believed was the essence of the story.

Focusing on the psychological terror of an author battling his own demons in a haunted hotel room, John Cusick and Samuel L. Jackson deliver in this creepy and tightly focused thriller.

Searching for chills? Sign up for The Lineup's newsletter to get terrifying recommendations delivered straight to your inbox.

Stephen King Net Worth

According to multiple sites on the internet, Stephen King’s net worth is around an estimated $500 million dollars.

Considering he has written dozens of global bestselling novels, had multiple adaptations, and seems to live a quiet lifestyle, it should be no surprise that he’s managed to amass that fortune.

While some of that money is tied into the three homes he owns, King also donates millions every year to libraries, local fire departments, schools, and subsidizes the National Poetry Foundation.

It’s also rumored that he’s turning his infamous Bangor, Maine mansion into an archive for his work along with a writer’s retreat.

Is Stephen King Still Alive?

The author has had his fair share of health issues throughout his life.

He has openly talked about his struggle with drugs and alcohol, and how he’s worked to overcome those darker impulses and maintain sobriety for decades.

In 1999, while walking on the shoulder of a state road, King was hit by a car and suffered serious injuries, including a collapsed lung and multiple broken bones.

He recovered and is currently healthy, alive, and doing well.

Where Does Stephen King Live?

Related

Everything You Need to Know About Stephen King’s (Former) House

How Old is Stephen King?

Stephen King is 76 years old at the time of this writing. He was born on September 21, 1947.

This places King firmly as a Virgo, which makes a lot of sense. Virgos are known for being hard-working and diligent, while also being very personable despite their quiet demeanor, traits that seem to embody the author.

And don’t be fooled by his age. King continues to write, and even publishing a book earlier this year.

Stephen King Twitter

Before Twitter became X, it was the preferred social media for most authors, which makes sense.

It was the only social media that not only relied primarily on words, it forced users to craft their thoughts into razor-sharp short tweets. It was a challenge writers happily accepted and Stephen King is no exception.

Even after many authors changed their accounts to “updates only” and fled for bluer skies or new threads, King has remained as vocal and active on X than ever before. And why not?

He still enjoys over seven million followers with thousands continuing to engage with his posts.

It helps that King has no qualms with fighting for what he believes in. One of his most popular tweets garnering over twelve million views chastised Elon Musk after the billionaire accused King of “deadnaming” Twitter as a terrible attempt at anti-trans humor.

The author has also never held back when expressing his thoughts on former President Donald Trump. He has never been a fan, and clearly never will be.

But even someone who enjoys a relatively strong following with fans can’t always avoid the negative spotlight. One of his most controversial tweets was regarding diversity in the arts.

At first, King tweeted that quality should be held above diversity, a stance that many argued was very problematic because it ignores how many people are excluded from participating when diversity is ignored.

He later walked back his comments.

Related

Stephen King Recommends 21 Creepy Horror Movies & Shows You Should Watch on Netflix

Was Stephen King in Sons of Anarchy?

Stephen King is known for making appearances in adaptations of his works. But does he appear in shows that aren’t his own?

He does, though often it’s as himself, like when he told Marge Simpson he was taking a break from horror to write Benjamin Franklin’s autobiography.

King’s appearance on Sons of Anarchy was brief, but memorable. He played a caretaker named Bachman, a nod to one of his more famous pen names, Richard Bachman.

In addition to the role, a fictional Stephen King novel titled, Cycle Zombies, is written into the story with one of the bikers reading it when hunkered down in the crew’s cabin.

Is Stephen King Married?

Stephen King is happily married to Tabitha King, née Spruce. The couple wed on January 2, 1971, and have remained together ever since.

Tabitha King is a philanthropist and novelist in her own right, and King often attributes her for not just salvaging his debut novel but being the steady hand throughout his career and life.

Related

Terror Times Two: Every Novel Stephen King Has Co-Written With Other Horror Authors

How Tall is Stephen King?

It might come as a surprise that Stephen King is quite tall. He stands 6’4” tall and has maintained his weight around 200 pounds for his entire life. On his website, he states that he descends from Scots-Irish ancestry, who were known for their height.

Is Joe Hill Stephen King’s Son?

Stephen and Tabitha King have three children.

Joe Hill is their middle child, though not the only writer. Owen King, the youngest, also writes and publishes novels.

Joe Hill decided at the start of his career to try to succeed as a writer on his own merit and largely succeeded. It was only after his first novel was a success and Vanity Fair wrote an article on his relationship with his famous father that Hill admitted his true identity publicly.

Related

40 Best Stephen King Quotes That Every Horror Fan Needs to Read