Publish date: 2024-06-08

Stephen King biography and early life

Stephen King bio, age, career, net worth, family & more-American author. Stephen Edwin King was born on September 21, 1947, in Portland, Maine in the United States of America.

Stephen King nationality

King was born in Portland, Maine in the United States of America. He is an American.

READ ALSO: Stephen King Wife: Meet Tabitha King

Stephen King age

King was born on September 21, 1947, hence he is currently 76 years of age.

Stephen King net worth

King has a net worth estimated to be about $500 million as of 2023.

Stephen King height and weight

King stands at a height of 6ft 4 inches and weighs 200 lbs.

Stephen King education

King attended the Lisbon High School in 1962. He furthered at the University of Maine from 1966 to 1971 when he graduated.

Stephen King career

King has written two novels with horror novelist Peter Straub: The Talisman (1984) and a sequel, Black House (2001).

My Pretty Pony (1989), an artist’s book he co-created with designer Barbara Kruger, was released in a limited run of 250 copies by the Whitney Museum of American Art Library Fellows. It was published as a general trade edition by Alfred A. Knopf.

A paperback companion to the Stephen King-written miniseries Rose Red (2002) was The Diary of Ellen Rimbauer: My Life at Rose Red (2001). The book was authored by Ridley Pearson and published under anonymous authorship.

The book is written by Ellen Rimbauer in the style of a diary, with annotations added by Joyce Reardon, a fictitious professor of paranormal activity.

The book also includes a made-up afterword by Steven Rimbauer, Ellen Rimbauer’s grandson. Its success led to the creation of The Diary of Ellen Rimbauer, a 2003 television miniseries that served as a prelude to Rose Red and was intended to be a promotional piece rather than a stand-alone work.

A different author was given permission to use King’s fictional characters and plot devices in this spin-off, which is an unusual occurrence. In Stephen King’s subsequent project, the miniseries Kingdom Hospital, the book tie-in concept was used once more.

In 2004, Richard Dooling, who worked with Stephen King on Kingdom Hospital and penned a number of the miniseries’ episodes, released a fictional journal titled The Journals of Eleanor Druse. In Rose Red, Dr. Joyce Readon and Ellen Rimbauer are both significant figures, and Eleanor Druse plays a similar role in Kingdom Hospital.

His son Joe Hill and he co-wrote the novella Throttle (2009), which is included in the collection Him Is Legend: Celebrating Richard Matheson.

In the Tall Grass, their second novella project appeared in Esquire in 2012 and was split into two parts. Later, it was made available as an audiobook read by Stephen Lang as an e-book.

The 2017 book Sleeping Beauties, written by King and his son Owen King, is set in a prison for women.

A horror novella set in King’s made-up town of Castle Rock, Gwendy’s Button Box (2017) was co-written by King and Richard Chizmar.

Chizmar wrote the entire sequel, Gwendy’s Magic Feather (2019). A full-length novel titled Gwendy’s Final Task, the third book in the series, will be published in February 2022, according to a November 2020 announcement by Chizmar and King.

Stephen King family and siblings

King was born to Nellie Ruth King and Donald Edwin King. He has an older brother named David King.

Stephen King wife

King has been married to the novelist, Tabitha King since 1971.

Stephen King children

King has three children, Joe Hill, Naomi King, and Owen King.

Stephen King religion

King is not religious but he believes in the existence of a Supreme Being, God.

Stephen King social media

Source: www.Ghgossip.com

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7qLTGqKqsoaBjsLC5jqyrnqiYmrtut8innmaamaR6orPEZpqaqpWav266xK1ksKeiqbVussCmoKWxXaK8s7GO