Ringwood Training is a great place to access VET in Schools programs and nationally recognised training such as apprenticeships and traineeships. RT has exceptional facilities that are custom-made for specialised education and training. Many would say that RT’s facilities are the best of their type in Australia. Certainly they are unrivalled in the Victorian government secondary school system. The facility is designed to deliver trade training. The hi-tech machinery and equipment is specialised (e.g. Trumpf laser cutter, Kuka robots, and newly installed metal lathes and mills). RT’s trainers are industry trained and student-focused. RT provides great opportunities for senior secondary students and post-school young people. School students can complete their schooling (VCE and VCAL), gain a VET Certificate and commence work as a school-based apprentice or trainee (SBAT). Post-school young people can complete an Apprenticeship or Traineeship and gather a portfolio of IT related training. All this in an environment designed to enhance student transition from school to further education, training and employment. RT started its life in 2006 as a Commonwealth Government funded ATC – Australian Technical College Eastern Melbourne (ATCEM), governed by Ringwood Secondary College. The Ferntree Gully campus of ATCEM is now part of St Joseph’s College. The Ringwood campus is now RT. RT aims to provide high quality training in the Engineering and Automotive trades as well as in the Information Technology and Cisco fields. Training includes VCE VET Certificate II level programs and School-based Apprenticeships and Traineeships. Higher level training is delivered in Cisco and Information Technology. Training delivered by RT is in areas of national, state and local skill shortages. RT sees itself as the local ‘provider of choice’ for Engineering, Automotive and Information Technology/Cisco. You are invited to come and see for yourself. RT is happy to host visits and tours of our facilities and to provide opportunities for you to speak with our staff.

Website

http://rt.vic.edu.au

External link for Ringwood Training

Industry

Higher Education

Company size

11-50 employees

Headquarters

Ringwood East, VIC

Type

Educational

Founded

2007

Specialties

Engineering, Automotive, IT, Welding, Four Wheel Drive, Short Courses, VETis, Apprenticeship, SBAT, Post School, and Room Hire