Although center Chris Kaman continues to draw the most trade interest among New Orleans Hornets players as the NBA trade deadline of 3 p.m. today approaches, sources confirmed Wednesday that the franchise is willing to part ways with any of their veterans if they can acquire additional first-round picks and expiring contracts in a deal.

Going into today’s deadline, the Hornets have been trying to trade center Emeka Okafor, and they have listened to offers for starting small forward Trevor Ariza as well as exploring offers for Kaman, according to sources. But Ariza’s agent, David Lee, said by telephone Wednesday that he hasn’t heard of any trade scenarios involving his client. He said anything can happen between now and the trade deadline.

In a scenario that has been oddly reminiscent of the cloak of secrecy that surrounded the knee injury to shooting guard Eric Gordon, injured Hornets center Emeka Okafor was said to be undergoing additional tests on his sore left knee, according to Coach Monty Williams. The Hornets have not revealed the nature or extent of Okafor’s injury, other than to describe it as “a sore left knee.” He was not at the team’s shootaround when the media was allowed access Monday morning, but he was on the bench Monday night. Okafor shed little light on the injury after a 73-71 loss to his old team, the Charlotte Bobcats. “I’ve just got to take a little more time,” said Okafor, who has missed 15 games in a row. Asked specifically what the diagnosis was, Okafor said, “It’s going to take time. It’s a sore knee, has a little swelling. It’s going to take more time. I’d rather not get into specifics about what happened.”

While the team is continuing to be vague about the nature and extent of his injury, Hornets Coach Monty Williams said Monday that center Emeka Okafor was having further tests done on the knee and seeking opinions from other physicians. Okafor has missed the last 14 games with the issue, which has never been described as anything other than a sore knee. Okafor was not present at the team’s shootaround Monday at New Orleans Arena in advance of tonight’s game against Okafor’s old team, the Charlotte Bobcats. Williams said Okafor has had his knee drained at least once in the last several weeks.