Amanda Seyfried's breakout role was in the 2004 movie "Mean Girls."

Her character, Karen, claimed she could predict the weather with her breasts.

Amanda Seyfried said strangers approached her and asked her if it was raining repeatedly after her appearance in "Mean Girls."

In the 2004 movie from Tina Fey and Mark Waters, Seyfried played Karen Smith, a girl who said she could tell the weather with her breasts. "It's like I have ESPN or something...my breasts can always tell when it's going to rain," the character chirps in a memorable scene with Lindsay Lohan, who starred in the movie as Cady Heron.

Seyfried said she would feel uncomfortable when the joke was brought up to her, mostly by male fans. "I always felt really grossed out by that," she told Marie Claire in an interview accompanying her cover story. She was particularly bothered by how young she was when the comments were made. "I was like 18 years old. It was just gross," she added.

Seyfried is one of many actresses who have spoken out about how they were routinely sexualized as teenagers, including her "Mean Girls" costar Lohan, who felt compelled to confirm her breasts were real in a 2004 interview with Rolling Stone when she was 18.

Natalie Portman, who began her acting career at age 12 with her role in the 1994 movie "Léon: The Professional," also spoke out about how being sexualized in films as a child affected her on a December 2020 episode of Dax Shepard and Monica Padman's Armchair Expert Podcast. The Olsen twins and Millie Bobby Brown are among the many former child stars who have been the subjects of websites devoted to counting down the days until they turned 18.

Seyfried told Marie Claire she considers herself only "somewhat recognizable." She considers her path the "healthiest trajectory" and thinks being wildly famous while young "must really fucking suck."

"It must make you feel completely unsafe in the world," she added.

Seyfried said she chose to move away from media hubs like New York City and Los Angeles to live a quieter life on her farm in upstate New York.