Nearly 20 years after making her feature film debut in the classic 2004 comedy Mean Girls, Amanda Seyfried is hoping to have a cameo in the Mean Girls musical movie adaptation.

The 37-year-old actress only had a handful of episodes on soap operas As the World Turns and All My Children before she was cast as Karen Smith, part of The Plastics clique, in Mean Girls.

The film earned strong reviews and took in $130 million worldwide from a $17 million budget, loosely based on Rosalind Wiseman's 2002 non-fiction book Queen Bees and Wannabes and writer-star Tina Fey's own high school experiences.

Fey would go on to adapt the movie into a musical which debuted in Washington D.C. in 2017 and Broadway in 2018, with the stage musical now being adapted into a movie musical for the Paramount Plus streaming service.

While chatting on the red carpet with ET, Seyfried said that she and co-stars Lindsay Lohan, Rachel McAdams and Lacey Chabert are '100% into' returning for the movie... days after reports surfaced that they may not return after being offered a 'disrespectful' amount of money for their appearances.

'It's been a long legacy for Mean Girls, and I think we all kinda just need to hang,' Seyfried said of Lohan, McAdams and Chabert.

She added that nothing is confirmed about her possible appearance in the movie musical, though she is, 'still hoping for a miracle' that she'll make a cameo.

'It's not it's not really up to us, is it? All four of us are 100% into it,' Seyfried insisted, adding who she thinks the original main characters could play.

'Maybe the mothers of our characters? That's what I was thinking, but listen, I have not even seen the script,' Seyfried revealed.

Fey will return to write the script for the feature musical (like she did for the stage musical), with music by Jeff Richmond, lyrics by Nell Benjamin.

Samantha Jayne and Arturo Perez Jr. will direct, with Angourie Rice, Auli’i Cravalho, Jaquel Spivey and Reneé Rapp announced in early December to star.

Rice plays Cady (played by Lindsay Lohan in the film and Erika Henningsen in the stage musical), with Rapp reprising her role from the musical as Regina (played by Rachel McAdams in the film).

Cravalho and Spivey will play Janis Ian (played by Lizzy Caplan in the movie) and Damian (played by Daniel Franzese in the movie and Grey Henson in the stage musical).

Avantika will play Karen Smith, the role originated by Seyfried in the film and played by Kate Rockwell in the musical, with Bebe Wood playing Gretchen Wieners, played by Chabert in the movie and Ashley Park in the stage musical.

It was also recently revealed that Fey will reprise her role as Ms. Norbury in the movie musical, while Tim Meadows will also be reprising his role from the original movie as Principal Duval.

The cast also includes Jenna Fisher as Cady's mom Ms. Herron, Christopher Briney as Aaron Samuels (played by Jonathan Bennett in the movie and Kyle Selig in the stage musical).

Seyfried also opened up about how she was planning on going to college before she landed the Mean Girls role that launched her career.

She was nominated for her role as Elizabeth Holmes in the hit Hulu series The Dropout, reflecting on her awards season run.

'It's the end of the road, and it's been a great road,' she said, adding the 'unexpected' honors proved, 'that I chose the right career.'

'I know it sounds ridiculous but it is true, to even be nominated, to even be accepted into the Academy or into the Screen Actors Guild, to hold those cards -- to get nominated, that's a whole other level,' Seyfried said.

'When your fellow actors are like, "You did a great job, that was a great take," you're like, "You didn't have to say that!"'