One of the defining films of the early Noughties is Tina Fey 's high school comedy Mean Girls, which sees main character Cady Heron (Lindsay Lohan) get swept up in the lives of the popular girls and lose her way.

Released in 2004, Mean Girls has been a firm favourite for a coming-of-age comedy with endlessly quotable dialogue and rare representation for female friendship at the time.

The film's legacy continues with a movie musical in the works, adapted from the stage show Fey created in 2017 and original Mean Girl Amanda Seyfried has said all 'The Plastics' are up for a cameo appearance.

Discover, learn, grow. We are Curiously. Follow us on TikTok, Instagram, Facebook and Twitter.

In 2017, Fey announced a musical version of her hit comedy which ended up being so popular it is being adapted back into film nearly 20 years after the release of the original.

Much of the core cast have been announced with Angourie Rice, Reneé Rapp, Auli’i Cravalho, and Jaquel Spivey taking on the roles of Cady, Regina, Janis, and Damian, respectively.

In the musical version Janis and Damian, who Cady first befriends, double up as narrators, while Regina is still the main antagonist and leader of 'The Plastics', a group of mean girls that Cady falls in with.

A big question remained over whether the original cast would return in some way, especially since Fey is set to return as teacher Ms Norbury and Tim Meadows back playing Principal Duvall.

In an interview with Entertainment Tonight, original 'Mean Girl' Amanda Seyfried said she was "still hoping for a miracle". Seyfried made her film debut playing Karen Smith in the 2004 film, who was one third of 'The Plastics' before Cady joined.

"It's not it's not really up to us, is it?" said the Jennifer's Body star, who insisted she hadn't seen a script, but added: "All four of us are 100% into it."

The musical element wouldn't be a problem either since Seyfried has starred in the film adaptation of Les Misérables as well as Mamma Mia and its sequel Mamma Mia: Here We Go Again.

In fact all three of the original Mean Girls have shown off their singing chops as Rachel McAdams, who played Regina George, starred in Eurovision Song Contest: The Story of Fire Saga. Lacey Chabert (Gretchen Weiners) has also performed in musicals throughout her career, including as Cosette in Les Misérables on Broadway.

Seyfried suggested they could return as the mothers of their characters, although in the original film only Regina and Cady's parents are given serious screen time.

Rumours have swirled that the original four are not returning at all due to a "disrespectful salary offer", as reported by Page Six.

According to the unnamed person who claimed to be a "highly placed production source", negotiations had "stalled" as "Paramount has not been respectful of what they are worth".

As the writer and returning cast member, it has been reported that Tina Fey will receive a seven-figure deal for appearing in the movie musical. Page Six said that Seyfried, Lindsay Lohan, Rachel McAdams, and Lacey Chabert were offered "a fraction" of that.

It's unclear what roles the four would have been offered as this is not a direct sequel but no final casting has been announced yet so fans may still see the original 'Plastics' return.

Do you have a story to share? We pay for stories. Email us at yourmirror@mirror.co.uk