If Hitler died on June 23 1941, who out of the generals has the best strategy. Sure, Goering will most likely be Hitler's successor, but who should lead the strategy and the diplomacy to avoid big damage?

There is an argument to be made for von Witzleben, as he argued against Barbarossa and was slotted to lead the military by the July 20th plotters:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/20_July_plot#Planned_government

Generalfeldmarschall Erwin von Witzleben (Army) – Minister of Defence and Commander-in-Chief of the Wehrmacht

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erwin_von_Witzleben

In 1941 he was even appointed Commander-in-Chief OB West, succeeding Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt, but only a year later he took leave from this position for health reasons. Some sources, however, claim he was again forcibly retired at this time after criticizing the regime for its invasion of the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941 in Operation Barbarossa.

In 1944, the conspirators around Stauffenberg saw Witzleben as the key man in their plans. Whereas Colonel-General Beck was seen as a prospective provisional head of state, and Colonel-General Hoepner was in line to command the inner Ersatzheer ("Replacement Army") forces, Witzleben was to take over supreme command of the whole Wehrmacht as the highest-ranking German officer.

OKW over to Witzleben.

Speer as Fuhrer?

Milch as head of Luftwaffe?

Rundstedt as OB East?

Speer? No Fuhrer at all. Speer was not even in an office in 1941 and even in 1942 derived all of his power from Hitler.

The OP supposes Goering takes over, so he is Fuhrer. Not sure who he would designate head of the economy or whether he would take it over himself, but if he abdicated it Todt is the most likely to get the job. Not sure who Goering would put in office for head of the military, he would probably retain it and keep the existing power structure. You'd really just need to clean out the Nazis if you wanted the best strategist, as with the Nazis you'd just get a politicized military that kept out the best strategists to ensure Nazi control, rather than effectiveness.