PROVIDENCE, R.I. (AP -- Anthony

Quinn, the barrel-chested Oscar winner remembered for his roles as the earthy

hero of ''Zorba the Greek'' and the fierce Bedouin leader in ''Lawrence of Arabia,''

has died. He was 86.

Mr. Quinn's death was reported by

Providence, R.I., Mayor Vincent ''Buddy'' Cianci, a friend of the actor. He

said Quinn died of respiratory failure at a Boston hospital.

''He was larger than life,'' Cianci

said. ''I was proud to call him a friend.''

Mr. Quinn was living in Bristol,

near Providence.

Mr. Quinn, who appeared in more

than 100 feature films, won Academy Awards for ''Viva Zapata!'' and ''Lust for

Life.''

Born in Mexico and raised in poverty

in East Los Angeles, Mr. Quinn went from stage and B-movie roles to become an

international leading man renowned for his big-man sensitivity and honest acting

style.

In a film career that spanned more

than 50 years, Mr. Quinn portrayed characters ranging from kings to Indians,

including a pope, a boxer and an artist.

''I never get the girl,'' Mr. Quinn

once joked in an interview. ''I wind up with a country instead.''

He won his first Oscar for his work

in the 1952 film ''Viva Zapata!'' as the brother of Mexican revolutionary leader

Emiliano Zapata.

To many, Mr. Quinn's Oscar-nominated

characterization of the Greek peasant Zorba from the Nikos Kazantzakis novel

remained his most memorable role.

The Ouzo-drinking and bouzouki-dancing

Zorba was Mr. Quinn's favorite role as well, so much so that he returned to

the stage in 1983 in a revival of the musical inspired by the 1964 film.

As a child, he shined shoes, sold

papers and preached with Aimee Semple McPherson. After working as a movie extra,

he met and married the adopted daughter of Cecil B. De Mille, Katherine.

A real-life artist, sculptor and

author, his role as painter Paul Gauguin in the 1956 film ''Lust for Life''

earned him his second Oscar.

Later, after leading roles became

less frequent, he left Hollywood to live and work in Italy.

''What could I play there? They

only think of me as a Mexican, an Indian or a Mafia don,'' he said in a 1977

interview with the Associated Press.

He was divorced from Katherine in

1965 after he fathered two children with Italian costume designer Yolanda Addolari,

sparking an international scandal.

In 1972, Mr. Quinn wrote his autobiography,

''The Original Sin,'' which has been translated into more than 18 languages.

He followed with a second volume titled ''Suddenly Sunset.''

The characteristically straightforward

actor shunned the use of ghost writers, favoring blunt honesty over Hollywood

image-making.

''I could either lie or tell the

truth,'' he said. ''I figured the only value in such a book would be to describe

my life as I lived it.''

(End of published text

In 1978, he played a character closely

resembling the late shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis in ''The Greek Tycoon.''

As his film career slowed in recent

years, Quinn devoted most of his time to painting and sculpting.

Quinn said in a 1987 interview that

he reached most of the goals he set for himself as a young boy.

''I never satisfied that kid but

I think he and I have made a deal now,'' he said, referring to his younger self.

''It's like climbing a mountain: I didn't take him up Mount Everest, but I took

him up Mount Whitney.

''And I think that's not bad.''

PHOTO: QUINN:

50-year

career.