Founder & President

Katherine is the widow of legendary actor and artist, Anthony Quinn. From 1985 until his death in 2001, she worked closely with Anthony in his creative life as a painter, sculptor and writer. Katherine established the Anthony Quinn Foundation in 2007 to perpetuate her late husband’s artistic legacy by supporting arts education. Under her direction and with the support of hundreds of generous donors, the Foundation's annual competitive Scholarship Program was instituted in 2010. Katherine obtained her B.A. in Political Science at SUNY Stony Brook, New York. She currently resides in Bristol, Rhode Island where she manages the Anthony Quinn Creative Archive and organizes traveling exhibitions of Mr. Quinn's work. Since 2011, Katherine has served as a member of the Rhode Island State Council on the Arts.

Treasurer

Mr. Burke has been in the insurance business for 40 years and is President of Hadley Insurit Group (HIG) with locations in Fall River and Somerset, Massachusetts. He is an active EMT with the Swansea Ambulance Corp and has been a volunteer firefighter for 35 years. Mr. Burke is the Chairman of the Board of Trustees for Argosy Collegiate Charter School in Fall River, MA and serves on several nonprofit boards, including the Narrows Center for the Arts, the Fall River Office of Economic Development and the Center for Marketing Research at UMASS Dartmouth. He is Town Moderator in the Town of Swansea where he resides with his wife Dona.

Scholarship Chair

Mr. Roberts is a Senior Lecturer of History at the Rhode Island School of Design, where he received the 2017 Frazier Award for Excellence in Teaching. He is Chair of the Anthony Quinn Foundation Scholarship Committee. Among his eight books, Tom was a collaborating author for Anthony Quinn’s Eye: A Lifetime of Creating & Collecting Art, published in 2004. He served as executive producer of documentary film, Keats and His Nightingale: A Blind Date, which was nominated for an Academy Award in 1986. Prior to teaching, he served as the founding Executive Director of the Rhode Island Council for the Humanities. Mr. Roberts holds a BA from the College of the Holy Cross and an MS from Boston University.

Events & Fundraising

Sandra van den Broek is a long time art collector and dealer specializing in Tiffany lamps and 19th and 20th Century Decorative Arts. She currently shares her time between New York City and Bristol, Rhode Island, where she has been involved with the Anthony Quinn Foundation for over five years. She is passionate about the Foundation's mission, all types of art as well as hosting events. Being part of the Anthony Quinn Foundation has allowed for a blend of all of these. "This experience has continually been a wonderful opportunity to support exceptionally artistic high school students in their blossoming into even more creative adults."

Marketing & Design

Antonia has spent most of her life immersed in the world of art. As a child, her father would let her create her own masterpieces with his paints and sculpture materials while he worked in his studio. At the age of six, she began designing her own clothes and would entertain the family by creating and performing plays and musicals with her friends. She has continued to stay involved with the arts throughout her life, from both a performance and business perspective. Antonia received her B.S. in Film & Television from Boston University College of Communication and then moved to New York to study acting for two years at the William Esper Studio. She now lives in New York and is doing freelance creative work as she pursues a career in the film industry.

Finance

Mr Barbo has been in the financial industry for over 25 years. He currently is the Global Head of Finance at a large global macro hedge fund based in New York City. Mr Barbo holds a B.S. in Business Management from Bryant College. Steve is involved with several non-profit organizations that benefit the arts in New York City. Steve currently lives in Rowayton, CT and is an avid golfer and outdoorsman.

Marketing & Events

Beth Devine has over 25 years of experience in nonprofit leadership, marketing and events, and relationship building. She is currently the Executive Director of the Philadelphia Youth Sports Collaborative, a backbone nonprofit organization working to give access to quality sports-based youth development programming for all of Philadelphia’s kids. While her passion lies in sports opportunities for underserved youth, Beth believes that all children have the right to explore their passions and interests, whether it be sports, art, music, dance, theater, science, or anything else! Beth holds a dual Bachelor’s Degree from Lafayette College in Psychology and American Studies and a Master of Arts in Clinical Counseling Psychology from LaSalle University. She serves on the governing board of Philly Girls in Motion, an organization she founded in 2009 that engages girls in after-school sports and physical activity programs in Philadelphia.

Beth resides in the Philadelphia area where she enjoys spending time with her enormous family, friends, loved ones and three rescue cats.

Endowment & Fundraising

Lisa Raiola is the founder and President of Hope & Main, Rhode Island’s premier culinary incubator. Lisa has more than 30 years of experience in program development and advancement at non-profit organizations in healthcare and higher education with a special focus on distributive justice, social responsibility, and economic development. Currently, she is the VP for Advancement at Roger Williams University. Previously, Lisa was a Clinical Assistant Professor for Community Health and Medical Ethics at the Brown University School of Medicine where she developed and instructed courses in public health research; health promotion and disease prevention; food security and food justice; healthcare financing and system reform; and health disparity and the burden of disease.

Scholarship & Endowment

Randall Rosenbaum was the Executive Director of the Rhode Island State Council on the Arts, a position he held from January 1995 till his retirement in December 2021. From 1984 to January 1995 Mr. Rosenbaum served in a variety of capacities at the Pennsylvania Council on the Arts, including Deputy Director and Director of the Dance and Presenting Organizations Programs. In 2016 Mr. Rosenbaum received the Gary Young Award from the National Assembly of State Arts Agencies, awarded every two years to a state arts agency director “who makes an extraordinary contribution to public support for the arts at the state, regional and national level.” A practicing musician, Mr. Rosenbaum has sung professionally in churches and synagogues, and with performing ensembles throughout the East Coast.