Judy Garland and Robert Walker star in the World War II romance THE CLOCK (1945), released on Blu-ray this summer by the Warner Archive.

THE CLOCK was one of three Garland films released by the Warner Archive in celebration of Garland's centennial. I previously reviewed the other titles, ZIEGFELD GIRL (1941) and FOR ME AND MY GAL (1942). They are enjoyable films, but THE CLOCK is the gem of the trio. Having now revisited it for the first time in decades, I would describe it as a four-star classic.

THE CLOCK has a huge cast but a very intimate story, written by Joseph Shrank and the novelist Robert Nathan (PORTRAIT OF JENNIE). As with my recent review of WHEN TOMORROW COMES (1939), it's really impossible to discuss this film without discussing the plot in its entirety, so those who would like to see it "cold" are advised to wait and read this after seeing it.

Alice Maybery (Garland) and Corporal Joe Allen (Walker) chance to meet in New York's Penn Station when he's on leave and she happens to trip over his leg, breaking off her heel.

Joe helps Alice find a shoe repair shop, and then he persuades her to walk with him a while. Alice is initially a bit wary of the awkward soldier who's never visited the big city, but one thing leads to another and after spending the afternoon together, she agrees to meet him that night for a real date.

Eventually circumstances lead to them spending a night helping a milkman (James Gleason) -- it all makes perfect sense in context! -- and then, marriage. All beautifully told in 90 minutes.

THE CLOCK is absolute perfection, directed by Vincente Minnelli (and, before he was replaced by Minnelli, an uncredited Fred Zinnemann); it was filmed in gorgeous black and white by George Folsey.

The script and performances are brilliantly nuanced, depicting the push-pull of Alice and Joe getting to know one another. She's not quite sure at first, a little edgy responding to Joe's interest, and she really might rather get home to her apartment and relax than spend time with him, but something about Joe keeps drawing her back.

The gradual development of the romance, building to a kiss under the stars in Central Park, is completely believeable. The real world occasionally intrudes on the magic, as obtaining a blood test and marriage license and even the wedding itself all prove to be dreary, but then they find the lasting beauty of their relationship once more, alone in a quiet church.

At the movie's opening Alice is a confident city girl compared to Joe's Indiana boy, but underneath that we realize she's a bit lost herself, away from her family and with a roommate (Ruth Brady) who natters at her about not being "picked up" by a soldier.

Like Alice, we gradually realize that Joe is a man of substance and devotion underneath the "green kid in the city" exterior, and by movie's end Alice is a completely different person. Alice genuinely believes that she and Joe were brought together for a purpose and that he'll return safely, and, having bidden her new husband a loving goodbye, she confidently leaves the station where they first met. The happiness of their "See you soon" farewell is a marvelous, perhaps unexpected twist as the movie comes to an end, reflecting the wonderful surprise of their new relationship and marriage.

The cast includes James Gleason's wife Lucile playing his wife and Keenan Wynn as a drink in a diner. Familiar faces seen briefly include Marshall Thompson, Barbara Bedford, Nella Walker, Arthur Space, Robert Emmett O'Connor, Geraldine Wall, Ruby Dandridge, Steve Brodie, Wally Cassell, and Angela Lansbury's mother, Moyna MacGill. Look for a very young Terry Moore as one of a trio of girls Alice and Joe see in a museum. "B" Western leading lady Nan Leslie is said to be an extra in Penn Station, but I didn't pick her out of the crowds.

The Blu-ray print and sound are outstanding. Disc extras consist of the trailer; the cartoon SCREWY TRUANT (Tex Avery, 1945); a short, HOLLYWOOD SCOUT (Pete Smith Specialty, 1945); and a 1946 Lux radio version with Judy Garland and John Hodiak.

I have no idea why I hadn't seen the movie in so many years, especially given my love for '40s MGM films, but I certainly won't go that long again without revisiting it. I can't think of a thing this film could have done better; indeed, it's one of the films I've enjoyed the most so far this year. Very highly recommended.

Thanks to the Warner Archive for providing a review copy of this Blu-ray. Warner Archive Blu-rays may be purchased from the Warner Archive Collection Amazon Store or from any online retailers where Blu-rays are sold.