Former Peruvian president Alberto Fujimori poses for a photo with daughter Keiko and son Kenji and two unidentified family members in Lima, Peru.

DPA/Lima

Peru's former rightwing strongman Alberto Fujimori has been reunited with his family after being controversially pardoned and released from prison on humanitarian grounds. "Very happy to welcome our father in this new phase of his life!!" his daughter Keiko Fujimori said in a tweet, showing the ex-president with his four children, which was quoted by local media yesterday. Alberto Fujimori left a Lima clinic in a wheelchair late Thursday following the pardon, which was granted by President Pedro Pablo Kuczynski last week. The 79-year-old was serving a 25-year prison sentence for human rights abuses during his term in office from 1990 to 2000. He had been admitted to hospital before Christmas. Fujimori's son Kenji accompanied him to a house in the upmarket Lima neighbourhood of La Molina, which was under heavy police guard. Inside the house, Fujimori's three other children were reportedly waiting for him. Kenji is a legislator and Keiko the leader of Popular Force (FP), the biggest party in parliament. The luxury residence where Alberto Fujimori is staying measures 1,900 square metres and costs $4,900 a month to rent, the website RPP Noticias reported. Fujimori waved to sympathisers on leaving the Centenario clinic, but did not speak to journalists, according to television reports. The 79-year-old was whisked away in a waiting car, where he was seen talking into a cell phone. Kenji posted pictures of the pair on Twitter with the caption: "With my dad!" A medical panel has determined that Alberto Fujimori suffers from a serious, degenerative, incurable but non-terminal illness. He also has blood pressure problems, depression and tongue lesions which might be cancerous. Independent doctors, however, have questioned whether his health problems are serious enough to justify his release from prison. Kuczynski pardoned Fujimori two days after he survived an impeachment vote in parliament driven by the FP. The president was suspected of hiding his business connections with the corruption-tarnished Brazilian construction giant Odebrecht. Ten FP members, including Kenji Fujimori, unexpectedly abstained from voting, leaving Kuczynski in office. Allegations of a deal to release Alberto Fujimori have surfaced since then. The pardon strongly divides Peruvians, according to an Ipsos poll quoted by the daily El Comercio on December 30. About 56% of Peruvians approve it while 40% oppose it, the poll showed. The pardon sparked widespread protests after Christmas. More are now being planned.

[c] Gulf Times Newspaper 2017 Provided by SyndiGate Media Inc. ( Syndigate.info ).