For such an important archaeological and literary find, the Nag Hammadi and library--

including the Gospel of Thomas--took an incredible amount of time to be published.

In the first years after the discovery, French scholars look the lead with efftorts to publish the Nag Hammadi library (Robinson, 1979, p. 239). This effort was conducted under the partonage of Etienne Drioton, French Director of the Egyptian Department of Antiquities and his former student, Copt Togo Mina, Director of the Coptic Museum in Cairo (p. 239). In the first decade after the discovery, none of the texts were published. In fact in 1960, Gerard Garitte of Louvain wrote, "So fifteen years after the discovery only forty-eight of the some thousand pages that the manuscripts [...] contain have been published in the original language [...] At this tempo, it would take three centuries for all the texts to be edited" (as cited in Robinson, 1979, p. 239).

In the second decade, there was a shift in favour from French scholarship to German scholarship (p. 239). This was due to a number of factors. First, Togo Mina died in 1949 and was succeeded by Pahor Labib who had a degree from Berlin. Secondly, after the Egyptian revolution in 1952, the Department of Antiquities was restructured under local Egyptian leadership. Thirdly, the Suez crisis of 1956 led to the breaking of diplomatic ties with France (p. 239). By 1970, 34% of the Nag Hammadi library was published in German or French and 21% in English (p. 240). UNESCO stepped in to act as an intermediary to get the text published further and translated into English (p. 240).

UNESCO created an international team of scholars to photograph and publish a facsimile edition of the library. The team was also responsible for translating, transcribing, and publishing the books (DeConick, 2007, p. 470). James Robinson led the international team. The first English translation of the Nag Hammadi library in its entirety was published in 1979, thirty-four years after the initial discovery (p. 470). In 1988, a revised edition of the translation was made available (p. 470). ​

Editions of the Gospel of Thomas

When the initial transcription work was being conducted, scholars discovered that another edition of the Gospel of Thomas was in existence. Another papyrus hoard found in Oxyrhynchus, Egypt in the 1890s contained a related text (DeConick, 2007, p. 470). In 1952, French scholar Henri-Charles Puech made the connection between the Greek fragments found at Oxyrhynchus and the Coptic text found at Nag Hammadi. This meant that the Coptic version was a translation from the earlier Greek version. The Greek text was originally dated to 200 CE. This was evidence that the Gospel of Thomas existed 150 years earlier than the Coptic edition (p. 470). However, Grenfell and Hunt used internal evidence to suggest that the original composition of the Greek fragment could be dated to the late 1st century or the early 2nd century, or no later the 140 CE (p. 470). This would date the Gospel of Thomas to be contemporary with some of the New Testament writings.

Robinson's Suggestions for Future Manuscript Discoveries

James Robinson, who led the UNESCO team in translating and publishing the Nag Hammadi codices, wrote an article discussing the best practices in regard to new manuscript discoveries. Since the handling of the Nag Hammadi library discovery went so poorly, and the publications took many years to reach academia, Robinson decided to express the key academic and ethical principles future researchers should adopt when dealing with new and exciting manuscript discoveries. These principles are best adopted by all future lead researchers.

Editiones Principes:The scholar who accepts the responsibility of the first edition of a manuscript accepts the assignment on behalf of and for the academic community as a whole. There are to be no exclusions of any researchers. Furthermore, any first translation, no matter the qualifications of the scholar, is also the first mistranslation. This means that ongoing scholarly debate is expected to correct and improve the editiones principes until standard editions are achieved and can stand alone (Robinson, 1991, p. 236).

Policy Commission in Future Manuscript Discoveries: A commission should be created to set up policies for the correct handling of future discoveries. This could be an international organization such as UNESCO. Membership would include a variety of scholarly organizations to avoid any exclusion. The commission would establish policies and procedures that would then be published and distributed to the academic community, museums and libraries (Robinson, 1991, p. 237).

On-call Team of Technicians: Expert technicians should be ready on short notice to implement the correct procedures to keep damage to a minimum. Robinson states, "The greatest challenge occurs at the very beginning, both in terms of conservation and in terms of persons getting monopolistic control" (1991, p. 237).

Pre-publication Accessibility: Scholars should not have exclusive publication rights to manuscript discoveries. The entire scholarly community should not have to wait for access until they have proven their worth. Access could include manuscript transcriptions being entered into a database so that other scholars may gain access.

Practical Policies for Editiones Principes: The initial discoverer could be given a certain period of time, for example five years, for exclusive publication rights. After that date, however, all others may study the text and publish. If the text is too large for one person, material should be divided among other scholars.

Eliminate Conflict of Interest: Scholars who edit the manuscript should not be involved in assigning and managing publication rights.

These six steps could ensure that another publication fiasco, as was experience with the Nag Hammadi library and the Gospel of Thomas, will not happen again. Certainly, scholars today are of a more open attitude. However, having internationally accepted policies such as these would decrease future conflict.

James M. Robinson working on the Nag Hammadi fragments at the Coptic Museum, Cairo.

Gos. Thom. 62: Jesus said, 'It is to those [who are worthy of my] mysteries that I tell my mysteries. Do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing.'