"Gibson's view of a very probable downside future was a satirical criticism of current trends. Somehow, it touched a nerve and triggered a cascade of intelligent inquiry and practical experimentation. There's no end of discussion -- which ranges from literary to practical to psychological -- about the implications of our new found powers. The fact is that we are building another reality."

-- Henry W.Targowski

William Gibson is an American science fiction author living in Vancouver, Canada. He was born near Myrtle Beach, South Carolina, USA, in 1948. Gibson is married with Deborah Gibson, and they have 2 children.

Gibson has been writing short stories since the 70's, and he had a few vague ideas as early as 1976, the year he wrote his first published story 'Fragments Of A Hologram Rose', which mixes end-of-an-affair melancholy with an early take on virtual reality. But it wasn't quite working, so he gave up and spent 1977 buying punk 45s.

Gibson's first novel, Neuromancer, appeared in 1984. Neuromancer very soon gained a cult status by being one of the first novels in a new science fiction genre called cyberpunk.

Gibson is the coiner of the word cyberspace. He used it for the first time in his story "Burning Chrome" in 1982.

The cyberpunk literature of the eighties had a very pessimistic view of the future, predicting the rise of multinational capitalistic corporations, and showing the negative effects the forthcoming new technologies may have on everyday human life. Although it has been said that cyberpunk as a literary genre is already dead, the ideas William Gibson presented in his novels are now appearing in many other contexts - both artistic, sociological and technical.

Bibliography

Neuromancer (1984)

Spawl one. Cyberpunk science fiction book which has become the bible of cyberpunk.

Count Zero (1986)

Sprawl two. Cyberpunk science fiction.

Mona Lisa Overdrive (1988)

Sprawl three. Cyberpunk science fiction.

Burning Chrome (1986)

Cyberpunk science fiction.

Virtual Light (1993)

Cyberpunk science fiction.

Idoru (1996)

Cyberpunk science fiction.

All Tomorrow's Parties (1999)

Cyberpunk science fiction.

The Difference Engine (1990)

Steampunk fiction. In collaboration with Bruce Sterling

Gibson has also one shorter story, Agrippa, which he published in 1992 after his father's death.

Gibson has written the X-Files episodes Kill Switch (1998) and First Person Shooter (2000) with Tom Maddox.

References

William Gibson FAQ

Compiled by Manuel Derra.

An Interview with William Gibson

Conducted by Larry McCaffery.

Links