Before seeing The Mirror Has Two Faces (1996), I hardly knew what Barbra Streisand, the leading actress of the movie, even looked like. Despite her huge success as a singer and actress, I had only seen her in Meet the Fockers movies and I knew only one song from her – Woman in Love. She is a legend but still only few people are actually familiar with her work. When I acknowledged this “problem”, I had to watch this movie.

The movie that is also directed by Barbra Streisand, is set in New York City where two Columbia professors, Rose (Barbra Streisand) and Gregory (Jeff Bridges) meet when Rose’s sister answers Gregory’s “personals” ad. After being burned several times in relationships, Gregory has come to the conclusion that sex has ruined his life and therefore he wants to marry a woman with no sexual appeal. Therefore Gregory and Rose begin a relationship that is based on companion and finally they even marry. However, at that point Rose understands that she can’t be in a sexless marriage and therefore she undergoes a complete change on her outlook in order to save her marriage.

Lauren Bacall, one of the last living legends of the Hollywood Golden Age, also appears in the movie as Rose’s mother Hannah who lives together with her daughter. Hannah is the opposite of Rose, which creates tension between the mother and daughter. While Hannah has always been beautiful and the center of attention, Rose is more ordinary looking and never on the spotlight. Bacall’s performance as a demanding was probably the best thing about the movie. And – believe it or not – it brought her her first Academy Award nomination ever. In 1996 she was nominated in Best Supporting Actress category but, to everyone’s surprise, the Oscar went to Juliette Binoche (The English Patient). In 2009 she was given the Honorary Award, which she really deserved.

We’ve got three feminine archetypes: The divine whore, Medusa – and me. What archetype am l? – The Virgin Mary? – Thanks a lot, Trevor. (Rose giving a lecture)

If Lauren Bacall was the best thing about the movie, the crazy plot was the worst thing about the movie. In reality, nobody is as naive as Gregory. Come on, he’s not asexual so why would he want a sexless marriage? I just don’t get it. Regardless of the stupid main idea of the movie, Barbra Streisand was able to make the most of it. The scene where Rose gives a lecture to a full room of students and talks about love is another pearl of the movie. If only my teachers could talk as enthusiastically as Rose, I would enjoy lectures much more than I do :D

Although the obviously stupid plot does lower the points of The Mirror Has Two Faces quite a lot, it is not completely waste of time. Couple well made scenes and the brightest star Lauren Bacall are the saviors of the movie.

My rating: ♥♥+

(♥ waste of time, ♥♥ passable, ♥♥♥ satisfactory, ♥♥♥♥ serious crush, ♥♥♥♥♥ masterpiece)