Author: Mia Gasko

Religion in the sixteenth century was a prominent factor in the determinants of peace and order, as it was why many disputes and long wars occurred on the European continent. Religion was highly influential to the Holy Roman Empire; it was the reason why the Empire was plagued with many unsettled conflicts. One of the major issues leading to many holy wars in religion in the sixteenth century was the ongoing religious struggle between Catholicism and Lutheranism.

The Augsburg Confession was arguably one of the most important documents of the Protestant reformation in the sixteenth century, as it consisted of 28 articles that set forth the Lutheran religion in 1530. Following the Augsburg Confession, the Diet of Augsburg took place in 1555. It discussed the religious tensions in the Empire and led the Empire one step closer to a treaty that changed the era: the Peace of Augsburg of 1555. As a result, the Peace of Augsburg concluded the Diet of Augsburg that was in practice from February 1555 to September 1555.

In September 1555, signed in the city of Augsburg, the Peace marked the end of prolonged religious wars in the Holy Roman Empire. The Imperial Diet, also known as the highest representative in the Holy Roman Empire, established the innovative treaty alongside with the Lutheran princes. The Peace was a compromise between the Lutheran and Catholic estates, consisting of electors, princes, dukes and counts in Germany, as they sought to achieve politico-religious peace. Moreover, it became Germany’s first legal basis for the coexistence of religions, as it accepted and recognized the legitimacy and exercise of both Lutheranism and Catholicism.

The Peace was created as the estates in the Empire soon acted bitter, mistrustful and coarse towards each other due to religious disputes. The Peace stated that the Holy Roman Empire and its estates “will not make war upon any estate of the empire […] nor do violence to those estates […]. Nor […] trouble […] them, but shall let them quietly and peacefully enjoy their religion, […] property […] and rights.” [1] This suggests that the Peace prevented religious based conflict, as it enabled the free practice of more than one religion, did not go against the will of others to abandon faith, ensured that violence was not used to disparage estates and let individuals live in peace.

The Peace took part in acting as a solution to the series of exhausting wars that had been jeopardizing both the Lutheran and Catholic estates since 1542, as the treaty consisted of four of the following listed provisions that prevented future conflict. The core of the Peace was the principle of cuius regio, eius religio, by which each ruling prince could choose and determine the religion of his subjects. Those who did not adhere to the religion that was chosen by the ruler were free to emigrate after selling their property. The treaty explained that religions that had already been established in both free and imperial cities had the right to be practiced and that the Lutheran towns in Catholic states were permitted to continue their Lutheranism. It also pointed out that the land relating to the Christian Church or its clergy that the Lutherans had secularized before the Treaty of Passau in 1552, a treaty that allowed for the tolerance of Lutheranism, will be confirmed as belonging to them. Prior to the develpment of the treaty, the right of the ruler to control the religion of the state had not been present, hence after the Peace was approved, rulers such as the princes and the members of the Imperial Diet believed that they had finally earned ius reformandi, known as the right to reform, and could officially implement the foundation of the treaty, cuius regio, eius religio. A notable omission, however, was that the Peace failed to include the increasing popular Calvinism in this arrangement, leading to future problems.

The Peace was flawed and made by those who did not foresee future major developments, as it stood half-way on a lengthy process of religious tolerance development that the Peace of Westphalia later addressed. Additionally, it had a lack of even-handedness as the idea of equity, also known as Billigkeit, was established but the principle of equality was not present. [2] Not only was the popular religion of Calvinism rejected from the treaty, but also other religious sects such as Zwinglians, Anabaptists and Protestants were excluded, therefore putting the Peace into the question of whether the freedom of religion for individuals was granted or not. Notably, the Peace states that “[a]ll others, however, who are not adherents of either of the aforementioned religions are not included in this peace, but shall be altogether excluded from it.” [3] After the Peace was implemented, tensions arose as Catholics and Lutherans that lived alongside each other in small German territories began to engage in somewhat rampant conflict, threatening the future of the Empire as a whole. Other religions such as Calvinism found it difficult to spread their ideologies and expand across Germany, stirring up anger and engaging in the opposite principles of what the Peace had intended to establish. Finally, it may well be argued that the Peace was insufficiently constructed and respectively failed, as it was broken and essentially replaced by the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648.

The Peace of Augsburg marked a new and clear turning point in international relations, as it introduced the idea of religious toleration and illustrated one of the first concepts of religious peace. It was also a remarkable breakthrough for Europe in the sixteenth century, as it affirmed princely power, permanently changed the confessions of the Germanic Land that had led to long lasting ramifications and protected the Empire from internal conflicts until 1618. Likewise, it is very significant as it reorganized and created a new idea of normality in the Holy Roman Empire, and transformed it from a solely Catholic Empire to an Empire renewed by religious plurality. In addition, it can be argued that the Peace is seen as a victory for territorialism, for the reason that it stands as a symbol of the triumph of imperial attempts to unify Germany as a powerful state with only one dominant religion. It may also be regarded as certain that the Peace triggered and sped up the disintegration of the large, powerful and multi-ethnic complex, the Holy Roman Empire, into nothing more than petty states. Finally, it is important to note that the treaty remained as the core of the religious arrangement in the Holy Roman Empire until the Thirty Years War was concluded by the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648, but it continued to act as the fundamental law of the Holy Roman Empires governance until 1803.

Notes

[1] Thomas A. Brady, Ellen Yutzy Glebe, Heidi Bate, Katherine G. Brady, Jeanne Grant and Julie Tanaka, “The Religious Peace of Augsburg (September 25, 1555),” German History in Documents and Images (German Historical Institute, 2003). http://ghdi.ghi-dc.org/docpage.cfm?docpage_id=5366, 2.

[2] Thomas A. Brady, Euan Cameron and Henry Cohn, The Politics of Religion: The Peace of Augsburg 1555. (2006), 86.

[3] Thomas A. Brady, Ellen Yutzy Glebe, Heidi Bate, Katherine G. Brady, Jeanne Grant and Julie Tanaka, “The Religious Peace of Augsburg (September 25, 1555),” German History in Documents and Images (German Historical Institute, 2003). http://ghdi.ghi-dc.org/docpage.cfm?docpage_id=5366, 2.

Works Consulted

“Augsburg, Religious Peace of.” In The Oxford Dictionary of the Renaissance, edited by CAMPBELL, GORDON. : Oxford University Press, 2003. https://www-oxfordreference-com.proxy1.lib.uwo.ca/view/10.1093/acref/9780198601753.001.0001/acref-9780198601753-e-246.

Brady, Thomas A., Ellen Yutzy Glebe, Heidi G. Bate, Katherine undefined Brady, Jeanne Grant, and Julie Tanaka, eds. “The Religious Peace of Augsburg (September 25, 1555).” German History in Documents and Images. German Historical Institute, 2003. http://ghdi.ghi-dc.org/docpage.cfm?docpage_id=5366.

Immenkötter, Herbert, and Hans J. Hillerbrand. “Augsburg, Peace of.” In The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Reformation. : Oxford University Press, 1996. https://www-oxfordreference-com.proxy1.lib.uwo.ca/view/10.1093/acref/9780195064933.001.0001/acref-9780195064933-e-0076.