She's a famous Australian singer and actress who boasts 11 platinum and eight gold albums.

And the entertainer in question took to Facebook on Friday to share an unrecognisable throwback photo from her youth.

In it, the Melbourne-born future star posed alongside her younger brother while gazing at the camera.

The now-57-year-old wore a turtleneck white top beneath a V-neck jumper in the photo.

So can you guess who the future Jesus Christ Superstar theatre alum is?

That's right, it's none other than Bedroom Eyes songstress and noted Scientologist Kate Ceberano.

The mother-of-one captioned the post, 'My mum Cherie sent me this picture and it reminds me how much a tribe holds the tender pieces together until it becomes a whole.

'My big brother Paul has held my hand across roads and through life and he continues to create "safe environments" [for me].

'I love him more than my own life,' she concluded.

The post comes after it was revealed Ceberano's daughter Gypsy Rogers' relationship with Kate Langbroek's son Lewis Langbroek-Lewis is 'getting very serious'.

The nepo babies, both 20, have been dating since April last year and things are moving full steam ahead, according to New Idea magazine.

Gypsy, who is following in her mother's musician footsteps, and Lewis recently enjoyed a camping trip together in Bright, Victoria during the summer holidays.

The lovebirds also set sailed on Sydney Harbour with a group of friends earlier this month.

Both Kates approve of their children's blossoming relationship, with Ceberano commenting on one of their holiday snaps.

'My darlings love that you are there together,' she wrote.

According to the publication, Gypsy is 'often a fixture' at the Langbroek dinner table alongside Lewis and his parents, Kate and her husband Peter.

In September, Langbroek confirmed her son's romance with Ceberano's daughter and spoke publicly for the first time about the pair.

Speaking on Stellar's podcast Something To Talk About, the radio host spoke very fondly of Gypsy and recalled how the pair fell in love.

'But she's absolutely, she's just such a beauty. She's divine,' Langbroek said.

'And they're both really beautiful, two beautiful nepo babies who, neither of whom are casual, do you know what I mean?'

Langbroek shares four children with her husband Peter Allen Lewis - sons Lewis, Artie, 16, Jan, 14, and daughter Sunday, 18.

As for Gypsy, she is Ceberano's only child with her husband of 28 years, director and producer Lee Rogers.