The Long Ryders were pioneers of ‘alt country’ music a good decade before the genre got a name, and Final Wild Songs, a new four-CD set issued by Cherry Red Records, is a definitive career overview…

The band’s original line-up was Sid Griffin (vocals, guitar, autoharp and bugle), Stephen McCarthy (guitar, steel guitar, mandolin and banjo), Des Brewer (bass – Brewer was later replaced by Tom Stevens) and Greg Sowders (drums and percussion). Formed in 1983 from the ashes of Los Angeles band The Unclaimed, the musicians brought a heady brew of diverse influences to the table – from country to punk rock. Consequently, the Long Ryders’ novel sound gave a respectful nod to the likes of Gram Parsons, The Clash, The Flying Burrito brothers, The Byrds and Buffalo Springfield.

For those of you less familiar with the band’s oeuvre, check out rockpillsTV’s mini-documentary here, which features a December 2014 interview with the band reliving their mid-Eighties pomp.

As discussed in the documentary, a lack of radio play in the States and the predominance of synth pop music in the UK meant that commercial success was elusive for this “organic band” whose members always followed their instincts for writing good songs rather than what would sell. That’s why, perhaps, as acerbic comedian and Long Ryders’ enthusiast Stewart Lee puts it, they are “one of rock’s great undiscovered bands, like the Flamin’ Groovies and Big Star.”

So high time to discover them, then, and this box set appears to be as good a way as any to do so. According to a post on Griffin’s Facebook page in December announcing Final Wild Songs, Griffin and Stevens spent over a year compiling and organising the songs featured in the set. With all tracks remastered by Andy Pearce (from the original tapes, where they existed), Griffin claims the recordings have never sounded so good.

The first three CDs feature the 10/5/60 EP, the three LPs the band recorded – Native Sons, State Of Our Union and Two Fisted Tales. There are also 18 rare tracks – eight of which are previously unreleased – including, on disc two, audio of the band performing Looking For Lewis And Clark on the Beeb’s Old Grey Whistle Test in 1985. The bonus tracks on that disc also include completely different mixes of Lights Of Downtown and Capturing The Flag from sessions for the State Of Our Union album. The CDs also include nine selections previously only released in the USA, and listen out for a “top-secret hidden brief track” too.

The fourth disc offers the rarest treat of all for Long Ryders disciples, showcasing as it does their March 1985 gig in Goes, The Netherlands. Long forgotten, this concert was unearthed by Stevens from his personal collection, and the track list includes live versions of songs they played on that one tour alone.

The box set’s artwork and enclosed booklet is designed by UK graphic artist, Phil Smee (a close friend of Griffin’s). The booklet features previously unseen photos, fans’ memorabilia, a fold-out poster, song-by-song comments by “five Long Ryders” (we’re assuming the fifth one is original bassist Des Brewer… ) and an introduction by Rolling Stone writer and Long Ryders’ fan, David Fricke.

And if the box set whets your appetite to see the reformed band play live, they are touring in 2016. The schedule is currently a bit hazy so look out for precise gig dates and venues, but the European tour will begin in Spain on 23 April and end in Scandanavia (probably) on 7 May, with a London date or two (hopefully) in between. Sid Griffin will also be playing some solo gigs in the UK in June before rejoining his fellow Long Ryders in August for their first proper US tour for 28 years.

Final Wild Songs is released on 22 January 2016.

• UK Pre-order: Final Wild Songs

• USA Pre-order: Final Wild Songs

• CANADA Pre-order: Final Wild Songs

• GERMANY Pre-order: Final Wild Songs

• FRANCE Pre-order: Final Wild Songs

• ITALY Pre-order: Final Wild Songs

Disc One: 1983-1984

Original 10/5/60 EP:

Join My Gang

You Don’t Know What’s Right…

10/5/60

And She Rides

Born To Believe In You

Native Sons:

Final Wild Son

Ivory Tower

Run Dusty Run

(Sweet) Mental Revenge

Fair Game

Tell It To The Judge On Sunday

Wreck Of The 809

Too Close To The Light

Never Got To Meet The Mom

I Had A Dream

Masters Of War

Black Girl – Acoustic May-June 1984

Wreck Of The 809 – Acoustic May-June 1984

Further Along – Acoustic May-June 1984

The Rains Came – CBGBs April 1984

You Can’t Judge A Book By The Cover – West End, Chicago Nov 1984

Disc Two: 1985

State Of Our Union:

Looking For Lewis And Clark

Lights Of Downtown

WDIA

Mason-Dixon Line

Here Comes That Train Again

Years Long Ago

Good Times Tomorrow, Hard Times Today

Two Kinds Of Love

You Can’t Ride The Boxcars Anymore

Capturing The Flag

State Of My Union

Southside Of The Story

Child Bride

If I Were A Bramble And You Were A Rose

Looking For Lewis And Clark – OGWT

Lights Of Downtown – Captain’s Mix, Island Studios

Capturing The Flag – Captain’s Mix, Island Studios

Christmas In New Zealand – State Of Our Union

Encore From Hell

Disc Three: 1986

Two Fisted Tales:

Gunslinger Man

I Want You Bad

A Stitch In Time

The Light Gets In The Way

Prairie Fire

Baby’s In Toyland

Long Story Short

Man Of Misery

Harriet Tubman’s Gonna Carry Me Home

For The Rest Of My Days

Spectacular Fall

Ring Bells

Demos:

17 Ways

Basic Black

Pushin’ Uphill

How Do We Feel What’s Real

He’s Got Himself A Young Girl (And He Can’t Keep Up)

He Can Hear His Brother Calling

Sad Sad Songs

Flak Jacket

Blues Theme

Disc Four: Live ’T Beest, Goes, The Netherlands (1985)

Mason Dixon Line

Time Keeps Traveling

(Sweet) Mental Revenge

Run Dusty Run

You Don’t Know What’s Right…

As God Is My Witness

Ivory Tower

I Can’t Hide

Masters Of War

Wreck Of The 809

Good Times Tomorrow, Hard Times Today

Six Days On The Road

Southside Of The Story

Still Get By

Tell It To The Judge On Sunday

• UK Pre-order: Final Wild Songs

• USA Pre-order: Final Wild Songs

• CANADA Pre-order: Final Wild Songs

• GERMANY Pre-order: Final Wild Songs

• FRANCE Pre-order: Final Wild Songs

• ITALY Pre-order: Final Wild Songs