Fashion History Blog

Joseph Bonaparte was also portrayed…

.. as “Golden Boy” in a play written by Clifford Odets. (portraits: Joseph Bonaparte, eldest younger brother of Napoleon I’s wife Marie Julie Clary)

And.. there were places in the US named after Joseph Bonaparte…

… although Napoleon’s brother returned to be the Governor of Paris, and to run the French army, when Napoleon was exiled in 1815, Joseph moved to the United States to live most of the time. He was considered the heir to the French throne when Napoleon II, Napoleon I’st legitimate …

There were several “Charlottes” in this generation of Bonapartes…

… Joseph’s legitimate daughter was Charlotte Napoleone Bonaparte, who married Napoleon Louis Bonaparte. Catherine Charlotte, his illegitimate daughter by Annette Savage, went on to the US. (portrait: Catherine Charlotte Benton of New York)

At the time 3 women were bearing his children…

.. in 1808, Joseph Bonaparte was replaced of his Kingdom in Rome by his brother Napoleon I who wanted him to go to Spain and make the same reforms and progress. He put Joachim Murat in his place in Italy. Napoleon was trying to keep Joachim and his wife, Napoleon’s …

Joseph had 3 women who gave him only daughters…

… 2 by his wife Julie Clary, 2 by Annette Savage “Madame de la Folie”, and 2 by Maria Giula, Countess of Atri. Guila was born in 1806, and Teresa in 1808 by Maria Giula, while he was in Rome, and at about the same time as his legitimate children. …

Napoleon’s brother Joseph was a busy man…

… between fathering children, he ruled 2 countries. In 1805, Napoleon sent Joseph, his eldest younger brother, as head of the army to Rome. In 1806, Joseph invaded Rome and Italy, and overthrew King Ferdinand of Naples AND the British. Napoleon was so happy, he made Joseph King of Naples …

Joseph and Marie Julie Clary..

… also had Charlotte Napoleone Bonaparte, who would also marry a cousin, Napoleon Louis Bonaparte. (portrait: mother Julie Clary, Queen of Spain in the early 1800’s, with legitimate daughters Zenaide and Charlotte, of Joseph Bonaparte, Napoleon’s eldest younger brother; about 1801 “1st Regency” style as embellished for the French and …

Marie Julie Clary and Joseph Bonaparte had 3 daughters…

.. Julie died in childhood.. and Zenaide Laetitia Julie Bonaparte married Charles Lucien Bonaparte in 1822. She became Princess of Musignano. (portrait: Zenaide as Princess in 1834. Note the very late Regency style as fabrics became heavy, ornaments somewhat Spanish or Rococco, waistlines dropped, and the wide, dropped sleeves began …

Joseph Bonaparte married in 1794..

… Marie Julie Clary was part of what was considered a “love triangle” with his brother Napoleon and Desiree Clary. The novel “Desiree”, written by Annemarie Selinko told the story which was made into a movie starring Marlon Brando as Napoleon, and Cameron Mitchell as Joseph. (photos: movie poster and …