Adding to the already strange news coming from HP as of late, it seems that Logoworks, an online logo design service that simplified the process of commissioning a logo, is not on HP’s agenda any more. According to the notice posted on the LogoWorks site, HP has decided to close its Logoworks unit as part of its “strategic decision to focus its web resources on non-design related projects.”

So now it’s a company that doesn’t want to make PCs (or does it?), webOS devices or logo designs. What exactly does HP want to do?

That’s what new CEO, former eBay CEO Meg Whitman, aims to determine this month. With so many of Hewlett Packard’s core products and services getting tossed, it’s anyone’s guess where Whitman will take the company.

Lots of small businesses relied on Logoworks. Logoworks made it easy to follow a streamlined and organized online procedure to get a logo. For that reason it was easy for small businesses to use, 24/7. And it was affordable. Maybe you wouldn’t get the world’s most beautiful or most creative logo, but for many small businesses a Logoworks logo was more than adequate. HP’s direction of helping small businesses with design elements (which in turn aligns with its printers, a key part of the HP business), seemed solid. But now? HP still has a great brand and the chance to develop it, even if it is in a different direction. However, to the outside world, including small businesses, their direction seems unclear.

All is Not Lost for the Designers

HP acquired Logoworks in April 2007 for a reported $9 Million, along with its team of designers. Now that the subsidiary of HP is no more, two designers have salvaged something from the loss. Paul Browning and Aaron Nabaum formed Business Logos to carry on the work they did under HP. On their website they say:

“Two former senior designers at Logoworks decided to pool their 30-plus years of combined talent and form a new company called Business Logos – determined to serve the needs of businesses, start-ups, entrepreneurs, and the world at large. Now leaner and agile, Business Logos aims to improve on the legacy that Logoworks started.”

As of now HP’s Logoworks site refers visitors to Business Logos (or to HP’s do-it-yourself tool, Logo Maker) . And what if you used Logoworks in the past? You can still retrieve your design files from the Logoworks site until March 31, 2012.

From Small Business Trends

HP Logoworks Closes Doors … One More Confusing Signal