NEW YORK, Oct. 4, 2012 /PRNewswire/ -- OldSlip Group today announced that Logoworks, an online design company previously operated by Hewlett-Packard, is now fully up and running with its independent team of logo designers. The company offers inexpensive custom logo design services at http://www.Logoworks.com.

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20121004/PH87002LOGO )

"At Logoworks, our main objective is to provide high-quality and affordable custom logo design services. With our internal team and design community, which we are eager to grow, we are able to offer the professional, custom designs common to big business design firms, but at a price many small businesses can afford," said Daniel Wolfson, President of Logoworks.

Each new customer who signs on with Logoworks receives a personal project team that will oversee every step of their logo design process; clients will be presented with several different design options to provide them with a range of choices. Logoworks is now offering a silver design package for new clients, which includes two designers, four original logo concepts, two logo revisions, and a fast turnaround time for just $299. Customers start the process by filling out an online creative brief, and can expect to review design concepts in as little as three business days after first registering. Former Logoworks clients who are looking to recreate their previous logos are also eligible to receive a special offer from the company.

For businesses who require more options, the design firm offers the gold package, which provides clients with a team of three designers, six original logo concepts, and an unlimited number of logo revisions for only $399. Logoworks also features a selection of other services, such as custom stationary, Microsoft Word templates, and website designs, all of which are available at much more accessible price points than those offered by traditional design companies.

Businesses who are interested in Logoworks' custom logo design service can request a design consultation. Potential customers will receive free information on their logo preferences, including different logo options that are designed to promote memorable branding, as well as an exact price quote free of any hidden fees.

"We recognize how important small businesses are to our company, and we strive to ensure that all our clients receive a quality design tailored to their needs that is also paired with exceptional customer service. We believe Logoworks stands apart from other design firms because of our creative community of logo designers, each of whom are carefully screened and selected by our company. Not only do they offer strong corporate design skills, they are also uniquely accessible to our clients, which allows them to create logos that surpass client expectations," said Wolfson.

To find out more about Logoworks and its custom logo packages, visit http://www.Logoworks.com or call Daniel Wolfson at 747-666-5646. The design firm also maintains an active social presence and can be found on Facebook at http://www.facebook.com/Logoworks and on Twitter at http://twitter.com/Logoworks.

About OldSlip Group

OldSlip Group is a New York City based growth equity firm focused on investing in and operating privately held companies. While primarily focused on the technology sector, OldSlip continues to be active in consumer goods, subscription services, and ecologically friendly opportunities.

This press release was issued through eReleases® Press Release Distribution. For more information, visit http://www.ereleases.com.

SOURCE Logoworks