The Inklings of Oxford - A visual guide with over 200 photos and travel maps (15.01.09 by Pieter Collier) - Comments

Description:

Oxford’s fabled streets echo with the names of such key figures in English history as Edmund Halley, John Wycliffe, and John and Charles Wesley. Of more recent times are those of C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, and the other members of the renowned literary circle to which they belonged, the Inklings.

What would it be like to walk this medieval city’s narrow lanes in the company of such giants of Christian literature, to visit Magdalen College, where Lewis and Tolkien read aloud their works-in-progress to their friends, or the Eagle and Child pub, the Inklings’ favorite gathering place?

The lavish photography of this book will introduce you to the fascinating world of the Inklings, matching their words to the places where these friends discussed—and argued over—theology, philosophy, ancient Norse myth, and Old Icelandic, while writing stories that were to become classics of the faith.

The Inklings of Oxford will deepen your knowledge of and appreciation for this unique set of personalities. The book also features a helpful map section for taking walking tours of Oxford University and its environs.

The authors:

Harry Lee Poe

Harry Lee Poe holds the Charles Colson Chair of Faith and Culture at Union University in Jackson, Tennessee. The author of many books and articles on how the gospel intersects culture, Poe has written numerous articles on C. S. Lewis and co-edited C. S. Lewis Remembered.

James Ray Veneman

James Ray Veneman serves as assistant professor and director of visual communication at Union University. He covered the efforts in Iraq, spending time in Baghdad and on board an aircraft carrier in the eastern Mediterranean from which the book, A Greater Freedom, was produced. Other assignments include the days immediately following the World Trade Center attack and meetings in Cuba with Fidel Castro.

Final words:

I'm very happy to see that this book is now available for pre-order. I first heard about it beginning last year, when I was contacted to identify some locations and helped to find copyright owners on some photos. While I don't know if all the pictures I delivered info about were in the end added to the book; the quality of the pictures and research done by the authors convinced me that this will become a very high quality book. So very much looking forward to it! Have already added it to my ever growing wish list.

Enjoyed this post? Click to get the RSS feed.

Spread the news about this J.R.R. Tolkien article: