Six days before his death in 1963, C.S. Lewis wrote in a personal letter, "I am glad you are still in love with Hendersonville, and envy you your autumnal colouring."

I know because my son and I have a used and rare book business, and a year ago, we decided we needed a specialty. We are both fond of Lewis so we decided to make a specialty of Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, the Inklings and their circles. The Inklings was an informal writers group which usually met weekly in Oxford. Lewis and Tolkien were the big names but there were many others. One of the other members was Lewis' best friend, housemate and brother, Warren Lewis.

As we worked on creating our first catalog of books for the Inklings, I thought it would be interesting to offer a signed first edition of one of Warren Lewis' books. He was a specialist in French history. I found a book dealer who had two signed first editions, so I ordered them. When they arrived I found that they were inscribed to Mary Van Deusen. Book dealers and antique dealers know the importance of researching provenance so I googled Warren Lewis and Mary Van Deusen and was surprised to find that Ms. Van Deusen corresponded with C.S. Lewis.

I turned to my huge three-volume set, "The Collected Letters of C.S. Lewis."Lewis wrote to her 82 times from 1949 until his death. I read the letters in order. In his letters, Lewis often mentioned his brother and the last letter concluded with "love from both of us," so it was not surprising that my two French history books were warmly inscribed from Warren to Mary Van Deusen. A couple of times Lewis mentioned the Great Smoky Mountains but it was not clear if she lived in the area or if she had vacationed there.

When I got to the last letter Lewis wrote to her I noticed the date was just six days before his death (Nov 22, 1963, the same as John F. Kennedy). I admired his character as he wrote, "I'm afraid I'm condemned to an invalid life for the rest of my days … but when I look around me and see how much worse off many other people are, I am grateful for my condition." After that, he mentioned Hendersonville.

I could not stop there. Who was Mary Van Deusen? In his letters Lewis responded to comments she made about her church which I gathered was Anglican or Episcopalian. I called Father Joel Hafer at St. James Episcopal and asked if someone could research membership roles and he kindly turned me over to Charles Medd, who is now my nominee for Most Helpful Man in the World. He found that she was not a member of St. James but he had a great idea. He called Tom Shepherd at the funeral home who found out that Mary's husband, Arthur, passed away at Pardee Hospital in 1964. The folks at Shepherd's arranged transportation to Illinois.

I eliminated Calvary Episcopal in Fletcher, figuring Lewis would have said Fletcher rather than Hendersonville. But he might have said Hendersonville for a person attending St. John in the Wilderness in Flat Rock. So I called and Rector John Morton referred me to John Barker who also was very helpful. Ms. Van Deusen was not a member there either. Our conclusion was that she must have attended church in Hendersonville but not joined.

Now my appeal to the community. Does anyone remember Mary Van Deusen? She might have only been here a few years. She was married with at least one daughter. I would love to hear anything people can remember.

Final thought: Episcopalians are really nice and helpful people! Much thanks to everyone who gave assistance.