Not many bands can say they are releasing their third album thirty-five years after their debut, but not many bands have the history that California rockers Roxanne have. Originally formed in the late 80’s, Roxanne garnered commercial success with their 1988 self-titled debut album which was well received with two songs charting on rock radio; “Cherry Bay” and “Sweet Maria”, as well as a cover of Wild Cherry’s “Play That Funky Music.” The band is back with their first album of new material in five years and second for Rat Pak Records. Stereo Typical features ten brand new songs from the quartet comprised of Jamie Brown (Vocals, Guitar), John Butler (Guitar), Joe Infante (Bass) and David Landry (Drums). The new album also features guest appearance from Paul Gilbert of Mr. Big, dUg Pinnick of King’s X and Jeff Scott Soto. Stereo Typical is scheduled for release worldwide on February 24th.

From the driving intro of album opener “Stereotypical” to the anthemic outro of “Without A Rope,” Roxanne is back with their signature sound of rock-n-roll that garnered them a legion of fans in the late 80’s and continue to support them today. Tracks like “Gotta Live,” “The Cost Of Living” and “Until They Do” are chock full of memorable hooks and melodies. Mr. Big guitarist Paul Gilbert adds a blistering solo to the piano ballad “Looks Like Rain.” King’s X frontman dUg Pinnick offers his vocal talents to the catchy “Only A Call Away” and Jeff Scott Soto shines on the first single “Keep On Keepin’ On.

Produced by Rich Mouser and Jamie Brown and recorded, mixed & mastered at The Mousehouse Studio, Los Angeles, CA

“Radio Silence” is the sophomore release from the LA based rock band Roxanne and will be available on October 26, 2018 via Rat Pak Records. Originally formed in the late 80’s, Roxanne garnered commercial success with their 1988 self-titled debut album which was well received with two songs charting on rock radio; “Cherry Bay” and “Sweet Maria”, as well as a cover of Wild Cherry’s “Play That Funky Music” which hit #63 on the Billboard singles charts and was in full rotation on both dance and rock stations simultaneously.

As with many bands from that era, facing the decline in interest for AOR rock due to the onslaught of the “grunge” scene, the guys in Roxanne went on hiatus. Now 30 years later the band returns with a new offering entitled “Radio Silence”, which features 11 tracks of pure adrenalized classic rock influenced music and also features special guest appearances by guitar legend George Lynch, King’s X front-man dUg Pinnick and Korn drummer Ray Luzier.

Regarding the recording process, lead singer Jamie Brown comments, “We wanted to make a rock record that you’d want to crank in your car and drive fast with the windows down and I think we accomplished that!”. Drummer Dave Landry adds, “We are all very proud of this album and are ecstatic the way it turned out…the songs, the tones and the performances. Recorded on 2-inch analog, it sounds real, it is real, and truly represents the way our band sounds!”

With influences that range from Queen to Bad Company to Thin Lizzy, “Radio Silence” is best described as a perfect blend of classic rock with a modern-day edge!

Produced by Rich Mouser and Jamie Brown and recorded, mixed & mastered at The Mousehouse Studio, Los Angeles, CA