*Read their feature in our Program Profiles!

Berkeley Preparatory School is a highly regarded coed independent day school in Tampa that serves students in Pre-K through grade 12. Berkeley provides a safe, nurturing environment featuring inspiring teaching, engaged parents and alumni, and outstanding resources, including incomparable facilities on a beautiful 86-acre campus.

Enrollment: 1,420

Class Size: Varies

Grades: PreK – Grade 12

Tuition Range: $20,760 – $31,360

Amenities: Financial Aid, Sports, Arts, Uniforms required, Transportation

VIDEO: Take a Drone Tour of Berkeley Prep!

Amenities | Transportation Options Available; Sports: 16 sport, 80 teams in Middle and Upper Divisions; Arts: visual and performing arts offered in world-class facilities to practice and showcase student talent.

Campus Facilities | Berkeley is located on a beautiful 86-acre campus in Tampa.

Athletics | More than 80% of students participate in the athletic program, which includes 16 sports and 80 teams: Baseball, Cheerleading, Cross Country, Golf, Soccer, Swimming & Diving, Track & Field, Basketball, Crew, Football, Lacrosse, Ice Hockey, Softball, Tennis, Volleyball, Wrestling. In 2021-22, Berkeley won the FHSAA Floyd E. Lay Sunshine Cup All-Sports Award for the best overall athletic program in Class 3A, the FHSAA Fred E. Rozelle Sportsmanship Award, the FACA Cary McDonald Award winner for the Athletic Program of the Year for Class 3A, and the FHSAA Overall Academic State Championship.

Arts | We have a robust program in the fine and performing arts for every age and skill level. Opportunities abound for budding artists in painting, sculpture, ceramics, printmaking, silk dying, photography, music, drama, set design, video production, and so much more. Our Lykes Center for the Arts houses a 785-seat theatre and other spaces to showcase the arts. Additionally, our recital hall, black box theatre, art galleries, visual art studios, fabrication studio, and digital art labs provide ample space for students to create, perform, and showcase their work.

Technology | Berkeley earned Apple Distinguished School status in September 2021. 100% of Berkeley teachers have earned their Apple Teacher designation. Their knowledge of Apple products like GarageBand, iMovie, and Pages has transformed the classroom environment to become more interdisciplinary and experiential resulting in students grasping new information better. Anytime Anywhere Learning is Berkeley’s student technology initiative which recognizes that in today’s information-driven global society, learning should not be bound by the walls of the classroom or the hours of the school day. While all Berkeley students have convenient access to age-appropriate technologies, students in grades 4 through 12 enjoy ubiquitous access to their devices.

Accreditation and Memberships | Berkeley is accredited through the Florida Council of Independent Schools, the Southern Association of Independent Schools, AdvancED, and the Florida Kindergarten Council. Memberships include the National Association of Independent Schools, the National Association of Episcopal Schools, the Education Advisory Board, the Association of Independent School Admission Professionals, the Secondary School Admissions Test Board, the National Association of College Admissions Counselors and the College Board®.