Lindsay Lohan (Cady Heron)

Lindsay Lohan starred as Cady Heron, a transfer student from Africa who quickly learns the rules of girl world during her first year of American high school. While attempting to take down the popular clique, her character falls for both the glamour of it all and football player Aaron Samuels.

A child and teen actress, Lohan rocketed to stardom with her roles in movies like Mean Girls, Freaky Friday and The Parent Trap. However, in the years following Mean Girls, Lohan, while continuing to pursue a film and music career, eventually became better known for her wild partying, which led to assorted legal troubles and stints in rehab.

Last June, she signed on to the British comedy Sick Note for a role in the second season of the series starring Rupert Grint, Nick Frost and Don Johnson

Most recently, she poked fun at her past court appearances by signing on as a spokesperson for Lawyer.com.

Rachel McAdams (Regina George)

The queen of the mean girls, Regina George, was played by Rachel McAdams. Regina strives to make everyone else’s life miserable, even if hers is perfect

Since Mean Girls, McAdams has starred in films like The Notebook, Wedding Crashers, The Vow, About Time, Midnight in Paris, The Time Traveler's Wife, Southpaw, Doctor Strange and Spotlight, which earned her a best supporting actress Oscar nomination. She also appeared in the second season of HBO's True Detective.

Up next, McAdams stars opposite Rachel Weisz and Alessandro Nivola in Disobedience, the English-language debut from Chilean director Sebastian Lelio, whose A Fantastic Woman won this year's Oscar for best foreign-language film.

Tina Fey (Ms. Norbury)

Tina Fey didn’t just write the Mean Girls screenplay, she also appeared in front of the camera as tough-but-caring teacher Ms. Norbury, who tries to steer Cady in the right direction.

Although Fey was already known for co-anchoring Saturday Night Live's "Weekend Update" and being the late-night sketch show's first female head writer, she's become even more of a fixture on the comedy scene in the years since Mean Girls was released.

After leaving SNL in 2006, she created and starred in NBC's Emmy-winning 30 Rock, which ran from 2006 to 2013, and she more recently co-created and serves as co-showrunner on Netflix's Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt, occasionally making guest appearances on that series as well as NBC's Great News, which she also executive produces.

On the film side, Fey's had starring roles in movies like Baby Mama, Date Night, This Is Where I Leave You, Sisters and Whiskey Tango Foxtrot.

And she recently adapted Mean Girls into a Broadway musical.

Amanda Seyfried (Karen Smith)

Amanda Seyfried played the lovable but dim-witted Karen. She’s a devoted friend to Gretchen and Regina, even if she doesn’t always make sense. Seyfried’s performance has made some of Karen’s lines ("I'm a mouse. Duh!") live on.

After Mean Girls, Seyfried has been working consistently. She starred in the 2008 musical Mamma Mia! and will return for the 2018 sequel. In 2012, she played Cosette in the Oscar–nominated Les Miserables. Recently, she returned to TV, after spending five years on HBO's Big Love, for Showtime's Twin Peaks revival.

Lizzy Caplan (Janis Ian)

Janis Ian is the sarcastic, grungy friend of Cady and Damian. Janis is the mastermind behind the plan to destroy Regina George, holding a grudge against the queen bee due to bullying dating back to middle school.

Lizzy Caplan has been in a diverse range of films and TV shows. She was in Party Down, Cloverfield, True Blood, Hot Tub Time Machine, 127 Hours, Bachelorette, The Interview, Now You See Me 2 and New Girl, as well as a lead role on Showtime's Masters of Sex. Most recently, she was in The Disaster Artist, as herself, and was in talks to join Channing Tatum in Gambit in 2019.