Lindsay Dee Lohan (born July 2, 1986) is an American actress, pop singer, and model who portrayed Cady Heron in the movie Mean Girls.

After her notable role in Mean Girls, Lohan became a teen idol sensation, a household name and a frequent focus of paparazzi and tabloids. Along with her rising acting career, Lindsay attempted to start a singing career as well, releasing two albums, Speak and A Little More Personal in 2004 and 2005 respectively, which both received mixed reviews from the critics.

Early Life[]

Lindsay Lohan was born on July 2, 1986, in The Bronx, New York City, and grew up in Merrick and Cold Spring Harbor on Long Island, New York. She is the eldest child of Dina and Michael Lohan. Her father, a former Wall Street trader, has been in trouble with the law on several occasions, while her mother is a singer and dancer and currently is.

Lohan has three younger siblings, all of whom have been models or actors: Michael, Jr., who appeared with Lohan in The Parent Trap, Aliana, known as "Ali," and Dakota "Cody" Lohan. Lohan is of Irish and Italian heritage, and she was reared as a Catholic. Her maternal antecedents were "well known Irish Catholic stalwarts" and her great-grandfather, John L. Sullivan, was a co-founder of the Pro-life Party in Long Island. Lohan attended Cold Spring Harbor High School and Sanford H. Calhoun High School, where she did well in science and mathematics, until grade 11, when she started homeschooling.

Career[]

Lohan began her career as a child fashion model when she was three, and was later featured on the soap opera Another World for a year when she was 10. At age 11, Lohan made her motion picture debut in Disney's commercially and critically successful 1998 remake of The Parent Trap.

Her next major motion picture, Disney's 2003 remake of Freaky Friday, was also a critical and commercial success. With the release of Mean Girls (2004), another critical and commercial success, and Disney's Herbie: Fully Loaded (2005), another commercial success, Lohan became a teen idol sensation, a household name and a frequent focus of paparazzi and tabloids.

However, Lohan's next starring role in the romantic comedy Just My Luck (2006), received poor reviews and was only a modest commercial success. Following Just My Luck, Lohan focused on smaller, more mature roles in independent movies, receiving positive comments on her work, including A Prairie Home Companion (2006), Bobby (2006) and Chapter 27 (2007).

Run-ins with the law[]

In 2007, two driving under the influence incidents led to Lohan being put on probation, and together with three visits to rehabilitation facilities caused the loss of several movie deals.

Between 2010 and 2013, Lohan went into rehabilitation three times, and spent much of her time entangled in legal problems stemming from misdemeanors and probation violations.

[]