REVCO D.S. INC., operator of the nation's largest drugstore chain, may be suffering from too much diversification. The company announced on Tuesday that the earnings prognosis for its second fiscal quarter was indeed unhealthy.

Revco, which has more than 1,800 stores and annual sales of nearly $2.3 billion, said it expected earnings in the three months ended Nov. 17 to plunge 45 percent because of a number of factors, including the cost of opening new stores, slower growth in sales and increased interest costs.

But analysts agree that the greatest contributor to the financial ills of the company, which is based in Twinsburg, Ohio, was the unexpectedly poor performance of its Odd Lot Trading Company subsidiary, which it acquired last May.

Revco's stock reflected the disappointing earnings forecast, falling $1.75 a share Tuesday, to $22.875, on the New York Stock Exchange, on a turnover of nearly 200,000 shares. Yesterday, the stock recovered a bit, rising 37 1/2 cents, to $23.125. It has traded between $22.50 and $37.50 a share over the last 52 weeks.

''Basically, the problems Revco is encounterting pertain uniquely to that company,'' said Bruce Grier, who follows Revco for Drexel Burnham Lambert. ''Other companies in the industry, such as Walgreen's, are experiencing extremely strong sales and earnings momentum.''

''It seems that Revco's management has taken its eye off the ball,'' Mr. Grier continued. ''It has not taken the time to insure the smooth running of its basic drugstore business.'' He said that inventories, especially at the Odd Lot operations, were high and that interest expenses were further impairing earnings. Odd Lot is a wholesaler and retailer of close-out merchandise. ''Odd Lot's earnings were considerably below management's expectations,'' Mr. Grier said.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.