Columbus, OH – Credit Bureau Collection Services, Inc., doing business and widely known in the collection industry as “CBCS,” with branch offices located in Ohio, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Florida is changing its name to “Revco Solutions.” This change is in anticipation of joining forces with another top industry leader, Professional Recovery Consultants, Inc., based in Durham, NC. LaSalle Capital owned Revco Management is the holding company for these two entities, expected to merge in the coming months.

Revco Solutions was founded in North Carolina in 1979 and has since grown to become the region’s premier provider of fast, efficient, and hassle-free debt recovery and accounts receivable services. This growth has been a direct result of our concentration on client service while remaining on the cutting edge of new technology and collection technique development. Learn more at http://prorecoveryinc.com/. Revco Solutions provides 1st and 3rd Party Bad Debt collection services for several industries, including healthcare, government, commercial, and utility.

CBCS was founded in 1948 in Columbus, Ohio. Their original owner, CBC Companies, is a credit reporting company, owning a large amount of consumer credit data. CBCS became one of the earliest adapters in the collection industry by using consumer credit data to model, build processes, and augment efficiency, creating multiple benefits for CBCS’ business partners. CBCS also provides 1st and 3rd Party Bad Debt collection services for the healthcare, utility, and financial industries.

The combination of these two entities will create a strong provider of collection services and other customized programs in the industries that are served. Both companies are similar in experience, culture, services, commitment to compliance, and investment in technology. Geoff Miller, the former President of Professional Recovery Consultants, will remain on as the CEO of Revco Solutions. Larry Ebert, the former President of CBCS, will also remain on as the President of Revco Solutions.

“I couldn’t be happier with the anticipated merger of these two organizations and the opportunity to lead this company. The people involved in these two companies are talented, experienced, and have served our industry for decades. We are set-up for really strong performance and growth with the talent on our team,” says Geoff Miller.