THE CVS Corporation is in discussions to acquire Revco DS Inc. for an undisclosed price; such a deal would create the second-largest drugstore company in a once sleepy industry that is rapidly becoming dominated by giant chains.

CVS's purchase of Revco, a chain that is spread across the East and the Midwest, would create a company with 4,000 stores and revenue of $11 billion, second only to Walgreens. Revco and CVS issued a brief statement yesterday confirming a report in The Wall Street Journal that the two companies were in talks regarding a potential merger, but cautioned that ''there can be no assurance that the discussions will result in any transaction.''

Wall Street generally embraced the potential merger as a logical extension of the wave of consolidation now swamping the industry in response to changes in the health care system. In acquiring Revco, which is based in Twinsburg, Ohio, CVS, of Woonsocket, R.I., would gain a strong presence in both the East and the Midwest.

Analysts said they expected that a CVS-Revco deal would clear the regulatory hurdles that tripped up the Rite Aid Corporation's bid to acquire Revco last year. But analyst estimates of what shareholders could expect to reap from the sale of Revco varied from $2.7 billion to $3.2 billion, or as much as $47 a share. CVS also would take on about $900 million in Revco debt.

''It makes sense from a strategic point of view,'' said Philip J. Muldoon, an analyst at McDonald & Company Investments in Cleveland. ''Revco is a well-run company and there's not much overlap between the two. There's also a value to being big.''

After the report of a possible deal between the two companies, investors drove up Revco's share price $2 in early trading, to set a 52-week high of $41. But they reined in their enthusiasm later in the day and the stock actually closed down 37.5 cents, to $38.875. Over the last two weeks, Revco shares have climbed more than 10 percent. CVS stock declined 50 cents yesterday to close at $42.50 a share.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.