Jack Eckerd Corp. may be on the verge of making corporate history.

The Clearwater-based drug store chain announced Thursday it had cleared the way to acquire Twinsburg, Ohio-based Revco, D.S. Inc., which has been in bankruptcy reorganization for more than three years.

Revco said creditors have agreed to support a revised Eckerd plan that would pay creditors more than $1-billion in cash, stock and debt in a newly created public holding company comprising Revco and Eckerd.

The acquisition would make Eckerd the nation's largest drug store chain while spelling the end of Revco as an independent entity. In time, the Revco name, which today appears on 1,150 stores in 10 Eastern states, could disappear altogether. A combination of Revco's stores and Eckerd's 1,678 stores would create a chain larger than Rite Aid Corp., which operates 2,443 stores in 22 states.

Rite Aid announced earlier Thursday its was abandoning its efforts to acquire Revco because the bidding had reached levels that made it "uneconomical for Rite Aid to continue to pursue this acquisition," according to a company statement.

Although Eckerd's plan must still be approved by a federal bankruptcy judge, Eckerd said it has reached a consensus with virtually all the creditors' groups, representing about $1.5-billion in claims against Revco.

"We've been negotiating with various creditors groups all along and always felt we would reach a consensus," said Michael Zagorac, an Eckerd spokesman.

It didn't look that way earlier in the week, when six of the seven creditors groups rejected a previous Eckerd reorganization plan, which called for the payment of $970-million in stock and debt to various creditors. Four of the groups favored the creditor-proposed plan, which would have kept Revco independent and was, therefore, supported by Revco management. Two groups supported the Rite Aid plan, which proposed to pay creditors nearly $733-million in cash and stock in the publicly traded company.

Rite Aid spokeswoman Suzanne Meade said the company held firm at the $733-million offer, which had already been sweetened twice.

Eckerd will file a revised reorganization plan outlining the deal as soon as possible. A hearing scheduled for Monday probably will be delayed in light of the revised filing. Because the plan is so well-supported by creditors, U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Harold White is expected to approve it. It was not known late Thursday when his decision would come.

As part of its reorganization plan, privately held Eckerd will return to the public market with a stock offering in the new holding company. Zagorac said the company anticipates an initial public stock offering will take place in the first part of the year.

Eckerd went private in 1986 through a $1.2-billion leveraged buyout very similar to the one that sent Revco into bankruptcy court in July 1988.

If Eckerd's reorganization plan prevails, it will mark the first deal in which a failed leveraged buyout in bankruptcy was pursued _ and acquired _ by a hostile bidder, according to observers.

Revco already has a dubious spot in the record books, one it earned by becoming the first major leveraged buyout to fail. When Revco defaulted on $800-million in high-yield "junk" bonds and sought protection from its creditors in bankruptcy court, it heralded the beginning of the end of the junk-financed merger mania that swept corporate America in the 1980s. Many other highly leveraged companies have since followed suit.

While Revco has been used as an example of an LBO run amok, Eckerd has been cited as one of the country's more successful LBOs. The company has managed to reduce its debt and maintain positive cash flows every year since its buyout. Proceeds of the stock offering would be used to reduce debt.

Not only would the acquisition of Revco give Eckerd a presence in many new states, it would give the Clearwater company access to Revco's lucrative prescription list.

Revco has annual sales of more than $1.9-billion. Zagorac said Eckerd indicated in its original reorganization plan that it would close at least 300 Revco stores and possibly more. Revco stores operated in the same states as Eckerd stores would be closed or converted to Eckerds. Others will be operated as Revcos until a final decision is made, Zagorac said.