Byline: Faye Brookman

NEW YORK — Here we go again.

The consolidation of the chain drugstore industry is showing no signs of abating, with the CVS Corp. of Woonsocket, R.I., now in talks to acquire Revco D.S., based in Twinsburg, Ohio.

The proposed merger would create a chain with 4,000 stores and revenues of $11 billion, second only to Walgreen Co. in the drugstore world and just ahead of Rite Aid, which snapped up Thrifty PayLess last September.

J.C. Penney Co. has also been on the move, with its Thrift Drug division buying Eckerd, Fay’s and Kerr, and Rite Aid actually was chasing Revco before CVS — though that deal was thwarted last year by the Federal Trade Commission, citing antitrust concerns because of the overlap of the chain’s markets.

Those problems are not expected to arise in the current proposal, because CVS units are primarily in the East and Revco’s operating base is in the Midwest. The two chains overlap in only four states: New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Virginia.

From a beauty standpoint, CVS and Revco have a lot to offer each other. CVS has initiated moves to upgrade its cosmetics department, including adding a service area complete with beauty consultants and more expensive lines than traditional drugstore fare, such as Ultima II. CVS also has a reputation for being first in the market with new items.

Revco also has a heritage of breaking in new products and moves a high volume of beauty items. It, too, has looked for fresh ways to build the cosmetics category but has not followed the service route.

Both chains devote roughly the same square footage to beauty and operate similarly sized stores, although CVS’s new prototypes are slightly larger than the average Revco. Both chains have been eyeing freestanding market sites to make their stores more of an “easy-in, easy-out” shopping trip.

Many sources in the drugstore industry said CVS’s improved service, combined with the marketing savvy of Revco, could result in a potent beauty player that could give Walgreens and the new Eckerd/ Thrift company a run for the money.

The power of the two players together would also mean more powerful competition for Rite Aid, which is installing a new, larger beauty setup in its stores.

If the players come to terms, the deal is expected to be consummated next week. Should FTC problems arise, some industry experts expect another chain — perhaps American Stores — to step in and buy stores that overlap.

No word has been issued on what would happen to Revco personnel.

While the big keep getting bigger, one giant’s growth plan is not based on buying its competitors. At a Fragrance Foundation dinner this week (see story, page 7), Walgreens divisional merchandise manager Steve Lubin said the chain is “committed to growing only by opening our own stores — no acquisitions.”

In the year 2001, he said, “because of our aggressive strategy of opening new stores and relocating existing stores to better locations, the average age of all stores in our chain will be only 5.7 years.”

You May Also Like