Robert Carteret, Earl of Granville, had his land taken from him by revolutionaries. They were American revolutionaries who’d confiscated the Carterets’ “Granville District,” an expanse covering the top half of “Carolina” and extending to the Pacific.

The original grant had been to Robert’s grandfather, Sir George Carteret, the salty merchant strongman of Jersey who became Treasurer of the Royal Navy. When Oliver Cromwell’s government executed King Charles I for treason in 1649, Sir George, keeping the Jersey islands independent, proclaimed Charles II king and harbored Loyalists.

In 1660, King Charles II gained the throne and in 1663 made Sir George one of eight Lords Proprietors of a carved-up British America. Sir George got New Jersey as well as a one-eighth share of Carolina.

Carteret, derided for his vulgar speech, cut a large figure in Great Britain and got off scot-free when charged with mismanagement of funds. (“Scot” was the English word for tax or fine.) Andrew Marvell, poet and Parliamentarian, penned: “Carteret the rich did the accountants guide / And in ill English all the world defied.”

More: Portrait of the Past: Picture perfect Western NC mill, c. 1895

More: Visiting Our Past: Rattlesnake Lodge was Asheville’s dream house

Regarding America, the Proprietors argued amongst themselves and neglected their interests. Settlers were loath to enter the new country because of legal disputes and tangles. Squatters moved in and banded together. In 1729, the king took back his grants, except for the Granville District, which the Carterets held onto, their abstract share translated, in 1742, to the northernmost eighth of the country stretching from the bottom of Virginia to the bottom of Georgia.

It took Sir George’s son, John Earl Granville, six years after the district’s formation to open a land office, which he did in Edenton, the state capital that in 1743 was displaced by New Bern in a long-unresolved geographic contest.

Granville’s agents in Edenton oversaw land grants and collected quit rents-payments in lieu of labor. “The inefficiency and corruption of (the agents),” R.D.W. Connor wrote in his 1919 “History of North Carolina,” “soon became a public scandal.”

For personal gain, Connor outlined, the agents issued the same grant to multiple people; bribed clerks to change names on documents; issued improperly signed grants so that they could later be voided; charged three times the going rate; and only accepted gold and silver.

Profits did not make it to the pocket of Lord Granville, despite his attempts to stop the extortion. And immigration intensified.

Frozen assets

“The surge of immigrants through Philadelphia and the Chesapeake,” along with “competition between the land companies kept a continuous stream of settlers moving westward,” William Bennett wrote in “Early Settlement along the New River Basin,” a paper for the 1984 New River Symposium.

In the 1770’s, Ashe County, along the New River, was a last-resort location for migrants for two reasons. The geography was forbidding. And the land was owned by Lord Granville.

For two years after Col. James Grant’s devastating campaign against the Cherokee in 1761, the Granville office had seen a lot of activity along the Upper Catawba River. However, Bennett states, “I have yet to find where any deeds were issued by Granville's Office in McDowell County.”

In March 1763, Bennett continues, “following the death of Lord John Granville, the Granville Land Office closed. From then until May 1778, when the State assumed title to all vacant land and began issuing grants, it was impossible to obtain title to vacant land in Ashe County.”

In 1767, Governor Thomas Tryon began urging the Crown to buy the Granville lands with what, he was sure, would be the support of the residents. By 1774, Carolina settlers were crossing the Blue Ridge Mountains. This was when the next Earl of Granville, Robert, got involved to no avail. He died without an heir in 1776.

Revolutionaries

“Every treasonable person shall forfeit his Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels to the use of the State,” The North Carolina Revolutionary government stated in a 1776 “Declaration of Rights and State Constitution.”

An amendment was later added to affirm that squatters who had occupied a tract for seven or more years had more right to the land than former owners.

By 1795, the Granville District was still largely unsettled. Major landholders and developers in the region, including James Greenlee of Burke County, formed the Rutherford Land Company and approached Alexander Hamilton’s Assistant Secretary of the Treasury, Tench Coxe, to see if he wanted to buy up their shares.

Coxe bought “some 400,000 acres in western North Carolina,” including in Rutherford, Polk, Henderson, Cleveland, McDowell and Buncombe Counties, UNC Asheville’s Ramsey Library states in a note to its Speculation Lands Collection.

Tench Coxe revived the hunger for enterprise that had stoked his great-grandfather, Daniel Coxe, personal doctor to Charles I.

In 1692, Dr. Coxe had sold the West Jersey lands that Charles I had granted him and bought “Carolana,” the proprietorship of which, Jacob Cooke details in his book, “Tench Coxe and the Early Republic,” “dated back to 1629, When Charles I granted to Sir Robert Heath an area encompassing the entire North American continent between the 31st and 36th parallels and stretching westward from the Carolinas and Georgia to the Pacific Ocean.”

Thus, it seems the authoritative sources on Granville and Coxe doings disagree.

In the Coxe version, Heath gets Carolina in 1629; and in 1692, Dr. Coxe buys it from an in-between owner, Sir James Shaen. In the Granville version, eight Lords Proprietors, not including Heath or Shaen, and including Granville, get Carolina from Charles II in 1663.

What gives? There’s an overlap.

Kemp Battle clears it up partly in his 1904 paper, “The Lords Proprietors of North Carolina.” “Early after the Restoration,” he states, “the Heath patent was declared vacated and the territory, with the same name (Carolana, respelled Carolina), was in 1663 granted to eight nobles, favorites of Charles II.”

Daniel Coxe’s purchase through the Heath patent came after the Carolina 8 had taken over. Baylus C. Brooks, North Carolina historian, traces the property transfers on his blog.

Heath sold it to Lord Maltravers, whose son sold it to James Hayes, who sold it to Sir James Shaen, who sold it to Coxe, regardless of the Lords Proprietors’ claim.

Two conflicting grants were operating at the same time. Mix that in with the chicanery of Granville’s agents, the claims of squatters, the American Revolution, challenged surveys, and then Tench Coxe’s overlays, and you’ve got a lot of jobs for surveyors and lawyers.

What about the smaller landholders who followed the speculators? There’s a lot of drama there, too.

The history of a region can be seen as a pageant that shows who got to the land first; how long they were willing or able to wait to develop it; what uses they made of it; and what kind of help they got, including from government, to make it economically viable.

In other words, “Dynasty.” Next week, a closer view of the Coxes and at the people who bought from them.

“Portrait of Charles II in Garter Robes” by John Michael Wright, circa 1663, when the king gave the Lords Proprietors the Province of Carolina. Painting held by National Portrait Gallery, London.

Rob Neufeld writes the weekly “Visiting Our Past” column for the Citizen-Times. He is the author of books on history and literature, and manages the WNC book and heritage website, “The Read on WNC.” Follow him on Twitter @WNC_chronicler; email him at RNeufeld@charter.net; call 828-505-1973.