Sir George Carteret and the Royal African Company

On Friday I will be posting the final part of Balleine’s article on George Carteret from the Biographical Dictionary of Jersey, but today my focus is on my researches into George Carteret and the Royal African Company.

Sir George Carteret is mentioned in connection with the founding of the Royal African Company, but what part did he actually play?

I am not seeking in this study to allocate culpability or to whitewash Sir George. Anyone from Royalty down investing the company must have been aware that at least part of its trade was in slaves. After all, the charters issued by King Charles II (1630–1685) represent the moment at which the transatlantic slave trade officially began, with royal approval, in the English Empire. But while he was a figure of note in his day, was he known here for being a prominent courtier, or because of the scale of his involvement?

He was a “consultant” which basically meant an extra source of revenue in case the company had to draw upon his geographical knowledge of the African coast, and local historian Doug Ford notes that he was paid the sum of £300 per annum for that role.

First of all, let’s look at how the company operated? In “The Decline of the Royal African Company: Fringe Firms and the Role of the Charter”, Ann Carlos and Jamie Kruse note that:

“Although it was thought of as a slave trading enterprise, slaves were only one among a number of products shipped by the Company from Africa. In fact, over the last four decades of the seventeenth century, slaves comprised only 40 per cent of total English trade with Africa. The Royal African Company was a multi-product monopolist, which, in addition to slaves, also exported gold, ivory, malaguetta (pepper), and redwood (a dye). Castles were built and maintained to protect the gold trade, not the slave trade. As Eltis points out, one does not find structures equivalent to Cape Corso Castle on those areas of the coast which supplied four-fifths of the slaves. 'No castle was ever built where gold was unimportant’.”

“The African trade was based on barter in that goods were brought to Africa and exchanged for other commodities or for slaves. The commodities consisted of redwood (a dye), ivory, gold, wax, and malaguetta (pepper), which were shipped directly to England for sale. The trade in slaves was essentially a triangular one. Commodities were shipped to Africa; slaves were purchased, transported to the West Indies, and sold; and the proceeds, in bullion, bills of exchange, or sugar, were sent to London.”

Although Carteret was a consultant, he had retired from seafaring, and was purely an investor in the company. He is mentioned in many histories (and by Balleine and by Doug Ford) as a “founder”.