Thomas Kuhn (Childhood and Early years)

Thomas Kuhn was born in Cincinnati, Ohio in July 18, 1922. He was the son of Minette Scrook Kuhn and Samuel L. Kuhn. He went to a high school in New York known as Hessian Hills. He attended Taft School in Watertown and that is where he discovered his passion for mathematics and physics. In 1940, He graduated from the Taft School. He went to Harvard, where in 1943 he graduated with his B.S. degree in physics. He later went back to Harvard and got his M.S. degree in 1946 and 1949.

Thomas Kuhn Military Work

Thomas Kuhn joined the Radio Research Lab theoretical group where his job was to come up with counter measures against the enemies radar. After that he was sent to go work in the military lab in the United Kingdom. He went to France with the Royal Air Force to study German radar installations that they had captured.

Thomas Kuhn's (History of Science)

Thomas Kuhn was attending Harvard where he was working on his physics doctorate focusing completely on the development of his ideas as a science historian and philosopher. He was excited and preoccupied with the mechanisms which are used to understand scientific process. He taught the History of Science as a professor at Harvard, University of California and Princeton University. He really enjoyed teaching a lot when he was at the schools. He modeled after Isaac Newton's theories.

Thomas Kuhn ( Career)

Thomas Kuhn's career first started in Radio Research Lab when he was at Harvard. He also worked at the Scientific Research and Development in Europe. He also taught the History of Science as a professor at Harvard. He also was appointed as the professor to teach the History of Science at the University of California. He became a professor to teach the History of Science at Princeton University. He was often called the Rockefeller of Philosophy.

Thomas Kuhn's Book's

This book that was published in 1957, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, was his most influential work. In his book he talked about how competing paradigms are incommensurable. He proposed a notion of paradigm shifts so that the scientific fields can undergo shifts periodically as long as it doesn't progress in a linear and continuous pattern. In his book, The Copernican Revolution, he refuted the claims of other scientist that the earth was in the center of the solar system.

Thomas Kuhn (Paradigm Shift)

Thomas Kuhn became known when he presented his concept the Paradigm Shift. People used it in all subjects, not just science. Thomas Kuhn explained his concept of the Paradigm Shift in his book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. His framework came form the paths laid by other intelligent men such as Aristotle, Isaac Newton and Galileo. The change in the framework, was in itself the Paradigm Shift. Thomas Kuhn stated that sometimes you have to go back in order to find the starting point.

Thomas Kuhn's Theory for Normal Science

After a paradigm has already taken place, scientist can start building up facts again by studying different problems and finding facts that exist in different places that was suggested by a new paradigm. This period between paradigm shifts is known as normal science or puzzle solving.

Thomas Kuhn's (Awards and Achievements)

Thomas Kuhn was chosen to be the esteemed Society of Fellows at Harvard University. He was given the prestigious title Guggenheim Fellow. The History of Science Society gave him the George Sarton Medal. Along with all his books that were very influential as the framework for those studying philosophy and trying to understand the concept of science in the world as well as the universe and beyond. In his honor, he got the Paradigm Shift Award by the Chemical Society.

Thomas Kuhn's Theory (Incommensurability and World Change)

Thomas Kuhn used the term Incommensurable so that he can be able to give a description of paradigms that will represent a whole world that has different views on the same subject. He talked about how the mechanics of Newton and Aristotle differ in a way that is so drastic that there is no room for common ground.