HONG KONG, Sept. 5, 2013 /PRNewswire/ -- A number of Shenzhen-based jewellery and gemstone manufacturing houses have been shortlisted for various categories of the second edition of the JNA Awards, the most prestigious awards event in the jewellery and gemstone industry. Focusing on Asia, JNA Awards honours and recognises excellence and achievement in the global jewellery trade.

(Logo: http://www.prnasia.com/sa/2013/04/12/20130412193435863919.jpg)

(Logo: http://www.prnasia.com/sa/2010/04/19/20100419602891.jpg)

(Photo: http://www.prnasia.com/sa/2013/09/02/2013090219572410746.html)

JNA Awards 2013 Honouree List from Shenzhen

ttf HAUTE JOAILLERIE

Outstanding Enterprise of the Year – Mainland China

Shenzhen Xingguangda Jewellery Industrial Co Ltd

Outstanding Enterprise of the Year – Mainland China

Industry Innovation of the Year – Manufacturing – Technology

Manufacturer of the Year – Gem--Set Jewellery

Shenzhen United BlueOcean Technology Development Co Ltd

Industry Innovation of the Year – Manufacturing – Technology

Manufacturer of the Year – Precious Metals-Only Jewellery

Shenzhen Ganlu Jewellery Co

Manufacturer of the Year – Gem-Set Jewellery

Manufacturer of the Year – Precious Metals-Only Jewellery

Shenzhen Yuehao Jewelry Co Ltd

Manufacturer of the Year – Precious Metals-Only Jewellery

Odear Fashion Technology Co Ltd

Industry Innovation of the Year – Manufacturing – Business

Zhou Defen of Shenzhen Yuehao Jewelry Co Ltd

Young Entrepreneur of the Year (Age 40 and below)

Letitia Chow, Founder of JNA and Chair of the JNA Awards 2013 judging panel, said Shenzhen's prominence in the jewellery and gemstone industry is being reflected in the Honourees list.

"Shenzhen plays a pivotal role in the development of the region. Its strength as a manufacturing jewellery and gemstone hub is evident in the number of companies establishing its presence there," Chow said. "These Honourees represent the quality products coming out of Shenzhen, as well as the growing popularity of Shenzhen-produced jewellery in the worldwide market. I congratulate these companies and individuals, and wish them continued success. With everyone's tireless efforts, I believe Shenzhen jewellery will take centre stage in the global market!"

The Government of Luohu District, Shenzhen commented, " Our heartfelt congratulations go to the organiser of the JNA Awards. We are very proud that five jewellery manufacturers from the Luohu district of Shenzhen, including ttf HAUTE JOAILLERIE, Xingguangda and Ganlu, were shortlisted across various categories. We believe that the participation of these companies will make the JNA Awards even more exciting this year. We also wish to thank JNA for providing jewellery companies in Shenzhen an effective platform to showcase their strengths and abilities. The JNA Awards creates an important channel for further communication and exchanges between Hong Kong and Luohu jewellery industry.

The JNA Awards is a major event in Asia's jewellery industry. Its authoritative status, fairness and prestige are internationally recognised and has attracted the participation of some of the most established and illustrious names in the business. The Luohu government has been promoting business innovation among enterprises, encouraging them to participate in both local and international trade awards that are well recognised. We are confident that the JNA Awards will go from strength to strength, and serve as an important platform to share ideas and experiences between Hong Kong and Luohu's jewellery sectors. We have plans to raise the standards in jewellery design so that more Luohu-based jewellery companies will enter the JNA Awards in the future."

The JNA Awards judging panel is comprised of five industry experts namely Albert Cheng, managing director of the World Gold Council – Far East (WGC); James Courage, chief executive of Platinum Guild International (PGI); Lin Qiang, president and managing director of the Shanghai Diamond Exchange (SDE); Nirupa Bhatt, managing director of the Gemological Institute of America (GIA) in India and the Middle East, and Vichian Veerasaksri, director of the World Jewellery Confederation (CIBJO) and advisor to the Thai Gem and Jewelry Traders Association (TGJTA).

The second edition of the JNA Awards is led by Rio Tinto Diamonds and Chow Tai Fook as Headline Partners, with Gubelin, Israel Diamond Institute, KARP Group, Robert Wan Tahiti and the Shanghai Diamond Exchange as Honoured Partners.

The Award Recipients and Honourees will be feted at an awards ceremony and gala dinner scheduled for September 12 at The Grand Hyatt, Hong Kong. The event will be held on the sidelines of the September Hong Kong Jewellery & Gem Fair, which will run from September 11 to 17. The awards ceremony and gala dinner is a ticketed event by application only. Interested parties may submit their request by logging on to www.JNAawards.com.

Notes for Editors:

1. About JNA

JNA, first published in 1983, is the flagship magazine of UBM Asia's Jewellery Group. The publication is a leader in providing the latest industry updates and in-depth reports, covering the international jewellery trade with an Asian insight. Following its success, the publication launched its online edition in June 2011.

2. About the Headline Partners

2.1 Rio Tinto Diamonds (www.riotintodiamonds.com)

As one of the largest producers of rough diamonds in the world, Rio Tinto Diamonds enjoys an important presence in the international diamond market through its 100 percent control of the Argyle mine, 60 percent of the Diavik mine, 78 percent interest in the Murowa mine and an advanced diamond project in India. Rio Tinto Diamonds' production is sorted and prepared for sale at its sales and marketing office in Antwerp, Belgium, supported by a network of representative offices in Hong Kong, Mumbai and New York. Rio Tinto Diamonds maintains an extensive industry intelligence network and a high level of customer and product support. It also believes in supporting consumer confidence in diamonds and plays an active role in addressing key industry issues surrounding product integrity and sustainable development. It is a founding member of the Responsible Jewellery Council, the not-for-profit organisation established to reinforce consumer confidence in the jewellery industry.

2.2 Chow Tai Fook Jewellery Group Limited (www.chowtaifook.com)

Chow Tai Fook Jewellery Group Limited (Chow Tai Fook), listed on the Main Board of the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong in 2011, is today's largest pure--play jeweller by market capitalisation in the world. With a heritage and long-standing reputation spanning more than 80 years, the iconic brand "Chow Tai Fook" is recognised for its trustworthiness and authenticity, and renowned for its product design, quality and value. Chow Tai Fook has an extensive retail network with over 1,850 points of sale in more than 400 cities in Greater China, Singapore and Malaysia, and a rapidly growing presence in e-commerce. Chow Tai Fook's fundamentals and growth dynamics are strong.

3. About the Honoured Partners

3.1 Gubelin (www.gubelin.com)

Since 1854, Gubelin has stood for the highest standards in jewellery and gemstones. With its wide range of selected gems and signature jewellery collections, the family-owned business has established its presence in Switzerland's premier locations including Lucerne, Zurich, Basel, Bern, Lugano, St. Moritz and Geneva. Gubelin runs its first boutique in Asia at the famous Starhill Gallery in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. At the head of the business, now in its sixth generation, stands Raphael Gübelin. Besides the jewellery retail stores and the Gubelin Ateliers, the corporate group also operates the Gubelin Gem Lab, a world-renowned scientific gemstone laboratory with its headquarters in Switzerland and an office in Hong Kong. As head of the company, Raphael Gübelin is continuing his father's business philosophy and nurturing the company's traditional values of genuineness, purity, exclusivity, quality and authenticity.

3.2 Israel Diamond Institute (www.israelidiamond.co.il)

The Israel Diamond Institute (IDI) Group of Companies is a non-profit, public interest company that represents all organisations and institutions involved in Israel's diamond industry. Israel is one of the world's leading diamond centres, and the Israeli diamond industry has an illustrious and impressive history dating back to the late 1930s. IDI works for the benefit of Israel's diamond industry. Its responsibilities include marketing and public relations, build-up of R&D capabilities, rough sources promotion, professional development and training, publication of professional literature and security consultancy. IDI is also responsible for industry participation in major trade fairs around the world, organising Israeli Diamond Pavilions, receptions, press conferences and other events at these fairs. IDI operates a representative office in Hong Kong, which fosters trade relations with Asian markets.

3.3 KARP Group

With over four decades of experience and expertise in the diamond trade, KARP caters to international luxury brands. Apart from being a DTC Sightholder, the group is recognised as an "institution" in the industry, using the most technologically advanced manufacturing systems in the business. KARP manufactures a huge array of products, from 0.005-carat goods to stones weighing 10 carats and above. It excels in the production of certified fine makes, fancy-cut goods and fancy coloured diamonds. The manufacturer is one of the few companies that has achieved up to 5-micron precision in diamond manufacturing.

3.4 Robert Wan Tahiti

Based in Papeete, Tahiti, the Robert Wan Group is a global brand that focuses its activities around the culture of Tahitian pearls. The Group is represented in Europe, Hong Kong, Mainland China, Japan, the Middle East and Oceania. The brand represents the culmination of Robert Wan's vision to create timeless exquisite pearl jewellery, from elegant chokers and sautoirs of gem-quality pearls from his farms in South Marutea. One of the industry pioneers, Robert Wan is known as the "Emperor of Pearls."

3.5 Shanghai Diamond Exchange

The Shanghai Diamond Exchange is the only transaction platform authorised by the State Council for the import and export of diamonds in mainland China. It is a member of the World Federation of Diamond Bourses.

4. About UBM Asia

Owned by UBM plc listed on the London Stock Exchange, UBM Asia is Asia's leading exhibition organiser and the biggest commercial organiser in mainland China, India and Malaysia. Established with its headquarters in Hong Kong and subsidiary companies across Asia and in the US, UBM Asia has a strong global network of 30 offices and over 1,400 staff in 25 major cities. We operate in 21 market sectors with 160 exhibitions, 75 conferences, 28 trade publications, 18 vertical portals and virtual event services for over 1,000,000 quality exhibitors, visitors, conference delegates, advertisers and subscribers from all over the world.

5. About UBM plc

UBM plc is a global events-led marketing services and communications company. We help businesses do business, bringing the world's buyers and sellers together at events and online, as well as producing and distributing news and specialist content. Our 5,500 staff in more than 30 countries are organised into expert teams which serve commercial and professional communities, helping them to do business and their markets to work effectively and efficiently.

6. About UBM Awards

UBM Awards and Partnerships is UBM plc's awards organiser and producer. Based in London, UBM Awards and Partnerships specialises in end-to-end delivery of cross-sector awards programmes and bespoke events worldwide. UBM Awards and Partnerships organises more than 30 awards and bespoke events annually including the UK's National Business Awards and National Sales Award.

For more information, contact: