Six Apart is putting the social network in a pre-wrapped box. Now your company can have its own social network as an extension of a Movable Type package. Six Apart, the creators of Movable Type and Typepad, have announced a new commercial product dubbed, Movable Type Community Solution (MTCS).

Judging by the press release MTCS is aimed at commercial users and won't be free. The company claims that MTCS is “a complete, out-of-the-box social media solution that enables the quick and easy deployment of online communities.”

Presumably you login to your Movable Type account and then enable the social networking features you want to use — communities, forums, etc — though at the moment details are thin.

We're not big fans of one size fits all development (typically it ends up being more, one size fits a few, but needs some serious hacking to do what you want it to do), and that's doubly true of social networks where the feature set is often best developed in response to the community rather than simply using by-the-book features.

Still if you're looking to add some social networking features to an existing commercial MT site, this could be an easy way to go and might work well for simpler things — like, say, a forum for customer feedback or the like.

Other options in this realm include Ning, which allows you to build and customize your own social network, picking a choosing from a pre-built set of options.

See Also:

Six Apart Wants To Help Manage Your Social Networks

Six Apart Launches Typepad For IPhone/iPod Touch

Six Apart Launches Movable Type 4

Six Apart Launches Vox

The Best Fitbit for Every Type of Activity

Whether you’re tracking sleep or training for a 10K, we’ve tested the best Fitbits for your health and fitness.

The Best Food Steamers for Every Type of Cook

From electric appliances to clay pots, we’ve put some of the most popular types of steamers to the test.

Six-Word Sci-Fi: Stories Written by You

Here's this month's prompt, how to submit, and an illustrated archive of past favorites.

A Russian Propaganda Network Is Promoting an AI-Manipulated Biden Video

Experts tell WIRED that Russian disinformation campaigns are using generative AI more and more.

Spotify, Stop Trying to Become a Social Media App

The music streaming service has added a comment function under podcasts. Who is it for, anyway?

Supreme Court Rules That US Government Can Continue Talking to Social Media Companies

The SCOTUS ruling overturns an earlier injunction that prevented platforms from communicating with the government for more than a year.

The Best MacBook Accessories for Working and Playing at Home or on the Go

From charging adapters to external monitors, we’ve gathered the essential peripherals for your Apple laptop.

I’m a Heavy Sleeper, So I Tried 5 Clocks That Shock and Roll

From runaway robots to “sonic bombs,” we reviewed offbeat alarm clocks designed to awaken even the heaviest sleepers.