Wladyslaw Reymont – the second Polish

Nobel Prize winner in literature

Wladyslaw Stanislaw Rejment (he changed his last name to Reymont) was born on May 7, 1867, in a small village Kobiele Wielkie, near Radomsko, a central part of Poland ruled by Russia at that time.

His father, who worked as an organist, was not able to finance the education of nine children. So, Reymont never attended a secondary school. His father often used physical force, trying to teach Reymont organ music, but because of stubbornness and lack of progress he was sent to Warsaw into the care of the eldest sister. There, in 1885 he passed the exams and was given a title of journeyman tailor. However, he didn’t want to work as a tailor. Since his early years, he loved to read books, and was eager to explore the world and adventures like heroes of Walter Scott novels, so he joined traveling theatres.

Lack of money and perspectives for a career as an actor brought him to his parents’ home in Tuszyn. Thanks to his father’s connections, Reymont got a job as a gateman at a railway crossing near Koluszki. Due to harsh conditions of work and life in the province, he left his job and accompanied in travel, as a medium, a German spiritualist. Soon Reymont lost his faith in his principal’s miracles.

Young Reymont was again free and penniless. He tried to survive working as a land surveyor. He was a clerk in a shop, and a salesman for a lumber yard. He returned to the theatre but after touring for several months the theatre troupe was dissolved. So he again tried to work for a railway company. He wrote about that time in his journal: “I had a roof over my head, literally a piece of dry bread, and quiet time. I had only one suit, and boots with holes in them. I was 22-years old. I lived on tea, bread and dreams. I wrote feverishly: dramas in ten acts, novels without end, stories in several volumes, poems… Then, I tore up everything mercilessly and burned it.” He was close to committing suicide. He considered joining a Pauline order in Czestochowa.

In 1892, his “Korespondencje” (Correspondence) was accepted for publication by “Głos” in Warsaw. Reymont moved to Warsaw and tried to get connections to publish his works. In 1895, his “Pielgrzymka do Jasnej Gory” appeared in the Warsaw “Tygodnik Ilustrowany” and got the attention of critics. A few months later, his novel “Komediantka,” describing a rebellious girl from the province, who joined a traveling theatre troupe, was published. And then, the continuation of it ‒ a novel “Fermenty” – was published in 1897.

The request from “Kurier Codzienny” for a novel resulted in Reymont’s bestseller “Ziemia Obiecana” (1897) showing a city of “Lodz” in the dramatic time of industrialization. In 1900, Reymont got compensation after being in an accident as a passenger of a railway. Aurelia Szacnajder-Szablowska, who took care of Reymont at the time of his recovery, became his wife.

The next few years, despite his poor health condition, brought a masterpiece of the Polish novel - “Chlopi” (The Peasants, 190209), describing life in the village Lipce over a period of four seasons of a year. In 1924, Reymont was awarded the Nobel Prize for the Peasants, which then was translated to dozens of foreign languages.

Reymont’s historic works “Rok 1794,” describing the time of the decline of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, and a novel “Wampir” (The Vampire, 1911), didn’t receive so much attention as “Chlopi.” It is worth remembering that the last novel by Reymont was “Bunt” (The Revolt, 1924). The story was a metaphor for the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, and describes a revolt by animals which take over their farm to bring equality, but soon it turns into a bloody terror. What a parallel to Orwell’s “Animal Farm” published over 20 years later!

After World War I, in 1919-20, Reymont visited the U.S., as he wrote: “to see my compatriots in that country.” Reymont died on Dec. 5, 1925, in Warsaw. A huge popularity was brought to Reymont’s novels “Ziemia obiecana” and “Chlopi,” during the era of the Polish People’s Republic, by TV and film productions by A. Wajda and J. Rybczynski, based on those novels. At the same time, the novel “Bunt” was prohibited to be republished.

An interesting exposition of memorabilia of Wladyslaw Reymont is presented in Kolaczkowo, the property with a palace which Reymont bought in 1920. Visit: www.gok.mysite.pl.