Who Is Posidonius? The Most Academic Stoic

Introduction & Biography Posidonius was born in the Greek city of Apamea in 135 B.C.E., located in what is now Syria. After he completed his early education in Apamea, he moved to Athens to pursue philosophical study at the Stoic school under Panaetius. Similar to his teacher, Posidonius found himself...

Who Is Panaetius? Spreading Stoicism from Greece to Rome

Introduction Panaetius of Rhodes was a student of famous Stoic scholars Diogenes of Babylon and Antipater of Tarsus, both of whom were leaders of the Stoic school. Beginning in 129 B.C.E., Panaetius took over as the leader of the Stoic tradition. His most notable achievement was using his time as...

Stillness is the Key by Ryan Holiday: Book Summary, Key Lessons and Best Quotes

“All of humanity’s problems stem from man’s inability to sit quietly in a room alone.” — Blaise Pascal The Buddhist word for it was upekkha. The Muslims spoke of aslama. The Hebrews, hishtavut. The second book of the Bhagavad Gita, the epic poem of the warrior Arjuna, speaks of samatvam,...

The Truth About Women, Power, and the Workplace: An Interview With Bestselling Author Marissa Orr

Marissa Orr is a former Google & Facebook executive, a leadership speaker, and the bestselling author of Lean Out: The Truth About Women, Power, and the Workplace. With 15 years of experience working at today’s top tech giants, as well as having conducted talks for thousands of people in the US,...

Who Is Chrysippus? The ‘Second Founder of Stoicism’ Who Died Laughing

Introduction Many of us don’t consider philosophy a laughing matter. After all, we turn to philosophers to understand the world around us and determine how to find meaning in it. To many, philosophy is a matter of life and death. However, that doesn’t mean philosophers take their own lives so...

Bestselling Author David Epstein On Philosophy, Accepting Obstacles, and Why Generalists Triumph in a Specialized World

The stereotype of the philosopher is one who spends all day and night with their dense textbooks and their denser thoughts. But when we look at the Stoics, we see that that's just not the case. Seneca was a philosopher and a playwright and a political advisor. Marcus Aurelius was...

A Beginner’s Guide To The End: An Interview With BJ Miller and Shoshana Berger

The one thing that appears the most in Marcus Aurelius, Seneca, and Epictetus is the importance of coming to terms with our mortality so we’re not defined by it. Most of us either deny our mortality or we are incredibly anxious about it. BJ Miller, one of the most well-respected...

Ten Years A Nomad: An Interview With Matt Kepnes

Traveling—that itch to get away, to hit the road, to see the world—feels like a distinctly modern craze. Yet it was common in Ancient Rome for people to escape the heat and the frenzy of the bustling city to get away for some time in the countryside. Marcus Aurelius liked...

The Highest Good: An Introduction To The 4 Stoic Virtues

Summum Bonum was the expression from Cicero, Rome’s greatest orator. In Latin, it means “the highest good.” And what is the highest good? What is it that we are supposed to be aiming for in this life? To the Stoics, the answer is virtue. They said that everything we face...

How To Recover From A Breakup (Timeless Lessons from The Stoics)

It happens to all of us. We’re happily coupled one day, madly in love, walking hand in hand in a lovely spot as the light dies from the sky and the city is set alight with streetlights and the gentle warm glow emanating from nearby windows. Then there is a...