Felipe González Márquez

Felipe González Márquez is one of the key political figures in the history of Spain in the second half of the twentieth century. A major figure in the democratic transition process, he was the third President of the Government of Spain from the restoration at the end of the 1970s and is the longest standing holder of the post of president, covering four parliaments and a total of thirteen and a half years.

The modernisation of Spain and its full integration into the European concert took place during his years in government between 1982 and 1996. Although he is now retired from politics, the former president continues to be active in various areas of Europe and Latin America.

Born in Seville, he is the father of three children and has seven grandchildren. Between 1969 and 2008 he was married to Carmen Romero López and married for a second time with Mar García Vaquero in 2012. A keen diner, he loves cooking and photography. His devotion to matters of the natural world and the cultivation of Bonsai trees is well known although his other passion for the design of jewellery and furniture is less well-known. He enjoys relaxing by playing billiards or with a good book or sculpting. He is a keen reader and loves flamenco music. His curiosity is undiminished and he has an enquiring mind.

Felipe González was born on the 5th of March 1942 in the district of Bellavista in Seville (Spain). The son of the cattle dealer Felipe González Helguera and Juana Márquez Domínguez, he was the second of four siblings.

Secondary education (Bachillerato) took place at the Padres Claretianos college and pre-university studies at the San Isidro Institute. Subsequently he studied Law at the University of Seville, graduating in 1965 before attending the preparatory year for a degree in economics at the Catholic University of Louvain in Belgium.

While an undergraduate he collaborated with the Catholic Action University Youth Movement as well as the Catholic Worker Youth. In 1962 he joined the Socialist Youth just as it was undergoing clandestine reorganization in Andalusia. Two years later he joined the ranks of the Spanish Socialist Workers´ Party (PSOE) and the following year had been elected part of the provincial committee for the party which was still a banned organization in Spain as it had been since the end of the Spanish Civil War in 1939 and whose leadership was based in exile overseas. His activities were therefore by necessity underground so that in 1971 his participation in demonstrations against the government of General Franco led to his being arrested by the police.

Following his graduation in law he opened a legal practice which specialised in labour conflicts which helped in his getting to know at first hand the difficulties of the working class during the years of economic development under Franco´s dictatorship. From his legal practice he aided in the formation of the UGT (General Workers´ Union – Socialist Party Trade Union Organisation) in the capital and in the smaller towns of Seville province.

In 1969 he married his first wife Carmen Romero López, a secondary school teacher and socialist party activist and trade unionist member of the UGT, in Seville and with whom he would father three children: Pablo (1972), David (1973) and María (1978).

González joined the Provincial Committee of the PSOE in Seville in 1965 and in 1969 joined the National Committee before being elected a member of the Executive Committee in 1970. During those years he initiated a movement for renewal of the socialist party ranks. In August 1972 and representing the Executive Committee of the Interior (PSOE Renovated) which fought against the Exterior Executive (Historic PSOE made up of the veterans in exile and headed by the General Secretary since 1944, Rodolfo Lopis), participated in the 25th Congress of the party which was held in Toulouse in France. Two years later, in October 1974, the 26th Congress which was also held in France, in Suresnes, elected him General Secretary, a post which had been open since the previous congress due to internal splits.

The growing crisis in the UCD and the attempted coup d´état on the 23rd of February 1981 showed the urgent desire for political change on the part of public opinion. General elections were called for the 28th of October 1982 where the PSOE achieved overwhelming victory with 48.3% of the popular vote and 202 seats in parliament, the first absolute majority by any party. Never before had a party of the left received so many votes in Spain and is still the best result for any political organization since the democratic period begun under the 1978 Constitution.

On the 2nd of December 1982 Felipe González was inaugurated President of the first Socialist Government in the history of Spain with 207 votes in his favor, 116 against and 21 abstentions (2nd Parliament).

Under the PSOE slogan ´Por el Cambio` (For Change) which was used during the election campaign, the arrival in government of the socialists encouraged hopes for change and transformation at all levels and across all sectors in a nation where considerable underdevelopment was clear in comparison with the established Western European democracies.

In this first parliament with a wide range of executive decisions and legislative innovations, the socialists applied a policy aimed on the one hand to strengthening and extending democracy while on the other pushing a series of major reforms which lead these years to be known as the ´decade of change` and encouraged a climate of confidence on the part of the population in state institutions.

In the social field Spain began to experience clear progress through the setting up of a Welfare State. Basic education was modernized on the one hand by means of the Ley Orgánica de derecho a la Educación (LODE – Right to Education Law) of July 1985 followed in October 1990 during the third parliament by the Ley Orgánica de Ordenación General del Sistema Educativo (LOGSE – Law for Ordering the Education System) which restructured secondary education and provided for universal and free public education up to the age of 16. On the other hand, a comprehensive social security system was instituted which was supported by the contributions of its members. The Ley General de la Sanidad (1986 – National Health System) governed the operation of the National Health System which provided public health cover which was free of charge and universal and of high quality. This new framework transformed public health in Spain with the provision of cover ceasing to be dependent on the contributions of the employee, no longer being seen as social insurance but rather as a universal right for all citizens. In addition, the Ley Orgánica 9/1985 reforming the penal code, legalized abortion and carried out the delicate task of reforming and professionalizing the Armed Forces which was known as the ´military transition`.

The cornerstone of PSOE foreign policy was membership of the European Community which was an aim that had been pursued by all Spanish governments since 1962 although this only became a priority after the elimination of the reticence and mistrust of the nationalism of the Franco regime and the official request made by Adolfo Suárez in 1977. For the democratic governments it became indispensable to overcome the secular marginalization of Spain in the European political and economic project.

On the 12th of June 1985 and after six years of arduous and tortuous negotiations in which Madrid had to embrace the jurisdiction of the Council of Europe, adapt the industrial structures subject to protectionist policies and overcome French opposition to the competition represented by the potent Spanish agricultural industry, González signed the Act for Accession to the European Economic Community (EEC), the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) and the European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM) at the Palacio Real in Madrid. Formal entry into the European Community took place on the 1st of January 1986 along with neighbouring Portugal.

On the 29th of October 1989, seven years after first taking power, elections were held which were again won by the PSOE with 39.6% of the vote and 175 parliamentary seats (4th Parliament).

Between the first presidency of the council in the first half of 1989 and the second in the second half of 1995, the weight of Spain and the influence of González in the new European Union (from November 1993) were in line with his commitment to the most Europhile theories. In May 1993 González was awarded the Charlemagne Prize in the German city of Aachen for his contribution to European unity. González was the third Spanish national to receive this prestigious award after the philosopher and diplomat Salvador de Madariaga in 1973 and King Juan Carlos in 1982. In 1994 European authorities seriously considered the Spanish socialist Felipe González as the replacement for Jacques Delors at the head of the European Commission although this possibility was later dropped confounding those who believed that he would not fail to take advantage of an opportunity to leave government and enter Europe politics at the highest level.

The relaunching of Spain´s diplomatic relations over the 14 years of socialist government far exceeded the Euro-Atlanticist context. Spain had become a country which inspired the confidence of the Arab countries as well as that of Israel, being a nation which could act as an intercultural bridge having in the past been multi-faith as well as the site of Arab and Jewish coexistence. In fact it was the González government which in January 1986 re-established diplomatic relations with Israel by recognizing its statehood. This unique duality was recognized with the choice of Madrid as host of the historic conference which, under the aegis of the Unites States of America and with joint sponsorship from the Soviet Union, was the beginning of the Middle East Peace Process. This important event was held in the Palacio Real in Madrid between the 30th of October and the 1st of November 1991 and was attended by Israeli, Palestinian, Jordanian, Egyptian, Syrian and Lebanese delegations along with its joint sponsors, Presidents Bush and Gorbachev.

On the 20th of June 1997 González resigned as General Secretary of the PSOE at the opening of its 34th Congress. In the 2000 elections for the 7th Parliament he would return to parliament not representing Madrid but rather Seville. This was to be his final parliament as he would not be a candidate in the 14th of March 2004 elections. Although no longer having a seat in parliament nor holding any posts within the party, he has never cut his ties to the party and has collaborated with its management committees whenever requested to do so.

At the end of 1998 the 1994 situation with Delors was repeated as the date for the replacement of Jacques Santer as President of the European Commission approached. In spite of his being nominated by the Socialist Government of Portugal and by Delors himself, González declined to become involved in the candidature process alleging that he did not want to occupy any institutional posts.

In 1999 he resigned from the Vice-Presidency of the Socialist International which he had held since 1978 although only after being appointed to take charge of the Committee on Global Progress with the mission of drafting a new manifesto setting out the Social Democrat response to the phenomenon of globalization. Seen as a synthesis of the Third Way expounded by Tony Blair and the more traditional Socialism of France´s Leonel Jospin, the text served as the basis for the Declaration which closed the 21st Congress of the Socialist International held in Paris in November 1999. Following up the previous commission, the Global Progress Foundation was also founded which González presided over until 2009.

In February of 2009 González went on to form part of the new International and Cooperation Policy Council of the PSOE which was conceived of as a support for the Foreign Ministry.

Between December 2009 and December 2012 González acted as President of the Doñana Nature Reserve Participation Council, a collegiate body for consultation and decision-making purposes subject to the Andalusian Regional Government´s Environment and Development body.

Since December 2010 and until May 2015 González was an independent director on the board of directors of Gas Natural Fenosa.

Similarly, González has founded businesses including Lalcon Consultoría in 2001 and Tagua Capital in 2011, an investment fund manager for areas including health, energy and information technology which is no longer operating.

In December 2014 the President of Colombia, Juan Manuel Santos, granted Colombian nationality to González, a country where he has not only been active as a mediator in the peace process with the guerrillas of the FARC (Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia) over many years – both politically as well as personally – but also has been one of the personalities, together with the Toledo International Centre for Peace and the former presidents José Mujica (Uruguay) and Ricardo Lagos (Chile) which proposed the candidature of President Santos for the Nobel Peace Prize in 2016 following the signing of the peace accords.