Actor-director Chris Rock poses with his co-stars, Kerry Washington, center, and Gina Torres at the premiere of their movie, "I Think I Love My Wife," Wednesday, March 7, 2007, in Los Angeles.

Actor, writer and director Chris Rock arrives at the premiere of Fox Searchlight Picture's "I Think I Love My Wife" at the ArcLight Cinemas on March 7, 2007, in Los Angeles. The comedy opens nationwide March 16.

Actor Chris Rock and his wife, actress Malaak Compton, pose together at the premiere of "I Think I love My Wife," Wednesday, March 7, 2007, in Los Angeles. The couple, married since 1996, has two children.

"I Think I Love My Wife" star Gina Torres poses with her husband, actor Laurence Fishburne, at the movie's premiere Wednesday, March 7, 2007, in Los Angeles.

Actress Kerry Washington shows off her sunshine yellow gown on the red carpet at the premiere of her new movie "I Think I Love My Wife," Wednesday, March 7, 2007, in Los Angeles.

Grammy-winning singer Mary J. Blige arrives for the premiere of the film "I Think I Love my Wife" in Hollywood, Calif., March 7, 2007. The comedy starring Chris Rock, Kerry Washington and Gina Torres is also written and directed by Rock.

Actor Mario Van Peebles and his son, Mandela, arrive for the premiere of the film "I Think I Love My Wife" in Hollywood, Calif., on March 7, 2007.

Actor David Spade poses on the red carpet at the premiere of "I Think I Love My Wife" on Wednesday, March 7, 2007, in Los Angeles.

Actor Laurence Fishburne is photographed at the premiere of "I Think I Love My Wife" on Wednesday, March 7, 2007, in Los Angeles. His wife, Gina Torres, stars in the movie.

Actor Laurence Fishburne poses with his wife, actress Gina Torres, left, and Chris Rock's wife, actress Malaak Compton, at the premiere of the movie "I Think I Love My Wife" on Wednesday, March 7, 2007, in Los Angeles. Rock and Torres co-star as husband and wife in the comedy.

Actress Malaak Compton, wife of Chris Rock, arrives at the premiere of his new movie, "I Think I Love My Wife," Wednesday, March 7, 2007, in Los Angeles.

Actor Chris Rock and co-star Gina Torres pose at the premiere of "I Think I love My Wife" on Wednesday, March 7, 2007, in Los Angeles. They play husband and wife in the comedy that Rock wrote, directed and starred in.

Actress Gina Torres poses on the red carpet at the premiere of her movie, "I Think I Love My Wife," Wednesday, March 7, 2007, in Los Angeles. Torres appeared in "The Matrix" movies and has had roles on numerous TV shows, including "Alias," "CSI," "The Shield" and "Without A Trace."

Actor Tequan Richmond from "Everybody Hates Chris" arrives at the premiere of "I Think I Love My Wife" on Wednesday, March 7, 2007, in Los Angeles.

Chris Rock, right, talks with director John Singleton and a guest at the premiere of Rock's new movie, "I Think I Love My Wife," Wednesday, March 7, 2007, in Los Angeles.

Actors Steve Buscemi, left, and Chris Rock chat at the premiere of "I Think I Love My Wife" on Wednesday, March 7, 2007, in Los Angeles.

Actor Chris Rock and his wife, actress Malaak Compton, arrive at the premiere of "I Think I love My Wife" on Wednesday, March 7, 2007, in Los Angeles. Rock wrote, directed and starred in the movie.