Witness the world premiere of 11 new films and musical compositions inspired by accomplished Alabamians on Saturday, April 13, at the University of Alabama at Birmingham.

“The Courage Lies Within You” is an artistic collaboration between the UAB College of Arts and Sciences’ departments of Music and History. The multimedia project features 11 new works of music by 12 composers commissioned by the UAB Chamber Trio. The performance is interspersed with short films produced by seven students in UAB’s Media Studies Program, led and mentored by Director Michele Forman. The subjects of these new works and films are noteworthy people from Alabama’s recent past.

The performance of “The Courage Lies Within You” is set for 7 p.m. in UAB’s Mary Culp Hulsey Recital Hall, 950 13th St. South. Admission is free and open to the public.

The project is led by Forman, assistant professor of history, and Professor of Music James Zingara, DMA.

The UAB Chamber Trio is Zingara, trumpet and flugelhorn, with Distinguished Professor Denise Gainey, clarinet, and Chris Steele, piano. “The Courage Lies Within You” theme song will be sung by ​Margaret Jackson, visiting assistant professor, with music by Lois Henry and lyrics by Emily Jaworski-Koriath.

The Alabamians and the works they inspired include:

Charles Alfred “Chief” Anderson, Tuskegee Airman, known as the father of Black aviation, with musical composition by Andrew Wilson, vice principal of the National College of Music and Arts, London United Kingdom, and film by Sage Lucia.

Alice Coachman, the first Black woman from any country to win an Olympic gold medal, with musical composition by Jeffrey Boehm, senior lecturer in Music, Bath Spa University, Bath United Kingdom, and film by Laura Nell Walker.

Claudette Colvin, civil rights activist, with musical composition by Lori Ardovino, professor of music, University of Montevallo, and film by Kekeli Doamekpor.

​Laverne Cox, groundbreaking actor and LGBT advocate, with musical composition by Scott McAllister, professor of composition and director of Academic ​​Studies Division, Baylor University​, and film by Parker Yarborough.

Neil Owen Davis, journalist best known for his editorials in support for civil rights and opposition to ​​white supremacy in Alabama, with musical composition by Mark Lackey, associate professor of music, Samford University, and film by Annie Foreman and Olivia Hall.

Daniel “Chappie” James Jr., fighter pilot and first African American four-star general in the ​United States Armed Forces, with musical composition by Jaren Hinckley, professor of clarinet, Brigham Young University, and film by Annie Foreman and Olivia Hall.

Mae Carol Jemison, first African American female astronaut, with musical composition by Joseph Landers, the Linda and Todd Strange Endowed ​​Professor at the University of Montevallo, and film by Laura Nell Walker.

Frank M. Johnson, federal judge who played a crucial role in shaping civil rights law in America ​​and applying it in Alabama, with musical composition by Joshua Burel, chair of the Department of Music, Theatre and Film, ​​University of Alabama in Huntsville, and film by Kafui Sakyi-Addo.

Juliette Hampton Morgan, Montgomery, Alabama-based librarian and civil rights activist, with musical composition by Valentin Bogdan, DMA, professor of music, Mississippi University for Women, and film by Kekeli Doamekpor.

Hugh Clowers Thompson Jr., United States Army helicopter pilot who was instrumental in ending the My Lai massacre in Vietnam, with musical composition by William Price, UAB professor of music, and film by Sage Lucia.