THE HISTORY OF COLLEY: EARLY SETTLERS,

LOPEZ, RICKETTS, GANOGA LAKE, COLLEY, THE SOLDIERS, INDIVIDUAL BIOGRAPHIES, TOWNSHIP OFFICERS

Colley Township House

March 2009

This structure was formally designated as a Historical Resource by the Pennsylvania Historical & Museum Commission in March 2009. It was likely constructed in the 1890s by or at least for the interests of James McFarlane, the "father" of the local tanning industry and a prominent local landowner and businessman. In 1903, McFarlane and his wife Augsuta (Lovell) McFarlane sold the building to several prominent local politicans and business leaders for use as a townhouse. Read more in the biographical section on James McFarlane in the Streby History of Laporte. You can see the entire tax docuemnt by clicking on the photo shown above.

Source: Burton Adams, Sheriff of Sullivan County

Sullivan County Public Taxpayer Docuemnt, February 2009

Colley township was not settled as early as many other districts of the county. The first improvements were probably made at the Long Pond about the time the Turnpike was built but it does not appear that these were permanently occupied.

The first attempt to make a permanent settlement in what is now within the limits of Colley township was made by Hugh Bellas of Sunbury. By deed of July 16, 1813, George Lahmer and wife transferred to Mr. Bellas a 1/8 interest in 50 tracts of land on the headwaters of the Loyalsock Creek. In Oct. 3. 1817, he secured the second 1/8 interest in the same lands, and on March 17, 1824, the third 1/8 interest in the same lands, Nov.30, 1830, he purchased a 1/4 interest, thereby holding a 5/8 interest in these lands. July 2, 1832, Mr. Bellas, Joseph B. Anthony and George A. Fick, purchased the remaining 3/8 interest in the 50 tracts of land.

Mr. Bellas was determined to settle his lands and offered liberal inducements to settlers to locate there. The first improvements of a permanent character were made at Shady Nook, three and one-half miles up the Loyalsock from Lopez. Valentine Housewart and brothers, James and John, settled there in 1823 or 1824. The following year, Jesse, Nathan and Absalom Lee settled at Shady Nook. From them the settlement of the head waters of the Loyalsock received the name Lee Settlement, and the road built from the settlement to Long Pond was called the Lee Road.

After remaining one year, James and John Housewart returned to Northumberland county. Henry Rough, a German, received 100 acres of land in payment for work done on the Turnpike and settled near Rough’s Pond or Grant’s Lake on the lands now owned by his son-in-law, John Housewart.

The Hunsingers were among the early settlers in the eastern section of the county, three brothers, George, John and Jacob being among the pioneers. Tradition differs as to the origin of the family. It is claimed by some of the families that they are of French descent and came to America early in the eighteenth century in a French colony that landed at Plymouth Rock, and that, during the Revolutionary War, the colony was broken up, many of the colonists coming to Pennsylvania. In evidence of this theory, Alfred Hunsinger of Colley has in his possession a violin made near Paris, which it is stated was brought from France with the colony and has been handed down through several generations, being finally purchased by Mr. Hunsinger. A few years ago a member of the Hunsinger family of Philadelphia, who was writing a history of the Hunsinger families, wrote to P.W. Hunsinger of Cherry inquiring of the families of that name in this section, and stated that they came originally from France.

The descendants of George Hunsinger claim that he was born in the state of New York, and that he moved from there to Berwick and came to Sullivan county from that place about the time the Susquehanna and Tioga Turnpike was built as far as the Loyalsock. This would indicate that they came from the New England states with others who composed a large portion of the early settlers of the North Branch valley of the Susquehanna River.

Another theory is that the Hunsingers originally came from the valley of the River Rhine, Germany. It is also stated that John Hunsinger was born in Germantown, near Philadelphia. In evidence of this story is the fact that all of the older members of the Hunsinger families spoke the German tongue, some being unable to speak any other language. It is possible that they are of both French and German origin, and they may have come form that part of the Rhine valley formerly bordering on both countries.

John Hunsinger came from Luzerne county to the Lee Settlement in 1828, purchasing 100 acres of land to the north of Shady Nook. He was a blacksmith and did blacksmithing for those working on the Turnpike when it was being built. In 1848 he moved to the Colley settlement. His children were:

William, died when a young man

Katherine, married Wilson Potter of Colley;

Jerry, of Lee Settlement;

Daniel, settled in Colley;

Taper, settled in Colley;

Hettie, married Rev. Carl Erle;

Alfred, settled in Colley;

Margaret, married Ira Steel of Wilmot township.

Jerry Hunsinger married Hettie Derick of Schuylkill county, PA., and settled on the headwaters of the Loyalsock in the Lee Settlement where he built a sawmill in 1839. To Mr. and Mrs. Hunsinger have been born, Malinda, Maria, Louisa and Almond.

Daniel Hunsinger married Mary Miller of Cherry and settled in Colley township where he died about ten years ago. Their children were Mary Katherine, Wellington, Lawson, Reuben, Solon and Clinton.

Taper Hunsinger settled in Colley on the farm now owned by his son Thomas. He was married twice, his first wife being Mahal Henry, and his second wife Gusta Steel. His children were, C.F., Hannah, Theresa, Jonathan, Thomas, Hettie, Rush and Lizzie.

Alfred Hunsinger married Hannah Reeser, a daughter of John Reeser, one of the early settlers of Cherry township. He is a carpenter by trade and a veteran of the civil war, and was in the service nearly three years. To Mr. and Mrs. Hunsinger were born Addison, Louis, Oliver and Malissa.

Jacob Hunsinger, a brother of John Hunsinger, came from Luzerne county and settled first in Cherry. He later settled at the Long Pond, now called Ganoga Lake, and afterwards moved to Wyominng county. He had one son who lived near Harvey’s Lake. It is said that he built a section of the Turnpike near Ganoga Lake.

John Santee came from Northumberland county to Lee Settlement in 1838. There is a popular tradition that the Santee‘s were French Huguenots, moving to Holland in 1685 and coming to American in 1690. John Santee was a soldier in the war of 1812. His son, I.S. Santee of Colley, is the only survivor of the family at present living in the county.

Jacob Train settled on the farm later owned by the McCarroll’s, probably about 1834. Elias Girvin was also an early settler in that section. About 1840, a German settlement was started just across the county line from the Lee Settlement in Wyoming county.

What is known as the Colley settlement was made along the North Branch of Mehoopany creek in the north section of the township. John Bates was one of the first settlers in this section. John Persun and D.H. Goodwin built a sawmill on the Mehoopany creek soon after 1840, This mill was erected to cut the pine timber of which there was an abundance in the vicinity. Previous to this, a settlement had been made in South Wilmot and a large number came to this fertile and beautiful valley to secure homes between 1840 and 1850.

The Messersmith families have been as prominently identified with the history of Colley township since its organization as any family in the county. Jacob Messersmith, a soldier under Napoleon Bonaparte, came from Germany to America in 1833, landing at Philadelphia. Soon after, he came to Cherry with his four sons, Thomas, Adam, Jacob and George, and settled in the Fuller school district. In 1844, Adam settled in Colley, being followed soon by his brothers, Thomas and George. John Santee and John Hunsinger came from the Lee settlement. Samuel Bahr, Jonathan Colley, after whom the township was named, William W. Potter, Joel Potter and others settled in the valley.

Sciota Run forms a beautiful valley in the extreme northeastern corner of Colley township. This valley was occupied in the latter part of the eighteen-forties by William, Daniel, Dudley and Albert Vaughn. In 1851, Amos Hunsinger bought the J.H. Potter farm and Sylvester Steel and William Shields came to the Colley settlement. In 1852, David N. Oliver, Daniel Mossier and Henry Dieffenbach came to the settlement. In 1854, Christian Mosier settled there and John Dieffenbach of Cherry and his brother Henry of Colley built a gristmill on Mehoopany creek near C.F. Hunsinger's hotel. Henry Dieffenbach sold his interest in the mill and later, in 1863, re-purchased the plant.

The census of 1850 gives the population of Colley township as 175, that of 1860 places it at 388. For the next 20 years, the population of Colley township declined, being 366 in 1870 and 373 in 1880. In 1890, the population had increased again to 1662.

LOPEZ

This busy town takes its name from Lopez Creek which at this point unites with the Loyalsock, Lopez Creek having been named in honor of John R. Lopez, a contractor, who built a section of the Susquehanna and Tioga Turnpike. The place was originally called Tar Bridge from the fact that the bridge crossing Lopez Creek at this place was painted with coal tar to preserve the timber.

The first improvement was made May, 1886, when J.S. Hoffa of Dushore built a sawmill. The same year the Lehigh Valley Railroad Company extended its line from Bernice to Lopez.

D.W. Osler, of Forksville, realizing that a booming town would soon be located at this point, erected a hotel in the winter of 1886-1887. In the year of 1888, Jennings Bros., who were operating a sawmill on Taylor creek near Seaman’s hotel, moved their plant to Lopez. They enlarged their mill, built a large store and a number of dwelling houses and the town began to boom.

J.S. Hoffa sold his mill to C.W. Wilhelm, who operated it for a number of years. In 1888, Trexler & Turrell purchased a large tract of timber on the Lopez and Panther Den creeks and built a large mill south-east of Lopez. They built large dams and floated the logs to their mill. In 1897, they sold their mill to Jennings Bros, who are using it to cut hardwood lumber. The timber near Lopez was soon cut and Jennings Bros. built and equipped a narrow gauge railroad which has been extended 15 miles into the forests of Wyoming and Sullivan counties with numerous branches to reach the timber of Lee settlement. Later the firm added electric lights to their plant and now furnish light for their mills, store, residences and many other business places in the town.

The first kindling wood factory was erected in 1888 by McCartney & Hall. It was burned down in 1890 and rebuilt the same year by McCartney & Higgins and was operated by them until 1894 when it was sold to the Standard Kindling Wood Co. It has since been destroyed by a fire. In 1895, the Fisher kindling wood factory was built and six months later was destroyed by fire. It was rebuilt in 1896 and again burned down during the same year. Sixty days afterward, the factory was rebuilt and in operation. It was again visited by fire in 1897 and the packing room burned. The damage was soon repaired and the factory is now one of the important industries of Lopez.

The clothespin factory was built in 1894 by J.W. McCartney. It was destroyed by fire in 1896 and was rebuilt the same year. It is at present operated by Jennings Bros.

The North American Coal company leased the Jackson coal lands near Lopez and in 1901 commenced erecting a large coal breaker about a half-mile west of Lopez. The breaker was completed in 1902, having a capacity of 1200 tons per day. The company also built a number of dwelling houses and a large store and expected in a short time to do a very large business.

The growth of Lopez has been marvelous. A switching crew is kept constantly busy doing the local switching, the shipments of lumber, bark, coal, clothespins and kindling wood being very heavy.

The town of Lopez has at present four hotels, the Lopez House with James P. McGee proprietor, the McKibbins House, H.W. McKibbins proprietor, the McDermott House, Henry McDermott proprietor and the Loyalsock Hotel, Julia Jackson proprietor; three restaurants conducted by John H Yonkin, William E. Steafather and Reed G. Frutchey, respectively.

Jennings Bros. conduct a very large general store and employ a number of clerks. C.A. Johnson and H.J. Castle each conducts a store and are doing a prosperous business. Jacob Per, of Hughesville, has a branch clothing store at this place. H.M. Kellogg is the proprietor of a well-stocked jewelry store and he and Dr. Christian run in connection with it a drug store. A.L. Dyer conducts a meat market and livery. D.W. Pealer a shoe and harness shop. W.L. Johnson, Lawrence Dunn and L.R. Carrington each have a fine barbering business. J.P. Gorgg runs a wholesale liquor store. Dr. J.L. Christian looks after the health of the town.

The people of Lopez take great pride in their schools and in the few years of the town’s existence have equipped a school of six grades, and since 1899 have each year graduated a class from the high school. A school was established at the Murray mines in 1902.

There are four churches that conduct regular religious services in the town. The United Evangelical under the pastorate of Rev. T.J. Hower and the Protestant Methodists presided over by Rev. Josia Smith have each erected a handsome edifice in which to worship. The Lutherans hold services in the M.P. Church, Rev. J.M. Smeltzer, of Ricketts, being the pastor. Rev. J.A. Enright of Mildred holds regular services here for the Roman Catholics in this section.

The population of Lopez is nearly 1,000.

RICKETTS

The Bowmans Creek Branch of the Lehigh Valley railroad was extended to the county line in 1891, and through to Wilkes-Barre in 1892. In 1891 the present town of Ricketts was started. In 1891 the Albert Lewis Lumber company built a sawmill and lumbered about one year. The same year Trexler & Turrell commenced erecting a very large mill equipped with the most modern machinery. They have built many miles of railroad to haul the logs and bark from the woods. The firm has also a large store, and a stave and excelsior factory. About 150 men are employed in manufacturing lumber. In 1891 a large hotel was erected.

The town is on the county line. The greater portion consisting of the hotel, depot, store and a large number of dwellings, is located in Wyoming county. The sawmill and a number of mill houses are in Sullivan county. The Lutherans have a fine church, Rev. Smeltzer being the pastor. The United Evangelicals have also a congregation and hold services in the Lutheran church. There is a school of two grades in Sullivan county and a school of one grade in Wyoming county.

GANOGA LAKE

This summer resort has been very popular for many years. Improvements were made at the point when the Turnpike was built and buildings were erected for the accommodation of travelers. There is no record that the place was kept up. In 1852 the present stone house or hotel was built and in 1870 it was started as a summer resort. A large wooden building has since been erected to accommodate the large number who come to the resort each summer. The lake is a beautiful sheet of pure water and all the land surrounding is owned by R.B. Ricketts of Wilkes-Barre. No buildings have been erected except the depot and those used in connection with the hotel business as a summer resort.

COLLEY

For a number of years the town of Colley, if such it may be called, has been doing considerable business. But the business places are scattered so that it can scarcely be called a town. At Colley Corners there is located the store of G.D. Dieffenbach, who also conducts the post office. The Evangelical church is east of the store, and west a short distance is the hotel of C.F. Hunsinger. There are also a number of dwellings houses here. G.S. Landback has a store and sawmill about one mile west of the Corners. Arthur White conducts a blacksmith shop. The farmers of Colley have erected a large Grange hall and have had a prosperous lodge for many years.

THE SOLDIERS

Among those of Colley’s citizens to enlist in the days of 1861-1865, were Daniel V. Pritchard, Lewis D. Potter, Charles Shock, C.V. Potter, John G. Grant, Hector Pritchard, Major Scouten, Lyman Brown, Taper Hunsinger, Peter Mosier, Nathan L. Brown, Alfred Hunsinger, Patrick Slow, William Junk and Josiah Hembury.

FRANK NORTHRUP

Of Lopez, was born in 1875 at Powell, PA. He is the son of Eugene Northrup whose father John Northrup settled in the vicinity of Powell at an early date. He is a miner by trade and is employed at the Murray mines. In 1897, he married Louisa Ryant, who was born at Spencer, NY, in 1877, a daughter of Charles Ryant. To them have been born Juliette, Emma and May.

ARTHUR STREVY

Of Ricketts, was born in 1879 at Overton, Bradford county. He is a son of Wilson Strevy of Overton and a descendant of Leonard Streby, the third settler in Overton township. He has been fireman on a log train for 6 years. In 1901, he married Jennie A. Meckes, of Ricketts, who was born at White Haven, PA., in 1884. She is a daughter of Amos Meckes who came from White Haven to Lopez when Lopez was first started.

WILLIAM A. CROWL

Was born in Cherry in 1868. Ten years ago, he came to Ricketts where he has since been employed as engineer on Trexler & Turrell’s log train. He is a member of the Colley School Board. He married Stella Strevy who was born in Albany township in 1874. Her father is John Strevy, a son of Isaac Streby and a grandson of Leonard Streby. To them have been born Albert J., Edith M. and Archie M.

WILLIAM E. STEAFATHER

Was born in Dushore in 1871. He is a son of Lucas and Mary Steafather and a grandson of Sylvester Steafather, who came from Germany to Lee Settlement in 1837 in a German colony, and who later moved to the farm near Dushore now owned by his heirs. Lucas Steafather moved to Cawker City, Kansas, in 1878 where the subject of this sketch was educated. He later returned to Dushore and afterward moved to Lopez, where he died in 1901, aged 60 years. Mr. Steafather is a baker by trade and in 1893 started a bakery in Lopez, where in 1899 he opened a saloon and eating house which he now conducts. Previously, he had worked as a baker at Dushore, Thorndale and Eagles Mere.

GEORGE HENRY HUFFARD

Was born in 1868 at Mehoopany. He is a son of Jeffery Huffard who was born at Stroudsburg and reared at Pittston. The family is of French and German descent. His mother is a descendant of a Hessian colonel, her father coming from Canada to Wyoming about 1820. Mr. Huffard is a lumber inspector and assistant foreman of Jennings Bros. hardwood mill at Lopez. He is a member of the K.O.T.M. In 1895, he married Katie Fromfelker who was born in 1878 in Pike county. To them have been born three children, Grier, Ross and Irvin.

JOSIAH HEMBURY

Of Colley, was born in 1831 at Worcestershire, England. He came to America in 1842, locating first in Wyoming county. About 55 years ago, he came to Sullivan county where he operated the first steam saw mill in the county, that of Michael Meyert at Laporte. Later, he sawed the lumber for the S.L.& S.R.R. Co. when they built the breaker at Bernice. In 1861, he married Mary Ann Carroll of Philadelphia and to them have been born fourteen children: Mary Ann, dead; William, dead; Ellen, married Adam Dieffenbach of Cherry; John, drowned in 1861; Jane, married Aaron Reed; Emery; Ella, married Judson Cooper; Ada, married Adam Baumgartner, deceased; Elizabeth married Frank Baumgartner, of Towanda; Josiah, of Bernice; Andrew, of Somerset county; George; John, of Dushore, and Lottie at home.

ALBERT L. DYER

The present Member of Assembly from Sullivan county, was born in 1868 at New Era. His father John C. Dyer was born in Bradford county, his grandfather Ephraim Dyer coming from Boston to Bradford county at an early date. Mr. Dyer secured his education in the public schools at New Era and the Susquehanna Collegiate Institute of Towanda. When 19 years of age, he came to Bernice where he engaged in the lumbering business until May 1891, when he went to Lopez where he has since resided. At present, he conducts the Lopez Meat Market and a livery stable. Fraternally, he is identified with Evergreen Lodge, No. 163, F.& A.M., of Monroeton, Dushore Lodge, No. 494, I.O.O.F. and Lopez Tent, K.O.T.M. He is an active member of the Republican party, has filled several township offices, and in 1902 was elected to the State Legislature. In October 1894, he married Allie Mae Utz, a daughter of John Utz, of Dushore, who for many years was one of the most prominent businessmen of Sullivan county. To Mr. and Mrs. Dyer has been born one son, Paul.

PHILIP J. TUBACH

Of Colley, was born at Dushore in 1859. His father is Philip Tubach, Sr. who came to Laporte from Baden, Germany, about 47 years ago. About 45 years ago, he came to Dushore where for many years he was engaged in the furniture and undertaking business. Mr. Tubach owns a farm in Colley, one in Cherry, and valuable real estate in Dushore borough. For a time he was identified with his father in the undertaking business at Dushore. In 1884 he married Adaline Saxe who was born in Wilmot township in 1865. Her father is Samuel R. Saxe, of Cherry, who was born in Philadelphia in 1836 and came to Wilmot township when a child with his father Samuel Saxe, Sr., a native of Germany. Her mother, Caroline Obert, was born in Germany in 1846, a daughter of Mathias Obert who settled in Colley. To Mr. and Mrs. Tubach have been born William E. , Arthur L., Blanche B., who died in 1894, Caroline, Samuel Walter, Charles Leon who died May 11, 1902 and Mary Regenia.

GEORGE S. LANDBACK

Of Colley, was born in 1865 in Cherry township. His father, Harvey Landback, came to Cherry with his parents from Berks county over fifty years ago. Mr. Landback owns a store and sawmill at Colley where he has for many years been extensively engaged in the lumbering and mercantile business. In 1887, he married Sophia Shoemaker, who died after a few brief years of married life. To them were born two children, Edna and Grover. In 1900, he married Clara Secules, a daughter of ex-county commissioner Philip Secules of Shrewsbury.

REV. JOSIAH SMITH, Ph.D.

Of Lopez, was born in England in 1866. His father, John D. came to America when a young man, became an American citizen and served in the Civil War. Later, he returned to England. Mr. Smith spent four years at Usharmon College and two years at Durham University where he received honors. He is the possessor of two gold medals which he received from the science and art departments, respectively. He came to America in 1893 and is a minister of the Methodist Protestant church. He has been stationed at Lopez since 1902. He married Jane Teasdale who was born in England in 1864, a daughter of John G. Teasdale. To them have been born James G., George M., Herbert T., Floyd H. and an infant.

A.H. ROBERTS

Of Lopez, was born in 1865 in Susquehanna county. His father, Nathaniel Roberts, was born in Susquehanna county in 1835. His grandfather Samuel Roberts, a first cousin of ex-President Hayes, was among the number that emigrated from Connecticut to Susquehanna county. In 1889, Mr. Roberts came to Bernice and is at present employed at the Murray mines having charge of the hoisting machines. In 1892, he married Margaret McGee, who was born at Barclay in 1873, a daughter of Enos McGee of Bernice. To Mr. and Mrs. Roberts have been born four children: E. Manville, Margaret M., Helen and Pauline.

REED G. FRUTCHEY

Was born in Wilmot township in 1866. He is a son of William H. Frutchey who was born in Monroe Co., Pa., and came to Wilmot township about seventy years ago, being one of the early settlers of that township. Mr. Frutchey came to Lopez in 1902 where he is the proprietor of a restaurant and eating house. In 1891 he married Belle Potter, who was born in Colley township in 1867, a daughter of William Potter and a granddaughter of Wilson Potter, who lumbered in Colley in 1864

HENRY J. CASTLE

Was born in 1858 in Kiantone, Chautauqua county, New York, a son of John Castle of that place. His mother was Mary Gordon both his parents being natives of Ireland, in which country they were married. They emigrated to America and came to Chautauqua county, New York. Mr. Castle came to Sullivan county in 1878, where he entered the employ of Jennings Bros. For a number of years he was postmaster at Lopez. In 1901, he embarked in the mercantile business at Lopez, in which he has ever since been engaged. In 1893 he married Alice Deegan who was born at Dushore in 1868. Her father Jeremiah Deegan was born in Kingston, New Jersey in 1833, coming to Cherry with his parents when an infant. He is a veteran of the Civil War and one of Dushore’s most successful businessmen. Her mother was Ella B. Smith who was born in Monroeton in 1843. To Mr. and Mrs. Castle have been born three children, Leo J., Geo H. and Mary E., who died in 1902.

JAMES P. MCGEE

Was born in 1867 in Wilmot township, Bradford county. His father is John P. McGee of Satterfield. He was born in Cherry township, a son of Patrick McGee who settled in Cherry in 1845. Mr. McGee’s mother was Margaret Miner, a daughter of John Miner, Sr., who was one of the early settlers of Cherry, settling the farm now owned by his son Thomas Miner. At present, he is proprietor of Hotel Lopez, which he purchased off Mrs. Ambrose Farrell and where he conducts a first class hostelry. In 1895, he married Mary Gilligan, who was born in Cherry township in 1867, a daughter of James and Bridget Gilligan. To them have been born two children, Leo J. and Mary Alice.

REV.J.F. HOWER

Was born in 1864, in Anthony township, Lycoming county. His father, Christian Hower, is a native of Wurtemburg, Germany and came to America about 1839, when 17 years old. He settled in Anthony township where he lived over 52 years. Mr. Hower taught school for eleven years, engaged in Y.M.C.A. work, and in 1897 was ordained a minister of the United Evangelical Church. At present, he is stationed at Lopez with appointments at Lopez, Bernice and Ricketts. In 1885, he married Ida Bell Moyer, of Anthony township, who was born in Lycoming county in 1866.

D.W. PEALER

Of Lopez, was born in 1854 at Fishing Creek, Columbia county. His father was Elias Pealer, a native of Columbia county and a descendant of the early settlers of that section. Mr. Pealer is a shoemaker and came to Lopez from Dushore in 1889. He married Elizabeth A. Lawrence, who was born at Dushore in 1853. She is a daughter of John Lawrence and a granddaughter of William Lawrence, one of the first settlers of Cherry township. To them have been born five children: Anna F. married Charles Meyer of Somerset county, M.L. married Jennie Wilcox and resides at Ricketts, N.W., Cora E. and T.J.I.

CLARENCE A. JOHNSON

Of Lopez, was born in 1864 at Light Street, Columbia county. His father was George W. Johnson, a farmer. He is a merchant, first commencing with an ice-cream parlor at Lopez in 1894, which he has since enlarged and where he now conducts a general store. He married Diana Hawk, who was born at Albrightville in 1865, a daughter of Timothy Hawk, who died in 1869. To them have been born four children, Floyd who died in 1891, Ethel, Evelyn and Merle.**

** Editor's Note: In June 2007, Dale Berger, the author of the Mackes-Meckes Genealogy Page, provided additional information and corrections on the Johnson-Hawk lineage as follows:

The family of Diana (Hawk) Johnson is listed on page 435 of "Genealogy of Conrad and Elizabeth (Borger) Hawk" by Atwood James Shupp (Gateway Press, Inc., Baltimore, 1990). This Hawk genealogy shows that Diana's father was Timothy Hawk, b. 9 Jul 1840 and d. 16 Oct 1869. Timothy is buried in Salem Church cemetery at Gilbert in Monroe Co., PA. The dates on his tombstone agree with the dates in the Hawk genealogy.

For Diana Hawk, the Hawk genealogy shows a date and place of birth of 12 Oct 1866 in Gilbert, Monroe Co., PA. No sources are given for this information.

Bob Mackes, the former genealogist for the Meckes/Mackes family, found that Diana was born in Oct of 1865 in Carbon Co. I believe that information probably came from the marriage license of Diana to Clarence A. Johnson (Sullivan County marriage license #1685, vol. 1, pg. 422). Since Albrightsville is in Carbon Co., she could have been born there.

The mother of Diana Hawk was Catharine Meckes (1845-19 May 1892). About 1871, after the death of Timothy Hawk, Catharine married Anthony Schuch (22 Dec 1847-28 Feb 1901). Anthony was also from Carbon Co., PA. Catharine and Anthony are both buried at Bahr Hill (aka. Fairview) Cemetery at Dushore, Sullivan Co.

Based on the information presented in the Hawk genealogy, I have changed the name of Diana's father from "Unknown" to "Timothy Hawk" in the Meckes genealogy. I have also removed the statement about whether or not Timothy Hawk and Catharine Meckes were ever legally married. Since Catharine did not marry Anthony Schuch until 1871, two years after Timothy's death, I think they were probably married. These changes will be on RootsWeb and Ancestry. com with the next update I post to those sites.

The "Mrs. Robert Hawk", mentioned in The Sullivan Review of 13 May 1897, was Sallie Ann (Burger) Hawk (27 Dec 1839-7 May 1897), wife of Robert Hawk (14 Mar 1839-31 Mar 1913), who was a brother of Timothy Hawk, father of Diana (Hawk) Johnson. Diana would have been Sallie Ann's niece, not her daughter. The obit is in error on that point. Robert and Sallie Ann (Burger) Hawk are also buried at Dushore.

At Fairview, the note with the transcription for "Sally" Ann Hawk (1839-1897)is that she was the wife of "Robinson Hawk"; this is a transcription error. Robert Hawk, her actual husband, is shown in the Federal Census for Lopez in 1900 as widowed and living with his daughter Stella Hawk, age 18. Another family headed by Liander Hawk is also shown in Lopez in this census report; we are not certain if they are related families.

BURTON L. KEENEY

Was born in Braintrim township, Wyoming county, in 1840, a son of Ezra Keeney. Richard Keeney, an ancestor, came from Connecticut with the early settlers of Wyoming Valley. Mr. Keeney lives on a farm in Sciota Vale where he has lived the past six years. He enlisted in Co. I. 6th Pa. Reserves and was in the service four years during the Civil War. Mrs. Keeney was a daughter of H.D. Williams of Braintrim township, Wyoming county. She was born in 1859. Mr. and Mrs. Keeney were married in 1882 and to them have been born: Anna M. married C.E. Miller of Sciota Vale, Leroy B., and R.R.

FRANK B. HUNSINGER

Was born in Cherry township in 1862. He is a son of Jonas Hunsinger whose father was Joseph Hunsinger and his grandfather, George Hunsinger, one of the early settlers of Cherry township. Mr. Hunsinger is a single man. He is a stationary engineer and is employed on G.S. Landback’s saw mill.

MICHAEL ROUSE

Was born in Cherry township in 1855. His father Michael Rouse, a native of Ireland when he landed in America, went to Carbondale and about fifty years ago came to Cherry township where he cleared up a farm. Later he engaged in lumbering. Mr. Rouse is a machinist and is employed at Jennings Bros. Mills at Lopez. In 1885 he married Catherine Stafford who was born at Hazleton in 1867. She is the daughter of Nicholas Stafford, a native of Ireland, who settled at Lovelton about 60 years ago. The Staffords have been one of the most prominent families of Lovelton for many years. Her mother was Ellen Cullen who came to America from Ireland about 50 years ago. Mr. and Mrs. Rouse have five children: Michael W., Nicholas, Josephine, Catharine and Lawrence.

JENNINGS BROTHERS

Bishop Worth Jennings and Cortez H Jennings constitute the firm of Jennings Bros. at Lopez. The pioneer of the family was Paul Bishop Jennings, a native of Wiltshire, England, who came to America in 1816 when eighteen years old. He worked on a farm near Philadelphia and later at lumbering. He finally located at Jenningsville, Wyoming county, where he owned a farm, gristmill, sawmill and store. His son William N. located at Mehoopany where he also engaged at lumbering.

Cortez H. Jennings, the eldest son was born at Jenningsville, Wyoming county in 1855. He took a course in the Wyoming Seminary at Kingston and spent three years at West Point Military Academy. He married Florence N. Mott, a daughter of Captain A.V. Mott of Tunkhannock, Pa., in June, 1880. She died in 1883 and, in 1885, he married Mary L. Bowman a daughter of Harry H Bowman, of Towanda. To them have been born three children: Donald Hicks who died in infancy; Sarah Hicks and Paul Bishop.

Bishop Worth Jennings, junior member of the firm, was born at West Pittston in 1862. He studied at Bloomsburg State Normal and the Wyoming Seminary at Kingston. In 1887, he married Ella M. Castle of Kiantone, N.Y., a daughter of John Castle. This union has been blessed with two children: William Worth and Ethel May, who died in 1897 aged eight years. In 1894, and in 1896, he was elected as Representative to the Legislature. Both brothers are identified with the Masonic fraternity.

They came to Sullivan county in 1881, and purchased the timber on a large tract of land of James McFarlane & Co., about four miles from Bernice, south of the Loyalsock creek. In 1887, they moved their mill to Lopez where they have purchased several thousand acres of timber land. They operate two mills, a clothespin factory, and conduct a large store, at Lopez, having in their employment at that place over two hundred men. Both are public-spirited men and are always ready to lend a hand to the public and benevolent enterprises. Recently, they purchased two large tracts of timber in Maryland and West Virginia and have, within the last two years, commenced lumbering there on a large scale.

P.L. MESSERSMITH

Was born in 1863 at Colley. He is a son of Adam Messersmith, who settled in Colley in 1844, and a grandson of Jacob Messersmith, who came to Cherry township in 1833. His father married Mary Lorentz, a German who settled in New Jersey. Their children were: P.L. of Colley, S.C. married Florence Thurston and lives at Lopez, Margaret married John Lission of Wilmot, Louisa married Mahlon Shores of Towanda, and Lena who lives at home. P.L. Messersmith is a single man. He owns a fine farm and is a member of the Colley township School Board.

JOHN MCCARROLL

Of Sciota Vale, was born in 1856 at the Dutch Mountain in Lee Settlement. His father Samuel McCarroll, came from Ireland and was one of the pioneers of Lee Settlement. Mr. McCarroll is a farmer and settled on the farm where he now lives 22 years ago. In 1877, he married Fannie Hopkins, who was born at Colley in 1858, her father Rufus Hopkins, who came from Schuykill county, also being one of the early settlers of Lee Settlement.

HENRY MCDERMOTT

Of Lopez, was born in 1861 in Albany township, Bradford county. His father Henry McDermott was a native of Ireland and settled in Albany township about fifty years ago. Mr. McDermott at present is proprietor of Hotel McDermott at Lopez. Formerly, he was a farmer in Albany township. In 1898 he married Mary Crossen who was born in 1874 in Wilmot township, Bradford county. Her father is John Crossen of Lopez, who came from Lackawanna county to Wilmot township about forty years ago. To Mr. and Mrs. McDermott has been born a daughter, Ellen.

REUBEN THRASHER

Was born in Luzerne Co., in 1843. He is a son of George Thrasher, who came from Luzerne county to Cherry township in 1846, and a grandson of George Thrasher, a native of Reading, who came from Luzerne county to Cherry township in 1828. His mother was Lydia Weaver, a daughter of Christian Weaver, who came to Cherry township from Luzerne county in 1847. Mr. Thrasher is a farmer and has filled various township offices. In 1878, he married Catharine O. Barber of Columbia county. She died in 1883. Their children are Addie M., married George Eberlin, of Colley, and Lillian L. married Levi J. Rohe, of Colley.

DANIEL A. MESSERSMITH

Of Lopez, is a son of Thomas Messersmith, one of three brothers who settled in Colley about 1844, their father having settled in Cherry in 1833. Mr. Messersmith is employed at Jennings Bros. Mill, and for many years was school director and served as tax collector one term. In 1885, he married Susan Eberlin of Wilmot township. To them have been born four children: Harry A., Thomas Walter who died in 1900, aged 13 years, Ida V. and Arthur I.

F.L. CAMPBELL

Of Lopez, is a son of W.R. Campbell of New Albany and a grandson of Caleb Campbell of Forks township. They belong to the clan of Campbell so famous in the history of Scotland and whose deeds have been told in many a Scottish song and story. The first of this branch of the family to come to America was the great-great-grandfather of F.L. Campbell, who was accompanied by his four brothers. His son, John Campbell, the great-grandfather of the subject of this sketch, came from Montour county to Bradford county in 1833 and about 1850 founded Campbellsville, Forks township, Sullivan county. F.L. Campbell is a clerk in Jennings Bros. store at Lopez. In 1898, he married Dora Ayer of New Albany. To them have been born two children Ethlyn and Ralph.

J.O. VOUGHT

Was born at Rome, Bradford county, in 1836. He is son of Thomas and Lucy (Wafus) Vought who were among the early settlers of Rome. His grandfather Acetias Vought was a soldier of the war of 1812. Mr. Vought is a farmer owning 200 acres of land in Colley township, and a veteran of the Civil War, having served in Co.D., 4th New York heavy artillery. He is a member of Sullivan Post, G.A.R. of Dushore, Pa. At present, he is one of the overseers of the poor of Colley township. In 1862, he married Cynthia Decker, who was born in 1845 at Wellsburg, N.Y. Her father was Isaac Decker, who came from Chemung county, N.Y. and settled at Rome. Mr. and Mrs Vought have three daughters: Mattie L. married J.T. Forbes of Colley, Minnie L. married Edmund Holmes of Mildred, and Bertha Z., married Daniel Bahr of Sylvania.

WILLIAMM L. JOHNSON

Of Lopez, was born in Columbia county in 1859, a son of George Johnson, a farmer in that county. In 1879, he came to Sullivan county and in 1884 opened a barber shop in Dushore, where he continued in business until 1891 when he went to Lopez, where he now conducts a barber shop. In 1896, he married Rebecca Hopkins, a daughter of Rufus Hopkins who settled in Colley in 1856. Mr. and Mrs Johnson are active members of the United Evangelical church.

JUSTIN L. CHRISTIAN M.D.

Of Lopez, was born near Millville, Columbia county in August 1866, a son of Jacob Christian, a farmer. In 1890, he graduated from the Baltimore College of Physicians and Surgeons, and located at Hillsgrove in the spring of that year, where he practiced medicine until 1897, when he moved to Lopez where he has ever since engaged in his profession. In 1899, he was elected to the State Legislature. He has an interest in the Lopez Drug Store and belongs to the 32nd degree of Free Masons, the I.O.O.F., the P.O.S. of A, the American Medical Association, and the Pennsylvania State Medical Society. In 1893, he married Celia Peck, a daughter of Homer Peck of Hillsgrove. To them has been born one son, Justin L.

THOMAS BROUGHAM

Was born in Tioga county, N.Y. in 1863, a son of Cornelius Brougham. He came to Sullivan county in 1883. In 1884, he married Gertude Hartzig, a daughter of Jacob Hartzig of Cherry township. To them have been born four sons: Ernest, William, George and James.

H.M.KELLOGG

Of Lopez, was born in 1869 at New Albany, PA. The Kelloggs settled in Connecticut during the colonial period. The great-grandfather for our subject, Amasa Kellogg, settled in Albany township, Bradford county, in 1813, having come from Columbia county, New York. Mr. Kellogg’s father was Morris Kellogg and his mother was Minnie Haythorne, a native of East Franklin, Bradford county, and a daughter of Benjamin and Fanny Haythorne. He learned the jeweler’s trade with his uncle J.V. Rettenbury of Dushore, for whom he opened a branch store at Lopez in 1890. In 1892, he purchased the store which he still conducts. Later, in connection with Dr. Christian, he opened the Lopez Drug Store. He has been treasurer of Colley township. In 1895, he married Florence Scureman, who was born July 3, 1869, a daughter of Appolos and Lydia Scureman of Dushore. Her father was born in New Jersey and her mother is a daughter of Andrew and Mary Wilt, early settlers of Overton township, Bradford county. Mr. and Mrs. Kellogg have one son, Morris.

HENRY W. MESSERSMITH

Was born in 1863 in Colley township. His father was Thomas Messersmith, who settled in Colley soon after 1844. His grandfather was Jacob Messersmith, who settled in Cherry in 1833. Mr. Messersmith is a clerk in Jennings Bros. Store. He is secretary of the Colley township school board. In 1891, he married Clara C. Heverly, who is a daughter of Reuben Heverly, a son of Philip Heverly, who came from Susquehanna county and settled in Cherry township in 1834. Mr. and Mrs. Messersmith have two daughters, Blanche M. and Ethel M.

JOHN YONKIN

Was born in Cherry township in 1866. He is son of George Yonkin of Cherry Mills, and a grandson of Henry Yonkin whose father Henry Yonkin, Sr. was a native of France and settled in Cherry township in 1823. Mr. Yonkin’s mother was Mary J. Sweeney, a daughter of John and Mary (Connor) Sweeney, who were born in County Clare, Ireland, and came to America in 1852. Mr. Yonkin is proprietor of a restaurant at Lopez. In 1892, he married Agnes Litzelman, a daughter of John Litzelman of Cherry. She died in 1901. To them had been born two children, Arthur and Bernard.

Bobcat Bagged Near Colley

January, 2003

In the early days of Sullivan County, panthers and bobcats, called "catamounts" by the early settlers, roamed the forests and mountains. Today, the panther is gone but the wily bobcat still can be found.

Source: Wyalusing Rocket-Courier, January 9, 2003

Township OFFICERS

Judge of Election-William Snider

Inspectors-C.E. Painter and Joseph Drake.

Road Commissioners-George Whipple, Henry Castle, Hiram Nichols.

School Directors- H.W. Messersmith, Frank Rice, Daniel Osborn, Peter Messersmith, Richard May and William Crowl.

Town Clerk- John Heverly.

Constable- B.J. Ely

Justices of the Peace- John Cosdill & Adam Schock.

Treasurer- James P. McGee

Auditors- John Cornell, B.L. Kenney & Thomas Lundy.

Tax Collector- J.P.Gorgg

Colley School in 1937

Colley, like other towns in Sullivan County, was proud of its schools and many of the successful citizens mentioned in Streby's History served on the Colley School Board. Here is the 1937 class in this one-room school house. Other than clothing styles and syllabus changes, the same photograph could probably have been taken in 1887!

Front row, l to r: Evelyn Wintermute, Duane Steele, Richard Steele, Jimmy Junk, Shirley Steele, Mary Lou Gephart, Warden Rosengrant, Norman Wintermute and Charles Saxe

Second row, l to r: Phoebe Hieber [teacher], Anna Crawford, Arlita Foote, Nina Bates, Margie Basley, Dorothy Bates, Edith Steele, Sally Steele, Earl Wintermute, Robert Pond, Richard Wintermute, Donald Saxe and David Gephart

Back row, l to r: Charlotte Pond, Doris Basley, Millie Schafer, Gerald Crawford, Dick Schafer, Earl Tubach, Ed Dieffenbach, Gwen Reeser and Alta Crawford