Most of my career has been in movies so I don’t know a ton about how the games industry operates. But I often see two game studio names in game trailer pre-roll credits, plus a publisher. What is the typical relationship between these two game studios? Is one a middle man and the other the actual developer, or do they typically split the development work between studios?

Depends from game to game, but in many cases two or more studios work on the same game. Parts of game are outsourced to another studio. One could be doing programming, one could be doing models or one could be doing cinematics. It really depends. I am quite sure somewhere in the credits or online information it says which studio did what.

You could maybe post an example or two of such games.

I was reading the Games Press digest this morning and there was a press release about Forza Horizon:

Playground Games and Turn 10 Studios both claim to be developers so I wasn’t sure how the work could be divided. It seems tricky to divide coding, but outsourcing the art makes sense.

Also, as Brent_M pointed out, studios disbanding is probably a common problem.

That specific example is (at least as far as I’m aware) a case of the actual game being put together by Playground games, but Turn 10 providing all the tech, cars, dynamics, etc. which the game is built on.

Another example of multiple teams working on a single game is Call of Duty. The last one was helmed by Infinity Ward with Sledgehammer taking charge of the multiplayer components and other areas such as accessibility and additional bug fixing, Treyarch handled porting to the Wii and helped with the multiplayer while Raven and Neversoft were stuck on creating the DLC for the game (plus used for additional assets on the main game). All five of them were developers on MW3 but they all had specific tasks.

Large development houses will have multiple groups or studios. Example would be Sega having The Sonic Team or the Ninja Team. Also during acquisitions it’s not rare for an acquired studio to retain its name.

The large development house may not be the publisher still, although it can be (like with Sega.) There are quite some development houses out there that are published by EA but don’t belong to EA, and in turn have their sub-studios.

As mentioned above, there also will be cases where a game may be worked in collaboration by multiple studios, not always under the same company. Like Devilbox Games noted, Call of Duty is a good example of this.

Finally there are port-studios. Studios that may be either in-house or entirely third party that do porting job. A game like Call of Duty is not exactly done for all platforms by the core team, it usually is made in core at one studio and other studios handle platform specific ports in parallel fashion to have a simultaneous release. Some studios will actually have people on board for the main target platforms, but still pass things to another studio for the “secondary” targets like the Wii.