September 7, 2020

#332

Thank you, Barbara Schock, for sharing your extraordinary gift of these vignettes of Galesburg & 19th century American history.

Walt Whitman, Poet

(continued)

By Barbara Schock

Walt Whitman (1819-1892) was a poet, Civil War nurse, journalist and nonconformist. When his book, LEAVES OF GRASS, was published for the first time in 1855, there were questions among some that he was even a poet. Others thought his poems were immoral. His lines of word didn’t conform to the usual rhyming in every other line or counting the number of syllables in a line. Some of his lines of words were quite long and looked strange on the printed page.

His chief subject was people. He wanted to see how they lived, how they worked, how they talked, how they perceived the world or how they felt about things in general. While editor of the BROOKLYN EAGLE he traveled on the ferries between the boroughs of New York City to observe the activities of workers, buildings being constructed and the constant back and forth of traffic on water and land.

He had read the classic literature and decided it was of little use as it was about the past. Whitman didn’t receive much formal education so he decided to be his own teacher. He wanted to understand himself as well as other people. He became his own schoolmaster and gave himself a long and difficult course of study.

In 1863, during the Civil War, Whitman went to Washington, DC, to learn the condition of his brother who had been wounded. He tried to get a job as a government clerk, but was hired only for part-time copying. It was painful to him to observe the wounded men trying to get their army pay. He began to visit the military hospitals to help the soldiers who were suffering so much.

He wrote newspaper articles about the conditions in the military hospitals and the needs of the wounded. He wrote letters to his family and friends about his observations and the need for help. People began to send money to Whitman to be used to help the patients. He carried apples and oranges in his pockets, sacks of horehound candy, paper and pencils for writing letters to give to the patients. Sometimes he brought a jar of jelly and a spoon so the soldiers could have a taste of home. Some of the patients craved milk so Whitman gave them small amounts of money to buy it. Others craved tobacco so he carried a plug and broke off a piece for them even though he didn’t approve of it.

Whitman became ill with blood poisoning after helping bathe a wounded man. It took some months for him to recover.

He continued to revise and add to LEAVES OF GRASS throughout his life. It was in the eighth edition at the time of his death. He is considered one of the most influential poets of the nineteenth century.

Below is one of Whitman’s poems, “I Hear America Singing.”

This version of “I Hear America Singing” appeared in the 1867 edition of Walt Whitman’sLeaves of Grass. The original version appeared as number 20 in the section titledChants Democraticin the 1860 edition ofLeaves of Grass.