About this campaign

Volunteer transcriptions now enable discovery and access for some portions of the Feinberg Whitman Collection and the Miscellaneous Manuscript Collection. Search them.

Walt Whitman (May 31, 1819 - March 26, 1892) is best known as a path-breaking poet and author of Leaves of Grass. He worked as a school teacher, printer, newspaper editor, journalist, and carpenter, before becoming a civil servant and volunteer visitor in Union Army hospitals in Washington, D.C. during the Civil War. As a freelance writer, Whitman penned a variety of poetry and prose, including essays, articles, reviews, fiction and nonfiction for the periodical press, speeches, and autobiographical works. The Library of Congress holds the largest number of Walt Whitman materials in the world, including drafts, notes, fragments, letters, poetry, and prose in the Charles E. Feinberg collection of Walt Whitman Papers and other collections in the Manuscript Division.

Note: Transcriptions available on The Walt Whitman Archive site may be a helpful resource for volunteers working on the correspondence in this campaign. The Whitman Archive does not cover the entirety of the Library's collections but does contain transcriptions for many of the Whitman letters held by the Library. Search keywords from a document to try to locate it in the Whitman Archive database.

About this project

The Miscellany section of the Charles E. Feinberg collection of Walt Whitman Papers contains a wealth of varied and fascinating materials in print and handwritten formats. Spanning from 1834 to 1918, the Miscellany includes autographs, correspondence, calling cards, programs, invitations, scrapbooks with clippings and leaves from trees, railroad and ferry tickets, marginalia and annotated items, labels, wrappers, property and contracting records, and business, real estate, tax, employment, investment, and other types of financial papers, all offering evidence about Whitman’s life and the activities of those who were close to him. There are also images of Whitman, young and old.

The materials offer bits and pieces, hints and insights, into many phases and interests across Walt Whitman’s lifetime and continuing beyond his 1892 death. There is evidence of his 1850s work in Brooklyn as a carpenter and contractor; his 1862 military passes to visit Army camps; the 1863 Christian Commission certificate for volunteering in Civil War military hospitals; his 1866 appointment for civil service work in the Attorney General’s office in Washington, D.C.; invitations to celebrations of his birthday during his Camden-Philadelphia years; annotated maps indicating travels; evidence of help he received to acquire a horse and buggy to aid in his mobility in old age; a copy of his will; and his sketched design for the Whitman burial vault in Harleigh Cemetery, Camden, New Jersey. Later materials include cigar box lids commercially commemorating Whitman as a literary celebrity.

The items are arranged alphabetically by subject or type of material.

Helpful Links

Whitman Archive project

About the Feinberg collection

About the Whitman Miscellaneous collection

About the Harned collection

Text order

Transcribe text in the order it appears on the page. If you're unsure, transcribe the text how it would make sense to read aloud.

Preserve original spelling, grammar, and punctuation

Transcribe original text spelling, grammar, and punctuation. Type what you see. Do not paraphrase.

If a misspelling will impact search of the document, you can tag the page with the correct spelling. Example: "Abe Linkin" - Transcribe as spelled and tag with "Abraham Lincoln"

Line breaks

Preserve line breaks. Line breaks make it easier for someone to review your transcription. Sometimes text in the transcription box spills over two lines in the transcription box. If you don't hit enter, no line break is recorded.

When words are broken over two lines on the same page, type the word on the first line. Example: Write library rather than li-brary.

Page breaks

If a word breaks across two pages, transcribe it on the first page.

Illegible or unclear text

If you can't decipher a word or phrase, that’s ok! Another volunteer may be able to. If you are unable to read a lot of a page, save and looking for another.

You may not be able to read some text due to damage, cross-outs, blurred ink, or bad handwriting! In place of illegible words or letters, transcribe a pair of square brackets around a question mark [?]. If you can read any part of a word, transcribe what letters you can and use question marks for the rest. Example: [?] score and s[????] years ago

Blank pages - Nothing to transcribe

Do not transcribe any text for blank pages. Check the Nothing to Transcribe box below it and hit "Save."

Deletions

If you can read text that has been crossed out or otherwise deleted, transcribe the deleted words within square brackets [ ].

Inserted text

When text has been inserted over a line or otherwise added later, transcribe it in the original text in the order you would read it. Do not use caret symbols or brackets to indicate text has been inserted.

Multiple pages

If there is more than one page in an image, transcribe all pages in the order they appear, one after the other. Leave empty lines between pages.

Don't leave notes in text

Only type original text from the page into the transcription box. You may be tempted to leave notes about the document, but please don't! You can leave help or context for others as a tag or post in our discussion forum on History Hub.

Expanding abbreviations

Do not expand abbreviations; just type what you see. You can use tags to record the expanded text of an important abbreviation that otherwise does not appear in the text. Example: Transcribe "UL" and tag "Urban League"

Formatting text: Bold, underlined, italic, indented, etc.

Do not try to capture formatting, such as underlining or indents or note it in the text. Preserving text style or format does not enhance the discoverability or accessibility of a page and may not display as desired in published transcriptions.

Printed or typed text

Some material in By the People is typed or printed, including letters and memos, newspaper clippings, printed forms, and more. This text still needs to be transcribed as it is not yet machine-readable. "Transcribe with OCR" may be a useful though imperfect starting point.

Catalog and page numbers

Do transcribe page and catalog numbers and letters.

Letterheads

Transcribe letterhead text; it often includes names and addresses researchers may find useful.

Newspapers

Transcribe all newspapers articles, not just those you think relevant. Transcribe columns in the order you would read them. Don't try to preserve layout.

When not to transcribe print

Some mass-produced diaries contain many pages of pre-printed calendars, almanacs, dates, and other text that does not need to be transcribed. This text does not broadly aid discovery and access to historical information. We recommend clicking "Nothing to transcribe" and moving on.

Images

Ignore images. Don't describe or note them in the transcription box. If a page has only images and no text, click "Nothing to transcribe." You can use tags to capture information about images, watermarks, stamps, or any other non-text features.

Text in margins

Marginalia is text written around the main text block. It is often a comment on the main body text, but can be unrelated. It differs from an insertion, in that it was not intended to be woven into the main text.

Transcribe marginalia within square brackets and asterisks [* *]. If it comments on a specific portion of the text, order it after that text. Put it at the end of the transcription if it appears unrelated. Transcribe all original punctuation within the [* *], including parentheses. Example: We are met on a great battlefield of that war. [*Refers to Gettysburg*]

Non-English languages, characters, and translation

Many languages are found in our campaigns. All text should be transcribed wholly and accurately in the original language.

Use the correct characters when transcribing non-English text. For example, do not substitute C for Ç. You can use alt codes to enter non-English characters. See our Spanish and Latin cheat sheets.

Do not enter translation! If you want to translate a document, you can share it in History Hub!

Shorthand

Do not transcribe shorthand. Some of our campaigns include shorthand text, a note-taking method popular in the early 20th century that substituted symbols for words and phrases to quickly capture text (here's an example).

Many forms of shorthand exist and shorthand transcription can be closer to translation. When you recognize shorthand, just insert [[shorthand]]. You can also add the tag "shorthand."

Other symbols and special characters

Transcribe symbols and other special characters as they are used in the original. Most common are ampersands (&), currency ($, £, etc.), and the silcrow (§, used in legal documents). Here's more help for early American and British Colonial currency.

Bleed-through

Text written or printed on thin paper, like letterbooks, will often have bleed-through. Ink from the proceeding page seeps through the paper or is visible through it and appears to be written backward. Ignore backward mirror image text. You can go to the previous page to transcribe it.

Long s or "funny" f

Some historical handwriting and printing uses the "long s", which looks like a lowercase "f". Transcribe this as a lowercase "s".

Tables

Some documents contain tables of data, such as accounting records or statistical information. Transcribe these in a way that will preserve the relationships between columns and rows, and reflect the meaning of the original documents. Don't worry about replicating layout, just try to capture the data and make your transcription relatively easy for a reviewer to check. You can use spaces and hard returns, but please do not add characters such as the pipe symbol or slashes to divide the data.

Cross-writing

Some letters include "cross-writing" where the author layered text in two directions to save on paper or postage. Transcribe a cross-written page in the order you would read it. You can also add the tag "cross-writing."

Volunteer peer review is the final vital step. Once a page is accepted by a reviewer, it is complete. Completed pages are published on loc.gov to enhance search and accessibility. Review is also great way to become familiar with reading handwriting and our transcription rules.

How to review

Read the entire transcription and carefully compare it to the document image, checking for accuracy and completeness. We recommend going line-by-line, which is why we ask transcribers to preserve line breaks. Make sure the transcriber followed all transcription rules.

Register to review

Anyone can review; you just need to register. An account also allows you to track your contribution on your profile page and to tag documents.

Accepting a transcription

If a transcription is whole and accurate and you do not need to make any changes, click "Accept". The page is now complete! You can no longer edit, but the page is still available to read and tag. If you think a completed page in an active campaign can be improved, contact us to reopen it.

Editing a transcription

If you find errors or missing text click “Edit”. You can make changes to the text yourself or leave it "In Progress" for another volunteer. Correct any mistakes made by the transcriber and complete any words you can. Just like transcribing, click “Save” as you go and "Submit" when you're done. Another volunteer will need to review the page again.

Should I add line breaks?

Line breaks aid reviewers and other readers in comparing the transcription to the lines of text in the image. They allow you to read across the transcription and image line-by-line. However, if the absence of line breaks is the only issue in a transcription, and you can review it as-is, you do not need to add them.

Can I review my own transcriptions?

You cannot review transcriptions you submit unless someone else edits the page and re-submits it.