The original A 1 forms were received from Robert Martin, England - His source: Public Records Office, Kew.

The details have been compared to, and supplemented by, information received from Don Kindell, based on A. Hague's own research. (Don's work, which covers "Royal & other Navies Day-by-Day in World War 2" can be viewed at this website, a section of Gordon Smith's site Naval-History.net). The escorts named on this page also came from D. Kindell.

Further details have been added with the help of:

"Axis Submarine Successes of WW II", Jürgen Rohwer

"Loyd's War Losses", Vol I.

See also Convoy KMS 6.

Br=British, Norw=Norwegian, Du=Dutch, Am=American, Pa=Panamanian.

† = dead

Commodore was the captain of Houston City, Vice Commodore the captain of Cliona, Rear Commodore the captain of Benalbanach.

* Note that these 5 ships are not included in MKS 1X from Gibraltar by A. Hague. (They are, however, included in Convoy MKS 1Y below).

Clan Mactaggart, on a voyage from Gibraltar for Clyde in ballast, was torpedoed and sunk on Nov. 16 by U-92. She had a crew of 100, 17 gunners and 55 Naval personnel - 2 crew and 1 Naval personnel were killed.

Escorts:

Nov. 12: Convolvulus

Nov. 12-Nov. 15: Enchantress

Nov. 12-Nov. 17: Marigold

Nov. 15: Stornoway

Nov. 15-Nov. 17: Brixham, Coreopsis, Rothesay

Nov. 15-Nov. 23: Bideford, Woodstock, Landguard, Londonderry (S.O.), Louisburg, Lulworth

Nov. 16-Nov. 23: Prescott

Related external link:

The attack on Clan Mactaggart

A 1 form was received from Robert Martin (source: Public Records Office, Kew), supplemented by information received from Don Kindell, based on A. Hague's own research.

No ships are listed in the 3rd column in the original A 1 form. However, A. Hague gives the following stations (the remaining ships have been given the same station [by A. Hague] as the A 1 form):

He lists Algerian in station 63, City of Christchurch in station 51, Fort Chipewyan in station 61, Jean Jadot in station 31, Kaia Knudsen in 32, Ocean Liberty in 53, Ocean Volga in 42, Ocean Wanderer in 62, Oporto in 33, Tiba in 41, and Zebulon B. Vance in station 52.

This could simply meant that the ships were moved as the voyage progressed.

A. Hague has a note re Dewdale saying "recalled to Gibraltar". (She does not show up again until MKS 10 in March).

Related external links:

SL, HG and MKS and MKF convoys - In Chronological order. The MKS and MKF convoys start on this page for 1942.

Sl & SL/MKS Convoys - Some later MKS convoys were combined with SL convoys from Freetown. This site names the ships in them.

Liberty Ships - Alphabetical list (quite a few of the ships listed as American in this convoy, were Liberty Ships).

List of Liberty Ships by Hull No. - Includes info on the men for whom the ships were named (from Wikipedia).

This site has more on the the "Ocean" and "Fort" ships mentioned in this convoy.

Empire Ships - Also listed in alphabetical order. The site allso has a section listing the Liberty ships.

Back to Convoy Index

To the next MKS convoy in my list MKS 2

will be added

In the meantime, see thislist of ships sailing in all MKS convoysThe next available convoy isMKS 3X