May 10, 2019

This is a long and wordy picture book. David also wrote the book Cathedral and we read that book already. This is similar in that we get to see how the castle was planned and constructed. They were really so smart in how they made these structures. It’s neat to see how they were done. The artwork and detailed drawings are amazing. They are graphic.

This is more like a non-fiction work and it’s a lot of story, so more mature or older readers will appreciate it more. My nephew figured out within pages this was like the book Cathedral and he bailed on it. He said he wouldn’t do this. Ok then. It took me and the niece 2 nights to finish this. There is a scene where they show how they made toilets and the niece called in the nephew and he thought that picture was funny. They laughed at that and then he went back to reading something with his dad. Potty humor reigns in this household. It works everytime. My nephew’s classic line to anything is when someone asks what happened during any story, my nephew will says they fart, without fail. We don’t get through one meal without the subject coming up. I didn’t like potty humor as a child, so I get to live it as an adult. Hahaha. Jokes on me.

Anyway, the niece hung in there with this, but it was long for her. It was interesting, but she still thought it was a little dull. She gave this 2 stars. She said it was neat, but too long. I say know your kids for this one.

April 19, 2018

The glorious illustrations are what really does make David Macaulay's Castle an aesthetic and visual treat, as they are meticulously detailed, intensely informative, and really in all ways quite simply outstanding (appearing almost like minute and specific architectural blueprints at times). However, as much as I do appreciate (and even absolutely adore) the author and illustrator's pictorial offerings (although part of me would definitely want and desire at least some coloured illustrations instead of only black and white renditions), his accompanying text is rather majorly if not even overly dense and so specifically descriptive and convoluted that I actually often feel my attention wandering and drifting (and as such, my eyes skimming over entire parts). And furthermore, considering that Castle in many ways strives to educate and enlighten, its teaching and learning potential would be massively increased by the inclusion of a list of works consulted and cited (a bibliography), as well as additional historical background material (an annoying and yes, even sadly frustrating shortcoming for this type of a book, and indeed the main reason, why I am now changing my erstwhile three star ranking to but two stars).

And finally, I also do have to wonder if David Macaulay's fictitious Welsh town and castle are based on the coastal town of Aberystwyth, but that is pure conjecture and speculation on my part (having visited the former, and seen the ruins of its castle, the comparisons are ready and clearly present, and it would definitely tickle my fancy if Macaulay had indeed based his Aberwyvern on Aberystwyth, yet another reason why a detailed and expansive author's note with such presented information would be or would have been an appreciated and actually in my opinion also rather necessary addition).

January 2, 2017

Instagram || Twitter || Facebook || Amazon || Pinterest

David Macaulay is a British writer and illustrator who specializes in architecture and history. I remember I used to force my poor, beleaguered parents to sit through Pyramid (1988) with me, over and over and over. (Pyramid is excellent, by the way; if you ever happen upon a copy of it, you must watch it.) He also did another child-focused documentary called Castle, which I wasn't as interested in: this girl favored Egyptians over European feudalism & crusades, thank you very much.

Now that I've gotten into fantasy novels and bodice rippers, CASTLE suddenly feels much more relevant. Imagine my delight when I find out that my library has a copy of it in their e-book library. I checked it out immediately.

CASTLE is an account of a fictional Welsh castle called Aberwyvern. While the castle itself may be purely make-believe, the descriptions of how it was built were not. Macaulay goes into all the steps of building a castle, from the outer wall to the fortifications to the construction of the bathrooms. He includes helpful illustrations, maps, and blueprints to illustrate more complex and detailed concepts.

I loved how informative this book is. Even though it's a children's book, Macaulay uses many difficult terms, so I'm not actually sure how child-friendly this book is, or whether a child would actually have any interest in it beyond using it as a secondary resource for a history project. For an adult who loves fantasy or historical romance, it's quite useful in providing a visual concept for how many of your favorite fictional settings might have looked. If you do choose to purchase this book, though, don't go with the ebook. I read this in EPUB and many of the images were cut off halfway, which spoiled the overall effect of the book. Splurge and get the hard copy - you'll be glad you did!

3 to 3.5 stars

October 14, 2014

I've always wanted to read this book and can't believe it's taken me so long. It can be read in a single, very enjoyable sitting. The artwork, text and research are first rate. My family watched and thoroughly enjoyed Macaulay's exceptional PBS special called Building Big where he teaches the architectural feats needed to construct big projects such as: bridges, tunnels, dams, domes and skyscrapers. If you've never seen it--it's sensational! So is the companion book...I digress.

So there's no excuse for me not reading Castle--I know how good Macaulay is. Just time I guess. When I lived in England, one of my favorite things to do was to go 'castle-hunting' in Wales. The north coast of Wales has some particularly fine castles and the fictional castle in this book is a conglomeration of some of the best. Conwy and Caernarfon were two of my favorites.

Anyway, I wished I'd had this book when I used to go castle-hunting; I could have used it. It answered a lot of questions I had, like what were the names for all the various parts of castles. I learned what garderobes were, a batter was used for, the difference between an inner and outer curtain, all about merlons, embrasures and finials; the book takes you step-by-step through the construction of a castle with wonderful pen and ink drawings on every page. There's even a 'real' battle at the end to test the validity of the structure. Cool!

First read: June 10, 2008

October 14, 2014: Good to pick up again and reread!

October 13, 2017

I work in a library. Once, a patron came in asking for a book on the clarinet. There was a grimace about his face while flipping through a 300-page "introductory" course on the instrument. "Wait a second," I said. Returning with a much thinner book from the juvenile nonfiction section, I offered, "Try this one on for size." He smiled. "This is what I need! Just something to start with."

One thing I've found out is that juvenile nonfiction is often more helpful to adults than adult nonfiction. Since they're made for kids, the books get straight to the point, often explore the topic through a relatable narrative—great for those of us who learn best by example—and almost always include lots of photos or illustrations. And when any of us, as grown up people now, try to learn something new, a childlike part of us resurfaces for air.

Well, I didn't care about the clarinet, but I did want to know about castles. After reading the series A Song of Ice and Fire and eyeing other book runs of the same sort, I wanted to know how to envision such vital structures in my head. What's a corbel? How does a portcullis work, exactly? Oh, and the murder holes—definitely wanted to know more about those.

Castle is a great starter for anyone else interested in...castles. Not just that, though; we also learn a bit about how society worked in medieval times—how and why a city would bud and flourish around a major castle. Macaulay takes us from the initial marking of the land to the final product, with all the steps between. From foundations, curtain walls, and towers, to the city wall, moats, and dungeon. The illustrations are numerous and detailed. We see the tools used to build and the builders themselves. We see the weapons used to defend and the defenders themselves. It's a fun book and very informative.

Also recommended: Castles: Their Construction and History / The Medieval Castle / Stephen Biesty's Cross-Sections Castle

June 14, 2015

As a history/ historical-fiction lover of most things involving royalty; I have read many books with castle or palace scenes. These scenes tend to be taken for granted and are the “norm”. However, if you are seeking to expand your knowledge of the ins and outs of a castle built from the ground up; then look no further than David Macaulay’s “Castle”.

Let me be frank: “Castle” is an illustrated children’s book. However, rather than viewing this as a bedtime storybook for the loved child in your life; this is more of an adult-children’s book (almost like a coffee-table book). What do I mean by that? The writing style is not simplified or dummied down to a degrading or child-like tone. Instead, the language is mature, beautiful, and yet easy-to-understand. It will satisfy an adult and still entice and entertain a child. Basically, it is the best method for incorporating lessons into a well-illustrated book.

The flow and build-up of “Castle” is better than some recent adult novels I have read. Written in a narrative and yet informative way, Macaulay explains the steps behind building a castle. Terms and descriptions are introduced with ease and even I (as an adult) learned exciting facts. Exciting enough that I shared them with others after reading! Although the concept seems simple, it magically holds depth and grabs attention in a way that the reader doesn’t want the book to end. Plus, Macaulay adds certain elements of wit and humor which accompany “Castle” quite well.

The illustrations in “Castle”, from an artistic stand-point, are absolutely indulgent. I shared the drawings with a professional illustrator and he was so impressed, that he has borrowed the book to study the drawings. Although Macaulay’s work is in a black and white style; his architectural talent is easily seen in the details, shadows, and perspectives of the drawings. They are simply fascinating and impressive (especially since most children’s books are written and illustrated by separate individuals versus one).

David Macaulay’s “Castle” is a stand-out book and worth a read whether you are a child or adult history-lover, alike. The reader’s age will not limit the information learned and one will be enticed to explore Macaulay’s other works. There is a reason “Castle” is a Caldecott Honor winner… it surely deserves it.

May 21, 2018

This book took castles from being archetypal fairy-tale constructs to living environments with place and purpose. My imagination followed suit and soon my day-dreams and games of make-believe were rooted in reality no matter how fantastic.

I'd spend hours flipping just between those pages showing the growth of the town, my mind animating the empty years in between with strangely nostalgic imaginings. What was it like to be the thatcher that made just that little house there? Was it relief or disappointment the stonemason felt when the last stone of the outer bailey was laid?

And the pages on siege and war telling of a dangerous world beyond, men who would take what you have unless you have the strength to defend it.

Ending, of course, in a moldering cliff-top ruin slowly worn down by theft and weather. I wanted the castle - and the book - to go on forever, but there it was every time I got to the last page: this too shall end.

January 18, 2008

I bought this book twenty years ago while in college because it was so well illustrated, and it did such a great job of answering questions I had about how castles were built and arranged. I haven't looked at it since, but save dit because I knew someday my kids would love it as much as I did.

Last year my 2nd grade son checked out a perfectly good book on castles from his school. He poured over the illustrations and read the captions, but he couldn't get answers to his questions: "Dad, what's a 'keep'?.... How did they get up so high to build the towers? ...."

We pulled out Macaulay and he was enthralled. The art work, the text, and the whole flow of the book are all just so well done.

Glad I kept this!

August 20, 2023

This has been sitting on my bookshelf for a very long time. I honestly have no memory of where or when I acquired it. But 11 year old me would have loved this. It’s basically a general fictional narration of the construction of a castle and it’s surrounding village but supplemented with beautiful line ink drawings. Basically the ink drawings are the star of the show with the narration providing the direction of the illustrations. Very nice.

February 12, 2020

I Wasn't prepared for the new up-dated all colour edition, as I was expecting black and white as in Macauley's "Cathedral" but it's a good-looking production, clear and informative and a joy to handle, especially in hardback format.

September 21, 2022

I don’t typically include picture books to count towards my yearly reading goal, but this book was lengthy and took us several days to get through as a read-aloud, so I’m counting it!

August 1, 2022

One of my favorite books from childhood. Good memories.

Read

February 10, 2016

1978 Caldecott Honor - Favorite Illustration: the interior shot of the Great Hall. I really enjoy all of Macaulay's illustrations and attention to detail.

Like his previous Caldecott honor, Cathedral: The Story of Its Construction, this tells the story of the massive construction feat of a fictional edifice. I really enjoyed reading through this, and I even learned a few new things on the construct of a castle. The ending, though, that stated the castle was little more than a quarry 200 years later was a bit saddening, to me. Although true, and once the conquest of new nations was complete and castles were no longer needed, I still wish that the engineering and hard work would have lasted longer throughout time - a lot like many of the medieval cathedrals that are still in use today.

This book is more of a historical narrative than a story, however, and a bit too wordy for younger children. It would be great for use with older children and those learning of the history of Europe, to help them understand just how and why these mammoth buildings were constructed.

October 19, 2007

I absolutely adore this series ( Pyramid, Cathedral, Mill, etc.) I had the opportunity to meet the author at a benefit hosted at the Museum of the University of Pennsylvania around 1987 or so, he's amazing.

This book, and the companion video, give incredible insight into the mammoth human effort, gargantuan investment, and astonishing technical knowledge that went into building the monuments we still tour in awe today. McCauley balances technical information with accessible characters, creating pieces that allow people both young and old to understand the human story behind architectural masterpieces. Many of his works are required reading or supplemental texts in elementary and secondary schools, if your school does not offer them, considering donating one or more of them to your local library.

March 3, 2010

Castle is a Caldecott Honor book (1978) and is recommended for students in grades 2 and up. This book explains the creation and construction of Lord Kevin’s castle. This is a progressionary tale and it explains the tools, materials, and workers used and needed to build the castle. Through this book, readers will see and experience the amount of time and methodical work put into the construction of a castle.

Readers will get to see and experience the amount of hard work that goes into the building of a Castle, specifically during the time period of 1277 through 1305. It is definitely a unique and interesting book done in very beautiful and detailed pen-and-ink illustrations. Children who love to know how things work will greatly enjoy and appreciate this book as the author’s interest for process and engineering shines through. The text and illustrations work well together, as they are both very detailed. Readers will also gain some insight into the true meaning of cooperation when reading this book. Overall, this is a very detailed and interesting book; one that I am sure will be of interest to older elementary and middle school boys.

May 16, 2008

My 13 year old and I read this book together. He absolutely loved reading about the history and building of the castle. He has another larger DK book on Castles and as we read told me about his previous knowledge on the topic we were reading about and expanded our discussion. The images (drawings) being b/w are a perfect match so that details of the castle stand out. After reading this story, we watched the accompanying PBS special Castle by the same author. The movie is s a perfect tag-a-long going into further details and highlighting real castles and showing the details that were discussed in the book. To follow up on the book/movie, my son is now building his own brick castle. We ordered a kit and it includes everything to make little bricks from molds and then directions on exactly how to build the castle. I highly recommend purchasing the book, movie and castle building kit together if you or your child is interested in castles and/or medieval studies. All three provide great discussion, for both visual and auditory learners as well as a hands-on experience.

Read

September 15, 2008

I reread this book after nearly ten years; it remains a brilliant educational and entertaining book. Macaulay once more uses his plot device of describing a fictional edifice, this being a kind of Platonic ideal of the Crusader-era medieval castle, framed within proper historical conflict of England’s conquest of Wales in the Thirteenth Century. We see the castle itself, the city walls, and a thriving town rise from it’s foundations in these pages with delightful and realistic illustrations. Young readers will enjoy learning how much effort and difficulty goes into the construction, and the details of how it’s inhabitants lived and how the fortress is defended.

If I could find one complaint it is how he speaks of the conflict in rather glossy terms, describing the inevitable way the welsh will mix with the English and how both will benefit from the stability the castle and it’s new associated town provide. Reality is far bloodier, but he does do us the favor of depicting the violence of welsh revolts in an exciting way that will draw in young readers.

April 2, 2015

Fabulous!! As I taught British Literature, I used a tape made by this author to teach my high school students how a castle was made, etc. Mr. Macaulay's illustrations are just marvelous. Not only do they explain in detail how and why castles were built, but the book is written so anyone can read and understand it. The illustrations back up the text, but Mr. Macaulay goes a bit further and adds humorous items to his illustrations. For example, in explaining the various floors of a tower in the castle being built, under the basement, there is the dungeon. In the dungeon, there sits the "culprit". On the same page, he has one of the women of the castle staring out a window. I found myself wondering what she was seeing! On page 44, there is a soldier using the "garderobe" (the bathroom). The author explains how 'Master James', the architect, had garderobes built into the stone walls, and they were placed all over the castle. No matter what age, this book should not be missed by any reader!!!

October 5, 2017

I am not a non-fiction reader, so all the details of castle-building weighed a bit heavily on me, but I could appreciate why this was a great book. Kids who are obsessed with castles, or with buildings in general love books with this level of detail, and this book makes all that dry information very interesting and readable. The illustrations and diagrams add a necessary visual component that contextualizes everything and really helped me stick with the text even when it really felt like too much. My favorite thing about the book were the pages showing the layout of the castle and its surrounding town at various points as it changed and grew. I think kids are fascinated by maps that show the passage of time like that.

June 20, 2018

Kings, to protect their lands, built castles. The first line of protection was the town and the second line of protection was the moat.

I’ve always had a fascination with castles but never considered any of the information I learned from reading the Castle book such as the job titles of workers who built the castle (architect, diggers, carpenters, quarrymen, blacksmith, mortar makers, cartman and masons? Castle

gave a great description on the building of castles and is a great resource for someone writing a book report on the subject. The illustrations will prove to be useful.

August 14, 2022

Possibly my favourite of the three of Macaulay's books I've read. I cannot convey my enjoyment and appreciation of these books, and even excitement at seeing how the castle and accompanying town develop, year by year, step by step. His drawings still haven't lost their magic, all these years later. It's like looking at Warhammer Fantasy concept art, or Hieronymous Bosch paintings; the mesmerise you and almost literally draw you in with their complexity and detail. I still pore over the houses in their nest little squares or the little outcroppings and turrets of the castle, and muse over which of of them I'd like to live in...

And this one even has a kind of plot, and a glimpse into Mediaeval siege warfare at the end. Also ethnic cleansing/colonisation.

October 14, 2021

What a brilliant little book with incredible artwork! I look forward to reading others in this series.

March 29, 2023

Twas good I think. There was a lot of info to take in

June 8, 2023

Very informative and well researched book on castle design. I like that it includes the important Edwardian Welsh campaign.

December 1, 2008

How and why medieval castles were constructed, with intricate drawings showing details of castle construction, defenses,and life.

Recommended for ages 9-12. Approprate for ages 12-18, possibly younger children if they are already interested in castles.

I would not recommend this book as a first introduction to castles for young children. For that purpose, I highly recommend Castle, by Nicholas Harris and Peter Dennis. If, however, your older child knows about castles and is interested in learning more, this book will teach him or her a great deal about castle construction, as well as about why castles were built, what life was like inside one, and how castles could withstand attack. The narrative revolves around a fictional English lord who builds a castle in Wales. Everything, from the siting to the construction of the castle is built with defense in mind. Macaulay goes into great detail about the kinds of workmen that were needed and the tools they used. Whimsical additions, like a picture of the master builder's dog, keep the book from becoming too dry. Still, the black and white drawings and heavy text, which uses a very advanced vocabulary, might alienate many young readers. This book would also make a good gift for an adult who was about to travel to the British Isles.

Ironically, although this book won numerous awards, such as the Caldecott Honor and ALA Notable Book awards, it is difficult to find online reviews. I was only able to find excerpts, such as one from School Library Journal, which voted it the Best Book of the Year in 1977. The review praised the illustrations and the "stone-by-stone" explanations. The New York Times praised the writing and the drawings, which were executed with "an engineer's clarity". Without the full-text reviews, it is not possible to judge the helpfulness of these reviews.

September 18, 2020

I remember that I really loved this book. It taught me a lot about castles from how they made trebuchets to how they made the toilets. Definitely recommend.

January 5, 2011

My 10-year old son read this book for his monthly book report and because his class has been studying medieval castles. I've always wanted to read the book as well so we sat down and had a big "castle reading" party one night! It was an amazing book. I desperately wish we had read this book before our trip to Europe last spring...we would have understood perfectly what we were seeing and the mind-blowing feat it was to construct these castles. Illustrations are superb and the text engaging and easy to read although it is on a reading level for "older" children. Highly recommend any of his books!

July 8, 2012

A detailed look at the construction of a castle and a town. When both are complete their defenses are put to the test when they are attacked. Black and white illustrations visually present the process, the tools and the people involved in the construction. Drawings are so careful they almost resemble blueprints. A long book, no doubt, but one that answered every question I thought up while I read and had me in a state of fascination from start to finish. Great nonfiction read for kids who are into castles and medieval topics and even fantasy.