Albania (Albanian: Shqiperia), officially the Albanian Socialist Republic (ASR; Republika Socialiste Shqiptare, RSSH), is a socialist state in Southeast Europe home to just under 3 million people. It borders Yugoslavia to the northeast, Greece to the southeast, and the Adriatic Sea to the west. Its capital and largest city is Tirana, and its official language is Albanian.

Geographically, the country displays varied climatic, geological, hydrological and morphological conditions, defined in an area of 28,748 km2 (11,100 sq mi). It possesses a remarkable diversity of landscape ranging from the snow-capped Albanian Alps and the Korab, Skanderbeg, Pindus and Ceraunian Mountains to the hot and sunny coasts of the Albanian Adriatic and Ionian Sea along the Mediterranean Sea.

Historically, the area of Albania was populated by various Illyrian, Thracian and Ancient Greek tribes as well as several Greek colonies established in the Illyrian coast. The area was annexed in the 3rd century by Romans and became an integral part of the Roman provinces of Dalmatia, Macedonia and Illyricum. The autonomous Principality of Arbër emerged in 1190, established by archon Progon in the Krujë, within the Byzantine Empire. In the late thirteenth century, Charles of Anjou conquered Albanian territories from the Byzantines and established the medieval Kingdom of Albania, which at its maximal extension was extending from Durrës along the coast to Butrint in the south. In the mid-fifteenth century, it was conquered by the Ottomans.

The modern nation state of Albania emerged in 1912 following the defeat of the Ottomans in the Balkan Wars. The modern Kingdom of Albania was invaded by Italy in 1939, which formed Greater Albania, before becoming a Nazi German protectorate in 1943. After the defeat of Nazi Germany, a Communist state titled the People's Socialist Republic of Albania was founded under the leadership of Enver Hoxha and the Party of Labour. The country experienced widespread social and political transformations following the start of the communist era. In the aftermath of World War III, in which Albania fought as a co-belligerent on the side of the Warsaw Pact, the Socialist Republic was one of the original founding members of Interpact.