Join our Communist Albania Tour as you discover the communist reign of Enver Hoxha in the former People’s Socialist Republic of Albania. Despite the collapse of the socialist regime, Albania is still one of the least visited countries in Europe.

Renowned for its hospitable culture, delicious cuisines and picturesque scenery. We’ll delve deep into the historical accounts of Albania communist past visiting forgotten historical sites and hearing first-handed accounts of life under Hoxha.

Hoxha led the partisan movement against the fascist Italians occupation during WWII. After Albania’s liberation, Hoxha served as the head of state. The country was left in ruins after the war, it was under his leadership who progressed the redevelopment of the country. Increasing the population’s literacy rate, providing free healthcare, developing infrastructure and the state becoming more self-reliant. However, these radical changes were achieved by brutal tactics to his critics.

Your journey starts with us in Tirana, the capital of Albania. Here we’ll explore the shocking history of Hoxha regime, which was one of the most brutal, secretive and isolationist country during the Cold War era.

Since WWII, Hoxha paranoia grew under his one-party rule. The fear of invasion and need to defend Albania in gorilla style warfare led the leader to create bunkers. A feature you’ll see throughout your tour. We’ll discover and explore many of these bunkers and underground cities, a ghostly remainder of how resources could be put to better use for the Albanian people.

We’ll continue further into Albania and discover its untouristy northern capital – Shkodra. Reformed and operating as a tattoo artist from his bunker, we’ll meet a former member of the Albanian underworld describing their personal accounts of criminal activity and serving time after communism.

Your journey continues to Kukes on our scenic road-trip, we’ll stop off at local villages interacting with genuinely friendly locals. We’ll visit Spaç Prison and learn about the harrowing treatment of Hoxha dissidents. In Kukes we’ll explore an underground city constructed to outlast any invasion.

We’ll then take you to the hidden gems glorified during the communist reign including Soviet statues of Stalin and Lenin, Hoxha house and the Pyramid of Tirana. You’ll have the opportunity to sample some of best Albanian cuisines and homemade raki (traditional alcoholic drink).