To the northeast of the city center in Tirana, Albania's capital, rises a building that was once an expression of national glory. Years of neglect, however, have taken a toll. Recently, the Ministry of Culture decided to move in, so officials ordered a renovation. The resulting facelift has buried some of the communist-era symbols under a thick layer of white paint. Still, it is hard to miss the hallmarks of late Stalinist architecture: the ornamental gate, the entrance with its Corinthian columns, the emblem of the People's Republic emblazoned on the pediment. Three sculptural figures loom above: a male and a female dressed in traditional garb, flanking a central female character raising a torch to the sky (it was once a star, but renovators reportedly opted for a more western-friendly version). This is the official birthplace of Albanian cinema.

Established in 1952, the country's film studio was based on a Soviet design, which explains the neoclassical façade. Authorities baptized it Shqipëria e Re (New Albania). Residents no longer refer to it by that name, instead simply calling it Kinostudio. On one level, this was the almost-magical seat of a national project: the point of origin for many postwar careers, the source of mass entertainment and the first motion pictures, the first reels that defined many childhoods. That building sought to produce, as the art historian Gëzim Qëndro put it, “a map of reality” under socialism.Footnote 1 On another, it was a manifestly Soviet product of the 1950s, as the architecture attests, offering an opportunity to consider how international engagement produced a national icon.

This article explores Cold War-era filmmaking as a window into collaboration and confrontation across the Sino-Soviet split. Over two decades, a small Balkan country became a site of cross-continental exchange between local planners, Soviet advisers, and, later on, Chinese collaborators. Briefly a Yugoslav satellite after the Second World War, Albania then embraced Stalinism in the 1950s, only to switch allegiances again during the dramatic early 1960s Moscow-Beijing dispute. This shift implicated party functionaries, government administrators, cultural directors, and ambitious youths in worldwide developments, from early struggles over spheres of influence in the Balkans to the advent of socialist disunity across Eurasia. A country on the edge of the capitalist and communist spheres is a good place to explore Cold War antagonism, but Albania also offers extraordinary access to ideological antagonism within the socialist world, including its various economic and cultural manifestations.

In tracing Soviet-Albanian-Chinese exchanges, my objective is to show that nationalizing and globalizing processes have been deeply intertwined. For the novice rulers of Albania—a country that declared independence in 1912, struggled to retain it, then lost it—nationalization was a matter of survival. The regime vowed to build a non-capitalist society but found itself economically dependent on bigger powers like Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union. Nationalization meant more than confiscating private property, devising central plans, and making up enemies. Films, newsreels, and documentaries could be instruments of self-definition too, especially in the context of high levels of illiteracy. It is useful, then, to think of this postwar self-definition as proceeding along three parallel lines: producing a usable past (against an Ottoman and more recent fascist background); mapping a socialist present (with the participation of Soviet actors and directors); and, ultimately, repositioning the country within a changing global map of revolutionary politics (thanks to China's anti-Soviet turn in the 1960s).

As discussions of socialism as a form of transnational exchange proliferate, it becomes necessary to spell out precisely how this exchange interacted with national imperatives over time.Footnote 2 Within Balkan studies, nationalism often emerges as a driving force seemingly drowning alternative ideologies—especially when compared to scholarship on central Europe, where national indifference now seems endemic. Rather than assuming nationalism's fully-formed presence, I show how geopolitics and transnational contact made forms of national assertion possible. Film is only one possible avenue for pursuing this kind of analysis, but it offers some advantages. First of all, a national film industry in Albania was a late development, requiring extensive imports. Soviet directors brought their reels and their plots to the Mediterranean, revealing how the Soviet civilizational blueprint could be used to tell a local story of heroic resistance, Ottoman backwardness, and western betrayal.

By the early 1960s, however, the Soviet-Albanian friendship was in ruins. From instruments of friendship, films became weapons in a battle over the soul of socialism. As Tirana turned to Beijing for support, Albanian films assumed unexpected meaning, especially during China's self-inflicted isolation of the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution (1966–76). When seen as products of negotiation, then, films make it possible to consider the vision of those who made them, the interests and calculations of those who distributed them, and, ideally, problems of reception and interpretation. Analyzed in the specific context of geopolitical and ideological conflicts, they help bring into focus the role of cultural intermediaries (directors, editors, censors, and administrators of socialist taste), beyond the usual top-level powerbrokers that populate political histories of the Cold War.Footnote 3

Specifically, this article spotlights the Sino-Soviet split not only as a rupture but as an opportunity to connect across a vast distance. Sino-Soviet disagreements played out at the highest party levels, and so Cold War scholars continue to scrutinize documents for clues into the rift, supplying elite-driven analyses.Footnote 4 But a split in the socialist world was always bound to be more than an affair between Central Committees. We lack deep analyses of its far-reaching social consequences, especially from comparative and transnational perspectives. It is the aftermath of the rift that constitutes the pertinent story of how socialism's global fortunes came to be rearticulated. The 1960s provide an opportunity to consider the social history and the cultural dimensions of political disunity within international socialism. How did the schism structure new worldviews and categories of thinking? This, too, was a large-scale offensive to redefine the proper ownership of a revolutionary legacy.

To my mind, a global perspective on this history would have to give a sense of the various scales at which socialism operated—large centers like Moscow and Beijing, with their Central Committees and planning bureaus, but also regional powers and assertive peripheries, internal ideological fault-lines, and zones of contact that the Soviets (or, later, the Chinese) could not control.Footnote 5 The new Cold War scholarship insists that the revolutionary battleground shifted to the Global South by the 1960s, but this overlooks the simple fact that revolutionary battles kept raging in the heart of Europe.Footnote 6 A global perspective on the Cold War can also be an opportunity to capture the surprising reach of small states, specifically how ideological conflict endowed them with outsize significance.Footnote 7 The outcome can be a suggestive view of socialism as containing multiple mental geographies and time regimes, and of socialist connectivity as paradoxical but also productive in unforeseen ways. In this specific instance, the nationalizing process that Soviet directors championed in 1950s Albania combined with the geopolitics of the Sino-Soviet split to create new, unanticipated possibilities for asserting one's place in the world.

Initially, Soviet directors found the story of local resistance against foreigners—fifteenth century to fascism—compelling. They celebrated Albanian militancy, the idea of an improbable state pursuing socialism at all costs. Still, they framed Albania as a socialist country-in the making, which was to say that it lagged behind. A decade later, cultural authorities sought to define a non-Moscow-centered way of being socialist in the world. As Albanian war films circulated around China, Mao Zedong hailed the small Balkan country as being ahead—the defiant protector of Marxism-Leninism and a revolutionary example to emulate. The outcomes of this shifting mental geography were unpredictable; the cultural reorientation from Moscow gradual and uneven. In cinema, for example, it meant allowing a spattering of (carefully screened) western films, rotating Soviet classics, and shipping Albanian war-themed films to China for mass dissemination. There, Cultural Revolution-era audiences encountered Albanian films as a small window into Europe (and hence, “the west”).

To capture these zigzags over time, the article initially sketches Albania's shift from Belgrade to Moscow in 1948, which helps explain the zealous cultural promotion of the Soviet Union that followed it. The administration of films in this period reveals the profound challenge of bringing a national public into being. The analysis then shifts to how two Soviet directors engaged with Albania's Ottoman and fascist past, as well as its socialist present, seeing in their collaborative efforts a kind of mutual discovery in a Soviet key. Sergei Yutkevich and Il΄ia Kopalin both addressed themes of struggle, but they worked in different genres and across a decade, making it possible to give a sense of the scope and evolution of socialist collaboration. The article's final section asks: What happens to socialist interconnectedness after the Moscow-Beijing schism? Championed by Moscow, Albania's emerging national cinema later found a captive audience in China under Mao Zedong, where it came to be celebrated as progressive, militant, and Marxist-Leninist. Earlier Soviet collaborations eventually fell from view, obscured by the writing of nationalized histories of filmmaking. Therefore, this article complements wide-ranging Albanian, Russian, and German archival sources with published and unpublished recollections, as well as contemporary press accounts.