Throughout Washington, DC, there are many memorials, monuments and museums dedicated to honoring those who have served our country in the various branches of the military. There is a separate section on this website dedicated to Civil War sites that may be of interest to visitors.

Arlington National Cemetery

(877) 907-8585

Arlington, Virginia

Hours and Admission

8am-7pm April 1-September 30

8am-5pm October 1-March 31

No tickets needed for self-guided tours

Tickets required for tour buses, which operate throughout the day

The somber sight of hundreds and hundreds of white crosses lined up across a green lawn is a striking visual and brings into sharper focus the debt of gratitude owed to our nation's military heroes. It’s no surprise that it’s called “our nation’s most hallowed ground.” Final resting place of President John Kennedy and thousands of American servicemen and women. One section at Arlington National Cemetery features the graves of "Colored Troops."The Changing of the Guard occurs on the hour each hour October through March, then occurs every half-hour April through September. Tour bus services operate throughout the day; tickets can be purchased at the cemetery.

Korean War Memorial

(202) 426-6841

Located Southeast of the Lincoln Memorial, south of the Reflecting Pool on the National Mall.

Hours and Admission

Memorial is open 24 hours

National Park Service Rangers are available from 9:30am-10pm

No admission charged

The design of this memorial gives visitors a feel for what was faced by soldiers serving in Korea from 1950 to 1953. With 19 larger than life-size statues representing a squad on patrol, a long black granite wall with photographic images, and a Pool of Remembrance, the memorial provides a stirring tribute to one million and a half veterans who served in the Korean War.

National Museum of the Marine Corps

(877) 635-1775

18900 Jefferson Davis Highway, Triangle, VA 22172

Hours and Admission

9am-5pm daily

closed December 25 No admission charged

Opened in November 2006 in Quantico, Virginia, this museum provides interactive exhibits and innovative technology to provide a lasting tribute to U.S. Marines. Its design evokes the image of the flag-raisers at Iwo Jima, and celebrates more than 230 years of Marine Corps history. The museum is divided into sections that focus on various wars and events: World War II, Vietnam, Korean and the Global War on Terrorism are just a few of the galleries.

National Guard Memorial Museum

(202) 789-0031

1 Massachusetts Avenue, NW (Corner of Massachusetts Avenue NW, and North Capitol Street)

Washington, DC 20001

Hours and Admission

9am-4pm Monday-Friday

No admission charged

The National Guard Memorial Museum is dedicated to telling the story of the men and women who answered the call to serve as citizen-soldiers. With more than 5,600 square feet of images, artifacts and interactive exhibits, the museum highlights the contributions the National Guard has made to communities and our country.

National Museum of the United States Navy

(202) 433-4882

Building 76, 805 Kidder Breese SE, Washington, DC 20374-5060

Hours and Admission

Monday-Friday: 9am-4pm

Weekends: 10am-5pm

Closed Thanksgiving, December 24, 25, January 1.

No admission charged, but appointment required

Located at the Washington Navy Yard, this is the official history program of the U.S. Navy and is a great research resource about Naval history. It contains displays on Navy ships, submarines, and various wars in which the Navy has played a role. Artifacts from Admiral Richard Byrd’s Polar Expedition, uniforms and weapons. For safety reasons, please do not use public transportation to get to the Museum; plenty of parking is available inside the Navy Yard.

The Pentagon

(703) 697-1776 (Pentagon Tours Office)

Arlington, VA

Hours and Admission

Monday-Friday 9am-3pm

No admission fee, but reservations required through the Pentagon Tours website

Guided tours of the Pentagon are available and reservations must be made in advance. A tour can be booked as early as 90 days in advance but no later than fourteen 14 days before your desired tour date. Requests for dates within 13 days of a desired date or more than 90 days in advance will not be accepted.

Please review the Pentagon's tour guidelines and security information before requesting a tour.

The headquarters of the Department of Defense, the Pentagon is one of the largest office buildings in the world and houses approximately 23,000 military and civilian employees. Its unique five-sided construction makes it one of the most recognizable landmarks in the country. The Pentagon conducts limited one-hour public tours, which must be arranged through my office.

You can visit the 9/11 Memorial on the Pentagon grounds without being on a tour.

U.S. Air Force Memorial

One Air Force Memorial Drive Arlington, VA 22204

Hours and Admission

9am-9pm Daily

Closed Christmas Day

No admission charged

The U.S. Air Force memorial is a display of three, stainless steel spires honoring the Air Force's three core values: "Integrity first, service before self, and excellence in all we do." Additionally, the spires also represent three of four planes performing a Missing Man formation.

U.S. Marine Corps Evening Parade

Marine Corps Barracks, Washington, DC

8th and I Streets, SE, Washington, DC 20390

Hours and Admission

Friday's at 8:45 p.m.

May-August

No admission charged, but online reservations required.

Each Friday evening during the summer months, the Washington, DC, Marine Corps Barracks hosts an evening parade and concert by the U.S. Marine Corps Band. The one hour, fifteen minute performance of music and precision marching ceremony reflects the story of the Marines and their service throughout the world. Features are “The President’s Own” United States Marine Band, “The Commandant’s Own” The United States Marine Drum and Bugle Corps, the Marine Corps Color Guard, the Marine Corps Silent Drill Platoon, Ceremonial Marchers, and Sgt. Chesty XIII, the official mascot of the Marine Barracks Washington. Reservations can be made through the Marine Barracks, Washington, DC, website.

U.S. Marine Corps Memorial (Iwo Jima Memorial)

(703) 289-2500 for scheduled events

Hours and Admission

Memorial is open 6am-midnight No admission charged

During the summer, the U.S. Marine Corps holds Sunset Parades at the memorial on Tuesday evenings. The memorial plaza is closed to the public from 6pm-9 pm on Tuesdays in June and July and from 5:30pm-8:30pm on August 5 and August 12.

The bronze replica of the iconic Pulitzer Prize-winning photo taken shortly by news photographer Joe Rosenthal after the Battle of Iwo Jima commemorates the soldiers of the U.S. Marine Corps who paid the ultimate price for their country. The base of the memorial contains the names and dates of every principal Marine Corps engagement since the founding of the Corps. It offers lots of open ground around the memorial for picnicking and play. You can also enjoy the nearby Netherlands Carillon. During the summer months, the U.S. Marine Corps Drum and Bugle Corps and Silent Drill Team perform Tuesdays at 7 p.m. at the memorial.

U.S. Navy Memorial

(202) 380-0710

701 Pennsylvania Ave NW, (Between 7th and 9th Streets) Washington, DC 20004

Hours and Admission

Open daily 9:30am-5pm

Closed Thanksgiving, Christmas, and New Year's Day

The statue, The Lone Sailor, was dedicated in 1992. It stands on the Quarterdeck of the Naval Heritage Center, adjacent to the Memorial Plaza. It is surrounded by fountains, pools, flagpole masts and sculptural panels depicting historic achievements of the Navy and sea services. The statue was designed by sculptor Stanley Bleifeld, and represents all those who have served, are serving and have yet to serve in the Navy and other sea services. The nearby Naval Heritage Center, 701 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, is open to the public.

Vietnam Veterans Memorial

(202) 426-6841

5 Henry Bacon Dr NW, Washington, DC 20037

Hours and Admission

Memorial is open 24 hours

National Park Service Rangers available 9:30am-10pm

No admission charged

"The Wall" is a somber tribute to those men and women who gave their lives during the Vietnam War. It honors those who died by listing their names on the Memorial Wall, a sleek expanse of black granite that sinks into the ground in a V-shape. The award-winning design by Maya Lin was selected from nearly 1,500 entries. Items are frequently left at The Wall by family members, friends and comrades of those who served in the war. You can locate specific names on The Wall through a directory placed at the west end of the memorial.

Nearby are two additional statues: The Three Soldiers and the Women’s Memorial that honor contributions made by those who fought in the Vietnam War.

World War II Memorial

(202) 426-6841

1750 Independence Ave SW, Washington, DC 20006

Hours and Admission

Memorial is open 24 hours

National Park Service Rangers are available 9:30am-10pm

No admission charged

The National World War II Memorial commemorates the sacrifice and celebrates the victory of the of the WWII generation. It honors the 16 million who served, those at home who supported the war, and the more than 400,000 who died in the conflict. The Freedom Wall contains 4,448 stars, one for every 100 Americans who died in WWII.

Notice: The links contained in this website are intended to provide a tool for easy navigation to sites related to the Washington, D.C. area. The content of the sites listed are the sole responsibility of those who maintain the websites. The views reflected in these sites are not necessarily the views of Senator Mike Crapo. In no way should a link from the website of the office of Senator Crapo be construed as an endorsement by Senator Crapo of that organization or the views contained in the site. Once you have left the Senator’s website, Senator Crapo is not responsible for the content of the website you may visit.