Eddie Griffin substitutes repeated use of vulgarity for standup comedy with structure and substance in "DysFunKtional Family."

It's a a crutch - and after a while, it becomes an assault.

Griffin fancies himself the heir to Richard Pryor's comedy throne, with material that originates from a bleak, abusive childhood.

But he has nothing new to say with his concert film, like Pryor did with 1979's "Live in Concert." Griffin's irregularity - more misses than hits, really - has more in common with Martin Lawrence's similar stage rant, last summer's "Runteldat."

Director George Gallo repeatedly cuts away from the stage to shots of audience members hooting at Griffin's jokes - sometimes before he's even delivered the punch line - as if we need to be convinced that Griffin is funny.

His funniest jokes are his cleanest: what dogs and cats really think of us, how he's sure Jesus was black, how he knows the nation's forefathers must have been cocaine addicts. And his Michael Jackson impersonation is a scream.

But then it's back to a spiel that includes crude jokes about gays and people who are mentally retarded.

Behind-the-scenes moments with Griffin's real-life dysfunctional family, mixed in with his comedy act, are more interesting. The documentary-style footage was shot on hand-held video during a return to his hometown of Kansas City, Mo., where his concert also took place.

But the film only superficially suggests the impact his childhood torment may have on him now that he's 34 and the star of films including "Undercover Brother" and "Double Take."

The belt-buckle beatings he endured from his mother, the homemade porn his Uncle Curtis showed him (which we also get to see), and the heroin addiction he witnessed in his Uncle Bucky - all of these are played for laughs.

While the film doesn't need to be a therapy session, Griffin doesn't truly seem interested in exploring his past in order for him or anyone else to learn from it. It's just another gag.

And those observations about the differences between blacks and whites, which make up the bulk of his routine, feel really hackneyed - especially after a barrage of recent feature films, including "Head of State" and "Bringing Down the House," which hammer home the same archaic stereotypes.

"White people do some strange (stuff), don't they?" he asks. "When I'm having a bad day, I go white-people watching."

This theme already was overplayed about a decade ago when "The Simpsons" made fun of it; in one episode, Homer sits on the couch, watching a black comic on television goofing on how uptight white people are.

"He's right," Homer says, doubling over with laughter. "We're so lame!"

But it's this film that's truly lame.

onscreen

"DysFunKtional Family"

Grade: D+

Starring: Eddie Griffin

Director: George Gallo

Rated: R for strong sexual content, language and drug-related humor

Love

0

Funny

0

Wow

0

Sad

0

Angry

0

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.