THE unacceptable arrival in New Jersey of the socially, emotionally and morally disturbed Eddie Griffin gives new meaning to the phrase, “I’ve got the shooter.”

Don’t misunderstand; I’m all for the Nets’ offering employment to accomplished mistake players. How can a stumble-bum like myself – the recipient of a book of chances, and those are the ones I’m willing to openly discuss – cop a Hypocritical Oath?

I’ll tell you how. While I believe in cutting the marginally sane some serious slack, Griffin’s most recent (alleged) grievous faults cross the border into a whole new revolting realm of dysfunctional civilization.

This just isn’t another case of some stupid, unlicensed fool getting pulled over because his uninsured car’s inside fog light wasn’t working properly. This is a thug who’s accused of beating up a woman (current girl friend?) because she supposedly wouldn’t leave his home, and then squeezing off a round in her direction.

Forget Griffin’s sickening shot selection and horrific history of punching out decidedly smaller high school and college teammates; he’s 21 and can block shots and score with the best of the worst.

Obviously, that’s all the Nets and six other eager suitors care about, including James Dolan’s theoretically disinfected Knicks. Had Isiah Thomas been able to recruit Griffin, his besieged boss would have taken a relentless public pounding (the media already had started taking well-warranted pot shots over the weekend) after raising a ruckus when Latrell Sprewell was exiled over the importance of stocking the roster with character.

At the risk of appearing jaggedly judgmental, there are some mortal sins that aren’t quite as excusable – much less pardonable – as failing sobriety or drug tests. Molestation, rape, assaulting a woman and firing a gun in her vicinity immediately come to mind.

Is management from six NBA halfway houses telling us that getting an edge on the competition knows no out-of-bounds? That skill takes precedence over foul play? That it isn’t worth the wait for a defendant to clear his name before associating with his stench?

How low will teams stoop in order to attain ultimate success, or even so much as win another game or two, you wonder? Signing Griffin, fresh out of rehab where he was forced to flee when the charges against him in Houston mounted to near double figures, and recently dumped by the Rockets like toxic waste, is the answer to today’s spot quiz.

This is one crime scene, I submit, that can’t be further contaminated. Though I hear Rod Thorn has been checking the whereabouts of Sly (Williams) and The Family Spirits Of St. Louis.

It occurs to me, if the Nets were so intent on procuring a 6-10 forward, why not go for someone infinitely more established in the league, community and central booking? I’m talking Jayson Williams, who also happens to be innocent until proven guilty?

At least Jayson’s a great guy, a great teammate and a great colleague of mine at NBC (No Background Checks).

* Rebuffed in his attempt to make the streets safer by getting Griffin off them for a few hours a day, Isiah Thomas is now about to sign Leon Smith to a non-guaranteed contract, a way to get a jump on a 10-day contract. Shortly after being drafted out of high school by the Mavericks several years ago, the 6-10 forward seemed to have Griffin’s athletic potential and felonious mindset – as evidenced by busting up an ex-girl friend’s car and menacing her mom, as I recall.

Just your average nut job. The Mavs quickly ditched Smith, the Hawks did likewise after a brief tryout – apparently without incident – and he’s currently averaging 22 points, 16 boards and four blocks.

Considering his routine rap sheet and miniscule investment, of course, Thomas finds him fascinating. For me, Dolan’s rationalization of Smith’s flawed character is far more intriguing.

* While on the sorry subject of hypocrites, I see where Charles Barkley stated, “What Rasheed said may be the stupidest thing I’ve heard in my 20 years in the NBA.”

Clearly, Sir Charlatan must be like the rest of us; not listening to anything he dribbles off his lower lip.