The Spaak Report

The Intergovernmental Committee created by the Messina Conference, placed under the chairmanship of Belgian Foreign Minister Paul-Henri Spaak, held its constituent meeting on 9 July 1955 at the offices of the Belgian Foreign Ministry in Brussels. This working party, composed of delegates from the six governments, was tasked with drawing up a report which would sketch the broad outline of a future European Economic Community (EEC) and European Atomic Energy Community (EAEC).

The Spaak Committee worked until 21 April 1956, aiming to answer the questions raised at the Messina Conference about the choice between a general common market and partial sectoral integration. It also identified ways of attaining the objectives set by the ministers. A steering committee comprising the heads of the national delegations and chaired by Paul-Henri Spaak was immediately appointed to organise, direct, coordinate and regularly monitor the work of the specialised committees. These committees examined the common market, investments and social issues; conventional energy; nuclear energy; and public transport and works. Various highly specialised subcommittees were subsequently set up to deal with the topics raised, which included customs and nuclear issues.

On 21 April 1956, the secretariat of the Intergovernmental Committee published the Spaak Report, which set out the broad lines of a future European Economic Community (EEC) and European Atomic Energy Community (EAEC). The report was divided into three parts: the first dealt with the common market, the second with Euratom, and the third with areas where the need for action was considered most urgent.

‘The Messina experts have submitted their report’ from L’Écho de l’Industrie (12 May 1956)

Address given by Walter Hallstein: the revival of European integration (Bonn, 14 May 1956)

The solutions proposed in the Spaak Report constituted a specific action plan and served as a basis for the intergovernmental negotiations at Val Duchesse.