Kimberly Anne Scott is the ex-wife of rapper Eminem, with the duo being married twice and sharing three children.

The musician married Kim in 1999, divorced in 2001, tied the knot again in 2006 before divorcing for the second time in 2006.

They share one biological daughter, Hailie Jade, and it's thought that Eminem adopted Kim's daughter Whitney from a previous relationship.

The former couple also adopted a third daughter, Alana, who was the daughter of Kim's sister Dawn, who later died of a drug overdose.

Kimberly is also mother to a son Parker Scott from another relationship she had.

The 46-year-old has featured in the lyrics of Eminem's songs – and she's had a very difficult life aside from her marriages to him.

Abuse as a child

Kim and her twin sister Dawn, born January 9, 1975, were born in Warren, Michigan.

Not much is known about their biological father, however the sisters allegedly had a difficult time with their step-father.

According to Eminem's mother's memoir, Kim claimed that she had been sexually abused by her stepfather.

Kim and Dawn reportedly ran away from home in 1988 and moved into a youth shelter outside of Detroit, Michigan.

Teen romance with Eminem

Eminem, real named Marshall Mathers, met Kim when he was 15 and she was 13 while at a house party.

He moved her into his home, with his mum Debbie Nelson writing in her 2008 book that they had initially told her that Kim was 15.

However when truancy officers got in touch, Debbie found out the teen's true age.

It wasn't long before Marshall and Kim became high school sweethearts – though their lives were far from easy after that.

Eminem's horrific lyrics

Eminem rapped about murdering Kim with the help of their daughter Hailie in the song 97 Bonnie & Clyde, including on The Slim Shady LP.

In the song, they get rid of the body in the ocean.

He even took Hailie into the studio to record some vocals for it, admitting he lied to Kim about where he was taking their girl.

To make matters even worse, Eminem and Kim were actually back together when he recorded the song.

Despite this, they tied the knot in June 1999 for the first time.

While watching her husband on tour, Kim first heard another murderous song about her, with him beating up a blow-up doll made to look like her in the performance.

Kim said in 2007: "Seeing the crowd's response and everybody cheering, singing the words and laughing and it just felt like everyone was staring at me."

Suicide attempts

After witnessing Eminem's performance of the song Kim, Kim tried to kill herself in July 2000.

They went on to divorce in 2001.

They were drawn back together through their shared custody of Hailie, and they married again in 2006.

In the years after their split – which came just 41 days later – Kim struggled with mental health issues and substance abuse.

On October 7, 2015, she downed some Malibu rum and prescription pills, and intentionally drove into a telephone pole.

It resulted in a concussion and a few broken bones – however it had not been the intended consequences.

Kim said on 95.5 WKQI's Mojo in the Morning: "I never expected to make it out of that alive. I apologised immensely.

"I did not even expect to make it through that, and I told [police] that I tried to do this on purpose."

Run-ins with the law

Following the intentional crash, Kim was charged with a DUI and ordered to make a $900 (£668) fine, as well as attend drug and alcohol counselling, while also serving a one-year probation.

However Kimberly had been arrested multiple times for possession of drugs after she started abusing substances following her first marriage with Eminem.

Her sister Dawn also had a history of drug abuse, and she died of a heroin overdose in her trailer home in 2016.

Life after Eminem

Kimberly Scott is worth an estimated $2million (£1.5m), with it thought that some of that has come from her ex-husband.

Eminem reportedly has a whopping net worth of more than $230m (£171m), and it has been reported that he pays her $52,000 (£38,600) a year for child and spousal support.

But she has also found some success as a writer and illustrator.

Back in 2009, she released the children's book Mommy! There's a Snot Man Standing Next to You!

If you or somebody you know has been affected by this story, contact Alcoholics Anonymous for free support on 0800 9177 650 or email help@aamail.org