Fans of Eminem are familiar with his ex-wife Kimberly Scott as her name has been included in many of the rapper’s lyrics. But after she and Marshall Mathers divorced several years back we haven’t heard much about her leaving some to wonder: What ever happened to Kim?

Read on to find out what Scott is up to now as well as some things you probably didn’t know about her relationship with the hip-hop superstar.

Eminem and Kimberly Anne were married not once, but twice

Eminem and Scott met in 1988 at a house party when they were teenagers and began dating through high school. In 1995, the couple welcomed a daughter, Hailie Jade. Four years later, Scott and Em tied the knot.

Their relationship though was rocky, something Slim Shady rapped about in his songs, and they divorced in 2001. But the two got back together and remarried in 2006. However, it wasn’t all wedded bliss then either and they decided to divorce again after a few months.

As part of their settlement, Scott reportedly receives more than $50,000 from her ex in annual payments.

The rapper released a notorious song about her

In 2000, the hip-hop artist released an explosive song about his then-wife.

In an interview with People, Scott revealed how the track in which Eminem aired their dirty laundry and spoke about murdering her, took her down a very dark path.

She confessed that she harmed herself after seeing her husband-at-time performing the song on stage and beat a blow-up doll that was supposed to be her.

“Seeing the crowd’s response and everybody cheering, singing the words and laughing and it just felt like everyone was staring at me,” Scott recalled. “I knew that it was about me and that night I went home and I tried to commit suicide.”

What Kimberly Anne is doing now

Scott has had few run-ins with the law. Over the years she’s been arrested for possession of illegal substances and multiple DUIs. She opened up to the Detroit-based radio show Mojo in the Morning that an accident she was arrested for in 2015 was another attempted suicide. “I sat at the end of a road where I knew that no one else but myself would get hurt. Yes, I drank, I took pills, I hit the gas and aimed for a pole,” she said, reports Yahoo.

Scott’s SUV flipped but she was all right. For the crash, she received one year of probation and a $900 fine. Scott praised her ex for helping her explaining that “He has been real supportive. We are really close friends. We are just trying to raise our kids together and make it as normal for them as possible.”

In addition to Hallie, Scott and Slim adopted Alaina, the daughter of Kim’s late twin sister. Em adopted Whitney, Scott’s daughter from another relationship as well. Scott also has a son named Parker but Eminem is not his legal guardian.

During an interview on Mike Tyson’s Hot Boxin’ podcast, Em spoke about Hallie and how proud he is of her today.

“She’s doing good, she’s made me proud for sure, she’s graduated from college,” the rapper told the boxing legend. “So when I think about my accomplishments that’s probably the thing I’m the most proud of is that — is being able to raise kids.”

As for Scott, she got clean and has become an author and illustrator, having worked on over a dozen children’s books