Fablehaven Night Of The Evening Star Summary

View Writing Issues

609 Words

Grammar

Plagiarism

Writing

Score

Fablehaven Night Of The Evening Star Summary

Fablehaven Night of the Evening Star Fablehaven rise of the evening star was written by Brandon mull and is a fiction story. It provides pictures that we can look to see what they think they look like. This book was released on May 31, 2007. In this book there is someone that can control people when they sleep. The book Fablehaven rise of the evening star written by Brandon mull and illustrated by Brandon Dorman is a great book. And in this book report I’ll show everyone. Kendra found a knoble in her school that all her friends said looked hot. In trying to get rid of the noble Kendra and Seth (Kendras brother)came across a guy named Errole that helped them get the knoble out but in the process of doing this he wanted them to steal. The night Errole was going to take them to steal another thing there grandfather called to ask if they could stay the summer. After talking to their mom they decided to go and the grandpa sent Vanessa to get them. On the way to the grandpa's house Vanessa rescued them from a giant straw. When they got to the grampas house the grandpa told them that they were …show more content…

Everyone thinks that the knoble is cute but kendra sees her true form. A man named Errol came in and help get rid of the noble but makes them steal something from their gondolas dear friend. Venessa came in to save the day when Errol tried to get them to steele something else ,but on the way to their grandpa's house they come across a monster that tries to attack. Vanessa saved them, but her car barely ran any more. When they got to the grandpa's house he explained that there were on the hunt for a artifact that was very important. In the path of finding the artifact they met the sphinx, a powerful person that has been alive since the dinosaurs. After they met the sphinx they found out Vanessa was a traitor and they were locked out of their own house. Now it is a race to find the