Nazli Sabri (Arabic: نزلي صبري / نازلى صبرى‎ Turkish: Nazlı Sabri) (June 25, 1894 – May 29, 1978), was the Queen consort of Egypt, (May 26, 1919 – April 28, 1936) as the second wife of King Fuad.

Contents

1 Early life

2 Marriage to King Fuad

3 Life during Farouk's reign

4 Life outside Egypt

5 Queen Nazli and public perception

6 Titles and styles

7 References

8 Bibliography

9 External links

Early life

She was the daughter of Abdu'r-Rahim Pasha Sabri, Minister of Agriculture and Governor of Cairo, by his wife, Tawfika Khanum Sharif. Queen Nazli also was the maternal granddaughter of Major-General Muhammad Sharif Pasha, Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, who was of Turkish origin.[2] She was also a great-granddaughter of the French-born officer Suleiman Pasha.[3]

Nazli Abdel Rehim Sabry first went to the Lycée de la Mère de Dieu School in Cairo, and later to Notre Dame de Sion in Alexandria.After the death of her mother, Tewfika Hanem, her father sent her and her sister to Paris, France for two years. After she returned, she was married by force to her paternal Turkish cousin, Khalil Sabri. After 11 months of marriage, she got divorced by force also because of her cousin's bad behavior. After her divorce, she stayed for about a month at the house of Safia Zaghloul, wife of Saad Zaghloul, where she met Saad Zaghloul's nephew, Saeed. She was engaged to Saeed until he broke up with her in his exile with his uncle. Later on 12 May, 1919, the Sultan Fuad I proposed to her, although he was twenty five years older than her. She was forced to accept because of her father's weakness against the Sultan to refuse.

Marriage to King Fuad

On 26 May 1919, Nazli married the Sultan of Egypt, Fuad I, at Bustan sarayi, Cairo. She later moved to the Haramlek in the Abbasiya Palace. She was under a lot of pressure by her husband, and she was threatened that she would stay in the Haramlek if she doesn't have a son for the Sultan. And then she had their only son, Farouk I, which was the reason that made her move to Koubbeh Palace with her husband. When Fuad's title was altered to King, she was given the title of Queen. Then she had 4 daughters: Fawzia, Faiza, Faiqa, and Fathiya.

Confined to the palace through most of Fuad's reign, Queen Nazli was nonetheless allowed to attend opera performances, flower shows, and other ladies-only cultural events. It was said whenever the Royal couple fought, she was been slapped by the King, and was been kept in her suite for weeks. It was also said that she tried to commit suicide by taking an extra quantity of Aspirin. She also accompanied the King during part of his four-month tour of Europe in 1927, and was much feted in France in view of her French origins. With the introduction of parliament in 1924, the she was among the royal attendees at parliament's opening ceremony seated in a special section of the guest gallery.

Life during Farouk's reign

After the death of King Fuad in 1936, her son Farouk became the new King of Egypt, and she became the Queen Mother. Her brother Sherif Sabri Pasha served on the three-member Regency Council that was formed during Farouk's minority. In 1942 Nazli and Ahmed Hassanein Pasha, the famous desert explorer and Chief of the Royal Cabinet, were secretly married by Sheikh Mustafa el Maraghi of the Azhar[4]. After Hassanein's death in 1946 Nazli left Egypt and went to the United States.

Life outside Egypt

She was deprived of her rights and titles in Egypt by her son on August 1, 1950 because of Princess Fathiya's marriage to Riyad Ghali Effendi, which was a refused marriage by the King. Another reason for this action was Nazli's conversion to Catholicism, for which she took the names Mary Elizabeth.[5] On 1976, she sent a request to President Anwar Al-Sadat to give her and her daughter Princess Fathiya Egyptian passports, and right of return to Egypt. Unfortunatlly, on the day they were leaving the United States, her daughter was killed by her ex-husband Riyad Ghali, which was an obstacle to her return to Egypt. She eventually settled in the USA, due to her painful sickness. And on 1978, she died in Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Queen Nazli and public perception

Queen Nazli possessed one of the largest jewelry collection in the world and always topped the list of the world's richest and most elegant women[citation needed]. There has been a recent Egyptian TV series that provided an account for the life of Queen Nazli, Queen in Exile starring the Egyptian actress Nadia Al Jundi.

Titles and styles

26 May 1919 – 15 March 1922: Her Gloriness The Sultana (French: Sa Hautesse la Sultane; Arabic: عظمة السلطانة‎)[6]

15 March 1922 – 20 January 1938[7]: Her Majesty The Queen (French: Sa Majesté la Reine; Arabic: جلالة الملكة‎)

20 January 1938 – 8 August 1950[8]: Her Majesty The Queen Mother (French: Sa Majesté la Reine Mere; Arabic: جلالة الملكة الام‎)

References

Bibliography

Montgomery-Massingberd, Hugh, ed (1980). "The Royal House of Egypt". Burke's Royal Families of the World. Volume II: Africa & the Middle East. London: Burke's Peerage. pp. 20–37. ISBN 9780850110296. OCLC 18496936.

Egyptian Royalty by Ahmed S. Kamel, Hassan Kamel Kelisli-Morali, Georges Soliman and Magda Malek.

L'Egypte D'Antan... Egypt in Bygone Days by Max Karkegi.

Egyptian royalty Vacant

Title last held by

Shwikar Khanum Effendi Sultana of Egypt

1919–1922 Became Queen New title

Queen consort of Egypt

1922–1936 Vacant

Title next held by

Farida