Avril Lavigne will be going ‘out for a rip’ with comedian Jay Leno on a new season of CNBC’s Jay Leno’s Garage (see videos below). The fifth season of the Emmy-winning series returns with eight new episodes of Leno and celebrity guests getting ‘behind the wheel of some of the most badass machines on the planet.’

Lavigne, who was raised in nearby Napanee, joins a list of guests this season that includes John Travolta, Matt Damon, Martha Stewart, Billy Joel, Keith Urban, Avril Lavigne, Tim Allen, Jim Jefferies, Jeff Dunham, and a rare appearance by Charlie Sheen.

The season premiere is Wednesday, August 28 at 10pm ET with Jay Leno and comedian Kevin Hart ‘on a near-deadly ride in one of the most outrageous off-road vehicles in the world.’

According to a release:

“Jay Leno’s Garage” takes fast and furious car fans for a high-octane spin across the country with a mix of stunts, reviews, celebrity interviews and challenges. As well as putting some of the world’s most amazing vehicles through their paces, Jay meets fellow car enthusiasts from whom he’ll discover the touching, hilarious and sometimes hard-to-believe stories that make these cars more than just rubber and metal. There’s no wheel Jay won’t get behind to tell the story of our love affair with the automobile.

An air date for Lavigne’s appearance has not been announced and no details about the episode have been provided*, however in videos posted from Willow Springs race track – captured by ‘Avril Videos Brazil‘ – Avril says she will be driving a RUF CTR3 sports car and later Jay Leno says she got up to 150 mph on the track.

* Update: Jay Leno’s Garage Season 05 Episode 08 (“Built for Speed”), featuring Avril becoming “the newest student at Jay’s Driving School”, aired October 16, 2019. See the promo video below.

Coincidentally, Lavigne’s rumoured boyfriend, Phillip Sarofim – son of Texas hedge fund billionaire Fayez Sarofim – appeared on the Jay Leno’s Garage Youtube channel back in 2016, where the two took a ride in Sarofim’s rare 1993 Jaguar XJ220. [Video]

For more information about Jay Leno’s Garage:

Website || Facebook || Instagram || Twitter

UPDATE: Check out the Avril episode Promo: