Cover: Kristen Stewart

From McMan’s Seven Challenges that treats Youth Addiction

North Hill Inn, January 7, 2013

Tara Veer introducing Kristen

Annie Kamarainen giving her Christmas/NY update

Ray Dunham recited his NY best

Jack Panteluk presenting an eye sight certificate to Kristen

Visiting Guests: Kristen Stewart, Tara Veer

Visiting Rotarians: Jim MacSween, Annie Kamarainen

Melody McKnight: Went to some length to indicate that the RDSO was not “on strike”, it was the staff at Symphony Aspen Ridge that was.

Jim McPherson: Has begun teaching 2 days/week at the RDC. Looking forward to receiving a pension from it.

Shelley Ralston: Got a letter from RIYE exchange student Enique from Hungary. She’s graduated from high school. If she takes geography as she plans, there is a six year return in service. Still loves Avril Lavigne and Nickelback. Shelley also skyped with Blossom. Her kids took the lap top outside to show her the winter scenes. She hadn’t seen any wild animals since leaving Canada. Is in university now.

Robert Mast: Was delighted that the Rotary Everest Fundraiser was highlighted in Rotary Canada, with a photo and recognition of their $135,000 donation. Flew back from studying in Vancouver on the weekend at 2:00 AM and was at work at 8:30 AM.

Dean Williams: Will join Marty Skinner as the co-chair of the Citizen of the Year banquet. Asked for speaker suggestions.

Jack Panteluk: Deposited 20 sad dollars because of his father’s stroke 1/12 ago and his passing on Christmas day. He had 8 great years of retirement.

Ken Johnston: Quoted his knowledgeable son who described the RDSO obo soloist presentation (by Melody McKnight) at the United Church as “ergasmic”. That ups PP Ken’s vocabulary to 5,001 words. Advertised his bank’s sponsorship of the Giller prize with the winner coming from Red Deer - Will Ferguson.

Glen Labuc: Has a new granddaughter.

Marty Skinner: His son has returned to Red Deer, and is now retired from the army after 6 risky years. Delighted he survived.

Joel Ward: Announced the RDC has purchased the City Center theatre. Its arts program will move there, as well as the dinner theatre and art shows. There will be more productions in the 300 seat theatre. The biannual school of business speaker series will be held there too. Renovations will be required.

50/50: Took the Sgt 3 draws. More worrisome he had no cards, so he juggled his fingers behind his back. The sore thumb won it, as did Steve Chow who got the 4 way test right, but was thumbs down on the skill testing question.

Program: Annie K. went to Lethbridge for Christmas. The turkey dinner was different than her usual ham and sauna. Toured the Christmas lights and the Parkland sculptures. Visited the Drumheller dinosaur museum. Made some Finnish pastries for New Years. Saw the Bower Ponds fireworks. Has transferred to the Harrops.

Elaine McFadden introduced guest speaker Kristen Stewart. She’s worked with Victor Doerksen MLA, foster care, and the Piper Creek foundation. Has an SW degree from St. Louis, Missouri. Came to Red Deer in 2001. Tara Veer added that RD needs better services for youths with addictions. She gave one example of a youth who was stealing from his family within 2 weeks of starting drugs. Kirsten said the objectives of the program were to reduce social and city impact on the community, reduce crime, reduce the opportunity cost of addiction and show youth we care. She is the community advisory board representative on the initiatives board along with Jim MacSween, and Dr. Metcalf. The board has accepted that the best program is the Seven Challenges one initiated by Dr. Schwevel of the USA. They have had 25 years of experience with it, in 350 states. The program voluntarily accepts candidates into it. It works with schools, to introduce the Seven Challenges decision making program to help the youths understand their problem, dealing with their concurrent psychological and physiological difficulties and teach them to think for themselves. 42 students have been assisted so far. The program is designed to make them more confident, stronger and less fearful. It stresses that the program is in their own best interest. The programs modalities include contracting, counseling, site supervision and outreach follow-up. They are looking for a remote site (preferably an acreage) that would require a long walk to leave the facility. In the Q&A Kirsten noted success is measured in 3 month increments. The royalty cost is $8,700 (with a trainer) and $2-5,000/year. AADC does not treat youth. There’s no AADC facility in RD. Most referrals are from the individual, but also from probation officers, parents and the alternative school program.