Avril Lavigne arrived at the 2024 iHeartRadio Awards in an all-black outfit.

For Monday's awards show, held in Los Angeles, the 39-year-old music sensation styled a shredded black Green Day T-shirt with parachute pants.

The Canadian pop star added height to her petite frame with lace-up boots that had a chunky heel.

Lavigne, who rose to fame at age 17, hit the red carpet with heavy eye makeup as she layered rings of black liner.

Her long, bright blonde locks were styled in a deep center part and ironed straight as they flowed over her chest.

Avril flaunted a lengthy, matte black manicure and flashed her tattooed arms as she posed for photos.

She layered glinty silver-toned chains around her neck, including a smaller one with a locket.

The hitmaker also stacked multiple bracelets on her left wrist as she flashed her megawatt smile.

Missing from the scene was her new boyfriend Nate Smith, who she was first spotted with earlier this year.

Cher is set to receive an Icon Award at the ceremony, which is being held at the Dolby Theatre in Hollywood.

iHeart is 'honoring her unparalleled contributions to music and pop culture for over seven decades,' per a press release.

Cher, who had hits dating back to the 1960s with I Got You Babe and was on the popular The Sonny & Cher Comedy Hour in the 1970s, is the only artist to have a number one single on a Billboard chart for seven consecutive decades.

Justin Timberlake and Jelly Roll are among the performers hitting the stage for the show.

2024 iHeartRadio Music Awards Winners At a Glance

Song of the Year:

'Kill Bill' - SZA - WINNER

Innovator Award: Beyonce - WINNER

Pop Album of the Year: Olivia Rodrigo, GUTS - WINNER

(New for 2024) Pop Song of the Year:

'Flowers'- Miley Cyrus - WINNER

Artist of the Year:

Taylor Swift- WINNER

Beyonce wins the Innovator Award at the 2024 iHeartRadio Music Awards

(New for 2024) Pop Artist of the Year:

Taylor Swift - WINNER

Innovator Award: Beyonce - WINNER

Icon Award: Cher - WINNER

Landmark Award: Green Day - WINNER

Duo/Group of the Year:

OneRepublic - WINNER

Advertisement

Green Day, TLC, Lainey Wilson and Tate McRae will also sing at the star-studded event, which airs on Fox from 8 to 10 p.m. ET.

The nominations were announced in mid January.

Taylor Swift, Jelly Roll, 21 Savage, SZA and Olivia Rodrigo lead with most nominations.

Airing LIVE on FOX, the event also will be heard on iHeartRadio stations nationwide and on the iHeartRadio app.

Artists receiving multiple nominations include, 21 Savage, Beyoncé, Billie Eilish, Blink-182, Carin León, David Kushner, Doechii, Doja Cat, Drake, Dua Lipa, Fall Out Boy, Foo Fighters, Grupo Frontera, Ice Spice, Jelly Roll.