Well, well, well, here we are again. Because I love a good "Wow, they used to date?!" moment, here are 45 couples who were dating in 2014 who definitely aren't now.

1.Britney Spears and Charlie Ebersol

2.Justin Long and Amanda Seyfried

3.Tiger Woods and Lindsey Vonn

4.Big Sean and Ariana Grande

5.Suki Waterhouse and Bradley Cooper

6.Jennifer Lawrence and Chris Martin

7.Mary-Kate Olsen and Olivier Sarkozy

8.Jenny McCarthy and Donnie Wahlberg

9.Chad Kroeger and Avril Lavigne

10.Future and Ciara

11.Sean Penn and Charlize Theron

12.Prince Harry and Cressida Bonas

13.Olivier Martinez and Halle Berry

14.Nick Loeb and Sofía Vergara

15.Ryan Sweeting and Kaley Cuoco

16.Blanda Eggenschwiler and Joe Jonas

17.Megan Fox and Brian Austin Green

18.Jon Hamm and Jennifer Westfeldt

19.Casper Smart and Jennifer Lopez

20.Gwen Stefani and Gavin Rossdale

21.Jennifer Lawrence and Nicholas Hoult

22.Miranda Lambert and Blake Shelton

23.Wiz Khalifa and Amber Rose

24.Taylor Bagley and Zach Braff

25.Michelle Rodriguez and Cara Delevingne

26.Matthew Bellamy and Kate Hudson

27.Hilary Duff and Mike Comrie

28.Emma Stone and Andrew Garfield

29.Rita Ora and Calvin Harris

30.Brooklyn Beckham and Chloë Grace Moretz

31.Jordin Sparks and Jason Derulo

32.Josh Groban and Kat Dennings

33.Patrick Schwarzenegger and Miley Cyrus

34.Nick Cannon and Mariah Carey

35.Katy Perry and John Mayer

36.Aaron Rodgers and Olivia Munn

37.Khloé Kardashian and French Montana

38.Michelle Rodriguez and Zac Efron

39.Justin Theroux and Jennifer Aniston

40.Diane Kruger and Joshua Jackson

41.Drew Barrymore and Will Kopelman

42.Nick Jonas and Olivia Culpo

43.Lena Dunham and Jack Antonoff

44.Zooey Deschanel and Jamie Linden

45.And last: Nick Kroll and Amy Poehler

The Daily Beast

Why Colbert Thinks Trump’s Terrified to Face Kamala Harris

It’s only been two days since Kamala Harris began her official presidential campaign, but Stephen Colbert is already impressed with how it’s turning out.“Biden dropped out and endorsed Kamala Harris on Sunday, and today, Tuesday, she’s already secured enough delegate endorsements to win the Democratic presidential nomination,” Colbert said.“Democrats everywhere are feeling the Kamalamentum,” Colbert continued. “Her campaign broke a single-day fundraising record with 1.1 million individual donors

Deadline

Elisabeth Hasselbeck Calls Out ‘The View’ For Supporting Kamala Harris: “They’re Going To Pump The Girl Candidate No Matter What”

Elisabeth Hasselbeck appeared on the Fox News show Hannity to call out her former co-hosts at The View for their support of Kamala Harris. The conservative political commentator said she was “glad” she was not on the ABC talk show for expressing their opinions on the political race. Hasselbeck also said that “mainstream media is …

BuzzFeed

People Are Calling Out The Most Toxic, Problematic, And Out-Of-Touch Things Celebs Do, And Yikes

"I hate when celebs complain about how their lives are so hard, yet they live in a $200 million house and can afford basic, everyday needs when most of the world can't afford a home."

Cover Media

IN CASE YOU MISSED IT: Cardi B, Cher and others react to Biden withdrawal

Following the news that President Joe Biden is officially dropping out of the 2024 presidential race artists such as Barbra Streisand, Cardi B, Cher and many others took to social media to share their reactions. "Joe Biden will go down in history as a man who accomplished significant achievements in his 4 year term. We should be grateful for his upholding of our democracy." Cardi B reposted a video of herself commenting on Biden's dismal performance against Trump during a debate in Atlanta in late June. "Ahahhaha lets gooooo i told yalll Kamala was supposed to be the 2024 candidate…”

NY Daily News

New royal report reveals Prince William’s huge annual salary

Prince William’s whopping annual salary was revealed Wednesday as part of a new royal report. The 42-year-old heir to the British throne inherited the Duchy of Cornwall estate and Duke of Cornwall title upon King Charles III’s ascension, following the 2022 death of Queen Elizabeth II. Through the estate, the Prince of Wales earned £23.6 million ($30.4 million) during the 2023-2024 financial ...

Hello!

Victoria Beckham scolds David Beckham over Photoshop fail

Victoria Beckham and David Beckham might be enjoying some romantic moments together – but the Spice Girls singer was not impressed when the former England striker shared a photo of his wife looking different than normal