She recently revealed a new record is on its way after a nearly five-year hiatus from the music industry following a difficult battle with Lyme disease.

And Avril Lavigne looked to be healthy and happy as she enjoyed an afternoon out and about in Bel Air on Monday.

The 33-year-old rockstar showed some shoulder wearing a billowing, bright red mini dress as she held hands with Phillip Sarofim before the pair drove off into the sunset.

Avril got some sun on her skin as she enjoyed a spot of shopping while wearing a bright red off-the-shoulder dress.

The vibrant number featured a ruffled hem along her chest, with a straight cut down to her thighs.

She dressed the number down with a pair of crisp white trainers worn with black ankle socks and carried a matching red bag in her hand.

The Complicated songstress wore her long platinum blonde hair in natural waves and shielded her eyes from the bright sun with a pair of over-sized shades.

Phillip - the son of Texan billionaire Fayez Sarofim - donned a pair of navy blue trousers and a white polo T-shirt with red stripes across the shoulders.

Going somewhat incognito, he rocked a pair of yellow-framed sunglasses in addition to a matching navy blue baseball cap.

The couple stopped by a local coffee shop and were spotted holding hands after grocery shopping at Jaydes Market at the Beverly Glen Center.

Avril and Phillip's relationship appears to be heating up as the couple have been pictured enjoying fancy dinner dates together in Beverly Hills.

Lavigne's new love has quite the tangled family history.

His father Fayez made headlines nearly four years ago after proposing to Susan Krohn, who had just become Phillip's mother-in-law.

Less than six months before the engagement, Susan's daughter Lori wed Phillip in a Hawaiian ceremony, according to Houston's Culture Map.

The 85-year-old father-of-five - born into Egyptian royalty and co-owner of the Houston Texans - wed Susan on Dec. 31, 2015, also in Hawaii.

It's unclear when Phillip and Lori separated.

Avril is set to make her return to the music world after a five-year hiatus while focusing on her health during a difficult battle with Lyme disease.

'I'm feeling a lot better,' Lavigne said to PEOPLE magazine. 'It's been a long time for me to be able to be here, and I'm making a record right now.

'I have my life back, which is amazing. It's something I continue to work at every day. And [I'm] just grateful to be making music.'

Her fifth, self-titled studio album was released in November 2013, and reached No. 5 on the US charts.

'I've written a really powerful record, [a] really emotional album sort of reflecting where I am today,' Lavigne said. 'I'm going to release that this year. I'm actually going to be done in two weeks.'

Her focus on health has been paramount to any music endeavor after being diagnosed with Lyme disease in 2014.

'I was bedridden for five months,' she told PEOPLE in 2015. 'I felt like I couldn't breathe, I couldn't talk and I couldn't move.'

Avril was married to Sum 41 frontman Deryck Whibley from 2006 until their divorce in 2010.

She went on to marry fellow Canadian singer Chad Kroeger in 2013 before separating in 2015.

Avril, who has citizenship in both Canada and her father's native France, also dated Caitlyn Jenner's dashing son Brody Jenner between marriages.