“Engagingly written…This is an effective entry point for those interested in the grand politics of crusader states.”—Andrew D Buck, BBC History Magazine

“In this compelling book…Tibble argues persuasively that although the crusaders lacked the jargon and analytical apparatus of what we now (often incorrectly) call ‘strategy’, their ability to support policy by actions repeated over time and modified in the light of constraints properly amounted to just that.”—Ian Garrick-Mason, Spectator

Shortlisted for the 2020 Duke of Wellington Medal for Military History

“The Crusader Strategy tackles the fundamental problem faced by 'the defenders of the East' in the twelfth century. How did practical men implement God's will in almost impossible circumstances? Tibble's penetrative analysis shows that they responded by developing intelligent long-term strategies, skilfully adapted to the numerous challenges which confronted them.”—Malcolm Barber, author of The Crusader States

“Viewing the crusader states' first century through the lens of strategic theory, Steve Tibble finds broad designs amid a whirlwind of battles, sieges, and negotiations. It is a compelling story vigorously-told of medieval men and the plans that they made.”—Thomas F. Madden, author of The New Concise History of the Crusades

“Confident, brisk and engaging, Tibble offers a sharp new understanding of the Crusader States. He deftly reveals the strategic imperatives that shaped the early eras of conquest and consolidation, convincingly showing how and why the crusaders made their strategic choices. Pithy anecdote and clever analysis illuminate the crucial competition for Egypt, a race won by Saladin, who forced the crusaders out of their mighty castles and onto the fateful battlefield at Hattin. Insightful, original and persuasive - the perfect sibling to Tibble's Crusader Armies.”—Jonathan Phillips, author of The Life and Legend of the Sultan Saladin

“Yes indeed! The kings of Jerusalem did have a strategy. The case is argued with great panache. Tibble brings a freshness and a breadth of knowledge to his subject and has clearly thought long and hard as to why things went wrong. A welcome addition to a lively debate.”—Peter W. Edbury, author of The Conquest of Jerusalem and the Third Crusade