Theatrical poster

Country Hungary Directed by Márton Keleti Release Date 1965 Language Hungarian Studio MAFILM

Main Cast Character Actor Albert Tamás Major Cpl. Ferenc Molnár Imre Sinkovits Wo. Eduárd Gálfy Iván Darvas István Szíjjártó György Pálos

The Corporal and Others (Original title: A tizedes meg a többiek) is a 1965 Hungarian war film set during WWII. In the film, Corporal Ferenc Molnár (Imre Sinkovits) deserts from his unit, after it gets annihilated during the siege of Budapest, and plans to wait for the end of the war. He decides to hide in a deserted mansion, which is only guarded by the lone butler, Albert (Tamás Major), but soon finds out, that not only other deserters inhabit the mansion, but both the Germans and the Hungarian fascists want to use it as an HQ.

The following weapons were used in the movie The Corporal and Others:

Femaru 37M

Warrant Officer Eduárd Gálfy (Iván Darvas) tries to commit suicide with his Femaru 37M, but Molnár takes it away from him, only to find out that it was empty. Later both Gálfy and István Szíjjártó (György Pálos) use this type of gun when they pretend fighting with the Russians to scare away the Nazis from a farm. The Levente commander (Gábor Agárdi) also carries a Femaru 37M.

Luger P08

The Obersturmführer (László Márkus) and Gutnacht (Tivadar Horváth) both use a Luger P08.

Mannlicher 31M rifle

Imre Gáspár (László Kozák) and Suhajda (László Bánhidi) both carry a Mannlicher 31M rifle.

Mannlicher 35M rifle

Most of the Nazis soldiers carry Mannlicher M35 rifles, which is historically incorrect.

Mosin Nagant rifle

The Soviet soldiers use Mosin Nagant rifles, most likely a mixture of original Russian rifles and postwar Hungarian copies.

PPSh-41

Grisha (Lajos Cs. Németh) and other Soviet soldiers carry PPSh-41 SMGs.

MP-40

Along with Molnár several Nazis and Hungarian fascists carry MP-40 SMGs.

Király M43 SMG

Several Hungarian Fascists carry Király M43 SMGs.

Degtyaryov DP-28

At the start of the movie a Soviet soldier aims a DP-28 Machine Gun at Molnár, but decides not to shoot.

MG 34

One of the Hungarian fascists brings an MG 34 to the execution.

DShK heavy machine gun