Association of Hungarian Film Artists regrets to report that István Gaál, multiple award winner (Balázs Béla, Kossuth and Lifetime Achievement Awards) director, Merited Artist and Master of Hungarian Motion Picture passed away after a long and protracted illness on September 25, 2007 at the age of 75.

István Gaál graduated from the class of Márton Keleti at the directing faculty of the College for Theatrical and Film Art (1958). After that he worked as a call-boy in Hunnia Film Factory, then studied thoroughly at the film college of Rome (Centro Sperimentale di Cinematografia). He studied film theory, film history and film editing. He was also employed here as an assistant professor until 1961. At home he worked as an assistant for the Budapest Film Studio making newsreels, and he was one of the founding members of Béla Balázs Studio. His career continued at the 4th Studio—the legal successor of Budapest Film Studio—with the guidance of István Nemeskürty. The facts that he held master courses in India (1985, 1994, 1995, 1996) and was a member of the jury in Cannes show his recognition in the film industry. In 1990 an exhibition at the Hall of Arts presented him as an artist of still photographing. He also gave proof of his poetic skills in his essay Portugál gálya (Physalia).

He started his filmmaking career as a documentarist; Surfacemen, a short film (his college examination film) used physical work as a visual, acoustic and rhythm-creating effect. As cinematographer of Gypsies, directed by Sándor Sára, he gave a poetic constat taken from the world of nature about a fundamental problem of domestic reality. His first feature, Current, which gave him international recognition, was inspired by his studies at the Tisza river. His first long feature film showed his responsibility as an intellectual youth with roots in the rural population. The Falcons was based on Miklós Mészöly’s short novel, as well as Dead Landscape, a lyric account on the desolating countryside of Hungary.

Béla Bartók—and music in general—was a determining experience for Gaál. Orpheus and Eurydice is the visualization of Gluck’s music, and philosophic examination of the purpose of human life.

Further films by him—without aiming at completeness—: Green Years, Baptism, Peer Gynt, Our Heritage, Customs Frontier, The Chronicle, Two Trains a Day, Legato, The Dance of Death, Buffer Zone, Roman Sonata, Creatures of God, Night, Roots (Bartók-commemoration), Irregular Inventory of Paris, Kerala.

The shooting of the USD 65 million budget work took thirteen weeks in the Stern Film Studio of Pomáz. The story of the movie—defined as „mystic fantasy” by its creators— directed by Andrei Konchalovsky is based on the ballet of the same title by Tchaikovsky.

The film, currently under the working title Nutcracker: The Untold Story, features actors like John Turturro (as the evil Mouse King), Nathan Lane (as Uncle Albert) and nine-year-old Elle Flanning (as little Mary). The cast also includes Richard E. Grant and Frances de la Tour. The screenplay is written by the director Andrei Konchalovsky together with Chris Solimine, the producers are Paul Lowin, Moritz Borman and József Cirkó.

Eight new songs were composed for the film adaptation of Nutcracker, using the popular tunes of Tchaikovsky. Their lyrics were written by Oscar-winner Tim Rice, well-known for the lyrics of works such as The Lion King, Evita, Jesus Christ Superstar and Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat.