The inexhaustible humour of Márton Keleti and screenwriter Péter Szász made this comedy one of the best-loved cult films of the 1960s, an outstanding example of the bizarre genre of “entertaining rallying films,” and a frenetic benefit performance for a cast of great actors. With its gags that have since become catchphrases, it primarily held up a warped mirror to a country with an unsettled history such as ours, where it was the most natural thing in the world that “the Russians are already in the pantry.” At the Hungarian Film Festival in 1965, Keleti’s film won the main prize, director’s and special prizes, while Imre Sinkovits received the prize for best actor. Our visitors are kindly informed that this film will be screened in Hungarian. Presented by: Palace of Arts, MaNDA

Sections

A tizedes meg a többiek (1965) – Mafilm, Film Studio IV, black and white, 101 minutes

Director

Márton Keleti

Screenplay

Péter Szász, Imre Dobozy

Cinematography

István Pásztor

Music

István Sárközi

Editing

Mihály Morell

Host

András Réz

Cast

Imre Sinkovits, Iván Darvas, Tamás Major, György Pálos, László Márkus, József Szendrő

Parking information

We wish to inform you that in the event that Müpa Budapest's underground garage and outdoor car park are operating at full capacity, it is advisable to plan for increased waiting times when you arrive. In order to avoid this, we recommend that you depart for our events in time, so that you you can find the ideal parking spot quickly and smoothly and arrive for our performance in comfort. The Müpa Budapest underground garage gates will be operated by an automatic number plate recognition system. Parking is free of charge for visitors with tickets to any of our paid performances on that given day. The detailed parking policy of Müpa Budapest is available here.

Safe ticket purchase

Dear Visitors, please note that only tickets purchased from the Müpa website and official ticket offices are guaranteed to be valid. To avoid possible inconvenience, we suggest buying tickets to our performances and concerts via the mupa.hu website, the Interticket national network (jegy.hu) or at our official ticket offices.