Wuerhosaurus is a genus of stegosaurid that lived during the early Cretaceous in China. Being from the early Cretaceous makes it notable as it means it’s one of the last living stegosaurid genera. While stegosaurids as a group flourished during the late Jurassic, they went completely extinct by the end of the early Cretaceous. A few figures of Wuerhosaurus exist including an old 2009 one by CollectA, a mini by PNSO, and one by Vitae. Today we’re looking at Haolonggood’s Wuerhosaurus, released in 2023.

Remains for Wuerhosaurus are scant and include a mostly complete pelvis and sacrum, some vertebrae, bits of the shoulder and forelimbs, and a couple plates. Wuerhosaurus is typically reconstructed with shallow plates like what’s preserved, but this is probably incorrect since the preserved plates are broken. Indeed, the most recent study on Wuerhosaurus phylogeny places it close to Stegosaurus and it’s likely that it had larger plates than what we typically see.

The Haolonggood Wuerhosaurus has the shallow plates that you would expect it to have. Chances are good that this is inaccurate, but we would need more material to say for sure. The shallow plates are somewhat of a trope for the genus and without them the figure wouldn’t really be recognizable as a Wuerhosaurus, so I’m cool with it for now.

Any reconstruction of Wuerhosaurus is going to be largely speculative anyway but Haolonggood’s figure does have the standard stegosaurid body plan that’s generally accurate for the group. It is presented low to the ground which is correct for the genus. It appears that five digits are sculpted on each forelimb, and it appears that digits 4 and 5 are clawless. I say “it appears” since the digits are so small it’s hard to study them closely. The hindlimbs have three digits. This is all correct as well. You’ll notice that this figure lacks shoulder spikes while Vitae’s has them but there is no evidence for them in Wuerhosaurus and their presence is unlikely.

The Haolonggood Wuerhosaurus measures 7” (17.78 cm) in length and stands 2.5” (6.35 cm) tall at the hips. It is estimated that Wuerhosaurus measured 23’ (7 meters) long which puts the figure at 1/39 in scale. The figure is presented striding forward with the neck bending slightly leftward and the tail with some subtle curves.

This figure comes with two different paintjobs, green and blue. I got the blue variant but it’s really more of a purple. I chose this one because purple dinosaurs are a rarity while green dinosaurs are not and are especially common in stegosaur figures. Patterning is the same on both figures. The main body is purple with a peach-colored underside that radiates in stripes across the body. Darker purple squiggles and spots add further complexity to the figure. The plates are edged in purple with an orange center, looking somewhat like a little sunset on each plate. The smallest plates on the neck are painted the same color as the body. The tail is tipped in vibrant orange in typical Haolonggood fashion. Claws are painted grey, and the eyes are simple shiny black specks.

Overall, I find this paintjob unique, but I don’t care for the darker squiggles. Also, the entire figure has a flat, hazy look to it, like it was dusted with flour. This makes the finer details harder to see and appreciate and it also makes it difficult to accurately represent the figure’s appearance in photographs. I’ve seen other collectors add a dark wash to their copies with great effect.

Although they’re hard to see the fine details are indeed there. The entire figure is covered in fine pebbly scales and saggy looking creases and skin folds. Larger feature scales run in rows along the flanks and clusters of larger scales are sculpted at the bases of the plates and tail spikes. The plates themselves have unique jagged edges and grooves that I enjoy. A cloaca is sculpted on the underside along with a round bulge on either side of it. These remind me of the hemipenal bulges seen in male lizards so I guess it’s a boy!

Even though the figure is largely speculative, and the shallow plates are likely inaccurate, I’m happy to finally have a Wuerhosaurus in my collection to boost my stegosaur diversity. The figure itself is masterfully sculpted and lifelike and I find nothing to take issue with aside from the hazy appearance that can be easily remedied if one felt so inclined. The Hoalonggood Wuerhosaurus is currently available and retails at about $17-20, an excellent price point for a figure of this quality.