EpicLLOYD as Frederick the Great Character information Birth name Friedrich II Nickname(s) Frederick the Great

Der Alte Fritz

Old Fritz

His Royal Highness The Crown Prince

His Majesty The King of Prussia Born January 24, 1712

Berlin, Prussia Died August 17, 1786 (aged 74)

Potsdam, Prussia Physical description Hair White Eyes Blue Based on Rap battle information Appeared in Alexander the Great vs Ivan the Terrible Vs Ivan the Terrible Release date July 12, 2016 Official vote(s) TBD Location(s) The Prussian flag

The Brandenburg Gate

Hohenzollern Castle

The Cathedral of the Dormition

“

I'm Frederick the Great! Out the gate, first servant of state!

— Frederick the Great

”

Frederick the Great battled Ivan the Terrible following Alexander the Great and preceding Catherine the Great in Alexander the Great vs Ivan the Terrible. He was portrayed by EpicLLOYD.

Information on the rapper

Frederick II, better known as Frederick the Great (German: Friedrich der Große), was born on January 24th, 1712, in Berlin, Prussia. He was King of Prussia from 1740 until 1786. His most significant accomplishments during his reign included his military victories, his reorganization of Prussian armies, his patronage of the Arts and the Enlightenment in Prussia, and his final success against great odds in the Seven Years' War. He died at the age of 74 on August 17th, 1786, in Potsdam, Prussia.

Lyrics

[Note: Frederick the Great is in dark blue, Ivan the Terrible is in regular text, and additional voices are in italics.]

Verse 1:

(Psst!) What about a flute-busting Prussian?

Old Fritz! Old Fritz! Old Fritz! Old Fritz!

Old Fritz! Old Fritz! Old Fritz! Old Fritz!

I'm Frederick the Great! Out the gate, first servant of state!

Oblique attack tactics ain't exactly straight!

I've got creative talents and battle malice!

Hard as steel on the field, genteel in the palace!

Russia's fucked up, but no wonder why!

With your tundras and taigas and bears! Oh my!

I would pay a guy to tear out my eyes

If I had to look at your troll face every night!

Now, bring me my chair!

I'm weary from tearing you a new derrière from here to Red Square!

Fought a Seven Years' War; I ain't scared of a Tsar

'Cause beating you only took me twelve bars!

During Ivan the Terrible's third verse:

I'd keep ripping you to shreds, but I'll take a break instead

And just rest my little head. Why don't you drop dead, Fred?!

Trivia

Frederick is the eleventh rapper to die in-battle.

He is the second one to die peacefully, after Steve Jobs.

He, Jobs, and Billy Mays are the only characters who were not killed by another character.

He is the second rapper to step in later during the battle yet have their own title card, after Macho Man Randy Savage.

He is the first rapper with a title card to not be introduced by the announcer.

He is the only rapper in his battle who did not speak his own language, in this case, German.

Ivan the Terrible and Catherine the Great spoke Russian ("на здоровье" and "нет", respectively), and Alexander the Great spoke Greek ("kudos").

He was never good at speaking German however, and mostly preferred speaking French, which he does in the battle ("derrière").

He is the second rapper to have a chant or song at the beginning of his verse, after Walt Disney.

He is the fourth rapper to hold a title of "the [blank]," after Jack the Ripper, Ivan the Terrible and Alexander the Great.

He was good friends with (and possibly a lover to) French philosopher Voltaire, who previously appeared in Eastern Philosophers vs Western Philosophers.

His reign over Prussia overlapped with Catherine the Great's rule over Russia, both parties politically interacting with one another many times, such as signing diplomatic alliances between their two nations, as well as the partitioning of Poland. This makes Frederick II one of the few rappers to have interacted with another character from the same battle, in real life.

The stance in which he stands during his title card, with his left foot on his right leg, mimics Jethro Tull frontman and flautist Ian Anderson.