Jonathan Lethem Books In Order

Book links take you to Amazon. As an Amazon Associate I earn money from qualifying purchases.

Publication Order of Standalone Novels

Publication Order of Short Stories/Novellas

Publication Order of Short Story Collections

Publication Order of Graphic Novels

Publication Order of Non-Fiction Books

Publication Order of PM's Outspoken Authors Books

Publication Order of 33⅓ Books

Publication Order of Deep Focus Books

Publication Order of Anthologies

The well known and equally well regarded American novelist Jonathan Lethem has been writing for a number of years now, with his work being viewed worldwide as being at the forefront of its genre, as he’s one of the leading figure within his specific field. Not only does he write novels, he is also held in high esteem for his short stories, as well as his essays, with him truly being a master of his craft and an expert in the industry. Focusing on the detective and science-fiction genres, he’s combined elements of them both, creating his own unique and interesting take on the medium and one that many have attempted to replicate since to varying degrees of success.

Early and Personal Life

Born on the 19th of February, 1964, Jonathan Lethem was born and raised in Brooklyn, New York City, in the United States of America. Growing up as the oldest of three siblings, his mother was a political activist, whilst his father was an avant-garde painter. Obsessed with science-fiction from an early age, along with the works of Bob Dylan, he would use this interest to shape his career and his future writings.

With an initial interest in art, he aimed to become like his father, as he attended the High School of Music and Art in New York. Over time his bright and colorful visual style, which lent itself well to animation, started to shift, as he began to move towards writing. In 1982 he went on to Vermont, whereby he attended Bennington College and, following this, went on to hitch-hike from Denver in Colorado to Berkeley in California, back in 1984.

This all lead up to him going on to live in California for over twelve years, during which time he worked in a number of book-stores. Working as a store clerk he’d continue on his path to becoming a writer full-time, with his unique ‘genre bending’ take on the format. It was in 1989 that he finally published his own short-story, followed by a number of other books in the early nineties.

Marrying Shelley Jackson, the artist and writer, in 1987, he lived with her until they divorced ten years later in 1997. Living with the film executive Julia Rosenberg after marrying her in 2000, he would divorce her two years later. Then, in 2007, he married his third wife Amy Barrett, a film-maker, as they had they had their son Everett Barrett Lethem on the 23rd of March of that same year, both of whom he lives with to this day.

Writing Career

It was in 1994 that Jonathan Lethem came out with his first novel ‘Gun, with Occasional Music’, a hard-boiled science-fiction detective story. Utilizing themes and ideas that would return to him throughout his career, it features more surrealistic elements to convey major ideas on technology and progress. It would also help to establish his name within the science-fiction community as one to most definitely watch.

This was soon followed up by the novel ‘Amnesia Moon’ in 1995, and later ‘The Wall of the Sky, The Wall of the Eye’ in 1996. Whilst he doesn’t have any full series of franchises, he’s been a concise and consistent writer of science-fiction over the years. Not just writing novels, he’s also published collections of short-stories and other assorted writings throughout the course of his career as well.

Winning awards during his career as well, he’s been given the MacArthur Fellowship in 2005, gaining him a high degree of prestige. Along with his critical acclaim, he’s also received a high level of commercial success as well, as he got onto the ‘New York Times Bestseller List’ too. He was also given the ‘National Book Critics Circle-Award’ too, for his popular 1999 novel ‘Motherless Brooklyn’.

Politically active as well, he has also taken part in ‘Occupy Wall Street’, whereby he gave readings at the event. He’s also written a number of articles and essays, along with being involved in Marvel comics too, branching out over a whole variety of different mediums. This activism and political consciousness has weighed heavily on his work, giving his material a sense of immediacy it otherwise wouldn’t have had.

With him continuing as a strong presence in the industry, he maintains his output on a regular and consistent basis. Not only that, but he also has film adaptations of his work as well, along with a number of non-fiction works from him as well. As he carries on into the foreseeable future, it appears that he’s not stopping any time soon, as his writing career grows from strength-to-strength.

Gun, with Occasional Music

Initially published in 1994 in March, this was to be the first book from Jonathan Lethem as an author. Setting up his forthcoming career and establishing his name as a writer, it worked at introducing him to the general public. Containing a lot of his early ideas and themes, many of which he’d develop throughout his later work, it’s ideal for anyone looking to learn more on the writer.

Conrad Metcalf is a detective in the future whereby animals have evolved alongside humans to fully fledged members of society. Set in Oakland, he’s got a gun toting kangaroo hot on his tail and a rabbit client sat in his waiting room. Now, with a new case in the works, he’s currently shadowing Celeste, the wife of a soon to be deceased doctor. Will he find the killer? Can he uncover the truth? What will become of the gun, with occasional music?

Motherless Brooklyn

First published in 1999, this book came out through the Vintage publishing label, being another stand-alone from the author. A few books into his writing career now, it shows Jonathan Lethem as a far more developed and confident writer, echoing a lot of his core ideas and principles once again. Ideal for any reader looking to get into his work, it offers not only an insight into the writer, but it also provides a clear and articulate view of his mindset.

Seen as a human freak-show of sorts, mostly by his own volition, though, Lionel Essrog is a Brooklyn orphan with Tourettic impulses. This then leads him to tear the English language apart in wildly different and inventive ways, as he barks, grunts and growls. Not only that, but he’s also working for the mob too, with Frank Molina as his small time mobster boss, who also runs a limo service along with a detective agency. Will he be able to deal with the fallout after Frank is stabbed, though? Can he handle the case following the arrest of his colleague? What will become of him once he heads into a motherless Brooklyn?