Jonathan Lethem

Jonathan Lethem appears in the following:

Jonathan Lethem's 'Brooklyn Crime Novel'

Jonathan Lethem joins us to discuss his latest book, Brooklyn Crime Novel, which follows the crime that occurs all across a 1970s Brooklyn neighborhood.

Get Lit: Jonathan Lethem

We air highlights from our conversation with Jonathan Lethem from our special “Love Letter to New York” edition of our book club, Get Lit with All Of It.

Get Lit: Audience Q&A with Jonathan Lethem

We air highlights from the audience Q&A portion of our December Get Lit with All Of It event with author Jonathan Lethem.

Jonathan Lethem's Apocalyptic New Novel

Jonathan Lethem's "The Arrest."

In Jonathan Lethem's New Novel, a Gambler Tries his Luck on High-Stakes Backgammon

Jonathan Lethem discusses his latest novel "A Gambler's Anatomy," which combines science fiction with aa spy thriller.

Jonathan Lethem's 'The Fortress Of Solitude' Is Now a Musical

The coming-of-age saga following two teenage friends as they navigate adolescence and racial tensions in 1970s Brooklyn has just been extended through Nov. 16 at the Public Theater.

Five Women Command The Top Of The Charts; Jonathan Lethem Adapted For Stage; James Plays Live

For the first time ever, female solo artists have held all top five spots on the Hot 100 for more than four weeks in a row -- going on seven weeks at this point.

Jonathan Lethem's Dissident Gardens

Jonathan Lethem discusses his new novel, Dissident Gardens, an epic yet intimate family saga about three generations of all-American radicals that was inspired by his own family.

Guest Picks: Jonathan Lethem

Jonathan Lethem was on the Leonard Lopate Show recently to talk about his latest novel, Dissident Gardens. He also told us he's a fan of Molly Ringwald movies. Find out what else Jonathan Lethem likes!

Guest Picks: Jonathan Lethem

Writer Jonathan Lethem was on the Lopate Show recently to discuss the relationship between the novel and contemporary culture... and he also shared what his favorite comfort food is!

Jonathan Lethem on The Ecstasy of Influence

Jonathan Lethem talks about the relationship between the novel and contemporary culture. In The Ecstasy of Influence, a collection of new and previously published essays, he looks at the role of the writer as public intellectual, tackling topics from sex in cinema to drugs, graffiti, Bob Dylan, cyberculture, 9/11, book touring, and Marlon Brando, as well as his literary models.

Musical Chain Letter: Jonathan Lethem

Pass it on! This week on Soundcheck, four authors pass along an album recommendation in a chain-like fashion to the next day's guest. Today, author Jonathan Lethem leaves behind his pick for tomorrow’s guest, music critic Alex Ross of The New Yorker.

Jonathan Lethem And 'The Ecstasy of Influence'

Pop music often plays an important role in the novels of Jonathan Lethem. But the Brooklyn native’s new essay collection, The Ecstasy of Influence, finds real-life musicians stealing the show. Lethem joins us to explain what it was like to interview James Brown and Bob Dylan, and why the Go-Betweens are his favorite band.

Underappreciated: L. J. Davis's A Meaningful Life

For this week’s Underappreciated segment, Jonathan Lethem, author of Motherless Brooklyn, The Fortress of Solitude, and Chronic City, discusses L. J. Davis's 1971 novel, A Meaningful Life. It’s about a failed writer who attempts to channel his creative energy into real estate, in the form of a decaying Brooklyn mansion-turned-rooming house he buys in the late 1960s. The novel raises questions about gentrification that are still relevant today. Lethem wrote the introduction for New York Review Books release of the novel, grew up down the block from Davis in Boerum Hill.

Talk to Me: Patti Smith Chats with Jonathan Lethem

Patti Smith spoke with Jonathan Lethem about writing, CBGB, and New York nostalgia for the PEN World Voice Festival. Listen to their conversation and Smith's song about William Blake.

Talk to Me: Utopia and Dystopia at PEN

Russian poet Inga Kuznetsova, Israeli writer Eshkol Nevo, Polish writer Andrzej Stasiuk and New York's own Jonathan Lethem talked about utopia and dystopia for the PEN World Voice Fes...

Rock Critic Requiem

When the music writer Paul Nelson died in 2006, few people remembered who he was: one of the first to champion a young Bob Dylan, an influential contributor to magazines like Rolling Stone and Sing Out! -- and the guy who dared to sign the New York Dolls to a ...

Remembering Paul Nelson

The pioneering rock critic Paul Nelson documented the rise of Bob Dylan, wrote for Rolling Stone – and signed the New York Dolls to a record label. Today: author Jonathan Lethem talks about the fictionalized version of Paul Nelson in his new novel "Chronic City." Plus: jazz pianist Gerald Clayton ...

Chronic City

Jonathan Lethem, author of Motherless Brooklyn and The Fortress of Solitude, discusses his new novel, Chronic City, a story about Manhattanites wrapped in their own world.

Events: Jonathan Lethem will be reading and answering questions with Colson Whitehead, as part of the New Yorker Festival

Friday, October 16, ...

The Year in Music Writing

More than two dozen stories are included in this year's "Best Music Writing" anthology. Among them: Novelist Jonathan Lethem’s in-depth portrait of the legendary James Brown and Pitchfork Media writer Nitsuh Abebe's profile of indie hero Daniel Johnston. We’ll talk with Lethem, Abebe, and the book's guest editor, rock critic ...