Sprites are the basic components of Scratch. Similar to characters in a video game, they can move around the stage, change their appearance, and interact with other sprites. Each sprite uses one or more images and is controlled by scripts. Multiple costumes are the key to making sprites look like they are animated. Remember, while you have may have multiple costumes, there is still only one sprite.

Read / view the images below (to enlarge, click and open image in new tab / window) to learn about scripts

In your portfolio (Scratch > Intro Activities) answer the questions / do the activities that go with each of the images.

Again, feel free to copy and paste the list of questions into your document so you can save on some typing.

Press the "Publish" button when you are finished.

1. In Scratch, multiple images in a sprite are referred to as ______________.

2. Become familiar with the info on the stage section.

Try moving the cat sprite around the screen, observe what happens to the X and Y positions / coordinates

Try renaming the sprite... remember to press enter

Try changing the size of the sprite... remember it is a percentage of the original sprite

Experiment with changing the direction of the sprite. Watch what happens with the values when you go clockwise or counter clockwise.

4. Spend five minutes on the Internet and do some research to find out the key differences between Vector and Bitmap images. Include your answer on your scratch introduction page

5. Choose a simple sprite from the library and experiment with using the various paint tools to modify at least one of the costumes (if you chose a sprite that only has only one costume, in the costumes tab, you can right click or control click the costume to duplicate it). Be sure to post your results.

Here are some things to try

You can modify a costume or try making a new costume completely (different pose ... to show movement)

When using the reshape tool, experiment with creating new points by holding the option key as you drag from the edge of the shape.

Experiment with grouping shapes / parts of the image... once you do, rotation and a couple of features come into play.​

Explore what happens if you press and hold the "shift" key down while using certain tools

Explore what happens when you hold the shift key while moving an object or shape

When changing colour of a stroke or fill, try using the eyedropper tool to select colour from other shape or image

Use the magnifying glass to zoom in and out to see more or less detail