We have assisted the people of the Central African Republic for over 30 years, providing humanitarian assistance, education, access to justice, and health care.

In the autumn of 2023, Cordaid ended its activities in the Central African Republic and closed the country office in the capital Bangui.

WHAT WE DID IN THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

Health care

Cordaid has strengthened the health system, mainly by using a results-based financing approach. We have improved the quantity and quality of healthcare services. Since 2015, Cordaid has spent 41.5 million euros on health programming in the CAR.

Justice and peace

Together with our local partners, we created an enabling environment where victims of violence feel empowered to rebuild their lives, restore their sense of dignity, and fully participate in their communities. Our Strategic Partnership programme provides a platform for local organisations and has been key in capacity-building initiatives.

WHERE WE WORKED IN THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

In the Central African Republic, Cordaid used to work in seven prefectures. In Nana Mambere, Mbomou, Ouham Pende and Ouham in the northwest, Cordaid focused on improving basic health services and providing humanitarian aid, including water, sanitation and hygiene, shelter, food security, and protection to displaced people as well as host communities. In addition, we built and supported schools and safe spaces for children to learn and play.

In the southern prefectures of Mambere Kadei, Lobaye and Ombella Mpoko, we provided primary healthcare services and had programmes on advocacy and social cohesion and sexual and reproductive health care for youth. We also improved the livestock value chain, in partnership with the government and local partners.

In the Basse Kotto prefecture, we supported quality health services, built and restored clean water sources and promoted good hygiene practices for host communities and displaced people.

PARTNERS AND DONORS

We coordinated our work in close collaboration with the Central African government, including the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Humanitarian Action, as well as other development partners and NGOs, such as the World Bank, the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the European Union, Fonds Békou, Misereor, OCHA, UNFPA, UNICEF, and Startfund.