Silvio Berlusconi, the flamboyant media tycoon who was a three-time Italian prime minister, has been laid to rest after a high-profile funeral at Il Duomo, the world-famous gothic cathedral in his native Milan.

Berlusconi, who died of cancer on June 12 at age 86, was buried this past Wednesday following the funeral Mass, which was presided over by Milan’s Archbishop Mario Delpini.

While Pope Francis himself invoked "eternal peace for him and consolation of heart for those who mourn his passing", people will remember Berlusconi's relationship with the Catholic Church as one that was often stormy.

A marriage of convenience

When Italy’s Catholic-inspired political party – “Democrazia Cristiana” – collapsed in 1994 in the wake of the "Clean Hands" anti-corruption operation, the Church lost its historic ally in Italian politics. An alliance of interests was formed between Cardinal Camillo Ruini, papal vicar for the diocese of Rome and president of the Italian Bishop Conference (CEI), and Berlusconi, who had just founded Forza Italia, a liberal and conservative center-right party.

"This alliance was above all an alliance of converging interests," noted one Vatican observer. Indeed, for the bishops, a stable relationship with Italy's chief executive would increase the Church's influence in the life of the country, through the promotion of conservative values on subjects such as bioethics or the status of homosexual couples. Berlusconi's campaign promises focused on education, the family and the defense of life.

For his part, Berlusconi was counting on the legitimacy provided by the support of the Vatican hierarchy to win the support of Catholic voters in a still very devout Italy. This alliance explains, among other things, the high frequency of meetings between Il Cavaliere (a title of merit he received from the Italian state in 1977) and successive popes.

The end of a peaceful cohabitation

But it was during his last term of office (2008-2011) that the alliance between Berlusconi and the Italian cardinals gradually deteriorated, when the former prime minister was caught up in scandals. With underage prostitution, orgies, abuse of power and corruption, Berlusconi began to sink under the weight of indictments.

"Though no one on the Vatican side really condemned Berlusconi, it was mainly to keep the religious out of politics," said one source. Although many Catholics called on the Church to speak out in the wake of the "Rubygate" scandal involving the prostitution of underage girls, Pope Benedict XVI declared: "We do not concern ourselves with the internal affairs of countries."

In 2009, a definitive break

But it was in 2009 that the rupture was definitive, when L'Avvenire, the CEI-owned daily paper, cautiously reprimanded Berlusoni’s misbehavior following the latest revelations about him (corruption, prostitutes...). Il Caviliere’s response was swift. The next day, Dino Boffo, director of L'Avvenire, was slandered about his private life in the columns of Il Giornale, a Berlusconi-owned newspaper. From then on, a number of high-ranking Vatican cardinals never missed an opportunity to oppose Berlusconi, denouncing the gap between his moralistic rhetoric and his behavior.

In 2009, in an attempt to ease tensions with the Vatican, Berlusconi diverted his plane coming from Pittsburgh, where the G20 summit was being held, so as to arrive early at Ciampino Airport and be able to greet Benedict XVI before he left for a pastoral visit to the Czech Republic.

No Vatican representative at Berlusconi’s funeral

Although the meeting between him and the pope was cordial, his attempt at appeasement was unsuccessful. In 2011, during the opening address at a meeting of the CEI permanent council, Cardinal Angelo Bagnasco, then CEI president, denounced the "behavior of certain politicians, hardly compatible with institutional dignity". The statement was implicitly aimed at Silvio Berlusconi, whose antics regularly made international headlines.

And it was only at the end of his last term as prime minister, when Berlusconi became less virulent in the Italian media, that the Italian Catholic hierarchy began to soften its stance towards him.

On the announcement of his death, Pope Francis – who, incidentally, has never met Berlusconi – contented himself with soberly saluting a "protagonist of Italian political life who has assumed public responsibilities with an energetic temperament". And although the pope sent his sincere condolences to Berlusconi's eldest daughter, the only Vatican representative he sent to Il Cavaliere’s funeral was the papal nuncio to Italy, rather than one of his cardinals.