Like any movie star, Sam Shepard fits right in among the glittering crowds at Sundance. But he’s probably the only actor in Park City, Utah, who looks like he could have easily dropped by from a nearby mountaintop ranch, rather than arriving by plane from Los Angeles. Shepard has brought his unique rugged gravitas to the screen and stage for 40 years, from Days of Heaven to last December’s August: Osage County; at this year’s Sundance Film Festival he was representing Cold in July, a low-budget noir co-starring Michael C. Hall, Vinessa Shaw, and Don Johnson.

How low-budget? “It’s very much a handmade movie,” he told V.F.’s Krista Smith when he sat down for an interview at the festival. Going into a big shoot-out scene, Shepard was handed the cartridges for the prop gun and told: “Make sure you make each one of these count. It’s going to be a big gunfight, but you only have three cartridges.” Another scene with characters shooting bottles off barrels involved “a girl standing at the top of a ladder, with a fishing pole and with fishing line, and she’s popping each one of the bottles off as you shoot.”

Shepard popped up at last year’s Sundance as well in Jeff Nichols’s Mud, opposite Matthew McConaughey in one of his many recent standout roles; McConaughey is now nominated for his first Oscar, for his lead role in Dallas Buyers Club. Says Shepard about his former co-star, “It’s really great to see an actor find himself, in his sojourn.”

And where will Shepard’s sojourn take him next? Far away from the madding crowds of Sundance, to start with. “I try not to be in situations where I’m being grabbed at. For the most part you can avoid them. Not here.”

Check back to Vanity Fair’s Hollywood for more Sundance Film Festival coverage, and visit our Sundance hub for the full lineup of video interviews.

Sundance Stars in Exclusive Photos

1 / 30

Politics

RFK Jr.’s Family Doesn’t Want Him to Run. Even They May Not Know His Darkest Secrets.

A shocking photograph. Blowback from a Trump meeting. Alleged sexual assault. The Kennedys have voiced support for Joe Biden, but certain aspects of Robert F. Kennedy Jr.’s character are only just now coming to light.

Movies

When You’re 23 and Spielberg Calls: The Wild Origin Story of Jon M. Chu

In an excerpt from his new memoir, the director of Crazy Rich Asians and Wicked remembers the shock and awe.

Award Season

In Conclave, the Pope Dies—Then the Twisty Search for His Successor Begins

Ralph Fiennes top lines the new film from the director of All Quiet on the Western Front, a thriller about both a personal and a collective crisis of faith—backed by a brilliant ensemble including Isabella Rossellini, Stanley Tucci, and more.

Movies

The 25 Best Movies on Netflix to Stream Right Now

From comedy classics to recent Oscar winners, these are the titles you don’t want to miss.

Celebrity

Towa Bird Wants to Be a New Kind of Rock Star

On her debut album, American Hero, the 25-year-old queer musician celebrates identity, joins the “lesbian renaissance,” and becomes the representation she never had.

News

Lauren Windsor Has a “Substantial Amount” of Secret Recordings She Hasn’t Released Yet

The SCOTUS sting-operator who secretly taped Justice Alito talks to VF about the material she’s yet to drop, her “huge list” of targets, and whether it’s ethical to tell a lie in pursuit of the truth.

News

The 1992 Republican Convention Jump-Started the Culture Wars—and the GOP’s Prime-Time Extremism

In an excerpt of his book The Naughty Nineties, David Friend recounts the partisan political battle America has been fighting for three decades, beginning with Pat Buchanan and George H.W. Bush in Houston.

Politics

How Donald Trump Echoes Joe McCarthy

My grandfather was jailed in the Red Scare of the 1950s. Political writers could suffer a similar fate in a second Trump term.

Tech

“It Was Astonishing”: How NBC Convinced Al Michaels to Embrace His AI Voice for Olympics Coverage

The network will use an artificial clone of the legendary broadcaster’s voice to narrate its daily recaps of the summer event. “It was not only close,” he says of the technology, “it was almost 2% off perfect.”

Hollywood

22 Undersung TV Gems to Binge Right This Second

Now that Peak TV has peaked, consider watching one of these unjustly uncelebrated series, handpicked by Maureen Ryan.