“When you hit a wall – of your own imagined limitations – just kick it in.”

― Sam Shepard

Sam Shepard

Samuel Shepard Rogers IV is an American playwright, actor, and television and film director. He is the author of several books of short stories, essays, and memoirs, and received the Pulitzer Prize for Drama in 1979 for his play Buried Child. Shepard was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal of pilot Chuck Yeager in The Right Stuff (1983). Shepard received the PEN/Laura Pels International Foundation for Theater Award as a master American dramatist in 2009.

Awards:

Won Obie Award for Best Distinguished Play(s): 1966 Chicago, Icarus’s Mother, Red Cross; 1967 La Turista; 1968 Forensic and the Navigator, Melodrama Play; 1973 The Tooth of Crime

1975 Won Obie Award for Best Playwriting: Action

1977 Won Obie Award for Best New American Play: Curse of the Starving Class

1979 Won Obie Award for Best Playwriting: Buried Child

1979 Pulitzer Prize for Drama: Buried Child

1980 Won Obie Award for Sustained Achievement

1984 Won Obie Award for Best New American Play: Fool for Love

1984 Won Obie Award for Best Direction: Fool for Love

1984 Nominated Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor: The Right Stuff

1985 Nominated BAFTA Award for Best Adapted Screenplay: Paris, Texas

1986 Won Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Play: A Lie of the Mind

1986 Won New York Drama Critics’ Circle for Best Play: A Lie of the Mind

1986 Won Outer Critics Circle Award for Outstanding Off-Broadway Play: A Lie of the Mind

1992 Won American Academy of Arts and Letters – Gold Medal for Drama

1994 Inducted American Theatre Hall of Fame

1996 NominatedTony Award for Best Play: Buried Child

1997 Nominated Lone Star Film & Television Award for Best TV Supporting Actor: Hallmark Hall of Fame: “Lily Dale”

1999 Nominated Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie: Dash and Lilly

1999 Nominated Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Miniseries or TV Film: Dash and Lilly

2000 Nominated Tony Award for Best Play: True West

2001 Nominated Phoenix Film Critics Society Award for Best Acting Ensemble: Black Hawk Down

2008 Nominated SAG Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor – TV Movie or Miniseries: Ruffian

Born Samuel Shepard Rogers IV in Fort Sheridan, Illinois, he worked on a ranch as a teenager. His father, Samuel Shepard Rogers, Jr., was a teacher and farmer who served in the United States Army Air Forces as a bomber pilot during World War II; Shepard has characterized him as “a drinking man, a dedicated alcoholic”. His mother, Jane Elaine (née Schook), was a teacher and a native of Chicago, Illinois. Shepard was forced to support his mother and brother when his father’s farm lapsed into insolvency. After graduating from Duarte High School in 1961, he briefly studied agriculture at Mt. San Antonio College, where he became enamored with the oeuvre of Samuel Beckett, jazz, and abstract expressionism. Shepard soon dropped out to join a touring repertory group, the Bishop’s Company.

After securing a position as a busboy at The Village Gate … after winning six Obie Awards between 1966-1968, Shepard emerged as a viable screenwriter … drummed sporadically from 1967 through 1971 with psychedelic folk band The Holy Modal Rounders … (1968).

Shepard’s early science fiction play The Unseen Hand (1969) would influence Richard O’Brien’s stage musical The Rocky Horror Show. Cowboy Mouth—a collaboration with then-mistress Patti Smith—was staged for one night at The American Place Theater in April 1971, providing early exposure for the future punk rock singer; seeking to distance himself from Smith and his substance abuse, Shepard relocated with his wife and son to London in the early 1970’s. Returning to America in 1975, he moved to the 20-acre Flying Y Ranch in Mill Valley, California and served for a semester as Regents’ Professor of Drama at the University of California, Davis.

Shepard accompanied Bob Dylan on the Rolling Thunder Revue of 1975 as the ostensible screenwriter of the surrealist Renaldo and Clara (1978) … His diary of the tour (Rolling Thunder Logbook) was published by Penguin Books in 1978. A decade later, Dylan and Shepard co-wrote the 11-minute “Brownsville Girl“, included on Dylan’s Knocked Out Loaded (1986) album and later compilations.

In 1975, he was named playwright-in-residence at the Magic Theatre, where many of his notable works (including his Family Trilogy: Buried Child [1978], Curse of the Starving Class [1978], and True West [1980]) received their premier productions. Some critics expand this grouping to a quintet which includes Fool for Love (1983) and A Lie of the Mind (1985).

Shepard began his acting career in earnest when he was cast as the handsome land baron in Terrence Malick’s Days of Heaven (1978), opposite Richard Gere and Brooke Adams. This led to other important films and roles, most notably his portrayal of Chuck Yeager in The Right Stuff (1983), earning him an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor. By 1986, one of his plays, Fool for Love, was being made into a film directed by Robert Altman; his play A Lie of the Mind was Off-Broadway with an all-star cast including Harvey Keitel and Geraldine Page; he was living with Jessica Lange; and he was working steadily as a film actor—all of which put him on the cover of Newsweek magazine.

Throughout the years, Shepard has done a considerable amount of teaching on writing plays and other aspects of theatre. His classes and seminars have occurred at various theatre workshops, festivals, and universities.

Shepard was elected to The American Academy of Arts and Letters in 1986. He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1986.

In 2000, Shepard decided to repay a debt of gratitude to the Magic Theatre by staging his play The Late Henry Moss as a benefit in San Francisco. The cast included Nick Nolte, Sean Penn, Woody Harrelson, and Cheech Marin. The limited, three-month run was sold out.

In 2001, Shepard had a notable role of General William F. Garrison in the box office hit and cult classic movie Black Hawk Down. Although he was cast in a supporting role, it reinvigorated interest in Shepard among the public and critics alike.

He performed Spalding Gray‘s final monologue Life Interrupted for its audio release through Macmillan Audio in 2006.

In 2007, Shepard contributed banjo to Patti Smith’s cover of Nirvana’s song “Smells Like Teen Spirit” on her album Twelve.

Although many artists have had an influence on Shepard’s work, one of the most significant has been actor-director Joseph Chaikin, a veteran of the Living Theatre and founder of a group called the Open Theatre. The two have often worked together on various projects, and Shepard acknowledges that Chaikin has been a valuable mentor.

… publication of the collection Day out of Days: Stories. The book includes “short stories, poems and narrative sketches … that developed from dozens of leather-bound notebooks [Shepard] has carried with him over the years.”

See you Sam

Like this:

Like Loading...

Begins January 20.

My Favorite Westerns: If you’re going to shoot a Western period piece – in the mountains – in the winter, why not choose the most brutal winter we’ve had in years?? Because that’s exactly what they’ve done with Klondike.

Maybe the weather is different up there in the mountains? but down here in Calgary we’ve had at least 3 blizzards – so far.

So I gotta believe a lot of the hardships that will be depicted in Klondike won’t require a great deal of acting.

Anticipating a good show – with a lot of snow.

_______________________________________________________________________

Reposted from CBC News site:

Klondike series could bring gold rush for Discovery Channel

http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/klondike-series-could-bring-gold-rush-for-discovery-channel-1.2493724

Richard Madden, Abbie Cornish, Tim Roth among big-name stars

CBC News Posted: Jan 12, 2014 11:46 AM MT Last Updated: Jan 12, 2014 1:01 PM MT

Discovery Channel is set to launch its first-ever scripted venture, Klondike, in a bid they hope will help them strike it rich with viewers.

The six-hour, three-night miniseries begins Jan. 20 on Discovery Canada before continuing the following Tuesday and Wednesday. Scottish actor Richard Madden, best-known for his role as the brutally-murdered Robb Stark in HBO’s Game of Thrones, is among multiple high-profile stars who have been in Alberta filming for the series.

Abbie Cornish, Tim Roth, Sam Shepard and Augustus Prew also star, while powerhouse producers Ridley Scott, Paul Scheuring and David Zucker have been working away behind the scenes to bring the series to life.

It’s all based on Charlotte Gray’s 2010 book, Gold Diggers: Striking It Rich in the Klondike.

On Thursday, the cast and producers took questions from reporters as part of the semi-annual Television Critics Association press tour.

According to Scheuring, who wrote the script, said he wasn’t intimidated to be writing for Shepard, a Pulitzer Prize-winning American playwright, “because the part was written, thank goodness, before he was cast.”

Days of Heaven actor returns

Shepard was a last-minute replacement for Chris Cooper, who had to withdraw with an illness right before production was scheduled to begin.

The 70-year-old actor had worked in Alberta before, memorably on Days of Heaven in 1978.

He was apparently hard to reach after Cooper pulled out because he was offline and out fishing, something he indulged in while on location in Alberta.

“Some of the biggest cutthroats I’ve ever seen in my life,” Shepard said about fly fishing “way up there on the Athabasca River.”

No chance of shooting in Dawson City

The producers say there was never any thought of shooting the series right in Dawson City, despite the fact that the picturesque Yukon town retains much of the look it had back in the gold rush days of the 1890s.

The usual lure of tax grants and funding — from the Government of Alberta and the Alberta Film Development Program — lured production to Alberta.

And it was damn cold, says Brittish-born Prew,

The actor plays Byron Epstein, who teams up with Madden’s character, Bill Haskell, as the two childhood friends set out to make their fortune along with thousands of others during the peak year of the Klondike gold rush.

“We were in period costumes, no thermals,” Prew said of his experience on location in Alberta last April through July. “I went on holiday right after to Turkey. It was lovely and warm there.”

‘Brutal’ shooting conditions in Rockies

The cast, producers and crew faced a 40-minute snowmobile ride followed by another 40-minute trek — sometimes by helicopter — for scenes shot in a tiny town high up in the Rocky Mountains, northwest of Calgary.

There are Canadians in the cast, including Brian Markinson (Da Vinci’s Inquest), who is currently shooting Fargo in Calgary, and Saskatchewan native Michael Greyeyes.

While Prew said the relatively isolated mountain-top locales could be “rather meditative,” he won’t miss the 18-hour days.

“I only saw my hotel six hours a night,” he said.

According to Zucker, one of the series’ producers, much of the shoot “was brutal. There was so little time to shoot such a big thing and it took four months of 18-hour days.”

Despite that, the real-life struggle and challenges look good on screen.

“We wanted to emphasize that it was miserable,” Zucker said. “A lot of that was in the script and I pushed it even further. It is about the battle with nature and we didn’t want that to look easy.”

Like this:

Like Loading...

Casting Director, Lynn Kressel won Casting Awards for Streets of Laredo. Let’s see why …

James Garner

Nothing much needs to be said about James Garner as a Western Film Actor He’s an icon.

Garner’s Westerns

Maverick with Jack Kelly 1957-1962 TV

Shoot-Out at Medicine Bend with Randolph Scott / 1957 Movie

Alias Jesse James with Bob Hope 1957 Cameo as Maverick Movie

Duel at Diablo: with Sydney Poitier 1966 Movie

Hour of the Gun with Jason Robards 1967 Movie

Support Your Local Sheriff with Jack Elam and Walter Brennan 1966 Movie

Sledge with Dennis Weaver and Claude Akins 1970 Movie

Support Your Local Gunfighter with Suzanne Pleshette 1971 Movie

Skin Game with Lou Gossett 1971 Movie

Nicols with Stuart Margolin 1971-1972 TV

The Castaway Cowboy 1974 Movie

Young Maverick with Charles Frank 1979 TV

Bret Maverick with Ed Bruce 1981-82 TV Movie

Murphy’s Romance with Sally Field 1985 Movie

Sunset with Bruce Willis 1988 Movie

Maverick with Mel Gibson, Jodie Foster, James Coburn and others 1994 Movie

Streets of Laredo – 1995 TV Mini-Series

Sam Shepard

Sam Shepard seems to have Western written all over him – so we’re bit surprised that he hasn’t been in more. Yet I believe All the Pretty Horses is massively under-rated and may fare better in time. The Assassination of Jesse James … ??? the jury is still out. Thunderheart is well known – an entertaining enough movie … but a good Western? Blackthorn could have been Classic, but poor support acting let it down.

Verdict? Streets of Laredo is probably the best Western Sam has ever done. And he’s damn good in it.

Shepards’s Westerns

1978 Days of Heaven – with Richard Gere

1992 Thunderheart – with Val Kilmer and Grahame Greene

1995 Streets of Laredo with James Garner

1999 Purgatory with Eric Roberts and Randy Quaid

2000 All the Pretty Horses with Matt Damon

2005 Bandidas with Penélope Cruz and Salma Hayek

2007 The Assassination of Jesse James with Brad Pitt and Casey Affleck

2011 Blackthorn

1994 Silent Tongue / Writer / Director

2014 Klondike with Richard Madden

Randy Quaid

Randy Quaid has been in at least 2 notable Western: The Missouri Breaks and The Long Riders – both pretty highly regarded by most Western Movie fans – some holding them as Minor Classic in quality. In Streets of Laredo he plays the famous gunslinger John Wesley Harding.

Quaid Westerns

1976 The Missouri Breaks with Jack Nicholson and Marlon Brando

1979 The Last Ride of the Dalton Gang

1980 The Long Riders with Dennis Quaid, David Carradine, Keith Carradine, Stacy Keach …

1999 Purgatory wtih Sam Shepard 2004 Home on the Range with Judi Dench, Cuba Gooding Jr., Rosanne Barr …

Sissy Spacek

We probably think Sissy Spacek has been in a few Westerns because she did Coal Minors Daughter (1980) and has done some Country Music singing and writing. But not so. Despite a ton of great work in her acting career, Sissy has done no real Westerns.

She’s in a great one this time though.

Decent Western roles are tough to find for female actors- mainly because most Westerns are written by – and for – men. But McMurtry is different and Streets of Laredo includes 3 great roles for the ladies – one of which is also an excellent role for a child female actor. Good job Mr. McMurtry.

Wes Studi

Wes Studi is another actor that has well established himself as a Western Film Icon. His first 2 Westerns are undeniable Westerns Classics: Dances with Wolves and The Last of the Mohicans.

Most everything else he’s done is quality work as well.

Wes Studi Westerns

1990 Dances with Wolves with Kevin Costner

1992 The Last of the Mohicans with Daniel Day Lewis

1993 Geronimo: An American Legend with Gene Hackman

1995 Streets of Laredo

1997 Crazy Horse with Ned Beatty

2005 Into the West with Russel Means

2005 Miracle at Sage Creek with David Carradine

2005 The New World with Colin Farrell, Christopher Plummer, Christian Bale

2007 Seraphim Falls with Pierce Brosnan, Liam Neeson, Anjelica Huston

2007 Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee

2008 Comanche Moon with Val Kilmer

2009 Trail of Tears

2011 Hell on Wheels with Colm Meaney

2014 A Million Ways to Die in the West (post-production)

2014 Palominas (pre-production)

Charles Martin Smith

We wouldn’t normally think of Charles Martin Smith as being a Western Actor but, incredibly, Smith has appeared in at least one bona fide Western Classic: Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid and two other worthy Westerns:Culpepper Cattle Co. and The Spikes Gang. That’s 3 out 3 Chuck – Not bad for a green horn.

In Streets of Laredo, Smith plays the ‘everyday man’ – that’s you and me – the guy we’re supposed to relate with. His character can’t handle the rugged and vicious Western world he suddenly finds himself in – and makes us wonder if we could cut it either. Possibly not.

Charles Martin Smith Westerns

1972 The Culpepper Cattle Co.

1973 Pat Garrett & Billy the Kid

1974 The Spikes Gang

Sonia Braga

Brazilian actress and International Film Star, Sonia Braga has 75 film credits to her name.

And when you see here performance in Streets of Laredo, it’s hard to believe she too has no Westerns among them.

She was Nominated forNCLR Bravo Award 1996 for her performance in Streets of Laredo.

Ned Beaty

In Streets of Laredo, Ned Beaty is well recognized – even with his Santa Claus beard. Beaty is another actor we are surprised to find has made very few Westerns – in his long career where he has appeared in over 100 films – and has been nominated for an Academy Award, two Emmy Awards, an MTV Movie Award and a Golden Globe Award; he won a Drama Desk Award also.

But he’s done a couple.

2011 Rango

1996 Crazy Horse

1994 Outlaws: The Legend of O.B. Taggart

1975 Gunsmoke (TV)

1972 The Life and Times of Judge Roy Bean with Paul Newman

George Carlin

You might have to shake your head for a second when you see George Carlin in Streets of Laredo. The second surprise is that he does a hell of job. Completely believable and in command of his part. Makes you wish he’d done more.

Vanessa Martinez

Vanessa Martinez is that 3rd female role I was talking about – playing Sonia Braga’s blind daughter. She is superb – and we wonder why we haven’t seen more of her either ??

Alexis Cruz

An unlikely badguy we may think – almost baby faced. But Cruz is ominous and lethal as the psychopathic killer tracked by Garner. Yet another actor we’ve seen little of since Laredo.

Though still active in TV and Film, Cruz seems to have fallen from view.

Alexis Cruz Westerns:

1997 The Brave (A Western?) I note this here because it Stars Marlon Brando and Johnny Depp.

________________________________________________________

An impressive cast. In an excellent production.

Like this:

Like Loading...

“Capt. Woodrow F. Call: I will not tolerate rude behaviour!”

Fortunately, Streets of Laredo is chock full of rude behaviour.

https://myfavoritewesterns.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/ed-bruce-streets-of-laredo.mp3

I selected this version of the very famous song The Streets of Laredo by Ed Bruce (http://www.edbrucemusic.com/) (writer of “Mammas Don’t Let Your Babies Grow Up to Be Cowboys” and “You’re the Best Break This Old Heart Ever Had“) because Bruce is a close friend and co-hort of James Garner. And I like it.

Larry McMurtry’s Streets of Laredo • Official Trailer • Miniseries

I have no problem understanding what people like about McMurtry’s writings: Lonesome Dove (1986 Pulitzer Prize winner) etc. of which Streets of Laredo is part of his enduring saga of Woodrow Call – and others – It’s the people in his stories. They are fully realized and believable. Real. And we like them and admire them. His people are honest, hard working, caring, loyal, honest … good people. Not perfect in any way – but good. They have standards and they have a code – and they stick by – and stick together. We come to care about them and relate quite a bit with them – I hope. McMurty’s stories are good too – filled with these interesting characters and his great knack for excellent dialogue. No problem finding quotes in his writing.

Streets of Laredo is excellent. Streets of Laredo starts out with a coyote howling in the sunset and plaintive death march of the song Streets of Laredo … giving a sense of loss – that something is ending rather than beginning. And in the opening scene we see the no longer young Woodrow Call (Garner) preparing for a journey … his last quest ??

Posters

They don’t usually make many posters and such for TV events (tell that to Game of Thrones) so we often have to rely on DVD covers and the like for any promotional images. As such:

Notice anything about one of these DVD images?

It’s reversed. Yes. This is something that you encounter

very often on the internet – reversed images. Why? I don’t know.

It’s annoying. For one thing it’s dishonest. Secondly, sometimes

you can’t tell which is the honest/correct/original image.

Why do people do this? It can’t be done accidentally.

It’s a head scratcher … ??

Reviews

STREETS OF LAREDO – DVD review

I was completely caught up in this gritty Western.

http://moviemet.com/review/streets-laredo-dvd-review#.UrWy6tJDtwA

James Plath

Wednesday, May 5, 2010 – 12:00 am

” … a considerably better-than-average Western . . . even if it isn’t quite the same caliber as “Lonesome Dove.” It hooked me right from the beginning, and that’s worth something. Like the best mini-series, “Streets of Laredo” depends upon strong characters to make the difference, and they do.”

“Alexis Cruz does a fantastic job as the child killer, but so does Randy Quaid as John Wesley Hardin and Ned Beatty as the self-appointed law west of the Pecos, Judge Roy Bean. Even comedian George Carlin turns in a decent performance as grizzled carryover from “Lonesome Dove.”

Bottom Line: As a stand-alone mini-series, “Streets of Laredo” merits a high 7 to a low 8 out of 10. As a sequel? It’s probably not going to satisfy anyone looking for consistency from film to film. But I think the first point trumps the second. Always.”

______________________________

If interested in finding Streets of Laredo you’ll have no problem – it’s freely available on YouTube – all 3 parts in blazing Hi Res that you can watch right on your computer – though I downloaded it and Rose and I enjoyed watching it on her big screen TV.

That’s enough for today …

Coming Up …

Streets of Laredo: The Cast

Like this:

Like Loading...

Sam Shepard

Actor, Director, Playwrite, Author, Pulitzer Prize Winner …

Soon appearing in Discovery Channel’s miniseries KLONDIKE

“I don’t have a computer. I don’t have an Internet. I don’t

have the e-mail. I don’t have any of that shit.” – Sam Shepard

Sam Shepard Website: http://www.sam-shepard.com/index.html

MFW: You’ve got a hell of a lot of something Sam.

Wikipedia:

Sam Shepard (born Samuel Shepard Rogers IV; November 5, 1943) is an American playwright, actor, and television and film director. He is the author of several books of short stories, essays, and memoirs, and received the Pulitzer Prize for Drama in 1979 for his play Buried Child. Shepard was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal of pilot Chuck Yeager in The Right Stuff (1983). Shepard received the PEN/Laura Pels International Foundation for Theater Award as a master American dramatist in 2009.

Awards:

Won Obie Award for Best Distinguished Play(s): 1966 Chicago, Icarus’s Mother, Red Cross; 1967 La Turista; 1968 Forensic and the Navigator, Melodrama Play; 1973 The Tooth of Crime

1975 Won Obie Award for Best Playwriting: Action

1977 Won Obie Award for Best New American Play: Curse of the Starving Class

1979 Won Obie Award for Best Playwriting: Buried Child

1979 Pulitzer Prize for Drama: Buried Child

1980 Won Obie Award for Sustained Achievement

1984 Won Obie Award for Best New American Play: Fool for Love

1984 Won Obie Award for Best Direction: Fool for Love

1984 Nominated Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor: The Right Stuff

1985 Nominated BAFTA Award for Best Adapted Screenplay: Paris, Texas

1986 Won Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Play: A Lie of the Mind

1986 Won New York Drama Critics’ Circle for Best Play: A Lie of the Mind

1986 Won Outer Critics Circle Award for Outstanding Off-Broadway Play: A Lie of the Mind

1992 Won American Academy of Arts and Letters – Gold Medal for Drama

1994 Inducted American Theatre Hall of Fame

1996 NominatedTony Award for Best Play: Buried Child

1997 Nominated Lone Star Film & Television Award for Best TV Supporting Actor: Hallmark Hall of Fame: “Lily Dale”

1999 Nominated Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or a Movie: Dash and Lilly

1999 Nominated Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Miniseries or TV Film: Dash and Lilly

2000 Nominated Tony Award for Best Play: True West

2001 Nominated Phoenix Film Critics Society Award for Best Acting Ensemble: Black Hawk Down

2008 Nominated SAG Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor – TV Movie or Miniseries: Ruffian

Born Samuel Shepard Rogers IV in Fort Sheridan, Illinois, he worked on a ranch as a teenager. His father, Samuel Shepard Rogers, Jr., was a teacher and farmer who served in the United States Army Air Forces as a bomber pilot during World War II; Shepard has characterized him as “a drinking man, a dedicated alcoholic”. His mother, Jane Elaine (née Schook), was a teacher and a native of Chicago, Illinois. Shepard was forced to support his mother and brother when his father’s farm lapsed into insolvency. After graduating from Duarte High School in 1961, he briefly studied agriculture at Mt. San Antonio College, where he became enamored with the oeuvre of Samuel Beckett, jazz, and abstract expressionism. Shepard soon dropped out to join a touring repertory group, the Bishop’s Company.

After securing a position as a busboy at The Village Gate … after winning six Obie Awards between 1966-1968, Shepard emerged as a viable screenwriter … drummed sporadically from 1967 through 1971 with psychedelic folk band The Holy Modal Rounders … (1968).

Shepard’s early science fiction play The Unseen Hand (1969) would influence Richard O’Brien’s stage musical The Rocky Horror Show. Cowboy Mouth—a collaboration with then-mistress Patti Smith—was staged for one night at The American Place Theater in April 1971, providing early exposure for the future punk rock singer; seeking to distance himself from Smith and his substance abuse, Shepard relocated with his wife and son to London in the early 1970s. Returning to America in 1975, he moved to the 20-acre Flying Y Ranch in Mill Valley, California and served for a semester as Regents’ Professor of Drama at the University of California, Davis.

Shepard accompanied Bob Dylan on the Rolling Thunder Revue of 1975 as the ostensible screenwriter of the surrealist Renaldo and Clara (1978) … His diary of the tour (Rolling Thunder Logbook) was published by Penguin Books in 1978. A decade later, Dylan and Shepard co-wrote the 11-minute “Brownsville Girl“, included on Dylan’s Knocked Out Loaded (1986) album and later compilations.

In 1975, he was named playwright-in-residence at the Magic Theatre, where many of his notable works (including his Family Trilogy: Buried Child [1978], Curse of the Starving Class [1978], and True West [1980]) received their premier productions. Some critics expand this grouping to a quintet which includes Fool for Love (1983) and A Lie of the Mind (1985).

Shepard began his acting career in earnest when he was cast as the handsome land baron in Terrence Malick’s Days of Heaven (1978), opposite Richard Gere and Brooke Adams. This led to other important films and roles, most notably his portrayal of Chuck Yeager in The Right Stuff(1983), earning him an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor. By 1986, one of his plays, Fool for Love, was being made into a film directed by Robert Altman; his play A Lie of the Mind was Off-Broadway with an all-star cast including Harvey Keitel and Geraldine Page; he was living with Jessica Lange; and he was working steadily as a film actor—all of which put him on the cover of Newsweek magazine.

Throughout the years, Shepard has done a considerable amount of teaching on writing plays and other aspects of theatre. His classes and seminars have occurred at various theatre workshops, festivals, and universities.

Shepard was elected to The American Academy of Arts and Letters in 1986. He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1986.

In 2000, Shepard decided to repay a debt of gratitude to the Magic Theatre by staging his play The Late Henry Moss as a benefit in San Francisco. The cast included Nick Nolte, Sean Penn, Woody Harrelson, and Cheech Marin. The limited, three-month run was sold out.

In 2001, Shepard had a notable role of General William F. Garrison in the box office hit and cult classic movie Black Hawk Down. Although he was cast in a supporting role, it reinvigorated interest in Shepard among the public and critics alike.

He performed Spalding Gray‘s final monologue Life Interrupted for its audio release through Macmillan Audio in 2006.

In 2007, Shepard contributed banjo to Patti Smith’s cover of Nirvana’s song “Smells Like Teen Spirit” on her album Twelve.

Although many artists have had an influence on Shepard’s work, one of the most significant has been actor-director Joseph Chaikin, a veteran of the Living Theatre and founder of a group called the Open Theatre. The two have often worked together on various projects, and Shepard acknowledges that Chaikin has been a valuable mentor.

… publication of the collection Day out of Days: Stories. The book includes “short stories, poems and narrative sketches … that developed from dozens of leather-bound notebooks [Shepard] has carried with him over the years.”

Shepard starred in the 2011 Western film Blackthorn.

Western Films:

1995 / Streets of Laredo

1999 / Purgatory

2000 / All the Pretty Horses

2005 / Bandidas

2007 / The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford

2011 / Blackthorn

2013 / Klondike – miniseries in post production

51.037434-114.052028

Like this:

Like Loading...