WAY-FM announces explosive digital growth in 2019, the launch of the new WAYNATION.COM website and Podcast Network, and an aggressive shift towards digital content ministry. Known for its radio network, operates more than 20 Christian music radio stations around the nation in markets like Nashville, Dallas, Portland, and Denver. Now WAY-FM’s parent company, WAY Media, announces that, in the first six months of 2019, its total digital audience surpassed 750,000 persons, and the WAY Nation Podcast Network has earned nearly 3 million downloads in the past 12 months. These numbers nearly equal the size of WAY-FM’s total radio listenership.

According to CEO John Scaggs, “Our mission has always driven us to be current. It reads,“We want to influence this generation to love and follow Jesus, using culturally relevant media.” We believe our digital content future is now. The time to make a shift isn’t when you are dead or dying. It’s when you are healthy. WAY Media is truly moving towards becoming a digital-first ministry, where we create, curate, and partner with others to provide compelling faith-based content that will influence the world to love and follow Jesus.”

Director of Digital Content Zach Boehm adds, “The fun and meaningful content we feature on-air is what this world needs, but as people’s consumption habits continue to shift to digital and on-demand delivery, we have an amazing opportunity to make a deeper and wider impact by embracing digital content, especially videos and podcasts. 25 million people live in WAY-FM’s radio markets. WAY Nation positions us to better impact the 300 million people in the U.S. beyond our terrestrial signals with videos, blogs and podcasts that point people to Jesus.”

“The relaunch of WAYNATION.COM this week will provide a central platform for our digital content,” adds Faron Dice, Chief Content Officer. “Additionally, we believe our that our new video and audio studios in Nashville and Colorado Springs give us two very strategic locations for partnership with artists, labels, authors, ministry leaders, and influencers. As we continue to expand our offerings of engaging videos, compelling podcasts and challenging written articles, we want to partner even more with those who share our vision for digital content ministry.”