Jerry Lewis’s controversial film, The Day the Clown Cried, has always remained hidden from the public. Although Lewis wrote, directed, and starred in the 1972 film, he chose to bury it. According to the May 1992 issue of Spy, the film's synopsis goes as follows: "An unhappy German circus clown is sent to a concentration camp and forced to become a sort of genocidal Pied Piper, entertaining Jewish children as he leads them to the gas chambers." It's meant to be a drama—one of Lewis's first attempts at serious filmmaking. "It was all bad," Lewis said of the film during a press conference at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival. "You will never see it, no one will ever see it, because I am embarrassed at the poor work." The film is a “perfect object” of awfulness, according to Harry Shearer, who remains among the handful of people who have ever seen the movie.

The film has only gained notoriety because of the lengths Lewis has gone to keep it under wraps. Many people actively search for clips, despite the fact that the Library of Congress acquired Lewis's complete film archive—including the one remaining print of The Day the Clown Cried—on the condition the film not be released to the public until June 2024. This only made the search more rabid.

The wait to see the film just got a little shorter, though. Screen Crush reports that 30 minutes of The Day the Clown Cried is now available online. The footage has been cobbled together from different sources, including a German documentary about the making of the film, with missing material filled in with title cards. It’s not the complete version, but it’s 30 minutes more than viewers have ever had.

The newly edited film is available on YouTube with German dubbing and English subtitles. Watch at your own peril.

Tears of the Clown

Jerry Lewis’s Holocaust Movie May Finally See The Light Of Day

The Day the Clown Cried has been acquired by the Library of Congress.

Proust Questionnaire

Jerry Lewis Answers the Proust Questionnaire

Having helped to raise more than $1.6 billion to fight muscular dystrophy over the last 45 years, the King of Comedy hosts his final telethon this Labor Day. Here, he holds court on nuns, nymphomaniacs, and a certain philandering governor.

Celebrity

Towa Bird Wants to Be a New Kind of Rock Star

On her debut album, American Hero, the 25-year-old queer musician celebrates identity, joins the “lesbian renaissance,” and becomes the representation she never had.

Celebrity

Method Man Talks Wu-Tang Clan, Working With ODB’s Son, and the “Uncomfortable Subject” of Martin Shkreli’s Auctioned Album

The Wu-Tang Clan member goes deep on the history of Shaolin with Vanity Fair.

Hollywood

The 32 Best True-Crime Documentaries to Binge Right Now

From murders to cults to miscarriages of justice, the best true-crime documentaries have it all. Your next watch is waiting.

Hollywood

Here: Robert Zemeckis’s New Movie Spans a Century, but the Camera Never Moves

Tom Hanks and Robin Wright reunite the Forrest Gump team for a drama set entirely in one household’s living room.

Politics

How Biden Can Flip His Fortunes—or Flop!—in His First Debate With Trump

A veteran of numerous presidential debates offers a strategy for thumping Trump.

Style

As Tensions Continue to Flare Over the War in Gaza, the Upper East Side Is Divided

Talking about the war in Gaza is complicated for Jewish Americans, and in Manhattan’s wealthiest circles, disagreement has created social cloisters.

Television

How Princess Diana’s Funeral Inspired House of the Dragon’s Somber Procession

It’s brother versus brother in “Rhaenyra the Cruel,” which sees Ser Arryk and Ser Erryk come to fatal blows. Plus, House of the Dragon director Clare Kilner drops by to discuss staging the funeral procession and the trickiness inherent in working with identical twins.