'The Simpsons' finds replacement to voice Carl after Hank Azaria's exit

Fans of “The Simpsons” might notice one character sounds different in the Season 32 premiere Sunday.

‘The Simpsons’ actor Harry Shearer weighs in on using white actors for non-white characters

“The job of the actor is to play someone who they’re not,” he said.

'The Simpsons' Will No Longer Have White Actors Play Non-White Characters

The announcement comes months after Hank Azaria said he would stop playing the controversial Simpsons character Apu.

‘Spinal Tap’ band scores victory in Vivendi lawsuit

Harry Shearer, Rob Reiner and Michael McKean were dismissed on Thursday from a profits lawsuit around the classic 1984 rock comedy “This Is Spinal Tap.”

In the Wake of Jerry Lewis's Death, Will We Ever Get to See 'The Day the Clown Cried'?

The infamous film starring Lewis as a clown who entertains children in a concentration camp during the Holocaust has never been released.

The movie Jerry Lewis didn't want you to see

Few would deny the comedic genius of Jerry Lewis, who died Sunday at age 91. But there is one movie in his slapstick-riddled filmography that drew no laughs — partly...

Why 'The Simpsons' Should Ditch Episodes and Move Online

People still enjoy what The Simpsons are up to, just not in the unnecessarily rigid form of a 22-minute, plot-driven episode.

'Spinal Tap' creators fire back at current owners in court

The creators of “Spinal Tap” have turned the legal volume up to 11 in an effort to advance their $400 million suit against the movie’s current owner. In pleadings filed...

'Spinal Tap' owners attempt to get creators' $400M suit tossed

The foursome behind the “Spinal Tap” mockumentary — Harry Shearer, Christopher Guest, Michael McKean and Rob Reiner — should have the volume of their $400 million suit against Vivendi turned...

'Spinal Tap' star says he was cheated out of royalties in $125M suit

Harry Shearer, who played bassist Derek Smalls in the 1984 mockumentary, “This Is Spinal Tap,” claims Universal Pictures has cheated him out of millions of dollars by paying him and...

Voice of Mr. Burns isn't leaving 'The Simpsons' after all

Looks like Harry Shearer squeezed some more “D’oh!” out of “The Simpsons.” Shearer, who voices decrepit Mr. Burns, obsequious Waylon Smithers, God-fearing Ned Flanders and Principal Skinner — among others...

Release The Hounds! 10 'Simpsons' Episodes That Showcase How Much We'll Miss Harry Shearer

It's a fool's errand to try and sum up Harry Shearer's contributions to The Simpsons in a simple Top 10 list, but that's not going to stop us from trying.