Birthday wishes go out to Eddie Vedder, Susan Lucci and all the other celebrities with birthdays today. Check out our slideshow below to see photos of famous people turning a year older on December 23rd and learn an interesting fact about each of them.

Top celebrity birthdays on December 23, 2023

Actor Harry Shearer turns 80

Fun fact: Voiced multiple characters on ‘The Simpsons’ including neighbor Ned Flanders and Principal Skinner

Actress Susan Lucci turns 77

Fun fact: Once appeared as a judge on an episode of ‘Beat Bobby Flay’

Rocker Eddie Vedder turns 59

Fun fact: Once appeared in an episode of ‘Twin Peaks’

Actor Finn Wolfhard turns 21

Fun fact: His middle name is Michael

Check out other celebrities born in Canada.

More celebrities with birthdays today

Actor Ronnie Schell (“Gomer Pyle, USMC”) is 92. Guitarist Jorma Kaukonen (Jefferson Airplane, Hot Tuna) is 83. Musician Adrian Belew (King Crimson) is 74. Guitarist Dave Murray of Iron Maiden is 67. Actor Joan Severance (TV’s “Wiseguy”) is 65. Jazz trumpeter Irvin Mayfield is 46. Actor Anna Maria Perez de Tagle (“Hannah Montana,” ″Camp Rock”) is 33. Actor Spencer Daniels (“Mom”) is 31. Actor Caleb Foote (TV’s “The Kids Are Alright”) is 30.

Other popular or historical birthdays on December 23rd

Joseph Smith, founder of Mormon Church

Corey Haim, actor

with The Associated Press

Celebrity fun facts

Recent lists: Margot Robbie fun facts | Kevin Costner fun facts | Tom Cruise fun facts | Gal Gadot fun facts | Hilary Swank fun facts | Dwayne ‘The Rock’ Johnson fun facts | Reese Witherspoon fun facts

Popular lists: Robert Downey Jr. fun facts | Emma Watson fun facts | Jason Momoa fun facts | Miley Cyrus fun facts

Check out our full list of more than 40 celebrity fun facts.

Movie and TV fun facts & more

Recent lists: ‘How I Met Your Mother’ guest stars | ‘Groundhog Day’ fun facts | ‘Yellowstone’ trivia

Popular lists: Canadian celebrities | ‘Friends’ guest stars | Celebs on ‘The Office’

Check out our rundown of more than 30 posts featuring trivia and fun facts about movies and TV shows.