Just when you thought nothing could rival the success of “High School Musical,” the star-studded musical “Camp Rock” hit Disney Channel in June.

Featuring Demi Lovato from “As the Bell Rings,” another Disney Channel show, and the Jonas Brothers, “Camp Rock” is a well-written, fun movie for all ages.

Fourteen-year-old Mitchie Torres (Lovato) is a shy girl who dreams of being a singer and believes Camp Rock, a prestigious camp for aspiring rockers, could make that a reality for her.

Joe, Nick and Kevin Jonas play Shane, Nate and Jason Gray, who make up a band called Connect 3. The fame of the group has gotten to Shane’s head, however, and he is sent to Camp Rock for good publicity and to become more grounded.

Other characters in the film include Caitlyn Geller (Alyson Stoner), who hopes to become a top-selling producer some day; and Tess Tyler (Megan Martin), the queen bee of the camp. Mitchie’s mom, Connie Torres, is played by the beautiful and talented Maria Canals-Barrera.

Connie is a caterer who gets her big break by serving at Camp Rock. Mitchie is allowed to come along, but she has to help her mother in the kitchen.

Because of his bad behavior, Shane (Joe Jonas) is teaching classes at the camp, where his uncle is the director. When some girls at the camp chase after him, he hides, only to overhear a girl with a wonderful voice — Mitchie — but he doesn’t whose voice it is.

As camp goes on, Mitchie hides her identity as the cook’s daughter and pretends to be a well-to-do camper to fit in. Eventually, she befriends Tess and her group and tries to keep her true identity hidden.

Meanwhile, Shane has spread the word that he is looking for the girl with the beautiful voice, so every girl at camp starts singing for him to prove they are the one.

The mean and nasty Tess, who only wants to be accepted by her own mother, learns Mitchie’s secret and exposes her. Everyone turns against Mitchie for being a fake.

By the time Final Jam comes around, it looks as if Mitchie won’t be able to perform for the camp as she had planned, which would be detrimental to her plans for fame.

But because this is Disney, everything works out in the end, and Shane finds the voice he’s been seeking.

“Camp Rock” is a blast to watch. There is friendship-testing, trust issues and even some family moments. Some scenes will make you sad and some will make you happy, while others will just make you laugh so hard you cry.

The music in the movie is great and written very well. “This is Me,” performed by Mitchie, is a song describing who she is and her dream of becoming a star. “Gotta Find You” is another song on the track that Shane sings about the girl with the voice.

The “Camp Rock” soundtrack already is in stores, as is a book based on the movie. The movie itself comes out on DVD Aug. 19, and a “Camp Rock 2” is coming out in 2009.

So don't settle for any old camp. Experience “Camp Rock” and rock out!

Bethany Kennedy will be a junior at Springfield High School.