THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

OAKLAND, Calif. — The Golden State Warriors re-signed centre Andris Biedrins to a six-year contract worth more than US$62 million Monday, retaining another restricted free agent and possibly capping a tumultuous month for the club.

Biedrins averaged career-highs with 10.5 points and 9.8 rebounds with the Warriors last season, his fourth with the club that drafted him with the 11th overall pick in 2004. He also led the NBA in field-goal percentage, making 62.6 per cent of his shots.

After fielding interest from at least one Russian club this summer, the Latvian centre elected to rejoin Monta Ellis, another restricted free agent who signed a six-year, $66-million deal to return to Golden State last Thursday.

“We’re extremely happy to have Andris under contract for many years to come,” said Chris Mullin, the Warriors’ top basketball executive. “He is clearly one of the top young centres in the NBA, and much like (Ellis), he has continued to improve every season. It’s not easy to find quality young big men in this league, but we certainly think we have one of them, and he’s only 22 years old.”

Biedrins has improved his scoring average in each of his seasons with Golden State, developing from a skinny rebounding specialist into an all-around player and a low-post scorer for the uptempo Warriors.

“The organization and fans have been terrific to me over the last four years, and I’m looking forward to building on some of the success that we’ve had in the last couple of years,” Biedrins said.

The Warriors’ latest signing might finally finish one of the busiest off-seasons in club history. Golden State added three free agents and retaining three more in the four weeks since Baron Davis announced his plan to spurn the club by signing a free-agent deal with the Los Angeles Clippers.

Golden State countered by signing swingman Corey Maggette away from the Clippers and grabbing forward Ronny Turiaf from the Lakers with an offer sheet. Meanwhile, forwards Mickael Pietrus (Orlando) and Matt Barnes (Phoenix) went elsewhere.

Although the Warriors elected not to use a $10-million trade exception, they also matched the Clippers’ offer sheet for guard Kelenna Azubuike and acquired backup point guard Marcus Williams in a trade with New Jersey.

Biedrins, Ellis and Maggette should join veterans Stephen Jackson and Al Harrington in the starting lineup for coach Don Nelson, whose club led the NBA in scoring last year. Harrington also has quietly explored trade possibilities after falling out of Nelson’s rotation at times last year.