History

//= $post_id['post_content']; ?>

The Municipal establishment «Kharkiv humanitarian –pedagogical academy» of the Kharkiv Regional Council is one of the oldest pedagogical establishments of higher education in Ukraine, which was founded in October, 1920 by the decision of the People’s Commissars Council of the USSR on the basis of Kharkiv Ukrainian Gymnasium named after Borys Dmytrovych Hrinchenko as 3-year pedagogical courses named after Hryhoriy Savych Skovoroda, directly subordinated to the executive committee of the Council of Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army Deputies of the Kharkiv Province.

In 1923, the Pedagogical Courses were reorganized into a higher educational establishment of the system of the People’s Commissariat of Education of Ukraine Kharkiv 4-year pedagogical school named after Hryhoriy Savych Skovoroda.

From 1937 to 1993 the establishment functioned as a teacher training school.

In 1993, the school was granted the status of a pedagogical college.

In 2004, Kharkiv Pedagogical College was reorganized into Kharkiv Humanitarian Pedagogical Institute at the direction of the Kharkiv Regional council of October 21, 2004 № 424, with the Pedagogical College as a structural subdivision.

The Kharkiv Regional Council changed the establishment type and renamed into the Municipal establishment “Kharkiv Humanitarian Pedagogical Academy” of the Kharkiv Regional Council upon the management decision of the VI session of the VI convocation dating June 16, 2011, the structural subdivisions of the Academy are Kharkiv and Krasnohrad colleges and Balaklia brunch.

The academy trains specialists at the first (bachelor’s), second (master’s) and third (doctor of philosophy) levels. In the structural subdivisions graduates receive the degree of “junior bachelor”.

More than 85,000 highly qualified specialists for educational institutions and social services have been trained at the establishment since 1920. Graduates are competitive and in demand in the labor market of Kharkiv, Kharkiv region, Ukraine and abroad.

Since 1992, the rector of the establishment has been Halyna Fedorivna Ponomariova, Doctor of Pedagogical Sciences, Professor, Academician of the International Academy of Sciences of Pedagogical Education, Academician of the National Academy of Human Problems, Honored Worker of Education of Ukraine, Honorary Citizen of Kharkiv Region.

The academy has 16 departments that carry out scientific and methodological work at 4 faculties. Specialists are trained in 16 specialties and 15 specializations: Primary education; Pre-school education; Secondary education (Music); Secondary education (English); Secondary education (Physical culture); Secondary education (Informatics); Social work; Special education; Physical culture and sports; Culturology; Biology; Philology; Psychology; History and Archeology; Management; Computer Science; as well as postgraduate studies in the following specialties: 011 Sciences of Education (specialization: general pedagogy and history of pedagogy; theory and methods of education); 231 Social work (specialization: social work).

In Kharkiv Pedagogical Professional College, specialists can get 5 specialties: Preschool education; Primary education; Secondary education (Music); Secondary education (Physical education), Social work.

In Krasnohrad Pedagogical Professional College, specialists are trained in 4 specialties: Preschool education; Primary education; Secondary education (Labor training and technology); Secondary education (Physical education).

In Balaklia Pedagogical Professional College, specialists are trained in 2 specialties: Preschool education; Primary education.

The educational process is provided by highly qualified academic staff. 74% of academic staff have the scientific degree of doctor and candidate of sciences, academic title of professor and associate professor.

78% of scientific academic staff are awarded state, departmental and local government awards.

In the Kharkiv, Krasnohrad and Balakliia pedagogical professional colleges, 117 teachers have the title of “teacher-methodologist”, 30 –”senior teacher”, 203 teachers of the highest category.

The academy and its structural subdivisions have a modern material and technical base to implement the educational process.

During 2004-2020, on the basis of establishing interuniversity relations, cooperation agreements were concluded with Daugavpils University (Latvia), Mogilev State University named after A.O. Kuleshov (Republic of Belarus), Academic Society. M. Baludyansky (Slovakia), University of Social Sciences (Republic of Poland), University of Natural Sciences and Humanities (Republic of Poland), Institute of Communal Integration, University of Minnesota (USA), Länsi Suomen Opisto College (Finland), EduFuture Educational Foundation (Finland), David Game College, England Italian charitable organization BO Chalabria Ukraine Charitable Foundation (Italy), Pavlodar State Pedagogical University (Republic of Kazakhstan), Baltic International Academy (Latvia), Public Association “European Institute of Continuing Education” (Slovak Republic) and 30 higher educational establishments of Kharkiv and Ukraine. The staff of the academy cooperates with the National Academy of Pedagogical Sciences of Ukraine, higher educational establishments of the Kharkiv University Center, departments and educational divisions of the Kharkiv region, as well as secondary schools to improve the content quality of teacher training.

Every year the academy holds international, all-Ukrainian and regional conferences on topical pedagogical issues (according to the plan of the Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine). The conferences are attended by academic staff and students from Ukraine, the Republic of Belarus, Moldova, the People’s Republic of China, Poland etc.

According to the results of participation in international exhibitions, the staff of the academy have been awarded diplomas for scientific and practical achievements in providing quality professional training for the national education system, gold medals for the updating content of national education international forums “Innovation in modern education” and “Modern educational establishments”.

Extensive extracurricular and mentoring work as well as teacher and students` volunteer activities is carried out to contribute to establishing social ties and form moral and spiritual qualities. The priority task is to focus on a new strategy of education as a multi-component and multi-vector system, which largely shapes the future development of Ukrainian. The administration of the academy and its structural subdivisions, academic staff provide a full-fledged national-patriotic education of students, strive to form a healthy nation and create conditions for harmonious development of students.