PIC S&T 2019: 2019 IEEE International Scientific and Practical Conference "Problems of Infocommunications. Science and Technology"

Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University

About

Information and Communication are playing an increasing role in society and within our lives. Recognizing this, PIC S&T aims to provide a forum for researchers from both academia and industry to share their latest research contributions, future vision in the field and potential impact across industries and exchange knowledge with the common goal of shaping the future of Infocommunication

The conference will provide its attendees with an uncommon opportunity to expand their network beyond their immediate professional environment. It is a unique chance to work with other accomplished individuals from diverse areas towards the common goal of shaping the future of communication.

Submission Guidelines

All papers must be original and not simultaneously submitted to another journal or conference.

The paper (4-6 full pages in English) and application form prepared strongly in line with IEEE Manuscript Template for A4 paper size in MS WORD, should be submitted using EasyChair conference management system.

Organizing Committee will not consider papers received after the deadline and by e-mail. Information about the including author’s submission into conference program will be provided by e-mail.

Presentation materials may be prepared in ppt, pptx or pdf file formats, or printed for poster sessions.

List of Topics

Infocommunication System Theory

Fundamentals of the telecommunication systems theory.

Control, adaptation, self-organization in infocommunication systems.

Delay and disruption tolerant networks.

Resilient Networking.

Applications of fractal and chaos in infocommunication technologies.

Constructing, design and planning methods for infocommunication systems.

Cybersecurity

Information security in infocommunication systems.

Security and Risk Management.

Cybersecurity and Critical Infrastructures.

Wireless & Sensor Network Privacy, Security and Routing Techniques.

Infocommunication technologies, networks and services

Infocommunication technologies and networks.

Network architectures, middleware integration, and data management.

Cloud Computing.

Software Defined Networking and Network Function Virtualization (SDN/NFV).

Internet of Things.

Wireless Infocommunication technologies and networks

Mobile infocommunication systems and signal processing.

5G Heterogeneous Networks.

Multi-carrier systems, spread spectrum techniques, cognitive radio networks, emerging technologies.

High speed, low latency, multi-stream data techniques (full-duplex, LTE, MIMO).

D2D, M2M, V2V Communications.

Active and passive wireless sensors, systems, and networks.

Committees

Conference Chair and Publication Chair:

Dmytro Ageyev, Dr.Sc., Prof., Kharkiv National University of Radio Electronics, Kharkiv, Ukraine.

Program Committee Chair and Financial Chair:

Tamara Radivilova, Cand.Sc., Ass.Prof., Kharkiv National University of Radio Electronics, Kharkiv, Ukraine.

Local Organizing Committee Chairs:

Oleksandr Lemeshko, Dr.Sc., Prof., Kharkiv National University of Radio Electronics, Kharkiv, Ukraine;

Volodymyr Buriachok, Dr.Sc., Prof., Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University, Kyiv, Ukraine.

Activities Chair:

Pavlo Skladannyi, Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University, Kyiv, Ukraine.

Publicity & Public Relations Chair:

Arkadiy Snigurov, Cand.Sci., Ass.Prof., Kharkiv National University of Radio Electronics, Kharkiv, Ukraine.

PR Manager:

Yuliia Kobytska, Kharkiv National University of Radio Electronics, Kharkiv, Ukraine.

Organizing Committee:

Oleksandra Yeremenko, Dr.Sci., Ass.Prof., SR., Kharkiv National University of Radio Electronics, Kharkiv, Ukraine;

Maryna Yevdokymenko, Cand.Sci., Ass.Prof., Kharkiv National University of Radio Electronics, Kharkiv, Ukraine;

Volodymyr Sokolov, Cand.Sci., Ass.Prof., Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University, Kyiv, Ukraine;

Victor Semko, Dr.Sci., Ass.Prof., Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University, Kyiv, Ukraine;

Anatoliy Bessalov, Dr.Sci., Prof., Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University, Kyiv, Ukraine;

Oleksandr Bushma, Dr.Sci., Prof., Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University, Kyiv, Ukraine;

Volodymyr Astapenia, Cand.Sci., Ass.Prof., Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University, Kyiv, Ukraine;

Oksana Lytvyn, Cand.Sci., Ass.Prof., Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University, Kyiv, Ukraine;

Alla Mykhatska, Cand.Sci., Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University, Kyiv, Ukraine.

Program Committee

CHAIR:

Tamara Radivilova, Cand.Sci., Ass.Prof., Kharkiv National University of Radio Electronics, Kharkiv, Ukraine.

MEMBERS:

Publication

Conference proceedings will be published before the beginning of the Conference.

All papers are subject to the peer-review process.

All accepted papers, which are oral or poster presented at PIC S&T`2019 will be submitted for inclusion in IEEE Xplore Digital Library as well as other Abstracting and Indexing (A&I) databases (Scopus, Web of Science etc).

Please pay attention that “No-show” papers won’t be included in the IEEE Xplore Digital Library.

Venue

The conference will be held in Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University, Kyiv, Ukraine.

Contact

All questions about submissions should be emailed to PIC S&T’2019 Organizing Committee, Kharkiv National University of Radio Electronics,

Nauka ave., 14, room 305a, Kharkiv, 61166, Ukraine.

Conference Website: http://picst.org