Henry 1

Samantha Henry Sherry Blum-Pretty ENG 14 March 2023 A Lesson Before Dying: Book or Movie?

The book “A Lesson Before Dying” is better than the movie because it covers important parts that the movie didn’t, pays more attention to detail, and gives the reader an insight into how Grant felt specifically about the events he was a part of firsthand. In the book “A Lesson before Dying” they give the readers details that they missed in the movie and it causes some of the story to not feel as connected to the person watching it, as when it is read. For example, During the book, a character named Paul is met. Paul is the deputy in the jail, and he is the one who does the search of all the items that Grant Wiggins, the Reverend, Miss Emma, or even Tante Lou bring when they come to see Jefferson. Throughout the book, a connection is created with this character because of how often he is around. When he is first spoken to, it is by Miss Emma who is requesting that he allow all the other inmates to have all the leftover food after Jefferson had eaten. In the movie, Paul is never named and almost never seen except for in quick spurts. This takes away from the connection that is formed with him in the book because the readers do not find out anything about Paul in the movie. In addition to this, the movie missed out on key details of the first visit with Jefferson where Miss Emma shows how compassionate she is for the other inmates by telling Paul to share the food with the others. Now let’s talk about the details that were missing from the movie. The part that specifically needs to be talked about is the second visit that Grant Wiggins does with Jefferson in the jail. While it may not seem like a big deal at first, this difference can have a huge impact on the entire story and how the readers interpret and connect with it. In the book, it starts out with Grant Wiggins going alone because Miss Emma suddenly claims to feel ill. They go into

Henry 2

describe how She was all wrapped up when Grant went inside to check on her, and he is still forced by Tante Lou to go visit with Jefferson anyway. She forces him to take the basket of food that Miss Emma made and go visit with him to help turn Jefferson into a man before he must take his place on the chair. Reluctantly, Grant Wiggins went to the jail cell and attempts to get Jefferson eat some of the food that Miss Emma made for him. At first Jefferson refuses, but after a while of being pestered by Grant, he gets down on his hands and knees on the ground and eats it up as if he is eating slop off the ground. He does this while making a comment about how hogs eat, and he is a hog and nothing more than a hog. However, in the movie, this scene is completely twisted and does not occur in the same fashion. Instead, he throws the basket across the room, he never makes a comment during the scene about how hogs eat, that happens later but at that point everything is mixed up. This changes the way the story felt because Grant Wiggins was later questioned in the book on what happened when he brought Jefferson the food, because he lied to Miss Emma and told her that he ate it and loved having a homemade meal, but they knew he was lying because they had already went to visit with Jefferson and the things that Grant told them didn’t add up to him enjoying the meal. All things considered this difference causes changes on how the story ends up being told. The last thing that made a huge difference to the story was the insight the book gave the reader into how Grant Wiggins felt during the entire event. While both the book and the movie cover his feelings, the book goes into more details and feels a lot more personal about Grants life story and how he became a teacher and what he feelings on that were. There are portions of the book that cover him talking about his childhood and how people that he grew up with have ended up dead for one reason or another. However, in the movie, a lot of his inner thoughts were turned into a conversation between him and Vivian. While this is not a bad way to portray his