Key facts

Club: FC Groningen | Opening: 2006 | Capacity: 22,550 seats

History and description

Hitachi Capital Mobility Stadion, previously knows as Stadion Euroborg and Noordlease Stadion, replaced Groningen’s old Oosterpark Stadion in 2006. The construction of the new stadium had started two years earlier and came at a cost of €45.5 million.

Stadion Euroborg was officially opened on 13 January 2006 by Arjen Robben, who had started his career at the club. The first official match played at the stadium was a league match against Heerenveen (2-0). A week earlier a try-out match had been played against Veendam.

Soon after the opening of the stadium, Groningen already considered expanding Stadion Euroborg as it consistently sold out. But while the stadium can technically be expanded to a capacity of 33,000, the club lacked the finances, and in recent years attendances have dropped to below full capacity.

In 2016, the stadium changed name to Noordlease Stadion following a sponsorship deal, and in 2018 to Hitachi Global Mobility Stadion following a merger of the companies.

How to get to Hitachi Global Mobility Stadion

Hitachi Global Mobility Stadion is located about 2 kilometres south-east of Groningen’s city centre and main railway station. The walk from the centre should take less than half an hour.

Groningen Europapark rail station lies closer to the stadium though, a 5-minute walk. The station has regular service from the main railway station. The journey only takes 2 minutes.

If coming from Groningen city centre, the stadium can be reached with bus 8. Take the bus from the A-Kerkhof square (in the direction of Station Noord). Get off at stop Boumaboulevard after an approximate 15-minute ride. Bus 8 runs twice an hour.

Alternatively, take bus 5 from the central Grote Markt square (direction Ter Borch) and get off at Meeuwderbaan. It is a 10-minute walk from there to the Noordlease Stadion.

There are also shuttle buses on the day of the match, line 28, that run from the railway station and city centre (Grote Markt square).

There is plenty of parking around the stadium, in particular around the Bornholmstraat just east of the stadium, including the large official P3 parking.

Address: Boumaboulevard 41, 9723 ZS Groningen

FC Groningen Tickets

Tickets for FC Groningen matches can be bought online, at the Fanshop at the Noordlease Stadion, or at a number of news agencies in the Groningen region.

If tickets remain available, these can also be bought at the stadium on the day of the match. While Groningen used to sell out most home matches, they currently do so less often and tickets for most matches will be easily available.

In general, all matches go on general sale, but in the odd case Groningen may require the possession of a Groningen fan card to buy tickets. ID may be required to be able to buy tickets at the stadium on the day of the match.

Ticket prices range from €18.00 for a seat behind the goal to €29.00 for a central seat at the long side. Prices are increased with €4.00 for four high-profile matches.

Email supporterszaken@fcgroningen.nl for more information.

Hitachi Global Mobility Stadion tours

FC Groningen offer guided stadium tours around the Hitachi Global Mobility Stadion, that include access to the press areas, VIP boxes, the dressing rooms, and players tunnel. The tours last about 90 minutes.

Tours run every Wednesday at 4:30 pm, but require a minimum attendance. The tour costs €9.00.

Email rondleidingen@fcgroningen.nl for bookings, which are required.