Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell: Blacklist

Action 20 August 2013

A third-person action game developed by Ubisoft Toronto. This is the sixth installment in the franchise telling the story of Sam Fisher. Together with the members of Fourth Echelon, the agent has to face a dangerous terrorist group planning to conduct a series of attacks on the US soil. The story campaign contains missions taking place in the United States, Iraq, Indonesia, and Paraguay. The assignments can be completed in accordance with one of three gameplay styles recognized by the game: ghost (avoiding contact), panther (silent elimination), and assault (direct combat). Thus, the gameplay depends on the player's preferences to a certain degree. The game offers several well-made multiplayer modes as well, allowing both for rivalry and cooperation.

PCX360PS3WiiU

Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell Trilogy

Action 16 September 2011

Graphically refreshed conversion of the trilogy of classic stealth games. The set includes three cycle views. The first one, Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell, takes place in 2004 and introduces us into the dark world of Third Echelon. In the second part, Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell: Pandora Tomorrow we must stop the inclinations of Indonesian terrorists. The third part entitled Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell: Chaos Theory, takes place in 2007 and throws us into the middle of an IT war between North Korea, China, Japan and South Korea.

PS3

Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell 3DS

Action 17 March 2011

Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell 3DS is the first edition of a series of action games created by Ubisoft addressed to the Nintendo 3DS console. The title is a conversion of Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell: Chaos Theory, enriched with several new solutions using the technical capabilities of an innovative platform (e.g. three-dimensional screen). Players take on the role of Sam Fisher's agent, who tries to stop the chaos spreading all over the globe.

3DS

Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell: Conviction

Action 13 April 2010

Next installment of stealth action game series created by Ubisoft company, with agent Sam Fisher. The plot of the game focuses around searching for murderers of the main hero's daughter. While conducting his own investigation he breaks all the contacts with the agency and his old friends. When Sam receives help from his former colleague from Third Echelon, he doesn't realize that it's just a pretext to drag him back to work in the agency.

PCX360

Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell: Double Agent

Action 17 October 2006

The fourth part of the hit series of third-person stealth games by Ubisoft, whose main character is a secret government agent Sam Fisher. In the game, he has undergone a distinct transformation, turning into a smooth-shaven villain serving a 20-year sentence. But it's all an effect of deliberate mystification, thanks to which our protagonist tries to infiltrate the ranks of a dangerous terrorist network and work it out from the inside.

PCX360PS3PS2WiiXBOXGCN

Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell: Chaos Theory

Action 25 March 2005

The third installment in the popular third-person stealth action game series starring special agent Sam Fisher. The game is set in the near future, where a conflict between North Korea and Japan escalates, unintentionally fanned by the United States. This is when our unfailing protagonist steps into action. His task is to reconcile the interests of all countries involved in the conflict. When compared with previous installments in the series, Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell: Chaos Theory offers a great deal of changes, both in visuals and mechanics. Individual missions are of non-linear structure and you can reach your goal in several different ways, while completing optional objectives along the way. It is also noteworthy that the character can make use of new moves, attacks, and combat techniques, as well as new types of gadgets and weapons. Moreover, there is no shortage of multiplayer modes, starting with the online co-op mode.

PCPS2XBOXGCN

Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell: Pandora Tomorrow

Action 23 March 2004

The sequel to the highly acclaimed third-person action game by Ubisoft Montreal studio, in which we play as Sam Fisher - a secret government agent and member of a special operations group called the Third Echelon. The action of Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell: Pandora Tomorrow takes us from heavily urbanized areas to the tropical region of Indonesia, where a host of new tasks await us, such as sabotage of a submarine base or infiltration of a local village where secret documents are hidden.

PCPS2XBOXGBA

Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell

Action 28 November 2002

A third-person stealth action game by Ubisoft Montreal, inspired by the works of the famous Tom Clancy and the NetForce novel series. We assume the role of Sam Fisher, a federal agent and an operative of a secret unit within NSA (National Security Agency). The protagonist's task is to perform missions given to him by the agency, usually involving elimination of incredibly dangerous enemies, destroying documents, or infiltrating secret installations. Contrary to such series as Rainbow Six or Ghost Recon, where the emphasis is put on teamwork and commanding a unit, Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell focuses on controlling one character, making it more of a stealth game. There is no shortage of open confrontation opportunities in the title, though. In such scenarios, we can choose from 13 available weapons and other useful gadgets.

PCPS2XBOXGBAGCN