Tom Clancy’s Splinter Cell video games series is one of the best in its genre. The first of the series was released way back in 2002. Over the years, many have requested a movie based on the same.

Advertisement

The movie was announced back in 2012, starring Tom Hardy in the lead role. However, even in 2023, the movie is yet to hit the theaters. In some ways, it’s good that the project is on hold since the movie would have nowhere been close to the video game series.

Also Read: Andy Serkis’ Initial Condition To Direct Tom Hardy’s Venom 2 Sounded Selfish But Saved $506M Movie When The Pandemic Hit

Advertisement

Tom Hardy Starrer Splinter Cell Movie Was Way Different Than the Beloved Video Game Series

The key to make a successful live-action adaptation of any video game series is to stick as close as possible to the original story. However, according to a 2017 report by Collider, Tom Hardy’s Splinter Cell movie would have heavily deviated from the original storyline, which featured in video games.

Splinter Cell really is a first-person shooter game. And so the challenge of making Splinter Cell interesting was we didn’t have this IP with a very specific backstory. That allowed us to make up our own world and really augment and fill out the characters. I don’t think one applies to the other because I don’t think our movie will feel like a movie that came out of a video game, I think it’ll feel like a badass, Tom Hardy action movie, which is what we wanted.

The producer Basil Iwanyk’s essentially revealed that the movie would have been a classic Tom Hardy action movie. While the general public may have loved it, the hardcore fans of the video game series would have been disappointed.

Keeping that in mind, many are happy with the project being doomed, despite missing out on the chance to see Tom Hardy as Sam Fisher.

Advertisement

Also Read:“I hate f**king losing work”: Tom Hardy Was Furious When a Leonardo DiCaprio Movie Forced Him Out of DC Movie

Why was Tom Hardy’s Splinter Cell Movie Shelved?

Although the movie was green-lit back in 2012, it has received a series of bad news since then. First, a new draft of the movie was written by Sheldon Turner in 2014. Following the new draft, director Doug Liman surprisingly exited the movie.

Despite the director’s exit, Tom Hardy confirmed that the movie will begin filming in early 2016. Keeping that in mind, 2017 was kept as a realistic release date for the action movie.

Advertisement

However, it’s been more than six years since the previously slated release date, and the movie is yet to be released. Hardy has appeared in several projects ever since, but it seems like fans may never see the veteran actor as Sam Fisher.