Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell 3D

We've seen the Tom Clancy series on just about every gaming platform in existence, from mobile phones to home consoles and even the Mac and now our favourite protagonist and hero, Sam Fisher returns and makes his first debut on the Nintendo 3DS. Even though most gamers have probably played this title before, it is a little different on the Nintendo 3DS due to its 3D technology that actually adds a whole new depth to the gameplay. But before we get to the gameplay, it should be noted that this game is a remake of Tom Clancy's Chaos Theory.

In terms of story, Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell 3D that once again calls his super agent out of retirement in order to save the free world from the unthinkable... world war III. Taking control of Fisher, you'll be traversing the globe as you embark on a variety of missions. I also like how the game has some awesome pre-rendered cinemas to help progress the story which looks quite impressive on this console.

As opposed to first person shooters, Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell 3D is more an action stealth game as opposed to a Rambo style military operation. As mentioned, players control the enigmatic Sam Fisher, a veteran agent who has once again be called to duty and in order to succeed in the game, you need to sneak around, avoid security cameras and take out your enemies with as least possible disruptions. With that said, Tom Clancy Splinter Cell is similar to the first few Metal Gear Solid games.

At your disposal, you have a variety of different gadgets and weapons to help you succeed but the most useful gadget in the game is the 3D technology of the 3DS. Although its not as prevalent as some of the other games, it does create a unique gaming experience as you hide in the shadows and sneak around. It just makes the game feel much more interactive. The mini-games work very well on the console and can be quite challenging like lock-picking and hacking computers. You also have access to a wide variety of weapons that does sometimes break up the monotony of repetitive gameplay at times.

With that said, Tom Clancy Splinter Cell 3D is a very slow game and can be quite frustrating at times. For example, you need to ensure that you have plenty of time to play a level because any real-world distractions can sometimes be disastrous because more often than not, once the enemy is alerted to your positions, it's usually game over and you will need to start the level again.

However for those that like a healthy dose of strategy than this game offers a great deal in that department, especially when you try to think of new solutions to your problems, whether using your equipment or just good old fashioned stealth and takedowns but a spanner is thrown into the works here. For those that want to play multiplayer, the game is pure single-person fun.

The control system of the Nintendo 3DS is a little bit of a mixed bag for this game and although I initially thought it was clunky, it just takes a little time to get use, especially working with the camera and not against it. Although the bottom screen used primary to access all your goodies and some basic interaction with the environment, the game even supports the gyroscope of the 3DS which allows you to tilt the console to perform a particular activity like peering around the corner. Unfortunately I often found myself fighting the controls, as I used the circle pad to move Sam and the d-pad used to control the camera angles.

But the game does offer a very in-depth tutorial system to teach you the basics such as hide in shadows, takedowns, using guns and picking locks... just like the original game. Although I enjoyed the game, the controls could have been considerably better which may annoy quite a few gamers but thankfully for me, the character, story and graphics kept me going.

Graphically, Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell 3D looks good on the Nintendo 3DS with some great attention to detail from the environments to the characters. There is some good use of depth included in the game that enhances the gaming experience and almost makes Sam actually appear 3D. The game is also quite dark which does effect the 3D effects, especially in a bright room or if you are using the gyroscope because you can only view the console from a particular angle when using 3D. Add in a Hollywood spy style of soundtrack, a touch of voice acting and a plethora of sound effects and Splinter Cell is a decent enough game, it just lacks a little originality and smooth controls.