The Campion School in Hornchurch, Essex, is a Roman Catholic school for boys with a mixed sixth form college and was established by the Society of Jesus in 1962. Granted academy status in 2011, the oversubscribed school specialises in science and has a renowned sporting reputation, both locally in the region and across the nation.

When facilities managers at the Campion School realised that the current life safety system would benefit from being upgraded, the team consulted local fire protection systems supplier, Fisk Group.

There were a number of factors to consider when selecting a new system for the Campion School. As well as enhanced efficiency and reduced running costs, the system also needed to offer superior networking capability without compromising the overall aesthetics of the site.

Fisk Group opted to use Hochiki Europe’s FIREscape+ system to meet these requirements. FIREscape+ is a combined fire detection and emergency lighting system with the added benefit of wayfinding technology. It is exclusively available in the UK to members of Hochiki Europe’s Systems Partners Network, which includes Fisk Group.

FIREscape+ is a revolutionary system that offers full monitoring and self-testing. Unlike traditional emergency lighting systems that require 230V to each unit, FIREscape+ units only require 40V and therefore do not need to be wired by a qualified electrician. The system is also designed to run via a single panel, and each loop combines both fire detection and emergency lighting units. These features mean that, by using FIREscape+, facilities managers can simplify installation, save on cabling and labour costs, keep day-to-day running costs down and manage maintenance more effectively in the long term.

As well as cost savings and enhanced maintenance management, FIREscape+ has been manufactured with aesthetics in mind. The emergency lighting units are both sleek and functional, and capable of exceeding the minimum lux level requirements in line with BS 5266:1 2016. As such, FIREscape+ is suitable for use in a range of different environments, giving installers like Fisk Group even more options when it comes to specifying solutions on projects.

Speaking about the project, David Brant, Contract Manager at Fisk Group, noted: “FIREScape+ offers our customers an incredibly innovative system with unrivalled performance capabilities, meeting the complex requirements needed by a large school. Hochiki Europe was our first choice when specifying this project as we benefit a lot from being a systems partner. Having worked with the manufacturer for many years, we were assured in their ability to provide state-of-the-art life safety devices and technical support. Although this was our first time installing FIREscape+ on a project, the ease of installation was what we have come to associate with Hochiki Europe.

“Operating from a loop-based system, all units could be installed to the same bases, meaning we were able to complete the job quickly and efficiently. The system met the brief perfectly, being energy efficient, durable and aesthetically appealing. Also, the wayfinding function is an ideal added bonus.”

Chris Connor, Site Manager at the Campion School, added: “FIREscape+ is now actively helping us reduce our costs with regards to emergency lighting, while also giving us the ultra-reliable protection we need. It’s easy to use as well, which helps us cut down on maintenance and monitoring processes.”

Neil Eves, Systems Manager at Hochiki Europe, explained: “European legislation calls for all commercial premises, like schools, to install approved fire detection and alarm systems. Many countries, including the UK, also strongly advise building owners and facilities managers install self-testing emergency lighting systems. FIREscape+ fulfils these requirements and with its introduction to market, we are able to offer our systems partners a solution that is easy to maintain, cost effective and most importantly, ultra-reliable.”