About Campion School

New Beginnings

The Campion School, in Hornchurch, Essex, opened in September 1962 and has a long history of old boys returning in various capacities - including the last Headmaster Mr. John Johnson (who retired in 2011) who was one of the first intake of pupils aged 11 into the new school.

The order of Jesuit priests, based at St Ignatius College in north London raised the funds to build the school from their own resources and other donations over a twenty year period. The school took its name from the great Jesuit martyr, Edmund Campion, executed under the reign of Queen Elizabeth 1 on 1st December 1581. Edward Campion was renown for his learning, his daring wit and his support for English Catholics during a time of repression. His example has inspired The Campion School since its inception.

The first headmaster, Michael Fox S.J., died tragically of a heart attack within seven weeks of the school opening. Under the new headmaster, Peter Hackett S.J., the school grew in numbers and reputation over the next three years until the rebuilding of St Ignatius College and a reduction in the number of Jesuit teachers led to the school being passed over to the control of the Diocese of Brentwood. From 1965 the school has been lead by a lay headmaster and staff supported by a Jesuit Chaplain. Under Mr. Philip Moloney, the first lay headmaster, the school achieved an academic and sporting reputation second to none - a tradition that continues to this day.

sporting heritage

By 1978 the school was known as a centre of sporting excellence, particularly in rugby, and the school tradition of international touring had already been established. It was John Davies, a first class scrum half with the outstanding London Welsh side of the late 1960’s who took the school to a new level when he joined the coaching staff in 1969, leading the school rugby team into the top echelons of English schools rugby.

Over the years, the school has expanded to offer unrivalled state school sporting facilities from the Jubilee Sports Hall celebrating our 25th anniversary to the swimming pool, floodlit all-weather pitch and fitness suite.

On the sporting side, the Rugby 1st XV first entered the Daily Mail National Schools Cup in 1993, losing narrowly in the semi-finals. Since then, the team has constantly proven to be one of the best schools sides in the country. We lost three semi finals before finally triumphing in the final at Twickenham in 2001 against Durham Grammar, to become the first state run school to win the competition. As defending champions, we narrowly lost the final in 2002 to a strong Oakham side and were losing semi finalists again in 2003 and 2004.