LinkedIn and 3rd parties use essential and non-essential cookies to provide, secure, analyze and improve our Services, and to show you relevant ads (including professional and job ads) on and off LinkedIn. Learn more in our Cookie Policy.

Select Accept to consent or Reject to decline non-essential cookies for this use. You can update your choices at any time in your settings.

Founded in 1946, the Mota-Engil Group is one of the top construction companies in Portugal. The multinational EPC company has operations focused on construction and infrastructure management in Engineering and Construction, Environment and Services, Transport Concessions, and Energy. The Group is present in 24 countries, across Europe, Africa, and Latin America.

With more than 38,500 employees and a turnover of EUR 3,804 mn in 2022, Mota-Engil performs its activities aligned with the best practices and is committed to a model of ethical, social, and environmentally responsible management sustained on a unique and integrated strategic vision for the Mota-Engil of the future: a more international, innovative, sustainable and competitive Group on a global scale.

The Teixeira Duarte Group is a prominent Portuguese multinational conglomerate that boasts a rich legacy dating back to its founding in 1921. Over the course of its history, the company has evolved into a diversified powerhouse with interests spanning multiple sectors.

One of the cornerstones of the Teixeira Duarte Group is its robust presence in the construction industry. The company has been at the forefront of numerous high-profile construction projects, both domestically and on the international stage. These projects encompass a wide spectrum, including infrastructure, transportation systems, and iconic buildings. Teixeira Duarte's commitment to excellence and innovation is evident in the quality of its projects.

This list is important for Building/Project Owners, Clients, Engineers, Subcontractors, Construction Project Managers, Building Material Suppliers, and Architects. A compiled list of the most reputable and reliable construction companies in Portugal can allow you to identify the best relevant partners and address them directly for your next project.

Blackridge Research & Consulting is a premier market research and consulting organization covering the Global energy transformation. We provide objective, independent and holistic view of the markets and present critical insights that are essential not only to help you make better business decisions but also to develop transformational business growth strategies.