Moloya Goswami is a renowned actress from Assam. Moloya Goswami was born in Dibrugarh to a Rajkhowa family.

After passing out her matriculation, she came to Guwahati and completed her graduation from Handique Girls College and post graduation from Guwahati University.

Moloya Goswami was very much active during her college days and she also got selected for the first women’s hockey team from Assam.

After her education, Moloya Goswami took up teaching as her profession and started out working initially in Sonari College and later joined Jagiroad College in 1983. In 1981, Moloya Goswami married Pradeep Goswami, an engineer in ASEB.

Career:

Moloya Goswami’s greatest inspiration of her acting career was her husband who motivated her to take up acting. Her debut film was ‘Agnisnaan’ by the great Assamese film maker Late Dr. Bhabendra Nath Saikia in 1987.

The movie was based on Bhabendra Nath Saikia’s famous novel ‘Antareep’. In the movie, Moloya Goswami has the main role as Menaka.

This film gave her the boost and popularity in the Assamese film industry.

In the year 1992, Moloya Goswami acted in her second movie’ Firingoti’ directed by another great film maker of Assam Jahnu Baruah.

In this film she plays the role of a lady who overcomes personal trauma and dedicates her life to the education of a village.

The film earned her the most prestigious National ‘Rajat Kamal’ award for Best Actress in the year 1992. After these movies, there was no looking back for Moloya Goswami. She worked in a number of films ‘Uttarkaal’, ‘Maa’, ‘Asene Konoba Hiyaat’, and ‘Sesh Upahaar’.

She also acted in a number of popular Assamese TV serials like ‘Writu Ahe Writu Jai’. Moloya Goswami has acted against all veteran actors and directors of Assam.

Her strong voice also gave her the chance to lend her voice to many radio plays. She also made a mark in poetry recitation by reciting poems of great Assamese poets. Moloya Goswami has also been involved in many different stage plays.

Achievements: