James A. Rhodes Arena

James A. Rhodes Arena, commonly nicknamed "The JAR," is a basketball arena in Akron, Ohio on the campus of the University of Akron named for former Ohio governor Jim Rhodes. The arena opened in 1983 and is home to the Akron Zips men's and women's ba…

Mogadore, Ohio

Mogadore (/ˈmɒɡədɔər/ MOG-ə-dor) is a village in Portage and Summit counties in the U.S. state of Ohio. It is a suburb of Akron and is part of the Akron Metropolitan Statistical Area.

Archbishop Hoban High School

Archbishop Hoban High School is a private, Catholic, college prep high school in Akron, Ohio, USA. It is a part of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Cleveland. In the early 1950s, Archbishop Edward F. Hoban invited the Brothers of Holy Cross to staff a …

WIVM-LD

WIVM-LD (channel 39) in Canton, Ohio, WIVN-LD (channel 29) and WIVD-LD (channel 22) in Newcomerstown, and WIVX-LD (channel 51) in Loudonville, Ohio are low power television stations serving Stark and Tuscarawas counties in Ohio, and nearby counties …

InfoCision Stadium–Summa Field

InfoCision Stadium - Summa Field is a college American football stadium in Akron, Ohio and the home field of the Akron Zips football team at the University of Akron. New for the 2009 football season, the official ground-breaking ceremony for the sta…

Canal Fulton, Ohio

Canal Fulton is a city in Stark County in the U.S. state of Ohio. The population was 5,479 at the 2010 census.

WAKR

WAKR (1590 AM) – branded 1590 WAKR – is a commercial radio station licensed to Akron, Ohio, serving the Akron metro area. Locally owned by Rubber City Radio Group, Inc., the station broadcasts a mix of news, talk, and sports. WAKR is also the Akron …

Navarre, Ohio

Navarre (named after the Navarre region in Spain) is a village in Stark County, Ohio, United States. The population was 1,957 at the 2010 census.

New Franklin, Ohio

New Franklin is a city located at the southern edge of Summit County, Ohio, United States, in the northeastern part of the state. It is bounded by Coventry Township, as well as the cities of Barberton and Norton to the north; by Chippewa Township, W…

League Park (Akron)

League Park refers to two former American football and baseball stadiums located in Akron, Ohio. The original League Park was located at the corner of Carroll St. and Beaver St.; the newer stadium was on Lakeshore Blvd. between W. Long St. and W.

Greentown, Ohio

Greentown is a census-designated place (CDP) in Stark County, Ohio, United States. The population was 3,154 at the 2000 census.

Central Catholic High School (Canton, Ohio)

Central Catholic High School is a private, Catholic coeducational diocesan high school in Canton, Ohio run by the Roman Catholic Diocese of Youngstown. Central began educating in 1946 when the Diocese merged the all-female Mount Marie Academy and th…

St. Thomas Aquinas High School (Louisville, Ohio)

St. Thomas Aquinas High School (abbreviated "STA") is a private, Catholic co-educational high school located in Louisville, Ohio, USA, run by the Roman Catholic Diocese of Youngstown. It was founded in 1964 to serve the Catholic families of eastern …

Paul Brown Tiger Stadium

Paul Brown Tiger Stadium is a high school football stadium located in Massillon, Ohio. It is primarily used for American football, and is the home field of the Massillon Washington High School Tigers football team. The stadium has a seating capacity…