Al Jarreau

My favorite musical artist is Al Jarreau. He is an American singer-song writer of Jazz, R&B, soul. Al Jarreau was born Alwin Lopez Jarreau in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, on March 12, 1940. Jarreau was the fifth of six children. His father was a Seventh-day Adventist Church minister and singer, and his mother was a church pianist. Singing in church with his family doing concerts, benefits and also performing with his mom at the PTA (Parent Teacher Association) meetings. His life shifted once he went to college, he studied psychology and earned a Bachelor of Science degree in psychology from Ripon College, where he also sang with a group called the Indigos. He earned a master’s degree in vocational rehabilitation from the University of Iowa. He then moved to San Francisco, where he worked as a rehabilitation counselor and moonlighted with a jazz trio led by George Duke, another musical artist I admire. Jarreau later teamed up with acoustic guitarist Julio Martinez in 1967. They became the star attraction at a small California night club called Gatsby’s, which led to Jarreau’s decision to make professional singing a full-time career.

These songs are old friends I have entertained myself with when I'm washing the dishes, driving to the store and walking down the aisles. The ones that you sing when you're driving in the car and as a singer you always go back to them.

I first learned about Al Jarreau around 1976 or 1977; I had just signed up for the Navy and was awaiting orders in Chicago. The first song I remembered hearing was called “Take 5”. The lyrics of the song, the music and the sound of his voice just held me in awe, it truly made an impact on me. I can recall being downtown at a music store in Chicago, and while walking around looking for a EWF (Earth Wind and Fire) album. I began hearing his voice and music coming from the overhead speakers, I asked the guys I hung out with if they knew who was singing and no one could tell me. I asked one of the store employee’s that worked there and that’s when I learned the name Al Jarreau. I bought the album and that’s when my journey and love for jazz began.

Before I get out of bed, I am saying thank you. I know how important it is to be thankful.

When I listen to his music it puts me into a relax state of mind. Even after having had a long day at work the sound of his music ease’s my thoughts and helps me to unwind. This may sound a little deep, but this is how my musical artist makes me feel. Jarreau’s music puts me in a serious atmosphere to think about love, peace and serenity, this is what his music and ballads are about. The love of your significant other in your arms holding them close, seeing that special someone sitting in the same room across from you or just the thought of speaking to that man or woman you just made eye contact with and it made your heart skip a beat. This is how his music makes me feel and what I think about when listening to his songs. One of my favorite tracks by Al Jarreau would be “My Favorite Things” from his Tenderness album featuring Kathleen Battle and David Sanborn.

I like this track because of the melody and the acoustical vocal range by Kathleen Battle, her operatic and soprano voice was wonderful along with the impeccable sound of David Sanborn playing the alto saxophone the connection and performance of these three artist was great, I truly thank Al Jarreau for the genre of artist’s he has performed with throughout his lifetime, which was my connection to other jazz musicians and singer/song writer’s as well. My opinion of this great artist is precisely that, he is great and will be “one of the greatest of all times.

youtube link to Al Juarreau take five youtube link to Al Juarreau morin song