Michigan State University is forming a committee that will include faculty, staff, deans, students and alumni to help in the search for a new president, MSU trustees Dianne Byrum and Melanie Foster said Wednesday.

The committee will have about 15 members.

Also happening this summer: MSU just launched a website about its presidential search, and will soon begin "listening seasons" to get public input, Foster and Byrum said at a press conference.

The board hopes to name a new president in June 2019, according to the timeline announced by Foster and Byrum.

The two trustees got some push back at the press conference from several faculty members and students who criticized the board for not getting public input about the timeline and other decisions relating to the search process so far.

"We wanted to be included from the beginning and they're not listening to us," said Katie Paviot, a MSU sophomore in comparative cultures and politics.

The board is seeking for a replacement successor to Lou Anna K. Simon, who stepped down in January amid the Larry Nassar controversy. Former Gov. John Engler has been serving as interim president.

Engler will not be part of the search process, the trustees said Wednesday.

The board's timeline:

Mid-July to October 2018: Listening sessions with stakeholders.

July 2018: Issue request for proposals from presidential search firms.

August 2018: Form the search committee.

September 2018: Conduct search firm interviews and make a selection.

October 2018: Finalize the position profile and make public.

November 2018-January 2019: Identify candidates and conduct initial interviews.

February-May 2019: Host finalist interviews with the Board of Trustees.

June 2019: Announce the selection of the new president.

The board already has hired Teresa Sullivan, the outgoing president of University of Virginia, to advise the board on its search for MSU's next president.

Sullivan, 69, is a graduate of MSU's James Madison College and former provost at University of Michigan. She has led University of Virginia since 2010 and is retiring from that job in July.

Foster noted this is the first time since 1992-93 that MSU has conducted an outside search for a new president. That's when the board picked Peter McPherson to head the university. McPherson left in 2003 and was succeeded by Simon, who was MSU provost.

The two board members declined Wednesday to commit to public interviews or forums for the finalists in the presidential search, saying they wanted to get the advice of Sullivan and the search firm first.

"All the details have yet to be determined," Byrum said.

Foster and Byrum stressed the importance of the listening sessions, which they said will include both small groups and larger public forums, and will include faculty, staff, students, alumni and others.

The purpose of those sessions is to determine the qualities people are seeking in a new leader, as well as a list of MSU's strengths and weaknesses should be included in the posting for the position, they said.

"We're very sincere" in wanting to hear from stakeholders about what they seek in a new president, Byrum said.

For her part, she said, "given all that has happened, I think we need someone who is a good listener. ... Someone able to show compassion."

Said Foster: "We need someone who understands and embraces institutional integrity."

While MSU has garnered national headlines for the Nassar scandal, Byrum and Foster said they are confident the presidential search will yield "world-class" candidates wanting the job.

"We're one of the top 100 research universities in the world," Foster said. "I'm very confident that we'll have a robust pool of candidates."

The two trustees were questioned by a student about the board's decision to name Engler as interim without public input, and whether the board can be trusted now to listen to stakeholders.

"You can't compare" the two circumstances, Byrum said. One involved a decision that needed to be made quickly while the university was in crisis, and the other is a much longer, more deliberative process.

"They are not the same situation," Byrum said.

Andaluna Borcila, an associate professor at MSU's James Madison College, was not convinced.

"The process so far is not transparent," she said. "There's a lack of trust at this point."