If historical epics are your thing, then this is it.

TW: Violence, Blood

Akira Kurosawa’s late-life gem, Ran (1985), an addition to his samurai cinema, is a loose adaptation of Shakespeare’s play, ‘King Lear’. Set in sixteenth- century Japan, the epic drama deals with deteriorating family relationships, the futility of war, and the collapse of an egomaniac’s empire in lust for power.

Ran, Japanese for ‘chaos’, follows the story of an old warlord, Hidetora Ichimonji who divides his empire amongst his three sons in a failing attempt to forge peace. However, things don’t go as planned and the two elder sons, Taro and Jiro, battle for power with the youngest son, Saburo, banished from the kingdom. As family relations crumble in a battle for authority, Hidetora realizes Saburo’s defiance and the vanity of his decision. Soon the aging king flees his castle, knowing that his sons are after his life. Wandering wild with his jester, Kyoami, and servant, Tango, Hidetora reflects upon his gory past and the unquenchable thirst for control that plagued his sons. They encounter a blind man, Tsurumaru (brother of Lady Sue, Jiro’s wife) who fails to provide them any hospitality because of his disability but offers to play his flute. Finally, Hidetora musters up the courage to glance at Tsurumaru’s face, only to face the grim reality that he ordered for the murder of the latter’s parents to occupy their land and commanded his eyes to be gouged out. The emotionally charged soundtrack by Japanese composer Toru Takemitsu plays a significant role in Ran. Soon after Hidetora discovers Tsurumaru, the ominous music playing in the background implies the end of Hidetora and his clan overlooking the kingdom, underlining the psychological state of his mind. As fate dictates, his guilty consciousness drowns the senile warlord, ultimately losing his hold on reality.

With a running time of nearly 3 hours and a budget of $11 million, the film is a visual treat with its lustrous palette and archaic Japanese costumes, capturing the zeitgeist of the late Sengoku period. The colourful costumes, courtesy of Emi Wada, fuse into the lush backdrop of Japan. It features eloquent cinematography with brooding hues, mastered by the techniques of Kurosawa, Asakazu Nakai, Shoji Ueda, and Takao Saito. Although the film comprises two battle segments, the first one strikes out the most. The meticulously constructed battle scene devoid of any sound with the chilling, haunting score playing in the background is eye-capturing. Instead of classic sword fights, the audience is met with images of amputated bodies with blood dripping off wooden ceilings and floors percolating into the black soil. Independent of any CGI effects, the film is captured through subtle, static camera movements. Red and black dominate the colour scheme of Ran, with the former being coincidental with the color of Jiro’s house, who turns out to be the only surviving member of the Ichimonji clan. Red strengthens the narrative representing passion, anger, and violence while black seems to surround Hidetora in his solitude. Contrasting colours such as red, blue, and yellow, which signify the three houses of the Ichimonji clan; First Castle (Taro), Second Castle (Jiro), Third Castle (Saburo) also reciprocate clashes among family members.

Tatsuya Nakadai (Hidetora) and Mieko Harada (Lady Kaede) portray the most brilliant performances. The inherent beauty of Ran lies in its flawed protagonist that one can’t help but sympathize with. Caught in a cycle of vengeance, Lady Kaede sets up an almost perfect plan against Hidetora, marking her as one of the strongest presences in the entire film. The characters of Hidetora and Lady Kaede are fine examples of the Japanese Noh Theatre. Noh Theatre, Japanese traditional theatre, is popular for focusing on the fictional aspects rather than the reality. Artists of Noh Theatre express emotions through a series of conventional gestures. Tatsuya Nakadai’s shadowy makeup bears a resemblance to the masks worn by Noh performers. Even his acting style, distinct from the usual, hints at Noh Theatre: sudden jerks with static pauses.

One of the most fascinating segments in Ran and a rather realistic one shows Hidetora trying to teach his sons the lesson of unity through the famous arrows-in-a-bundle task. He begins with giving them single arrows and then segues to a bundle of arrows. Hidetora’s youngest son, Saburo, frantically breaks the bundle of arrows in an attempt to make his father realize his clouded judgment. Commenting on this scene Kurosawa states, “When I read that three arrows together are invincible, that’s not true. I started doubting, and that’s when I started thinking: the house was prosperous and the sons were courageous. What if this fascinating man had corrupt sons?” Here, ‘this man’ refers to real-life daimyo Mori Motonari, whose story was the blueprint for Ran in the initial days. Unlike other Kurosawa films, Ran includes a rather contemporary element accentuating the dark side of technological advancements. During the occupation of the Third Castle, Hidetora’s men are outnumbered by Jiro’s army of arquebusiers, an ideal demonstration of how reformed arms changed samurai battles. The burning imagery of the Third Castle furthermore symbolizes the crumbling of the Ichimonji clan and the end of Hidetora’s role as a patriarch.

The triviality of war and the perpetuated hate among humans is an adjacent theme in Ran. The ardent desire to ascend on the ladder of authority drives both brothers into madness to the extent they exile their father. Machiavellian dogma rules the narrative, juxtaposed with nihilism. Post world war Japanese cinema witnessed an increase in underlying themes of nihilism as the terrors of Hiroshima-Nagasaki seized the audience and artists equally. In the scene where Kyoami laments the death of Hidetora; questioning the existence of Buddha or a higher life form of justice, he is interrupted by Tango who refutes him: “It is the gods who weep. They see us killing each other over and over since time began. They can’t save us from ourselves”. As bodies pile up and clouds of sorrow overcast on the battlefield during the occupation of the Third Castle, the shot cuts to Buddha’s image in a temple amidst the bloodshed. Yet in another sequence, Hidetora disregards the presence of Buddha and his compassion in the modern world. The last shot of the film shows the silhouette of a lonely Tsurumaru waiting for his sister, unknown of her demise while the scroll of Buddha Amida falls, symbolizing the dying hope of humanity.