Pitch Perfect is a 2012 American musical comedy film directed by Jason Moore and written by Kay Cannon. It features an ensemble cast, including Anna Kendrick, Skylar Astin, Rebel Wilson, Anna Camp, Brittany Snow, Hana Mae Lee, Alexis Knapp, Ester Dean, Adam DeVine, Ben Platt, John Michael Higgins, and Elizabeth Banks. The plot follows Barden University's all-girl a cappella group, The Barden Bellas, as they compete against another a cappella group from their college to win Nationals. The film is loosely adapted from Mickey Rapkin's non-fiction book, titled Pitch Perfect: The Quest for Collegiate a Cappella Glory.

Plot[]

The Barden Bellas are a collegiate, all-girls a cappella singing group thriving on female pop songs and their perfect looks. After a disastrous failing at last year's finals, they are forced to regroup. Among the new recruits is freshman Beca, an independent, aspiring DJ with no interest in the college life. But after she meets Jesse, from the rival all-male a cappella group, Beca has a new outlook and takes it upon herself to help the Bellas find their new look and sound and get back into the competition.

Why It Rocks[]

Awesome musical score.

Top-notch acting.

The "Cup" song is one of the greatest songs of this film.

The other songs are really catchy.

Very memorable moments.

Cool cinematography.

Brilliant dialogue.

Unlike other feminist movies, there is no gender obsession.

Bad Qualities[]

Really slow pacing.

The story is predictable.

Beca can be a bit unlikeable at times.

Infamous party where Aubrey pukes, while funny, it can be disgusted by the younger viewers.

Reception[]

On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 80% based on 148 reviews, with an average rating of 6.39/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Pitch Perfect's plot is formulaic, but the performances are excellent and the musical numbers are toe-tapping as well." Metacritic gives a weighted average score of 66 out of 100, based on reviews from 33 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".

Box Office[]

Pitch Perfect grossed $65 million in North America and $50.3 million in other territories for a total gross of $115.4 million since release, against a $17 million budget.

Videos[]

EmbedVideo received the bad id ">Q-j8XXtwSO0" for the service "youtube".

EmbedVideo received the bad id ">VIF631UhOfE" for the service "youtube".

EmbedVideo received the bad id ">ryyV7_oB5IQ" for the service "youtube".

EmbedVideo received the bad id ">x30vLqFCbio" for the service "youtube".

[]