Directed by: Jason Moore

Based On: Pitch Perfect: The Quest for Collegiate a Cappela Glory by Mickey Rapkin

Starring: Anna Kendrick, Anna Camp, Brittany Snow, Rebel Wilson, Skylar Astin, Ben Platt, Adam DeVine, Utkarsh Ambudkar

Release Date: September 24, 2012

Box Office: 115.4 million

Tagline: "Get pitch slapped."

Genres: Musical, Female Buddy Comedy, LGBT, teen comedy, college comedy-drama

Pitch Perfect isn American 2012 musical comedy film directed by Jason Moore and starring Anna Kendrick as Beca Mitchell, a rebellious anti-social misfit who joins an a cappela club, gaining a whole new circle of friends and challenges to deal with. The film was a sleeper hit and garnered much critical acclaim for its balance of humor, romantic drama, and excellent musical scenes. It was followed by two sequels.

Plot[]

At a 2011 national a cappella competition, Barden University's all-female a cappella group, the Barden Bellas, perform well until Aubrey Posen (Anna Camp) projectile vomits on the audience during her solo.They are publicly humiliated, losing the competition. Four months later, newly arrived Barden freshman Beca Mitchell (Anna Kendrick) has no desire to attend college, but she is forced to do so by her father (John Benjamin Hickey), a professor at the university, with whom Beca has a strained relationship.

When Beca's father discovers she has not been attending classes, he comes to her with a proposition: if she joins a club and still does not want to remain at college after one year, he will allow her to leave college, and he will pay for Beca to move to Los Angeles to pursue her music career. After some persuasion from Chloe Beale (Brittany Snow) the co-leader of the Bellas along with Aubrey, she reluctantly joins the Barden Bellas.

The Bellas participate in the southeastern regional competition at Carolina University where, at Aubrey's insistence, they perform the same medley that helped the Bellas advance to the finals the previous year. In spite of their old set list, the group manages to place second, thanks to Fat Amy putting her own spin on her solo, which sends them to the semi-finals.

At the semi-finals, Beca provides an impromptu layering of one of her favorite songs into the traditional song on the Bellas' set list in an attempt to reinvigorate the crowd after they seemed to have lost interest.Even though the audience seemed to enjoy Beca's remix, the Bellas come in third in the competition behind the Treblemakers and the Footnotes. Aubrey becomes furious with Beca, who in turn quits, with the Bellas losing on their chance to advance due to their third place ranking. Benji, however, finds out that the Footnotes have recruited a high school student into their team and reports it, causing their disqualification and simultaneously advancing the Bellas to the finals by default.

At the a cappella national competition, the Treblemakers perform, with Benji performing for the first time. The Bellas sing a piece arranged by Beca, which includes "Don't You (Forget About Me)" a song featured in The Breakfast Club, one of Jesse's favorite movies. This acts as a more effective apology from Beca, and after the performance, she and Jesse kiss. The Bellas win the national competition, and six months later auditions for new members take place.

Characters[]

Main[]

Beca Mitchell - An introverted and rebllious college student who joins the Barden Bellas.

Aubrey Posen - The uptight and girly leader of the Bellas.

Chloe Beale - The kinder and more civil co-leader of the Bellas.

Fat Amy - A cowardly and atheltic-averse australian fat girl.

Jesse Swanson - An outgoing Barden freshmen who loves movies.

Benji Applebaum - A nerdy & dorky magician who wants to join the Treblemakers.

Bumper Allen - A super-talented leader of the Treblemakers.

Supporting[]

Lilly Onakuramara - A seemingly quiet, soft-spoken women with tendency to speak dark things under her breath.

Donald - Bumper's right hand man and beatboxer.

Dr. Benjamin Mitchell - Beca's father.

Trivia[]