Years of experience teach you to set your sites low for some movies. An ambitious, combat-heavy WWII RAF bio-pic with no big names in the cast, no major distributor behind it, a modest-budget film that premieres and reaches much of the world on Tubi?

That’s “The Shamrock Spitfire,” the story of an Irish ace in the “British Oppressor’s” Royal Air Force during World War II. Tubi got it, and it’s a sturdy, sentimental period piece with decent performances, excellent production values and great special effects.

I don’t know how the Higgins brothers, Dominic and Ian, got their dazzling aerial combat sequences, which can be Heironymous Bosch freeze-frames of planes, clouds, tracer bullets, pilots, explosions and fire. Sampling, compositing and layering combat footage, repurposing clips from “The Battle of Britain,” whose collection of airborne Spitfires, German bombers and ME-109s have turned up in decades of RAF stories since?

But those scenes serve as foundation to a solid, if somewhat dramatically flat and generally unsurprising genre picture on the order of “Mission of Honor” (about Polish pilots in the RAF) and “Dark Blue World” (about Czech pilots in the RAF).

Brendan Finucane was a Dublin native, son of an Easter Uprising revolutionary and an English mother. After Irish independence, his father’s work took them to London, where Brendan (Shane O’Regan), long fascinated by flight, answered the call to join the Royal Air Force just before World War II.

His father (Eoin Lynch) may not approve, fretting over what the folks “back home” would say about an Irish patriot’s son serving in the “Royal” anything. But young Mister “head in the clouds” confers with his priest, whose advice about “the cost of not following your heart” sways him.

Young Brendan is determined to succeed, even though he has trouble with the “landing” part of flying — lots of trouble. But his instructors see the “fight” in him.

And as he notes later in the film, once he’s won his wings, “‘Fighter’ always comes before ‘pilot,’ doesn’t it?”

The film follows Finucane’s tough-minded career, from training to glory as the pilot of the “Shamrock Spitfire,” which wore that green symbol on its fuselage once he became famous.

The Higgins are British filmmakers (Birmingham born) whose earlier feature films had faith-based themes (“The 13th Day,” “All That Remains”). They cover a parade of tropes and cliches in this script, from the “lass back home, waiting” (Bethany Billy), the taunting and bullying the pilot they nickname “Paddy” which his English comrades serve up — sometimes leading to fisticuffs, the twinkling Catholic priest and the “Battle of Britain” “finest hour” newspaper headline montages.

Only two Brits would try to soften the “Paddy” business by referring to this infamous, ancient ethnic slur as an “affectionate” nickname in an opening title. But Finucane could have taken it that way, one supposes — after a few fistfights over it.

What’s novel here is the attention to detail in the training sequences, the combat and the in-the-cockpit actions of a flyer frantically looking all around him for enemy planes, working the controls, trying to stay alive to fight another day, even when he’s been hit.

In that regard, “The Shamrock Spitfire” holds its own, and then some, with big-budget films such as Christopher Nolan’s “Dunkirk.”

The many obvious moments of foreshadowing, the first sight of the squadron dog, first words about “my lucky (cigarette) lighter,” the lager-fueled esprit de corps with his British comrades and later the Australian-piloted squadron “just call me ‘Paddy'” commands, are common currency in such films, so common that Monty Python mocked these cliches fifty years ago.

Still and all, “Shamrock Spitfire” more or less gets the job done, with or without surprises. O’Regan shows promise and the cast is competent, even without the sparks.

And when this one gets in the air, it’s a cinematic textbook on how to create suspenseful dogfights, how to fake, shoot and edit convincing aerial combat on a tighter-than-tight budget.

Rating: TV-MA, violence, mild profanity

Cast: Shane O’Regan, Bethany Billy, Chris Kaye, Eoin Lynch and Emily Outred

Credits: Scripted and directed by Dominic and Ian Higgins. A Tubi release.

Running time: 1:48