Intel said Monday it agreed to buy computer networking gear vendor Shiva for approximately US$180 million in cash in a move to expand its networking equipment product line.

Intel (INTC) will pay $6 for each share of Shiva (SHVA) stock. In exchange, the world's largest computer chipmaker acquires a broad range of additional networking equipment, including Shiva's virtual private networking, or VPN, gear. VPN lets big companies use the infrastructure of the Internet to set up secure connections between far-flung offices.

The purchase of Shiva, a Bedford, Massachusetts, company, ends the firm's long struggle against eroding market share and poor financial performance. The company was a high flyer in the networking equipment world in the early 1990s, but began to lose ground to competitors like Cisco Systems (CSCO) and 3Com (COMS). Shiva changed its focus to lower-end products, making gear for local-area networks and the remote-access market, but still had trouble earning money. Shiva's stock has fallen from a high of more than $80 in 1996 to about $5 recently.

The Intel buyout is likely to boost Shiva's standing with potential new customers -- and should bring some relief to existing Shiva customers worried about the firm's long-term prospects. Intel and Shiva expect the deal to close by the end of this year, pending shareholder and regulatory approval.

Shiva's stock jumped $1.25, about 30 percent, to $5.50 on Nasdaq. Intel's shares gained $1.25 to close at $85.

Shiva "needed to be acquired a couple years ago," said Brad Baldwin, an analyst with market researcher International Data Corp. "To move into larger areas, they need a larger partner that has access to larger corporations, more sales channels, and has extreme credibility with a wide gamut of business types."

Intel already makes low-end networking gear, like PC Ethernet cards. The initiative is part of Intel's strategy to nurture technologies that increase uses for PCs -- and in turn increase demand for its chips. Adding Shiva's VPN technology broadens Intel's menu of products aimed at small- and medium-sized businesses that need to link workers in remote locations, but can't afford to build their own networks or lease dedicated lines.

The combined companies would benefit from a broader product line, and from the strength of mingled sales forces, customer relationships, and R&D efforts, officials for both firms said Monday. The move could help Intel gain a major position in emerging market for VPN gear, analysts said, a space that networking heavyweights like Cisco don't yet dominate.

"We now have adequate critical mass to become a major player in this marketplace," said Mark Christensen, vice president of Intel's Networking Products division in a conference call Monday.

Short term, Shiva will operate as a subsidiary of Intel and maintain its existing product line. But the firms plan to integrate their technologies to drive development of enhanced applications for VPN technology. One major potential area, analysts said, is transmitting voice calls over virtual private networks. Shiva is currently working on the technology, which could help Intel grab a chunk of another important emerging networking market.

"Virtual private networking is going to be important, but the pot of gold is going to be the application of voice on these networks," said IDC's Baldwin.