LOS ANGELES – While the majority of the NBA universe worried itself with potential trades and rumors, the Clippers had a game to play.

And, yeah sure, it might have been a seemingly unimportant battle for 12th in the 15-team Western Conference. But it meant something, whatever that may be, to the Clippers, who beat the Memphis Grizzlies 100-86 Wednesday night at Staples Center.

“Yeah, it matters,” the Clippers’ Tim Thomas said. “You don’t want to say the season is over right now. You play till it’s over. You still go out there and play as hard as you can and leave it all out on the floor.”

Corey Maggette had 30 points and 10 rebounds, and the Clippers blew this one open in the third quarter, going up 82-67 heading into the fourth quarter.

The Grizzlies pulled within 10 points in the fourth quarter, and that was as close as they got as the Clippers avenged a 125-120 overtime loss in Memphis on Jan. 26. In the Grizzlies’ past 13 games, they’ve only won twice, and that OT win was one of them.

The biggest difference Wednesday was the Clippers’ shooting and passing. They shot 45 percent to the Grizzlies’ 36.4 percent. They had 28 assists to the Grizzlies’ 15. The 28 assists tied the Grizzlies’ number of field goals.

And all of those numbers came out, despite a terrible first quarter when they trailed by as many 12 points.

“Defensively, after the first quarter, we did a good job,” coach Mike Dunleavy said. “We got out into the open court, and we did a nice job of moving the ball and running the floor.”

Brevin Knight keyed the Clippers’ defense and ball movement. He no longer is on restricted minutes because of a stress reaction in his leg and played 29 minutes with a team-high eight assists. Although Memphis rookie Mike Conley scored 16 points, Knight did a relatively good job on him.

“Their quickness in the backcourt with Mike Conley – that’s just a tough matchup,” Dunleavy said. “That’s why I went with the change.

I thought matchup wise, being able to keep their guards in front of us, was really important.”

Four other Clippers, with Maggette, scored in double figures. Thomas had 17 points, six rebounds and five assists, and Al Thornton added 13.

Perhaps the biggest thing the Clippers had to overcome was early foul trouble to Thornton and Chris Kaman, who still finished with 11 points, seven rebounds and five blocks. Thornton started in place of Thomas, and Dunleavy said that was simply a function of the rookie providing more energy of late.

“I got to learn how to stay on the floor,” Thornton said. “I got to learn the referees and how they call the games.”

Neither Knight nor Cuttino Mobley, who scored 12 points, started, but they were so effective in the second quarter that Dunleavy got away from his normal pattern and started the duo in the second half.

Memphis got 21 points from Rudy Gay, and 20 from Hakim Warrick. This was the first time the Grizzlies were in Los Angeles since trading Pau Gasol to the Lakers for Kwame Brown, Javaris Crittenton and two first-round draft picks.

CLIPPER NOTES Sam Cassell could have played his last game as a Clipper on Wednesday, but if that were the case, the team sure did a good job concealing its plans.

Various members of the organization, both on and off the record, said the team does not plan on making a move before today’s noon trading deadline. That means the only way Cassell will leave the Clippers is through a buyout, and the team likely will not do that because it wants his services for the rest of the season.

…On various media outlets and blogs, trade rumors are flying with the Clippers in the middle of a few of them. Dunleavy says that all of the rampant rumors have an affect on modern-day trading in the NBA.