If anybody knows the pressures facing Kwame Brown, chosen with the first overall pick in the NBA draft by the Washington Wizards, it's Los Angeles Clippers Coach Alvin Gentry. With five players younger than 21 -- including former high school standout Darius Miles, who was selected third in the 2000 draft from East St. Louis (Ill.) High -- the Clippers are loaded with Kwame Browns.

"I think, collectively, the average age of the UCLA men's team last season was older than mine," Gentry said.

On road trips this past season, the Clippers' plane had the feel of a high school field trip. Rappers DMX and Nelly blared through the stereo, and players would challenge each other to video games.

"I've heard more rap in one year than in my 45 years," Gentry said, chuckling. "My 16-year-old daughter thinks I'm the hippest dad."

Advertisement

Gentry's success with the Clippers this season, and the rapid development of teens turned pros such as Kobe Bryant of the Los Angeles Lakers, Tracy McGrady of the Orlando Magic and Kevin Garnett of the Minnesota Timberwolves, has established a road map for Brown to follow. The 19-year-old from Brunswick, Ga., must learn, as those players did, how to handle life's daily tasks while at the same time developing the basketball skills necessary to compete against stronger and more experienced players.

Before he ever lived away from home, rented an apartment or held a full-time job, the 6-foot-11 Brown held his first news conference -- seated next to Michael Jordan -- signed a guaranteed three-year $11.9 million contract, rode through Manhattan in a limousine, appeared on "Live with Regis and Kelly" and received a new wardrobe at no charge.

"It's tough when you're a young man going into a grown man's world," said George Glymph, the former high school coach for the Indiana Pacers' Jermaine O'Neal and an assistant coach for the Pacers. "You don't have people telling you when to wake up or bells directing you to your next class. You have to be the ultimate professional."

Advertisement

Often, young NBA players are expected to assume a level of responsibility and maturity that is beyond their age, several psychologists said.

"Society expects them to become highly venerated males in American society," said David Pargman, a professor of educational research and sports psychology at the University of Florida. "They're 18-year-olds. We deceive ourselves in treating them as men."

Added Gentry: "One thing as a coaching staff we've tried to do is to let the young players be kids, because that's what they are. But they also understood that at certain times, it is time to be serious and get the job done."

Striking that balance, however, can present problems.

For every Garnett and Bryant, there are plenty of high school phenoms who skipped college to enter the draft and were never selected, or have had to struggle before making their mark. Taj McDavid, who entered the 1996 draft with Bryant and O'Neal, was not selected. He is living in his home town of Williamston, S.C., playing pick-up basketball.

Advertisement

Ellis Richardson, a California native who applied for the '98 draft, was released last year from prison after a robbery conviction. Leon Smith, from Chicago's Martin Luther King High, the final first-round pick of the '99 draft by the Dallas Mavericks, never played in a NBA game before being released after suffering from emotional problems. At one point during Smith's short-lived NBA career, he was hospitalized after an attempted suicide. Korleone Young, a Hargrave Military Academy sensation, was chosen in the second round by Detroit in '98, but has spent the past three years playing for minor league teams.

Getting Help

Ever since 1969, when all-American sophomore Spencer Haywood left the University of Detroit to play professionally and later successfully challenged the NBA in a court case to open its doors to nonseniors, the question has been debated: Are 18-, 19- and 20-year-olds ready for the NBA? There is no simple answer.

Advertisement

But in an attempt to prevent disasters similar to Richardson, Smith and Young, the NBA has implemented programs to make the transition for high school players and other rookies more successful. During NBA rookie orientation, former pros offer advice to the novices on issues ranging from handling finances to avoiding the traps of groupies.

"There's a lot to learn," Garnett told Sports Illustrated. "It's everything from how to pass out of the double team to where to get a good breakfast on the road. Some things nobody can teach you, but it definitely helps to be with a team that knows how to help."

During his 1995 rookie campaign, Minnesota management offered Garnett the option of living with a surrogate family, and pizza outings with the University of Minnesota players. Garnett ultimately did not use the services.

Advertisement

"It's a Catch-22," Gentry said. "At what point do you start to invade their privacy? The coaching staff tried to communicate with those guys all the time from the standpoint of catching problems early and assessing how they were adjusting.

"You do have to be somewhat of a big brother so that they know the door is open so you can help them, along with the responsibility of educating them. There are consequences when you're irresponsible. I didn't want to be an enabler."

The Clippers monitored the nutritional health of their younger players, but left them largely on their own to establish support networks, as most professional teams have done. Many of those players who have had success in the league turned to their families.

"The social support provided by a wholesome family is incredible," Pargman said. "The younger kids are, they are less likely to be able to manage anxiety, or be aware that they're getting upset or frustrated and be able to cope with those experiences."

Advertisement

Miles lives with his mother and stepfather in Los Angeles. Teammate Quentin Richardson, who entered the draft after his sophomore season at DePaul, brought his older brother to live with him.

"The fact is, I don't have to worry about anything because that's my brother," Richardson said. "You have a lot of people who come at you wanting something, people from your neighborhood thinking you owe them something. It's demanding on your time. You've gotta deal with the right people."

At the same time, he has adopted Miles's family as his own. "His family is like my family," Richardson said. "I can go over to his house and talk with them about anything that's going on in my life."

McGrady, a 6-9 swingman from Mount Zion Christian Academy in Durham, N.C., who was drafted by Toronto in '97, uses the advice he receives from family and close friends to handle some of life's daily tasks, such as buying a car.

Advertisement

"The big thing was getting Tracy to realize if we go to a car lot, you always try to get the best price," said Wayne Hull, McGrady's personal trainer and a business mentor. "He always thought the price on the sticker is what you pay. Just cause you have millions doesn't give people the means to take advantage of you."

Brown has gotten the message. He plans on living in an apartment alone, but his mother, Joyce, or his minister and mentor, John Williams, will set up a home nearby. "I need to get acclimated with the city and build relationships," Brown told The Washington Post the day after the draft. "It's about relationships." Days later, he added: "I've got a lot of stuff to do off the court. In high school, it was strictly the basketball."

A Different Game

Aside from controlling off-court distractions, surviving on the court with developing skills is the challenge facing Brown and young players like him.

Advertisement

"The game of basketball as played today is largely a combination of geometry and chess," Pargman said. "It's a science. You need to be fairly intelligent to cope with the sophisticated defenses and offenses. Therefore, a guy who is 25 has more life experience and basketball. A high school kid is liable to be overwhelmed and consumed by what he has to do on the court."

To avoid overload, the Clippers simplified their game plan.

"What happens is you have to slow things down to a crawl," Gentry said. "Mental adjustments and strategic alignments aren't what you'd find with the likes of Joe Dumars or Grant Hill."

Young players often are not always prepared to meet the demands of their new jobs.

"When you're 28, you've put in eight seasons and have faced criticism of your performance and that tends to sharpen your view of your own competency," Pargman said. "These kids sometimes have aspirations, hopes and inflated perceptions of what they're capable of doing."

When O'Neal was drafted by Portland in '96, he did not expect to be a starter. But the 6-11 forward-center from Eau Claire High in Columbia, S.C., did not think he would have to toil on the bench.

"He [Jermaine] was very thankful that Portland gave him the opportunity to play in the NBA," Glymph said. "Playing in practice sessions with [Arvydas] Sabonis, [Brian] Grant and [Rasheed] Wallace, he got an education that he never could have gotten at a university. . . . Though it was very, very tough for him not to play, especially his last year" in Portland.

Other players have experienced similar growing pains. In his rookie season, McGrady would often become depressed over his lack of playing time and constant criticism from then-Raptors coach Darrell Walker about his work habits.

"They [NBA observers] were already labeling Tracy as a journeyman," Hull said. "If he had waited one more year, he wouldn't be where he is today. Once you are labeled in the NBA, it's hard to erase it. It's political. Teams don't want to take chances. . . . I think it was good for Tracy. It let him know that he needed a trainer because his body wasn't in the shape it needed to be to compete."

McGrady signed a seven-year, $93 million contract with Orlando this past season and responded by winning the league's most improved player award.

"The thing these kids have to remember is that they can't measure their success by coming into the league and playing right away," Gentry said. "The greatest example of that is Tracy McGrady. There is a physical maturation, and a mental one, that must take place."

After his first minicamp with the Wizards, Brown knows he faces a steep learning curve.

"I knew that there was going to be a period like this, where I'm down in the dumps," he said after a practice. "I'm not learning plays. I just have to work hard and get over it."

Los Angeles Clippers Coach Alvin Gentry, flanked by Darius Miles, left, and Lamar Odom, has five players under age 21. "I think, collectively, the average age of the UCLA men's team last season was older than mine," he said.The Washington Wizards' Kwame Brown is the first high school player to be top overall pick in NBA draft.