Is Drafting Kwame Brown The One Blemish On Michael Jordan's NBA Bio?

On June 27, 2001, Michael Jordan made Kwame Brown the first high school player drafted No. 1 in the NBA, Brown played 12 seasons, but never reached the stardom that Jordan predicted, Brown only played a four seasons with the Washington Wizards before becoming a journeyman.

Kwame Brown: 'LeBron Is The GOAT Because LeBron Controls Media. No NBA Player Think LeBron Is The GOAT.'

Kwame Brown recently stirred controversy with his bold claims regarding LeBron James and the GOAT debate. In a segment on his "Bust Life" YouTube channel, Brown asserted that James' status as the greatest of all time is largely a product of media manipulation orchestrated by the Lakers superstar himself.

Kwame Brown Says Lakers Traded Him After He Gave Tickets To Kobe Bryant's Mother And Father

Kwame Brown, the former NBA player, has recently revealed an unexpected reason behind his trade from the Los Angeles Lakers. Brown, who was the first overall pick in the 2001 NBA Draft, shared this information during an interview on 'VLAD TV.' "Kobe was an as*****.

Esteemed NBA Analyst Regrets Infamous Lakers Flameout Trade Rant

Appearing on Los Angeles Clippers superstar forward Paul George's podcast, "Podcast P With Paul George," this week, one NBA analyst's introduction to many sports fans should have never happened in his own words. Expressing regret for his animated reaction to the trade that brought in Pau Gasol for the Purple and Gold, ESPN personality Stephen A.

Kwame Brown Doesn’t Hold Back On ‘Stat Sheet Junkie’ LeBron James

Former NBA big man Kwame Brown is back in the news after he went off on Los Angeles Lakers superstar small forward LeBron James during a recent IG Live session.

NBA Fans Crush Kwame Brown For His Awful Take on LeBron James

Following the Lakers’ exit from the NBA playoffs, one of the biggest draft busts in league history eviscerated LeBron James on social media for his lack of killer instinct down the stretch in Los Angeles’ Game 4 loss to Denver.

Former Laker Kwame Brown Prefers His NBA Career Over LeBron James’

Legacies of professional athletes are often defined by a simple term: boom-or-bust. The careers of LeBron James and Kwame Brown have gone in complete opposite directions, but both of their careers started off the same. Both James and Brown were highly coveted high school players and decided to declare for the draft instead of going to college.

Kwame Brown Says It's Better To Be A Bust Than To Be LeBron James

Kwame Brown made a wild claim based on the scrutiny LeBron James faces about it being better to be a bust than to be the King. Kwame Brown and LeBron James have some things in common, both were picked with the No.

Kwame Brown Didn't Want To Play With Kobe Bryant, But Then The Black Mamba Changed His View Of Basketball

Kwame Brown explains how his mindset changed about Kobe Bryant after playing with him. Kobe Bryant was one of the best players to ever play in the NBA.

Kwame Brown Blasts Gilbert Arenas: "He’s What’s Wrong With Our Community"

Kwame Brown had a heated response to all the negative comments Gilbert Arenas has made about him over the years. Kwame Brown is a much-maligned figure in NBA history.

NBA Fan Points Out A ‘Washed’ Michael Jordan Managed To Lead The Wizards With Kwame Brown To A Better Record Than The Lakers With LeBron James, Anthony Davis, And Russell Westbrook

Michael Jordan had a sensational career in the NBA. He saw a lot of success throughout his career. But most of his achievements came during his time with the Chicago Bulls.

Gilbert Arenas Destroys Kwame Brown For Criticizing LeBron James: "You Are Right. Kobe Never Looked At The Stat Sheet Because He Knew Your Ass Had 0 Points."

Gilbert Arenas and Kwame Brown have engaged in a back and forth in recent weeks, exchanging jabs on social media, letting everybody know how they feel about one another.

Kwame Brown Goes Off On LeBron James For Ruining Dwight Howard: "You're Not Gonna Win Coming Off Screens Shotting Threes All Day Long."

The Los Angeles Lakers were a hot destination in free agency. Over the summer, multiple players flocked to the team to chase a title alongside LeBron James in the NBA's biggest market.

Kwame Brown Rips LeBron James For Checking Stat Sheet During Game: "Kobe Bryant Would Have Never Done That."

LeBron James is widely hailed around the association for being an exceptional leader both on and off the court. Over his 18-years in the league, Bron has always been the one to lead his teammates and set the tone for his club on both ends of the floor.

Kwame Brown Praises Ja Morant While Calling Him 'A Bust': "Some People Don’t Like That Word. But I Know What It Means."

Ja Morant is still making a lot of noise in the NBA this season. The Memphis Grizzlies young star is even getting MVP buzz thanks to his recent performances,

Kwame Brown Believes The Lakers Are Missing A Leader Like Kobe Bryant: “They’re Missing That Leadership. Everyone’s So Friendly, They’re Slapping Hands."

With the 2021-22 NBA season well underway, the Los Angeles Lakers are yet to show signs of becoming the scary team that they were touted to be prior to the season.

Former LA Bust Kwame Brown Is At It Again, This Time Criticizing Anthony Davis

"They gave up Kwame Brown!" is a quote Laker fans will always remember from Stephen A. Smith. Brown was famously dealt to the Memphis Grizzlies in return for Pau Gasol back in 2008, and the Lakers then became champion competitors and won two championships in the next three years.

Kwame Brown Says Anthony Davis Is "No Leader" After Dwight Howard Altercation

There has been a lot of scrutiny on the Los Angeles Lakers over the course of the last week, as they lost both of the games that they've played. They will face the surging Memphis Grizzlies next, and they will hope that things will turn out differently than they did the last two games.

Kwame Brown Flames Russell Westbrook For Wearing Skirt In Public

Russell Westbrook has never been shy about his fashion choices. Over the years, he has worn countless different things, and many of them can be considered bizarre and/or abnormal.

Ranking The Worst No. 1 Draft Picks In NBA History: Kwame Brown Is Not The Worst

Going No. 1 in the NBA Draft is the greatest achievement for a college player coming into the NBA. It proves that they are the best player in college and have the most chance at stardom in the NBA.

Former NBA GM confirms false narratives hurt Kwame Brown, others

Pete Babcock is a former NBA executive, who served as the general manager of the San Diego Clippers, Denver Nuggets and Atlanta Hawks. He also worked in