Born in Holland, Alfred Peet grew up in the coffee trade and moved to America after World War II. Shocked by the coffee standards of the U.S. and what the U.S. called coffee, Mr. Peet opened the first Peet’s Coffee & Tea store on April 1, 1966. His style of coffee was unlike anything Americans had ever tasted before. Mr.Peet used small batches, fresh beans, superior quality, and a dark roast which produced a coffee that was rich and complex.

Peet’s Coffee & Tea has some of the most high quality coffee and tea that I have tasted that is served in a relatively small coffee chain. Every time I walk into the store, I am greeted by the kind workers and they are quick to place my order and prepare it in a matter of mere seconds. The workers in the store all have their proper barista certification and work very quickly and cleanse their various types of equipment immediately after each drink is made.

The menu at Peet’s Coffee & Tea is full of flavorful and rich tasting drinks, and among my favorites are the Matcha Green Tea Freddo with Raspberry Syrup, the Iced Pumpkin Chai Latte, the Espresso, and the Extra Bold Café Freddo. The Pumpkin Chai Latte is like nothing I have ever tasted before it has a perfect balance of sweet and spicy truly giving thoughts about the holidays to the customer. Not forgetting the Extra Bold Café Freddo which has a rich three shots of espresso with milk and blended ice. Although a tamper is not used when producing the espresso, it is of more than acceptable quality and I can assure that every gram of coffee is pulled into each shot of espresso giving it a nice dark and rich brown color with the froth on top.

In regards to seating and parking at Peet’s Coffee & Tea, there is more than plenty on some days, but it generally depends on the weather outside because the air-conditioning inside is nice and cool on a hot day. The seating inside is perfect because pretty much every single seat has an outlet so you could plug in your laptop and other electronic items. Peet’s Coffee & Tea also provides free wifi which is very fast considering the fact that many people are connected to the same network. Also not forgetting to mention that some coffee shops charge per hour for wifi access, whereas Peet’s does not.

As far as the level of sound and ability to focus on assignments it is very minimal, and most of the time there is classical music playing which helps me focus on my homework or other errands that I work on. There are many regulars at Peet’s Coffee & Tea and most people who sit inside are quiet and keep their conversations to a minimal volume level.

The inside of the coffee shop has a warm and inviting feel with marble counter tops and wooden cabinets and storage spaces. The lighting is perfect, not too dim and not too bright. There is also a restroom and out-door seating if there is no space to sit inside. There is also a nice and large glass window which gives a view of the cars and people passing by. The straws and various coffee essentials are near all seats and at an ease of access, and include many things from coffee creamer to cinnamon, sugar, nutmeg, and various spices of the sort.

Unlike some of Peet’s Coffee & Tea’s competitors, they sell freshly ground coffee from around the world and give the customer the option to choose the number of fineness and coarseness they would like for their coffee grinds. They provide you free of charge with an airtight bag which keeps the coffee fresh until the next time it is used. Peet’s Coffee & Tea also sells various products related to coffee and also provide free samples for customers to try every once in a while. As far as snacks and things to munch on while at Peet’s Coffee & Tea, they sell various types of cookies, muffins, croissants, etc.

In conclusion, there are no negative complaints or concerns that come to mind when it comes to Peet’s Coffee & Tea because I can assure that they are providing me and various other customers with the best coffee and coffee essentials at a reasonable and affordable price. Every beverage at Peet’s Coffee & Tea is served with a smile and a satisfying smell and taste that attracts all types of people and keeps them coming back!