Elizabeth Hurley Says Lockdown Is Scuppering Her Chances Of Finding Love

Elizabeth Hurley wants to ''fall madly in love with someone'' - but her hopes have been scuppered by the coronavirus lockdown. The 54-year-old actress - who has dated the likes of actor Hugh Grant and...

By Bang Showbiz in Lifestyle / Showbiz on 13 April 2020

Elizabeth Hurley On What She Looks For In A Man

Elizabeth Hurley is attracted to men who work in a different field to her. The 50-year-old actress, who was previously married to entrepreneur Arun Nayar and has dated the likes of cricketer Shane Warne in...

By Bang Showbiz in Lifestyle / Showbiz on 19 October 2015

Elizabeth Hurley Sells Farm For £9 Million

Elizabeth Hurley has sold her farm for £9 million.'The Royals' actress bought the farm in the Cotswolds in central England for £3.3 million in 2002 while she was dating her future husband, Indian businessman Arun...

By Bang Showbiz in Lifestyle / Showbiz on 03 August 2015

Elizabeth Hurley Thanks Stepchildren For Warm Welcome

Elizabeth Hurley has thanked her fiance's children for being so ''welcoming, inclusive and charming'' towards her.The model-and-actress is set to become stepmother to Shane Warne's children, Brooke, 14, Summer, nine, and 13-year-old Jackson, and is...

By Bang Showbiz on 16 May 2012

Elizabeth Hurley's Marriage Wait

Elizabeth Hurley and Shane Warne are going to be engaged for "a while". The 'Gossip Girl' actress - who split from her first husband, textile heir Arun Nayar, last December, with their divorce completed in...

By Bang Showbiz on 17 October 2011

Hurley Still Friends With Nayar

British model/actress Elizabeth Hurley is determined to remain friends with her estranged husband Arun Nayar for the sake of her young son.The Austin Powers star split from the Indian businessman last year (10) and they...

By WENN on 13 April 2011

Elizabeth Hurley 'Gets On Well' With Arun

Elizabeth Hurley still spends "lots of time" with her estranged husband Arun Nayar.The actress-and-model - who filed for divorce from the Indian textile heir earlier this month after four years of marriage - insists their...

By Bang Showbiz on 11 April 2011

Elizabeth Hurley Gets A Parrot

Elizabeth Hurley has got a pet parrot.The model-and-actress was given the exotic bird, a Blue Fronted Amazonian, for Christmas but she only received her feathered friend this week.She has called the animal Ping Pong and...

By Bang Showbiz on 20 January 2011

Elizabeth Hurley Had No Prenup With Arun Nayar

Elizabeth Hurley didn't sign a prenuptial agreement with estranged spouse Arun Arun Nayar.The British actress-and-model - who announced on Sunday (12.12.10) she had split from the Indian textile heir "months ago" - did not put...

By Bang Showbiz on 14 December 2010

Elizabeth Hurley And Arun Nayar Announce Split Amid Warne Speculation

Elizabeth Hurley has announced her split from husband Arun Nayar amid claims she has fallen for Australian cricket star Shane Warne. The British actress announced yesterday (12.12.10) she had called time on her three-year marriage...

By Bang Showbiz on 13 December 2010

Elizabeth Hurley Falling For Shane Warne

Elizabeth Hurley is falling for Australian cricket legend Shane Warne. The British actress-and-model - who announced yesterday (12.12.10) she had split from her husband of over three years Arun Nayar "months ago" following revelations she...

By Bang Showbiz on 13 December 2010

Elizabeth Hurley To Dye Hair For Son

Elizabeth Hurley is considering dying her hair blonde to please her son.The actress' eight-year-old son Damian has been quizzing his brunette mother on why she doesn't have "yellow" hair leading her to question the shade...

By Bang Showbiz on 16 September 2010

Elizabeth Hurley Has Zac Crush

Elizabeth Hurley has a crush on Zac Efron.The 45-year-old beauty has a soft spot for the 22-year-old screen heartthrob, admitting Efron brings out the "cougar" in her - a reference to women who like younger...

By Bang Showbiz on 26 August 2010