Adverb of degree Modifying Example extremely adjective The water was extremely cold. quite adjective The movie is quite interesting. just verb He was just leaving. almost verb She has almost finished. very adverb She is running very fast. too adverb You are walking too slowly. enough adverb You are running fast enough.

Usage of "enough"

Enough can be used as both an adverb and as a determiner.

Enough as an adverb

Enough as an adverb meaning 'to the necessary degree' goes after the adjective or adverb that it is modifying, and not before it as other adverbs do. It can be used both in positive and negative sentences.

Enough is often followed by "to" + the infinitive.

Enough can also be followed by "for someone" or "for something".

Enough as a determiner

Enough as a determiner meaning 'as much/many as necessary' goes before the noun it modifies. It is used with countable nouns in the plural and with uncountable nouns.

Usage of "too"

"Too" is always an adverb, but it has two distinct meanings, each with its own usage patterns.

Too meaning "also"

Too as an adverb meaning "also" goes at the end of the phrase it modifies.

Too meaning "excessively"

Too as an adverb meaning "excessively" goes before the adjective or adverb it modifies. It can be used in both affirmative and negative sentences.

Too is often followed by "to" + the infinitive.

Too can also be followed by "for someone" or "for something".

Usage of "very"

Very goes before an adverb or adjective to make it stronger.

If we want to make a negative form of an adjective or adverb, we can add "not" to the verb, we can use an adjective or adverb of opposite meaning, or we can use "not very" with the original adjective or adverb. The meanings of the phrases are not identical. Usually the phrase using "not very" is less direct, and thus more polite, than the other phrases.

Difference in meaning between "very" and "too"

There is a big difference in meaning between "too" and "very". "Very" expresses a fact while "too" suggests there is a problem.

Other adverbs used like "very"

Some common adverbs are used in the same way as "very" to heighten the degree of adjectives and adverbs.

Expressing very strong feelings Expressing strong feelings Expressing somewhat doubtful feelings extremely, terribly, amazingly, wonderfully, insanely especially, particularly, uncommonly, unusually, remarkably, quite pretty, rather, fairly, not especially, not particularly The movie was amazingly interesting. The movie was particularly interesting. The movie was fairly interesting. She sang wonderfully well. She sang unusually well. She sang pretty well. The lecture was terribly boring. The lecture was quite boring. The lecture was rather boring.

Inversion with negative adverbs

Normally the subject goes before the verb, however, some negative adverbs can cause an inversion when placed at the beginning of the clause. The order is reversed and the verb goes before the subject. This inversion is only used in writing, not in speaking.