Back in 2019, I saw a trailer for a movie that looked bonkers. The word "bonkers" can take on a lot of different meanings, and make sense in a lot of different contexts, so I want to make sure that I'm entirely clear with this: when I say the trailer for Hobbs and Shaw (later officially titled Fast & Furious Presents: Hobbs & Shaw, for reasons I don't quite understand) looked bonkers, I meant it in a good way. I'm not someone who needs every movie to be Parasite or Tár; just as much as those character-driven dramas, I can enjoy a (wildly) dumb action movie that chooses to defy logic and make cinematic choices purely for the purpose of entertaining audiences and telling them one important thing: stop thinking.

That's what the long-running Fast series, which began way back in 2001 with The Fast and the Furious is all about. This is a series that embraces its main theme (family), its larger-than-life characters (Vin Diesel's Dom Torretto has essentially become an on-screen spy/racing/action deity), and utterly ridiculous action sequences for one goal and one goal only—to entertain audiences.

And so after I saw that Hobbs and Shaw trailer, I decided to go on a journey. I decided to watch every single movie in the Fast series, which at the time had been running for nearly two decades. That encompassed my entire summer of 2019, and I've been aboard with the franchise ever since. All in all, I've spent 1,376 minutes—or 22 hours and 56 minutes—of my life watching every Fast and Furious movie ever made. Every frame. The entire series. All of it.

After watching the most recent entry in the series—the truly absurd Fast X, following up on the space venturing of F9: The Fast Saga—it was time to take everything I had experienced, and put it into a new order. Like just about everything else, if there's one thing we love to do with movies and shows when we've seen them all, it's rank them. And so here I am, doing it again. After all, this series—which has now been going strong for 22 years(!)—started as a low-stakes street racing/petty crime movie, and now is about flesh-eating viruses, venturing into outer space and literal nuclear bombs. Obviously, we needed some reflection.

Sure, not all of these movies are good. Yes, sometimes the acting might leave... a bit to be desired. But the set pieces? The action? There's something to this series that just sticks, and it's not a surprise that each movie makes approximately a bazillion dollars in its sleep. Each Fast and Furious movie is immensely watchable in its own way—but some are also clearly better than others.

So, without further ado, after the release of Fast X (now ), I give you the complete ranking of every movie in the world-acclaimed Fast and Furious franchise.