If you’re new to the franchise and looking to entrench yourself in the family, it’s a good idea to make sure you’re watching the films in the best order.

While you might be tempted to watch the movies in the order they were released, there’s some timeline trickery, with later films taking place prior to earlier films.

So, ahead of Fast X: Part 2 – the final instalment in the series, which is expected to land in 2025 – read on for everything you need to know about how watch the franchise in order.

How to watch the Fast and Furious movies: chronological timeline order

Although most of the Fast films follow on from each other, there is one standout exception: you guessed it, The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift.

Although it was the third Fast film to be released in cinemas, Tokyo Drift is actually set between Fast & Furious 6 and Furious 7. Swerving away from the story of Brian and Dom, the film follows a completely new set of characters led by Sean Boswell (Lucas Black), a student forced to move to Japan to avoid jail time.

Here are the movies in chronological order:

The Fast and the Furious (2001)

2 Fast 2 Furious (2003)

Fast & Furious (2009)

Fast Five (2011)

Fast & Furious 6 (2013)

The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift (2006)

Furious 7 (2015)

The Fate of the Furious (2017)

Fast & Furious Presents: Hobbs & Shaw (2019)

F9 (2021)

Fast X (2023)

Tokyo Drift also marks the first appearance of Han Lue, a fan favourite who (SPOILER ALERT) appeared to be killed in a chase near the end of the film.

Fortunately, Universal decided Han was so popular he would be resurrected with a clever workaround: all subsequent Fast films would be set before Toyko Drift.

This meant Han was able to return alive and well in Fast & Furious, the next film in the franchise.

Fast and Furious timeline

Just to make things even more complicated, the Fast and Furious franchise also features several high-speed prequels, sequels and midquels. Most of these shorts were created for DVD releases of the original movies, shining light on unknown areas of the high-speed saga’s timeline.

First released on the DVD of 2 Fast 2 Furious (the next film on this list), the short film Turbo-Charged Prelude shows exactly how Brian (Paul Walker) went from being an LAPD cop to criminal. The reason is the one you’d expect: after assisting Dom Toretto (Vin Diesel) evade law enforcement, Brian himself becomes a wanted man.

Los Bandoleros, the next short film, focuses on Dom and was served up to fans via a DVD bonus feature. No, it doesn’t explain how Brian became a fully-fledged FBI agent by the next film but does introduce audiences to Han (Sung Kang), Rico (Don Omar) and Tego (Tego Calderon). Including all of these mini-movies, the Fast and Furious timeline looks like this:

The Fast and the Furious

Turbo-Charged Prelude

2 Fast 2 Furious

Los Bandoleros

Fast & Furious

Fast Five

Fast & Furious 6

The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift

Furious 7

The Fate of the Furious

Fast & Furious Presents: Hobbs & Shaw

F9

Fast X

How to watch the Fast and Furious movies: release order

If you’re new to the Fast and Furious, sticking to the simplest route may be the best. After all, most of the movies follow a chronological order, with only really the third instalment in the franchise, The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift (2006), causing some confusing pile-ups in the timeline as discussed.

Here's how you watch Fast & Furious movies in order of release:

The Fast and the Furious (2001)

2 Fast 2 Furious (2003)

The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift (2006)

Fast & Furious (2009)

Fast Five (2011)

Fast & Furious 6 (2013)

Furious 7 (2015)

The Fate of the Furious (2017)

Fast & Furious Presents: Hobbs & Shaw (2019)

F9 (2021)

Fast X (2023)

For all of the details on the released films and how to watch them, see below.

1. The Fast and the Furious (2001)

Starring: Paul Walker, Vin Diesel, Michelle Rodriguez, Jordana Brewster, Rick Yune, Chad Lindberg, Johnny Strong, Ted Levine.

The first episode in the saga, The Fast and the Furious (2001), follows undercover cop Brian O'Conner (Paul Walker), who integrates himself into a heist crew run by Dominic Toretto (Vin Diesel).

Where to watch: Amazon

2. 2 Fast 2 Furious (2003)

Starring: Paul Walker, Tyrese Gibson, Eva Mendes, Cole Hauser, Chris "Ludacris" Bridges, James Remar.

2 Fast 2 Furious doesn't feature Vin Diesel, but it does star Walker and follows on from the events of The Fast and the Furious. This one introduces Ludacris as Tej and Tyrese Gibson as Roman, who went on to become two main characters.

Where to watch: Amazon

3. The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift (2006)

Starring: Lucas Black, Bow Wow, Nathalie Kelley, Sung Kang, Brian Tee.

This is where things take a turn. This one was seen as a 'reboot' of sorts for the whole franchise. There was no Paul Walker or Diesel (outside of a minor cameo)... or Ludacris, or Michelle Rodriguez, or Gibson. Basically no core characters here. The movie was set in Japan and featured Han (Sung Kang). Luckily, fans took to Han, but the movie did confuse the timeline somewhat.

Where to watch: Amazon

4. Fast & Furious (2009)

Starring: Vin Diesel, Paul Walker, Michelle Rodriguez, Jordana Brewster, John Ortiz, Gal Gadot, Laz Alonso.

Not to be confused with the first film in the franchise (these titles are confusing!) this one comes fourth. Set after 2 Fast 2 Furious, we ignore The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift for now.

Where to watch: Amazon

5. Fast Five (2011)

Starring: Vin Diesel, Paul Walker, Jordana Brewster, Tyrese Gibson, Chris “Ludacris” Bridges, Sung Kang, Tego Calderon, Don Omar, Gal Gadot, with Dwayne Johnson, and Matt Schulze.

The Rock first appears in Fast Five as Luke Hobbs, and we finally see Ludacris and Tyrese return to the franchise. Sung Kang also appears as Han – and Gal Gadot pops up too. The movies start ramping up and steering into the ridiculousness here.

Where to watch: Amazon

6. Fast & Furious 6 (2013)

Starring: Vin Diesel, Paul Walker, Dwayne Johnson, Michelle Rodriguez, Jordana Brewster, Tyrese Gibson, Chris "Ludacris" Bridges, Sung Kang, Gal Gadot, Luke Evans, Gina Carano, John Ortiz.

We have a new villain introduced, or a whole villain family with Luke Evans starring as Owen Shaw. We also have a post-credits scene to introduce Jason Statham's character Deckard Shaw, who appears to kill Han in a scene first glimpsed in Tokyo Drift. Now we've caught up – phew.

Where to watch: Amazon

7. Furious 7 (2015)

Starring: Vin Diesel, Paul Walker, Dwayne Johnson, Michelle Rodriguez, Tyrese Gibson, Chris “Ludacris” Bridges, Jordana Brewster, Djimon Hounsou, with Kurt Russell, and Jason Statham.

The team reunite for this one that sees us say goodbye to Paul Walker. Statham is back after that credits scene for his first proper starring role in the FF franchise which saw him clash with Diesel and The Rock.

Where to watch: Amazon

8. The Fate of the Furious (2017)

Starring: Vin Diesel, Dwayne Johnson, Jason Statham, Michelle Rodriguez, Tyrese Gibson, Chris "Ludacris" Bridges, Scott Eastwood, Nathalie Emmanuel, Elsa Pataky, with Kurt Russell, and Charlize Theron.

We carry on the franchise with this eighth movie. We say hello to Charlize Theron here as villain Cipher. This marks the first instalment without Paul Walker's Brian and also introduces us to a new member of Dom's clan.

Where to watch: Amazon

9. Fast and Furious Presents: Hobbs and Shaw (2019)

Starring: Dwayne Johnson, Jason Statham, Idris Elba, Vanessa Kirby, Cliff Curtis, and Helen Mirren.

A little detour here, as it's not really part of the core franchise, but a spin-off. The Rock and Statham return to team up against Idris Elba's super-soldier. Shaw transitions from villain to hero. Vanessa Kirby also stars as Statham's sister Hattie, while Helen Mirren reprises her role as their mother following a cameo in the eighth Fast and Furious film.

Where to watch: Amazon

10. F9 (2021)

Starring: Vin Diesel, Michelle Rodriguez, Tyrese Gibson, Chris "Ludacris" Bridges, John Cena, Nathalie Emmanuel, Jordana Brewster, Sung Kang, with Helen Mirren, with Kurt Russell, and Charlize Theron.

In the most recent instalment of The Fast Saga, Dominic and Letty find their retirement interrupted as a dangerous new threat emerges: Dom's younger brother, Jakob Toretto, played by John Cena.

Dwayne Johnson is absent from this film, but we do get the return of Charlize Theron as Cipher and Helen Mirren as Queenie Shaw.

Where to watch: Amazon

11. Fast X

Starring: Vin Diesel, Michelle Rodriguez, Tyrese Gibson, Chris "Ludacris" Bridges, Jordana Brewster, Nathalie Emmanuel, Sung Kang, Jason Statham, Scott Eastwood, Michael Rooker, Charlize Theron, Cardi B, Jason Momoa, Daniela Melchior, Brie Larson, Alan Ritchson, and Rita Moreno.

The tenth and penultimate film in the main Fast and Furious series released in 2023.

The film saw Jason Statham return to the main franchise as Deckard Shaw, whilst also introducing new stars to the series in the form of Jason Momoa as a villain and Oscar winners Brie Larson and Rita Moreno.

Charlize Theron also returned as the recurring antagonist and hacker Cipher.

Where to watch: Amazon

Where to watch the Fast and Furious movies

According to JustWatch, most of the Fast and Furious franchise can be viewed on streaming service NOW with a cinema pass (£11.99 a month).

None of the franchise is available on Netflix.

As for Amazon Prime Video, all of these are available to find on the platform, with prices starting from £3.49.

The director's cut of Fast and Furious 9 is also available on the service.

The Fast and Furious films are available to buy/rent on Amazon Prime Video.