Trekking in Nepal is all about trekking amidst the biggest mountain ranges and on this trek, you will see mountains surrounding you. All along the way, you can feel the sense of legacy left behind by the greatest mountaineers. Crossing the route beyond Namche Bazaar, you will come across, Tenzing Norgay Stupa, a tribute to the great mountaineer, who was the first to scale Mt. Everest along with fellow mountaineer Edmund Hillary. Also, just near Dughla on Everest highway, there are memorials for distinguished mountaineers who dedicated their lives on the slopes.

ReachingEverest Base Camp means trekking through the traditional Sherpa villages, with warm and friendly villagers, hidden Gompas, picturesque mountain views, and exceptional natural beauty. Those who take part in such a trek will never forget the amazing experience.

About The Trek

Your journey will start at Kathmandu from where you will take a short flight to Lukla. The iconic trek starts at Lukla in the southern part and the trail weaves towards Namche Bazaar in the north. We will stay a day here, acclimatizing to the higher altitudes. It then diverges in the northeast direction towards Pheriche and Dingboche. Once we reach Dingboche, we will spend a day at Dingboche as a rest day. From Dingboche, the route continues to Lobuche. Everest Base Camp is a little further east from here and the Kala Patthar viewpoint can be seen towards the west.

There are other variations to the trek route as well, where the trek bifurcates towards Gyoko Ri early on at Namche Bazaar. The route then follows the left side to arrive at the Base Camp. Sometimes people also prefer trekking from Jiri village instead of Lukla, Jiri is a short bus ride away from Kathmandu. However, trekking from Jiri adds a couple of days to the trek as Jiri is considerably further away from Lukla. The EBC trek follows a gradual ascent up to the base camp, following which there is a steep descent. The entire journey lasts for 13 days and in between, we also have acclimatization days as well.

What Can You Expect At The Trek

It is a difficult grade trek. Trekking to the Everest Base Camp requires exceptionally high physical fitness and while the trek is not dangerous, you need to prepare well for it. A variety of factors add to the difficulty of the trek like the terrain, the duration of the trek, the distance covered every day, and the number of days spent at high altitude and a difficult exit in case of emergencies. While all trek is not especially tricky but it is surely an endurance test.

It is a high altitude trek and as such chances of AMS are quite high but with adequate hydration, proper rest, and a well-planned itinerary taking into consideration the acclimatization criteria will help counter such issues. Our trek leaders are mountaineering-certified individuals with a keen understanding of AMS and other high-altitude issues. They can detect the signs of AMS early on and adopt necessary measures for the prevention of the same. Our Trek Leaders are also all Wilderness First Aid Responders, who are diligent in handling emergencies.

The trek from Lukla to Everest Base Camp is 50 km and it takes 13 days to complete the trek starting from Kathmandu. To mitigate the risks of being at a higher altitude for such a long time, we have incorporated acclimatization and rest days in the itinerary. Mt. Everest can be spotted multiple times on the trek even in the initial part of the trial.

In cold conditions, batteries drain pretty quickly be it phones, cameras, or Kindles. Make sure to bring spare batteries with you. Some teahouses allow you to charge your phone and other electronics but they will charge you for it.

Be prepared for extreme weather conditions as the weather at high altitudes is unpredictable. Layer properly to regulate your body temperature and stay comfortable while trekking. When its sunny, the weather can get quite warm and you may even have to discard a couple of layers in the first few days of trekking, however, the temperature at night drops pretty quickly. Make sure to drink a lot of water to stay hydrated and avoid altitude sickness. Also, remember that sunburn happens much quicker at higher altitudes so always wear sunscreen and keep your sunglasses ready.

Accommodations at Everest Base Camp will be in teahouses in Sherpa villages or mountain lodges. Also, keep enough cash with you as there are no ATMs in Lukla. Also, if you want to do some last-minute shopping for trekking gear and equipment, Kathmandu is a good place to do so.

Phakding To Namche Bazaar | A Major Trading Hub In Khumbu

Altitude: 3,450 m/ 11,300 ft

Trek Distance: 10 km | 7 hrs.

Altitude Gain: 850 m/ 2,800 ft.

Moderate level of climb and steep climb before Namche Bazaar.

Namche Bazaar is the capital of the Khumbu region.

You will get the first views of Mt. Everest today.

You will spot Kongderei and Thamserku Peak.

Monjo village is the mid-point of the trek.

A Swiss suspension bridge on the Dudhkosi River. It is one of the major attractions.

Dudhkosi River is considered the lifeline of the Khumbu Region.

Today you will enter the Sagarmatha National Park (a UNESCO World Heritage Site).

Post breakfast, we will start our trek toward Namche Bazaar. The route today is surrounded by green mountains and will take you through suspension bridges over the Dudh Koshi and Bhote Koshi rivers. Before entering the Sagarmatha National Park, you will have to obtain permits and then the trail follows a steep ascent before arriving at Namche Bazaar. Namche Bazaar is an important trading hub of the Khumbu region.

We will start our trek early in the morning from Phakding and soon you will cross a suspension bridge over the Dudh Koshi River, the walk from here is easy and pleasant with short uphill and downhill climbs. You will cross another suspension bridge over the Bhote-Koshi River. It is a busy area and you may notice a multitude of trekkers and porters here. After a 20-minute climb from this area, you will arrive at Monjo. Monjo is a pit stop for many trekkers and many people also camp here. At Monjo, you will see interesting watermills that are used to grind barley, a staple diet of the Sherpas. Monjo is situated right below the majestic Thermasarkhu peak (6,608 m) and quite close to this village is the entrance to the Sagarmatha National Park.

Treading along the Dudh Koshi River, you will arrive at the Sagarmatha National Park. At this point, your trekking permit will be checked and the officials will keep a record of all the trekkers going ahead. Sagarmatha is a UNESCO World Heritage Site that showcases stunning mountain views and rich biodiversity. Here, you may spot rare Himalayan species like snow leopards and the lesser panda. The presence of Sherpa settlements with their unique culture makes the trek even more interesting. A gradual walk from Sagarmatha National Park will lead you to Namche Bazaar. From Namche Bazaar, you will catch the first glimpses of Mt. Everest. Namche Bazaar is a historic trading center of the Khumbu area and you can stock up on essentials from this point. At night we will stay here at a guesthouse.

Acclimatization Day | Explore Namche Bazaar

Wake up to the beautiful views of the highest Himalayan peaks and enjoy a delicious breakfast. Today we will stay in Namche Bazaar allowing our bodies to acclimatize to high altitudes. You can spend the day exploring the surroundings and enjoy the culture and hospitality of Nepal. Namche Bazaar is a commercial hub so you can do any last-minute trek shopping from here. The market has a vibrant atmosphere and there are a couple of restaurants and coffee shops as well.

You can do a short hike to Sagarmatha National Park headquarters. From here, you can get a good view of Ama Dablam, Mt. Everest, and other Khumbu peaks. Sherpa Cultural Museum is close by and lies just above Namche Bazaar. The museum gives you a fair amount of details about the history of the Himalayas, the geographic and cultural aspects, mountaineering history, and information about the various flora and fauna in the region. You will see many pictures of Tenzing Norgay and Edmund Hillary from their climb and maps detailing their trails as well. In the evening, take acclimatization walks around the market, preparing your body for higher altitudes. Soak in the Nepalese Buddhist culture, food, and traditions. Namche Bazaar gained popularity during the time when Tibetan salt was traded for grains from Nepal\\s lowlands. Nowadays, you can see a roaring trade of rugs, clothing, dried meat, and salt in the village center. There are many shops that also offer locally made handicraft items, you can buy them as souvenirs or gifts for your friends and families. You will stay the night at a guesthouse in Namche Bazaar.

Namche Bazaar To Tengboche | Visit The Largest Buddhist Monastery Of Khumbu

Altitude: 3,850 m/ 12,650 ft.

Altitude Gain: 400 m/ 1,350 ft.

Trek Distance: 8 km | 5 - 6 hrs.

Mixed ascent till Phunki Tenga.

Steep ascent after Phunki Tenga to Tengboche.

Tengboche has the biggest monastery in the area.

You can attend a prayer ceremony held by the monks to invoke protection on your expedition.

Cross another high bridge at the village of Phunki Tenga.

Start your day with a delicious breakfast and get ready for your trek to Tengboche from Namche Bazaar. It’s an 8 km long trail and is a fairly easy trek accompanied by the views of the majestic Himalayas. You will also spot Himalayan Wildlife on the way as well.

Tengboche is a small alpine valley that is situated at an altitude of 3860 m and the trek starts with an easy walk. The trek from Namche Bazaar to Tengboche is extremely beautiful and along your trek, you will get a bird’s eye view of Dudh Koshi River down below and the epic mountain views as Thamserku (6,608 m), Kantega (6,782 m), Ama Dablam (6,812 m), Lhotse (8,516 m) and Everest (8,849 m) comes into view.

A 20-minute walk from Namche Bazaar will take you to the top of Namche Bazaar. From here the trek descends to Khumjung, a Sherpa village and then climbs up the sides of the mountains through some stairs and then diverges from the Everest Highway at Sanasa. You will be able to catch glimpses of Lhotse, Nuptse, and Mt. Everest from here. This is probably the best view of Mt. Everest you will get until you reach Gorakshep when climbing to Kala Patthar. Two hours of pleasant walking will bring you to Sanasa. Up to Sanasa, it is a walk-through forest covered with Oak and Rhododendrons. It is a great location for bird watching and you may spot the Danphe Pheasant, the national bird of Nepal. Musk-deer and Himalayan Tahr, a Himalayan goat that looks like an antelope are commonly spotted in these areas. You will also spot the Tengboche monastery from here which you will reach in the later part of your trek.

Next, following a gradual descent, you will reach the Imajtse River at Phungitenga at an altitude of 3,250 meters. Phunki Tenga is a small Himalayan settlement with teahouses and army posts. The climb down can be a little tougher as the terrain is rocky and uneven. You will reach a suspension bridge over the river and after you make the crossing, you will need to get permits at a checkpoint to proceed further in your trek. From here it is a strenuous climb of about an hour that will take you to a Buddhist monastery just before Tengboche and finally to Tengboche village. This is the last part of today’s trek and you can expect the trail to be rocky with a couple of switchbacks. Don’t push yourself too hard, take it slow and steady as you make your trek uphill.

Tengboche Monastery, locally known as Dawa Choling Gompa is the largest monastery in the Khumbu region. It overlooks the beautiful region and the mountain landscapes around it. There are daily prayers that occur around 7:00 am and once around 3:30 pm. You can take part in the prayers if you truly want a cultural experience. It is one of the important cultural aspects of the EBC Trek. Enjoy the serenity at this revered place of worship and night your stay will be in the guesthouses at Tengboche.

Tengboche To Dingboche | Stunning Views Of Ama Dablam

Altitude: 4,350 m/ 14,250 ft.

Altitude Gain: 500 m/ 1,600 ft.

Trek Distance: 9 km | 6-7 hrs.

Gradual descent and a little bit of ascent after Lobuche River to Dingboche.

The trail passes through lush forests of birch, conifer, and Rhododendron trees.

The route offers amazing views of Ama Dablam standing over you.

The trail crosses the Imja River to reach Pangboche.

Continue along the Imja Valley and Lobuche River before ascending to Dingboche.

Today, we will begin our trek towards Dingboche. From Tengboche, cross bridges and rivers accompanied by beautiful mountain views to Dingboche. Stone steps will lead you through forests of Rhododendrons, conifers, and birches, and at the bottom of the forest lies the Deboche village. From here, the trail rises and enters into the alpine meadows and Dingboche. Dingboche is the only place in the entire Khumbu region where barley is grown. The views of the Himalayas are amazing from Dingboche. Start your trek from Tengboche and walk towards Pangboche Village, you will get to see some beautiful views of Mt. Ama Dablam and from Pangboche we will trek towards Pheriche and to Imja Valley. The beautiful Lobuche River passes through Imja Valley and from here a steep hike will take you to Dingboche. The trek takes about 6 to 7 hrs and for the most part, the difficulty is moderate.

At the beginning of the trail, you will first descend into a forest trail passing the small settlement of Deboche. As you trek from Tengboche to Dingboche, the scenery changes as you gain altitude, greenery slowly giving way to barren landscapes, and the trails gradually becoming more rugged and it will also start getting cold and windy. In the initial part of the trek, you will pass by a wall with stone inscriptions and a small stream will keep you company along the trail. You will have to cross the stream to the left-hand side of the valley. The majestic Ama Dablam dominates the skyline ahead of you. About two hours into the trek, you will arrive at Pangboche, a mountain village, where you get beautiful views of Mt. Everest. From Pangboche, you will hike upwards towards the valley, and throughout the trek, you will slowly gain elevation. Although the trek is mostly uphill, the slope is relatively easy without extremely steep inclines. Ama Dablam continues to stay in view, however, you will only get to see a tiny sliver of the top of Mt. Everest. Lhotse and Nuptse become quite prominent now.

Soon you will arrive at the village of Shomare, your last village before Dingboche. Ama Dablam remains in view but now you will get to see a different angle of the mountain from what you have seen before. The trail continues winding to the valley side and you will cross another river before entering Dingboche village. Dingboche is a lovely Himalayan hamlet and you will see agricultural fields protected by stone walls. Once at the village, we will check into a guesthouse and we will stay the night in the guesthouse.

Dingboche To Lobuche | Pay Your Respects In Everest Memorial

Altitude: 4,950 m/ 16,200 ft.

Trek Distance: 7 km | Duration: 6 hrs.

Altitude Gain: 600 m/ 1,950 ft.

Tricky climb on moraine and rocky terrain.

You can visit the memorial shrine.

The top of the ridge is filled with prayer flags and stones which are memorial shrines for climbers who lost their lives on Mt. Everest.

As you cross Khumbu Glacier, you will see Mt. Nuptse (7,861 m).

Today’s walk will take you from Dingboche to Lobuche through alpine pastures and in the summertime, you can see Yaks grazing in these pastures. You will trek towards the end of the moraine of the Khumbu Glacier offering spectacular views of Mt. Nuptse. At the moraine, you will see stone monuments, these are dedicated to six Sherpas who died in an avalanche along with monuments dedicated to other mountaineers. From here, it’s a steep climb towards Lobuche where you will get a magnificent view of Mt. Nuptse and the sunset over this mountain peak is even more spectacular. From Dingboche, you will have to ascend a small ridge behind the village, towards the north you can see Lobuche Peak (6119 m) and the snowfields of Cho La. Later you will cross Khumbu Khola, the huge glacier moraines of the Khumbu Glacier flowing from Everest. Crossing the memorial cairns, and following the valley stream, you will arrive at Lobuche in the early afternoon. The 6 hrs trek covers 7 km and brings us much closer to the Everest Base Camp.

Start the hike from Dingboche along the inclined path running alongside the mountain’s wall and go further into the valley. As you make your turn along the path and inside the valley, you arrive at the village of Pheriche, we will be staying here on our way back from the base camp. For the next 2 to 2.5 hrs, you will follow into the valley, while the incline is not very difficult but you are at a high altitude, so take it slow and steady and avoid using too much energy too quickly. A river lies in front of you and crossing the river, you will arrive at the village of Thukla. This is a great spot to rest for a couple of minutes, refuel yourself and continue on the trek.

The next part is going to be the toughest part of the trek today as you climb to Lobuche. The climb takes you along a zig-zag path all the way to the Thukla Pass and it becomes steeper and steeper as you climb until you reach the edge of the Khumbu Glacier and the Everest Memorial. The oxygen gets less and less from here and the temperature also starts to get lower. The remaining part of the trek follows the left side of the glacier as you reach the village of Lobuche and you will also gain a little elevation from the glacier as you arrive at Lobuche. In front of you, you get to see a beautiful view of Nuptse in front of you. Lobuche is a small Himalayan village with only a handful of teahouses. We will stay the night here before we head out to the last village on the trek tomorrow.

Lobuche To Gorkhashep | Excursion To Everest Base Camp

Altitude: Gorakshep - 5,150 m/ 16,900 ft | Everest Base camp - 5,350 m/ 17,700 ft.

Altitude Gain: 200 m/ 800 ft.

Lobuche To Gorakshep : 6 km | 3-4 hrs.

Gorakshep To EBC : 3 km away each | 3hrs.

It’s Everest Base Camp Day Today.

Good steep climb to Gorakshep.

It takes about 3 to 4 hrs to reach Gorakshep.

Lunch is at Gorak Shep.

A steeper climb to Everest Base Camp.

The trek to Everest Base Camp is not very difficult.

Trekker's stop point is just below the actual base camp.

Most tour groups are not allowed to enter or stay in EBC.

Make sure you carry your day pack since you will need water.

You can enjoy amazing views of Nuptse, Khumbutse, and Pumori mountains from the base camp.

Overnight stay in Gorakshep.

Note: Drinking water in Gorakshep is chargeable. We don’t include drinking water on the trek which you can buy from a number of places between $1 to $3 a bottle (it gets more expensive towards the base camp). The better alternative is to buy water tablets in Kathmandu/Pokhara for around $2 and treat the water.

Today is the most exciting day of the trek as you make an excursion to the Everest Base Camp. An adventurous journey and a great trekking experience await you. Waking up early, have your breakfast, and gear yourself up. We will follow the trail from Lobuche through narrow gaps in the mountains and glacial moraines along the Khumbu glacier to Gorak Shep, the last village on the trek. Post lunch in Gorak Shep, we begin our trek to the Everest Base Camp, the ultimate adventure of this entire journey. We follow the lead of Sherpas as the trail changes every season as the glaciers move. It takes about 7 hrs of walking to reach Everest Base Camp. Spend some time at the base camp, celebrate your victory, capture some stills, and descend back to Gorakshep. Overnight stay will be at Gorakshep.

The trek today can be broken down into two parts, the first part is the trek from Lobuche to Gorakshep and the second part is an excursion to EBC and back to Gorakshep. After breakfast at Lobuche campsite, we begin our trek towards Gorakshep. It is a 6 km hike that takes about 4 hrs. Walking along the sandy and rocky parts, you will gradually gain elevation as you walk alongside the Khumbu Glacier. Mt. Nuptse looms on the horizon in front of you. Some sections of the trail are a little steeper than others. On the way, you will pass Sherpa flag monuments indicating that you are getting closer to the Everest Base Camp.

The last section of the trail directs into a glacier before you reach Gorak Shep. the terrain is rocky and uneven with inclines and declines. Be cautious and watch your step in this part and always pay heed to the trek leader's advice to complete the patch safely. You can see a sliver of the top of Mt. Everest from here, right behind Nuptse. Soon the village of Gorak Shep comes into view guarded by Kala Patthar and Pumori in the back. Make your way into the guest house have some lunch, reenergize yourself and get ready for the next part of the trek.

From Gorak Shep, you will walk right along the Khumbu Glacier, the Everest Range lies right behind it. It is a vast glacier and as you continue walking along the side of the glacier, you will constantly gain elevation until you reach the base camp. The incline is not very steep and is slightly moderate. A technical terrain lays ahead of you with a mixture of sand and rocks and it can get pretty slippery at some points as well. As long as you watch your steps, you will be good. Continue on and you will reach a point where the Khumbu icefall comes into better view as it winds down from the mountain to the valley. More Sherpa prayer flags mark the way to the base camp. In the final stretch of the trail, you will see numerous prayer flags flowing in the wind and the popular Everest Base Camp Rock. You have made it to the Base Camp, congratulations! While this is not the actual base camp, it is a trekker’s base camp. Most tour groups are not allowed to enter or stay in EBC. Once you have had enough time to enjoy the area around EBC, it is time to head back to Gorakshep. Follow the rocky trail back to Gorak Shep. We will stay the night in Gorak Shep.

Hike To Kalapatthar And Retreat Trek To Pangboche | Enjoy Arresting Views Of Mt. Everest

Altitude: Kalapatthar - 5,550 m/ 18,200 ft | Pangboche - 4,000 m/ 13,100 ft.

Gorakshep To Kalapatthar: 2 km each way | 3 - 4 hrs.

Gorakshep To Pangboche: 18 km | 6-7 hrs.

Altitude Loss: 1,150 m/ 3,800 ft

Steep climb to Kalapatthar (difficult).

Gradual descent to Pangboche.

Start early in the morning to avoid early morning clouds.

Kala Patthar is the rocky hilltop below Pumori.

Views from the summit: Everest, South Col, Lhotse, Makalu, Khumbu Glacier & icefall, Pumori & Everest Base Camp.

Breakfast at Gorakshep after the Kalapatthar hike.

After your trek to EBC and back to Gorakshep, you are now ready to climb Kala Patthar. Gorakshep is also a good place to roam around, it has a couple of teahouses and it also used to be the base camp for climbing Mt. Everest in the 1950s. The trek starts with an easy walk from Gorakshep and you will be walking on sandy fields. After this, there is a steep climb of 45 minutes. After the strenuous climb, you will come to level fields and the walk is easy and gradual. You will have the comfort of walking for the next one hour, post which there is another steep climb to Kalapatthar for about half an hour. Mt. Everest from this point looks closer than you can imagine. From here, you will trek down to Pangboche.

Start your day early and leave your stuff at Gorakshep, only carry a daypack with the essentials as you will return to Gorakshep. As you cross the sandy trail and begin ascending, you will notice the Gorakshep village and Khumbu Glacier behind you including Ama Dablam. The top of Mt. Everest begins to peek out above the surrounding mountain ranges. The more you gain altitude the more Mt. Everest will come into view. The best part of today’s trek is that all along the trek you can enjoy the landscape of the surroundings and not just on the summit. The higher you get, the rockier and trickier the trail gets. Be mindful and watch your steps. The last patch is especially rocky.

The summit is a little difficult to navigate as well. You will know you are near the summit when the Sherpa prayer flags and weather reading device come into view. Take your time and dont rush to the summit to avoid any accidents. Once you reach the summit, you will get to see the breathtaking views of the entire Sagarmatha National Park but the main attraction is of course Mt. Everest itself. You will get the best view of Mt. Everest from here. Below Everest lies the Khumbu icefall that feeds into the Khumbu Glacier and to the right is the face of Mt. Nuptse. On the opposite side of the lake, you will see even more glaciers, lakes, and mountains, as far as your eyes can see. After spending some time at the top, descend the same path that you came in. When you are back in Gorakshep have a nice meal and refuel yourself as we will descend to Pangboche.

On the trek down, the first village will be Lobuche and throughout the trek, you will again be alongside the Khumbu Glacier. You have already completed this section while ascending up so you now have an idea of what to expect. The trek is a little tricky till Sagarmatha National Park sprawls out in front of you and the rest of the part is manageable. You can have some snacks at Lobuche before heading down to Pangboche.

As you descend, you will come to the intersection where one path diverges towards Dzonghla village, Cho la pass, and Gyoko Ri, and the one on the left heads towards Pangboche. Stay on the left side of the trail and you will come across another difficult patch of the trek. You will head down from the moraine wall of the Khumbu Glacier and descend to the Thukla Pass. Crossing the Everest Memorial, begin a tricky hike down to the river below and soon you will arrive at Pangboche.

Pheriche lies just below Dingboche so after crossing Thukla, you can take the lower path towards Pheriche instead of taking the higher path towards Dingboche. Once we arrive at Pangboche, you will check into a teahouse, have your dinner, and rest for the night before heading down to Namche Bazaar the next day.

Namche Bazaar To Phakding To Lukla | Last Day Of Trekking

Altitude: Phakding - 2,600 m/ 8,500 ft, Lukla - 2,850 m/ 9,350 ft.

Altitude Loss: 600 m/ 1,950 ft.

Trek Distance: 19 km | 7 - 8 hrs.

Moderate, continuous descent till Phkading and gradual ascent to Lukla.

Start your trek early in the morning as it is a long day trek.

Stop at Phakding for lunch.

Stay in Lukla.

Waking up to the lovely weather at Namche Bazaar, you can visit the place and roam around a little bit. You can explore the market and buy souvenirs from your trip to the Everest Base Camp and buy gifts for your friends and family. There are several local handicraft stores in Namche Bazaar as it is the biggest trade hub in the Khumbu region. You can also take a small walk-in around the Sagarmatha National Park and enjoy the local cuisine as well. Post which treks down to Phakding, it is an easy trek down to the village. The beauty of the distant mountains with several waterfalls adds to the beauty of your journey. This is the beauty of Nepal trekking, there will be a few uphill climbs but you will manage it very easily. The lush green beauty and forests will take your pain away. After this easy walk, you will reach Lukla. This will be your last day with the Sherpas and other crew members, so you would like to enjoy the day with a delicious dinner and a few drinks.

Right at the beginning of the trek, you will begin to lose elevation, after about 45 minutes of walking, you will arrive at a rest stop, the same that you came in on when ascending towards the basecamp. This is where you will get the last glimpses of Mt. Everest. After this point, there are no mountain views anymore only little peeks from behind the forest covers. You will cross a few suspension bridges and continue alongside the river as the initial steep decline eases into a more moderate decline. While most of the trek is downhill, there are a few uphill climbs as well. Pass by Sherpa stones into the village of Phakding. You are more than halfway to Lukla by now. We will stop at Phakding for lunch before descending further down the valley with river views, mountain ridges, and suspension bridges. You will also have several stair sections and an incline path all the way through. Passing by a few more villages, you will arrive at Lukla, your final stop for the day.