Himalayan Five Peaks Climbing includes the following peaks:

Peak 1 - Gokyo RI (5,330m)

Gokyo Ri/Gokyo Peak (5,360m) is a peak in the Khumbu region of Nepal’s Himalaya. It is located on the west side of the Ngozumpa glacier, which is the largest glacier of Nepal and known to be the largest in the whole Himalaya. Generally, it takes about 3 to 4 hours to climb and to descend down to Gokyo Ri. If we climb early in the morning, we can able to return Gokyo to have breakfast. Gokyo and lake is a hamlet of 4,750 m, at the base of Gokyo Ri. Of only a few stone houses, Gokyo is one of the highest human settlements in today’s world.

The view from the top of Gokyo Ri is unbelievable and spectacular, from there it is possible to see five 8,000-meter peaks: Mt. Everest, Lhotse, Makalu, Kanchenjunga, and Cho Oyu.

Peak 2 - Kalapathar (5,550m)

Kala Patthar, meaning 'black rock' in Nepali and Hindi, is a notable landmark located on the south ridge Pomari (7,161m) in Nepal’s Himalaya. Although its formation is not of a proper mountain but still the ascent of Kala Patthar is very popular among trekkers of the Everest region "The views of Everest, Nuptse, Amadablam, Changtse, and many other peaks are spectacular from Kala Patthar. And more, we can have glimpses of the northern flank and summit of Lhotse

The ascent of Kala Patthar begins at Gorekshep (5,164m), the original base camp for Mt. Everest. The ascent makes its way up a series of steep switchbacks before leveling off somewhere, as it traverses to the eastern side of the mountain. The trail then becomes steep once again until it reaches the wind-swept summit ridge. From there, a five to ten-minute scramble over boulders takes one to the top, which is marked with prayer flags. The full ascent usually takes between 1.5 and 2 hours.

Peak 3 - Lobuje East (6,119m)

Lobuje Peak is officially classified as a group “B” trekking peak by Nepal Mountaineering Association. Lobuje peak though offers a challenging climb but still is attainable with climbing objective. Lobuje peak is an ideal mission for trainee mountaineers. The climber must be proficient in using climbing gears like ice-axe and crampons etc. As a consequence, we will have the opportunity to test out our rope techniques on the way through the spectacular view of Everest, Lhotse, Nuptse, Pumori and innumerable white fangs all around.

Peak 4 – Pokhalde (5,806m)

Pokhalde Peak climb is relatively straightforward rock climbing and provides fantastic views of the valleys all around and particularly back to Lobuje East and its neighbors. From there we trek east, to Chhukung and on to Island Peak.

Phokalde is an insignificant-looking mountain and it appears as a rocky ridge and northern side of the mountain has a small hanging glacier that is best reached along the ridge rising from the Kongma La. The summit provides a good viewpoint and from that perspective is a fine little peak.

Peak 5 - Island Peak/Imja-tse (6,160m)

Island Peak is also officially classified as a group “B” trekking peak by Nepal Mountaineering Association and also known as “Imja-Tse. It looks like an island in a sea of ice and that is why it is called Island peak. It's situated at the top of the Imja-Khola valley in the Khumbu region. To climb the peak is semi-technical and straightforward so that the climber must be proficient in using materials like ice axe and crampons. The most difficult section is a slope of around 45-degree ice wall leading to the narrow summit ridge. This is a truly spectacular peak, surrounded by enormous mountains, and the technical nature of our course means that we can explore some of its less travelled slopes.

Kongma La – Snow and Ice Skill training

After climbing on Lobuhe east, we will head up over another pass, Kongma La, to enter the valley of the Imja Khola. Our high camp by the lakes gives terrific access to a remnant glacier that is perfect terrain for teaching crevasse res-cue and ice climbing – steep steps of ice cliffs. We will have a chance to practice our cramponing technique as well as steep ice and rope skills.

The Journey and acclimatization

The acclimatize trek is one that goes deep into the heart of the Himalayas. The mountain views are stunning. And the simplicity, the hospitality, of the Sherpa community is heartwarming. You will get to see the awe-inspiring views of Mt. Everest, the tallest of them all, Lhotse, Nuptse, Amadablam, Thamserku and many other peaks. You will also be visiting Sherpa villages and monasteries to gain insight into their culture and lifestyle from close up.

Taking an unforgettable flight to Lukla, we will head up into the stunning Gokyo Valley where the track clings to the western side and the valley walls are so steep that steps are needed to surmount parts of them. Until quite recently only yak herders visited the Gokyo Valley in the summer months but the expansion of the trekking industry has seen in a number of small villages, some of which are simply delightful. You will be amazed at the bowling green-smoothness of the walled yak pastures among this amazing rugged terrain. We will take our time heading up the valley, as acclimatization in these early stages of the trip is vitally important. The Gokyo Lakes toward the head of the valley are stunning, and Gokyo Ri (5340m), the first of our high points, offers views to Cho Oyu and Everest as well as down the valley.

We cross the Gokyo Valley near Dragnag and approach the Cho La Pass – the high route into the Khumbu. The glacier is quite flat and relatively crevasse free if you know the right route – depending on conditions we may not even need our crampons! From Dzongla on the eastern side, we head down and around to near the village of Lobuje to make our first real base camp. We will spend a few days on ropes skills and rock climbing on the lower parts of Lobuje and will make a day trip to Kala Pattar (spectacu- lar high point number two at 5550m), and Everest Base Camp. After exploring all the valleys of the Sargarmatha National Park, having climbed a number of its trekking peaks and viewpoints, crossing passes and glaciers and having worked up our mountaineering expertise, our objectives will be complete. We’ll head off back down the valley at something approaching lightning speed – you will be amazed at how fit and strong you are!

TRIP HIGHTLIGHTS

Ascents of Five Peak Island Peak (6,160m), Pokhalde (5,750m) and Lobuje East (6,119m) as well as Gokyo Ri (5,360m) and Kala Pattar (5,550m)

Develop and practice climbing skills at scenic spots in the Khumbu: giving you the opportunity to familiarize yourself with ropes, anchors, crevasses, crampons, ice axes

Snow-climb Lobuje East (6100m) adjacent to Everest

Develop high altitude experience and build the foundation for your future climbing exploits

Rock-climb to the summit of Pokhalde (5,806m) with panoramic views of the Khumbu region

Trek in and around all the major valleys of the Everest region of Nepal

DETAILS ITINERARY

Day 1

Arrival in KTM (1400m), Transfer to hotel, Trip briefing

After you arrive at Tribhuvan International Airport in Kathmandu, you will have to go through custom formalities. You will be greeted by our representative who will be anxiously waiting for you with a placard displaying your name in his hand. You will be transferred to the 3-Star category hotel in a private vehicle. Once you get refreshed, you will get briefing regarding the trek and itinerary followed by gear check and you will also be introduced with your crew members and other trekkers who are going to join you on the trip. Enjoy welcome dinner in the evening where you can taste authentic Nepali dinner. Stay overnight in a hotel.

Day 2

Necessary preparation & packing, Drive to Ramechhap - 5 hours (132km)

In the morning you will do the final packing and get ready for the trek, if you need to do any last-minute shopping, you will have time for that, after lunch in KTM, then we start our drive journey to Ramechapp for about 5hrs, 132km. In Ramechhap, we will stay over-night in a Freedom resort or in a similar standard resort near by airport and all meals will be provided.

Day 3

Fly to Lukla (20 min) and Trek to Phakding (2,610m) - 3hrs and O/N at Lodge

Early in the morning depending on our flight time we will move to airport, do the necessary check in process and fly for Lukla. We will follow one of the most scenic air routes in the world with panoramic views of glistening mountains to Tenzing Hillary Airport in Lukla. Lukla allows access to Everest Khumbu region. We will assemble the crew and take breakfast before start of Himalayan Five Peaks Expedition. Following the stone path through Ghat village, we will reach Phakding village. Visit local monastery. Stay overnight in Phakding.

Day 4

Trek to Namche (3,440m) - 5hrs, O/N Lodge

Leaving Phakding, we will walk along Dudhkoshi River and enter the dense pine forest. We will cross suspension bridges and walk through dispersed houses of Zapute, Benkar and Chumoa to reach Monjo. Monjo allows an entrance to Sagarmatha National Park. We need to go through required national park formalities before we can enter the park. The park is rich in Himalayan herbs, plants, mammals and birds. We will descend to Hillary Bridge existing at the base of hill. After crossing the bridge, we will follow the escalating path towards Namche Bazaar. The path rewards us with views of Thamserku Mountain, Everest, Lhotse and other mountains and peaks. Stay overnight in Namche Bazaar.

Day 5

Day hikes acclimatize to Everest view hotel and Khumjung village (3,840m) - 4hrs, O/N Lodge

Namche Bazaar acts as the major trade centre to conduct trade in between locals and neighbouring Tibetans. Namche is also popular as the capital of Sherpa land. It is wise to take rest at Namche on this day. For proper acclimatization with the changing altitude, we can arrange day hike to small Khumjung and Khunde villages. Visit the local monastery and observe the local lifestyle. Head office of National Park, Museum and monasteries are interesting places near Namche. We can get most of the modern facilities including hospital and post office at Namche. Stay overnight in Namche.

Day 6

Trek to Phortse Tenga (3,800m) – 5 hours, O/N Lodge

Leaving Namche, we will follow the trail towards to Tengbouche, the 1st an hour walk is very gentle with nice path, leaving behind few small Buddhist Stupas with superb view of Amadablam, Thamserku, Tengkangpouche, along with distance view of Everest, Lhotse, Nuptse. Now before we take downward steps, now we take upwards and bit of gentle climb until we reach at Mongla. We will enter birch forest and move further through grassy slopes to Mongla. We could have lunch at Mongla and continue downhill trek to Phortse Tenga max an hour. Stay overnight in Phortse Tenga.

Day 7

Trek to Machhermo (4040m) via Dole, - 5/6 hours, O/N Lodge

Crossing the river over bridge at Phortse village, we will climb high above the valley to the ridge which greets us with panoramic views of Kantega peak, Thamserku peak and Ama Dablam Mountain. Walking along the tree lines, we will walk past yak kharka at Tongba (4015m) and Gyele (4050m) to Dole (4084m) for our day lunch. Following the steep narrow trail escalating uphill, we will reach to the top of ridge. We will walk past Lhabarma (4220m) and reach Luza (4360m). Passing through scrub, we will climb along the side of valley to reach Machhermo (4410m). This area is known as the native land of mythical ape-man Yeti. Locals believe Yeti was seen for the first time in Machhermo in 1974. Few teahouses are available in Machhermo for accommodation. Stay overnight in Machhermo.

Day 8

Day hikes acclimatization -3/4 hours, O/N Lodge in Machhermo

This is a rest day. We will climb to the nearby ridge for the views of Cho Oyu, Kantega, Thamserku and other peaks and mountains. Visit Himalayan Rescue Association in the afternoon. Stay overnight in Machhermo. This is the last settlement that we will find before Gokyo.

Day 9

Trek to Gokyo (4,750m) – 4/5 hours, O/N Lodge

Leaving Machhermo, we will walk through Dudh Koshi Valley to Gokyo village. The trail leads us to Pangka village (4480m) that greets us with spectacular views of Everest, Thamserku, Nuptse and other peaks and mountains. We will walk through Nepal’s largest Ngozumpa Glacier rejoicing the pleasant views of Kantega Peak and Cho Oyu (8153m). Making our way through moraine and rock, we will get first view of three Gokyo Lakes including Longponga Lake, TabocheTsho Lake and DudhPokhari La. We will descend to the Gokyo village.

Day 10

Climb Gokyo-Ri (5,360m) & trek to Dragnag (4,700m) – 6/7 hours, O/N Lodge

Located at 5360m altitude, Gokyo Ri is one of the best view points in Everest which allows spectacular views of Everest and three other mountains that are over 8000m feet including Lhotse, Nuptse and Makalu. Capture the amazing image of Gokyo Village at the edge of third lake and move further through Nepal’s largest Ngozumpa glacier to Dragnag/ Thaknak. Stay overnight at Dragnag.

Day 11

Cross Cho La Pass (5,330m) & trek to Dzong-La (4,830m) – 7/8 hours, O/N Lodge

Cho La is one of the famous three high passes in Everest. Climbing Cho La pass is a challenging task where one needs to cross the steep and narrow slope. The difficulty is added by the steep glaciated path. Heading east, we will reach Phedi and walk along frozen lake to the top of the pass which is marked with cairns and prayer flags. We will enjoy the close-up views of Amadablam Mountain to the south and Cholatse peak to the west while we can also get soaring views of Lobuche East and Baruntse. Walking through crevasses, we will reach Dzongla village which greets us with views of Cholatse, Lobuche and other peaks and mountains. Stay overnight in Dzong La.

Day 12

Trek to Gorakshep (5140m) - 6/7 hours, O/N Lodge

From Dzongla, we will begin our trek towards Gorekshep. Although it is quite a long trek, the path is relatively easy for first couple of hours before it begins to escalate uphill through steep rocks. Walking through the Lobuche glacier, we will enjoy the spectacular views of Ama Dablam Mountain, Cholatse Peak, Pokalde Peak, Thamserku Peak, Kantega Peak and other surrounding peaks and mountains. We can stop at Lobuche for lunch and continue walk to Gorekshep and overnight at Buddha Lodge.

Day 13

Hike to Everest Base Camp and return to Gorekshep – 5/6 hours, O/N Lodge

The trail stretches through levelled path from Gorakshep to the Indian army mountaineers' memorials. Although levelled, the path is tricky as it is made slippery by the glaciers. Also, the challenges is added by the increased altitude and presence of thin air. Walking past the rocky dunes and moraines, we will reach Everest Base Camp. We will enjoy the views of Nuptse, Khumbutse and other peaks and mountains. We need to wait till we reach Kalapattar for close-up view of Everest. Since it is difficult to spend night at Base Camp of Everest due to altitude problem, we will return to Gorakshep for overnight stay.

Day 14

Day hike to Kalapathar (5,550m), Return to Lobuche – 6/7 hours, O/N Lodge

We start Kalapather climb very early in the morning about 4.30am to catch up the sunrise view over the mountains. Expect the challenges of low temperature and cold wind. Kalapattar is famous for its sunrise or sunset view over Everest. Get the 360 degree view of Everest including panoramic views of Khumbutse, Changtse and other peaks and mountains. The climb up is about maximum 3 hours and half of the up time. Take pictures and retrace the route back to Gorekshep for breakfast, and then we head to Lobuche for over night stay before heading to the peaks.

Day 15

Rope training and move to High Camp (5,400m) -3/4 hours, O/N Camp

In the morning after breakfast, the guide will share essential Peak climbing techniques and strategy that Dream Himalaya Adventures follow for the successful ascend. You will learn to use climbing gears like crampons, boot, harness as well as ascender and descender with ropes.

After lunch at Lobuche we will leave for high camp and follow the levelled path for brief period before the trail begins to contour up through steep boulders. Walking along the Lobuche glacier, we will enjoy the spectacular views of Amadablam Mountain, Cholatse Peak, Pokalde Peak, Thamserku Mountain, Kantega Peak and other peaks and mountains. The journey continues through moraine to High Camp. We need to walk through ice section and crevasses. So, we may need to use fixed rope as well as man rope. Stay overnight at Lobuche High Camp in a camping tents.

Day 16

Lobuche Summit day, Return to Lobuche – 10/12 hours, O/N Lodge

We will wake up much early at around 1am and prepare for climbing Lobuche. This is because our aim is to reach to the summit before noon. So, after taking light breakfast, we will follow the south East Ridge to reach the summit. We will proceed through snow and ice with help of fixed rope that will be placed earlier by our Sherpas. After taking gradual climb of plateau at around of 6000m, we will walk through the exposed ridge summit slopes from where we will reach to the summit. Views from Lobuche East Summit include Khumbu Valley, Mount Everest, Lhotse Mountain, Nuptse Mountain, Ama Dablam Mountain, Cholatse Peak, Pumori Mountain, Cho Oyu Mountain and other peaks and many more. We will take pictures and then lower down to High Camp and continue to Lobuche at teahouse where we will stay overnight.

Day 17

Moderate trek to Kongma La (5,400m) – 4/5 hours, O/N Camp

Leaving Lobuche after breakfast, the trail continues to the base of Kongma La Pass through a levelled path for brief period before escalating uphill to Kongma La Base. If we do this trip in the winter, we have to check the snow level on the Kongma La pass, some time we can’t go over the pass because of high level of snow on the pass. This is a relatively short trek. Stay overnight at base of Kongma La.

Day 18

Summit Pokalde (5,806m) and Trek to Chukung – 9/10 hours, O/N Lodge

From Kongma La Camp, our journey continues to Pokalde. We will climb Poklade peak and enjoy the panoramic views of surrounding peaks before descending to the Base Camp. We will celebrate the successful ascend of Pokalde peak and retrace the route back to Chukung where we will stay overnight.

Day 19

Chukung rest day or hike to Chukung Ri (5,550m), O/N Lodge

After Kongma La Pass, Pokalde, we take a rest day at Chukung before climbing Island Peak, or if you wish we can hike to Chukung Ri (5,550m) for the best views of Mt. Makalu, Baruntse and many other peaks. Stay over night in Chukung in a teashouse.

Day 20

Trek to Island Peak BC (5,000m) – 5 hours, O/N Camp

Short trek from Chukung will take us to Base Camp of Island Peak. Heading south from Chukung, we will walk through Lhotse glacier along Imja and Lhotse glacier moraines. We will reach to the southwest edge of Island Peak which will be our camp site. Enjoy the spectacular views of surrounding mountains and moraine valley. We will stay overnight in Base Camp of Island Peak in Camping basis.

Day 21

Summit Island Peak (6,160m) and return to BC/Chukung – 10/12 hours

After packing our essentials on the earlier day, we will begin our climb to the High camp of Island Peak. The slope continues to narrow and the trail enters a sloped rock channel. You will need to use crampons on this day. Follow the instructions of your guide properly for safety. The trail continues to raise up from the rock gully. We need to climb series of short rock steps which will bring us to the right side of the drain. We will follow a ridgeline which will take us to the exposed traverse onto the snout of the summit glacier. We will need rope on this day. Moving through crevasses, we will climb 40 degree slope by help of rope and follow the ridge up to the summit. We will spend some time in summit enjoying the successful ascend of Island Peak and lower down to Base Camp from where we will retrace the route back to Chukung.

Day 22

Spare / Emergency day

Its an emergency or extra reserve day incase of bad weather or any other sudden issues came up, otherwise it can be used any where for way back to Lukla.

Day 23

Trek to Pangboche (3,930m) – 5 hours, O/N Lodge

Leaving Chukung, we will move towards Dingboche village and pass through small Somare settlement to Pangboche village. We will visit the local monastery and stay overnight at Pangboche.

Day 24

Trek to Namche (3,440m) – 6/7 hours, O/N Lodge

We will descend to Deboche. From Deboche, the trail continues towards Tengboche Monastery where we can see Buddhist Lamas performing rituals. Tengboche Monastery is one of the famous monasteries in Khumbu region. From Monastery, our trail continues along DudhKoshi Valley to the small village of PhukiTenga. We will follow the ascending path to Namche. The path is scenic with views of Everest, Lhotse, Nuptse and other mountains. Stay overnight in Namche.

Day 25

Trek to Lukla (2,800m) – 6 hours, O/N Lodge

From Namche, we will lower down to rhododendron forest and walk along Dudhkoshi River to Phakding. Walking past the walled road of Ghat, we will reach Lukla. Stay overnight in Lukla.

Day 26

Flight Lukla to Ramechhap (20min), 5 hours drive to KTM (132km) and Celebration dinner

We will catch an early morning flight from Lukla to Ramechhap. As soon as we got off from the plane, we will start our drive to KTM, 5hours/132km, we might take a break in the middle for BF/Lunch depending on time. Once you reach KTM, hotel room check in and get ready to enjoy the celebration meal in the evening. Stay overnight in a hotel in Kathmandu.

Day 27

City sight seen tours, free afternoon/evening for shopping etc; Emergency Day for Lukla flight

In the morning after breakfast, get ready for the guided city tours for about 3hours, enjoy the city and heritage sites of KTM valley. Afternoon and evening will be free time on your own, you can go for shopping for your love one, family members, friends etc. Due to the climate condition, delay of flight in Lukla is a common experience. Also, we might lag behind schedule due to unforeseen circumstances. Under such condition, we will catch flight from Lukla to Ramehhap/Kathmandu on this day, you will be transferred to the hotel. Spend the day as you like.

Day 28

Departure for Int’l flight to home

We will transfer you to the Airport as per your scheduled flight for your onward destination. Safe journey. We hope to see you soon.

Fitness Requirements

Most of our trekking peaks are over 6,000m; therefore we count it as a tough trip. Your tough level of fitness is really important for this trek. So we strongly suggest preparing yourself for good physical fitness level. You do not need to be an athlete but a good level of overall fitness is important. Being fit will certainly improve your chances of reaching your chosen summit. As an indication, you should be able to walk 8 km / 5 miles with a maximum height gain of 800m / 2,000ft with a 10kg rucksack in 5 hours or less.

In order to get ready for this challenge, you need to be trained at least for about 4 to 6 months to prepare yourself as a strong candidate. You can go to the fitness center every morning for about 2 hours, do hiking every weekend with increasing weights on your pack (i.e. 7kg, 10kg, 13 kg, 16kg and up to 20kg). Manage some time for cycling for a couple of hours for 3 or 4 times a week. However, during climbing, there might be little symptoms of altitude illness like mild headache, fatigue, etc. but take it as normal and just drink a lot of water (4 – 5 liters) every day. On this trek, you need to be able to hike 6 – 10 hours over hilly terrain up to 6,000m of altitude with a daypack.

Value of Previous Experience

All of our trekking peaks climbing trips are accessible to experienced trekkers and those who have done some climbing trips in European mountains in order to take another challenge on the Himalayas Mountains. This trip will be helpful if you want to gain some knowledge about mountaineering and have a future plan to climb BIG Mountains.

If you have any previous mountaineering experiences and well knowledge about playing with mountaineering gears, good with rock climbing and ice climbing will increase the chances of reaching the summit but previous trekking and mountaineering experiences are not mandatory and also doesn’t require any technical experience. Note that if you are participating in one of the technical climbing peak then you must have well knowledge about playing with mountaineering climbing gears (i.e. crampon with boot, Ice axe, harness, ropes, jumars, prussiks, abseiling, moving past knots, anchor, etc.).Crampons are used for maximum grip and harness and ropes are used for maximum safety during climbing. But for those who have no mountaineering experience and skill but have got tough level of fitness, you will have basic training sessions by our guides about how to use the climbing gears during rest/acclimatization day. So we always make sure regarding the safety of the team and the successful climb of the peak.