"Raw, direct, and powerful...This work is vitally important."—Ken Stern, former CEO of National Public Radio

As a captain in the Army National Guard, Benjamin Tupper spent a year in Afghanistan. Separated from most of his unit, Ben, along with his partner Corporal Radoslaw “Ski” Polanski, served in an Embedded Training Team, teaching, training, and leading into combat the green Afghan troops. But what they experienced went well beyond the assigned mission, and the war proved to be a mix of drudgery, absurdity, and ever-present dangers.

Writing and recording from a remote outpost, Tupper began to share his stories with Americans back home. His boots-on-the-ground dispatches were broadcast on NPR’s Morning Edition and published on Slate.com’s military blog, The Sandbox.

In Greetings from Afghanistan: Send More Ammo, Benjamin Tupper’s chronicling of life under fire pulls the reader into the realities of war with poignancy, humor, and vivid reality, offering a unique and compelling firsthand view of the Afghan people, their culture, and a battle for survival that began long before the Americans arrived.

This book title, Greetings From Afghanistan, Send More Ammo (Dispatches from Taliban Country), ISBN: 9780451233257, by Benjamin Tupper, published by Penguin Publishing Group (June 7, 2011) is available in paperback. Our minimum order quantity is 25 copies. All standard bulk book orders ship FREE in the continental USA and delivered in 4-10 business days.

Unlike Amazon and other retailers who may also offer Greetings From Afghanistan, Send More Ammo (Dispatches from Taliban Country) books on their website, we specialize in large quantities and provide personal service, from trusted, experienced, friendly people in Portland, Oregon. We offer a Price Match Guarantee, and QuickQuote form, to make purchasing quick and easy.

Prefer to work with a human being when you order Greetings From Afghanistan, Send More Ammo (Dispatches from Taliban Country) books in bulk? Our Book Specialists are standing by Monday-Friday 8-5 PST, ready to help!