DENVER — The biggest surprise of the Denver Nuggets media day Monday was Carmelo Anthony's presence at the Pepsi Center.

All weekend, Anthony was the subject of a four-team megadeal that would have sent the superstar to the New Jersey Nets.

Yet at noon Monday, there Anthony was wearing his No. 15 Nuggets’ jersey and speaking to national and local media outlets about his plight.

“I’m here today,” said Anthony, who was obviously uncomfortable behind the microphone Monday. “Whatever the future holds, it holds. I’m not going to discuss what Masai (Ujiri) and I talked about, but it was a great conversation. I’m here and practice starts Tuesday (today) and we will just go from there.”

Ujiri and Josh Kroenke make up Denver’s main management team.

The deal discussed in the media over the weekend had Anthony headed to the Nets for New Jersey rookie Derrick Favors. The Nuggets also were going to get Utah’s Andrei Kirilenko and draft choices.

Denver has offered Anthony a $65 million contract extension which he has refused to sign.

“I’m leaving my options open right now,” said Anthony, who is entering his eighth season in the NBA, all with the Nuggets. “At the end of the season, I will sit down with my team and sit down with the Nuggets and we will discuss things and go from there."

Right now, I’m not really too focused on that. It has been a long summer for me with all the speculations and rumors and good things I have going on. I’m just excited to get back on the court and play.”

For weeks, several media outlets have been saying Anthony wanted or demanded to be traded from the Nuggets, a claim he denied.

“I never said I wanted to be traded,” Anthony said. “I never once said that. I’ve been a Nugget for seven years and this is what I’m doing here at my eighth media day. Tuesday, the ball will go up and the shoes are tied and we will get after it. There has been a lot of speculation going on and rumors about where I’m going to end up.

"At the end of the day, the goal is to win the championship. I’m only focusing on the moment right now and the goal is to win the championship.”

Ujiri did his best to control the circus surrounding Anthony.

“Melo is here as you can see and we’re very, very excited to have him here,” Ujiri said. “I met with Melo and we’ve talked and I think what we have talked about is going to stay between us and we’re going to keep talking as we go through this process.”

Karl, who is recovering from throat cancer, was upbeat about the future with Anthony.

“Melo and I chatted for about five minutes today and we’re going to spend some time together the next couple of days,” Karl said. “My thing is, I do not know why he wants to leave or if he does want to leave. My thing is to try and keep him here. I think we have a positive relationship. What was it four years ago when Kobe Bryant said he wanted out (with the Lakers) and six weeks later he loved his team and he went on to win two championships. That’s what I hope to reincarnate. Maybe I will give Phil (Jackson) a call and see if he can tell me what he did. We’re too good of a team to think negative this year.”

Chauncey Billups, the Nuggets veteran leader, also addressed Anthony’s status.

“He has been a Nugget longer than I have,” Billups said. “He knows the city loves him, I do not have to tell him that. He knows we love playing with him, I do not have to tell him that. I do not have to recruit him. It is pretty much a decision for his circle, his family. I really can’t have an impact it in anyway. Because of that, I have taken myself out of it and worried more about what we can do as a team.”

Kenyon Martin also says he has offered some advice to Anthony.

“I just told him to keep his head up,” Martin said. “He has enough people in his ear about basketball. I’m his friend first and foremost. He’s not upset. Who said he was upset? That hasn’t come out of Melo’s mouth. People speculate and assume things and people run with false information. He's still here and he’s got that 15 on his chest and it still says Nuggets above it. We’re here today and everything is great.”

For how long is the question.