ROBERT Redford is an actor, director and activist who has been married three times.

On August 18, 2021, Robert, who has had a profound impact on American cinema, turned 85-years-old.

Who is Robert Redford's wife Sibylle Szaggars?

Robert married Lola Van Wagenen, who dropped out of college to tie the knot with the actor, in 1958 at her grandmother's home.

Lola became a historian and environmental activist - but the pair divorced in 1985.

Robert married his second wife, longtime partner Sibylle Szaggars, in July 2009 in Hamburg. The pair first met in 1996 according to YourTango.

Born April 1957, Szaggars is 57-years-old.

She is a painter who was born and raised in Hamburg, Germany.

Her artwork was exhibited all throughout Europe, Monaco, Peru, Singapore, Japan, Suriname, and the United States.

"Her artistry spans across mediums and decades, from painted oil sketches and photographs of her Moroccan travels, expressions on canvas from her American Indian Pueblo visit and her recent works of watercolor abstracts shaped by the monsoon rains of Santa Fe, New Mexico, California and abroad." Szaggar's website writes.

"Her desire is to create art that transcends words, languages, cultures, and politics. She creates art in order to speak to a deeper universal consciousness that’s connected to and dependent on the earth and its environments."

In 2015 Szaggars Redford founded The Way of the Rain, Inc. a Non for Profit Organization with the specific purpose of developing, producing and performing educational and artistic performances to support the protection of earth.

She has also worked with international composers to put together integrated live performance art for the benefit of environmental charities.

How many children does Robert Redford have?

Robert and Lola had four children - two boys and two girls.

Their first, Scott Anthony, suffered sudden infant death syndrome, passing away at just two-and-a-half months old in 1959.

Shauna Jean was welcomed on November 15, 1960, before David James was born May 5, 1962.

But James died on October 17, 2020, after a long battle with liver cancer.

Robert and Lola's youngest Amy Hart was born on October 22, 1970, and is an actress, director and producer like her father.

Robert also has seven grandchildren.