Carl David Braden, 86, a lifelong resident of Enon Valley, passed away on Wednesday, May 1, 2019.

Born October 7, 1932, “the year of the big wind at corn husking time”, he was the son of the late James Holmes and Ella Stinson Braden.

A 1950 graduate of East Palestine High School, he worked at Babcock & Wilcox for 33 years in the East Works and the steel mill at Wallace Run. Post retirement he worked for many years for AgHog.

Carl was a dedicated servant to God, his country, his community, his family and many friends. He served the Enon Presbyterian Church all his life. Additionally, he was a veteran of the US Army, a former member of the Enon Valley Community Fire Department, a councilman on the Enon Valley Borough Council, and a member of the Meridian Lodge #411. Many of you may have seen him taking care of the Enon Memorial Park for over 40 years. Carl loved gardening, taking care of his property, and singing nonsensical songs to his dogs while cutting grass on his Allis Chalmers tractor (even though he couldn’t carry a tune in a bucket).

Carl’s outwardly gruff demeanor belied a generous and giving spirit. He gave of his time and talents to many and was always willing to lend a helping hand to a friend or anyone who needed him. His generosity will be missed by all who knew and loved him.

In addition to his parents, he was preceded in death by his brothers James & Robert.

He is survived by his wife of 62 years, Florence Rebecca Brown Braden; daughter, Karen (James) Pietsch, Enon Valley; son, David (Rhonda) Braden, Camp Hill, PA; son, William (Barbara) Braden, St. Louis, MO; five grandchildren, Justin (Liz) Braden, Adam (Katie) Braden, Julie Pietsch, Lindsay (Devin) LaRue, and Scott Braden; eight great-grandchildren, Jackson, Rhys, Harrison, Jonah, Ella, Olivia, Imogene and Emerson. He is also survived by his brothers-in-law, William (Dianne Haney) Brown, Robert (Marilyn) Brown; sister-in-law, Alice (Philip) Jubb; many nieces, a nephew, and cousins.

Friends will be received Monday, beginning at 1:30 pm until time of service at 2:30 pm at Enon Presbyterian Church, 230 Church Ave., Enon Valley, PA 16120. The Beaver County Special Unit will conduct military honors.

In lieu of flowers the family requests, memorial contributions may be made in Carl’s name to Enon Presbyterian Church, P. O. Box 292, Enon Valley, PA 16120.