Monty Carl Braden, 56, of Anderson, died Nov. 2, 2012, at Saint John's Medical Center after an unexpected illness. He was born on May 22, 1956, in Anderson, to Carl and Carolyn (Carper) Braden. He had a career with the United States Army for 20 years, retiring in 1994. Survivors include his wife, Karen (Whitehead) Shively Braden; his parents, Carl and Carolyn Braden of Mason, Ohio; two children, Christina (Daniel) Rigney and Jesse Braden, all of Alexandria; a granddaughter, Bella Rose-Marie Rigney of Alexandria; brother, Mickey (Steve Dempsey) Braden of Washington, D.C.; sister, Melissa (Greg) Troy of Mason, Ohio; and several nieces and nephews. He was preceded in death by his grandparents. Services will be at 11 a.m. Thursday at Rozelle-Johnson Funeral Service with Carol Whetsel officiating. Burial will follow in East Maplewood Cemetery with military graveside rites. Visitation will be held from 4 to 8 p.m. Wednesday at the funeral home. Post online condolences at www.rozelle-johnson.com or www.theheraldbulletin.com.

Published on November 5, 2012

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of MontyHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of Monty

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree