Louise of Sweden (Louise Josephine Eugenie ; 31 October 1851 – 20 March 1926) was Queen of Denmark from 1906 until 1912 as the spouse of King Frederick VIII.

Born into the House of Bernadotte, she was the only surviving child of King Charles XV of Sweden and Norway and his consort, Louise of the Netherlands. Although her father made several attempts to have her recognized as his heir, she was barred from the succession as at the time only males could ascend the throne of Sweden. In 1869, she married the future King Frederick VIII of Denmark with whom she had eight children. Louise became Queen of Denmark in 1906. As Queen, she was mainly known for her many charity projects, an interest that she shared with her spouse. She did not care for ceremonial duties and public events, and lived a discreet life dedicated to her children and her interests in art, literature and charity. After a short tenure as Queen, she was widowed in 1912.

Louise was the mother of both King Christian X of Denmark and King Haakon VII of Norway.

Sol turns thousands of years of human wisdom from the world’s spiritual traditions into a totally unique personality profile. To get your own profile, check compatibility with friends and much more, download the Sol App today.

Some of their strengths

Queen of Denmark Louise of Sweden has many admirable traits.

Based on spiritual traditions from around the world, they are someone who can be described as Innovative, Confident, Energetic, Passionate, Altruistic, Analytical, and Optimistic.

Intense and Passionate

According to Mysticism’s Astrology tradition, Queen of Denmark Louise of Sweden is someone who is an intense, passionate, and intuitive person who is fiercely independent, authentic and direct when engaging with others. A person who seems to identify with family, heritage and ancestry.

Constant and Serious

Based on Daoism’s Ba-Zi or ‘Chinese Zodiac’ tradition, people who know Queen of Denmark Louise of Sweden well know them as someone who can be determined, unmoving, and firm, like a rock or a high mountain.

Imaginative and Sentimental

According to Hinduism’s Jyotisha or ‘Vedic Astrology’ tradition, many would also describe Queen of Denmark Louise of Sweden as someone who is imaginative, sentimental, and in touch with emotions.

A person who has extremely good memory and analytical skills, likes to make sure that everyone gets along, enjoys all kinds of situations and people, has a talent for travel and languages, and who makes lifelong friends.

Influential and Dynamic

Based on the Mayan Tzolk’in or ‘Mayan Astrology’ tradition, Queen of Denmark Louise of Sweden is someone who tends to be focused on spreading ideas, information, and activities.

They are also someone who is charismatic, compassionate, and understanding, and who is interested in expressing themselves through writing, public speaking, or teaching.

Mysterious and Methodical

According to Judaism’s Kabbalah tradition, Queen of Denmark Louise of Sweden tends to be someone who can come across as mysterious and intense, who can be a complex thinker who is methodical and intuitive, and who can overcome challenges that most others would not be able to.

Some of Queen of Denmark Louise of Sweden's challenges

While Queen of Denmark Louise of Sweden has many strengths, nobody is perfect. They also have some challenging traits they need to manage.

For example, Queen of Denmark Louise of Sweden can be Rebellious, Arrogant, Stubborn, Bossy, Complicated, Brusque, and Emotionally Distant.

Complicated and Brusque

One of Queen of Denmark Louise of Sweden's key challenges is that they are someone who can be complicated and gruff with others.

Queen of Denmark Louise of Sweden must also exercise caution as they can have a hard time reconciling wants and needs, and can be short-tempered and aggressive, and can have difficulty dealing with responsibility, authority, or criticism.

Irritable and Moody

Queen of Denmark Louise of Sweden is someone who can be irritable and moody, have a tendency to experience self-doubt, be too secretive, can take too many risks, and who can have an extreme approach to managing personal finances.

Sensitive and Aggressive

Finally, Queen of Denmark Louise of Sweden also can be too "touchy-feely", have a hard time expressing feelings, be too aggressive and headstrong, and be too unforgiving of others' mistakes.