G. E. M. Anscombe (1919–2001) is one of the most important philosophers of the twentieth century. Known primarily for influencing research in action theory and moral philosophy, her work also has relevance in the study of metaphysics, philosophy of language, philosophy of mind, philosophy of religion, and politics.

The Anscombean Mind provides a comprehensive survey of Anscombe’s thought, not only placing it in its historical context but also exploring its enduring significance in contemporary debates. Divided into three clear parts, twenty-three chapters by an international array of contributors address the following themes:

ancient philosophy

metaphysics

mind and language

Wittgenstein

action and ethics

politics

religion and faith.

The Anscombean Mind is an indispensable resource for anyone studying and researching action theory, ethics, moral philosophy, Wittgenstein, twentieth-century philosophy, and Anscombe herself.

Introduction Adrian Haddock and Rachael Wiseman

1. Report to the Mary Somerville Fellowship Committee, May 1948 G. E. M. Anscombe

Part 1: From Parmenides to Wittgenstein

2. Anscombe’s Aristotelian Metaphysics Christopher Frey

3. The Enigma of Existence: Russellm? Kantfrege? Anscombe Arindam Chakrabarti

4. Anscombe, Stenius, and Ramsey on the Tractatus Peter Sullivan

5. Anscombe on Wittgenstein’s On Certainty: Linguistic Idealism, World-Pictures and Scepticism Andy Hamilton

Part 2: Metaphysics and the Philosophy of Mind

6. What is so Necessary about the Past? Anscombe Asymmetrist Anselm Winfried Müller

7. Temporal Passage and Being in Time Colin Johnston

8. Metaphysics and Modals Roger Teichmann

9. What do I Really Do? What do I Really See? Rachael Wiseman

10. On Our Relation to the World as a Whole, and to Others, in General Adrian Haddock

11. How Receptive Knowledge Relates to Practical Knowledge John McDowell

12. What is the Moral of Davidson’s Carbon Copier? Towards an Anscombean account of Practical Knowledge Eylem Özaltun

13. Anscombe and the Difference Rationality Makes Eric Marcus

14. The Practicality of Practical Inference Will Small

Part 3: Ethics, Religion, and Politics

15. Anscombe’s Skepticism about the Possibility of (Kantian) Practical Syllogisms Alexandra Newton

16. What is the Bearing of Thinking on Doing? Marshal Bierson and John Schwenkler

17. Human Action Valérie Aucouturier

18. The Elusiveness of the Voluntary: Anscombe and the Problem of Human Agency Jean-Philippe Narboux

19. Sensation in Intention Clare Mac Cumhaill

20. Justice in Criminal Trials R. A. Duff

21. Anscombe and the Rules of Ordinary Practices Peter Faulconbridge

22. Anscombe on the Dignity of the Human Being Matthias Haase

23. Practical Knowledge and the Spiritual Nature of Man Evgenia Mylonaki.

Index