Getting ready to visit Belgrade, Serbia? How great, welcome to my home country and our vibrant capital! I’m a Serbian local and have spent months in Belgrade for work, studies, and leisure. So I know exactly where to stay in Belgrade for the best experience.

In this ultimate guide on the best areas to stay in Belgrade, I pinpoint the 6 top places to stay for a memorable trip! I also cherry-picked top-rated hotels in each area and divided them by budget so you can easily book your favorite!

Old Town is the best area to stay in Belgrade for first-timers, since it’s the heart of the city where the most attractions are.

Before we start, I highly recommend you book your hotel in Belgrade as soon as possible to take advantage of the best deals!

Quick Picks for Your Stay

Book the best hotels in Belgrade’s Old Town and get the adventure started now:

I made this map to help you visualize the best areas to stay in Belgrade:

1. Old Town (Stari Grad) – where to stay in Belgrade, Serbia, for the first time

Old Town is the very core of Belgrade. We call it Stari Grad in Serbian (literally meaning Old City) because this is one of the oldest parts of our capital. Together with Savski Venac and Vracar (read more about them below), Old Town is part of the greater City Center.

Whenever I have guests coming over, I take them to see attractions in this part of the city. The Kalemegdan Fortress and its Victor Monument (map) are the symbol of Belgrade and given their uphill location at the confluence of two rivers (Danube and Sava), they make the most beautiful place for catching the sunset in town!

The most popular pedestrian street, Knez Mihailova (map), connects Kalemegdan with Terazije on one side and Republic Square on another, both being popular tourist hotspots.

This lovely street is lined with quirky cafés, shops, bookstores, institutions, and street musicians, and it’s alive 24/7!

Old Town is also the very center of Belgrade nightlife! Make sure you visit a kafana (traditional Serbian restaurant serving local dishes and playing live Serbian music) in Skadarlija to experience what is, for me, the absolute best way to party. The best kafanas here are Tri Šešira (map) and Dva Jelena (map)! I’ve been to both and had a blast every time!

In short, whether you’re into sightseeing, culture, shopping, nightlife, or history, you’ll find it all in Stari Grad! The area abounds with accommodation, but I just wanted to tell you to be careful and not book too close to Skadarska Street (Skadarlija), especially if you’re visiting in the summer. It can get too noisy at night! I learned this the hard way…

PRO TIP: Get a Belgrade Card for free entrance to the city’s museums, discounts, and freebies at restaurants!

Other accommodation options in Stari Grad

Things to do in Stari Grad

See Belgrade’s top spots on foot

Visit the National Museum of Serbia located on Republic Square

Try local foods like pljeskavica (meat patty) and burek (cheese pastry)

Have a fun night out in Skadarlija

Explore Ruzica Church (map), the oldest church in town

Join the underground tour of the Belgrade Fortress and catch a sunset afterward

Take a guided boat tour of Belgrade

2. Terazije – an urban place to stay in Belgrade, Serbia

As I already mentioned, Terazije is part of the City Center that begins just as you walk to the end of Knez Mihailo Street toward Terazije Square (map). It offers a mix of very urban vibes, but it’s also a great place for business travelers and those seeking luxury.

Terazije’s central attraction is the stunning Hotel Moskva (map), an old hotel with beautiful architecture that is more like an institution. They have a lovely restaurant on the ground floor with live piano music and delicious food. Sometimes, when I want to spoil myself, I’ll get some desserts and coffee there before or after visiting the Old Town.

You can really feel the big city vibe as you walk down Terazije Street, which is one of the commercial hubs of Belgrade. The vicinity of business and government buildings also means you’ll see more people in suits. In fact, if you’re attending a conference in Belgrade, chances are, it’ll be nearby!

Terazije Square is filled with authentic shops, so if you’re into shopping outside of Knez Mihailova Street, you can have a blast here! Plus, you’ll be just steps away from the beautiful Tasmajdan Park and the St. Mark Orthodox Church (map), both of which are some of the favorite places in Belgrade for locals.

Other accommodation options in Terazije

Things to do in Terazije

Join a culinary tour of Belgrade

Check out the Royal Palace of the Obrenovic dynasty (map)

Take a selfie at the iconic Terazije Fountain (map)

Have a fun time at the Museum of Illusions

Go beer tasting at Samo Pivo (map)

Visit the Zeleni Venac market (map) for fresh, local produce & people-watching

Walk to the nearby Nikola Pasic Square (map) and see Serbian government buildings

3. Vracar – where to stay in Belgrade for families

Vračar (pronounced as Varchar, can also be written Vracar) is one of my favorite Belgrade neighborhoods! It’s nestled in the City Center, so it’s close to all the hustle and bustle of the capital, and yet it’s so peaceful and quiet!

The district is some 2.5 km (1.5 miles) away from the Old Town, and an easy stroll to Vracar takes around 40 minutes. I love walking the picturesque route from Kalemegdan to Saint Sava Temple (map), one of the largest Christian Orthodox temples in the world – located in the heart of Vracar!

Now is the perfect time for a short history lesson (sorry, but it’s really interesting!). Saint Sava was a 12th-century member of a Serbian royal family, and he brought Christian Orthodoxy to Serbia. Today, he’s regarded as one of the holiest and most respected saints in the country. The Ottomans, who ruled over Serbia for almost 500 years, burned St. Sava’s remains at a hill in Vracar in 1594 as a punishment to Serbs for rebelling against them. On that very spot now lies the glorious St. Sava Temple with impressive frescoes and a surreal crypt!

PRO TIP: Saint Sava Temple has an observatory at the top where you can enjoy fabulous panoramic views of the whole city! Don’t miss it! Just talk to the temple staff, and they’ll arrange a guide to take you there for a fee (around $10).

Other than important historical moments, Vracar also has many lovely parks where the kids can play, and it’s also known as the gastronomy hub of Belgrade. You’ll find local bakeries serving delicious cheese pastry called burek, which we love to eat for breakfast! I recommend pairing burek with some yogurt (they sell it in all bakeries) – there’s nothing I love to eat more to start the day!

Apart from St. Sava Temple, a must-visit attraction in Vracar is the Nikola Tesla Museum. There are plans for this museum to be moved to a bigger building elsewhere, but for now, you can enjoy learning about the life and work of one of the world’s most important scientists in its old location in Vracar!

Other accommodation options in Vračar

Things to do in Vračar

Visit the crypt and observatory of the Saint Sava Temple

Go on a full-day sightseeing of Belgrade’s top attractions

Experiment with Nikola Tesla’s inventions by yourself in his museum

Try moussaka (eggplant & meat dish) or prebranac (bean stew) in local eateries

4. Savski Venac – the trendiest place to stay in Belgrade

Savski Venac is a large municipality in Belgrade, with plenty of popular districts like Savamala, Belgrade Waterfront, Autokomanda, Dedinje (the richest district of Belgrade with celebrity villas), and others.

The area starts South of Terazije, and the parts I recommend staying in include Savamala and Belgrade Waterfront (map), which are closer to the City Center (a 20-minute walk from it).

Savamala is where I usually stay in Belgrade. This is where the Central Bus Station (map) is, the main point of arrival for buses from across Serbia. Savski Venac also has an excellent bus connection with all other parts of the city, so it’s ideal to stay here without a car.

In Serbia, we mostly use buses to get from one city to another (other than cars, of course), so staying close to the Central Bus Station is a good idea if you plan to explore other cities in the country. Since I always catch a bus to get to Belgrade, it makes sense why Savamala is my first choice for accommodation.

Recently, the Belgrade Waterfront area here has seen a multi-million dollar renovation project with new luxury residential blocks, shopping malls, and restaurants rising at every corner.

You’ll now also find a beautiful promenade by the river with lovely sights of the opposite bank of the Sava River, with plenty of cafés from which you can soak in the views. Honestly, it’s hard to pick just one place here, as I’ve been to a bunch of them, and they’re all stunning! You must try coffee at Cafeteria BW (map) and sushi at Buddha Bar (map)!

TRANSPORT TIP: Taxis in Serbia are known for scamming tourists, especially if you catch one near the Central Bus Station. The only way to make sure you won’t get scammed is to order a taxi ride via phone call. I usually call Pink Taxi (+381 11 6355000 is their number), they’re reliable and let you pay with a credit card. Most of the taxi apps have really poor ratings, so I don’t recommend them.

Other accommodation options in Savski Venac

Things to do in Savski Venac

Go for a walk along the Sava Promenade (map)

Shop in the fanciest mall in town, Galerija – Beograd

Catch an event at Cultural Center Grad (map)

Take a day trip in nature at Ada Ciganlija (map)

Explore the shops, bars, and restaurants of Belgrade Waterfront

Tour Crvena Zvezda and Partizan stadiums (the Real Madrid and Barca of Belgrade)

Visit the Museum of Yugoslavia with the tomb of Tito, the famed Yugoslav president

5. Novi Beograd – where to stay in Belgrade like a local

Novi Beograd (New Belgrade in English) is a large area located across the Sava River from Old Town, and it was planned with a typical socialist architecture in mind that was popular during the times of Yugoslavia. Novi Beograd mostly consists of residential buildings, large open spaces and boulevards, business centers, and some important landmarks.

Serbia, Croatia, Slovenia, Macedonia, Bosnia, and Montenegro were part of a single country, Yugoslavia, until 1991. Today, you can see neighborhoods like Novi Beograd in cities across these countries.

If you want to experience authentic local life while still being close to tourist attractions, Novi Beograd is a perfect spot. Given the distance from Old Town (a 10-20-minute ride) and the wide boulevards that run through it, it makes sense to stay here with a car. There are also plenty of public transportation options that connect Novi Beograd to Stari Grad.

Points of interest here include the iconic UŠĆE Shopping Center (map) and the floating bars and restaurants along the Sava River known as splavovi. Also, the Museum of Contemporary Art is located here!

I always recommend Novi Beograd to everyone who wants to explore brutalist architecture since this is where you’ll find most of them! In fact, I pinpoint the best photo spots in my article on things to do in Belgrade, and most of them are in Novi Beograd! Check out activity number 14 in this article to see their locations!

CULTURAL TIP: Serbs are super hospitable toward foreigners. A simple Hvala (Thank you) or Dobar dan (Good day) goes a long way! I even know of stories where foreigners got drinks for free just because they could say a few words in Serbian!

Other accommodation options in Novi Beograd

Things to do in Novi Beograd

Take a vintage car tour through Yugoslavian history

Hang out in floating restaurants like Keops (map) and Gabbiano (map)

Stroll in the Park Usce (map) and then cross Branko Bridge to the City Center

Explore the architecture of the Genex Tower (map) and the Palace of Serbia (map)

Go shopping in the Usce Shopping Center

6. Zemun – the most charming place to stay in Belgrade

Zemun is the area furthest from Old Town, it’s basically considered a town of its own. It’s very close to Novi Beograd and 10 km (6.2 miles) away from Old Town. You can drive or use public transport to get here. A bus ride takes around 35 minutes, while the drive takes around 20.

Zemun is known as a bohemian and romantic spot with cobblestone streets and unique architecture. The architecture here was actually influenced by the Austro-Hungarian Empire, which ruled over Northern Serbia for hundreds of years.

I wholeheartedly recommend Zemun to couples since it’s so romantic, but also filled with tons of opportunities for spending time in nature. Zemunski Kej (map) is a long promenade along the Danube River and is a signature spot of Zemun!

Another popular landmark here is the Gardoš Tower (map), also known as the Millennium Tower. It was built by Austro-Hungarians in 1896 to celebrate the 1,000-year anniversary of the settlement of Hungarians in the area. Today, you can climb the tower and appreciate the lovely panoramic views of the Belgrade Fortress.

PRO TIP: In Zemun, you’ll find the most unique ice cream shop in Serbia. Poslasticarnica sa Stavom (map) serves ice cream with flavors like white wine, brandy, cheese, plum, lavender, and even ajvar (a Balkan condiment made of sweet bell peppers). Best of all is that they are all handmade and contain zero chemicals or additives! A must-try for ice cream lovers!

Other accommodation options in Zemun

Things to do in Zemun

Climb the Gardos Tower and enjoy the views

Go on a sightseeing cruise with drinks during the sunset

Stroll down Zemunski Kej and enjoy the nature

Take a tour of Veliko ratno ostrvo

Try authentic ice cream flavors at Poslasticarnica sa Stavom

FAQs about where to stay in Belgrade

Making the most out of your stay in Belgrade

That’s about it, my dear traveler! I hope I helped you decide where to stay in Belgrade and how to spend your time in the city! I loved being your virtual guide, and I hope you’ll have a pleasant time!

In case you’re still indecisive about the best hotel for you, these are my favorites:

Hotel Moskva – a hotel with a story that’s also elegant and centrally located

Hotel Balkan – I’ve been dreaming of staying in this charming hotel since childhood as there is one really famous song about it (YouTube link) that everyone in Serbia knows

Regardless of where you stay, remember to book your stay in Belgrade in advance! The best deals sell out really fast in Serbia’s bustling capital!

Finally, feel free to drop me a comment if you have any questions or want more recommendations for your upcoming stay in Belgrade or Serbia!

Enjoy Belgrade,