Join us at the Wallis as we Bring the Noise with an evening of conversation and a live orchestral performance of songs recorded at Abbey Road Studios, celebrating renowned photographer and filmmaker Mary McCartney and her critically-acclaimed Disney+ film If These Walls Could Sing. Through rare footage and interviews with music icons, If These Walls Could Sing gives a front-row seat to the history of Abbey Road Studios and the vibrant music scene that makes London the cultural hub that it still is today.

Arts Circle Members receive access to the Founders Room, including complimentary beverages, one hour prior to showtime.

This event will be moderated by award-winning filmmaker Morgan Neville, and is a must-see for music lovers and anyone who has ever felt the magic of a live performance. The orchestra will be conducted by Mark Graham (Avengers: Infinity War, 2018; The Grand Budapest Hotel, 2014; and Star Wars: Episode VII – The Force Awakens, 2015).

About If These Walls Could Sing

For more than 90 years, Abbey Road Studios has been at the heart of the music industry. Fans journey every year to have their photo taken at the world-famous zebra crossing, and artists strive to follow in the footsteps of their heroes. In this personal film of memory and discovery, Mary McCartney guides us through nine decades to see and experience the creative magic that makes it the most famous and longest-running studio in the world. From classical to pop, film scores to hip hop, Disney Original Documentary’s If These Walls Could Sing explores the breadth, diversity and ingenuity of Abbey Road Studios. Intimate interviews reveal how leading artists, producers, composers and the dedicated engineers and staff of Abbey Road all found their musical language and community, while vivid archival footage and session tapes give exclusive access to these famously private studios. Featuring Paul McCartney, Ringo Starr, Elton John, Roger Waters, Liam Gallagher, John Williams, Celeste and Sheku Kanneh-Mason, among others.

If These Walls Could Sing is available to stream on Disney+.

Pricing

$35 for Film Independent Members and Wallis Subscribers, $45 for the general public. Proof of Member/Subscriber status is required to reserve tickets at the Member/Subscriber price; limit two tickets per order.

Tickets

Tickets may be purchased from the Wallis box office in person, over the phone, or online via the links below:

Film Independent Member ticketing

Wallis Subscriber ticketing

General ticketing

For additional information, or to get in touch with the Wallis box office, visit thewallis.org/contactus.

Safety/Event Policies

Masks are optional, and proof of full COVID vaccination is no longer required; however, guests are welcome to wear masks in all spaces at the Wallis.

The Wallis’ health and safety protocols are subject to change at the venue’s sole discretion or in accordance with CDC, State of California, and Los Angeles County recommendations.

Availability window and registration capacity may vary; always register as early as possible. All ticket sales are final; no refunds or exchanges.

Attendees must follow all rules and guidelines as laid out by Film Independent and/or its partners. If a guest has been registered for an event by a Member, these policies shall apply to that guest. Violation of written policies and/or staff instructions may result in removal from the venue and/or suspension or termination of Membership/access to future events.

Event details and guest participation are subject to change or cancellation without prior notice.

Accessibility

Film Independent is committed to hosting events that are accessible. For inquiries regarding accessibility, or to request an accommodation, please contact us at accessibility@filmindependent.org or 323 556 9305.

If you have already purchased your tickets but need assistance, please contact the Wallis Ticket Services at 310 746 4000 for personal assistance.

Parking

Parking is available in the underground garage (450 N. Crescent Dr.) with entrances on Crescent Dr. and S. Santa Monica Blvd.

$5 flat rate before 6:00 pm; $8 flat rate after 6:00 pm