A cinema advertisement has caused a stir among viewers with some claiming it's 'Chinese propaganda' that promotes socialism to impressionable young moviegoers.

At a recent screening of How to Train Your Dragon 3 viewers at the George Street Event Cinema in Sydney were shown an advertisement by Chinese film distribution company TangRen.

The Daily Telegraph claims that viewers complained the advertisement was 'promoting socialism with Chinese characteristics and aimed at increasing China’s "soft power" within Australia'.

The advertisement, which is voiced over in Mandarin, talks about 'promoting Chinese political philosophies' along with 'producing an important influence on Western society' before finishing with mentions of 'enhancing cultural soft power and promoting Chinese culture to the world!'.

Sydney is not the only place the advertisement has been run, with a social media user form Perth taking to the 'Hong Kong and China Not The Same' Facebook page to voice her concerns.

'Went to my local cinema in Perth, Australia, to watch the new Dragonball Super movie,' the user wrote.

'Suddenly lo and behold there was a china (sic) propaganda commercial from this 'tangren cultural group (sic)' with voice over in mandarin telling xi jinping propaganda. Wtf?!'

TangRen, a prominent film group within Australia and New Zealand, is responsible for two thirds of all Chinese and Korean films distributed in the two countries.

Daily Mail Australia attempted to contact the TangRen Cultural Film Group for comment.

Soft power is defined as 'a persuasive approach to international relations, typically involving the use of economic or cultural influence'.

It can also be defined as 'the ability to affect others to obtain the outcomes one wants through attraction rather than coercion or payment'.

The idea of soft power rests on the foundation of an ability to shape the preferences of others by employing the 'power of attraction' through seduction.

The concept of soft power derives from the fifth century Chinese philosopher Laozi (Lao-tzu) who said that 'a leader is best not when people obey his commands, but when they barely know he exists'.

University of Technology Sydney associate professor Chongyi Feng told The Daily Telegraph the advertisement was designed to spread China's 'Grand External Propaganda’ in Australia.

'The task is to tell the story along the party lines and (control the) narrative around China that will project the right image to the world,' he said.

Mr Feng was detained in China in 2017 until 'top government officials' pushed for his release after global outcry.

Upon his return to Australia Mr Feng was met by the media at the airport to tell his story.

'Australia is a beautiful multicultural democracy that respects cultural diversity and promotes equality among all ethic and cultural groups he said.

'However, even my freedom in Australia is increasingly under threat from China’s 'soft power'.