The King of Fighters, officially abbreviated KOF, is a series of fighting games by SNK Playmore, formerly SNK. The series was originally developed for SNK's Neo-Geo MVS arcade hardware, which served as the main platform for the series until 2004, when SNK retired the MVS in favor of the Atomiswave arcade board and will move the series to the Taito Type X2 with the release of The King of Fighters XII. Ports of the arcade games and original The King of Fighters games have been released for the Neo Geo CD, Neo Geo Pocket, Game Boy and Game Boy Advance, N-Gage, Sega Saturn and Sega Dreamcast, PlayStation and PlayStation 2, PC, and Xbox. One of the most recent games in the series are KOF: Maximum Impact series.

The initial storyline follows Kyo Kusanagi, a young Japanese who enters The King of Fighters tournaments. Being the heir of the ancient Kusanagi clan, who wield pyrokinetic powers, Kyo manages to use its powerful techniques to become champion of the tournament along with his friends. Kyo and his friends find themsleves meeting the host of the events: a powerful criminal named Rugal Bernstein, who wants to find worthy opponents to kill so that he can turn them into statues in order to remember his ruthless victories but is defeated. In the 1995 KOF tournament, it is revealed the entity of Orochi: an ancient eight-headed demon who was sealed by the three ancient artifacts of Japan. Rugal tries to use it but dies in the process. In this game, a fighter named Iori Yagami appears aiming to kill Kyo and destroy the Kusanagi clan, as revenge for the Yagami clan.

The King of Fighters '95 is a 1995 fighting game produced by SNK for the Neo Geo arcade and home console. It is the sequel to The King of Fighters '94 and the second game in The King of Fighters series. It is also the first game in the series to be ported to other home consoles besides the Neo Geo AES and Neo Geo CD, with versions released for the PlayStation, Sega Saturn and Game Boy.

The King of Fighters '95 marks the beginning of a story arc that later became known as the "Orochi Saga". However, the only elements from the Orochi saga known in this game are the introduction of Kyo's rival, Iori Yagami, and Rugal's use of the Orochi power.

Rugal Bernstein, thought to have perished in an explosion in the previous game, had in fact survived and sent out invitations to the teams from the previous game signed simply 'R'. Only one of the previous teams failed to attend the new tournament, the American Sports team, now replaced by the "Rival Team" consisting of Iori Yagami, Billy Kane (from the Fatal Fury), and Eiji Kisaragi (from Art of Fighting 2).

The Playstation version features an Art Gallery with illustration gallery, unused art and a secret ending demo unlockble, this version is also vibration function compatible.

Manufacturer's description:

The world's toughest fighters team up for the supreme competition!

Out of the storm of battle comes 24 fighters from around the world who are invited to enter the King of FIghters '95 tournament. Omega Rugal is alive and out to seek revenge on the participants who destroyed him and his plan to rule the world. Be prepared for a living hell!

- A near perfect translation of SNK's blockbuster arcade fighting game!

- Face 24 of SNK's greatest warriors, including masters from Fatal Fury and Art of Fighting 2 plus 2 hidden fighters - the most fighters ever for a home video game!

- Each fighter has 5 unique special attacks and an incredibly grisly Last Resort move. That's 144 awe-inspiring original moves!

- 5 phenomenal battle modes include 1-on-1, 3-on-3, Head-to-Head, Battle Royale and Tag Team!

- Build over 2,000 three-fighter combat teams for infinite challenge.

Features:

Third person perspective.

2D graphics

Cartoon graphics

Fighting theme.