Kyo Kusanagi (草薙 京, Kusanagi Kyō) is the main protagonist in SNK's The King of Fighters video game series. He was first introduced in The King of Fighters '94 as the leader of the Japan team. He is the rival of Iori Yagami.

Why He Rocks

He is one of the most popular characters in fighting-game history.

His fighting and fire skills are on top. For instance, he has the ability to control fire all thanks to his heritage. He can create fire from thin air, create fire balls, deliver punches of fire, create pillars of fire, and put his own body on fire.

He had crossovers with Capcom characters along with other SNK Characters.

His designs are pretty cool and iconic.

He has a badass bad-boy attitude. Despite all of this, however, Kyo is a well-meaning protagonist who is more interested in enjoying life.

He may not seem like it, but he treasures his friends and family, enjoying their presence and particularly doting on his girlfriend, Yuki. It's pretty nice for an individual who is really over-confident.

He actually believes in having a strong sense of justice and he's not even a coward to fight against opponents who are much more stronger than him.

What makes Kyo interesting is his personality in King of Fighters Destiny. In the games, he's always cocky, fight-happy, rebellious, and really full of himself. In Destiny, however, he does keep his traits yet he's nobler, shows great respect to Master Chin, and is less of a jerk toward the others. Another similar instance happened in King of Fighters XIII Climax. In XIII Climax and NESTS!, Kyo is portrayed to be slightly Older and Wiser than normal!Kyo. For example, Kyo bluntly tells Leona to get out of the battlefield since "this is no place for those who can't control themselves", whereas "NESTS!:; Kyo asks her if she's up for controlling her Orochi blood instead.

His rivalry with Iori Yagami is incredibly iconic and true to his character. In fact, there were times when both Kyo and Iroi joined forces with each other which is often seen as a last resort solution (like in '97 when he alongside Iori and Chizuru fight against the last remaining forces of Orochi). The reason being is the Kusanagi and the Yasakani clans were one allies, but a horrible misunderstanding happened which lead the Yasakani to make a blood pact with the Orochi for more power and renamed their family name to Yagami while the flames were changed to violet.

Says some really shady yet fun comebacks like "So long, weenie king. We won't meet again" or "Wow! Back to the gym for you. You're really pathetic."

When he wanted to fight, his aspiration is to deal with the person standing on the opposite side as noted in Neo-Geo Freak 1998.

Bad Qualities

He can be jerk most of the times, by calling his friend Benimaru an idiot and sometimes leaving him behind in The King of Fighters: Destiny.

His English voice in The King of Fighters XII is really bad. The same guy (Peter von Gomm) who also voiced Megaman X in X7.

As mentioned before, he's overconfident and cocky.