Colleen Dewhurst, one of America's foremost actresses whose career on stage, screen and television spanned 40 years and earned her two Tony Awards and three Emmys, died last night at her home in South Salem, N.Y., The Associated Press reported. She was 67 years old.

Ms. Dewhurst was pronounced dead by her personal physician, said Jan Stutts, a spokeswoman for the Westchester County Medical Examiner's Office. The cause of death was not immediately available.

Ms. Dewhurst was closely identified with the works of Eugene O'Neill, and in 1974 won a Tony Award for her portrayal of Josie Hogan in the acclaimed revival of O'Neill's "Moon for the Misbegotten." She was nominated for a Tony in 1973 for her performance as Christine in O'Neill's "Mourning Becomes Electra," in which she was hailed as one of the United States' pre-eminent tragic actresses.

Her most recent New York appearances were on Broadway in 1988 as Mary Tyrone in O'Neill's "Long Day's Journey Into Night" and as Essie Miller in "Ah, Wilderness!," and as O'Neill's wife, Carlotta Monterey O'Neill, in "My Gene," a one-woman play by Barbara Gelb at the New York Shakespeare Festival in 1987. Led Actors' Equity

Ms. Dewhurst also served two terms as president of Actors' Equity Association, the 39,000-member union of professional actors and stage managers, holding office from June 1985 until last May.

An imposing presence both in person and on stage, Ms. Dewhurst was known as a woman never hesitant to use her distinctive, big throaty voice to express an opinion on almost any subject. In the theater, she conveyed a mature sexuality, a folkish earthiness; her feline smile, crinkly eyes and high cheekbones combined to soften her large stature and enable the audience to feel closer to her and to identify with her characters, who were often tragic.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.