There has been no official word yet, but given Canadian doubles legend Daniel Nestor's partners in the upcoming summer hard-court tournaments it seems that he and Leander Paes have parted ways.

No word on whether Paes may have an injury, but it certainly seems not. He has been playing World Team Tennis for the Washington Kastles the last couple of weeks. Certainly their results since they got together after Miami weren't what either had hoped for.

In Washington, D.C., a tournament that begins in 10 days, Nestor is signed up with Andy Murray.

(The top singles players often play doubles in their first event on a new surface - which for many is the Rogers Cup. That makes for a lot of fun doubles matchups - we're remembering that time in Toronto in 2010 when the very young team of Milos Raonic and Vasek Pospisil played – and defeated – Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic).

Oh, to be a fly on the wall when Nestor and Murray discussed who would play the ad side. With his brother Jamie (also a lefty), most recently in Davis Cup, Murray played the ad court. Nestor is pretty entrenched on that side – to say the least. We're betting Nestor gets his way on seniority, and because Murray probably doesn't care. His purpose in playing doubles is to get a little extra match time on the hard courts, preferably before he has to play his first-round singles match.

But then?

Nestor is entered with Édouard Roger-Vasselin of France at the Rogers Cup in Montreal. The entry deadline for doubles is Monday; Paes hasn't entered with anyone else yet, and there will probably be quite a few more duos signed up before then.

Nestor and Roger-Vasselin also will team up for the second Masters 1000 event in Cincinnati the following week.

On a related Canadian doubles note, Nestor's Belgium Davis Cup partner Adil Shamasdin seems done with the Aussie partner he has teamed up with most of the year, Rameez Junaid.

The two played with different partners this week in Umag, Croatia.

Next week, Shamasdin is playing with Sweden's Johan Brunstrom (that could be Hamburg or Gstaad - likely Hamburg). In Kitzbuhel the week after that, Shamasdin is entered with Frantisek Cermak of the Czech Republic.

The doubles merry-go-round never stops spinning.