On the roof of a museum inspired by Dante’s “Divine Comedy,” a sculptural walkway resembling a many-colored halo is attracting record-breaking crowds. It offers a 360-degree view through multicolored glass of Denmark’s second-largest city and by night it lights up, the brightest illumination in western Denmark.

The work hints at how Aarhus is trying to rival art-centric Copenhagen with bold exhibitions and projects that have excited, and put off, the locals.

The Danish-Icelandic artist Olafur Eliasson unveiled his work atop the ARoS museum in May. The walkway — which he calls “Your Rainbow Panorama” and has dubbed “an expectation machine” — has accounted for 250,000 of the ARoS’s record 380,000 visitors so far this year, the museum estimates.

“We expect to get into the super-league, perhaps with a half million visitors,” said Jens Erik Sorensen, the museum’s director since 1984. Mr. Sorensen had initially imagined a Garden of Eden-like sculpture park, with peacocks and perhaps a tearoom.

“This was much more visionary and ‘Blade Runner’-like,” he said, referring to the 1982 Ridley Scott science fiction movie. A sphere will be set at the center of the circular walkway, opening to a dark room where the sun is reflected through prisms for 18 minutes every hour, mimicking the rainbow effect of the halo, which sends its rays into the city and bathes visitors in its colors.

ARoS’s momentum has been growing since 2004, when it moved into a new building designed by the firm schmidt hammer lassen architects. In line with Dante’s tale, visitors begin in the nine circles of Inferno with nine rooms in the museum’s basement. Seven of them have so far been activated to shape a dark and gloomy gallery-in-progress, showing rotating video, light and installation art, like Bill Viola’s “Five Angels for the Millennium” (2001) and pieces by James Turrell and Olaf Breuning.

The ascendance through Dante’s mountain of Purgatory is made via a large, spiral staircase linking the museum’s 10 floors, where collections range from 18th-century Danish painting and sculpture to early 20th-century Modernism, the Cobra movement and recent contemporary works. With the Eliasson rainbow halo, the museum has followed Dante’s epic rise to Paradise.

The space has emboldened ARoS to blend newer and older art, and to take chances. Last year, the innocently titled exhibition “I Love You” was heavily sexual, from Jeff Koons’s pornographic “Ice — Jeff on Top Pulling Out” to Bjorn Norgaard’s grotesque cartoon sculptures of the Seven Dwarves poised for an orgy with Snow White.

“Aarhus is a young city and it’s worth gambling,” Mr. Sorensen said.

ARoS mounts two major exhibitions a year. The current shows are an immersive experience of lights and smoke by Mr. Eliasson and an exhibition of contemporary works from the collection of the Danish lawyer Leif Djurhuus.

ARoS has also shown contemporary notables like Shirin Neshat, Mariko Mori and Yue Minjun. The museum’s most successful exhibition so far was an Asger Jorn retrospective earlier this year. Next year, as part of its “ARoS Classic” series, it will present Danish Modernist painters alongside masters like Cézanne, with works on loan from the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.

Whereas Mr. Eliasson’s rainbow has pleased both ARoS and Aarhus, another sculptural project has been the subject of great debate. The city council voted unanimously in August to welcome “Store Robert,” a 72-meter, or 237-foot, sculpture designed by Robert Jacobsen, which is to greet seaward visitors at the entrance to the city’s port and is the latest element of Aarhus’s bid to become a European Capital of Culture in 2017.

The sculptor died in 1993, before the work was completed, leaving only a 1.20-meter model of the sculpture that he had intended for the port.

But in 2008 the Copenhagen city council voted against erecting the sculpture, a mastodon of towering geometric shapes, with a majority deeming the work too clunky and costly. Amid heated discussions, Per Arnoldi, the head of the Danish Arts Council, warned that the project was “provincial” and would make Copenhagen an “international laughing stock.”

In Aarhus, some worries remain. Plans for it be financed with private-sector funds, in an effort led by the businessman Frank Johansen, irk some detractors, who want an independent artistic assessment as a buffer to money dictating art.

One local politician has suggested a referendum. Fellow artists are concerned about scaling upward a small work — one that they do not consider among Jacobsen’s best — without the artist’s supervision.

In a lively discussion on Danish national radio, the chairwoman of the Aarhus arts council, Jette Gejl Kristensen, suggested that the shapes of triangles and a circle would resemble a giant “No entry” sign.

“It would be strange if there were no protests from the art world,” said Mr. Johansen, who has nurtured “Store Robert” since he first broached it with the sculptor 22 years ago. “But we are getting a gigantic sculpture by a world-renowned artist. No Danish living artist has been as groundbreaking, internationally, in the field of sculpture. It’s not merely a Robert Jacobsen project but a project to place Denmark on the world map, with something grandiose.”

Since the Copenhagen rejection, the cost of the project has been trimmed from 200 million kroner, or $36 million, to 100 million kroner, and with time allowed for fundraising, Mr. Johansen hopes to see the work finished within two years.

“I have no doubt that the Aarhus port could become one of the most beautiful in the world,” he said.

Driving westward across Jutland, the wide horizon of agricultural fields is broken by the black silhouette of another immense sculpture, “Elia,” a factory-like dome sculpture with spires stretching 32 meters into the air.

Unveiled in 2001, the work by the Swedish-born sculptor Ingvar Cronhammar was the first indication that Herning, a quiet post-industrial municipality of some 85,000 inhabitants, harbored cultural ambitions. In 2009, the Herning Museum of Art left its cramped, circular building in favor of an expansive and warmly minimalistic new complex designed by the American architect Steven Holl. Now named HEART — a play on “Herning” and “art” — the museum has become a progressive, and somewhat controversial, local presence.

Awarded the prestigious Bikubens Museumspris this year, HEART’s permanent collection is based around the art of the late industrialist and shirt-maker Aage Damgaard, who donated his personal collection to the Danish state in 1977 and thus helped launch the Herning Museum of Art. The collection encompasses Danish Constructivism, Abstraction and Experimentalism, with the country’s largest body of work by the painter Paul Gadegaard.

It is flanked by an Arte Povera section, with works by the Italian movement’s key artists, including Lucio Fontana, Mario Merz and Jannis Kounellis, and a selection of more recent contemporary art. Its core, however, is the world’s largest collection of works by the conceptual provocateur Piero Manzoni, who spent his 1960 and 1961 summer vacation near Herning and left behind 37 works — including his “Merda d’artista,” tin cans with the contents labeled as the artist’s feces, intended to be sold for their weight in gold.

HEART’s curatorial approach has been equally daring. The museum has shown ROUTEless?, an exhibition of photographs and writings by young asylum seekers. It has taken in Nadia Plessner’s immense painting “Darfurnica,” which landed her in court for appropriating a design similar to that of Louis Vuitton for a handbag on the arm of an African child. She won the case.

The museum’s Socle du Monde Biennale links international artists with local business to fund and produce works. Last year, it explored multiculturalism and globalization issues.

“It was relatively unpopular; people thought it was too difficult, too young and too wild,” said Holger Reenberg, HEART’s director.