The Turtles are back, and for the very first time, not animated, not live action, but in CGi*!

Movie: TMNT

Directed by Kevin Munroe

Release date 2007

Genre Action/Science-fiction animated film

Country USA

After am abysmal TMNT 3 and a pretty forgettable Next Mutation live action series, the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles franchise was put on hold for several years.

During that time there were plans for a 4th Ninja Turtles film, which never happened. Even though Kevin Eastman did some extensive work on it, designs and story ideas.

It wasn't until the successful return of the Turtles on TV, in an all-new rebooted animated series that was launched in 2003. This new cartoon was the source of many, many new fans for the series. And new toy lines. It ran for 7 seasons, up until 2009 (yes, all the way through and after this motion picture reviewed here).

With the Turtles now closer to their original comic book counterparts, the idea to make a new, darker more action-packed movie imposed some new direction. Their first new film in 14 years!

To finally make the Turtles as acrobatic as ever, this new all-new film was set to be entirely done with "Computer Graphics".

The film was produced by Imagi Studios, a new animation studio founded in 2000. TMNT was their first major motion picture. They went on to produce Highlander: The Search for Vengeance and Astro Boy after that. And a Gatchaman big budget film was also scheduled but it never was actually developed.

And to direct it, Kevin Munroe. Canadian filmmaker and artist. He has worked on designs in the past at Jim Henson Company, Stan Winston Studios and even Shiny Entertainment. Kevin Munroe also wrote the film.

The story takes place several years after our four heroes finally defeated their nemesis, The Shredder, for good.

Michelangelo, Donatello, Leonardo and Raphael have all grown apart now. And it has made Master Splinter really worried about his children.

Donnie and Mikey have now a day job. Working as a tech guy support and playing at children's parties respectively.

Leo has gone off to Brazil, to master his art and become a better leader.

And Raph is now secretly an urban vigilante, working under the guise of the Nightwatcher.

April O'Neil seems to have left a career in science (if you're a comic fan) or as a TV anchorwoman (for fans of the live movies/cartoon) to be a full-time ninja/kunoichi now. And she is seen still hanging out with Casey Jones.

As Leo comes back to New York City, we discover that this rich man, Maximillian J. Winters is trying to make himself an army of ancient legendary monsters.

For you see, 3000 years ago, an evil entity and his generals have been cursed to stone, which left 13 creatures escape into our world through an inter-dimensional door of sorts. (still following?) This Maximillian has been able to re-capture all these monsters (that have apparently been running free around the world, without being seen all these years!?) and with the help of the Foot Clan, he has been able to collect all these statues from these above-mentioned generals. The time is near and the portal will opened soon.

Or something. It's a really confusing and unnecessary complicated backstory for such a simple kind of film.

Anyways, our gangs gets back together not without difficulty and will have to face Karai and the Foot Ninjas before the big epic final showdown at the time-portal-doorway-thingie.

Thankfully, the film is a "sequel" of sorts. Not a full-on reboot which would have seen our heroes starting over from the beginning, avoiding the cliché of the origin story Hollywood seems so fond of.

TMNT works as a great continuation to any past Ninja Turtles iteration - comics, movies, cartoons. Although Kevin Monroe says it specifically the fourth episode in the TMNT film series. The film does make some references to the entire Ninja Turtles mythos, but mostly the 1st and 2nd live action films (with only a mere cameo allusion to the scepter from TMNT 3).

April is a ninja now, and younger than she ever was, which makes the connection to the film trilogy a bit tedious at first.

The film went through so many storylines during the pre-production, the actual plot wasn't entirely decided until very late. Originally it was set to take place in space, but they ended bringing it back to New York to simplify things. (though the way the city plays so little a part in the final act shows that it wasn't so at first)

TMNT marks the first time Michaelangelo's name is actually officially correctly spelled to "Michelangelo"! All films, merchandising, comics have since then featured it that correct way as well.

For this occasion, an all-new cast took over the character's voice. Leonardo (James Arnold Taylor), Michelangelo (Mikey Kelley), Donatello (Mitchell Whitfield) and Raphael (Nolan North) are all still very recognizable yet completely different! Nolan North is a fun fan-favorite fit for Raph. Sarah Michelle Gellar makes a convincing April O'Neil even if she has so little to do. Chris Evans is a great Casey Jones (and would be a totally great pick for Casey for a live action role as well).

Mako Iwamatsu plays here is final role as Splinter. He died during production, this film is dedicated to him. Greg Baldwin took over for most of the missing dialogue. John DiMaggio as a small role as Colonel Santino. And Kevin Smith gets an hilarious random cameo as the diner cook.

They even got Lawrence Fishburne to narrate the film!

TMNT has a stunning art direction and great animation.

Everything looks so crystal clear and smooth. Finally, the Turtles are able to perform fantastic ninja acrobatics.

Even if I'm not personally super fond of the Turtles' "mouth" (their nose seem way too big to me...), you gotta recognize is a fantastic looking animated film. Granted, they look great, with a nice even mix of the original comic book style with the lighter smoother shapes from the cartoon series.

The film features a pretty random modern soundtrack. With equally parts rap and parts rock. All the current hype hits. It works in the scenes and also works as a mix tape (CD, yeah).

The generic monsters rampaging in the heart of NYC is probably the weakest part of the film. The problem lies that there's no true villain for the film to focus on. While it's a nice change from Shredder, I kinda wish they had gone for an actual Ninja Turtles villain here (why not Triceratons for example?).

Still, the core of the film is about the brotherhood and family aspect.

It's sad to see Donatello and Michelangelo kinda forgotten, left in the background and comedy relief roles.

The film is a bit dark for kids, yet childish enough on other parts.

Overall, it's a great film with some truly spectacular action scenes.

It can easily appeal as much to fans of the old 80s series, those who've been dedicated toys collectors over the years, newer fans from the recent cartoon series, older fans from the original comics and kids alike!

It's a great introduction to the series.

The unique real problems are that plot is a bit silly and the pretty generic random alien villains are far from memorable. Random alien villains are so overused (my real complaint with The Avengers as well).

And that the film mostly focus on two of the four Turtles...

There was originally plans for a sequel to this film. It would have seen the return of the Shredder and focus on the Foot Clan. There were some talks about the Rat King as well. But despite the commercial success, this movie gathered mostly bad reception so nothing was really followed on.

Although the 2000s TMNT cartoon was then altered a lot to regain the same aesthetic and designs.

I give it:

2 / 3 Felixes!