The filmmakers let us in on their secrets to make the new film truly cutting-edge using state-of-the-art CG animation, giving Leonardo, Michelangelo, Donatello and Raphael a completely new look for the 21st century.

Read our review.

Like, watch the trailer dude!

"Let's make a movie, dude."

- Peter Laird, TMNT co-creator

The Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles were created in 1984 by Peter Laird and Kevin Eastman. TMNT writer-director Kevin Munroe reveals: "They did it to spoof the world of superhero characters. The original comic book was published in black-and-white and only 3 000 copies were printed which, much to everyone's surprise, sold out right away."

Within a year, Laird and Eastman were approached with a toy license, which was followed by a cartoon television series and three live-action feature films over the course of nine years. The live-action films, released in the early 1990s, provided a brand-new TMNT experience for audiences around the world with state-of-the-art animatronics and expert martial arts choreography.

Producer Thomas K. Gray, who also served as producer on all three previous TMNT films, notes: "We wanted to take the Turtles to another level in film and do something we hadn't done before. With the syndicated cartoon series doing great, and the comic book enjoying cult status, we wanted to give the fans something new."

To re-imagine TMNT for a new generation, the producers turned to up-and-coming animation filmmaker Kevin Munroe. Gray comments: "Kevin came in and designed a great trailer for us. It was obvious that he loved the Turtles and we really liked his ideas."

Daring to go where no Turtles have gone before...

Production of TMNT took place over roughly 28 months, in two very different locations: Sherman Oaks in sunny Southern California and on the other side of the Pacific Ocean in Hong Kong. More than 300 artists were employed in Hong Kong and nearly 70 artists in Los Angeles. With the production offices across an ocean, a project like this would have been almost inconceivable in the pre-high speed internet era.

However, with access to advanced video teleconferencing and high-speed point-to-point data transfers, Munroe says: "It felt like the Hong Kong office was just a click away. Also, because of the time difference, we could work around the clock. When it's five in the afternoon in LA, it's nine in the morning in Hong Kong, so we could teleconference at the end of our day, while they were just starting theirs."

Munroe remarks: "It was interesting to work with so many of the artists in Hong Kong because they have such a deep appreciation for martial arts, which complemented the style of the film. These are guys in their twenties who've been raised on Kung Fu action flicks, and when I would say things like, 'Okay, I want you to make your own Kung Fu movie in this scene,' they'd just go nuts over it."

In establishing a fresh storyline for the all-new CGI version of TMNT, the director states: "We didn't want to go back and remake the original, so we decided to start a new chapter in the Turtles' lives. We wanted to focus on each of the Turtles more by emphasizing their family relationship and how it's evolved since the last time we saw them."

Designing TMNT

To bring his vision for the latest incarnation of TMNT to life, Munroe sought the talents of veteran art director/concept illustrator Simon Murton. With more than 25 years of experience in film concept illustration and design, Murton counts among his recent film credits I, Robot, Van Helsing and The Matrix Revolutions.

Munroe says: "This was Simon's first all-CGI project and to me that's the most exciting thing about it because he had a different take on design coming from live action. I told him that, when we're done, I want to be able to go through this movie, and pull any frame of the film and put it into a comic book... in widescreen, of course."

"We began with cinematic cues from certain black-and-white films from the 1940s and '50s," notes Murton. "I really wanted to push the lighting and the environments to create the look and feel of an alternate reality."

With most of the story set in New York City, Murton stylized the familiar Manhattan skyline and urban landscapes to make them appear uniquely TMNT.

Digitally outfitted heroes

Half the battle in creating believable, CG-animated lean green crime-fighting machines was fought by digital artists who were responsible for researching and developing the Turtles' overall musculature, along with such details as the translucency of their skin and each of the characters' defining traits.

"We designed full-on muscle systems for the Turtles because they're essentially wearing nothing but a sash and a half-shell," Munroe explains. "We also gave them unique characteristics. For example, on Raphael, he actually has veins that pop out whenever he flexes, and Michelangelo has freckles."

Apart from the reptilian crime-fighters, Splinter, a human-sized, mutated sewer rat, presented the animators with another challenge. Munroe describes: "Not only is Splinter furry, but he wears a robe. So we fully rendered and animated the robe as well as his fur to show the effects of movement and outside elements."

Exterior structures ranging from muscles to shells to tentacles also had to be designed and animated for Winters' monsters – all 13 of them.

Beyond attention to the aesthetic quality of the backgrounds and characters, much effort was spent on choreographing the fight sequences for maximum impact.

Working closely with Munroe, animation director Kim Ooi was responsible for overseeing the execution of anything that moves on screen. Ooi offers: "The Turtles' fighting style is derived from Chinese- and Japanese-style martial arts. Many of the fight sequences were inspired by Hong Kong action films, but because we're doing CGI, we can push and stylize beyond the limits of live action."

Perhaps the most important challenge was staying true to TMNT fans while creating a completely new look for a new generation. Tom Gray says: "We wanted to stay true to the concept while taking the Turtles in a new direction. We went back to the original comic book, which is actually grittier than the previous films. We think this will be a fun experience for core fans and new fans alike."