Dr. Dre just accepted the inaugural Global Impact Award from the Recording Academy's Black Music Collective at the 2023 Grammys. In fact, the award is named after him. Moreover, his award came on a night in which dozens of artists came together to celebrate hip-hop's 50th anniversary. Furthermore, the Global Impact Award “recognizes the contributors, creatives and professionals with a proven track record of uplifting Black music.” During the ceremony, LL Cool J presented the Compton legend with the award. Also, he labeled him “an icon who helped define West Coast Hip Hop." In addition, LL believes the mogul's path is "one of the most impactful success stories of our time.” In his speech, Dr. Dre had much to be thankful for.

LOS ANGELES, CALIFORNIA - FEBRUARY 05: Honoree Dr. Dre accepts the Dr. Dre Global Impact Award from LL COOL J (L) onstage during the 65th GRAMMY Awards at Crypto.com Arena on February 05, 2023 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Kevin Winter/Getty Images for The Recording Academy)

Before he spoke, however, the ceremony featured an MC Late-narrated video of the 57-year-old's many accomplishments. From his early days with N.W.A., his solo success, and his business acumen, they hailed him as a trailblazer. “I’m extremely moved by this award,” he remarked. “I want to say thank you to the Recording Academy and the Black Music Collective for this honor, and I know everybody in here probably knows this already, but this is the 50th anniversary of Hip Hop. Make some noise for Hip Hop! Where would I be without it? Where would a lot of people be without Hip Hop, to be honest? Hip Hop became a lifeline for me as a teenager growing up in Compton, and it started with a song called ‘The Adventures of Grandmaster Flash on the Wheels of Steel.'”

Moreover, the artist continued to thank his collaborators and supportive loved ones. “What I love about this award is that it uses my name to inspire the next generation of producers, artists and entrepreneurs to reach for their greatness and demand that from everyone around you,” he concluded his speech. “Never compromise your vision at all, pursue quality over quantity, and remember that everything is important. That is one of my mottos: everything is important.”

After Dre received the honor, LL Cool J and The Roots hosted a tribute to hip-hop's 50th. It featured legendary acts, groundbreaking artists, and current titans of the game. “From The Bronx to the five boroughs, to the West Coast to the Heartland; overseas to Europe, to Africa, to Asia; TikTok, whatever’s next,” LL expressed towards the performance's end. “Because thanks to the 33 Hip Hop artists on stage and the countless more we love, Hip Hop is a global platform today. We’re celebrating. Happy 50th anniversary to Hip Hop, baby!" As always, come back to HNHH for the latest on Dr. Dre and to celebrate all things hip-hop.