Dr. Dre will forever represent his hometown of Compton, California.

The multi-millionaire and award-winning hip hop icon has donated $10 million toward a new $200-million campus for Compton High School, according to the Los Angeles Times.

The school’s new performing arts center will be named the “Andre ‘Dr. Dre’ Young Performing Arts Center” in his honor. The full project is funded through the school district’s bond measure, which was passed in 2015.

“I was an artistic kid in school with no outlet for it,” remarked Dre at Saturday’s groundbreaking ceremony according to the newspaper. “I knew I had something special to offer to the world, but with nothing to support my gift, schools left me feeling unseen.”

He continued, “This city is special, and [the] young people living in it are special.”

According to a press release, the unanimous decision was made to name the performing arts center after the Grammy Award-winning musician back in November of 2017.

“I am looking forward to seeing this tremendous vision break ground and am so thankful to Mr. Young, who has done Compton proud,” expressed Compton Unified Board President Satra Zurita in a statement at the time. “He is firmly planting a legacy of opportunity for our students!”

Superintendent Darin Brawley added, “I am grateful to Mr. Young, not only for making such [a] contribution to our District and its students, but also for seeing our students as valuable… as having potential and deserving of opportunity.”

The facility currently seat over 900 guests and the new campus for the 126-year-old school will serve up to 1,800 students, as reported by The Los Angeles Times. Aesthetic upgrades will include a new gym, an aquatics center, a football stadium, and a track.

The new campus is set to open in early 2025.

By clicking Subscribe, you confirm that you have read and agree to our Terms of Use and acknowledge our Privacy Policy. You also agree to receive marketing communications, updates, special offers (including partner offers) and other information from BET and the Paramount family of companies. You understand that you can unsubscribe at any time.