Grammy award-winning rapper, Kendrick Lamar, born May 12, 1986, is going down in history as one of the best rappers of all time. Known for his self-reflective and revealing lyrics, the Compton rapper stays relatively low-key about his personal life with his longtime girlfriend, high school sweetheart and fiancé Whitney Alford.

The songwriter’s first studio album came out in 2011, and his underground stardom developed into mainstream notoriety. This got him a record deal with none other than the infamous Dr. Dre. This debut album, Good Kid, M.A.A.D City, took him to the top, and his 2015 follow-up, To Pimp a Butterfly, cemented his status as one of the defining voices of his generation. By 2017, he achieved his first number-one single: “Humble.”

With 14 Grammy Awards, six Billboard Music Awards and a Pulitzer Prize, his fame only increases. Behind every celebrity, however, is a team of people who have helped get them into the spotlight. The leader of his team? That would have to be his right-hand woman, Alford.

The “Count Me Out” singer and Alford have shared a bond since they were teenagers in high school, got engaged in 2015 and welcomed two children together.

Besides her engagement to Lamar, Alford has made a name for herself. Over the years, she’s done well in the beauty industry as a makeup artist.

Keep scrolling to learn more about hip-hop star Lamar’s fiancé and their relationship through his lyrics:

Who is Whitney Alford?

Whitney Alford was born on May 12, 1986, in Compton, California, and attended Centennial High School.

After high school, Alford attended California State University Long Beach, where she studied accounting. As a licensed esthetician, she launched her own business in Los Angeles.

The makeup artist and “King Kunta” singer met in high school. Yup, that’s right, this is a classic high school romance. She stole our favorite hip-hop artist’s heart while they were still teenagers.

What started out as a friendship blossomed into a love story for the ages. Her first public appearance was at the Grammy Awards in 2014, where Lamar was nominated for seven awards.

The two are more than just lovers — they’re best friends, and Lamar is not shy to admit it. He told The New York Times Magazine in 2014, “She’s been there since Day 1.”

In March 2015, the rapper won his first Grammy, and he proposed to Alford that same year. They later welcomed a first and second child into the world.

Do Kendrick Lamar and Whitney Alford Have Children?

Yes! Us Weekly reported the two welcomed their first child, a baby girl on July 26, 2019. The pair later welcomed a baby boy whose name and birthday have not been revealed.

Not much is known about the family since the past SNL host is fairly private. Fans rarely see glimpses of all of them together on social media.

Learning About Lamar’s Fiancé Whitney Alford Through His Lyrics

The best way to learn everything there is to know Lamar’s lady love is to study his music.

On his album Mr. Morale and the Big Steppers, the rapper discusses a lot of personal moments. He’s never been afraid to spill his heart out, even about things like family issues, therapy and trauma (like in “Mother I Sober”). The most prominent topic, though, is Alford herself. Looking back through his lyrics, you’ll find she’s been there since the beginning.

“She Needs Me”

“She Needs Me” was the first love song to grace the pages of a Lamar tracklist. This 2009 song from an EP delves into the flawless nature of a woman. Its simple yet tasteful content explores who the woman is and how she lives her life.

Initially, the song’s story implies she needs the singer, but Lamar realizes it’s him who cannot live without her.

“Determined”

That same EP also held this gem, which subtly explains how Alford influenced Lamar’s work. He is quite committed to keeping their relationship private but won’t hesitate to admit that she’s been there for him.

The song discusses how Lamar’s lady kept him on track even when he doubted himself. Their love blossoms over some KFC chicken, and she eases his fears. Lamar is who he is because of Alford.

“Growing Apart (To Get Closer)”

This 2010 track comes off the mixtape titled Overly Dedicated. Lamar does not pretend to be perfect — or even a good person — since he’ll openly share that he struggles with lust and has cheated on his partner. This song mentions those struggles, and is transparent with his audience about the strain it puts on Alford.

“Buried Alive Interlude”

When Drake dropped the Take Care album, Lamar was already on his way to stardom. With fame comes doubt and insecurity, especially regarding this high school romance with Alford. The two clearly struggled over whether to let each other go.

“LOVE.”

Fast forward half a decade, and the two are engaged, according to his 2015 interview on The Breakfast Club talk show. A couple of years later, Lamar released the album DAMN, and it becomes clear that the high school sweethearts have matured into adult partners. What never changed is Alford’s love for him.

Mr. Morale & The Big Steppers

Thank You!

You have successfully subscribed.

Finally, in 2022, Alford is brought out of the secrecy and mystery surrounding Lamar’s personal life and put on the cover of his album Mr. Morale & the Big Steppers. Alford is holding their second child in her arms in the picture while he holds their first child. This album is all about family. Specifically, it is all about the family they created together.

The album cover is just the start, though. As Lamar tackles the age-old mystery of “knowing thyself,” Alford’s voice is heard as a narrator encouraging the rapper along his journey. In her final song, “Mother I Sober,” she says, “You did it, I’m proud of you/You broke a generational curse.”

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7tr%2FMmp6aspmjsm%2BvzqZmnJ2cmq%2BztdOyZKedp6h8r7HWrGawoJmpu6bFjJqjn6eimXqnrcKtqmaZkqTCtXnKnqWdqpmYuG64wKaYq6tdm7aiusKenGg%3D