About Mrs Henderson Presents... The Musical

No longer booking

Mrs Henderson Presents at the Noel Coward Theatre

Don’t miss the ‘joyous musical fun’ (The Times) of Mrs Henderson Presents, the hilarious five-star musical the Daily Express is hailing as a ‘triumph’.

Based on the much loved BAFTA and Oscar winning British film that starred Dame Judi Dench and Bob Hoskins, this ‘unashamedly entertaining’ (Daily Mail) new musical has been acclaimed by the Times as ‘a winner’.

Starring Olivier-Award winning actress Tracie Bennett and Emma Williams, Mrs Henderson Presents … The Musical is directed by Terry Johnson.

Mrs Henderson Presents will run from 9 February 2016 until 18 June 2016 at the Noel Coward Theatre.

STORY

Mrs Henderson Presents is the true-life story of the Windmill Theatre in London’s Soho, run by the formidable Laura Henderson. Recently widowed, the 70 year old Mrs Henderson opens the Windmill and hits on the idea of presenting vaudeville shows featuring tableaux of nude young ladies to entertain the the troops and boost morale during the Blitz. The theatre became famous for its refusal to close despite the bombings, and its catchphrase “We never close” went down in history.

CAST

Mrs Henderson Presents will star Tracie Bennett as Laura Henderson, Ian Bartholomew as Vivian Van Damm and Emma Williams as Maureen who all reprise the roles they played in Bath.

CREATIVE TEAM

The show is directed by Terry Johnson (La Cage Aux Folles) and features music by George Fenton – who composed the music for the film – and Simon Chamberlain, lyrics by Don Black and a book by Terry Johnson adapted from Martin Sherman’s screenplay.

Choreography will be by Andrew Wright (Barnum, Singin’ in the Rain), with set design by Tom Shortall, costume design by Paul Wills (American Buffalo, Barnum), lighting design by Ben Ormerod and sound design by Gareth Owen.

Show Information

Venue Information

Noel Coward Theatre, St Martin's Lane, London, WC2N 4AA

Nearest Tube or Train: Leicester Square (Northern line, Piccadilly line)

Nearest Buses: 24, 29, 176

Maps:

Google

Apple

What3Words

News about Mrs Henderson Presents... The Musical

More Great Shows

More >

All Shows

Musicals

Plays