Mrs. Henderson Presents is a 2005 British comedy drama film helmed by Stephen Frears. The movie follows a wealthy widow, Mrs. Laura Henderson, in post-war London. Bored and restless, she seeks a new purpose in life and decides to purchase a run-down theatre.

Here’s how you can watch and stream Mrs. Henderson Presents via streaming services such as Peacock.

Is Mrs. Henderson Presents available to watch via streaming?

Yes, Mrs. Henderson Presents is available to watch via streaming on Peacock.

The protagonist turns the run-down theatre into a more christened one called The Windmill. However, her ideas for traditional plays and variety shows do not gain enough traction. Worried by financial problems, she stumbles upon a daring idea inspired by the Moulin Rouge in Paris. She wants to do an all-nude play.

The cast includes Judi Dench as Mrs. Laura Henderson, Bob Hoskins as Vivian Van Damm, Christopher Guest as Lord Cromer, Will Young as Bertie, Kelly Reilly as Maureen, and others.

Watch Mrs. Henderson Presents streaming via Peacock

Mrs. Henderson Presents is available to watch on Peacock.

Peacock is among the most popular streaming platforms in the United States. You can stream your favourite shows and movies via Peacock anytime on any device as per your preference.

You can watch via Peacock by following these steps:

Go to PeacockTV.com

Click ‘Get Started’

Choose your payment plan

$5.99 per month or $59.99 per year (premium)

$11.99 per month or $119.99 per year (premium plus

Create your account

Enter your payment details

Peacock’s Premium account provides access to over 80,000+ hours of TV, movies, and sports, including current NBC and Bravo Shows, along with 50 always-on channels. Premium Plus is the same plan but with no ads (save for limited exclusions), along with allowing users to download select titles and watch them offline and providing access to your local NBC channel live 24/7.

Mrs. Henderson Presents’ official synopsis is as follows:

“Eccentric 70-year-old widow purchases the Windmill Theatre in London as a post-widowhood hobby. After starting an innovative continuous variety review, which is copied by other theaters, they begin to lose money. Mrs. Henderson suggests they add female nudity similar to the Moulin Rouge in Paris.“

NOTE: The streaming services listed above are subject to change. The information provided was correct at the time of writing.

The Strangers Stalk Stagecoach Country Music Festival

Renny Harlin’s The Strangers Chapter 1 is creeping closer to theaters, but in the meantime, the titular characters are getting some practice… Movies Neil Bolt 24 mins ago

She is Conann VOD Release Date Confirmed for Epic Fantasy Movie

Altered Innocence has announced the She is Conann VOD release date for Bertrand Mandico’s queer epic fantasy movie. She is Conann… Movies Neil Bolt 54 mins ago

IF New Video Goes Behind-The-Scenes With Voice Cast

A new featurette for IF has been released, highlighting the ensemble voice cast for John Krasinki’s latest movie. The upcoming fantasy comedy starring… Movies Ryan Louis Mantilla 11 hours ago

Think Fast: Asking Us to Use Our Brains Since 1989

In the early days, Nickelodeon found a lot of success with their game shows, especially programs like Finders Keepers and… TV Stephen Wilds 12 hours ago