About Folder

Title

Meeting with Dr. Erich Mende, Chairman, Free Democratic Party, West Germany, 4:00PM

Collection

White House Photographs

Finding Aid | Digitized Content

Digital Identifier

JFKWHP-1962-03-19-A

Folder Description

AR17, KN13

Extent / Physical Description

1 negative (color, 2 1/4 x 2 1/4 inches)

Preferred Citation

Robert Knudsen. White House Photographs. John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston

Subject(s)

Place(s)

Contributor(s)

Knudsen, Robert L. (Robert LeRoy), 1929-1989

Media Type

Use Restriction Note

Some of the archival materials in this collection may be subject to copyright or other intellectual property restrictions. Users of these materials are advised to determine the copyright status of any document from which they wish to publish.

Copyright Notice

Documents in this collection that were prepared by officials of the United States as part of their official duties are in the public domain.

Some of the archival materials in this collection may be subject to copyright or other intellectual property restrictions. Users of these materials are advised to determine the copyright status of any document from which they wish to publish.

The copyright law of the United States (Title 17, United States Code) governs the making of photocopies or other reproductions of copyrighted material. Under certain conditions specified in the law, libraries and archives are authorized to furnish a photocopy or other reproduction.

One of these specified conditions is that the photocopy or reproduction is not to be "used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research." If a user makes a request for, or later uses, a photocopy or reproduction for purposes in excesses of "fair use," that user may be liable for copyright infringement. This institution reserves the right to refuse to accept a copying order if, in its judgment, fulfillment of the order would involve violation of copyright law. The copyright law extends its protection to unpublished works from the moment of creation in a tangible form.

Page Last Updated:

October 28, 2023 9:32:06 AM EDT