“

The legendary warrior is back for more action!

— Boxart

”

Rygar: The Legendary Adventure is a reimagining of the 1986 arcade classic, Rygar, developed and published by Tecmo exclusively for the PlayStation 2. The game released in North America on November 25, 2002, and in Japan on December 5 the following month. In Europe, the game was instead published by Wanadoo Edition and released on May 30, 2003.

The game attempts to evolved the classic side-scrolling mechanics of the original into a full-blown 3D action-adventure game, with destructible environments and larger levels to explore. As the player progresses, they gain access to increased combat and traversal options, including grappling to new environments. The game received generally positive reviews and was followed with a rerelease, Rygar: The Battle of Argus in 2009.

Gameplay[]

To Be Written.

Plot[]

To Be Written.

Development[]

To Be Written.

Reception[]

Rygar received largely positive reviews on its original release, holding a Metacritic score of 83. In his review for IGN, Douglass Perry claimed that the only drawback to the game was its short length, favorably praising the combat, graphics, and soundtracks, ultimately giving the title an 8.4, saying "Rygar makes up for its weaknesses by displaying an array of gameplay elements woven craftily together in a game that should make any action gamer happy." These opinions are largely mirrored by Eurogamer's own review, written by Martin Taylor, who compared the game to Capcom's then-recent Devil May Cry and while he criticized the camera for its pre-set angles making combat frustrating, the slow start combined with the short length, and described the story and performances as easily ignored guff, he was impressed with the gameplay and found it engaging throughout, awarding it an 8/10 score.

GameSpot's Giancarlo Varanini gave the title a more mixed review, calling the story weak, complaining about the static camera and the lack of variety in enemies, but found it's ultimate problem to be the short length- stating that the package didn't offer enough compelling reasons to come back for replays or further content to unlock, and that the 4-5 hour runtime was insufficient. Varanini did compliment the game's graphics and music, calling the former "absolutely beautiful" and the latter "excellent". He also praised the game's ability to maintain a strict 60FPS despite the detail of the character models, which he noted helped the feel of the gameplay. Taking all of these points into account, Varanini awarded the game a 7.3.

Rygar would ultimately received a nomination at the DICE Game Awards in 2003, for Outstanding Achievement in Original Music Composition, coming up behind Medal of Honor: Frontline