The news we have all been waiting for is now here.

The news from Kettering based Pegasus Software is that End of Life for Opera II is finally here. Pegasus Software has commenced the of End of Life for Opera II with the announcement of no further updates to be made for the Opera II Payroll module.

From February 2018, Pegasus will no longer issue HMRC updates for Opera II Payroll. To remain HMRC compliant, Pegasus Opera II clients must upgrade to Opera 3 before February 2019.

After the 2018/19 tax year, Opera users that remain on Opera II and not being up-to-date with legislation are taking the risk of attracting fines from HMRC and damaging both their reputation as an employer and a business. Ian Thomas, Synergy Technology.

Pegasus is also reducing the upgrade discounts available. If you are currently running on Opera II, now is the time to move whilst the discounts are still in place for your business.

Upgrading to Opera 3

Synergy Technology urges all Opera II users to upgrade to Opera 3 as soon as possible and avoid any multiple demands or delays to upgrade.

Once you get started you can then enjoy the features available in Opera 3 including: enhanced user interface, improved reporting, open period accounting and credit management.

Opera 3 also has a brand new user interface with a bright, fresh look and feel. The introduction of a ribbon bar navigation and custom designed icons makes the user experience better. It really is so much easier to use. Users will become far more organised using the new Scheduler application that allows you to run Opera 3 tasks at a time that suits you. Ian Thomas, Synergy Technology.

With Opera 3 you can schedule tasks such as period ends, system back up and tidy system files to run overnight or over the weekend so you do not disrupt the day to day running of your business. Other enhancements include full integration with MS Office 2010 as well as mouse wheel navigation to speed up record searching.

Opera 3 does just about everything, in fact Opera 3 practically runs our entire business! Nick Blythe, Container Components.

Using a dedicated Pegasus Partner like Synergy Technology gives you peace of mind that your transition is smooth and trouble free. As a dedicated Opera specialist we can work with you to understand your requirements, analyse problems, manage change and rapidly implement Opera 3. We can provide face-to-face advice, support and training every step of the way.

Contact Synergy Technology on 0345 456 0050 to discuss your company’s requirements. Further information regarding upgrading to Opera 3 will be posted as they arise.