Say what you like about Scottish football but when it comes to club crests and badges, it's hard to beat.

There's lions, squirrels, eagles... even a harp and a boat, some nice flowers and a famous factory. Something for everybody.

But have you ever wondered where they originated from or how the designs came about?

We've taken a look...

ABERDEEN

The Dons possess a badge that is steeped in history.

The original crest, designed by local artist Donald Addison in the early 1970s, featured a capital letter A to form the outline of goal posts.

A football was used in the middle of the A while FC followed to signify the football club.

Simplicity was key with this design and while the current crest shows off modernisation, it retains plenty from the early work of Addison.

Exploits in Europe saw the words Aberdeen Football Club added to the design in a bid to make the badge more recognisable to sides outside of Scotland and two stars have been added above the badge on the jersey to signify their European trophies.

The 1903, the year the club was formed, has sat beneath the famous A goalposts in the middle of the red and white circle since the mid 80s. And anybody who collected Panini stickers back in the day will tell you the shiny version of this was always the pick of the bunch.

CELTIC

The colours green and white have become synonymous with those in the East End of Glasgow but there's few more recognisable badges in world football.

Much like the colours, the four leaf clover that provides the crest's focal point has been similarly iconic.

It was first introduced in 1908 when players were given medals after winning all four domestic trophies.

Since then it has, in some capacity, always stayed with the club and the latest version of the badge has largely been unchanged since coming into effect in 1977-78.

Anniversary badges have become commonplace with the recent example a commemoration of the club's famous Lisbon Lions side who became the first British team to lift the European Cup in 1967.

As well as the four-leaf clover, the year of establishment and the club's full title, much like other sides in the league, complete the circular crest.

DUNDEE

No animals or elements of historical significance in this one.

In Dundee's iconic navy blue colours, the double-shield design encases the letters DFC which are intertwined with each other.

The club first attached a badge to their shirts at the start of the 1950s during a cup game against Motherwell.

And while there have been minor tweaks through the years - including a switch to red and white lettering in the 60s (well, it was a time for experimentation) - the badge has retained its simplicity.

Simple. But effective.

HAMILTON ACADEMICAL

It took 105 years after forming for Hamilton Accies to add a crest to their red and white shirts. Was it worth the wait?

The badge, circular in shape, sees their full title, Hamilton Academical Football Club, arched around a red shield in the centre.

It is based heavily on the Hamilton Coat of Arms and the shield includes three plants to represent the Dukes of Hamilton (not to be confused with those General Lee-driving good old boys, Bo and Luke. They were the Dukes of Hazzard).

The badge has stood the test of time and remains in place after being brought in in 1979. That was also the year the Dukes of Hazzard was first aired. Sadly, it sped off into the sunset in 1985 and never returned.

HEARTS

The heart-shaped crest is steeped in local history having been based upon the Heart of Midlothian mosaic built into the pavement on Edinburgh’s Royal Mile.

It marks the entrance to the, now demolished, Old Tolbooth building which was a site for public executions.

Visitors to Edinburgh typically spit on the pavement heart for good luck.

While historically the badge holds real significance, the actual elements are minimal with the maroon heart holding the club’s HMFC initials as well as the year the club was founded – 1874.

Like Aberdeen, this one always looked classy as a 'shiny' in the sticker book.

HIBERNIAN

There was a moment where Hibs fans were fearful that the club's iconic badge would fall foul to 16th century heraldic law. (Yes, really.)

Heraldic law prevents groups or individuals using designs which include, but are not limited to, elements including crowns, shields and a lion rampant.

In the end, fears were eased and the club could keep the green and white crest.

The central shield holds elements which help unite various elements of the club's background although there has been debate over the years about whether their Irish heritage should be displayed so prominantly.

Anyway, the Irish harp, removed in the 1950s but brought back, takes its place alongside the castle (Edinburgh) and the ship (Leith). Surely they could get The Proclaimers in there somewhere, or at least a few lines of their hit, and Hibs anthem, Sunshine on Leith. Worth thinking about for the next redesign.

KILMARNOCK

If any animal can striker fear into the opposition it's a... squirrel. Maybe if the opposition is a nut and to be fair, there's been a few of them in Scottish football down the decades.

While Hibernian escaped it, Killie did fall foul of heraldic law.

The current crest of the Rugby Park club is an attempt to keep as much of the original as possible.

The previous design closely mirrored the coat of arms for the town of Kilmarnock and was thus deemed unacceptable.

The town’s coat of arms included not one, but two, red squirrels, a purple shield fit with castellations on top with Latin phrases in scrolls at the top and bottom of the whole design.

The current crest retains the two squirrels, has replaced the shield with a football and includes a hand, with fingers in the blessing position. Don't tip it sideways or the hand could be an LA gang thing. Maybe.

The latter element comes from the Boyd family (who were around a long time before current Killie hotshot Kris) coat of arms which is synonymous with the region of Ayrshire. Translating the Latin phrase 'confidemus', which sits at the top of the design, it reads 'We trust'.

LIVINGSTON

One of the newly promoted sides, Livingston's crest design is focused heavily on the side's amber and black colour scheme.

The colours have been used by the team since their inception in 1943.

Having first been Ferranti Thistle, and then Meadowbank Thistle, both had their own unique badges.

Since changing to Livingston FC, the latest design has looked to retain various elements from its predecessors.

The lion rampant, first introduced in the days of Ferranti Thistle, sits inside a yellow and black thistle. The black shield with an amber trim was used in the early days of Meadowbank Thistle.

A Latin motto was used on the initial Livingston badge but has since been replaced with the words 'West Lothian' where the club is based.

MOTHERWELL

A football and a factory. Nothing to do with Danny Dyer though, thankfully.

But the Motherwell Ravenscraig Steelworks pictured on this badge does have a historical significance - so much so that Motherwell are known as The Steelmen.

Sadly its closure in 1992 led to the loss of hundreds of jobs at the plant and thousands more linked to these.

In the club colours of amber and claret, the Lanarkshire side's badge was designed by supporters in the early 1980s. It is circular in shape with a shield enclosed in the middle. The name and the year the club was established sits at the top and bottom while the shield holds three key elements.

Fir trees sit at the top of the shield, which is significant given the club play their home games at Fir Park. Below that sits a football and at the foot of the shield is that famous image of the steelworks.

RANGERS

Interestingly, Rangers' official club crest is the only one in the SPL that is not on the players' shirts.

The design on the jerseys of Steven Gerrard's side sees the letters RFC intertwined.

Alternatively, the long-standing crest appears at Ibrox, on club merchandise and on any literature to do with the side.

The element of contention features the red lion rampant which, as alluded to earlier, is one of the many signatures that heraldic law deems unsuitable for club crests. (Curse you, heraldic law!)

Nonetheless, the club continues to keep the red animal in the centre of their circular badge along with the Govan side's motto - 'Ready'.

ST JOHNSTONE

The club's name is said to have derived from the local parish dedicated to St John the Baptist.

One of the symbols that linked back to him was 'The Lamb of God' and that has stood the test of time and remains on the latest interpretation of the club crest.

The modern design is closest to the one that was introduced late in the 1980s when a double-headed eagle stood beneath the lamb in the centre.

The bird's inclusion comes from the Coat of Arms of the Perth & Kinross District Council, another club looking to incorporate the history of the region into the crest that would go on to represent the football side.

ST MIRREN

Many of the badges on this list were initially created as a variation to the local Coat of Arms and St Mirren was no different.

In the 1950s, the club adapted Paisley's, including two red cinquefoil flowers and two blue covered cups, and despite developing it in recent years, some of the elements have stood the test of time.

The blue-and-white check pattern in the centre of the yellow shield represents the strong connections of Paisley Abbey with the Royal Stewart family.

That blasted heraldic law struck the club in 1996 due to the castle-like elements above the shield and the badge that followed has stuck with the club ever since.

Black and white stripes - the colours of the club - replaced the castle turrets while the club's name is written in black lettering inside the white circle.