One of the nicest things about traveling this year has been the opportunity to take some walks in places outside Irondequoit and Rochester.

Earlier this summer, I had the opportunity to take several walks through my hometown of Midland, Mich., snapping photos along the way of places we used as childhood and teen hangouts; photos of the old neighborhood, including the house my dad and my uncle built that we grew up in; and even one night, walking through the rain with one of my best friends, Dave Marsh, where we took photos of the houses our grandparents -- and for Dave, his great-grandparents -- lived in around town.

These made for very entertaining walks, especially the last one, since Dave and I had a chance to catch up, which does not happen too often at this stage of our lives.

This past weekend, I had another opportunity to do something similar on a walk, though this time, it was in a town I had spent very little time in during my 51 years: Canton, Ohio. I had been to Canton twice -- to visit the Pro Football Hall of Fame in the early 1970s and again just a few years ago.

This time, the plan was to combine my daily walks with a little presidential history. Canton is the city where William McKinley, the 25th president of the United States, lived from 1867 until he was elected president in 1896. There is a big-time McKinley presence in Canton today, 112 years after his death.

Of course, if you know even a tiny bit about McKinley, you might know that he was assassinated in Buffalo in 1901 by a man named Leon Czolgosz. What you might not know about Czolgosz, who was executed in Auburn, Cayuga County, is that he too was a Michigan native, and grew up in a small town (Posen) about 150 miles north of where I grew up.

So, my plan was to try to make some kind of amends to the president, since his final trip to western New York was not productive and his last contact with a Michigander had been a poor one.

For a couple weeks, we looked forward to visiting the McKinley Presidential Library, and found a hotel in downtown Canton (the McKinley Grand, incidentally), so we could be close to the museum.

Unfortunately, work got in the way the night before -- a Rochester shooting scene no less -- and so delayed our departure. By the time we arrived in Canton late Saturday afternoon, the McKinley library was closed for the day, and our schedule on Sunday made it impossible to go through the museum at all.

Still, there was one way to go about this. So Sunday morning, before Cathy and boys were even awake, I sneaked out for a morning walk, with the goal to trek to the McKinley library and then back to the hotel.

This worked out perfectly.

Canton proper is about one-third the size population-wise of Rochester, about 73,000 people live there. But the city has a pretty nice downtown area -- though on Sunday morning at 7:45 it was virtually empty, save for a few homeless souls on park benches. There was a husband-and-wife team taking photos of the tallest building downtown, and I asked the woman if there happened to be falcons up there. She said "yes." So that felt a little like Rochester.

I zig-zagged through the downtown streets to try and build up some mileage -- my morning goal was 5 miles -- and then headed toward the McKinley library. What I did not realize is not only is there the library, there is a massive monument to McKinley, which includes a large statue out front midway up a long set of steep stairs.

The monument is quite impressive.

What made me smile is that there were at least a dozen people -- all types of different folks -- who were using the long stairway as part of their exercise program. Up and down they went in the brilliant morning sunshine. Here was a president, I found, who was helping to keep his fellow citizens healthier more than a century after his death.

Not a bad non-political legacy.

On the way back to the hotel, still zig-zagging up and down streets, I ran into several other historical markers that pointed out important McKinley moments or facts. At one end of Market Street, where our hotel was located, was the Stark County Library, and out front a sign that noted that this is where McKinley's home had stood, and from the front porch of the house, leading up to his first election to the presidency in 1896, he had made speeches to more than 750,000 people who had made their way to Canton.

The house, meanwhile, has been moved down Market Street, across from the hotel, and is now a museum honoring the first ladies of the United States. Unfortunately, that was closed, too.

Still, I counted it as a great day walking, because I was able to get to my 5-mile goal while taking in a bit of presidential history.

Two of my very favorite things.

The September weigh-in

While we were out of town for the holiday weekend, I almost forgot that it was time for my monthly visit to the scales. While I was working out on the treadmill here in the office from February through June, I weighed myself daily, but since I started walking outside consistently, I am limiting myself to one visit to the scales per month.

I was somewhat curious as to what I would find, since over the past six weeks or so, I had added daily fresh fruit to my high-fat, low-carb diet, and I have been consuming a lot of watermelon. A lot ... of ... watermelon.

Now, common sense would tell you that daily snacks of fresh fruit won't ruin the weight-loss effort, but since losing weight is such a mind game, it is always nice to get some confirmation from the scales.

Well, according to this weigh-in, I was at 168.5 pounds, down 54 pounds from the 222.5 that I started with on Feb. 1. Also, Sept. 1 makes it 11 months since my last diet soda, so we are coming up on a calendar year quickly for that anniversary.