(From the S. M. Herald.)

The expedition of A. C. Gregory, who, in 1855

1856 surveyed the upper part of the Victoria River,

in Northern Australia, and the country in the vicinity

of its banks, brings before us one of the most remark-

able men who ever visited these coasts—we mean

Ferdinand von Mueller, the Government Botanist of

Victoria, and director of the Botanical Garden in

Melbourne. This indefatigable botanist and zealous

explorer accompanied Mr. Gregory, and co-operated

with him amidst all the disasters and difficulties

which that expedition encountered by sea and by

land. Mr. Gregory, as is well known, displayed much

energy of character in extricating himself and party

fom the horrors of shipwreck and the miseries of a

dreary sandstone country; and, as he advanced into

the interior he had the satisfaction of finding that

the character of the climate and the fertility of

the soil still continued to improve. The botanical

report, composed by Dr. F. von Mueller on the return

of the party, and read before the Linnean Society

in 1857, is the work of a master mind, and one

of the most important documents ever published in

connection with the botany of Northern Australia.

From that document we learn that the Doctor,

in that portion of his travels, added 800 species

to the flora of Australia, and appended to his

communication two very useful lists of plants. In

the first he determined the Northern limits of 243

species from the Southern latitudes of Australia,

which gradually appeared on the lines of exploration

from latitude 17.80 S. to latitude 27 S.; and in the

second he furnished a systematical catalogue of nearly

all the genera of plants observed during the journey,

with their respective number of species. Dr. F. von

Mueller has now been engaged for twenty-two years

in investigating the vegetabel kingdom of Australia,

and certainly, since the days of Robert Brown, the

celebrated botanist of Flinders' expedition, no one

has done so much to elucidate the peculiar features

of our Australian orders, or to furnish elaborate de-

scriptions of new species. Ferdinand von Mueller is

a native of Northern Germany, and, as both of his

parents died from pulmonary consumption when he

was yet in tender years and possessed of very slender

means, his early career was one of struggle and diffi-

culty. By the force, however, of great natural

abilities, aided by indomitable perseverance, he soon

acquired distinction amongst his competitors of the

same standing, and at the early age of fourteen com-

menced his botanical researches on a part of the

dukedom of Schleswig, and from 1840 to 1846 fur-

nished no inconsiderable contributions to the Danish

Flora. Being of a delicate constitution, and unable

to endure the rigour of a European winter, he was

compelled, on leaving the University, to seek to a

warmer climate. It was a source of deep regret to him

at the time, as his reputation was becoming established,

and he had before him the most brilliant prospects of

success: However, there was no alternative, for he

felt that he could not live through another winter in

the chilly parts of North Germany. He was induced,

moreover, to leave Europe, in order, if possible, to

prolong the life of an affectionate sister - a lady of

remarkable genius and gentle disposition, to whom he

was fondly attached—who has since passed away, we

trust, to a region where disease and pain are unknown.

The providential circumstances which thus drove Dr.

von Mueller from the scenes of his childhood, and

the pleasing associations of his youthful efforts, have

proved of the deepest interest to Australia; for no

sooner did he land on this continent than he became

fascinated with its vegetation, and, instead of returning

home after a few years, as he had originally contem-

plated, he has become permanently settled amongst

us: From 1847 to 1852 he examined in its full extent

the Flora of South Australia, relying solely on his

private resources and the occasional assistance of

generous friends, without any support from the

Government of that colony! In process of time, he

extended his field researches over 25,000 miles; and

partly by his own exertions, and partly by utilising the

collections of others, he accumulated a material—now

permanently located in the department over which he

presides—so varied and extensive, that he began to

think seriously of elaborating a work on the plants of

Australia, provided that the final identifications could

be affected by comparisons with R. Brown's and Cun-

ningham's collections, as well as with Indian ones which

he deemed as important as his own. Those of Drum-

mond and Preise he had almost completely investi-

gated, with many others from all parts of this con-

tinent. Having such resources at hand, he was

preparing to commence a grand work on the Flora of

Australia, but, with a feeling of generosity which does

him as much honour as his most interesting dis-

coveries, he relinquished the main task to Mr.

Bentham; the president of the Linnean Society, when

that illustrious man, on the death of Robert Brown,

resolved to prepare the Flora Australiensis on the

basis of the British collections, though it is a fact

worthy of being recorded, the collections obtained

since the time of Sir Joseph Banks are less ex-

tensive than those which the doctor himself has

treasured up, and which are now affording Mr.

Bentham so much assistance in the preparation of

this great work. And these collections, it must be

borne in mind, are exclusive of the numerous

specimens of plants, which from time to time he

has forwarded to Kew, and other places of Europe.

The task of describing the Flora of Australia—(a work

not even accomplished for civilised Europe, no de-

scriptive Flora of that portion of the globe as yet

being in existence)—involved great sacrifices; but

the Doctor was not reluctant to make them for the

promotion of his darling object. He has devoted

twenty-two years—the best years, it may be said, of

his life—to the collection of material, and, rising

above the sordid love of money, so prevalent in

these colonies, he has expended a private fortune for

the advancement of scientific knowledge. And yet

—noble and generous man—he thinks that he has his

reward in the simple yet suggestive reflection, that

scarcely a square mile in all Australia yet explored

can be found where the plants do not testify of his

exertions. He has added about 2000 species to those

previously known from Australia, one-half from his

own travels, and the remainder from the accumulated

material of contributors. The majority of these have

been described by the Doctor himself; whilst many

of the monocotyledoneae remain yet to be published

from notes in his possession. Nor must it be for-

gotten that, in addition to the labour of describing

new plants, he has re-examined, and partly rearranged,

all the older plants to the number of 7000. From the

various reports published by him, especially the

documents relating to the Exhibition, it will be

perceived that the Doctor has also rendered valu-

able assistance to industrial pursuits connected

with Australian vegetation, and he has said that,

should the Almighty spare his life for such a pur-

pose, he will endeavour, as a crowning work of his

days, to trace out, as his present material admits,

the geological relation of our native vegetation over

the continent. As an author, Dr. F. von Mueller is

as eminent as an explorer and botanist; for his

numerous works, composed as they have been amidst

the distracting occupations of official duties, testify

to his scientific skill and untiring energy. He has

nearly completed six volumes of his Fragmenta

Phytographia Australia, a work written in Latin, for

the information of the learned in all parts of the

world, and illustrated by accurate figures of remark-

able species. He is also the author of a splendid

volume on "The Plants Indigenous to Victoria,"

with suitable illustrations, and another large volume

of engravings with additional drawings, entitled "Litho-

grams." Then again, besides the four volumes of the

Flora Australiensis, to which he has so largely con-

tributed, he has published "The Vegetation of the

Chatham Islands ;" a small volume on "Australian

Mosses"; "Botanical Report on the North Australian

Expedition, under the command of A. C. Gregory,

Esq."; "Monograph of the Eucalypti of Tropical

Australia, with an arrangement for the use of colonists

according to the structure of the bark;" "Contribu-

tiones ad Acaciarum Australiae Cognitionem"; "A

Record of Plants collected by Mr. Pemberton Walcott

and Mr. Maitland Brown, in the year 1861, during

Mr. F. Gregory's Exploring Expedition into North

West Australia"; "Report on the Plants collected

during Mr. Babbage's Expedition into the North-

Western interior of South Australia in 1858";

"Essay on the Plants collected by Mr. Eugene

Fitzalan, during Lieutenant Smith's Expedition to the

Estuary of the Burdekin"; "Botanical Paper relative

to the Expedition in search of Dr. Leichhardt;"

"Documents relating to the Intercolonial Exhibition;"

elaborate "Annual Reports of the Melbourne Botanical

Garden;" Lectures on the "Rust in Wheat;" "The

Fate of Leichhardt," &c., &c., and numerous contribu-

tions to the scientific magazines of Victoria. After enu-

merating the Doctor's labours in the field, and the result

of his literary exertions in the study, the Australian,

public will think that the title "Prince of Australian

Botanists" was most appropriately bestowed upon him

by the late Sir William Hooker; nor will those who

are acquainted with his simple and unaffected habits,

his kindness of heart, and his courtesy to every one,

how humble soever he may be, — differ from the