Pioneering horticulturalist and botanist William Robert Guilfoyle is most often introduced in apposition to Sir Ferdinand Jakob Heinrich von Mueller. Guilfoyle was a gifted garden designer but also the supplanter, in 1873, of Sir Ferdinand as Director of Melbourne's Botanic Gardens. That's von Mueller, the greatly titled and brilliant scientist but rather ordinary landscaper. Von Mueller's imposing life and mind have long been revealed through his publications, and more recently his diaries. Guilfoyle, to many, has remained a lightly sketched character in the shadows of Australia's Victorian gardens and botanical history.

In a new book, illustrated with historical botanical drawings, Mr Guilfoyle's Shakespearian Botany, Guilfoyle is revealed as a plant enthusiast, as a thinker, and even as a scientist, albeit more of an enthusiastic amateur than you know who. In the 35 years it took him to transform Melbourne's Botanic Gardens into one of the world's spectacular botanical landscapes, Guilfoyle also amassed a systematic collection of many thousands of plant species from all over the world. His evolving creation is part landscape masterpiece and part living botanical collection.

Guilfoyle gained experience working beside his father Michael Guilfoyle at their Exotic Nursery in Double Bay, Sydney. His aesthetic and artistic flair enabled him to convert the orderly but uninspiring plantings of the Botanic Gardens into his famous balance of mass and void. He also blended rich plant diversity with landscape design. Step into his botanic garden, or one of his regional Victorian gardens, and you'll see beauty first. Look a little closer though and Guilfoyle the plantsman, the botanist, is there to be discovered.

By the time Guilfoyle was travelling to Europe, later in his tenure, he was confident enough to praise and to criticise some of the world's most revered gardens (which will be detailed in the second book in this trilogy, Mr Guilfoyle's Honeymoon: The Gardens of Europe & Great Britain, to be published in April 2019). He relishes teasing apart design and diversity. Guilfoyle clearly knows his plants, and how to use them best in the garden. When writing of Shakespeare, and claiming the Bard as a botanist, he does so from the comfortable position of being one himself. His approach to the exposition of Shakespearian plants is in the style of plant guide or even ethno-botanist. All this is far from the enthusiastic but inexperienced landscaper who arrived in Melbourne in 1873, and far from the popular perception of Guilfoyle as almost the opposite of the mighty von Mueller.

I should not have been as surprised as I was about the depth of his expertise and interest in plants. After all, in 1874, only a year after he started work in Melbourne, he published a book on Australian botany, and throughout his life he published pamphlets and books on various aspects of plants. As readers will learn in the third of these three fascinating volumes, Mr Guilfoyle's South Sea Islands Adventure on HMS Challenger, Guilfoyle travelled and collected plants in the South Pacific before he took up his post in Melbourne. His travels and interest in Shakespeare provided a further opportunity to write about the things he valued so greatly, plants.

The editors of these gorgeously executed publications, Diana E. Hill and Edmée H. Cudmore, describe Guilfoyle as a "plant hunter". Indeed, as a 28-year-old, armed with 12 Wardian cases, he hunted down and collected plants from the Pacific Islands for Sydney's Botanic Gardens. Around the same time, von Mueller – before Guilfoyle became a rival for his job – proposed Guilfoyle as a Fellow of the esteemed Linnean Society of London, a select assembly of botanists and zoologists.

I am delighted to support this long overdue celebration of William Guilfoyle, the botanist.

Professor Tim Entwisle is Director and Chief Executive of the Royal Botanic Gardens Victoria.

Michael Guilfoyle brought his family to the colony of New South Wales in the late 1840s. Shortly after their arrival in Sydney, he purchased land for a plant nursery in Redfern, which failed in part because of his limited knowledge of local conditions but also due to a scarcity of labourers, as many had gone to seek their fortune on the gold fields of California. Despite this setback, Michael was fortunate that his background and professional reputation led to a request from Thomas Sutcliffe Mort, a committee member of the Australasian Botanical and Horticultural Society, to develop and landscape Greenoaks, Mort's estate at Darling Point.

A forebear, Count Louis Delafosse, had advised the "Sun King", Louis XIV, on his hobby of scenic gardening.

This 12-month commission sealed Michael Guilfoyle's reputation as an Australian landscape designer and ensured the success of his new three and a half-acre exotic nursery and tropical garden in Double Bay.

The new nursery site was carefully chosen. It had good soil and adequate water, except for periods of exceptional drought. Its aspect was excellent and its position, being close to central Sydney and in close proximity to the new Double Bay jetty, was socially most acceptable. It is likely that the failure of the Redfern nursery influenced the way in which young William Guilfoyle was encouraged to experiment, explore, acquire knowledge and identify possible opportunities that could enable him and the extended family to succeed in the uncertain conditions of a changing world and a foreign environment.

William attended Lyndhurst College, Glebe, and a private school in the vicinity of George Street in the city. In addition to his studies, he was expected to assist his father, and even before his formal training commenced, he had acquired a general understanding of horticulture and the principles of landscaping. A highly intelligent pupil, he showed insatiable curiosity and tenacity.

William's parents and his uncle, Louis Delafosse, took an interest in his education and provided him with a tutor in English and European history. They felt that a study of the classics, history and literature was one way of ensuring that their cultural heritage, which they saw as a civilising influence, was not lost in a strange, unknown and rather uncouth environment.

Family friends – the Rev Dr William Woolls, who encouraged careful study of Botany; William Sharp Macleay (1792-1865), of the Australian Museum in Sydney; and John MacGillivray, a naturalist on the HMS Rattlesnake expedition to the Pacific Islands and New Guinea in 1846-50 – were impressed by Guilfoyle's enthusiasm and academic excellence, and offered to further his studies, particularly in the natural sciences. MacGillivray and Woolls encouraged Guilfoyle to collect extensively, first in the Hawkesbury and Blue Mountains areas and at a later stage in the northern New South Wales and southern Queensland districts. It was as a result of this fieldwork that Guilfoyle became interested in the Tweed River area in northern NSW and began to correspond with Ferdinand von Mueller of Melbourne.

In 1866, Michael Guilfoyle left William, then aged 25, in charge of Guilfoyle & Son's Exotic Nursery, and went to investigate the possibility of acquiring suitable arable land near Tweed River. He subsequently purchased 600 acres of scrub land at Cudgen on which to establish an experimental tropical garden and plantation.

From 1869 to 1873, William Guilfoyle had overall control of the Cudgen plantation, which was worked by labourers from the Pacific Islands. The plantation contained 30 acres of orange trees, 41 kinds of sugar cane, camellias, bananas, plums, apples, mangoes and breadfruit. The success of this plantation owed much to his botanical research while on HMS Challenger and to the new species he brought back from the South Seas and trialled at Cudgen.

In 1873, Guilfoyle became probationary curator of Melbourne's Botanic Gardens, Government House Reserve and the Domain.

Many of the Melbourne Botanic Gardens plantings today still echo the wonders, colour and diversity of the South Sea Islands, where he had travelled.

Guilfoyle wrote voluminously and his annual director's reports are meticulous and precise. He was keen to share his knowledge with others. In the spirit of the Victorian age, it seemed only a matter of time before he would turn his attention to the plants, fruits and flowers William Shakespeare referred to in his plays and poems, most particularly in an encyclopaedic series of articles for The Bankers' Magazine of Australasia written between 1899 and 1901.