DOMAIN PARKLANDS - History

CONTEXTUAL HISTORY

The Domain Parklands is part of a British tradition of establishing large Government domains around colonial government houses. The tradition was adapted from British royal estates which included large landscaped parks as settings for royal residences and the nineteenth century concept of public parks. Examples of parklands associated with vice-regal residences can be found in Sydney, Melbourne, Hobart and Adelaide, as well as other colonies of the British Empire including South Africa, New Zealand and Canada.

Several large reserves for public purposes and recreation were established around the Melbourne settlement, on land reserved from sale by Charles La Trobe, Superintendent of the Port Phillip District after his arrival in 1839. These included the Botanic Gardens, South Yarra; Alexandra Gardens, Queen Victoria Gardens, Kings Domain (the Domain Parklands), Royal Park, Fitzroy Gardens, Treasury Gardens and Yarra Park.

Significant Figures in the Development of the Domain Parklands:

Ferdinand von Mueller (1825-1896)

[based on Australian Dictionary of Biography entry by Deirdre Morris]

Ferdinand von Mueller trained as a pharmacist in Germany and developed a particular interest in, and knowledge of, botany before arriving in Adelaide in 1847. In 1852 Mueller travelled to Melbourne where he was appointed government botanist the following year by Lieutenant-Governor La Trobe. In this role he travelled extensively in Victoria, including areas little explored, and discovered and collected many species of indigenous vegetation.

As botanist to the North Australian Exploring Expedition, Mueller travelled across the continent in 1855, observing some 800 species new to Australian botany. After his return to Melbourne he was appointed director to the Botanic Gardens in August 1857, in addition to his role as government botanist. He organised the construction of an herbarium to which he contributed his extensive collection, and began work on his 12 part Fragmenta Phytographiae Australiae (1858-82). As director, Mueller exchanged seeds and plants with Australian, European and American herbaria. He contributed to the seven volume Flora Australiensis between 1863 and 1878.

Mueller's interest lay largely in the scientific and educational aspects of his work, rather than in the development of parklands in Melbourne for aesthetic and recreational purposes. In 1868 it was noted that no statues or structures had been erected in the gardens and Mueller was being criticised for his lack of directorship of the Botanic Gardens. As a result Mueller was replaced in the role by William Guilfoyle in 1873.

Mueller was a tireless worker and he published over 800 papers and major works on Australian botany and lectured on a large range of topics, both scientific and historical. In 1877 he surveyed a large part of the forests and coast of Western Australia at the request of the government. The first part of The Native Plants of Victoria, a work which remained unfinished, was also issued that year. He was involved in a number of societies, awarded a royal medal of the Royal Society, London in 1888 and won many European honours.

Based on his research and exploration, Mueller made recommendations on the use of land and plants and exported eucalyptus seeds to a number of countries. His European scientific contacts were important for the development of Australian science and his work helped gain international recognition for Australian scientific endeavour. His contribution to botany in Australia was immense and long lasting.

William Guilfoyle (1840-1912)

[based on Australian Dictionary of Biography entry by Alan Gross]

William Guilfoyle was born in England and his family migrated to Sydney in 1849. His father was a nurseryman and he established two nurseries on his arrival in Sydney. William acquired an interest in botany and collected specimens on trips to northern NSW and Queensland, some of which he sent to Mueller in Melbourne to identify. In 1868 he joined a scientific expedition to the South Sea islands before growing sugar and tobacco near the Tweed River.

In July 1873 Guilfoyle was appointed curator of the Royal Botanic Gardens in Melbourne and by the time he retired from this position in 1909 he had transformed them into gardens of world-wide repute. He replaced Mueller whose primary interest lay in the scientific aspects of the gardens at the expense of the aesthetic and recreational aspects. Guilfoyle proceeded to design the gardens with sweeping lawns, extensive plantings and picturesque built forms and in this way created panoramic vistas within the gardens. He also managed the cultivated land at Government House and land in the outer Domain, and designed several regional botanic gardens and private gardens.

In addition to his practical landscape gardening pursuits, Guilfoyle continued botanical studies and produced published works including the First Book of Australian Botany in 1874.

Guilfoyle earned his reputation as a brilliant, original and practical landscaper in Victoria, particularly through his extensive and influential work at the Botanic Gardens.

Carlo Catani (1852-1918)

[based on Australian Dictionary of Biography entry by Ronald McNicoll]

Carlo Catani was born in Italy in 1852 and trained as a civil engineer before working in railway construction. In 1876 Catani and two colleagues migrated first to New Zealand and then to Australia. The three Italian men joined the Department of Lands and Survey as draftsmen and in 1880 Catani was registered as a surveyor. Transferred to the Public Works Department in 1882, Catani was employed as an engineering draftsman, and as an assistant engineer in 1886. As head of his section, he directed the draining of the Koo-Wee-Rup swamp in Gippsland. In 1896 he was in charge of the widening and improvement of the Yarra River upstream from Princes Bridge and the scope of the project were greatly enlarged at his urging. It included the design and construction of Alexandra Parade, river bank works to the Cremorne railway bridge, and the laying out and planting of the Alexandra Gardens on the banks of the Yarra River.

Other works that Catani was involved with include the roads to Arthur's Seat and Mt Donna Buang, the Mt Buffalo Plateau development and the damming of the Eurobin Creek to form the lake that bears his name. His last major work was the reclamation of the St Kilda foreshore and the design of the Catani Gardens.

Hugh Linaker (1872-1938)

Hugh Linaker was born in Ballarat in 1872 and began his career in 1889 as an apprentice to the Ballarat Town Council. In 1901 he was appointed curator of Parks and Gardens for the Municipality of Ararat. In this position he landscaped the area known as Alexandra Park and his work was highly regarded in the community. In 1912 Linaker was appointed landscape gardener for the Mont Park Hospital for the Insane and his role included giving advice to other similar institutions such as Yarra Bend, Kew, Ararat, Beechworth, Sunbury, Ballarat and Royal Park. Work began on the 1200 acre site at Mont Park in 1910.

Linaker was appointed Superintendent of Parks and Gardens for Victoria in the early 1930s and in this role he was involved in a number of planting schemes including that of the Shrine of Remembrance and the enlarged King's Domain in 1933. These were his largest and most ambitious projects. He was also involved with the design of such public spaces as Buchan Caves Reserve, Castlemaine Botanic Gardens and Princes Park, Maryborough; private work such as Burnham Beeches for the Alfred Nicholas family and various road reserves in Victoria.

HISTORY OF PLACE

In 1839 the first surveyors described the area south of the Yarra as "hilly forest land - thin of trees". When Charles Joseph La Trobe arrived in 1839 as Superintendent of the Port Phillip District he found that brickmakers, quarrymen and woodcutters were causing "great detriment" to the land south of the Yarra River and he restricted the brickmakers to nine hectares in the vicinity of Princes Bridge. The land was swampy and subsequently became scarred by brickmakers' pits that became lagoons.

The high ground overlooking the Yarra was reserved in 1841 as parkland for a future vice-regal residence. Together with the Royal Botanic Gardens, set aside in 1846, the area consisted of 121 hectares. A "canvas town" grew up on the higher ground south of the Yarra following the gold rush population explosion in the early 1950s. The Government built a number of shelters to house the immigrants on the high ground adjacent to St Kilda Road. After a short time these buildings were used for other purposes.

In 1853 Ferdinand von Mueller was appointed government botanist and commenced the National Herbarium. In 1857 Mueller became Director of the Botanic Gardens and under his direction the Botanic Gardens embarked on a scientific program, introducing foreign plants from other parts of Australia and overseas. Many plants and animals were acclimatised for scientific research and education. Mueller was instrumental in supporting the establishment of regional Botanic Gardens and parks by providing many plants and advice, resulting in an exceptional collection of nineteenth century Botanic Gardens and plants in Victoria.

Control of the Domain was vested in the Board of Land and Works in 1857. However, soon after Mueller was appointed Director of the Botanic Gardens, he asked for temporary control of the land and commenced improvements to transform the reserve between the Gardens and Princes Bridge into a public park. He gradually extended the area under his charge to include all the land bounded by the Yarra River, St Kilda Road, Domain Road and Anderson Street. Mueller envisaged the Domain as an exotic pine forest interspersed with hundreds of Cordyline and groups of palms for contrast, providing dramatic views from the city. A large variety of both exotic and indigenous trees were planted in Mueller's attempt to transform the whole reserve into a park. His work included the conversion of one of the largest quarries into a rockery and fern gully, the provision of Domain Drive across the parkland and the beautification of the lagoons near Princes Bridge.

During this time some areas of the Domain were set aside for other uses, both temporary and permanent. A site was reserved in 1861 for the Observatory and this was extended and permanently reserved in 1868 when a new equatorial telescope was installed. Houses for the Government Astronomer and Assistant Astronomer were built south west of the observatory in 1863 and a botanical museum was built to the south of the observatory. Adjacent land on the corner of St Kilda and Domain Roads was set aside for a military hospital, however this was never built and a large residence constructed in 1866. This three hectare property, which became known as The Grange, was acquired by the government in 1912, the house demolished and the site reserved as public parkland. In 1914 the astronomer's residence was relocated from the Grange site to the stables area in the Domain for garden staff quarters. Mueller also had a botanical museum built south of the observatory for his collections and gardeners' houses were built in the old quarries.

Timber stables were constructed in late 1859 in the southern reserve of the Domain to accommodate camels for the ill-fated Burke and Wills expedition of 1860 and as part of the zoo collection housed at the Gardens. However, the camels were housed instead at the Parliament House stables, and then Royal Park, the expedition's departure point. The collection of the Zoological Society of Victoria was relocated to the Royal Melbourne Zoological Gardens in 1860. The stables were used to house horses belonging to the Gardens and for storage and later as an office.

Largely due to his scientific and educational approach to converting the Domain to a grand forest, Mueller met with a great deal of criticism from the public, the press and a Board of Inquiry. As a result he was asked to resign as Director of the Gardens in 1873, although he retained his post as Government Botanist until his death in 1896.

In 1873 William Guilfoyle was appointed curator of the Gardens, Government House Reserve and the Domain. A design competition had been held in 1872 for the construction of Government House which included an ornamental park for the vice-regal residence and public parkland in the rest of the Domain. None of the submitted schemes won, but a subsequent design by Caulfield resident Joseph Sayce was modified and adopted. Government House was constructed in 1872-76.

Dismissed three months after his appointment, Sayce was replaced by Guilfoyle who took over the implementation of Sayce's plan and made modifications. This modified plan saw the completion of a new road from St Kilda Road to South Yarra in 1874, known as South Yarra Drive (renamed Birdwood Avenue in 1939), the establishment of Government House Drive and the planting of avenues of trees to line these roads and their paths. Government House grounds were enclosed and developed and the lagoon near Princes Bridge was formed into a modified version of the lake layout proposed by Sayce, requiring construction of a river embankment. Islands in the lake were planted with large trees and shrubs. Many trees planted by Mueller were transplanted within the reserve to relieve overcrowding and open up vistas, a nursery was established near The Grange and a service road constructed which later became Dallas Brooks Drive. In 1880 1200 trees and shrubs were planted in Government House grounds and the Domain.

Major developments were undertaken in the northern sections of the Domain Parklands from 1896. Carlo Catani, Chief Engineer of the Public Works Department, was involved in these developments, the first of which was to straighten, deepen and widen adjacent sections of the Yarra River to control flooding. Catani was involved in many large projects, including the development of Mount Buffalo as a tourist resort and reclamation works along the St Kilda foreshore.

Excavated material from the Yarra was subsequently used to fill the lagoons and raise the level of low lying land on the south bank. In 1901 provision was made for the construction of a public road, Alexandra Avenue, on reclaimed land along the southern bank of the river between Anderson Street and St Kilda Road. Its innovative design by Catani featured four separate lanes for carriages, horses, bicycles and pedestrians across its 200 foot width. The equestrian lane, the southern-most track, was the original 'Tan', and was 1.6 kilometres in length between Anderson Street and St Kilda Road. The sections of roadway were separated by plantations edged with large rocks and planted with avenues of oaks, elms, planes and silver poplars. The Duke of York (later King George V) opened the new boulevard which was named in honour of his mother, Queen Alexandra, wife of the new king, Edward VII.

Another road, named Linlithgow Avenue in 1924, was formed around the boundary of the Government House Reserve, joining the newly formed Alexandra Avenue and the existing South Yarra Drive. The reserve incorporating these new roads was named Alexandra Park and included the areas now known as Alexandra Gardens, Queen Victoria Gardens, Toms Block and land along Alexandra Avenue.

Alexandra Gardens themselves were laid out in c.1902-4, probably to Catani's design. They featured a star-shaped flowerbed which was used for floral displays and may have symbolised the Federation Star, a popular emblem after Federation in 1901.

A feature of Catani's designs was rockwork which he used to delineate public open spaces by forming planting beds to define roadway sections and also as a form of ornamentation. Rockeries were used in the newly developed Alexandra Gardens and at either end of Linlithgow Avenue in the form of fountains. The latter were of concrete and volcanic boulder construction.

Boat houses were established along the Yarra River and by 1895 six buildings were located to the east of the existing boat sheds. The earliest of the still extant boat houses, Melbourne University Boat Club Shed was built in 1908, after the Alexandra Gardens had been laid out. The Henley Lawn developed to the east of the boat houses once the Henley Regatta became a popular annual rowing event from 1904, and this was laid out with a symmetrical path system by 1911. The Military Engineers' Depot, was located in between and relocated in the mid-1930s. The Engineers Lawn subsequently became a popular place to stage events. A kiosk was built facing Henley Lawn in 1927 and this was demolished in 1990.

After Queen Victoria's death in 1901, a triangular site near the new Alexandra Gardens was chosen as the location for her memorial statue (VHR H0369) and this was unveiled in 1907. The Melbourne City Council appointed a committee which included Carlo Catani to design the surrounding Queen Victoria Gardens, which was the only major garden to be developed by the Council. Much of the land was low lying, with extensive filling required before work could commence, and the subsequent design included a lake and island. The development of the Gardens was not completed until 1913 when the existing Immigrants Home was demolished and the two acre area it occupied incorporated into the Gardens. After the death of philanthropist Lady Janet Clarke in 1909, subscriptions were called for an ornamental bandstand to be built in her honour. The classical style rotunda was designed as part of a competition won by architect Herbert Black and was built at the edge of the Gardens next to Linlithgow Avenue and opened in 1913. Following the death of Edward VII in 1910, Bertram MacKennal was commissioned to execute a large equestrian statue of the monarch and this was unveiled in 1920 on the site of the original Immigrants' Home. The planting scheme in these gardens included the use of a variety of native trees and shrubs. A late 19th century drinking fountain was relocated from the corner of Elizabeth and Collins Street, firstly to the eastern section of Alexandra Gardens and later to the Queen Victoria Gardens.

In 1904 a South Africa Memorial (VHR H0382) was erected in St Kilda Road, near its existing location at the southern end of the Alexandra Gardens. Designed by the architect George De Lacy Evans and commemorating Australian troops serving in the Boer War, this was the first of many memorials established in honour of Australian servicemen in this vicinity. To the south of this memorial, opposite the entrance to Government House, a statue of the first Governor General of Australia (1901-02) and Governor of Victoria (1889-1895), the Marquis of Linlithgow (VHR H0366), was erected in 1911.

The demolition of The Grange at the corner of St Kilda Road and Domain Road in 1912 enabled this land to be integrated into the Domain. After the First World War a cricket ground was established on the eastern part of the site and Melbourne Grammar funded construction of an oval.

With the exception of two small areas, the Alexandra Park Act 1904 vested c19 hectares bounded by St Kilda Road, the river, Anderson Street, the Botanic Gardens, Government House Reserve, the Domain cow paddock and the approach to Government House gates, in the Board of Land and Works and the Melbourne City Council. In 1922 Melbourne City Council assumed management of Alexandra Park through its Parks and Gardens Committee and responsibility for the park drives was given to the City Engineer.

A major development in the inter-war period was the establishment of the Shrine of Remembrance (H0848) on a triangular area of land in the south west corner of the Domain. Constructed between 1927 and 1934, the Shrine features strong axial north-south and east-west roadways and diagonal paths leading to and from the memorial, with plantings playing an important symbolic role. The MacPherson Robertson Fountain was constructed in the Shrine Reserve at the corner of Domain and St Kilda Roads.

In contrast to the well maintained Alexandra and Queen Victoria Gardens, the northern section of the Domain had been largely neglected when in 1933 provision was made for the Domain and the surrounds of the Shrine of Remembrance to be laid out as public gardens and their control handed to the Council. At this time 17 hectares of the Government House Reserve adjoining the Shrine, and north-east to Alexandra Avenue, were added to the Domain and this 31 hectare park became known as the King's Domain.

The State Superintendent for Parks and Gardens from 1933, Hugh Linaker, designed the King's Domain as informal parkland with avenue plantings, winding pathways and lawn areas with scattered specimen trees. Ornamental shrubbery beds were restricted to boundary treatment to Government House and the Observatory sites. Linaker continued a scattered use of specimen trees in his Shrine landscape design, but with a more formal approach either side of the approaches to the building. A fountain was installed near the corner of St Kilda and Domain Roads as part of Linaker's scheme. Two 'Birdwood Avenue' signs were installed at either end of this road which was renamed in 1939. The 'Tan' equestrian track was extended along Linlithgow Avenue and Birdwood Avenue to the Shrine in 1935 to an overall length of 2.4 kilometres. At this time it was used by up to 200 horse riders on weekends. 19th century tea rooms on Alexandra Avenue were demolished and replaced with eleven rock cairns to define the area used by horses and a concrete horse trough in 1936.

The development of King's Domain in 1933-35 included two features on original stone quarry sites. These were a grotto, fern gully and waterfall near the botanic gardens and stone bridge with arbour seats and pond to the north of the King's Domain site. Both include distinctive rockwork, bridges and water features. The Pioneer Women's Garden was also constructed near an old quarry in the north east of the King's Domain in 1934-36 to a design by Linaker. It was funded by the Women's Centenary Council to commemorate the State's pioneer women as part of Melbourne's Centenary celebrations in 1935 and took the form of a sunken garden with pool and semi-spherical grotto.

The new work was an incentive to remove buildings no longer needed, including the botanical museum. A large shelter was built in 1937 to a design by Frank Stapley to take advantage of views across the skyline and in 1933 a substation was constructed in Domain Road.

Developments after World War Two included: the remodelling of the northern forecourt to the Shrine to accommodate the Second World War memorial; the establishment of a Peace Garden on 1.5 hectares in King's Domain and the construction of two entrance arbours; the construction of a memorial to Sir John Monash, unveiled in 1950 at the corner of Birdwood Avenue (formerly South Yarra Drive) and Government House Drive, a memorial to George V, located in the Domain facing St Kilda Road completed in 1952 and a memorial to Field Marshall Sir Thomas Blamey at the corner of Government House Drive and Linlithgow Avenue in 1960.

The original concept of Alexandra Park was lost when Alexandra Avenue and Linlithgow Avenue were proclaimed public highways in 1958. Further alienation occurred when Alexandra Avenue was reconstructed to pass under St Kilda Road in 1970 and portions of the former tan track, bicycle and pedestrian paths were excised.

In 1959 the Sidney Myer Music Bowl (H1772) was constructed on a 1.5 hectare site in the northern section of King's Domain. This required extensive excavation and grading, and the construction of associated facilities. An upgrade in 1989 absorbed more of the surrounding parkland. The prefabricated La Trobe's cottage was relocated to the Domain parklands in 1963 and relocated within the parklands in 1999. A floral clock was installed in the Queen Victoria Gardens in 1966. The 'Tan' was extended and redeveloped in 1974 into a 3.8 kilometre jogging and walking circuit with extensions along Birdwood Avenue and Anderson Street.

The construction of the Arts Centre in St Kilda Road in the 1960s, increased visitation to the Queen Victoria Gardens opposite and an upgrade occurred as a result. The lakes were remodelled and re-landscaped and a series of sculptures were installed in the 1970s.

A number of other statues, memorials and sculptures have been added throughout the vast site over a period of time. These include the Aboriginal Reburial Stone, installed in 1985, with the remains of thirty-eight Aboriginal people interred under the large granite memorial boulder.

REFERENCES:

P Jellie and G Whitehead. 'A Landscape History of the Melbourne Domain. 1992

J Patrick Pty Ltd in association with Allom Lovell & Associates Pty Ltd. 'Domain Parklands Conservation Analysis'. 2003 [for City of Melbourne]

G Whitehead. Civilising the City, a History of Melbourne's Public Gardens. Melbourne 1997

Australian Dictionary of Biography, various editions