Dallas-born Usher, or Usher Raymond IV, turned 44, another year into middle age, on Friday. But you’re not going to catch the rhythm and blues superstar on a tour stop celebrating his birthday.

Usher is exclusive to Las Vegas. He’s on the final leg of his My Way Vegas Residency at Dolby Live at Park MGM.

Here’s a look at some Usher highlights over the years:

Remember that duet with Blake Shelton in Dallas?

In 2015, Usher and Blake Shelton, who were competing coaches on NBC’s The Voice, joined in the 90th-anniversary celebration of the United Way in Dallas. A gala dinner on the visitors’ side of the field at AT&T Stadium in Arlington was followed by Usher and Shelton trading sets and performing occasional duets.

Then, they covered Joe Cocker’s “With a Little Help From My Friends.” Usher hiked his foot up on stage equipment and went into Cocker mode. As Shelton piped in, they were joined on stage by Troy Aikman, Emmitt Smith, Tony Dorsett and the Dallas Cowboys Cheerleaders.

So what about that residency in Vegas?

Texans will have to go see Usher in Las Vegas. He’s contracted for a 25-show residency through mid-July 2023.

During the residency, Usher is also celebrating the 25th anniversary of his album My Way. He’s released a mini-documentary that chronicles his journey from teen crooner to Grammy-winning R&B star.

Usher’s previous residency at the Colosseum at Caesars Palace concluded in January.

Usher joins Katy Perry, John Legend, Rod Stewart, Miranda Lambert, Santana, Luke Bryan, Barry Manilow, Donny Osmond, Wayne Newton (of course), Sting, Shania Twain, Adele and Maroon 5 with 2022 residencies in Vegas, according to Vegas.com.

There’s even a hologram residency appearance by Whitney Houston, which has the stamp of approval from her estate.

What’s that childhood connection to Dallas?

Usher was born to Jonetta Patton and Usher Diamond III in Dallas. But he spent most of his young life in Chattanooga, Tenn. He joined a local church youth choir when he was nine. His grandmother discovered his singing ability and the family moved to Atlanta to find more exposure for his talents.

But Usher does let people know he has Dallas roots. On a stop from his UR Experience Tour at the American Airlines Center in 2014, he acknowledged that he was proud to have been born in Dallas.

Usher was a Texas Ranger. Well, on film

Usher played a Texas Ranger in the 2001 Western action film Texas Rangers. Usher played the role of Randolph Douglas Scipio, the only Black man in the company of Rangers who were tasked with upholding the law along the Mexican border in the 1870s.

Usher wasn’t the only young star in this Rangers unit. James Van Der Beek (Dawson’s Creek) and Ashton Kutcher (That 70′s Show) also rode tall in the saddle, guns blazing.

A review by The Associated Press panned it: “A documentary on baseball’s Texas Rangers and their last-place season would have been more interesting.”

On Rotten Tomatoes, it received a 28% audience score and a 2% approval rating based on 51 reviews.

Usher’s character, who had concerns about being just a scout for the Rangers unit, had one big scene. In a shootout, he charged a Gatling gun manned by bandits, shot it up and declared to the pinned-down Rangers: “I’m a damn blasted shooter.”