Usher, who is to perform the Halftime Show during Sunday’s Super Bowl LVIII clash between the San Francisco 49ers and the Kansas City Chiefs, has never seen the team he supports lift the Vince Lombardi Trophy.

The R&B singer is a fan of the Atlanta Falcons, who are one of 12 franchises in the NFL that are yet to win a Super Bowl. The Falcons have reached the championship game twice, but on both occasions conceded 34 points on their way to defeat. The Georgians lost out to the Denver Broncos in 1998 and - after throwing away a huge lead - to the New England Patriots in 2016.

Why does Usher support the Atlanta Falcons?

It was in Atalanta that Usher’s music career took off. Born in Dallas, Texas, he spent his early childhood in Chattanooga, Tennessee, before moving to Georgia’s state capital at the age of 12.

Aware of his musical abilities, his family felt he would have a better chance of capitalising on his talent in a city larger than Chattanooga - and within two years of arriving in Atlanta, Usher had secured his first record deal.

Over the three decades since then, the 45-year-old has amassed nine No. 1 hits on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, has won eight Grammy Awards, and has racked up a net worth reported to be around the $180 million mark.

Consoled by Wahlberg after Falcons blow Super Bowl LI

Sporting Falcons colours, Usher was in the crowd for Atlanta’s most recent Super Bowl appearance, a historic defeat to the Patriots at Houston’s NRG Stadium. Leading 28-3 in the third quarter, Atlanta proceeded to concede 25 points without reply, before New England completed a stunning comeback win with an overtime touchdown. It is the biggest turnaround in the Super Bowl’s nearly six-decade history.

In the aftermath of the Falcons’ heart-breaking Super Bowl LI meltdown, celebrity Patriots fan Mark Wahlberg shared a screenshot of a video call with Usher, with the message: “Trying to console my guy”. The pop star, in turn, posted: “Can’t win them all. Congrats to the Pats. We will RISE UP and come back stronger!”

So far, Atlanta have failed to live up to Usher’s promise. After reaching the Divisional playoffs in 2017, the team has now missed out on the postseason six times in a row, finishing up with a losing record on each occasion.

Super Bowl LVIII: when, where, how to watch?

The 49ers face the Chiefs in Super Bowl LVIII on Sunday 11 February 2024, with kick-off at Allegiant Stadium scheduled for 6:30 p.m. ET/3:30 p.m. PT. Viewers in the United States will be able to watch the game on CBS and Paramount+.

You can stream Super Bowl LVIII live on fuboTV, which offers users a free trial.

You’ll also have the option of following live-text coverage of the Super Bowl right here at AS USA. We’ll be building up to the showpiece event throughout game day, before providing you with play-by-play commentary of the 49ers vs the Chiefs.

What has Usher said about his Super Bowl LVII Halftime Show?

Confirmed as Super Bowl LVIII’s halftime performer in September, Usher has described his selection for the concert as the “honour of a lifetime”.

On Friday, the singer took part in the NFL’s Halftime Show press conference, discussing his plans for a performance that he has said will be a celebration of his 30-year career, and will offer viewers “hope for the future”.

“It definitely has been a challenge to squeeze 30 years into 13 minutes,” Usher told the press conference’s host, Nadeska Alexis, adding: “I was very mindful of my past, celebrating my present, which is here in Las Vegas, and thinking about where we’re headed in the future.

“And that was really the idea. What songs do I feel people know me for? What songs have been a celebration of all of the journey of what life, and love, and emotion has been offered in my music?”

Watch - Usher’s Halftime Show press conference:

Is this Usher’s first ever Super Bowl Halftime Show?