Australia’s premiere synth-prog outfit VOYAGER have played to their strengths and have covered the Australian Modern Classic ‘This Boy’s in Love’, originally by Electronic duo The Presets. Fusing together VOYAGER’s signature Epic Electro Progressive Power Prog Metal with a huge pop song, the VSets version is sure to be a hit.

The band comments on the cover: “The Presets song is one of those songs that I heard and thought “I wish I’d written this”. At the time it came out it was so fresh in Australia, and so bizarre that it became so popular because it’s really very much Euro Style Dark Synthie EBM. Given that a lot of Voyager songs start out as electronic ideas, this semi-obscure modern Australian classic was a no brainer to cover. We hope you enjoy!”

Due to a hard border closure, VOYAGER are forced to cancel their previously rescheduled ‘Runaway’ tour dates, minus the Perth show on February 12th 2021.

Vocalist Danny comments on the cancelation: “With heavy hearts we advise that the hard border just this past week imposed by the WA government has made it impossible for us to continue with our “Runaway” tour scheduled for February in Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and Canberra. The band will perform in Perth on 12th February 2020 only. We tried our best to reschedule the dates to a time where we felt confident we could travel and that safety concerns were not an issue, but sadly that is no longer the case. We are forever grateful to our fans who bought and kept their tickets to our rescheduled shows. To our Brisbane fans, we hope you enjoy The Other Festival and we wish we could be there with you. Full refunds for Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and Canberra will be available at the point of purchase. We’ll have news of another online show in the coming weeks.”

Destined for longevity and worldwide success, Perth based quintet VOYAGER recently signed their first worldwide recording contract with Season of Mist following the release of their 6th opus Ghost Mile. Ghost Mile saw dedicated fans contribute to the band’s Pledge Music campaign in 2017, reaching the band’s goal in just a little over a week.

If there is one word to describe VOYAGER’s most current form, it is colourful. After years of evolution and amassing worldwide influences that mold the Perth quintet’s unique sound, VOYAGER have truly come into their own in recent years, crafting a path of success both on and off stage. The genre-transfiguring act blend new-romantic and 80’s infused vocals, keytar solos, technical yet melodic fretwork, groovy bass and bombastic drumming efforts. All of which make VOYAGER the pop/prog/power/rock/metal force that they are renowned as today.

Having toured the world a few times over and having shared the stage with names such as DEFTONES, LEPROUS, NIGHTWISH, COHEED and CAMBRIA, as well as headlining a number of festivals including opening the main stage at Download Festival Australia 2019, Voyager are back with a taste of what’s to come. The band’s versatile sound sees them complement a multiplicity of line-ups, and attract the love and attention of a wide demographic of fans!

In a bid to resonate with audiences all around the world, frontman Danny Estrin explains that “Colours in the Sun” is a musical depiction of a personal journey to an adopted country. “We are the colours in the sun” says Voyager, who are celebrating Australia’s vast and varied beauty with their new album.