LOS ANGELES — Comedian George Carlin, a counter-culture hero famed for his routines about drugs and dirty words, died of heart failure at a Los Angeles-area hospital Sunday, a spokesman said. He was 71.

Carlin, who had a history of heart and drug-dependency problems and had suffered several heart attacks in the past, died at Saint John’s Health Center in Santa Monica at about 6 p.m. after being admitted earlier in the afternoon for chest pains, spokesman Jeff Abraham told Reuters.

Known for his edgy, provocative material, Carlin achieved status as an anti-Establishment icon in the 1970s with stand-up bits full of drug references and an infamous routine called “Seven Words You Can Never Say on Television.” A regulatory battle over a radio broadcast of that track, from his classic 1972 album “Class Clown,” ultimately reached the U.S. Supreme Court.

In the 1978 case, Federal Communications Commission vs. Pacifica Foundation, the top U.S. court ruled that the words cited in Carlin’s routine were indecent, and that the government’s broadcast regulator could ban them from being aired at times when children might be listening.

Carlin’s comedic sensibility often came back to a central theme: humanity is doomed.

“I don’t have any beliefs or allegiances. I don’t believe in this country, I don’t believe in religion, or a god, and I don’t believe in all these man-made institutional ideas,” he told Reuters in a 2001 interview.

Carlin broke new ground for both himself and stand-up comedy in general with his 1972 album “FM & AM,” which won him the first of four Grammys for best comedy recording. His others were for “Jammin’ in New York” (1993), “Braindroppings” (2000) and “Napalm & Sillyputty” (2001), the latter two based on his best-selling books of the same name.

He recorded 22 albums in all, as well as taped 14 HBO specials; the next, “It’s Bad for Ya,” was reportedly completed in March and will presumably be aired by the cable network with a disc to be released by Atlantic Records posthumously. The native New Yorker also appeared in several films, including three for director and fan Kevin Smith (“Dogma,” “Jersey Girl” and “Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back”) as well appearances in “Bill & Ted’s Excellent Adventure,” “The Prince of Tides,” “Car Wash” and voice work in “Cars.”

And still Carlin kept touring indefatigably: He last appeared in Southern California on May 18 at the Grove of Anaheim. (See related links for one of his last interviews.)

He is survived by his wife Sally Wade, and daughter Kelly Carlin McCall.

Carlin was due to be awarded the 11th annual Mark Twain Prize for American Humor by the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts at its Nov. 10 ceremony, according to the Associated Press.