RESEARCH METHODOLOGY

DISCLAIMER

1. TORRENT CABLES LTD. COMPANY PROFILE

1.1. Key facts

1.2. Financial Performance

1.3. Key Executives

1.4. Ownership and Major Holders

1.5. Company History

2. TORRENT CABLES LTD. BUSINESS OVERVIEW

2.1. Business Description

2.2. Major Products and Services

2.3. Markets and Sales Activities

2.4. Locations, Subsidiaries, Operating Units

3. TORRENT CABLES LTD. SWOT ANALYSIS

3.1. Overview

3.2. Strengths

3.3. Weaknesses

3.4. Opportunities

3.5. Threats

4. TORRENT CABLES LTD. FINANCIAL ANALYSIS

4.1. Financial Statements

4.1.1. Income Statement

4.1.2. Balance Sheet

4.1.3. Cash Flow

4.2. Financial Ratios

4.2.1. Profitability

4.2.2. Margin Analysis

4.2.3. Asset Turnover

4.2.4. Credit Ratios

4.2.5. Long-Term Solvency

4.2.6. Growth Over Prior Year

4.2.7. Financial Ratios Charts

4.3. Stock Market Snapshot

5. TORRENT CABLES LTD. COMPETITORS AND INDUSTRY ANALYSIS

5.1. Torrent Cables Ltd. Direct Competitors

5.2. Comparison of Torrent Cables Ltd. and Direct Competitors Financial Ratios

5.3. Comparison of Torrent Cables Ltd. and Direct Competitors Stock Charts

5.4. Torrent Cables Ltd. Industry Analysis

5.4.1. Electrical Equipment Industry Snapshot

5.4.2. Torrent Cables Ltd. Industry Position Analysis

6. TORRENT CABLES LTD. NEWS & EVENTS

6.1. News & PR Activity Analysis

6.2. IR Corporate News

6.3. Marketing News

6.4. Corporate Events

7. TORRENT CABLES LTD. EXPERTS REVIEW1

7.1. Experts Consensus

7.2. Experts Revisions

8. TORRENT CABLES LTD. ENHANCED SWOT ANALYSIS2

9. INDIA PESTEL ANALYSIS2

9.1. Political Factors

9.2. Economic Factors

9.3. Social Factors

9.4. Technological Factors

9.5. Environmental Factors

9.6. Legal Factors

10. TORRENT CABLES LTD. IFE, EFE, IE MATRICES2

10.1. Internal Factor Evaluation Matrix

10.2. External Factor Evaluation Matrix

10.3. Internal External Matrix

11. TORRENT CABLES LTD. PORTER FIVE FORCES ANALYSIS2

12. TORRENT CABLES LTD. VRIO ANALYSIS2

APPENDIX: RATIO DEFINITIONS

LIST OF FIGURES

Torrent Cables Ltd. Annual Revenues in Comparison with Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Profit

Profit Margin Chart

Operating Margin Chart

Return on Equity (ROE) Chart

Return on Assets (ROA) Chart

Debt to Equity Chart

Current Ratio Chart

Torrent Cables Ltd. 1-year Stock Charts

Torrent Cables Ltd. 5-year Stock Charts

Torrent Cables Ltd. vs. Main Indexes 1-year Stock Chart

Torrent Cables Ltd. vs. Direct Competitors 1-year Stock Charts

Torrent Cables Ltd. Article Density Chart

1 – Data availability depends on company’s security policy.

2 – These sections are available only when you purchase a report with appropriate additional types of analyses.

The complete financial data is available for publicly traded companies.

SWOT Analysis

SWOT, which stands for Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats, is an analytical framework that identifies the internal and external factors that are favorable and unfavorable for a company.

Enhanced SWOT Analysis

Enhanced SWOT is a 3×3 grid that arranges strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats into one scheme:

How to use the strengths to take advantage of the opportunities?

How to use the strengths to reduce likelihood and impact of the threats?

How to overcome the weaknesses that obstruct taking advantage of the opportunities?

How to overcome the weaknesses that can make the threats a reality?

Upon answering these questions a company can develop a project plan to improve its business performance.

PESTEL Analysis

PESTEL (also termed as PESTLE) is an ideal tool to strategically analyze what influence different outside factors – political, economic, sociocultural, technological, environmental and legal – exert on a business to later chart its long term targets.

Being part of the external analysis when carrying out a strategic assessment or performing a market study, PESTEL gives an overview of diverse macro-environmental factors that any company should thoughtfully consider. By perceiving these outside environments, businesses can maximally benefit from the opportunities while minimizing the threats to the organization.

Key Factors Examined by PESTEL Analysis:

Political – What opportunities and pressures are brought by political bodies and what is the degree of public regulations’ impact on the business?

Economic – What economic policies, trends and structures are expected to affect the organization, what is this influence’s degree?

Sociological – What cultural and societal aspects will work upon the demand for the business’s products and operations?

Technological – What impact do the technological aspects, innovations, incentives and barriers have on the organization?

Environmental – What environmental and ecological facets, both locally and farther afield, are likely to predetermine the business?

Legal – What laws and legislation will exert influence on the style the business is carried out?

IFE, EFE, IE Matrices

The Internal Factor Evaluation matrix (IFE matrix) is a strategic management tool helping audit or evaluate major weaknesses and strengths in a business’s functional areas. In addition, IFE matrix serves as a basis for identifying and assessing relationships amongst those areas. The IFE matrix is utilised in strategy formulation.

The External Factor Evaluation matrix (EFE matrix) is a tool of strategic management that is typically utilised to assess current market conditions. It is an ideal instrument for visualising and prioritising the threats and opportunities a firm is facing.

The essential difference between the above mentioned matrices lies in the type of factors incorporated in the model; whilst the latter is engaged in internal factors, the former deals exceptionally with external factors – those exposed to social, political, economic, legal, etc. external forces.

Being a continuation of the EFE matrix and IFE matrix models, the Internal External matrix (IE matrix) rests upon an investigation of external and internal business factors integrated into one suggestive model.

Porter Five Forces Analysis

The Porter’s five forces analysis studies the industry of operation and helps the company find new sources of competitive advantage. The analysis surveys an industry through five major questions:

What composes a threat of substitute products and services?

Is there a threat of new competitors entering the market?

What is the intensity of competitive rivalry?

How big is the bargaining power of buyers?

How significant is the bargaining power of suppliers?

VRIO Analysis

VRIO stands for Value, Rarity, Imitability, Organization. This analysis helps to evaluate all company’s resources and capabilities and bring them together into one aggregate table that includes:

Tangible resources

Financial

Physical

Technological

Organizational

Intangible resources

Human

Innovation and Creativity

Reputation

Organizational capabilities

The result of the analysis gives a clear picture of company’s competitive and economic implications, answering the questions if the resources mentioned above are:

Valuable?

Rare?

Costly to imitate?

Organized properly?