"Tupac" redirects here. For other uses, see Tupac (disambiguation).

"Makaveli" redirects here. For the Italian philosopher, see Machiavelli. For the Tupac album often called "Makaveli", see The Don Killuminati: The 7 Day Theory.

Tupac Amaru Shakur ( TOO-pahk shə-KOOR; born Lesane Parish Crooks; June 16, 1971 – September 13, 1996), also known by his stage names 2Pac and Makaveli, was an American rapper, activist and songwriter. Considered to be one of the most influential and greatest rappers of all time,[1][2] academics regard him as one of the most influential music artists of the 20th century and also a politically conscious activist voice for Black America.[3][4] Shakur is among the best-selling music artists, having sold more than 75 million records worldwide. His lyrical content has been noted for addressing social injustice, political issues, and the marginalization of African-Americans,[5][6] but he was also synonymous with gangsta rap and violent lyrics.[7]

Quick Facts Born, Died ...

Close

Shakur was born in New York City to parents who were both political activists and Black Panther Party members. Raised by his mother, Afeni Shakur, he relocated to Baltimore in 1984 and to the San Francisco Bay Area in 1988. With the release of his debut album 2Pacalypse Now in 1991, he became a central figure in West Coast hip hop for his conscious rap and political rap lyrics.[8][9] Shakur achieved further critical and commercial success with his follow-up albums Strictly 4 My N.I.G.G.A.Z... (1993) and Me Against the World (1995).[10] His Diamond certified album All Eyez on Me (1996), the first double-length album in hip-hop history, abandoned his introspective lyrics for volatile gangsta rap.[11] In addition to his music career, Shakur also found considerable success as an actor, with his starring roles in Juice (1992), Poetic Justice (1993), Above the Rim (1994), Bullet (1996), Gridlock'd (1997), and Gang Related (1997). Shakur's most notable songs include "California Love," "Changes," "Dear Mama," "Hail Mary," "Keep Ya Head Up," "Hit 'Em Up," "Ambitionz az a Ridah," "All Eyez on Me," "Ghetto Gospel," "Do for Love," "So Many Tears," "To Live & Die in L.A.," "How Do U Want It," "2 of Amerikaz Most Wanted," and "I Get Around." Alongside his solo career, Tupac was part of the group Thug Life and collaborated with artists like Snoop Dogg, Dr. Dre, and the Outlawz.

During the later part of his career, Shakur was shot five times in the lobby of a New York recording studio and experienced legal troubles, including incarceration. He served eight months in prison on sexual abuse charges, but was released pending an appeal of his conviction in 1995.[12] Following his release, he signed to Marion "Suge" Knight's label Death Row Records and became heavily involved in the growing East Coast–West Coast hip hop rivalry.[13] On September 7, 1996, Shakur was shot four times by an unidentified assailant in a drive-by shooting in Las Vegas; he died six days later. Following his murder, Shakur's friend-turned-rival, the Notorious B.I.G., was at first considered a suspect due to their public feud; he was also murdered in another drive-by shooting six months later in March 1997, while visiting Los Angeles.[14][15]