Country music singer and songwriter Becky Hobbs has accomplished many things in her life, including writing Alabama's chart-topping I Believe There Are Angels Among Us .

Her latest project is Nanyehi -- Beloved Woman of the Cherokee, a musical in honor of an ancestor.

The musical is one of eight recipients of grants from the 2010 Visual and Expressive Art Program at The Smithsonian's National Museum of the American Indian. The museum supports arts activities to increase knowledge, understanding and appreciation of contemporary American Indian arts.

Hobbs has composed 16 songs for the musical, which will be staged by the Cherokee National Theatre Company in 2011. The goal is to create a traveling production that will eventually head to Broadway.

Hobbs also wrote the script with playwright- director Nick Sweet.

The musical is based on Hobbs' ancestor Nanyehi, also known as Nancy Ward. Her husband, Kingfisher, was killed in battle, and she took up his fight and led the Cherokees to victory over the Creek tribe.

She became a beloved Cherokee leader who advocated peace during the Revolutionary War era, and corresponded with Thomas Jefferson and Benjamin Franklin.

Hobbs is a native of Bartlesville, Okla. She has performed in more than 40 countries and had 25 charted singles.

"My great-great-grandparents, Susannah Taylor Parks and Samuel Parks, arrived in the Indian Territory (Oklahoma) in 1835," Hobbs said. "They had been living in the eastern Tennessee area. For the first time, I recently saw their list of belongings upon their arrival. Talk about touching."

LOTS OF UPCOMING FESTIVALS: This is a great time of the year for blues, gospel, country and bluegrass music. Here's what's coming:

- Papa Joe's Banjo-B-Que, May 28-29, The Hippodrome, North Augusta, with bluegrass festival on May 29 featuring Ricky Skaggs, Old Crow Medicine Show, Little Roy and Lizzy (Long), Crosstie Walkers, Chatham County Line and also Doug and the Henrys.

- 15th annual American Red Cross of Augusta's Hot Southern Night concert, June 4, Lake Olmstead Stadium, with Jake Owen, Chris Young and the Australian sisters trio The McClymonts.

- Jesse's June Jam, June 19, The Hippodrome, North Augusta, benefits Jesse C. Lynch American Legion Post 71 building fund, with The Tom Miller Project, Okefenokee Joe, True North Church Christian Rock Band and the new Nashville duo The Jane Dear Girls.

- Third annual Eryn Eubanks & The Family Fold Music Festival benefiting Lynndale Inc., June 26, Lake Olmstead with variety of entertainers including Flo Carter.