Tarumanagara in English dictionary

Tarumanagara

Sample sentences with "Tarumanagara"

Declension Stem

Ancient kingdoms such as the Tarumanagara and Mataram were dependent on rice yields and tax.

The port of Malayu in Jambi, Kota Kapur in Bangka island, Tarumanagara and the port of Sunda in West Java, Kalingga in Central Java, the port of Kedah and Chaiya in Malay peninsula are among the regional ports that were absorbed within Srivijayan sphere of influence.

He then attended Tarumanagara University, where he graduated with a degree in architecture.

Bekasi is one of the oldest city in Indonesia, and has a history of being the capital city of the Kingdom of Tarumanagara.

After the collapse of the Tarumanagara kingdom, due to an attack by Srivijaya, power in western Java fell to the Kingdom of Sunda.

From all of these inscriptions, it was concluded that Dapunta Hyang established the Srivijayan empire after defeating his enemies in Jambi, Palembang, Southern Lampung and Bangka island, and he even went further to launch a military campaign against Bhumi Java that probably contributed to the decline of the Tarumanagara kingdom in West Java.

In the first era of Hindu-Buddhist in Indonesia, Banyumasan region divided into Tarumanagara Kingdom's influence in the west and Kalingga Kingdom's influence in the east with Cipamali river or "Kali Brebes" as natural borders.

Indonesia entered its historical period after the adoption of Pallawa script and Sanskrit language from India as evidence in some of earliest inscriptions dated from Indonesia's oldest kingdoms such as the Yupa of Kutai, Tugu of Tarumanagara and historical records of Kalingga.

The heyday of the Tarumanagara Kingdom was between the fourth and seventh centuries.

By the end of the 8th century, many western Javanese kingdoms, such as Tarumanagara and Kalingga, were within the Srivijayan sphere of influence.

Based on archaeological data, the early period of Banten society was influenced by several kingdoms that brought Hindu-Buddhist beliefs, such as Tarumanagara, Sriwijaya and the Sunda Kingdom.

The two kingdoms themselves were a result of the division of the former Tarumanagara kingdom.

In the 5th century Banten was part of the Tarumanagara kingdom.

The first mentioning of a settlement at present Bogor dates to the 5th century when the area was part of Tarumanagara, one of the earliest states in Indonesian history.

Ancient kingdoms such as the Tarumanagara, Mataram, and Majapahit were dependent on rice yields and tax.

By the fourth century, the kingdom of Kutai in East Kalimantan, Tarumanagara in West Java, and Holing (Kalingga) in Central Java, were among the early Hindu states established in the region.

The inscription chandrasengkala (chronogram) written 458 Saka, however some historians suggested that the year of the inscription must be read backward as 854 Saka (932 AD) because the Sunda kingdom could not have existed in 536 AD, in the era of the Kingdom of Tarumanagara (358-669 AD).

The Indianised Tarumanagara kingdom was established in West Java around 400s, produced among the earliest inscriptions in Indonesian history.

One such early kingdom was Tarumanagara, which flourished between 358 and 669 CE.

The area in and around modern Jakarta was part of the 4th century Sundanese kingdom of Tarumanagara, one of the oldest Hindu kingdoms in Indonesia.

Buni culture clay pottery was flourished in coastal northern West Java and Banten around 400 BCE to 100 CE Buni culture was probably the predecessor of Tarumanagara kingdom, one of the earliest Hindu kingdom in Indonesia that produces numerous inscriptions, marked the beginning of historical period in Java.

Following the decline of Tarumanagara, its territories, including the Jakarta area, became part of the Hindu Kingdom of Sunda.

After the collapse of the kingdom Tarumanagara following an attack by the Srivijaya empire, power in western Java fell to the Kingdom of Sunda.

Authors