Founded in 1959, the Universitas Tarumanagara (Tarumanagara University) is a private higher education institution located in the urban setting of the metropolis of West Jakarta (population range of 1,000,000-5,000,000 inhabitants), Jakarta SCR. Officially recognized by the Kementerian Pendidikan, Kebudayaan, Riset, dan Teknologi, Republik Indonesia (Ministry of Education, Culture, Research and Technology, Republic of Indonesia), Universitas Tarumanagara (UNTAR) is a large-sized (uniRank enrollment range: 10,000-14,999 students) coeducational Indonesian higher education institution. Universitas Tarumanagara (UNTAR) offers courses and programs leading to officially recognized higher education degrees such as pre-bachelor's degrees (i.e. certificates, diplomas, associate or foundation), bachelor's degrees, master's degrees and doctorate degrees in several areas of study. See the uniRank degree levels and areas of study table below for further details. This 65-year-old Indonesian higher-education institution has a selective admission policy based on entrance examinations and students' past academic records and grades. UNTAR also provides several academic and non-academic facilities and services to students including a library, sports facilities, financial aids and/or scholarships, study abroad and exchange programs, as well as administrative services.

Student Enrollment

Universitas Tarumanagara has an enrollment range of 10,000-14,999 students making it a large-sized institution.

Academic Staff

This institution has a range of 400-499 academic employees (Faculty).

Control Type

Universitas Tarumanagara is a private higher education institution.

Entity Type

Not reported

Financial Aid

This institution offers one or more of the following financial aid for eligible students: scholarships, grants, loans, tuition waivers, emergency financial aid etc.

Study Abroad

This institution offers study abroad and exchange program opportunities for its students.

Distance Learning

Not reported