Arthur Charles Clarke was an author and inventor, most famous for his science fiction novel '2001: A Space Odyssey.' His work ranged from scientific discovery to science fiction, from technical application to entertainment. As an engineer, as a futurist, and as a humanist, Clarke influenced numerous artists, scientists, and engineers through his work.

Clarke's early life

1. Arthur C Clarke was born to an English farming family in the county of Somerset in southwestern England, on December 16, 1917.

advertisement

2. As a child, he enjoyed stargazing and reading American science fiction magazines, which sparked his lifelong enthusiasm for space sciences.

3. After moving to London in 1936, Clarke was able to pursue his interest by joining the British Interplanetary Society (BIS.) He worked with astronautic material in the society, contributed to the BIS Bulletin, and began writing science fiction.

4. After World War II erupted in 1939, Clarke joined the Royal Air Force and served as a radar instructor, and was involved in the early warning radar defense system which contributed to the Royal Air Force's success during the Battle of Britain.

5. After the war, Clarke returned to London, where he was awarded a Fellowship at King's College, London, and obtained a first class honors degree in Physics and Mathematics in 1948.

6. Clarke moved to Sri Lanka (then called Ceylon) in 1956, to pursue his interest in underwater exploration but was diagnosed with polio in 1962 which reduced his diving activities.

7. In 1988, he was diagnosed with post-polio syndrome and became wheelchair-bound until he passed away at the age of 90 on March 19, 2008.

NASA's statement on Clarke's death

"Although his personal odyssey here on Earth is now over, his vision lives on through his writing; he will be sorely missed."

Clarke's works

As engineer-

In 1945, Clarke published his landmark scholarly paper 'Extra-Terrestrial Relays - Can Rocket Stations Give Worldwide Radio Coverage?' in the British magazine Wireless World. In the paper, Clarke set out the first principles of global communication via satellites placed in geostationary orbits.

Clarke was the first to suggest that geostationary orbits would be ideal for establishing worldwide telecommunication relays.

Today, the geostationary orbit at 36,000 kilometers (22,000 miles) above the equator, which Clarke first described as useful for satellite communication relays, is named the Clarke Orbit by the International Astronomical Union.

As writer-

Clarke is best known as a world-renowned science fiction writer. His body of work contains more than 70 books of fiction and non-fiction, and he received numerous awards for his writing.

His first story 'Rescue Party,' written in 1945, appeared in the magazine 'Astounding Science' in May 1946.

Clarke's most famous non-fiction work is 'Profiles of the Future,' which is based on a series of essays he started writing in 1958.

In 1964, he started working with the noted film producer Stanley Kubrick on a science fiction movie script. The result of the collaboration was the film 2001: A Space Odyssey, released in 1968. It is widely recognized as one of the most influential films ever made.

Clarke and Kubrick were nominated for the best original screenplay Academy Award for the film.

Clarke also wrote a novelization of the film; the resulting book, which is based on the early drafts of the film.

advertisement

He published a sequel, 2010: Odyssey Two, in 1982, and worked with director Peter Hyams on the movie version, which was released two years later.

One of the notable aspects of this collaboration was the very advanced way it was done; using a Kaypro computer and a modem to link Clarke in Sri Lanka and Hyams in Los Angeles.

This novel approach was described later in the book The Odyssey File - The Making of 2010.

Clarke also worked alongside Walter Cronkite and Wally Schirra for the CBS coverage of the Apollo 12 and 15 space missions in the United States.

I'm sometimes asked how I would like to be remembered. I've had a diverse career as a writer, underwater explorer, space promoter and science populariser. Of all these, I want to be remembered most as a writer - one who entertained readers, and, hopefully, stretched their imagination as well - Arthur C Clarke

As humanist-

Clarke not only influenced young minds through his writing but also worked in formal education. He served as the first chancellor of the International Space University in 1989-2004.

advertisement

He was concerned about global climate change and what effect it may have on the future of humanity and stressed the urgent need for humanity to move beyond the use of fossil fuels, which he considered one of our most self-destructive behaviors.

Awards and accomplishments

Arthur Clarke's remarkable lifetime work was recognized by both the country of his birth and his adopted home country.

In 1988, Queen Elizabeth II honored Clarke with a Knighthood, formally conferred by Prince Charles in Sri Lanka two years later

In 2005, Clarke was awarded Sri Lankabhimanya (The Pride of Sri Lanka), Sri Lanka's highest civilian honor

There is an asteroid named in his honor, 4923 Clarke, as well as a species of Ceratopsian dinosaur, Serendipaceratops arthurcclarkei, discovered in Inverloch, Australia

1982 Marconi International Fellowship

Fellowship of King's College, London

Gold medal of the Franklin Institute

Vikram Sarabhai Professorship of the Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad

Lindbergh Award

Arthur C Clarke award

The Arthur C Clarke award is a British award given for the best science fiction novel, first published in the United Kingdom, during the previous year. The award was established with a grant from Arthur C Clarke and the first prize was awarded in 1987 to Margaret Atwood for 'The Handmaid's Tale.'

advertisement

Read | Remembering Dr Robert H Goddard, the 'father of modern rocketry' who invented the world's first liquid-fuel rocket

Interested in General Knowledge and Current Affairs? Click here to stay informed and know what is happening around the world with our G.K. and Current Affairs section.