Booze in his thermos, a garment bag slung over his shoulder, out of the morning strolls Paul Newman, itinerant radio announcer, to offer his services to WUSA, patriotic hate station broadcasting from New Orleans.To Newman comes Joanne Woodward, a wandering harlot with a heart of gold, a loving nature, a carved-up face, a certain vulnerability, and a fund of moral rectitude deep enough to float a generation of movie whores. And to them both comes Tony Perkins, shy social worker engaged among the black poor in a mysterious research project—which he learns too late is a fraud designed to discredit welfare, a fraud perpetrated by Pat Hingle, power-mad master of WUSA.Thus Stuart Rosenberg's "WUSA," which opened yesterday at the Penthouse and Plaza theaters, sets the stage for what it clearly intends as a major understanding of social forces at work in America—reactionary social forces, and in the South.If it were an ordinary bad movie (and it is a very bad movie), "WUSA" might, in spite of the distinguished names, and less distinguished presence, of its leading actors, be dismissed with no more than a nod to the tension between Rosenberg's ponderously emphatic direction, and Robert Stone's ponderously allusive screenplay. I suspect Stone wins out, for "WUSA" feels more like poor theater than poor moviemaking—so, that it continually suggests a failed version of "The Balcony," even though it strives to fall short of "The Manchurian Candidate."But at least in its ambitions, "WUSA" is not an ordinary bad movie. For in its climax, a huge white-power rally sponsored by WUSA, it means to hold a mirror up to middle America, to show the hate behind the innocence, the chaos implicit in the call to law and order.So, while Perkins stalks the auditorium catwalks with high-powered rifle, like the shade of Laurence Harvey (who is also in this movie, but in another role), Newman prepares to purge himself, to tell the country what it is like it is, when all hell breaks loose after the firing of the would-be assassin's bullet.In this sequence, during which Newman explains Vietnam to a panic-ridden, rioting mass of the thin-lipped pinch-faced silent majority, "WUSA" has its crucial image, and, presumably, its rational. But in this sequence it displays most brazenly the utter gratuitousness of all its images, the bad faith that informs its self-righteous view of Southern demagoguery, the poverty not of mainstream America but of its own ideas about mainstream America.Despite its obsession with collecting evidence, and its handy school of pseudo-documentary, "WUSA" fights unreal battles with an unseen enemy. Lacking either the grace of art of the vitality of guerrilla theater, it can offer only the coarsest nourishment—and only to the elaborately self-deceived.

The CastWUSA, directed by Stuart Rosenberg; screenplay by Robert Stone, from his novel "A Hall of Mirrors"; cinematographer, Richard Moore; music by Lalo Schifrin; produced by Paul Newman and John Foreman; released by Paramount Pictures. At the Penthouse Theater, Broadway and 47th Street and the Plaza Theater, 58th Street, East of Madison. Running time: 115 minutes. (The Motion Picture Association of America's Production Code and Rating Administration classifies this film: "GP—all ages admitted, parental guidance suggested.")Rheinhardt . . . . . Paul NewmanGeraldine . . . . . Joanne WoodwardRalney . . . . . Anthony PerkinsFarley . . . . . Laurence HarveyBingamon . . . . . Pat HinglePhilomene . . . . . Clorls LeachmanBagdanovich . . . . . Don GordonClotho . . . . . Moses GunnMarvin . . . . . Michael Anderson Jr.