AT:

GR:

CR:

Tuned In

HD: Remembering Jo Van Fleet: Local theater aficionados pay tribute to

Broadway, Hollywood actress

BY: Brian McCoy

CL: LONG ON TALENT: Jo Van Fleet, who died June 10 at the age of 81, lounges

during a scene from the 1936-37 University of the Pacific production

Oliver, Oliver. (Photo courtesy of Holt-Atherton Dept. UOP -- IN TALENTED

COMPANY: Van Fleet in a scene with James Dean, center, and Richard Davalos

from East of Eden. Van Fleet won Best Supporting Actress at the Academy

Awards for her portrayal of Deans mother in the 1955 film. -- SHE HIT HER

MARKS: Van Fleet takes center stage in Neil Simons The Gingerbread Lady,

which ran on Broadway during the early 1970s. (Photos courtesy of Tom

McKenzie

Lionel Kranitz had learned the news just 10 minutes before; the dismay in his

voice was fresh. Im really a bit numbed out right now, he said.

The shock and sadness, however, did not deter him. Kranitz had a story to

tell, a story of the theater that is, no doubt, as old as theater. The focus

of his tale and his grief that morning last week was Jo Van Fleet. The actress

-- raised in Oakland and educated at then-College of the Pacific -- died in New

York June 10. Said to be 81, some reference books gave her age as 76.

Fleet won a Best Supporting Actress Oscar for her portrayal of James Deans

mother in 1955s East Of Eden. The performance marked her film debut; and

over the next 15 years Fleet worked with a number of Hollywood legends,

including Burt Lancaster (The Rose Tattoo, Susan Hayward (Ill Cry

Tomorrow, Clark Gable (The King and Four Queens, Kirk Douglas

(Gunfight At the O.K. Corral, Montgomery Clift (Wild River and Paul

Newman (Cool Hand Luke.

She started her career on Broadway in the 1940s and returned there in the

mid-50s, winning a 1957 Tony Award for her work in Horton Footes Trip to

Bountiful. Kranitzs story dates from that era but another show, a

production of Thomas Wolfes Look Homeward, Angel starring Fleet and

Anthony Perkins.

She was a very big star, and I was Anthony Perkins understudy, recalled

Kranitz, now a Manteca clinical psychologist. Then one night, like it says

in the movies, Tony was too sick to go on and I went on.

Tempestuous talent

For Kranitz, the performance was a potential career-maker. For Fleet, it meant

sharing the spotlight with an untested actor. On stage that night, she made

every effort to steal scenes, until Kranitz put an end to that.

I decided, F--- you, lady; this is it for me. Jo, at that point, decided I

was a worthy opponent, and we became friends. We ran for over a year, and we

became friends socially. She was a good friend for that period of time.

I think she was an enormously talented woman, Kranitz added. Great lady.

If you decided not to belly up to her

bull----, she came across as a human being.

That image of Fleet -- talented but tempestuous, initially difficult to know

but capable of warm, lasting relationships -- was reinforced by other San

Joaquin County residents who knew the actress as an aspiring undergraduate, an

English and theater teacher at Ripon High School, even as a star of Broadway

and Hollywood.

Locally, no one knew Fleet better than DeMarcus Brown. Now 96, the architect

of UOPs drama and dance department taught and directed Fleet during her

Stockton days in the late 1930s, and the two remained in close contact until

just a few weeks ago.

Shes visited here and Ive visited her home many times, Brown said. I

called a short time ago and got no answer and then reached her son and

daughter-in-law, who live in Toronto. Thats when I learned how ill she was.

She was in a coma for several weeks.

Sixty years after the productions, Brown vividly recalls Fleets UOP

performances. She did a very fine Katherine in The Taming of the Shrew and

a very good comedy called Oliver, Oliver, he said.

The Oscar

She earned a teaching credential at UOP in the late 30s; years later, she was

awarded and honorary degree. After earning her credential, Fleet taught

English and theater in Ripon. Student Alice Anderson recalls the young

instructor bringing a new perspective to the drama department, moving it from

melodramas to more sophisticated fare. Moreover, through her connection with

Brown, she was able to borrow Pacifics costumes and sets.

We enjoyed her because she was young and she could relate with us,

Anderson said. There are a lot of interesting stories about her.

There was a little bit of, not scandal but talk anyway, because she dared to

go out with one of the high school seniors. They went out dancing and, of

course, in a place like Ripon, its a parochial thing and everybody was

shocked.

The principal who hired Fleet recalled no such incident. Either way, she left

Ripon and, at Browns urging, decided to pursue theater in New York.

At that time, New York seemed like another world to me, Fleet told the

Associated Press Bob Thomas in a mid-50s interview. But (Brown kept at me

until he convinced me to go.

The AP story continues: After she won the Academy Award, she telephoned her

former teacher to offer her thanks for his help. This, he said through his

tears, makes up for whatever disappointments I may have had in the teaching

profession.

Fleet moved East, enrolled at the Neighborhood Playhouse and studied some at

the Actors Studio. She made her New York debut in 1946 and over the next 10

years moved between Broadway (she worked with Tennessee Williams in Camino

Real and on the one-act that became A Streetcar Named Desire and early

television drama (where the likes of Paddy Chayefsky and Rod Serling wrote for

her.

Brown remained in contact. He recalled one trip to New York where Fleet

insisted they attend one particular play. She said, I want you to see this

young actor, hes going to be important. The talent in question was

Montgomery Clift.

Bittersweet career

Clifts self-destruction would claim him six years after working with Fleet in

Wild River. James Dean would die soon after the premiere of East of

Eden, also directed by Elia Kazan.

His death was a real blow to her, Brown recalled. She was very fond of

(Dean. She thought he was a very remarkable actor at the time.

Cool Hand Luke was filmed in Stockton in the fall of 1966 and Fleet stayed

with Brown during the shoot. Paul (Newman used to bring her back from (the

set, he said.

The picture ended a six-year screen hiatus, and its success brought a flurry

of offers. She appeared with Peter Sellers in I Love You, Alice B. Tolkas,

and a novice Robert DeNiro in The Gang That Couldnt Shoot Straight. Her

final film was Roman Polanskis 1976 black comedy, The Tenant.

She remained active in theater, taking on such projects as Neil Simons

The Gingerbread Lady and an Arthur Miller-directed revival of Death Of A

Salesman. She maintained her Stockton ties, too, helping to launch Lincoln

High Schools theater program and accepting an Outstanding Alumnus Award from

UOP.

In her busiest three decades as an actress, Fleet worked with the legends of

Hollywood, Broadway and television. She was not, however, entirely pleased by

the trajectory of her career.

It was a disappointment, Brown said. She wanted to do more and

circumstances just never turned out. She didnt get to do the big roles she

should have had.

Why? Part of the reason was poor health, which dogged Fleet through much of

her later life. But there also was the tempestuous nature that made her such a

fine Catherine in Browns Taming of The Shrew and that Kranitz saw on

stage in Look Homeward, Angel.

She was difficult ... nobody wanted to direct her because she was hard to

manage, Brown said. She was a very bright woman and incredibly talented,

and, sometimes, she was so talented it became almost a hindrance to her. She

knew so much that she got herself into trouble more times than not.

She was such a fine actress, I think she was one of the finest actresses of

the century, he added. And she would take no crap from anybody.

(Record Staff Writer Dianne Runion contributed to this story.

Brian McCoy writes a weekly radio column. Call him at 546-8293 or write to The

Record, P.O. Box 900, Stockton, CA 95201.