A private university located in The City of Stockton, California, University of the Pacific (UOP) was in the beginning associated by means of the United Methodist Church. On the tenth of July 1851, UOP was chartered in Santa Clara California using the moniker "California Wesleyan College." By 1858, the college founded the first school of medicine on the entire Western Coast. This school of medicine went on to became a part of Stanford University and today is the California Pacific Medical Center. Formerly called "COP" and later "UOP," now the school is principally recognized by the pet name of "Pacific" to steer clear of any association with the University of Phoenix

Click on map to enlarge, click again to reduce

.

The campus was relocated to San Jose, in 1871 and the school opened its campus to women for the first time, becoming the first co-educational independent college in California. The Conservatory of Music opened at Pacific in1878, give rise to being the first of a breed west from the Mississippi. Napa College united with Pacific in 1896 and in 1911, it's name was altered to "College of the Pacific" (COP).

The COP was moved from the San Jose to the Great Central Valley in the City of Stockton In 1925, and in 1961 it was renamed the "University of the Pacific".

Pacific united with the San Francisco College of Physicians and Surgeons in 1962 (originally established in San Francisco in 1896), and another merger in 1966, with the McGeorge School of Law (founded in Sacramento in 1924). Late in 1960s, the university was split from the United Methodist Church, after a "federal law over church-related organizations public funding turned into a concern."

Established in 1851, Pacific remains the oldest university chartered in California. It comprises of three professional colleges: the McGeorge School of Law campus in Sacramento, the University of the Pacific Arthur A. Dugoni School of Dentistry campus in San Francisco, plus the Thomas J. Long School of Pharmacy and Health Sciences located at the Stockton campus.

Pacific announced that an estate gift amounting to $100 million was received from Robert C. and Jeannette Powell in May of 2007. It was an unusual size gift for an institution such as Pacific which is not principally focused on research. Throughout the world Only 29 universities received a more generous gift in the past 40 years.

Pacific remains home to K-PAC 89.7 (FM) Student Radio plus the student operated newspaper The Pacifican.

Campus

The campus in Stockton, which features architectural columns, rose gardens, a tower, a large number of trees and brick-faced architecture, and was employed in several Hollywood films, owing to its aesthetic similarities to Ivy League East Coast colleges including: The Sure Thing, Dead Man on Campus and Raiders of the Lost Ark.

Three primary residential halls call the Stockton campus home: Southwest Hall, the Quad Buildings and Grace Covell Hall . The Quads consist of several smaller separate residential halls all near to one another. Grace Covell is the larger on campus residential hall housing over 350 students while the Quads and Southwest and hold a fewer amount of students. Upperclassmen have housing available in the University Townhouses located to the northeast of the campus and in two new apartment complexes known as Brookside and Monagan Halls.

The facade of Burns tower consists of reinforced concrete, with walls 8 inches thick. At one time tower included a 91-foot antenna mast on the roof. This has since been removed. This monumental tower is named after Robert E. Burns, the president of the University of the Pacific - Stockton, from 1946 to 1971. 200,000 pounds of concrete and 6 million pounds of steel were used in the construction of the tower. The tower includes a carillon near the top, an unused 150,000 gallon water tank, the offices for the Center for Professional & Continuing Education (CPCE), and Pacific's Brubeck Institute. Construction of the tower began in 1963 and was completed in 1964

In 2008, UOP opened a $30 million state-of-the-art University Center in order to provide centralization for all student-centered campus activities. This new University Center houses a mailroom, central dining hall, pub, student cafe, conference centers and a bookstore, taking the place of the McCaffrey Center. At the same time It is constructing a new Biological Sciences Center costing $20 million which will offer advanced laboratory and classroom facilities for scholars studying natural and health sciences.

UOP Campus

Morris Chapel a church of non-denomination with gothic architecture, fantastic acoustics and photogenic backdrops calls the campus home

Demographics

The Stockton campus as of 2007 included 4,646 students including (641 First professional students, 535 graduate students, and 3,470 undergraduates). Around 83% from California with the balance attending from 43 different states and 42 unique countries. There were also 516 students at The University of the Pacific Arthur A. Dugoni San Francisco School of Dentistry, and 1,073 students at the Sacramento McGeorge School of Law.

Undergraduate Ethnic Makeup

White/Caucasian 35%

Asian/Pacific Islander 34%

Hispanic 9%

Multi-ethnic 6%

Unknown 6%

African-American 3%

Non-resident Alien 3%

Native American 1%

Female: 1914: 55%

Male: 1556 45%

Academics

For an facility of its size, the university is unique in the span and makeup of professional and undergraduate instruction it provides. There are more than 100 separate programs available and issues over 60 undergraduate university degrees. According to the rankings of the 2009 US News & World Reports, it is ranked as a member of the top national universities allowing economic diversity, top 50 best value schools, and top nation wide universities featuring ethnic multiplicity, with its outstanding dentistry and pharmacy. Graduate degrees are provided in (M.M., M.A., M.Ed., M.S, and MBA), including educational school psychology specialist (Ed. S.), plus doctoral ( Ph.D, Ed. D., and D.P.T.) degrees spread over 15 departments over five colleges and schools University degrees.

Bachelor of Arts (BA)

Bachelor of Fine Arts (BFA)

Bachelor of Science (BS)

Bachelor of Music

Doctor of Dental Surgery (DDS)

Doctor of Education (Ed.D)

Doctor of Juridical Science (JSD)

Doctor of Pharmacy (Pharm.D)

Doctor of Philosophy (PhD)

Doctor of Physical Therapy (DPT)

Education Specialist (EdS)

Juris Doctor (JD)

Master of Arts (MA)

Master of Business Administration (MBA)

Master of Education (M.Ed)

Master of Laws (LLM)

Master of Music

Master of Psychology (M.A.)

Master of Science (MS)

Degrees are available over a range of nine schools plus a graduate office within the university. They include:

College of the Pacific: The University's school of science and liberal arts, Stockton

Conservatory of Music: The first conservatory of music on the west coast, Stockton

Eberhardt School of Business: Stockton

Gladys L. Benerd School of Education: Stockton

McGeorge School of Law: Sacramento

School of Engineering and Computer Science: Stockton

School of International Studies: One of six undergraduate schools of international studies in America. The school offers four Bachelor of Arts in International Relations, Global Studies, International Affairs and Commerce, and Development as well as a minor. The school offers a M.A. in Intercultural Relations. [The Office of Research and Graduate Studies: Stockton

Thomas J. Long School of Pharmacy and Health Sciences: Stockton

University of the Pacific Arthur A. Dugoni School of Dentistry: San Francisco

An adjunct professor, U.S. Supreme Court Justice Anthony Kennedy, instructs at the McGeorge School of Law. The school's study programs may be found on the school's pages of Academics.

School of International Studies

The School of International Studies augmented its stress on social enterprising: In 2006 when The Katalysis Bootstrap Fund, a foremost microfinance provider from Central America, moved to the Campus at the University of Pacific, giving Pacific the distinction of being first University in the U.S. to house a microfinance center operation on campus.

The School of International Studies started The Global Social Entrepreneurship Center in 2006. According to the school’s website, the center performs exploration on Social Entrepreneurship and also functions as an assembly place forf social entrepreneurship. The school is in the course of creating a specialization of Social Entrepreneurship for its B.A. studies along with a certificate program.

The Skoll Foundation for Social Entrepreneurship has awarded a pair of UOP graduates Martin Burt was given an award In 2005, for his rural entrepreneurship and agricultural education studies, Fundación Paraguaya. Sakena Yacoobi was given an award for her Afghan Institute of Learning foundation, with the goal to restore health and education programs In 2006,

University Athletics

Facilities include the Klein Family 2,500-seat baseball field, the Bill Simoni 350-seat softball field, the Alex G. Spanos6,150-seat basketball and volleyball center, the Amos Alonzo Stagg 30,000 (seat soccer and football) Memorial Stadium, the Chris Kjeldsen swiming Pool. and the Tennis Courts named in Hal Nelson's honor.

UOP, Pacific Tigers competes in the NCAA Division I athletics, principally in the Big West Conference. The athletics department Led by Lynn King, supports 16 different sports: women's and men's basketball, baseball, women's field hockey, women's cross country soccer, men's golf, women's and men's swimming,, women's softball, women's and men's tennis, women's and men's water polo. and women's and men's volleyball. The two national championships awarded the university have been in women's volleyball, a game where the university moved on in (1981-2004) to 24 straight NCAA Tournaments and competed in 9 (2 AIAW, 7 NCAA).Final Fours .

The men's basketball program, The Pacific Tigers has recently enjoyed national success, climaxed by three consecutive manifestations in the NCAA (2004, 2005, 2006) Tournament. Bob Thomason, head coach turn out to be the Big West Conference's most winning league games coach on February. 14, 2009, when he won his 206th league career conquest, passing up the total wins of Jerry Tarkanian, past head coach.for LBSU and UNLV.

The Tigers finished 25-8, In 2003-04 after being awarded an NCAA Tournament First Round game, scoring an unexpected defeat over seeded number 5 Providence in the very First Round. This was the second trip for Pacific to the NCAA Tournaments under the guidance of Thomason (1996-97). In the Big West Conference 2004 championship game, The Tigers also won a game with Cal State Northridge scoring a win of 75-73. Pacific has also shared the regular championship season of the Big West Conference with a 17-1 record. Three times The Tigers have scored a winning streak of 16 games coached by Thomason. During the 2004-05 season, Pacific ranked as high as number 17 in both ESPN/USA Today and AP Polls. Pacific took home an at-large bid as an 8 seed during the NCAA Tournament while they upset 9 seeded Pittsburgh during the First Round. In 2004-05 the Pacific Tigers completed the season with their best performance in UOP history at 27-4.

After scoring the Big West 2005-06, regular season and tournament designations, Pacific secured their third trip in a row to the NCAA Tournament. As a 13 seed, Pacific played the 4th seed Golden Eagles and gave Boston College a run for their money, fighting back from a 13- point shortfall in the second half to force overtime play. In the 1st extra session, The Tigers were ahead by as many as six points, except The golden Eagles was able to push the game into double overtime. Boston College overpowered The Tigers in the 2nd extra session, wining over Pacific, 88-76. Following the 1995 season, after 77 continious years of football, Pacific halted its football games.

Administration

Following the retirement of President Donald DeRosa on July 1, 2009, he was succeeded by Pamela Eibeck, the university's first female and 24th and president. The university embarked on a fundraising campaign of $200 million to build, along with other things, a Biological Sciences Center, a University Center, a library addition, multipurpose gymnasium, and the Klein Family Baseball Field. In the summertime of 2007, UOP made an announcement that it had infinitely surpassed their stated goal, having raised in excess of $330 million7, which included a $100 million bequest gift coming from Robert C. and Jeannette Powell. Assisting the president are a number of vice presidents. During 2005, Ted Leland the former Director of Stanford Athletics made an announcement that he was returning to his undergraduate alma mater to become Pacific's Vice President in charge of University Advancement. The university president is chosen by the Board of Regents of the University, comprising 27 members, including Judge Janice Brown, U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, Judge Connie M. Callahan U.S. Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals and Judge Morrison England U.S. District Court. Former members are sometimes selected as Emeritus Board Members. This list includes Alex G. Spanos, owner of the San Diego Chargers. Philip N. Gilbertson, The provost, presides as chief academic officer, supervising all of the schools and divisions of university. The Council of Deans consists of all academic deans, assistant and associate provosts, the Academic Budget Office plus the Director of Planning and Research .

Greek life

Greek life enjoys a role at UOP, there are four social fraternity houses on-campus, plus five multicultural fraternities overseen by the Department of Housing and Greek Life. A varied assortment of professional fraternities are also on campus, and overseen by the Student Leadership Office and Involvement. UOP is actively involved in deferred recruitment, another way of saying that no student may become a member of a sorority or fraternity until such time as they have completed a minimum of 12 college units while maintaining a 2.5 overall grade point average. About 20% of the Pacific students are engaged in Greek life .

Fraternities

Delta Upsilon - Omega Phi Alpha Chapter

Pi Kappa Alpha - Kappa Nu Chapter

Sigma Chi - Kappa Sigma Chapter

Theta Chi - Iota Eta Chapter

Sororities

Alpha Phi--Iota Gamma Chapter

Delta Delta Delta

Delta Gamma

Kappa Alpha Theta

Multicultural organizations

Delta Sigma Theta

Gamma Alpha Omega

Omega Delta Phi

Rho Delta Chi

Xi Chi Sigma

Professional fraternities

Alpha Chi Sigma—Chemistry

Delta Phi Epsilon (professional)—Foreign Service

Delta Sigma Pi—Business

Kappa Psi—Pharmacy

Lambda Kappa Sigma—Pharmacy

Mu Phi Epsilon—Music - Mu Eta Chapter

Phi Alpha Delta

Phi Delta Chi—Pharmacy

Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia—Music - Beta Pi Chapter

Rho Pi Phi—Pharmacy

Sigma Alpha Iota—Music

Theta Alpha Phi

Service fraternities

Alpha Phi Omega

Honors societies

Omicron Delta Epsilon

Phi Beta Kappa

Phi Kappa Phi

Pi Kappa Lambda

Rho Chi

Sigma Delta Pi

Tau Beta Pi

Significant alumni

Clint Eastwood a chair member on the honorary board of the Brubeck Institute in Stockton.

Susan B. Neuman, 1977, EdD, prominent literacy researcher, educator and author; US Assistant Secretary of Elementary and Secondary Education 2001-2003

James Aiona, Jr., 1977, present Lieutenant Governor of Hawaii

Homero Andrade, 1969, Ecuadorian entrepreneur and politician

Scott Boras, 1977, 1982 (JD), Major League Baseball agent

Dave Brubeck, 1942, legendary jazz pianist and founder of the Brubeck Institute

Connie Callahan, 1975, Judge, Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appealsv

Pete Carroll, 1973, head football coach at the University of Southern California

Matt Castle, 1975, Actor, Musician, Musical Director New York City

Bruce Coslet, 1968, former NFL head coach for the New York Jets and Cincinnati Bengals

Robert Culp, 1949, Actor

Jamie Lee Curtis, 1979 (non-graduate), Actress

Dell Demps, 1992, 1998, former pro basketball player, now San Antonio Spurs executive

Gustavus Cheyney Doane, 1861, U.S. Army, member of Washburn-Langford-Doane Expedition to Yellowstone in 1870

John Doolittle, 1978, United States House of Representatives

Doris Dörrie, 1975, German film director and producer

Arthur A. Dugoni, 1948, President, American Dental Association Foundation. Past President: ADA, AADS, CDA, etc.

Morrison England, 1976, 1983 (JD), U.S. District Court Judge

William A. Finley, 1863 (non-graduate), First president of Oregon State University

Jo Van Fleet, 1941, actress

Tom Flores, 1959, retired Super Bowl-winning coach of the Oakland Raiders of the National Football League

David Gerber, 1950, Golden Globe, Emmy and Peabody Award winning TV producer/executive

John M. Gerrard, 1981 (JD), Nebraska Supreme Court

Allan D. Hardcastle, 1977, 1979 (JD) Judge, Superior Court, Sonoma County

James W. Hardesty, 1975D (JD), Nevada Supreme Court

Walt Harris, 1967, former head football coach at Stanford University and University of Pittsburgh

Jose Hernandez 1985, NASA astronaut

Chris Isaak, 1980, actor and musician

Jennifer Joines, 2004, USA volleyball Olympian (2008)

Malia Kamisugi, 1998, Nationally-ranked open ocean outrigger canoe racer

Joseph R. Knowland, 1895 Congressman and Owner Oakland Tribune

Eddie LeBaron, 1950, former NFL football player and NFL executive

Janet Leigh, 1947 (non-graduate), Actress

Ted Leland, 1970, 1972, former Stanford Athletic Director and Pacific's current Vice President of University Advancement

Bill Lockyer, 1986E (JD), California Attorney General

Ronald O. Loveridge, Mayor of Riverside, California

Craig Manson, 1981D (JD), former General Counsel of the California Department of Fish and Game, Sacramento County Superior Court judge, and Assistant Secretary, Fish, Wildlife and Parks in the U.S. Department of the Interior

Lionel Manuel, 1984 (non-graduate), former New York Giants wide receiver

Bridget Marquardt, 2000 (Masters Degree in Comm.), Playboy Playmate and one of the stars of The Girls Next Door

Steve Martini, 1974 (JD), NY Times Bestselling author of legal novels

Darren McGavin, 1948 (non-graduate), television and film actor

Mike Merriweather, 1982, Pittsburgh Steelers and Minnesota Vikings pro-bowl linebacker

George Moscone, 1953, former Mayor of San Francisco, assassinated along with Harvey Milk by Dan White

Elaina Oden, 1989, two-time Olympic volleyball player

Michael Olowokandi, 1998, former NBA player and 1st overall pick in 1998 NBA Draft

Theodore Olson, 1962, lawyer and former Solicitor General of the United States

Johnnie Rawlinson, 1979D (JD), Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals

Ginnylee Roderick, 1994, Olympic Gold Medalist, Synchronized Swimming (1984)

Anthony Shafer, 1996, Recipient of the Young Alumni Award (2003), Previously a Visual Effects Technical Director at Industrial Light and Magic and Stereoscopic Supervisor at ImageMovers Digital for Robert Zemeckis and Disney

Bradley Schumacher, 1997, 2005, two-time Olympian (1996 Swimming, 2000 Water Polo) and two-time Olympic Gold Medalist (1996 Swimming)

James Farrell Segerstrom, 1968, founder of Rescue 3 International, founding member of the International Rescue Instructors Association, originator of the Swiftwater Rescue Technician program, Executive Director of Special Rescue Services Group, Managing Director for the Canadian/US consortium, World Rescue Services, Inc.

Alex Spanos, 1948, owner of the San Diego Chargers

Chauncey Veatch, 1970, National Teacher of the Year (2002)

Craig Whelihan, 1995, former NFL, XFL and AFL quarterback

Joseph Pomeroy Widney, 1863, 2nd President of the University of Southern California (1891-1895), co-founder of the Church of the Nazarene

Allan Zaremberg, 1978, President & CEO, California Chamber of Commerce

Significant coaches

John Dunning, won 2 NCAA women's volleyball titles and had 7 Final Four appearances as Pacific's head coach from 1985-2000; now head coach at Stanford University

Jon Gruden, former Pacific assistant football coach, later served as head coach of the NFL's Tampa Bay Buccaneers until his dismissal in 2009

Terry Liskevych, former 3-time Olympic women's volleyball head coach; Pacific's head coach from 1977-84

Buddy Ryan, former Pacific assistant football coach, former NFL head coach of the Philadelphia Eagles and Arizona Cardinals

Ed Sprague, former Major League Baseball all-star; current head baseball coach, 2004-present

Amos Alonzo Stagg, "The Grand Old Man of Football", head football coach at Pacific from 1933-46

Bob Thomason, 5-time Big West Coach of the Year and school's all-time winningest men's basketball coach; Pacific's head coach from 1988-present Jan 17, 2010

UOP Campus

Brookside Road

Brookside Hall and Monagan Hall - Campus Housing

Brubeck Way

UOP Stagg Stadium

Bottom row photos by Robert Bellin

Related External Articles

University of the Pacific Official Website

Morris Chapel

University of the Pacific's Residence Hall Association

KPAC Student Radio, 89.7fm

Shop for School Supplies