Kamal Haasan was born in Paramakudi, Ramanathapuram, Tamil Nadu State , India, on 7th November 1954.

He is an Indian film star, screenwriter, film director, film maker, playback singer, choreographer, lyricist, philanthropist, dancer & songwriter, well known in Tamil, Malayalam, Hindi, Telugu and Kannada cinema for his work.

Personal Life:

Kamal Haasan's parents are D.Srinivasan and Rajalakshmi Srinivasan. He was previously married to Vani Ganapathy from 1978 to 1988.

In 1988, he married Sarika Thakur, and the couple got two daughters, named Shruti Hasan and Akshara Hasan. In 2004, the pair got divorced. He then had a live-in partnership from 2005 to 2018 with Gautami Tadimalla.

Career:

As a child artist, he made his acting debut with the Tamil film Kalathoor Kannamma. He was only 4 years old when he played this part, and he earned the President's Gold Medal for his performance.

At the age of 16, he then made his full-fledged acting debut by appearing in the 1970s Tamil film called Maanavan.

He then acted as an assistant director and performed several supporting roles before he eventually played his first lead role in the much-acclaimed Tamil film titled Apoorva Raagangal by K. Balachander in 1975.

This film transformed him into an overnight star, after this movie, he lived up to the hype that was generated by him. In 1983, for his role in the Tamil film Moondram Pirai, he received his first ever National Film Award.

He managed to reach new heights in the Tamil film industry and received Best Actor awards for his films such as Manmadha, Oru Oodhappu Kan Simittugiradhu, and Leelai for three consecutive years.

His success began to grow and in 1981 he made his Hindi film debut with the film named Ek Duje Ke Liye. At the box-office, the film performed badly, but his success was highly praised.

After the success of his movie Saagar in 1985, he earned a niche for himself in the Hindi film industry. In this movie, he shared screen space with Dimple Kapadia and Rishi Kapoor.

Guna, Thevar Magan, Vettaiyaadu Vilaiyaadu, Mahanandi, Vasool Raja MBBS, and Dasavathaaram are some of his prominent Tamil films. Over all, he has worked in 6 languages for films. Among Hindi films, he received tremendous acclaim for his films Chachi 420 and Hey Ram.

In addition to acting, Kamal Hassan has been connected to several facets of filmmaking, including actors, producers, directors, singers and songwriters. He released numerous blockbuster films under his production company Rajkamal International, including Hey Ram, Vishwaroopam, and Chachi 420.

He is also renowned for his philanthropic work and he has kindly contributed to the betterment of the needy in India.

Awards & Honours:

He has received 19 Filmfare awards and 4 National Awards throughout his career spanning over 4 decades.

Kamal Haasan has been honoured by the Indian Government with Padma Shri (1990) and Padma Bhushan (2014) for his film industry services.