Kamal Haasan (Tamil: கமல் ஹாசன்; born 7 November 1954) is an Indian film actor, screenwriter, and director, considered to be one of the leading method actors of Indian cinema. He is widely acclaimed as an actor and is well known for his versatility in acting. Kamal Haasan has won several Indian film awards, including four National Film Awards and numerous Southern Filmfare Awards, and he is known for having starred in the largest number of films submitted by India in contest for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. In addition to acting and directing, he has also featured in films as a screenwriter, songwriter, playback singer, choreographer andlyricist. His film production company, Rajkamal International, has produced several of his films. In 2009, he became one of very few actors to have completed 50 years in Indian cinema.

After several projects as a child artist, Kamal Haasan’s breakthrough into lead acting came with his role in the 1975 drama Apoorva Raagangal, in which he played a rebellious youth in love with an older woman. He secured his second Indian National Film Award for his portrayal of a guileless school teacher who tends a child-like amnesiac in 1982’s Moondram Pirai. He was particularly noted for his performance in Mani Ratnam’s Godfatheresque Tamil film Nayagan (1987), which was ranked by Time magazine as one of the best films of all time. Since then he has gone on to appear in other notable films such as his own productions, Hey Ram and Virumaandi, as well as theDasavathaaram, in which he appeared in ten distinct roles.

Early Career (1960’s)

After shifting from Paramakudi with his family for his mother’s medical treatment, Kamal was enrolled at Holy Angels school in T. Nagar. As a child, he became interested in dance. There are two versions regarding his entry into films. One version has it that, as a little boy, he accompanied a doctor who went to treat an ill woman at the home of movie mogul A V Meyyappa Chettiar (father of AVM Saravanan). On hearing loud shouting from a first-floor tenant of the bungalow, the doctor became uneasy. Young Kamal Haasan strode up the stairway to ask the noisemaker not to shout over the phone as someone was ill, leaving the person astonished. An impressed Meyyappa Chettiar later provided him an entry into films. The other version is that when young boy Kamal accompanied a family doctor of Meyyappa Chettiar to his house, producer AVM Saravanan noticed Kamal as a hyperactive child. He took him over and introduced to AV Meyyappa Chettiar who was looking for a young boy to play a role in the movie Kalathur Kannamma.

Kamal Haasan made his film debut as a four-year-old child artist in Kalathur Kannamma, which was directed by A. Bhimsingh and released on 12 August 1959. He was cast along with the veteran Tamil actor Gemini Ganesan, winning the National Film Award for Best Child Artist. He acted as a child actor in five other Tamil films in the subsequent few years co-starring with Sivaji Ganesan and M. G. Ramachandran. On seeing Kamal’s interests in arts, his parents supported and helped him join the TKS Nataka Sabha, an old-style theatre. T. K. Shanmugam was Kamal’s guru in the theatre. During this period, he continued with his school education at Hindu High School in Triplicane while still being a prominent part of the theatre troupe. He learned acting by watching his guru Shanmugam perform on stage and acquired his interest in make-up from Shanmugam.

Family

Kamal Haasan was born in the village of Paramakudi in the Ramanathapuram district of Tamil Nadu, to a criminal lawyer named D. Srinivasan and his wife Rajalakshmi. He was born as an Iyengar brahmin. Kamal Haasan was the youngest of four children, the others beingCharuhasan, Chandra Haasan and Nalini Raghu. His father was a martinet. He wanted all his sons (Chandrahasan, Charuhasan, Kamalahaasan) to study and do well. The two elder brothers followed their father’s example and studied law. Kamal spent his childhood learning everything except staying focussed on his studies.

Kamal Haasan had referred to his parents in couple of his films, with references being made in Unnaipol Oruvan as well as in the song Kallai Mattum from Dasavathaaram. His eldest brother Charuhasan, like Kamal Haasan, is a National Film Award-winning actor, who appeared in the Kannada film Tabarana Kathe, among others. Kamal’s niece (Charuhasan’s daughter), Suhasini is also a National Film Award winner and is married to director and fellow Award winner Mani Ratnam, who collaborated with Kamal Haasan on 1987’s Nayagan. Chandra Haasan has appeared as the producer for several of Kamal Haasan’s films as well as being an executive of Kamal Haasan’s home production company,Rajkamal International. His brother’s daughter Anu Haasan has appeared in several films in supporting roles, most notably in Suhasini’sIndira. His sister Nalini Raghu is a dance teacher. Kamal Haasan later named an auditorium after his sister as Nalini Mahal.[ Her son, Gautham, played Kamal Haasan’s grandson in his directorial venture, Hey Ram.

Relationships

Despite his celebrated film career, his personal life had some setbacks which have been exploited by the media. In his early career, he co-starred in several Tamil and Malayalam films with actress Srividya. The pair were reported to have been a part of a notorious affair in the 1970s, with their relationship being explored in the 2008-released Malayalam film, Thirakkathaby Renjith, with Anoop Menon portraying Kamal Haasan and Priyamani playing Srividya. Srividya, who died in 2006, was visited by Kamal Haasan at her bedside during her final days. In 1978, at the age of 24, Kamal Haasan married danseuse Vani Ganapathy, who was older than him. Vani put on the mantle of costume designer for her husband’s movies and was publicized for walking along with Haasan into the Filmfare Awards South ceremony of 1980 immediately after their wedding. However, the couple split after ten years together, after Kamal Haasan began dating fellow actress Sarika, confirming in a later interview that he and Vani have never been in touch since their divorce.

Subsequently, Kamal Haasan and Sarika lived together from 1988, opting to marry only after having their second child. Of the two children: Shruti Haasan (born 1986) and Akshara Haasan (born 1991), the former is a singer as well as an upcoming actress, while the latter is pursuing higher studies in Bangalore. Sarika took a break from acting soon after her marriage with Kamal Haasan. However, she replaced his ex-wife, Vani Ganapathy, as Haasan’s costume designer, with acclaimed work in Hey Ram. The couple filed for divorce in 2002, with Sarika estranging herself from Kamal Haasan by the end of the procedure in 2004. His intimate relationship with co-star Simran Bagga, who is twenty-two years younger, became the reason for the split. However, Haasan’s relationship with Simran, who appeared opposite him in two consecutive ventures with Pammal K. Sambandam and Panchathantiram, was short-lived as Simran went on to marry her childhood friend in late 2003.Haasan now lives with former actress Gouthami Tadimalla, who co-starred with him in several films in the late 80s and early 90s. He had helped her during her traumatic experience suffering from breast cancer and the pair have been in a domestic relationship since 2005. Along with Shruti and Akshara, Gouthami’s daughter, Subbalakshmi, from an annulled marriage also lives with them.

Religious views

Kamal Haasan, despite being born into a Hindu Brahmin family, has declared himself as an atheist; many of his films, notably Mahanadi and the two films co-written by Kamal Haasan (Anbe Sivam and Dasavathaaram), have featured anti-theistic views. Kamal Haasan, has also been mistaken for a Muslim due to the Islamic nature of his surname, and was famously stopped for his name at Toronto Airport in 2002. The name originated from a friend of his father, Yaakob Hassan, a Muslim freedom fighter who spent time in prison with Kamal Haasan’s father while imprisoned by the British. Yaakob Hassan had protected Srinivasan from other prisoners who hated the Brahmins. Later, he paid tribute to his friend by incorporating part of his name into his sons’ names.

Social service

Kamal Haasan is actively involved in several social service activities through his fan clubs under the banner Kamal Narpani Iyakkam. (Kamal Welfare Association) His fan clubs are involved in organising blood and eye donation drives and donating education materials to school students. He received the first Abraham Kovoor National Award for his Humanist Activities and Secular Life in 2004. He has turned his fan associations into social service organisations. He was also the project ambassador of Hridayaragam 2010, a fundraiser to set up an orphanage for HIV/AIDS-affected children. In September 2010, Kamal Haasan launched a children’s cancer relief fund and presented roses to children with cancer at Sri Ramachandra University in Porur on the outskirts of Chennai. He has also pledged to endorse consumer products and use the money for social service.

Awards and Honors

Kamal Haasan, a Padma Shri holder, is the most decorated actor in terms of awards in the history of Indian cinema.[80] He holds the record for the most National Film Awards for an actor (four), three awards for Best Actor, and one for Best Child Artist. Moreover, Kamal Haasan holds a record nineteen Filmfare Awards, ranging across five languages. After his latest award in 2000, he wrote to the organization requesting exemption from further awards. In 2003, his films Hey Ram, Pushpak, Nayagan and Kuruthipunal were showcased under the “Director in Focus” category at the Rotterdam Film Festival. In 2004, Virumaandi won the very first “Best Asian film” award at Puchon International Fantastic Film Festival(PiFan).

In 2005, Sathyabama Deemed University awarded Kamal Haasan an honorary doctorate. He received the Chevalier Sivaji Ganesan Award for Excellence in Indian Cinema at the 2006 ceremony of the inaugural Vijay Awards. He received the Living Legend Award in 2007 from FICCI, which recognizes outstanding personalities from the entertainment arena and honors them with awards at their annual global convention, FRAMES. In 2010, the United Progressive Alliance government organised a retrospective of Kamal Haasan’s films. During that event, Union Information and Broadcasting Minister Ambika Soni said the actor fell under a special category, as his cinema broke barriers of language and region. The same year, theGovernment of Kerala honoured him for completing 50 years in Indian cinema during the inauguration of statewide Onam celebrations in Thiruvananthapuram. A light-and-sound show titled “Suvarna Kamalam” to mark Kamal’s 50 years in Indian cinema, conceived by director T. K. Rajiv Kumar, was the highlight of the evening.

Kamal Haasan is also a recipient of the Kalaimamani Award from the Government of Tamil Nadu in 1980. Other recognitions includes a string of Tamil Nadu State Film Awards, Nandi Awards, Screen Awards and Vijay Awards, including four separate awards for his performance in Dasavathaaram. In 2009, Kamal Haasan was appointed as the chairman of FICCI Media and Entertainment Business Conclave, organised by the entertainment division of the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI).

Acclaim and Criticism

Kamal Hassan, widely respected and admired in the Indian film industry, is often praised as someone who would have won many Oscars, if he had been born outside India. His mentor K. Balachandar, while agreeing with such sentiment, says in that case Kamal would not have been able to have a diverse acting career and the adulation he has now. Mani Ratnam, who directed Kamal in Nayagan, has claimed he has missed working with Kamal. Veteran Tamil actor Nagesh rated Kamal Hassan as the best actor he had seen. Kamal Hassan’s contributions to films have been lavishly praised by his peers in the Indian film industry like Shah Rukh Khan, Amitabh Bachan and Aamir Khan. Younger actors and film makers like Surya, Madhavan, Bala and Gautham Menon consider Kamal Hassan as their inspiration. His list of admirers go beyond cinema. M. F. Husain has claimed, he found Kamal Haasan as the most exciting Indian film-maker/actor.

Kamal Hassan has been accused of reusing story lines, plot elements from Western films without crediting them and also for using sexually explicit scenes and themes. He has also been accused of elitism, of offending religious sentiments and of being superficial about the social issues he depicts in his films. He has also been dubbed as an actor who consciously overshadows his co-artists. Other criticisms of Kamal Hassan include complaints about his obsession with needless perfection, which has caused some of his films to overshoot their budgets. Prem Panicker once observed that Kamal Haasan suffers from “the curse of talent”.