Antz is a 1997 American computer-animated adventure comedy film produced by DreamWorks Animation and released by DreamWorks Pictures. It was directed by Eric Darnell and Tim Johnson (in their feature directorial debuts) from a screenplay by Todd Alcott, Chris Weitz, and Paul Weitz. The film features the voices of Woody Allen, Sharon Stone, Jennifer Lopez, Sylvester Stallone, Christopher Walken, Dan Aykroyd, Anne Bancroft, Danny Glover and Gene Hackman. Some of the main characters share facial similarities with the actors who voice them. The film involves an anxious worker ant, Z (Allen), who falls in love with Princess Bala (Stone). When the treacherous scheming of the arrogant officer General Mandible (Hackman) threaten to wipe out the entire worker population, Z must save the ant colony from the flooded tunnel and strives to make social inroads.

Development began in 1988 when Walt Disney Feature Animation pitched a film called Army Ants, about a pacifist worker ant teaching lessons of independent thinking to his militaristic colony. Meanwhile, Jeffrey Katzenberg had left the company in a feud with CEO Michael Eisner over the vacant president position after the death of Frank Wells. Katzenberg would later go on to help co-found DreamWorks with Steven Spielberg and David Geffen, and the three planned to rival Disney with the company's new animation division. The film began production in May 1996, after production had already commenced on The Prince of Egypt (1997). DreamWorks had contracted Pacific Data Images (PDI) in Palo Alto, California to begin working on computer-animated films to rival Pixar's features. Harry Gregson-Williams and John Powell composed the music for the film, making their first animated film. During its production, a public feud erupted between Jeffrey Katzenberg of DreamWorks, and Steve Jobs and John Lasseter of Pixar, due to the production of their similar film A Bug's Life, which was released a month later. This is only worsened when Disney refused to avoid competition with DreamWorks' intended first animated release, The Prince of Egypt.

The film's production resulted in a controversial public feud between DreamWorks co-founder Jeffrey Katzenberg, Steve Jobs and John Lasseter of Pixar, concerning the parallel productions of this film and Pixar's A Bug's Life. This only worsened when Disney refused to avoid competition with DreamWorks' intended first animated release, The Prince of Egypt (1997).

Antz premiered on October 25, 1997, at the Toronto International Film Festival, and was released theatrically in the United States on November 7, 1997, by DreamWorks Pictures. It grossed $171.8 million worldwide on a budget of $42–105 million. Rotten Tomatoes's consensus was that critics praised the voice cast, animation, humor and its appeal towards adults.

Plot[]

Z is an anxious worker ant who chafes at conformity and the fact that everyone, even his psychiatrist, reminds him he is insignificant. While at the local bar one night, Z falls in love with Princess Bala when she visits the bar to escape her suffocating royal life.

The ant colony declares war on an encroaching termite colony, and soldiers are sent to engage the invaders. To see Bala again, Z exchanges places with his soldier friend, Weaver, and joins the army, where he befriends staff sergeant Barbatus. The ants are unaware that General Mandible, the army's leader and Bala's fiancee, is secretly sending the soldiers loyal to the Queen to die so he can stage a coup d'état. In the battle, everyone except Z is killed by much-larger acid-shooting termite defenders. Before dying, Barbatus tells Z to think for himself instead of blindly following orders. Meanwhile, Weaver joins the digging crew and falls in love with Z's co-worker, Azteca.

Z returns home and is mistakenly hailed as a war hero. Secretly unsatisfied, Mandible congratulates him and introduces him to the Queen. There, Z meets Bala, who recognizes him as a worker. Z panics and pretends to take Bala hostage, causing him and Bala to fall out of the anthill via a garbage chute. Now a fugitive, Z decides to search for Insectopia, a legendary insect paradise. Bala attempts to return to the colony, but quickly rejoins Z after encountering a praying mantis.

Z's act of individuality inspires the workers and some soldier ants, halting productivity. To gain control, Mandible publicly portrays Z as a self-centered war criminal, promotes the glory of conformity and promises the workers rewards for completing a "Mega Tunnel" he designed. However, Mandible's second-in-command, a flying ant named Cutter, begins to doubt Mandible's constant reassurances that he's acting "for the good of the colony".

Z and Bala come upon a human picnic, which they mistake for Insectopia. They are baffled by the wrappings on the food, but Muffy and Chip, a married couple of liberal wasps, condescendingly befriend them and try to help break the wrappers. They are disrupted by the humans, who kill Muffy with a fly swatter and attempt to squish them with a shoe. Z rescues Bala from the sneaker, and the two ants at last find Insectopia, a trash can overfilled with decaying food. Bala begins to reciprocate Z's feelings.

After interrogating Weaver, Mandible learns that Z is looking for Insectopia and sends Cutter to find it. That night, Cutter arrives at Insectopia and forcibly flies Bala back to the colony while Z is away. Seeing Z's desperation at finding Bala gone, a drunken Chip, mourning over Muffy's death, generously flies him back to the colony.

When Z arrives, he encounters soldiers who forcibly direct him toward the Mega Tunnel. Along the way, he finds Bala held captive in Mandible's office. After he frees her, they both discover that Mandible's Mega Tunnel leads straight to the puddle next to Insectopia, which Mandible will use to drown the Queen Ant and the workers at the opening ceremony. Bala warns the Queen while Z attempts to stop the workers in time, but fails. Z and Bala unify the Queen and workers into building a ladder of themselves towards the surface as the water rises.

Meanwhile, Mandible gathers the soldiers on the surface and gloats he has created a new colony, where only the strong survive. When the worker ants break through the surface, Cutter betrays Mandible and rescues the worker ants "for the good of the colony". Enraged, Mandible attempts to tackle Cutter, but Z intervenes and takes the blow. He and Mandible fall back into the flooded tunnel, with Mandible striking a root and dying on impact. Z is nearly drowned, but is rescued by Cutter and resuscitated by Bala.

Z is praised for his heroism, and he and Bala become a couple. Together, they rebuild the colony, and Z narrates that he is finally content with his place in the world. The camera then zooms out to show the anthill is in Central Park in New York City.

Voice cast[]

Woody Allen as Z Marion-4195 "Z", an idealistic but anxious worker ant.

Sharon Stone as Princess Bala, the Queen Ant's daughter, Mandible's fiancée, and Z's love interest.

Gene Hackman as General Mandible, the mean-spirited and arrogant supreme commander of the ant military. He is also the fianće of Princess Bala.

Sylvester Stallone as Corporal Weaver, a brave soldier ant and Z's best friend who becomes Azteca's boyfriend.

Jennifer Lopez as Azteca, another friend of Z's and a worker ant who becomes Weaver's girlfriend.

Christopher Walken as Colonel Cutter, a flying ant that serves as Mandible's patient and empathetic adviser who becomes disillusioned by the general's actions.

Danny Glover as Staff Sergeant Barbatus, a soldier ant who befriends Z during the fight against the termites.

Anne Bancroft as Queen Ant, Princess Bala's mother and the ruler of the ants.

Dan Aykroyd as Chip the Wasp, a wasp whom Z befriends.

Grant Shaud as The Foreman, the head of the worker ants.

John Mahoney as Grebs, the Drunk Ant Scout who talked about Insectopia.

Jane Curtin as Muffin "Muffy" the Wasp, Chip's wife.

Paul Mazursky as Z's Psychiatrist

Jerry Sroka as the Bartender, the unnamed bartender of the bar that Z and Weaver frequent.

Jim Cummings as Soldier Ant and Worker Ant #1

April Winchell as Ladybug

The cast features several actors from movies Allen wrote, starred in and directed, including Stone (Stardust Memories), Stallone (Bananas), Hackman (Another Woman), and Walken (Annie Hall). Aykroyd later co-starred in Allen's The Curse of the Jade Scorpion.

Additional voices[]

Jack Angel as Worker Ants, Soldier Ants

Michael Bell as Worker Ants

Bob Bergen as Ant Worker #2

Susan Blu as Female Ants

Rodger Bumpass as Worker Ants

Corey Burton as Soldier Ants

Cathy Cavadini as Female Ants

Robert Clotworthy as Worker Ants, Soldier Ants

David Cowgill as Soldier Ants

Jennifer Darling as Female Ants

Debi Derryberry as Female Ants

Paul Eiding as Ant Worker

Bill Farmer as Soldier Ants, Worker Ants

Pat Fry as Worker Ants, Termites

Jess Harnell as Worker Ants

Richard Horvitz as Worker Ants, Soldier Ants

Tim Johnson as Worker Ants

Matthew Labyorteaux as Worker Ants

Sherry Lynn as Female Ant

Danny Mann as Worker Ants, Termites

Mickie McGowan as Female Ants

Mona Marshall as Female Ants

Patrick Pinney as Worker Ants, Soldier Ants

Phil Proctor as Worker Ants, Termites

Jan Rabson as Worker Ants, Termites

Brian Tochi as Worker Ants

B.J. Ward as Female Ants

Jim Ward as Worker Ants

Loop Group[]

Charles Bartlett as Termites

Jack Blessing as Soldier Ants

Thomas Brunelle as Soldier Ants

William Calvert as Soldier Ants

Richard Cansino as Worker Ants

Kate Carlin as Female Ants

June Christopher as Female Ants

David Coburn as Worker Ants

Jennifer Crystal as Female Ants

Alex Daniels as Soldier Ants

James Dean as Soldier Ants

Peter Doyle as Soldier Ants

Murphy Dunne as Soldier Ants

Chad Einbinder as Worker Ants

Jeff Fischer as Worker Ants

Robin Florence as Female Ants

Rebecca Forstadt as Female Ants

Val Franco as Female Ants

Don Fullilove as Soldier Ants

Elisa Gabrielli as Female Ants

Anneliese Goldman as Female Ants

Brian Herskovitz as Soldier Ants

Bobby Jacoby as Ladybug Kids

Nick Jameson as Worker Ants

Laurie Johnson as Female Ants

Holly Kane as Female Ants

Daamen Kraal as Soldier Ants

Marsha Kramer as Female Ants

Steve Kramer as Worker Ants

Katie Leigh as Female Ants

Anne Lockhart as Female Ants

Anna Mathias as Female Ants

Don Maxwell as Worker Ants

David McCharen as Worker Ants

Christie Mellor as Female Ants

Jonathan Nichols as Worker Ants

Paul Pape as Soldier Ants

Julie Payne as Female Ants

Tony Pope as Soldier Ants

Peter Renaday as Soldier Ants

Al Rodrigo as Soldier Ants

Michelle Ruff as Female Ants, Ladybug Kids

Gary Schwartz as Soldier Ants

Steve Staley as Soldier Ants

Arnold Turner as Soldier Ants

Ruth Zalduondo as Female Ants

Uncredited[]

Frank Welker as Termites

Dan Aykroyd and Sylvester Stallone as Bar Guys

Sharon Stone as Bala's Friend #1

Carol Alt as Bala's Friend #2

Woody Allen, Albert R. Brooks and John Mahoney as Worker Ants

Dan Aykroyd, Albert R. Brooks, Gene Hackman and John Mahoney as Soldier Ants

Nolan North as Mosquito

Woody Allen and Paul Mazursky as Ridgeway the Soldier

Mischa Barton and John Mahoney as Fireplace Bugs

Production[]

Development[]

In 1988, Walt Disney Feature Animation was pitched a movie called Army Ants, about a pacifist worker ant teaching lessons of independent thinking to his militaristic colony. Years later, Jeffrey Katzenberg, then chairman of Disney's film division, had left the company in a feud with CEO Michael Eisner over the vacant president position after the death of Frank Wells. Katzenberg would later go on to help co-found DreamWorks Pictures with Steven Spielberg and David Geffen, and the three planned to rival Disney with the company's new animation division. Katzenberg at Dreamworks began developing he tried to pursue or suggested while at Disney, including The Prince of Egypt, a collaboration with Aardman Animations which resulted in Chicken Run, Sinbad, and Army Ants.

Production began in May 1996, after production had already commenced on The Prince of Egypt. DreamWorks had contracted Pacific Data Images (PDI) in Palo Alto, California to begin working on computer-animated films to rival Pixar's features. Woody Allen was cast in the lead role of Z, and much of Allen's trademark humor is present within the film. Allen himself made some uncredited rewrites to the script, to make the dialogue better fit his style of comedic timing.Template:Citation needed An altered line from one of his early directed films, Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex* (*But Were Afraid to Ask) was included – "I was going to include you in my most erotic fantasies..."

Feud between DreamWorks and Pixar[]

After DreamWorks' acquisition of PDI, Pixar director John Lasseter, Steve Jobs, and others at Pixar were dismayed to learn from the trade papers that PDI's first project at DreamWorks would be another ant film, to be called Antz. By this time, Pixar's project, then similarly called Bugs, was well known within the animation community. In general, both Antz and A Bug's Life center on a young male ant, a drone with oddball tendencies, who struggles to win a princess's hand by saving their society. Lasseter and Jobs believed that the idea was stolen by Katzenberg. Katzenberg had stayed in touch with Lasseter after the acrimonious Disney split, often calling to check up. In October 1995, when Lasseter was overseeing postproduction work on Toy Story at the Universal Studios lot, where DreamWorks was also located, Lasseter and Andrew Stanton visited Katzenberg and they discussed their plans for Bugs in detail. Lasseter had high hopes for Toy Story, and he was telling friends throughout the tight-knit computer-animation business to get cracking on their own films. "If this hits, it's going to be like space movies after Star Wars" for computer-animation studios, he told various friends. "I should have been wary," Lasseter later recalled. "Jeffrey kept asking questions about when it would be released."

When the trades indicated production on Antz, Lasseter, feeling betrayed, called Katzenberg and asked him bluntly if it were true, Katzenberg confirming it. Katzenberg recalled Antz came from a 1991 story pitch by Tim Johnson that was related to Katzenberg in October 1994. Another source gives Nina Jacobson, one of Katzenberg's executives, as the person responsible for the Antz pitch. Lasseter refused to believe Katzenberg's story. Lasseter recalled that Katzenberg was under the impression that Disney was "out to get him" and that he realized that he was just cannon fodder in Katzenberg's fight with Disney. Eisner had decided not to pay Katzenberg his contract-required bonus, convincing Disney's board not to give him anything. Lasseter grimly relayed the news of Antz to Pixar employees but kept morale high. Privately, Lasseter told other executives that he and Stanton felt terribly let down.

Competition with Disney[]

At the time, the current Disney studio executives were starting a bitter competitive rivalry with Jeffrey Katzenberg and his new DreamWorks films. In 1995, Katzenberg announced The Prince of Egypt to debut in December 1996 as DreamWorks' first animated release. A year later, Disney scheduled Bugs to open on the same weekend, which infuriated Katzenberg. Katzenberg invited Disney executives to DreamWorks to negotiate a release date change for Bugs, but the company refused to budge. DreamWorks pushed Prince of Egypt to the 4th of July, and the studio had decided not to begin full marketing for Antz until after Prince of Egypt was released. Disney afterward announced release dates for films that were going to compete with The Prince of Egypt, and both studios had to compete with Paramount Pictures, which was releasing The Rugrats Movie in November, based on the hugely-popular Nickelodeon cartoon. Katzenberg suddenly moved the opening of Antz from January 1998 to November 1997, in order to successfully beat A Bug's Life into cinemas.

David Price writes in his 2008 book The Pixar Touch that a rumor, "never confirmed", was that Katzenberg had given PDI "rich financial incentives to induce them to whatever it would take to have Antz ready first, despite Pixar's head start". Jobs furiously called Katzenberg to explain that there was nothing he could do to convince Disney to change the date. Katzenberg said to him that Jobs himself had taught him how to conduct similar business long ago, explaining that Jobs had come to Pixar's rescue from near bankruptcy by making the deal for Toy Story with Disney. He flat-out told Jobs that he had enough power with Disney to convince them to change specific plans on their films. Lasseter also claimed Katzenberg had phoned him with a final proposition to delay Antz if Disney and Pixar changed the date of A Bug's Life, but Katzenberg vehemently denied this. Jobs believed it was "a blatant extortion attempt".

Release fallout and comparisons[]

As the release dates for both films approached, Disney executives concluded that Pixar should keep quiet on Antz and the feud concerning DreamWorks. Regardless, Lasseter publicly dismissed Antz as a "schlock version" of A Bug's Life; however, Lasseter would later admit that he never saw the film. Lasseter claimed that if DreamWorks and PDI had made the film about anything other than insects, he would have closed Pixar for the day so the entire company could go see it. Jobs and Katzenberg would not back down and the rivaling ant films provoked a press frenzy. "The bad guys rarely win," Jobs told the Los Angeles Times. In response, DreamWorks’ head of marketing Terry Press suggested, "Steve Jobs should take a pill." Tensions would remain high between Jobs and Katzenberg for many years after the release of both films. According to Jobs, years later, Katzenberg approached him after the opening of Shrek, and insisted that he had never heard the pitch for A Bug's Life, reasoning that his settlement with Disney would have given him a share of the profits if that were so. In the end, Pixar and PDI employees kept up the old friendships that had arisen from working in computer animation for years before feature films.

The final product of both films are generally perceived to contrast one another in tone and certain plot points. Antz in the end seemed to be more geared towards older audiences, featuring moderate violence, mild sexual innuendoes, and profanity, as well as social and political satire. A Bug's Life was more family-friendly and lighthearted in tone and story. The two films especially differ in their artistic look: Antz played off more realistic aspects of ants and how they relate to other bugs, like termites and wasps, while A Bug's Life offered a more fanciful look at insects to better suit its story. PopMatters journalist J.C. Maçek III compared the two films and wrote, "The feud deepened with both teams making accusations and excuses and a release date war ensued. While Antz beat A Bug's Life to the big screen by two months, the latter film significantly out grossed its predecessor. Rip off or not, Antz's critical response has proven to be almost exactly as positive as what A Bug's Life has enjoyed."

Release[]

On November 27, 1996, a teaser trailer for Antz, depicting the opening scene with Z in an ant psychiatrist office, first played in theaters in front of select prints of 101 Dalmatians (1996 film). Anticipation was generally high with adult moviegoers rather than families and children.

Home media[]

Antz was released to VHS and DVD on January 6, 1998, becoming the first feature-length CGI-animated film to be available on DVD. However, the DVD release used a 35mm print of the film to create the copies, rather than using the original files to encode the movie directly to video. A special edition version was released on February 14, 2003.Template:Cn The film was released on Blu-ray on October 16, 2018 for the film's 20th anniversary.

Reception[]

Critical response[]

On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 93% based on 91 reviews and an average rating of 7.7/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Featuring a stellar voice cast, technically dazzling animation, and loads of good humor, Antz should delight both children and adults." Metacritic gave the film a score of 72 out of 100 based on 26 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale.

Roger Ebert praised the film, saying that it is "sharp and funny". The variety of themes, interesting visuals, and voice acting were each aspects of the film that were praised. Ebert's partner, Gene Siskel, greatly enjoyed the film and preferred it over A Bug's Life. Siskel later ranked it No. 7 on his picks of the Best Films of 1998.

Box office[]

The film topped the box office in its opening weekend, earning $17,195,160 for a $7,021 average from 2,449 theatres. In its second weekend, the film held the top spot again, with a slippage of only 14% to $14.7 million for a $5,230 average and expanding to 2,813 sites. It held well also in its third weekend, slipping only 24% to $11.2 million and finishing in third place, for a $3,863 average from 2,903 theatres. The film's widest release was 2,929 theatres, and closed on January 15, 1998. The film altogether picked up $90,757,863 domestically, but failed to outgross the competition with A Bug's Life. The film picked up an additional $81 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $171.8 million.

According to DreamWorks, the film's budget was about $42 million, while the number $60 million was also reported at the time. According to Los Angeles Times, the first figure was doubted by the film industry, considering that other computer-animated films at the time cost twice of that amount, and that the budget did not include start-up costs of PDI.

Accolades[]

Award Category Recipient(s) Result AFI's 10 Top 10 Animated Antz Template:Nom 1998 ASCAP Film and Television Music Awards[1] Top Box Office Films Harry Gregson-Williams, John Powell Template:Won 16th Annie Awards

[2]

Outstanding Individual Achievement for Directing in an Animated Feature Production Eric Darnell, Tim Johnson Template:Nom Outstanding Individual Achievement for Music in an Animated Feature Production Harry Gregson-Williams, John Powell Template:Nom Outstanding Individual Achievement for Production Design in an Animated Feature Production John Bell Template:Nom Outstanding Individual Achievement for Writing in an Animated Feature Production Todd Alcott, Chris Weitz & Paul Weitz Template:Nom 52nd British Academy Film Awards The Best Achievement in Special Visual Effects Philippe Gluckman, John Bell, Kendal Cronkhite, Ken Bielenberg Template:Nom 1999 Golden Reel Awards Best Sound Editing in Animated Feature Film — Music Editing Adam Milo Smalley, Brian Richards Template:Won Best Sound Editing in Animated Feature Film — Sound Editing Antz Template:Nom Golden Satellite Awards 1998 Satellite Award for Best Animated or Mixed Media Feature Brad Lewis, Aron Warner, Patty Wooton Template:Nom

Soundtrack[]

The original music for the film was composed by Harry Gregson-Williams and John Powell. The soundtrack was released on November 3, 1998 by Angel Records.

Initially, Jeffrey Katzenberg wanted Hans Zimmer to compose the music, but he was too busy with other projects. Instead, Zimmer suggested two composers from his studio — either Harry Gregson-Williams or John Powell — both of whom had already collaborated on the DreamWorks animated film The Prince of Egypt.

Songs featured in the film

"Almost Like Being in Love" – Woody Allen

"Give Peace a Chance" – John Lennon

"Guantanamera" – Joseíto Fernández

"High Hopes" – Doris Day

"I Can See Clearly Now" – Neil Finn

"When Johnny Comes Marching Home" – Patrick Gilmore

Template:Track listing

Video games[]

Title Release Date Platform Developer Publisher Antz September 24, 1999 Game Boy Color Panet Interactive Infogrames Antz Racing 2001 RFX Interactive Club Acclaim / Electronic Arts Antz World Sportz November 30, 2001 Light & Shadow Production M4 Ltd. Antz Extreme Racing August 28, 2002

September 5, 2002

September 19, 2002

November 20, 2002 Microsoft Windows

Xbox

PlayStation 2

Game Boy Advance Supersonic Software

Magic Pockets (GBA) Empire Interactive

Cancelled sequel[]