Dale Martin Brown, age 69, of Lee’s Summit, MO, passed away on Thursday, October 17, 2019 at St. Luke’s Heart Institute, Kansas City, MO.

Mr. Brown was born November 18, 1949 in Sullivan, MO, to the late Clinton and Betty (Stack) Brown. Dale graduated from Sullivan H.S. in 1967 where he excelled in both instrumental and vocal music. He attended SE Missouri State and Central Missouri State before graduating from Lindenwood College with a degree in Music Education in 1975. His love for music was not only evident through his teaching and impact on students, but through his performances with various bands and orchestras that performed for the governor and in Europe. Dale eventually left education to work many jobs from fundraising to sales and management. Eventually, his experiences led him to begin his own businesses in construction and disaster relief. In his retirement years, Dale was able to secure employment working for the Kansas City Chiefs and Kansas City Royals, an ideal job for him as he was a staunch supporter of these teams as well as his Mizzou Tigers. He found a great deal of enjoyment in this position, interacting with the players, their families, media and fans. Regardless of his occupation, Dale simply enjoyed people. His humor and love for children brought friendships and laughter to all those he met.

Dale was married to Elizabeth (Liz) Grotha of St. James, MO, in 1968 until her passing in 2002. From this union, two sons were born, Timothy (Tim) and Jeoffrey (Jeoff). Dale married Nikki Breedlove of Lee’s Summit in 2006.

Dale is survived by his wife Nikki Breedlove Brown of Lee’s Summit, MO, two sons; Tim Brown and Jeoff Brown both of Pensacola, FL, a stepdaughter Tiki Breedlove-Denham of Lee’s Summit, MO, three grandchildren; Colby, Cali and Tye, two brothers; Neal Brown of North Kansas City and Mark Brown and wife Kelly of Orlando, FL, and many nephews, nieces, uncles, aunts and cousins.

He was proceeded in death by his parents Clinton and Betty, late wife Elizabeth and infant twin brother Gale.

Dale was baptized into the Catholic church in 1999. He joined, was a member of and attended Unity Village Chapel in Lee’s Summit, MO for the past seventeen years. His wish was to be cremated with internment at Licklider Cemetery near Cuba, MO. A Celebration of Life service will be held on Saturday, November 2 at First Assembly of God Church in Sullivan at 1 p.m. An additional Celebration of Life is planned in Kansas City the following week with location and time still to be determined.