Tacoma is located the Pacific Northwest region of the United States. Tacoma is a major port city and the third largest city in the State of Washington. The encompassing Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue metropolitan statistical area is the 15th largest in the United States, and the largest in the northwestern United States. The city is on Washington's Puget Sound, 32 miles southwest of Seattle, 31 miles northeast of the state capital, Olympia, and 58 miles northwest of Mount Rainier National Park. Tacoma is the Puget Sound's second largest city, and the third largest city in Washington. Tacoma is the Pierce County seat. The 2018 population estimate is 209,100. The 2020 census population was 219,346, making it the third most populated city in Washington.

History

The Tacoma area's original inhabitants, the Puyallup and Nisqually lived here for centuries before European explorers arrived. They called today's Mount Rainier "Tacobet," which means "Mother of Waters." Europeans transliterated the native name into "Tahoma," and then "Tacoma."

Captain George Vacouver was the first European to reach Puget Sound, arriving in 1792 and naming the body of water after Peter Puget, one of his officers. In 1833, Hudson's Bay Company built Fort Nisqually a few miles south of today's Tacoma. By the 1850s, settlers began to arrive, and Nicholas Delin built a cabin and sawmill along the waterfront in 1852, on the site of modern Tacoma. In 1868, the Northern Pacific Railroad chose Tacoma as its western terminus.

After the railroad arrived in 1883, Tacoma grew rapidly, the city was incorporated in 1875, and by 1892, 50,000 people lived here, but it was eclipsed when the Klondike gold rush turned nearby Seattle into a boom town.

In the early twentieth century, Weyerhaeuser Timber Company took a major role in Tacoma's economy, and in 1918, Tacoma became an official U. S. Port of Entry, the first step toward Tacoma's status as the six-largest container port in North America. By the 1930s, Tacoma may have been best known for the "Aroma of Tacoma" because of the malodorous emissions from the local paper manufacturing plants, but by the 1990s, the problem had been largely solved.

Geography

Tacoma is at 47°14′29″N 122°27′34″W (47.241371, -122.459389). Its elevation is 38 feet above sea level.. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has an area of 62.6 square miles (2009). 50.1 square miles (129.8 km2) of it is land and 12.5 square miles (32.4 km2) of it (20.01%) is water. Situated on Commencement Bay, an inlet of Puget Sound, Tacoma lies at the foot of Mt. Rainier in the Puyallup River valley, bordered by mountains. It is about 36 miles south of Seattle. The city is near several military installations, including Fort Lewis and McChord Air Force Base.

Surrounding municipalities

To the northwest of Tacoma is Gig Harbor, while north is Vashon Island. To the northeast is Federal Way. Fox Island is directly east with Fife and Milton to the east. Lakewood is southwest of Tacoma, and Parkland to the south. Puyallup is to the southeast.

Districts and their Neighborhoods

Central Tacoma

Hilltop (Part of Downtown)

Delong Park

The Wedge

The McCarver Neighborhood (Part of New Tacoma and Downtown)

Bryant

New Tacoma

Downtown Tacoma

Saint Helens Neighborhood

Theater District

Central Business District

Warehouse/Brewery District

Foss Waterway

The McCarver Neighborhood

Stadium District

Dome District

Nalley Valley

Port of Tacoma

East Tacoma

McKinley Hill

Salishan

Hillsdale

Swan Creek

Strawberry Hill

North Tacoma

North Slope

Old Tacoma

Proctor District

Prospect Hill

Ruston Way

Skyline

Stadium District

Westgate

Yakima Hill

Northeast Tacoma

Browns Point

Crescent Heights

South End

Fern Hill

Larchmont

Lincoln International District

Stewart Heights

Wapato

South Tacoma

Edison

Manitou

Oakland / Madrona

South Park

Tacoma Mall

West Tacoma

Highlands

Narrows

Titlow

Salmon Beach

Westgate

Landmarks

Tacoma has many major landmarks including the Tacoma Dome, Union Station, the Tacoma Narrows Bridge, numerous churches, and districts within the city.

Climate

The climate is quite mild throughout the year. Although the area has the reputation of being rainy, Tacoma. Most of the precipitation falls in the winter, when snow blankets the mountains. Tacoma and the South Puget Sound tends to be a few degree's warmer then Seattle and several degrees warmer then Everett from Spring to Fall.

Tacoma's climate overall is warm during summer when temperatures tend to be in the 70's and 80's. It cools down during winter when temperatures tend to be in the 40's.

The warmest month of the year is August with an average maximum temperature of 76.60 degrees Fahrenheit, while the coldest month of the year is January with an average minimum temperature of 35.10 degrees Fahrenheit.

Average temperatures are 40.8°F in January, and 65.4°F in July. The annual average temperature is 53.1°F. The average annual precipitation is 39.2 inches.

Temperature variations between night and day tend to be moderate during summer with a difference that can reach 21 degrees Fahrenheit, and fairly limited during winter with an average difference of 13 degrees Fahrenheit.

The annual average precipitation at Tacoma is 38.95 Inches. Winter months tend to be wetter than summer months. The wettest month of the year is November with an average rainfall of 6.10 Inches.

Culture

Media

Newspapers

Tacoma Daily Index

The Business Examiner

The News Tribune

Tacoma Weekly

Weekly Volcano

Sports

Baseball: PCL: Tacoma Rainiers

Basketball: IBL: Tacoma Jazz

Soccer: PDL: Tacoma Tide

Infrastructure

Health systems

Tacoma has four major hospitals. Mary Bridge Children's Hospital, Puget Sound Behavioral Health Center, Saint Joseph Medical Center, Tacoma General Allenmore Hospital, and Western State Hospital.

Transportation

Tacoma's alternative transportation services include buses, commuter rail, light rail, and ferries. Public bus service is provided by Pierce Transit, which serves Tacoma and Pierce County. Pierce Transit operates a total of 55 bus routes, using mostly buses powered by compressed natural gas. Most bus service operates at 30-minute frequencies on weekdays, some routes once an hour, while three heavily-ridden "trunk" routes are served every 15 minutes on weekdays and every half hour on weekends.