Citation preview

Black & White Cinema

Black & White Cinema A Short History

WHEELER WINSTON DIXON

Rutgers University Press New Brunswick, New Jersey

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Dixon, Wheeler W., 1950– Black and white cinema: a short history / Wheeler Winston Dixon. pages cm Includes bibliographical references and index. ISBN 978–0–8135–7242–0 (hardcover : alk. paper) — ISBN 978–0–8135–7241–3 (pbk. : alk. paper) — ISBN 978–0–8135–7243–7 (e-book (epub)) — ISBN 978–0–8135–7244–4 (e-book (web pdf )) 1. Black and white films—History and criticism. 2. Cinematography—History—20th century. 3. Motion pictures—History—20th century. I. Title. PN1995.9.B575D59 2015 791.43'6—dc23 2014049332 Copyright © 2015 by Wheeler Winston Dixon All rights reserved No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without written permission from the publisher. Please contact Rutgers University Press, 106 Somerset Street, New Brunswick, NJ 08901. The only exception to this prohibition is “fair use” as defined by U.S. copyright law. Visit our website: http://rutgerspress.rutgers.edu Manufactured in the United States of America

For Gwendolyn, as always

Many moviegoers and video viewers say they do not “like” black and white films. In my opinion, they are cutting themselves off from much of the mystery and beauty of the movies. Black and white is an artistic choice, a medium that has strengths and traditions, especially in its use of light and shadow. Moviegoers of course have the right to dislike B&W, but it is not something they should be proud of. It reveals them, frankly, as cinematically illiterate. —Roger Ebert The angel said, “I like black-and-white films more than color because they’re more artificial. You have to work harder to overcome your disbelief. It’s sort of like prayer.” — Jonathan Carroll, The Ghost in Love

Contents

List of Illustrations Acknowledgments

xi xv

Prologue

1

1

Origins

6

2

The 1930s: Escapism and Reality

50

3

The 1940s: A Black-and-White World

95

4

The 1950s: The Age of Anxiety

151

5

The 1960s: Endgame

178

Epilogue

215

Works Cited Index

221 227

ix

Illustrations

An early Edison filmstrip, photographed by William Kennedy Laurie Dickson A scene from Alice Guy’s La Vie du Christ (1906), photographed by Anatole Thiberville Victor Milner, far left, next to the camera, on Robert Florey’s romantic drama Till We Meet Again (1936) Howard Hawks and the cast of Twentieth Century (1934) in a posed publicity shot, with cinematographer Joseph August kneeling next to the camera A futuristic cityscape from Fritz Lang’s 1927 film Metropolis, photographed by Karl Freund, Günther Rittau, and Walter Ruttmann Karl Freund, hands raised, right, directing The Mummy (1932), with cameraman Charles Stumar lining up a shot with star Boris Karloff Karl Freund’s eccentric horror film Mad Love (1935), photographed by Gregg Toland and Chester Lyons, with Peter Lorre, the film’s star, on the right Billy Bitzer at the camera, left; D. W. Griffith, right, during the shooting of Way Down East (1920) A scene from F. W. Murnau’s classic vampire film Nosferatu (1922), photographed by Fritz Arno Wagner and an uncredited Günther Krampf

7 10 20 21 29 30 31 36 39 xi

xii H Illustrations

A complex setup from Edmund Goulding’s Grand Hotel (1932), photographed by William Daniels Cinematographer William Daniels behind the camera on Rouben Mamoulian’s (seated, with glasses, on camera dolly) Queen Christina (1933) The famous Odessa steps sequence from Sergei Eisenstein’s Battleship Potemkin (1925), photographed by Eduard Tisse Cinematographer James Wong Howe early in his career A scene from Frank Capra’s Meet John Doe (1941), with cinematography by George Barnes A scene from F. W. Murnau and Robert Flaherty’s Tabu (1931), shot on location in the South Pacific, and photographed by cinematographer Floyd Crosby Boris Kaufman (back to camera, with gray hair and glasses) doing some location shooting for director Sidney Lumet (first from left, popping out of the top of the Volkswagen) for Lumet’s The Pawnbroker (1964) Nazi pageantry in Leni Riefenstahl’s Triumph of the Will (1935), photographed by a battalion of cameramen under the direction of Sepp Allgeier Cinematographer Sid Hickox, extreme right, with glasses, supervising a scene in To Have and Have Not (1944), as director Howard Hawks, left, seated on stool, watches the action Humphrey Bogart and Lauren Bacall in Howard Hawks’s The Big Sleep (1946), gorgeously photographed by Sid Hickox Orson Welles pointing for emphasis as cinematographer Gregg Toland, legs crossed, looks on during the production of Welles’s Citizen Kane (1941) William Wyler’s tale of returning World War II veterans The Best Years of Our Lives (1946), photographed by Gregg Toland Burnett Guffey, third from left, with light meter, taking a reading on the set of From Here to Eternity (1953), as stars Donna Reed and Montgomery Clift rehearse a scene and director Fred Zinnemann, far left, looks on Alfred Hitchcock lining up a scene with director of cinematography Ted Tetzlaff (partially obscured by Hitchcock’s hand) for his thriller Notorious (1946)

45 46 47 55 68 71

87 89

90 91 99 102

124 128

Illustrations H xiii

Sam Wood, seated, directing a scene from Hold Your Man (1933), starring Jean Harlow and Clark Gable, as cinematographer Harold Rosson looks on Jean Cocteau gesturing to the camera as Henri Alekan (entirely obscured, peering through the viewfinder under a black cloth) sets up a shot for his classic Beauty and the Beast (1946) Russell Metty looking through the viewfinder on the set of Orson Welles’s Touch of Evil (1958) Ernest Haller, far right with glasses, leaning on motorcycle, on the set of Robert Aldrich’s (seated, on motorcycle) Gothic horror film Whatever Happened to Baby Jane? (1962) Father and son in desperate straits in Vittorio De Sica’s Bicycle Thieves (1948), photographed by Carlo Montuori An expressionistic scene from Ingmar Bergman’s The Seventh Seal (1957), photographed by Gunnar Fischer, with Bengt Ekerot as Death and Max von Sydow as the Knight Sven Nykvist and Ingmar Bergman relaxing for a moment on the set of Bergman’s Persona (1966) A typical setup from Yasujirô Ozu’s 1953 masterpiece Tokyo Story, photographed by Yûhara Atsuta A scene from Jean-Luc Godard’s Breathless (1960), with Jean-Paul Belmondo and Jean Seberg, photographed by Raoul Coutard A pensive Antoine Doinel ( Jean-Pierre Léaud) in François Truffaut’s debut feature, The 400 Blows (1959), photographed by Henri Decaë David and Albert Maysles shooting their groundbreaking documentary Salesman (1966), using a handheld camera, available light, and a portable 16 mm camera Freddie Francis, left, in raincoat, lining up a shot on Jack Clayton’s Room at the Top (1959) Harpsichordist Gustav Leonhardt as Johann Sebastian Bach in Jean-Marie Straub and Danièle Huillet’s The Chronicle of Anna Magdalena Bach (1968), photographed by Ugo Piccone A scene from Pier Paolo Pasolini’s neorealist The Gospel According to St. Matthew (1964), photographed by Tonino Delli Colli, with nonprofessional actor Enrique Irazoqui as Christ Marcello Mastroianni and companions in Federico Fellini’s 1960 masterpiece La Dolce Vita, photographed by Otello Martelli

135 143 162 165 169 171 173 174 182 187 193 195 201 203 206

xiv H Illustrations

Gerard Malanga and Andy Warhol, at the start of Warhol’s prolific career as a filmmaker Director Jean-Luc Godard, who with cinematographer Raoul Coutard changed the grammar of cinema Fake black and white: The Artist (2011, directed by Michel Hazanavicius and photographed by Guillaume Schiffman) — shot in color, but screened in monochrome All images courtesy Jerry Ohlinger Archives

208 216

219

Acknowledgments The author wishes to thank Richard Graham, Love Library, University of Nebraska, for his assistance in unearthing many of the original source materials for this volume; his enthusiasm and unfailing kindness were a source of continual inspiration throughout the writing of this text. Thanks also to Leslie Mitchner of Rutgers University Press for commissioning this volume, to Eric Schramm and Alison Hack for their expert copyediting, to Dana Miller for a typically excellent typing job, and Jennifer Holan for her meticulous indexing. Sections of the first and last chapters of this text first appeared in Film International (Daniel Lindvall, editor); the material on Shanghai Express first appeared in Senses of Cinema (Rolando Caputo, editor); and the section on the films of Andy Warhol first appeared in Classic Images (Bob King, editor); my thanks to all for permission to use this material here. This text also contains brief sections of A Short History of Film by Wheeler Winston Dixon and Gwendolyn Audrey Foster, reprinted by kind permission of Rutgers University Press. The photographs in this volume are from the Jerry Ohlinger Archive; on project after project, Jerry and Dollie manage to come up with materials that have seemingly eluded everyone else. Most of all, though, I wish to thank Gwendolyn Audrey Foster, who has been my life partner and closest collaborator for more than three decades, and whose patience and support during the writing of this book were of inestimable value. During the final editing of the book, her help was absolutely essential, and I thank her sincerely for all her efforts on my behalf. I couldn’t have done it without you! xv

Black & White Cinema

Prologue

Black-and-white movies have almost completely disappeared from the current cinematic landscape. There are occasional projects shot in black and white, but with cinema rapidly becoming an all-digital medium, and black-and-white film stock almost impossible to purchase, color has taken over completely, either glossy and popped-out or desaturated for a more dramatic effect, but always using some palette of color. Furthermore, while there have been numerous books on the use of color in the cinema, there has been no book-length study on the black-and-white film, and yet black-and-white cinema dominated the industry internationally for nearly seven decades, until the late 1960s. Certainly, numerous cameramen and directors have weighed in on the use of black-and-white cinematography in their works, most notably John Alton in Painting with Light, but in each case, these works were created when black and white was still a commercially viable medium. Most of the texts I have encountered, with the exception of Alton’s book, and to a lesser extent Edward Dmytryk’s Cinema: Concept and Practice, written after the director had long since retired, treat black-and-white filmmaking as a part of everyday life, the main production medium for most movies, which at the time it certainly was. In these necessarily practical books, it’s about f-stops, filters, and cookies, but very little about the aesthetics of the medium. Indeed, when Alton published his landmark study, he was famously excoriated by his 1

2 H Black & White Cinema

colleagues as being a pretentious self-promoter; what cameramen did was work, nothing more, and any notions of artistic ambition were inherently suspect. During Alton’s heyday, color was dealt with as a special case, which it was, but now, in the all-color, all-digital world of images we currently inhabit, black and white has become the anomaly. Shooting in black and white is inherently a transformative act. As the filmmaker and opera director Jonathan Miller — whose beautiful film adaptation of Alice in Wonderland (1966) was elegantly photographed in black and white by the gifted Dick Bush — once observed in conversation with me, the very act of making a black-and-white film transmutes the original source material, for life, as we know, takes place in color. Therefore, there is an intrinsic level of stylization and reinterpretation of reality when one makes a black-and-white film, leading to an entirely different mode of cinematography. It’s a different world altogether, one that is rapidly slipping away from us into the mists of the past. Black and white was the original medium of the cinema from the invention of paper roll film and then cellulose nitrate film, and yet the industry and viewing audiences always yearned for color. This was first accomplished through the use of both hand-tinting the images frame by frame, as well as running entire lengths of film through baths of colored dye. By the 1920s two-strip Technicolor was well established with such films as Chester M. Franklin’s The Toll of the Sea (1922, d.p. J. A. Ball). In 1935, the first three-strip Technicolor feature film, Rouben Mamoulian’s Becky Sharp, photographed by Ray Rennahan, caused an industry sensation. Soon Technicolor, as a company, had a lock on color cinematography in Hollywood, leading to a trend that had its first peak in 1939, when Victor Fleming’s Gone with the Wind (with uncredited directorial contributions from George Cukor and Sam Wood, among others; photographed by Ernest Haller and an uncredited Lee Garmes), Fleming’s The Wizard of Oz (with uncredited directorial input from Cukor, Mervyn LeRoy, Norman Taurog, and King Vidor; photographed by Harold Rosson), and a few other A-level films were produced in the new process. Black and white, however, remained the standard form of film production, simply because Technicolor cost so much more than black and white, and color films were thus considered events while black-and-white films were the norm. From the 1900s to 1960, cinematographers such as James Wong Howe, Gregg Toland, Freddie Francis, Stanley Cortez, Nicholas Musuraca, Rob-

Prologue H 3

ert Krasker, John Alton, Boris Kaufman, Gunnar Fischer, John L. Russell, Sven Nykvist, Karl Freund, Fritz Arno Wagner, John Seitz, Robert Burks, and many others created an alluring and phantasmal world out of nothing more than light and shadow, transforming the real world into a cinematic trompe-l’œil that was so seductive and all-encompassing that it became an entirely new and hermetically sealed universe. Certain films lent themselves to black and white more than others; film noir, for example, is both a style and a genre, and, from its early days in such films as Boris Ingster’s Stranger on the Third Floor (1940, d.p. Nicholas Musuraca), depended on large patches of darkness splashed with a single light source from the left or right of the screen. As noir director Edward Dmytryk and cinematographer John Alton both noted, this sort of high-key lighting was both effective and economical in creating the bleak, unforgiving world of the film noir. Along with this, the archival statistics for black-and-white silent films are particularly shocking. A recent report by David Pierce tells a grim tale of just how much the black-and-white film has been neglected. Though most film historians and archivists have known for a long time that the news isn’t good, we now know how bad it really is. As the report’s introduction by James Billington notes, Only 14% of the feature films produced in the United States during the period 1912 – 1929 survive in the format in which they were originally produced and distributed, i.e., as complete works on 35mm film. Another 11% survive in full-length foreign versions or on film formats of lesser image quality such as 16mm and other smaller gauge formats. The Library of Congress can now authoritatively report that the loss of American silent-era feature films constitutes an alarming and irretrievable loss to our nation’s cultural record. Even if we could preserve all the silent-era films known to exist today in the U.S. and in foreign film archives — something not yet accomplished — it is certain that we and future generations have already lost 75% of the creative record from the era that brought American movies to the pinnacle of world cinematic achievement in the twentieth century. (vii – viii)

This is the result of a number of factors: the death of the silent film as a commercial art form and the resultant neglect of film negatives by the Hollywood studios; nitrate film decomposition, which plagues all films

4 H Black & White Cinema

made prior to 1950; but mostly, it’s a ringing indictment of the fact that we don’t value our cinematic heritage as much as we should, and now, it’s gone forever. We can’t get it back, no matter what we do. Unless some long forgotten print or dupe negative turns up in a vault somewhere, these films have been consigned by neglect and indifference to perpetual oblivion, and even if such materials do turn up, they will probably be in very poor shape. A few years ago, in 2008, twenty-five minutes of lost scenes from Fritz Lang’s 1927 film Metropolis (d.p. Karl Freund, Günther Rittau, and Walter Ruttmann) surfaced in the Buenos Aires Museo del Cine, in 16 mm dupe negative format, footage that had been cut shortly after the film’s initial premiere in Berlin. However, the footage was so scratched and damaged that even after extremely aggressive digital restoration, it was still of such inferior quality that it could only serve as an aide-mémoire for the images in their original form. The resultant “complete” version was thus so intensely compromised that it was of archival value only, and bore only the most distant relationship to the film’s initial creation. But it’s better than nothing, and for 75 percent of the silent era, that’s exactly what we get: nothing. For George Fitzmaurice’s The Dark Angel (1925, d.p. George Barnes), named by the New York Times as one of the ten best films of the year, nothing. For Herbert Brenon’s adaptation of The Great Gatsby (1926, d.p. Leo Tover), we have only tantalizing glimpses from the film’s trailer and a few stills, but nothing else. For Tod Browning’s London after Midnight (1927, d.p. Merritt B. Gerstad), we again have a few stills, but the last surviving print was destroyed in a fire in the MGM vaults in 1967. And the list goes on and on. The old saying “nitrate won’t wait” means that the decomposition of nitrate film negatives and prints is inevitable. Movies created in this medium must be transferred to either safety film or some sort of digital master or they will cease to exist. Film is a deeply fragile medium, and making a film is, as the 1940s producer Val Lewton observed, echoing John Keats’s famous epitaph, like “writing on water.” If just one copy of a book survives, no matter how badly damaged it is, if the text is decipherable, it can be reset in new type and reprinted, and thus live anew for succeeding generations, with no damage at all — the words have been reclaimed from the ashes. Not so with film. Once it’s gone, it’s gone forever; it’s the death of every film that no longer survives that we mourn here, something for which there is no remedy.

Prologue H 5

For those films that no longer exist, all we can do is memorialize them, and try to keep what artifacts we can from their production to remind us that once upon a time, literally thousands of people labored on thousands of films in a variety of capacities, to bring their vision to life on the screen. But since they are gone, we should also look toward the future, and aggressively seek to save every film, silent or sound, foreign or domestic, commercial or experimental that we possibly can. What’s more, silent films are only part of the picture. As Martin Scorsese’s Film Foundation notes, half of all American films from before 1950 are gone forever. That means that viewers of a certain age have seen films that no longer exist — because of nitrate decay, or vault fires, or poor storage, or simple neglect. And most of those films, of course, were black and white. What has vanished? Black and white offers a seductive world of fabrics and flesh tones rendered in sinuous images of shaded power, a world in which everything exists in gradations of black, gray, and white, constituting an entirely different way of looking at the movies. Watching a blackand-white film, we are lured into a world of romance, treachery, deceit, and fantasy, encompassing the work of literally hundreds of thousands of artists and technicians throughout the world. Just as 35 mm prints are now being routinely junked by studios that don’t want them around as an alternative to Digital Cinema Packages, so black-and-white films are now preserved only in archives and museums. When one considers that the world of black and white was once the only world of the cinema, it’s astounding that it has been so thoroughly abandoned, an art form as ancient as stone lithography. Although I necessarily focus on films that have survived, what follows in this text is a history of an era not merely gone, but almost entirely lost and impossible to recapture.

1

Origins

In their first incarnation, the movies were magic. The public had no idea how they worked, and as with any magic show, audiences were happier to be kept in the dark rather than learning the secrets of their construction. The first viewers of the Lumière films, for example, were amazed by the sight of a train rushing toward them (L’Arrivée d’un train en gare de La Ciotat, 1895), a sight they had hitherto seen only in real life, which now appeared as a phantasmal image on the cinema screen. A gardener being watered with his own hose as a prank (L’Arroseur arrosé, 1895), workers leaving the Lumière factory (La Sortie d’Usines Lumière, 1895), a snowball fight against a backdrop of Utrillo trees (Bataille de boules de neige, 1896) — it was all too new, and for the first time removed from actual existence. The audience had no opportunity to interact with the images they viewed; they remained spectators only, spellbound in the dark. Painting and photography had brought viewers the illusion of pictorial verisimilitude, but without movement. Now, the pictures on the screen danced and shimmered, pulsating with artificial existence, somehow taking the audience out of their own corporeal reality and transporting them into a phantom zone of a “realistic” presentation of events taken from life. And thus was the spell of the movies born. 6

Origins H 7

An early Edison filmstrip, photographed by William Kennedy Laurie Dickson

When the ultra-realist painter Paul Delaroche saw one of the first Daguerreotypes in 1839, he famously exclaimed, “From today, painting is dead,” but of course that wasn’t, and isn’t, the case. The impressionists, the surrealists, and others who saw reality and interpreted rather than recorded it, even in idealized fashion, immediately and intuitively sensed the limitations of the photographic image; they sought to move beyond it, to destroy it, to transform it into something else. In contrast, the first films remained slavishly representative of their subjects; even the fantasy films of Georges Méliès, for example, sought to replicate the real within the realm of fantasy. So as Nancy Mowll Mathews notes, one can see in the American Mutoscope films of life in

8 H Black & White Cinema

early New York, such as Madison Square, New York (1903) or Panorama of the Flatiron Building (1902), traces of the work of the realist painter Joseph Oppenheimer, as reflected in his canvas Madison Square (1900), clearly a source of inspiration and pictorial guidance for early filmmakers (“City in Motion” 119). Cinema pioneer William Kennedy Laurie (aka W.K.L.) Dickson, who began his career working for Thomas Edison and was one of the many inventors of the motion picture camera, eventually split off from Edison to join the American Mutoscope Company. American Mutoscope’s Delivering Newspapers (1899) bears a striking resemblance to George Bellows’s charcoal drawing Election Night, Times Square (completed between 1906 and 1909), with its monochromatic rush of action and streaks of bustling humanity; and Mutoscope’s At the Foot of the Flatiron (1903) is closely related to Everett Shinn’s pastel and watercolor drawing Sixth Avenue Shoppers (Mathews, “City in Motion” 120, 121). An even more direct example of pictorial representationalism can be found in American Mutoscope’s Spirit of ’76 (1905), which duplicates almost exactly the composition, framing, and lighting of Archibald Willard’s painting of the same name from 1891, attempting not only to capitalize on the fame of the painting, but also to “bring it to life” (Mathews, “Art and Film” 154). And, of course, soon films themselves were examining the exhibition process itself, as with Edwin S. Porter’s famous short film Uncle Josh at the Moving Picture Show (1902), which he both photographed and directed. A country rube tries vainly to interact with the “performers” on the screen; unable to separate illusion from reality, he ducks when a train approaches and later tries to intervene when a young woman’s virtue is threatened, only to discover that all he has managed to do is tear down the theater screen, exposing the projectionist and the cinematographic apparatus behind it — apparently, an early case of motion picture rear projection. As Antonia Lant notes of John Sloan’s depiction of early cinemagoers in his painting Movies, Five Cents (1907), “Film gatherings . . . combined new, peculiar, and contradictory elements. Key among these were assembling in the darkness, sexual and class mixing, mesmerization through lit motion, and a palpable sense of privacy within the mass. . . . As has often been remarked subsequently, film going offered spectators the apparently incompatible combination of public display and private reverie” (162). And indeed, this was clearly the case. One could not only get lost in the crowd, one could also get “lost” in the images, which is one

Origins H 9

of the primary aims of the spectatorial experience in nearly every case; to take the viewer out of her- or himself, to remove corporeal consciousness and replace it with an identification with an illusory other, whether that image is moving or static, projected on a screen or displayed on an iPad, representational or abstract. Whether or not the pictorial artist or filmmaker intends it — and often, more didactic artists in either discipline will claim this is manifestly not their intent — every imagistic construction implies a viewer, just as it implies, or acknowledges, the existence, past or present, of its creator. In such films as Georges Méliès’s A Trip to the Moon (1902, d.p. Lucien Tainguy), special effects exploded off the screen in waves of wonder: fantastic rocket ships, rabid moon devils, constellations that became alive with chorus girls, a moon that took a direct hit in the face when the spaceship landed, a suspenseful confrontation with the hostile aliens, and a miraculous escape. In Segundo de Chomón and Ferdinand Zecca’s The Red Spectre (1907, d.p. unknown), hand-tinted in lurid shades of red, a demon appears in a cavern and creates one illusion after another, entirely without narrative, in a naked attempt to dazzle the audience into silence and submission during its brief nine-minute running time. Alice Guy, the marginalized foremother of the cinema, began her career by directing and photographing the charming fantasy La Fée aux choux (1896), and then went on to direct no fewer than 409 films in Europe and then America, including L’Utilité des rayons X (1898), a very early example of fantasy/science fiction; the thirty-three-minute religious spectacle La Vie du Christ (1906, d.p. Anatole Thiberville), which featured extensive use of special effects, a large cast, and lavish sets; and a 1913 adaptation of Edgar Allan Poe’s The Pit and the Pendulum, which terrified audiences with its Gothic brutality. As Gwendolyn Audrey Foster notes, Like many other silent filmmakers of the era, Guy readily mixes staged studio settings with natural location shooting, a practice which continues to the present day. However, the extreme stylization of Guy’s vision in La vie du Christ effectively creates an alternative universe, in which the protagonists of the film seem enshrined by each of the carefully framed compositions. Indeed, Guy’s film is almost a moving painting, in which the prescient naturalism of the performers seems at times strikingly removed from the constructed settings which dominate most of the production. (“Performativity and Gender” 8)

10 H Black & White Cinema

A scene from Alice Guy’s La Vie du Christ (1906), photographed by Anatole Thiberville

As to Guy’s compositional technique, Foster remarks: Although the camera moves little and adheres to the style of proscenium arch directing (popularized in the early twentieth century), the development of multiplaned spaces populated by hundreds of onlookers and participants is impressive. The sets highlight the use of forced perspectives, reminiscent of illuminated Medieval manuscripts. Actions often take place at the borders of the frame to further the sense of extradiegetic space. The shot compositions are often unusually complex and involve staged designs that center around columns, arches, and multiple-level platforms with extraordinarily complex designs. (“Performativity and Gender” 11)

These, of course, are but a few examples—audiences had also seen Edwin S. Porter’s and George S. Fleming’s thrilling “true life” adventure Life of an American Fireman (1903, d.p. Porter) and The Great Train Robbery (1903, d.p. Porter and Blair Smith), both filled with violent action, films that through their pervasive influence almost singlehandedly created a series of genre conventions: the mother and her child saved from the flames in Fireman; the train robbers tracked to doom by an unrelenting posse for their crimes. It was all there on the screen — murders, daring escapes, phantasmagoric transformations, magic, suspense, spectacle,

Origins H 11

everything to take the viewer out of themselves and transport them into another world. Black-and-white cinema was especially seductive. It reveled in its artificiality and artifice, even if the primary considerations for most black-andwhite films were economic rather than artistic. But as that changed, many filmmakers resisted color, just as Charles Chaplin and Yasujirô Ozu initially resisted sound — black-and-white films had a special magic that the specific insistence of color films could never replicate. As Mark Winokur and Bruce Holsinger note, In the 1930s and 1940s cost was not the only factor determining which film stock a film project would employ. Hollywood Technicolor tended to be used to make everything pretty, so that the most serious dramas often tended to be black and white: Citizen Kane (1941), The Little Foxes (1941), the entire genre of film noir, and so on. . . . Black and white is never just that: It is also all the gradations of gray in between. And silver. And beiges. . . . White has, if anything, even more variations, and gray is practically infinite. Black and white is the color of glamour cinematography. The most glamorous icons of the screen, those actors who only require last names — Garbo, Bogart, Bacall, Gable, Dietrich — are most famously photographed in black and white. (“Movies and Film: The Aesthetics of Black and White and Color”)

Thus, almost from its inception, the cinema has been torn between the supposedly direct representationalism of color and the transformative power of black and white, switching back and forth as mood and/or circumstance dictated, creating a world of continual contestation. Alice Guy’s hand-colored films, for example, are an attempt not only to break the boundaries of black and white, but also to create an entirely new, hybrid medium — the image in constant pictorial flux. And while the world that these films inhabit is a result of many factors, in the final result it is the director of cinematography who translates this world into images on the screen. Too often, however, their contributions go unnoticed, sometimes out of ignorance, and sometimes — as we’ll see — because the director may claim all the credit, as if no other artists were responsible for a film’s visual presentation. Though few claimed to be or were acknowledged as such, the cinematographers discussed in this volume were all artists, instinctively knowing where light should come from naturally,

12 H Black & White Cinema

how it should fall on an actor’s face, how to light for comedy, tragedy, or romance. These cameramen — and they were all men, in a male-dominated profession that openly discriminated against women, relegating them to the editing room or script supervision positions — created the fundamental grammar of the cinema. (It was not until the 1960s that women, such as Brianne Murphy, would start moving behind the camera within the film industry, but that was during the beginning of the all-color era. In the classical black-and-white period of motion picture history, it’s a sad fact that cinematography was a profession completely dominated by men.) As Daniel Bruns astutely notes, the world of black-and-white cinematography has its own special rules: For the best results when lighting for black and white . . . [one should] create dramatic shadows and highlights while still keeping a full range of midtones. This is often best achieved with a strong backlight and keylight. That’s because without color to lead viewers' eyes in the shot, the only areas that a viewer’s eyes are going to be drawn to will be areas of sharp contrast. . . . The grays are especially important for capturing the proper tone in skin and the gradual depth of objects in your scene. That’s why overcast days are some of the best times to shoot landscapes in black and white. . . . The real trick is to make sure that the image not only includes a healthy gray level, but pure blacks and pure whites as well. Otherwise, your image will simply look washed out. (“Shooting in Black and White”)

But these are just general rules; the image in black and white is always waiting to be “discovered,” as it does not exist in real life. As Günther Rittau, one of the cinematographers on Fritz Lang’s two-part epic Die Nibelungen (1924), noted, All who are engaged in this task are apprentices of the new “camera-art”— for there is no master. We appeal to the eye by a transient sequence of optical impressions, as the musician appeals to the ear by an acoustic sequence of sounds. The lens is our etching needle. We turn backwards and sweep along the avenues of time; we observe humanity in all its moods — and discover a new physiognomy. We turn slowly, and the flowers bloom. We turn quickly, and there is revealed to us the secret of the bird’s flight. We let the camera swing through space, and observe its dynamics. We create giants and dwarfs,

Origins H 13

legendary forests, dragons, and knights errant. We lead man over the whole earth and point out to him the grandeur of Nature; and we conduct him through the secret, tiny places of the microscope. (“Camera Art”)

Or as cinematographer Philip Rosen, later a director, wrote in 1922, A scene may be photographed in such a manner that it has little or no effect on the audience. On the other hand, the same scene, properly filmed, may conjure in the audience practically any mood that the director wishes to effect. . . . To the director, as well as the cinematographer, photography should be what the artist’s colors and materials are to him. . . . Every sequence should have its own writing, that is, every sequence should be designed photographically, according to the impression which is designed to be conveyed. The simplest examples of designing for effect are the uses of light for “happiness” and shade for “sorrow.” (qtd. in Keating 24 – 25)

Throughout the industry, pioneering cinematographers were figuring out new ways to push the possibilities of the medium, using “cookies” to cast shadow patterns on the sets and the actors, neutral density filters to create a day-for-night effect, and exploring various new film stocks and post-production techniques to make the images suit the subject matter of each individual film. And as the profession began to become regularized, a group of cameramen founded the American Society of Cinematographers (ASC) on January 8, 1919, among them Philip Rosen, Homer Scott, William C. Foster, L. D. Clawson, Charles Rosher, Victor Milner, Joseph August, Arthur Edeson, Fred LeRoy Granville, Devereaux Jennings, Robert S. Newhard, and L. Guy Wilky (Birchard). Rosen would soon advance to the director’s chair, working for the most part on program pictures. In fact, he was more prolific as a director than as a cinematographer, with only thirty features to his credit as a director of photography (DP) and some 140 films as a director, starting with The Beachcomber in 1915 (d.p. Gus Peterson) and ending with a series of atmospheric thrillers such as The Mystery of Marie Roget (1942, d.p. Elwood Bredell) and The Secret of St. Ives (1949, d.p. Henry Freulich), along with several films in the long-running Charlie Chan series in between. Rosen was an early example of a cinematographer who knew how to efficiently and effectively “cover” a scene with speed and precision and yet deliver either moody, densely shadowed work on his thrillers or

14 H Black & White Cinema

more brilliant, sharp images in his comedy work. Rosen also helped to form the Director’s Guild in 1936, and could consistently be relied upon as a person who was sensitive to both the artistic and commercial requirements of the medium (Birchard). Other forming members of the ASC were less well known. Homer Scott shot his first feature film, John Francis Dillon’s The Key to Yesterday, in 1914, and followed with a 1916 version of Davy Crockett starring Dustin Farnum, a famous western star of the period. He was the director of cinematography on numerous Mack Sennett feature comedies from 1921 to 1923, including F. Richard Jones’s The Extra Girl (1923), Suzanna (1923), and Molly O’ (1921), all starring Mabel Normand, and served as the president of the ASC from 1925 to 1926. After that, his career was more sporadic; he moved to Warner Bros. to serve as second cameraman on William A. Seiter’s Little Church Around the Corner (1923), and rumors persist that he began work on Ernst Lubitsch’s The Marriage Circle (1924) before being replaced by Charles Van Enger and Henry Sharp, but other than that, little is certain (Birchard). He died in 1956, a forgotten figure in the industry, but a master of black-and-white comedy lighting, whose thirty-five feature films are a testament to his resilience and speed on the set. The aforementioned Van Enger, whose career stretched all the way from Clarence Brown and Maurice Tourneur’s The Great Redeemer (1920) to the television series Lassie in 1962 and My Mother the Car in 1966, was yet another cinematographic pioneer, with more than 170 credits to his name. His work also included Ernst Lubitsch’s 1925 version of Lady Windermere’s Fan, several entries in Universal’s Sherlock Holmes series, and Charles T. Barton’s Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein (1948). One of his signature films, however, was Rupert Julian’s 1925 version of Phantom of the Opera. Julian, not a director of any great distinction, relied heavily on Van Enger to get the film completed, as the latter would tell historian Richard Koszarski: “The director would tell me . . . ‘I don’t like the lighting.’ And I said, ‘Well, that’s the lighting you are going to get, brother.’ . . . [Photographically, Julian] would tell me what he wanted — if he wanted a long shot I would line up the long shot, and that was it. If he wanted a close-up — I listened to him and gave him what he wanted, but I gave it to him the way that I wanted” (281 – 283). Interestingly, in addition to the film’s deeply saturated black-andwhite images, there is also the use of two-strip Technicolor, the first color

Origins H 15

process created by the company, during the masked ball sequence, in which the Phantom appears as the figure of Death. At least one critic has described this as creating a “melodramatic and strident” effect ( Johnson 14), but given that one of the major tenets of commercial motion picture production, especially in Hollywood, is that of sensation, the sequence is perfectly designed and executed within the context of the overall film; it also gestures toward the future of the cinema and the introduction of three-strip Technicolor in feature films on a full-scale basis in Rouben Mamoulian’s Becky Sharp (1935). William C. Foster and L. D. Clawson both worked as cinematographers for Lois Weber, who in the early 1900s was one of the most prolific and highly paid directors in the business, shooting an amazing twentyseven films in 1914 alone. By 1916, Weber was Universal’s foremost director, but she made the mistake of leaving the company in 1917 to form her own thinly capitalized production outfit, Lois Weber Productions, and by the late 1920s she was bankrupt and out of the industry. During her career, however, Foster and Clawson ably created the naturalism she sought in the photography of her films, using available light and imbuing her players with a realistic aura that perfectly suited her grim social realist vision (Birchard). Another key film of the silent era, King Vidor’s The Crowd (1928), is one of the most technically sophisticated films of the period, and comes directly out of Vidor’s experience on his war film The Big Parade (1925), which he wanted to replicate in a peacetime setting. As Gregory W. Bush recounts, Vidor wondered about other “interesting environments which are dramatic for the average man.” He then hit upon the idea of creating a film that transferred wartime into peacetime encounters, adding that “objectively life is like a battle. . . .” The Crowd was one of the most technically advanced and thematically bold American films of the decade. Ultimately, Vidor’s image of man in mass society, while realistic in contrast to most of the films of the 1920s, manifests a narrowly drawn and cynical psychological portrait derivative of earlier crowd associations. (227)

As photographed by Henry Sharp (who also shot such disparate films as Leo McCarey’s Duck Soup [1933] and Fritz Lang’s Ministry of Fear [1944]), The Crowd is perhaps one of the most visually “plastic” films ever

16 H Black & White Cinema

made, using, as with Abel Gance’s Napoleon (1927), nearly every visual device in the cameraman’s arsenal to depict the life of an ordinary man and woman as they cope with the depersonalization and forced anonymity of everyday life. Today, we work in cubicles; in The Crowd, the workplace is a series of hundreds of desks in one huge room, where John Sims ( James Murray) toils in obscurity, just another cog in the machine. With its drab naturalism and purposefully dehumanizing frame compositions — a famous overhead crane shot of a sea of desks, for example, would much later be referenced in Billy Wilder’s equally bleak view of corporate life in The Apartment (1960), photographed in drab black and white by the gifted Joseph LaShelle — the concluding sequence of The Crowd, in which the camera pulls relentlessly back and up from the protagonists in the midst of a laughing theater audience until they are lost in a sea of humanity, is one of the most compelling and ultimately terrifying images of metropolitan isolation ever filmed — a credit to both Vidor’s vision as director and Sharp’s skill as cinematographer. Charles Rosher had an extremely long and distinguished career beginning as a still photographer, shooting “actualities” in the style of the Lumière Brothers on a trip to the United States to exhibit his photographs at the Eastman School of Photography. Accustomed to working with natural lighting, the preferred method of illumination for most early films, Rosher went west with producer/director David Horsley in 1911, in large part to take advantage of the sunny California climate, which offered more shooting days of vibrant sunshine than one could find on the East Coast. Starting with Tom Ricketts’s short film The Indian Raiders in 1912, Rosher was soon shooting feature films at a torrid pace, such as 1917’s A Mormon Maid, starring rising star Mae Murray and future director Frank Borzage; the film itself was being helmed by another Hollywood veteran, whose career would stretch from 1913 to 1957, Robert Z. Leonard. But Rosher’s greatest initial success came as the DP on a series of Mary Pickford vehicles, which he lit with such star quality, particularly in Pickford’s close-ups, that she used him on all her subsequent films from How Could You, Jean? (1918), directed by William Desmond Taylor, through My Best Girl (1927), directed by Sam Taylor. Accustomed to the freedom of movement that silent camerawork allowed, however, Rosher was unwilling to follow Pickford into sound films beginning with Taylor’s Coquette (1929). Pickford insisted on using

Origins H 17

a locked-down camera in what were known as “iceboxes” or “phone booths” — soundproof booths that muffled the sound of the camera’s whirring motor. This system of photography, employed on numerous feature films in the early days of sound-on-disc shooting, essentially immobilized the camera and transformed it into a mere recording device, something that Rosher could not countenance. In fact, Rosher’s long association with Pickford was due in no small measure to his care in lighting Pickford within the shot, essentially employing one strategy for photographing each scene as a whole and yet another for lighting Pickford within it. As Katherine Lipke reported, “This created a depth not accomplished in any other picture. . . . His method of lighting her . . . makes her personality fairly radiate beauty” (Los Angeles Times, January 21, 1925). Rosher was nevertheless well positioned to move on from Pickford’s production company due to his Oscar-winning work on F. W. Murnau’s Sunrise (1927), an award he shared with Karl Struss, who shot the film with him. Rosher soon found employment at Metro-Goldwyn Mayer on such projects as Nick Grinde’s This Modern Age (1931), a Joan Crawford vehicle in which his long partnership with Pickford proved exceptionally useful in building up the luminescence of Crawford’s early stardom as a romantic ingénue. He then moved on to the acerbic showbiz drama What Price Hollywood? (1932), directed by George Cukor, an early forerunner to A Star Is Born (with William Wellman’s version in 1937 and George Cukor’s knowing remake in 1954), before being loaned out to Selznick International for John Cromwell’s Little Lord Fauntleroy in 1936. In all these films, Rosher’s style is wedded to the material being presented; What Price Hollywood? is shot in very hard-edged style, with brilliant, deeply saturated blacks and whites that MGM would soon forsake for their figurative “museum style” lighting — bright, evenly lit, with most of the illumination coming from the lighting grid above the set, and very few “practical” sources (lights actually on the set and in the frame). Rosher’s career continued apace, with an additional Academy Award for Clarence Brown’s The Yearling (1947), which he shared with fellow DPs Leonard Smith and Arthur E. Arling, who worked with him on the film, though The Yearling was shot in color, and additional Oscar nominations for Gregory La Cava’s The Affairs of Cellini (1934), William Dieterle’s Kismet (1944), George Sidney and Busby Berkeley’s Annie Get Your Gun (1950), and George Sidney’s elaborate remake of the musical Showboat (1951). Rosher retired after his work on the similarly glossy Jupiter’s

18 H Black & White Cinema

Darling (1955), directed by George Sidney; he had long ago eschewed his earlier, more direct approach for the Technicolor glossiness of the studio, though it seems significant that his Oscar for The Yearling was an exception to his later style. Shot on location for the most part in Hawthorne, Florida, with additional photography in Ocala, Florida, Big Bear Lake, and Lake Arrowhead in the San Bernardino National Forest in California, as well as some studio material, The Yearling’s muted, naturalistic color style harkened back to the more subtle gradations of the black-and-white era. It was certainly not the usual candy-colored, slick style that Technicolor endorsed. Technicolor owned all the equipment necessary to produce their films, including the cameras, and when a studio made a Technicolor film, the head cameraman was part of the package, as was Natalie Kalmus, the omnipresent “Technicolor consultant.” Her job was to insist that the colors in every composition pop off the screen, creating an unnatural, hyperglossy look well suited, perhaps, for fantasies such as Victor Fleming’s The Wizard of Oz (1939) but out of place in a film with a much more intimate, real-life setting. Victor Milner was one of the most intriguing stylists of the black-andwhite era, a pioneer whose career stretches back to the 1913 featurette Hiawatha — for which no directorial credit is known to exist — through John Sturges’s suspense thriller Jeopardy (1953). Just a few of his 139 credits as cinematographer demonstrate that he was able to switch from one visual approach to another with speed and facility. One of his most exquisite films, and one of the supreme romantic comedies of all time, is Ernst Lubitsch’s Trouble in Paradise (1932), photographed in a dreamily romantic style with rich soft focus. Milner was decidedly outspoken regarding what he termed the “abuse” of tracking shots, which often disrupted lighting strategies that had been carefully worked out well in advance, but he praised Lubitsch for his thoughtful use of dolly shots in his films: Lubitsch, for example, regards camera movement as something to be used as precisely as punctuation. When he moves the camera, he invariably does it at a time when it is necessary to bring the audience closer to some important bit of business — some word, act, or expression which high-lights a whole scene or sequence. And he makes sure that the technique of the shot is so flawless that the movement is virtually imperceptible to the audience — natural, inevitable, and wholly subservient to the story-action. (Hall 47)

Origins H 19

This, of course, was further problematized by the unwieldy nature of early sound cameras, which, although they had improved greatly since their “phone booth” introduction in the late 1920s, still posed a real handicap for lighting and designing a scene. As Milner wrote in a 1932 article, “Riddle Me This,” the “weight and bulk [of the ‘blimped’ camera then in use] definitely slow down the production of pictures: one cannot move quickly from one set-up to another, nor can one take full advantage of many of the possibilities of the cinema, for these huge, bulky blimps are not easily adapted to the making of many effective angle and moving shots. In this connection, it is really amazing how well we have managed under this handicap” (12). For director Preston Sturges, Milner photographed the sardonic and cynical comedies The Lady Eve (1941) and The Palm Beach Story (1942) in an appropriately clean style, with sharply defined blacks and whites and relatively even illumination. He also worked for Robert Florey on the romantic drama Till We Meet Again (1936), bringing a brooding, moody approach to the melodramatic material. But then Milner would turn right around and create a world of menacing shadows for a series of noirs, such as Lewis Milestone’s The Strange Love of Martha Ivers (1946) and William Dieterle’s Dark City (1950). Though he was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Cinematography nine times, he won only once, for Cecil B. DeMille’s historical spectacle Cleopatra (1934), ironically a film on which DeMille executed total control on every aspect of the production, giving little latitude to his DP for any creative input. Milner, in fact, shot several features for DeMille, including The Crusades (1935) and the absolutely pedestrian North West Mounted Police (1940), demonstrating his almost chameleon-like ability to create a variety of lighting strategies to fit the mood and atmosphere of almost any film. Joseph August, an equally adept professional who packed 155 credits into his tragically short career — he died of a heart attack on the set of William Dieterle’s phantasmal black-and-white romance Portrait of Jennie in 1948 at the age of just fifty-seven — began his career working with another pioneer, Ray C. Smallwood, a director and cinematographer who would ultimately find his true calling as a photographic effects technician, specializing in background transparencies used in rear projection for studio work. As August recalled, Smallwood was a stern taskmaster who significantly refused to use a light meter when working on the set, preferring to let his eyes alone guide him in deciding what exposure

20 H Black & White Cinema

Victor Milner, far left, next to the camera, on Robert Florey’s romantic drama Till We Meet Again (1936)

aperture to use for each scene. As August told an interviewer toward the end of his life, “There was a device . . . known as an illumination system . . . designed to obtain for the cameraman something parallel to what a [light] meter would do today. I was told with considerable detail and even more emphasis just what fate would befall me if he ever found me fussing with one of those gadgets” (Birchard). August’s early work was very rough-and-tumble filmmaking, shot with available lighting under deeply primitive circumstances. In short, August learned on the job, creating his own style as he progressed through the ranks in such films as Howard Hawks’s classic screwball comedy Twentieth Century (1934). And yet, as he told Birchard, “Many things have changed during the rise and development of the picture-making

Origins H 21

industry, but the basis of lighting seems to be about the same as it was in the beginning.” In 1947, in the midst of photographing Portrait of Jennie, August took time out to reminisce about his early days in the industry and, as always, he presented his approach to cinematography as practical and workmanlike. Today I have the title of Director of Cinematography and a camera crew of four assistants. In the old days, I used to crank the camera myself. I can remember shooting William S. Hart in action on a horse by riding alongside him on another horse with my camera propped up in my lap. For one silent picture, I was perched high up on the edge of a ship’s mast grinding away at the camera and rocking it for the right effect. A tug boat was shooting water up at me for a storm scene and I almost fell off when a stream of water caught me unawares. My assistant grabbed me just in time. I always had a man standing by to cover me during the early pictures I shot since I had to keep my eyes glued to the camera no matter what was going on around me. (Goodman X3)

Howard Hawks and the cast of Twentieth Century (1934) in a posed publicity shot, with cinematographer Joseph August kneeling next to the camera

22 H Black & White Cinema

Arthur Edeson was a similarly versatile cameraman, and he too started as a still photographer before breaking into the movie business at the Eclair Studios in Fort Lee, New Jersey, in 1911. He spent his spare time shooting portraits of the other actors in the Eclair troupe, which brought Edeson to the attention of cinematographer John Van den Broeck, and when one of the regular Eclair DPs fell ill, Van den Broeck tapped Edeson as a last-minute replacement. This posed a distinct challenge for Edeson, who had developed a more painterly nuanced style in his still portrait work, and was reluctant to abandon it in favor of the utilitarian lighting techniques widely employed in the industry at the time. Not surprisingly, Edeson’s more sophisticated approach brought forth considerable resistance. As he noted, In those times, flat lighting was the rule of the day. However, I began to introduce some of the lighting ideas I had learned in my portrait work — a suggestion of modeling here, an artistically placed shadow there — and soon my efforts tended to show a softer, portrait-like quality on the motionpicture screen. This was so completely out of line with what was considered good cinematography in those days that I had to use my best salesmanship to convince everyone it was good camerawork. (Birchard)

Yet Edeson’s work was not solely defined by this “portraiture” style. The more romantic approach was well suited to Henry King’s maternal melodrama Stella Dallas (1925), but Edeson quickly demonstrated that he was also capable of darker, more deeply shadowed and menacing lighting in such films as Roland West’s suspense mystery The Bat (1926). Edeson easily adapted to the exigencies of early sound exterior shooting for Irving Cummings’s spare, sun-drenched western In Old Arizona (1928), and then shot Lewis Milestone’s darkly ambitious antiwar film All Quiet on the Western Front (1930, co-photographed with Karl Freund) in an almost documentary style, re-creating the horror of combat conditions in World War I with unflinching realism. For the latter film Edeson used a partially soundproofed camera that he himself designed. As he recalled in a 1968 interview, I had taken [my 35 mm] camera over to Gus, the mechanic at Mitchell’s, and he put a micarta gear in the rear of the camera. He took some of the metal parts out and that made the camera 50 percent quieter than other

Origins H 23

cameras. And I also had a big padded bag we called a ‘barney’ that I put over the camera to quiet it down more. . . . You couldn’t have made a picture like All Quiet on the Western Front using those sound houses [photographic “booths” that encased both the camera and the operator, making them soundproof ]. . . . You couldn’t get good photography. You couldn’t light. Now [All Quiet] was at least 50 percent exterior war stuff so my camera could easily handle it. We also shot the battle stuff silent. . . . Sometimes on the interior scenes when the camera moved in close I placed a big piece of plate glass between it and the actors so there were no big problems with camera noise. (Mitchell 38)

The film also allowed Edeson to show off his stylistic versatility. As George J. Mitchell astutely notes, Edeson treated the passage of day-to-night and [back-to-day] with a subtle but realistic lighting style. At night, flashes of gunfire light up the shell hole. In the morning Edeson’s camera catches [a] dead Frenchman’s face in an unforgettable close-up. His dead eyes are open and stare into nothing. A whiff of smoke from the battlefield drifts into the frame. . . . Paul and Albert [William Bakewell] are both wounded and taken to a hospital behind the lines staffed by Catholic nuns. Edeson uses a higher lighting key for these scenes. Albert’s shattered leg is amputated, unknown to him. When he comes out of the anesthetic, he complains of pain in his toes and suddenly remembers the complaint was the same he had heard made by another comrade in the same situation. Edeson’s camera adroitly captures the pathetic moment when Albert tilts a small hand mirror in such a way that he sees with horror his leg is gone. For Paul’s convalescent homecoming, Edeson has lit the scene in a high key. Bright sunlight streams through the front door as Paul enters his parents’ home. His sister runs to embrace him. ‘Paul’s home,’ she tells the mother, who is bedridden. As Paul realizes that he can no longer fit into life on the home front, the mood of the lighting becomes more subdued. (Mitchell 41)

Jumping from studio to studio, Edeson was always in demand, and his most influential work was still to come, notably James Whale’s Frankenstein (1931) at Universal. The film is significant for its German Expressionistic stylings, but here Edeson also embraced the artistic tenets of

24 H Black & White Cinema

tenebrism, which uses extremely deep shadows throughout the frame and offers sharp contrast between illuminated areas and the darkness surrounding them. The style is often employed in conjunction with a chiaroscuro approach to lighting, composition, and framing, which keeps much of the image area immersed in darkness and typically employs a single source of light to illuminate the scene — two techniques that would become immensely popular in the era of film noir in the 1940s. Edeson continued at Universal with Whale’s The Invisible Man (1933), a special effects tour-de-force, with superb matte work by the gifted John P. Fulton, but he seemed equally at home at Warner Bros. shooting Lloyd Bacon’s aerial war drama Devil Dogs of the Air (1935), which once again marked a decided shift in his approach, offering stripped-down images devoid of any trace of romanticism. Edeson reached a new career peak with his noirish work on John Huston’s first feature film The Maltese Falcon (1941) and then Michael Curtiz’s iconic wartime romance Casablanca (1942). For Casablanca, perhaps Curtiz’s supreme accomplishment as a director, Edeson created a world of parched, sunlit exteriors (many actually shot in the studio), coupled with polished, glittering interior lighting in the set for Rick’s cafe and deep shadows for Rick and Ilsa’s nighttime romantic interludes, all of which create a fully-rounded fantasy world of romance, intrigue, and adventure that remains a classic to this day. As George Turner writes of Edeson’s work in the film, He had a knack for making his players look bigger or smaller than life. In the films Frankenstein, The Invisible Man and The Maltese Falcon, his camera peers up at Boris Karloff, Claude Rains and Sydney Greenstreet, respectively, to enhance their size. In Casablanca, Peter Lorre gets the opposite treatment as he wriggles through a crowd like a worm crawling out of an apple. Edeson also made Humphrey Bogart (who wasn’t tall) seem bigger than Ingrid Bergman (who was) and just as tall as his rival, [Paul] Henreid. With deft lighting and the careful use of camera angles, he added menace to [Conrad] Veidt’s sculptured features, and helped Claude Rains sustain his characterization of a dapper, skirt-chasing little rogue. (“Casablanca” 112)

Looking over Edeson’s legacy, it’s hard to reconcile his work on Frankenstein just ten years earlier with his cinematography on Casablanca, so different are their approaches to the material; it’s also astounding to note

Origins H 25

that at the height of his career, Edeson would agree to shoot a “big band” one-reel short, Jean Negulesco’s Glen Gray and the Casa Loma Orchestra (1942), a project that took exactly one day to complete. In addition to all these accomplishments, Edeson was a pioneer in the use of 70 mm film and widescreen cinematography, comparable to the effect that one achieves through the use of an anamorphic lens and conventional 35 mm film in the CinemaScope widescreen process. Shooting Raoul Walsh’s epic western The Big Trail in 1930, starring a very young and raw John Wayne, Edeson actually photographed two versions; one in conventional 35 mm, and another in 70 mm widescreen, dubbed “Grandeur photography,” to obtain a wall-to-wall effect that was employed in only a few other films of the era. Edeson wrote about his work on the film in detail from both an artistic and a technical viewpoint: The chief requirements for lenses for wide-film cinematography are, first and foremost, extremely wide covering power; and secondly (and of quite as great importance), extremely great depth of focus. Due to the more natural shape of the Grandeur frame, there is a certain pseudo-stereoscopic effect produced: but this effect is lost unless there is a very considerable depth of focus in the image. The 70 millimeter picture is very nearly the same proportion as the natural field of our vision, which, I suppose, is responsible for this pseudo-stereoscopy. But, clearly, to take full advantage of this, we must use lenses [that] will give us a degree of depth at least somewhat approximating that of our eyes. Therefore, it is vital that Grandeur lenses be selected with a view toward getting this effect, so that the crispest, deepest pictures may be had. . . . The director, however, must in a Grandeur picture pay considerably more attention to his background action than is usually the case, for, even in close-ups, the depth of focus demanded by Grandeur makes the background an important part of the picture. (Edeson, “Wide Film Cinematography” 8, 9, 21)

Clearly, Edeson was correct in his prediction that CinemaScopic formats, and other widescreen formats such as Panavision, would eventually become a major part of the cinema industry — he was just two decades too early. Twentieth Century – Fox finally introduced anamorphic CinemaScope (as they dubbed it) in 1953, using a process patented by the French inventor Henri Chrétien in 1926. “Grandeur” photography, as Edeson

26 H Black & White Cinema

calls it, used the width of the entire 70 mm frame for a widescreen image, rather than squeezing it onto a 35 mm negative as CinemaScope did; in fact, using 70 mm film for a widescreen image is technically far superior to Chrétien’s process. However, the use of 70 mm film during shooting also necessitated the use of 70 mm projection equipment in theaters, and in the depths of the Depression few exhibitors were willing to install the necessary equipment, in view of both the prohibitive cost and also the fact that only a few films were being made using the process. Thus, only the standard 35 mm version of The Big Trail received wide distribution; the 70 mm version was screened in only a few major cities, such as New York and Los Angeles, and ultimately failed at the box office. Not coincidentally, the penetrating gaze of Edeson’s 70 mm camera also brought out relative neophyte John Wayne’s inexperience in front of the camera; the actor would be forced to labor in B-westerns for the rest of the decade, until his old mentor, John Ford, rescued him from poverty row by offering him the lead in his soon-to-be classic Stagecoach (1939), photographed by yet another pioneer of the medium, Bert Glennon. Edeson rounded out his career with one of Negulesco’s first feature films, the John Garfield noir Nobody Lives Forever (1946), and Arthur Pierson’s swashbuckler adventure The Fighting O’Flynn (1948). Thus, as cinematographers, only Rosher, Milner, August, and Edeson of the founding ASC members enjoyed careers that extended well into the sound era; the rest, Fred LeRoy Granville, Devereaux Jennings, Robert S. Newhard, and L. Guy Wilky, all enjoyed some measure of success, but nothing approaching the innovative distinction of their more accomplished peers. Granville left the United States to work in England in 1920 and never returned, dying there in 1932; working with cinematographer Bert Haines, Jennings created the naturalistic images for Buster Keaton and Clyde Bruckman’s Civil War farce The General (1926) as well as Charles Reisner and Keaton’s riverboat comedy Steamboat Bill Jr. (1928), but the success of both films is more dependent on Keaton’s skill as a slapstick comedian than any pictorial aspects inherent in either project; Newhard’s chief claim to fame is his work as the DP of Wallace Worsley’s 1923 version of The Hunchback of Notre Dame, starring Lon Chaney Sr.; while Wilky was blacklisted by major studios for his efforts as a labor organizer for the International Photographers Union and thus relegated to second-unit work after 1928, ending his career as an assistant

Origins H 27

at Columbia in the 1950s (Birchard). Not one can be considered a major stylist. But in their pioneering work with the ASC, as well as their collective impact on the discipline of cinematography in its formative years, all these technicians made a lasting contribution. The degree of input these cinematographers had on the films they worked on varied widely. Buster Keaton, of course, was the consummate auteur, controlling every aspect of his classic silent films in the mid- to late 1920s with an almost fanatical degree of perfectionism. He tended to concentrate more on the often dangerous gags he performed (such as when a house collapses around him in Steamboat Bill Jr., leaving only the space of a small window as an “escape hatch”) than on lighting, which was generally even and bright during the exterior daylight sequences — most often using natural light and reflectors — and suitably subdued at night, whether indoors or outside. Yet if Keaton’s approach to lighting his films could arguably be described as utilitarian, he knew exactly what to do in any given scene to obtain the designed effect. Describing a dream sequence in his film Sherlock Jr. (1924, d.p. Byron Houck and Elgin Lessley) to Christopher Bishop, in which Keaton seems to leave the audience in a movie theater to join the characters “on the screen,” Keaton explained: We built what looked like a motion picture screen and actually built a stage into that frame but lit it in such a way that it looked like a motion picture being projected on a screen. But it was real actors and the lighting effect gave us the illusion, so I could go out of semi-darkness into that well-lit screen right from the front row of the theater right into the picture. Then when it came to the scene changing on me when I got up there, that was a case of timing and on every one of those things we would measure the distance to the fraction of an inch from the camera to where I was standing, also with a surveying outfit to get the exact height and angle so that there wouldn’t be a fraction of an inch missing on me, and then we changed the setting to what we wanted it to be and I got back into that same spot and it overlapped the action to get the effect of the scene changing. (17, 18)

With such close supervision by Keaton, his DPs became more or less an extension of his vision, rather than being given more freedom as they might have with another director.

28 H Black & White Cinema

In Europe, cameramen were applying a different set of aesthetic principles to their work in the cinema. Yet many of these cinematographers adopted Hollywood’s utilitarian methodology later in their careers, especially after they left Europe — as many did, particularly from Germany in the 1930s, to escape the Nazi onslaught — and began working in America. In this regard, the career of the distinguished German cinematographer Karl Freund is a particularly instructive case study. Born in 1890 in what was then Bohemia in the Austro-Hungarian Empire, Freund broke into the business in Berlin in 1905, working as a projectionist. His first credit as a cinematographer was on Urban Gad’s forty-minute Asta Nielsen vehicle Gipsy Blood (Heißes Blut, 1911), on which he worked with two assistants, Gad and Guido Seeber (the film is now considered lost). Freund then continued with a string of shorts and featurettes for Gad and later Robert Wiene, who would soon soar to fame with his 1920 horror classic The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari, which Freund did not photograph; the honors on that film went to DP Willy Hameister. By 1920, Freund had graduated from smaller projects to big-budget feature films, such as Reinhold Schünzel’s Catherine the Great (1920) and Carl Boese and Paul Wegener’s The Golem (1920), in which Wegener also starred as a mythical creature, sculpted from clay, who is brought to life by a rabbi in sixteenth-century Prague to protect the Jews of the city from religious persecution. By 1924 he was working with the great Danish director Carl Theodor Dreyer on Michael, in which Freund also appeared as an actor in the role of an art gallery owner, and with F. W. Murnau on the tragic drama — until the intentionally preposterous happy ending — The Last Laugh (1924), becoming in the process one of the most influential cinematographers of the silent German cinema. But his magnum opus was yet to come: Fritz Lang’s epic Metropolis (1927), a science-fiction film so spectacular and grandiose in its execution that it became a worldwide sensation upon its initial release. Through the subsequent decades it has informed nearly every dystopian science-fiction film, from Ridley Scott’s Blade Runner (1982) to Marco Brambilla’s Demolition Man (1993) and, more recently, Alfonso Cuarón’s Children of Men (2006) and The Hunger Games franchise, along with countless other projects. With its overarching narrative of a society in which the privileged few lead lives of luxury while the masses toil in the depths below to support the wealthy’s lavish lifestyle, Metropolis foretold the coming

Origins H 29

A futuristic cityscape from Fritz Lang’s 1927 film Metropolis, photographed by Karl Freund, Günther Rittau, and Walter Ruttmann

economic inequality that engulfs us today, in which 1 percent of the population controls 99 percent of the world’s wealth, and the rest must be content with the few remaining scraps tossed their way by the ruling elite. The production design of the film was massive in scale, employing literally thousands of extras, state-of-the-art special effects, and a vision of the future that was both bleak and utterly convincing. Yet Freund was not blind to the rise of Hitler and his followers, or to the fact that technical facilities in Hollywood were vastly superior to those available in Germany. He thus resolved to immigrate to America in 1929 and soon found himself assisting Arthur Edeson in an uncredited capacity as associate director of cinematography on All Quiet on the Western Front, which, as noted, depicted the entire Great War as a useless and cynical exercise in territorial expansion. For obvious reasons, especially when the film won the Academy Award for Best Picture in 1930, All Quiet was not well received in Freund’s homeland, and Freund realized that he was now essentially a permanent Hollywood exile.

30 H Black & White Cinema

Assigned to shoot Tod Browning’s 1931 version of Dracula, Freund quickly recognized that the director’s difficulty with early sound techniques was becoming a problem on the film. Freund thus played a large part in the overall design and execution of the film, handling most of the visuals, while Browning concentrated on toning down Bela Lugosi’s performance in the title role, which was much too theatrical for the intimacy of the camera (Lugosi had played the role on Broadway in 1927 for 261 performances, and then went on tour with the production). Having directed films in Germany just before his departure, Freund now leveraged his camerawork on Dracula into a directorial assignment on The Mummy (1932), perhaps the most dreamlike and hypnotic film in the early Universal horror canon.

Karl Freund, hands raised, right, directing The Mummy (1932), with cameraman Charles Stumar lining up a shot with star Boris Karloff

Origins H 31

Karl Freund’s eccentric horror film Mad Love (1935), photographed by Gregg Toland and Chester Lyons, with Peter Lorre, the film’s star, on the right

Photographed by Charles Stumar, another pioneer of the cinema who shot more than 100 films before his untimely death in 1935, with Freund closely supervising the proceedings, The Mummy features horror icon Boris Karloff in one of his most compelling roles, as the “undead” mummy Imhotep who returns to life to claim his “bride,” reincarnated as the mysterious Helen Grosvenor (Zita Johann). The film was enormously successful and inspired a torrent of indifferent sequels, but Freund soon found that his gift for moody, deeply shadowed, macabre lighting was his strongest asset as a cinematographer, and that his own sensibility as an artist was less well suited to his subsequent directorial projects, such as the musical comedy Gift of Gab (1934). He finished out his career as director with a more suitable project, the willfully perverse Mad Love (1935) for MGM, in which insane surgeon Doctor Gogol (Peter Lorre) grafts the hands of a knife-throwing murderer on to pianist Stephen Orlac (Colin Clive) after the pianist’s hands are smashed in a railway accident. In the meantime, Doctor Gogol has become obsessed with Orlac’s wife, Yvonne (Frances Drake).

32 H Black & White Cinema

Filming began on May 6, 1935, with Chester A. Lyons as DP, but Freund soon recognized Lyons’s relative mediocrity behind the camera and insisted upon the services of Gregg Toland (who would later shoot Citizen Kane) for the final eight days of production (Mank 130). Tellingly, according to Frances Drake, the film’s female lead, “Freund wanted to be the cinematographer at the same time [as being the director]. . . . You never knew who was directing” (Mank 140). Mad Love is a deeply eccentric, visually stunning film, which nevertheless failed at the box office. Freund and Toland’s visual style was decidedly at odds with MGM’s studio look of blandly anonymous, flat, white lighting, to say nothing of the film’s outré subject matter. Recognizing that he was more interested in designing and capturing images than in helming entire films, Freund decided from then on to concentrate solely on work as a cinematographer. However, in doing so, Freund acquiesced almost entirely to the regularized overhead grid lighting that was MGM’s distinctive visual trademark, and his subsequent films for the company are on the whole visually undistinguished. Sidney Franklin and Victor Fleming’s The Good Earth (1937) is a conventionally epic MGM literary adaptation for which Freund nevertheless won an Academy Award for Best Cinematography in 1938; Green Hell (1940) is arguably James Whale’s least interesting film; Victor Fleming’s A Guy Named Joe (1943, co-photographed with George J. Folsey) is a predictably jingoistic wartime fantasy drama; and of these later films, only John Huston’s Key Largo (1948), for which Freund was on loan to Warner Bros., has the punch and verve of his best work. But an even more pronounced change in Freund’s style was just around the corner. By 1950, essentially retired from the business, Freund was lured away from his orange groves to design the first three-camera sitcom system of photography, which essentially remains in use to this day, for the still beloved television series I Love Lucy in 1951, which used three cameras running simultaneously — one in the middle to cover a wide shot of the action, and two other cameras, one on the left and the other on the right, to pick up close-ups of the performers during a scene (Arnaz 206 – 207). Using 35 mm Mitchell cameras with 1,000-foot magazines running ten minutes each, Freund devised the flattest, most even lighting of his career — entirely devoid of nuance or emphasis — to enable stars Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz to shoot 148 episodes of the series in front of a live

Origins H 33

audience, in three seven-minute acts, like a play, so that all the coverage the editor needed was accomplished in one take — as the cameras rolled nonstop through each seven-minute segment, supplying the master shot and the close-ups all in one pass. Now, of course, this is done on digital video, but the coverage model remains the same; get all the materials in one shooting session. This three-camera system, of course, represents the absolute nadir of creative cinematography — an odd twist in the career of such a prime exponent of Expressionistic lighting in his early work in Germany. Freund took it on as a technical challenge, and was richly rewarded for his efforts by Arnaz, who at this point in his career was so powerful that he bought out the failing RKO Radio Studios with one phone call, and turned the facility into the physical plant for his own company, the TV giant Desilu (Arnaz 294). Three-camera sitcom lighting was frankly an assembly-line procedure, nothing more, designed to record the performances of the actors as quickly and efficiently as possible, and, not incidentally, to take advantage of the live studio audience to create an instantaneous “laugh track,” which would, of course, be enhanced in post-production. It’s more than a little ironic, then, that Freund won his second Academy Award, in 1955, “for the design and development of a direct reading brightness meter,” which had been instrumental in creating the utilitarian bright, white world of I Love Lucy, and its companion series, Our Miss Brooks, for which Freund served as DP on 126 episodes using the same three-camera system. In 1956, Freund retired from the studio system that had so totally subsumed him; he died at the age of seventy-nine in 1969. Another classic horror film of the 1930s came not from Universal, by then regarded as Hollywood’s horror factory, but from Paramount, better known for its Mae West vehicles, Marx Brothers films, and Josef von Sternberg’s delirious exoticism. Erle C. Kenton’s Island of Lost Souls (1932, d.p. Karl Struss), a resolutely pre-Code film (that is, before the Motion Picture Production Code was strictly enforced, starting in 1934, though it had technically been in place since 1922), told the tale of the demented Dr. Moreau (Charles Laughton), who creates synthetic “manimals” from the various animals who roam his island kingdom. Kenton, an aggressive stylist, was for most of his career destined to work in generally undistinguished program pictures, but he is perhaps best known for the dreamy, almost hallucinatory images he created with Struss for Island of Lost Souls.

34 H Black & White Cinema

Much of the film, indeed, is suffused with a gauzy, soft-focus effect, but his work on the film remains an outlier in his career. It is perhaps no accident that among Kenton’s last assignments as a director were House of Frankenstein (1944) and House of Dracula (1945), both photographed by yet another gifted cinematographer, George Robinson, who started in the silent era with William Duncan’s Where Men Are Men (1921) and racked up more than 180 credits before his retirement in 1957. Kenton, working with Struss, Robinson, and others, had a distinct advantage over many of his directorial colleagues; as Struss noted, Kenton understood how to compose an effective image from his early days as a still photographer. Billy Bitzer, one of the first and greatest of all cameramen, knew this implicitly, even if he approached his labor with D. W. Griffith as an essentially workaday affair. The artistry that arose out of the images he photographed came from the light falling on the scene in front of him, the framing that accentuated certain portions of the image and excluded others, and, perhaps most importantly, the skill to make the end product look so effortless that no one viewing the film could conceive of the care that went into each new camera setup. Above all, Bitzer strove for a sort of faux naturalism, often accentuated in post-production by color tinting, which sought to emulate the actual circumstances of the situation, even going so far as to shoot at night using magnesium flares for Griffith’s epic Intolerance: Love’s Struggle Throughout the Ages (1916). Bitzer was born in 1872 in Roxbury, Massachusetts, as Johann Gottlob Wilhelm Bitzer. He began his long career as an assistant to W.K.L. Dickson, working for the American Mutoscope Company, later known as Biograph Pictures. He became a full-fledged cameraman as early as 1903, when he switched from shooting “actualities” to narrative films, and assisted Griffith on the director’s first film, The Adventures of Dollie (1908), which was actually shot by Arthur Marvin. Marvin, born in 1859, is another unjustly forgotten cinema pioneer, who shot an astounding 445 short films between 1897 and 1911, the year of his death; for Griffith, he not only shot Dollie but also The Lonely Villa in 1909, another key film in the director’s career. Bitzer absorbed everything he could from Marvin and then moved into the first cameraman slot with such films as Griffith’s A Corner in Wheat (1909) and In Old California (1910), and subsequently kept up a torrid pace of production. Although there is now legitimate dispute on the matter, since Alice Guy, head of production at Gaumont from 1896 to 1906, incorporated many of the stylistic

Origins H 35

and technical advances Bitzer is routinely credited for in her more than 400 films, Bitzer is considered by many to have created the fade-out, softfocus photography, and other basics of film grammar. Certainly, Bitzer’s work ethic was prodigious, with more than 1,200 credits to his name. He began his career as a DP with a documentary film, William McKinley at Canton, Ohio (1897), and shot nearly 500 films for other directors before his work with Griffith, for which he is best remembered. With the appallingly racist epic The Birth of a Nation (1915), Bitzer pulled out all the stops, consciously modeling his work in the film on the real-life Civil War photographs of Mathew Brady. As Richard Griffith and Arthur Mayer note, Bitzer obtained “the Brady prints from a librarian, who parted with her precious collection for a box of chocolates. The orthochromatic film of those days aided the illusion of nineteenth-century photography” (32). Astonishingly, the entire film was photographed with a single hand-cranked camera, and Griffith seemed oblivious to injury to both cast and crew during the battlefield sequences of the film. As Bitzer later recalled, There were times when I wished that Mr. Griffith didn’t depend on me so much, especially in battle scenes. The fireworks men shooting smoke bombs over the camera — most of them exploding outside camera range — and D. W. shouting, “Lower, lower, can’t you shoot those damn bombs lower?” ‘“We’ll hit the cameraman if we do,” answered the fireworks brigade, and bang! one of them whizzed past my ear. The next one may have gone between my legs for all I knew. But the bombs were coming into the camera field so it was okay. As I write this, looking at my hand, it still shows the blue powder specks from the battlefield of The Birth of a Nation. (Griffith and Mayer 33)

Bitzer’s most ambitious film—and Griffith’s as well, for that matter— was undoubtedly the 197-minute epic Intolerance, which was partially funded by Bitzer’s life savings. Griffith designed Intolerance as an answer to his critics who, even then, recognized Birth’s racism, but the film’s length, extravagance, and complex plot structure alienated audiences, who stayed away in droves. In an attempt to recoup a portion of his financial losses, in 1919 Griffith took two sections of the film, one dealing with the decline and collapse of ancient Babylon (which not incidentally had the most spectacular sets in the original work), the other a contemporary

36 H Black & White Cinema

Billy Bitzer at the camera, left; D. W. Griffith, right, during the shooting of Way Down East (1920)

American story, and released them as separate pictures, The Fall of Babylon and The Mother and the Law, respectively. But Griffith’s career was in decline. Bitzer’s last films with Griffith were Way Down East (1920); America (1924), a Revolutionary War drama that failed to capture the public’s imagination; Drums of Love (1928), a historical romance that also failed to catch fire; and Lady of the Pavements (1929), a part-talkie that survives only in a silent version. Work became harder to come by, and it wasn’t until 1933 that Bitzer got another assignment, but this time on the distinctly down-market Hotel Variety, directed by Raymond Cannon. A cheap production in every respect, running a scant sixty-five minutes, Hotel Variety would be Bitzer’s last DP credit, and his only fully synchronized sound film. His

Origins H 37

associate DP on the film, who had also worked with Bitzer on some of his final projects for Griffith, was Marcel Le Picard, whose career began in 1915 with the silent film The Outlaw’s Revenge and then stretched through the 1940s and 1950s as the cinematographer for more than 190 horror, western, and comedy films. Many of these were produced by Monogram Pictures — a reliable purveyor of quotidian black-and-white cinema, as evidenced by such projects as William Beaudine’s Voodoo Man (1944), an atmospheric horror film starring Bela Lugosi, John Carradine, and George Zucco, which Le Picard photographed. But for Bitzer, Hotel Variety was the end of the trail. Shortly before his death, Bitzer was working at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, in the newly inaugurated film department under curator Iris Barry, supervising the maintenance of the museum’s collection. He died in 1944, ten years after his last work as a cinematographer; his autobiography was published posthumously in 1973, and in 2003 he was voted one of the ten most influential cameramen of all time by the members of the International Cinematographers Guild. If Bitzer’s work is overshadowed by Griffith’s celebrity, it’s instructive to remember that Bitzer’s cinematography on more than 1,000 films is an accomplishment in its own right. More specifically, his conscientious application of the concepts of backlighting, early deep-focus cinematography (long before Gregg Toland became celebrated for his deep-focus work in Orson Welles’s Citizen Kane [1941]), and an almost painterly photographic style formed the foundation of Hollywood black-andwhite cinematography — and when Griffith moved west early in his career, Bitzer’s work as DP on Griffith’s In Old California (1910), in what was then called “Hollywoodland,” marked him as perhaps the first truly Hollywood studio cameraman. Bitzer was effectively passing the torch to a younger generation; on his last two films for Griffith, Drums of Love (1928) and Lady of the Pavements (1929), he was assisted by Karl Struss, whose work with Charles Rosher on F. W. Murnau’s Sunrise: A Song of Two Humans (1927) won Rosher and Struss an Academy Award for Best Cinematography in 1929. Struss and Rosher would both become major figures behind the camera, though for his part Struss was cheerfully pragmatic about his entry into the film industry. As he told Kenneth Turan, “Anyone who could turn a crank was a cameraman. [In the early days,] you tried to take the whole burden of production off the director so he could concentrate on the

38 H Black & White Cinema

acting.” This suited Struss just fine, and on Sunrise, he and Rosher were given the freedom to create an entire tactile world for the film’s characters to inhabit. Sunrise’s tragic narrative is of a man, never named, played by George O’Brien, and his wife, also unnamed, played by Janet Gaynor — the actors are listed in the film’s credits simply as “The Man” and “His Wife” — who are deeply in love until the man is seduced by the “vampish” Woman from the City (Margaret Livingston), who urges the man to drown his wife so they can be together. The man tries to do this during an outing on a boat, but at the last moment realizes that he can’t go through with it, that he truly loves her. But too late: his wife realizes his murderous intent and flees for her life, while the man pursues her through the city and pleads for forgiveness. Finally reconciled, the couple takes another boat ride together, but a storm comes up, the boat capsizes, and it appears that the wife has drowned. Stunned, the man returns home, only to find The Woman from the City waiting for him, convinced that her plan has succeeded. Furious with himself for agreeing to her scheme, the man begins to strangle her, only to be interrupted by a maid calling to him from the distance that his wife has survived. As the film ends, the man and wife are reunited and exchange a passionate kiss. The Woman from the City departs in her carriage, as the sun rises in the distance. I offer this brief summary of the film to frame remarks by the Cubanborn cinematographer Néstor Almendros (1930 – 1992), a master of the craft who photographed Terrence Malick’s Days of Heaven (1978), for which he won the Academy Award for Best Cinematography; Alan J. Pakula’s Sophie’s Choice (1982); Eric Rohmer’s Pauline at the Beach (1983); and François Truffaut’s Confidentially Yours (1983), among many other films. In a lecture delivered in 1984, Almendros had these observations on Rosher and Struss’s exquisite camerawork: The reason I chose [Sunrise] to discuss, aside from the obvious one that I like it very much, is that it received the first Academy Award given for cinematography. The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences awards were created in 1927, and . . . Sunrise won a special award that has never again been given, for “artistic quality of production.” . . . As strange as it may sound, awards for cinematography did not exist at that time and, stranger yet, they barely exist today. Cannes, Berlin, Venice and all the other major film festivals of the world have no awards for cinematography. They do have awards

Origins H 39

for supporting actors and supporting actresses, for writers and directors, and for a lot of other things, but the cinematographer’s work is often disregarded. Murnau belonged to the school of German Expressionism, perhaps most evident in his direction of the classic vampire film Nosferatu (1922), photographed by Fritz Arno Wagner and an uncredited Günther Krampf. The camera angles, the lighting, the sets and the costumes were meant to convey the psychological complexities of the characters. . . . The compositions give an interesting impression of three dimensions. This was achieved by having objects or people in the foreground and action in the background, as in the scene where the city woman is watching the searchers coming back from the rescue attempt. In the interiors, there are lamps in one part of the frame or, in some instances, statues in the foreground. The foreground objects are cut off by the frame on one side, leaving the rest of the foreground open for the main action, enhancing the impression of depth and perspective. (Almendros 95 – 96)

Almendros’s observations are right on target; this is a film which has an almost three-dimensional feel, in part because of the intensity of the

A scene from F. W. Murnau’s classic vampire film Nosferatu (1922), photographed by Fritz Arno Wagner and an uncredited Günther Krampf

40 H Black & White Cinema

actors’ performances, but also because of the magisterial camerawork of Struss and Rosher, who make the narrative seem authentic, immediate, and emotionally accessible to the audience. As the cinema moved into regularized feature films on an international basis, various “schools” of cinematography began to appear around the globe, marked by radically different stylistic approaches to lighting, set design, and editorial structure, all existing within the world of black-andwhite cinema as an alternative universe, separate from and yet inextricably tied to the real world. But another question was beginning to arise: just how much of this “other world” could be attributed to the director, and how much to the director of cinematography? Some directors worked exclusively with the actors, while others would design elaborate camera movements, and still others engage in a genuine collaboration. Who was really the author of the image on the screen — the director, the cinematographer, or both? As it turned out, this varied in each and every individual case, and the relationship between the actors, the director, and the cinematographer was often a matter of constant negotiation, unless, as is sometimes the case, the director and cinematographer were in rapport. Consider the example of Arthur C. Miller, whose remarkable career stretched from the short film A Heroine of ’76 (1911), directed by Lois Weber, to Louis J. Gasnier and Donald Mackenzie’s pioneering motion picture serial The Perils of Pauline (1914), starring Pearl White, and then into a long series of silent features such as Weber’s The Angel of Broadway (1927). Eventually he landed at Twentieth Century – Fox as the DP on the Shirley Temple vehicles Bright Eyes (dir. David Butler, 1934), Wee Willie Winkie (dir. John Ford, 1937), Heidi (dir. Allan Dwan, 1937), and Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm (dir. Allan Dwan, 1938), becoming Temple’s signature cameraman. In contrast to the soft, often romantic style of much of Bitzer’s work, Miller preferred a hard-edged, sharply detailed style, with rich blacks and whites and deep shadows. He found his greatest collaborator in director John Ford, for whom Miller shot the Welsh coalmining drama How Green Was My Valley in 1941, the first of three films for which Miller won an Academy Award for Best Black and White Cinematography, the others being Henry King’s The Song of Bernadette (1943) and John Cromwell’s Anna and the King of Siam (1946). Miller also enjoyed a fruitful relationship with director George Fitzmaurice; they made a total of thirty-three films together, starting

Origins H 41

with Fitzmaurice’s silent New York (1916) and concluding with two films in 1925, A Thief in Paradise and His Supreme Moment. Like Ford, Fitzmaurice encouraged Miller to experiment with his lighting and develop his own realistic style, and he gave the cinematographer considerable latitude; when Cecil B. DeMille later used Miller, however, DeMille’s rigidity of style created a much more evenly lighted, bland effect in such films as The Clinging Vine (1926) and Eve’s Leaves (1926), which left Miller deeply dissatisfied. Like many of his black-and-white compatriots who started in the silent era, in which the image was all and the sound track (except for an orchestral scene at best, or a piano banging away in the background) was nonexistent, Miller continued to insist on the primacy of the image in his work, with high-key lighting and brilliant surfaces. His final films, including Edmund Goulding’s The Razor’s Edge (1946) and Elia Kazan’s Gentleman’s Agreement (1947), climaxing with his work on Joseph Losey’s disturbing film noir The Prowler (1951), are a fitting legacy for a man who was one of the first to insist on a utilitarian style of cinematography, which eschewed artifice for honest simplicity. As Miller said of his work, “The basic principle I have had in making pictures was to make them look like real life, and then emphasize the visuals slightly.” This, of course, suited him well when working with John Ford, whom Miller called “the director I liked working with better than anybody in the industry. You’d only talk, I think you might say, fifty words to him in a day; you had a communication with him so great you could sense what he wanted” (“Arthur C. Miller”). For Miller, the unadorned integrity of the image was his ultimate goal, as it was with Ford. Working with DeMille, Miller realized that not every assignment would result in a wholly successful effect and that few directors were as gifted as Fitzmaurice and Ford, who allowed him the artistic latitude to paint with light. As he said, “I always gave a director my best, even if he was a truck driver” (“Arthur C. Miller”), and sometimes, as when he worked with such directors as William “One Shot” Beaudine, there was little time for artistry; it was just a matter of getting it in the can. But on those occasions when Miller and his director were able to work in harmony, the results could be truly astonishing. In the waning days of the silent era, several dramatic changes in lighting technique occurred, driven in part by the evolving technology of the

42 H Black & White Cinema

period, and also, oddly enough, by the coming of sound. As Deborah Allison notes, It became common to use a combination of several lights to create a pleasing aesthetic that flattered the appearance of the actors and the sets as well as serving the film’s narrative requirements. One of the best known lighting setups is the so-called three-point system, which was used primarily for figure lighting. The brightest of the three lights was the “key” light, which was directed toward the actor’s face from the front-side. If this light were used on its own it would leave one side of the f