They're still officially the team from New Orleans, but judging by the roaring capacity crowd and the startling success of their Oklahoma City debut, the Hornets should happy to wear those "OKC" patches for awhile.

J.R. Smith scored 19 points and had two electrifying dunks as New Orleans beat the Sacramento Kings 93-67 on the NBA's opening night, which also marked the first of 35 home games in Oklahoma City.

The celebration began with a street party outside the Ford Center, then got even more lively inside the sold-out arena as the Hornets, 18-64 last season, beat a Kings team expected to be a contender.

P.J. Brown scored eight points during a 16-2 run midway through the second quarter that gave the Hornets a 38-27 lead. Smith's two-handed fast-break dunk was the highlight of the run for New Orleans, which wore white jerseys with a hexagonal "OKC" patch on the right shoulder.

Brown finished with 20 points and 10 rebounds, Speedy Claxton added 17 and Chris Paul, the team's No. 1 pick in this year's draft, added 13.

Peja Stojakovic scored 18 and Shareef Abdur-Rahim added 14 for the Kings, who shot only 31.3 percent.

New Orleans, which was the lowest scoring team in the league last season, built their lead to 20 points in the second quarter as Smith again energized the crowd. He had seven points during a 12-0 run that put the Hornets up 58-38.

The Hornets were searching for a place to play this season after Hurricane Katrina devastated New Orleans. The other six home games will be played in Baton Rouge, La.

A street party before the game offered fans the chance to take part in interactive games, get their face painted in Hornets colors and listen to live bands. New Orleans then got a standing ovation when players ran onto the court for pre-game warmups to the announcement "Here come your Hornets!"

Around the rim

BUCKS 117, 76ERS 108 (OT): Michael Redd hit the game-tying 3-pointer in regulation and scored 30 points to lead the Milwaukee Bucks to a overtime win over the Philadelphia 76ers last night in the season opener.

Redd's 3-pointer with 1.6 seconds left tied the game at 102-all, brought the Bucks back from seven points down with 3 minutes left and helped make Terry Stotts a winner in his Milwaukee coaching debut.

T.J. Ford scored 16 points and had 14 assists in his first game after cervical spine surgery cost him all of last season. Andrew Bogut, the NBA's No. 1 draft pick who was college player of the year at Utah last season, started for the Bucks and added 13 points and nine rebounds.

Allen Iverson scored 35 points and had nine assists, and Chris Webber added 32 points and grabbed 14 rebounds for the Sixers.

The loss spoiled the return of Maurice Cheeks in his Philadelphia coaching debut. One of the most popular players in franchise history, Cheeks has a retired No. 10 jersey and a 1983 championship banner hanging in the rafters.

Now, he has his first loss as coach.

The Bucks totally took over in overtime, scoring all but six points. Redd hit a pair of jumpers and Bogut was a force inside, converting a three-point play for a 113-104 lead.

SPURS 102, NUGGETS 91: The San Antonio Spurs celebrated last season's success and started their title defense.

Tony Parker scored 14 of his 26 points in the fourth quarter and newcomer Michael Finley added 11 points in the period for the Spurs, who defeated Denver in the opening game for both teams.

Before the game, San Antonio unveiled its third championship banner in the rafters of the SBC Center, and NBA commissioner David Stern was on hand for the team's returning players to receive their diamond-studded title rings.

San Antonio trailed most of the second half until Finley hit a 19-footer to put the Spurs up 79-78 with about nine minutes remaining in the game.

AUTOPSY SHOWS COLLIER HAD ENLARGED HEART: Atlanta Hawks center Jason Collier died from a sudden heart rhythm disturbance caused by an abnormally enlarged heart, an autopsy showed.

The state's chief medical examiner, Dr. Kris Sperry, said his testing showed that electrocardiograms administered to Collier in 2003 and this year showed "some indication of electrical abnormalities."

"Looking at them now, and in retrospect in knowing what's going on with his heart, the abnormalities may have been associated with what we found in examining his heart," Sperry said.

He said that he had no evidence that the 28-year-old Collier was informed there was anything wrong with his heart. Collier's wife said he had never been told of a reason for concern, Sperry said.

Collier's father, Jeff, did not immediately return a phone message left at his Springfield, Ohio, home seeking comment Tuesday. He told TheAssociated Press after his son's death that his son did not have any diagnosed health problems besides past injuries to his knees.