J. R. Smith happens to be a famous American former basketball player. J. R. Smith played the position of Small forward and Shooting guard in the NBA. In addition, the celebrity basketball player has also garnered a huge fan following on his social media as well.

Early Life

J. R. Smith was born in the year 1985 and celebrates his birthday on 9th of September every year. Likewise, he was born in Freehold Borough, New Jersey, USA. As of now, the basketball player is 36 years old. Moreover, the celebrity basketball player belongs to American nationality and was born under the star sign Virgo.

Moving on towards the family background of the celebrity basketball player, he was born Earl Joseph JR Smith. His parents are Ida Smith and Earl Smith JR. Similarly, talking f siblings, he has two sisters and three brothers. Likewise, be grown up in Millstone Township located in New Jersey. His brothers Dimitrius and Chris are also sportsmen and have a huge reputation of themselves.

Education

Reflecting upon the educational background of the celebrity basketball player, he first went on to attend Saint Benedicts preparatory School located in New Jersey. Likewise, he also attended Steinert High School. He later transferred to the Trenton-McCorrisytin Catholic High School. However, he was not satisfied of his high school and requested another transfer to Lakewood High.

Career and Professional Life

JR Smith has been with the New Orleans Hornets since 2004. However, his coach was irritated by his poor work ethic. He was dealt with the Chicago Bulls in 2006 and then to the Denver Nuggets six days later. He made a lot of blunders with them at first, but they eventually started scoring well. The ‘New Orleans Hornets’ were JR Smith’s first professional basketball team.

He averaged 10.3 points, 2.0 rebounds, and 1.9 assists in his first season with the Hornets. He was selected ‘Western Conference Rookie of the Month’ three times in a row in 2005: in January, February, and March. His numbers dropped in the second season, and he ended up averaging 7.7 points, 2 rebounds, and 1.1 assists.

His performance in the first round of the 2006–2007 playoffs was a little underwhelming. During the season, he averaged 12.3 points, 2.1 rebounds, and 1.7 assists. Due to his role in an incident at a Denver nightclub, he was also suspended from the team for the first three regular-season games of 2007–2008. In his second postseason appearance, he played 27.0 minutes per game, scoring 18.3 points per game on 53.5 percent shooting against the ‘Los Angeles Lakers.’ He also had a 31.8 percent three-point shooting percentage.

Due to the 2011 ‘NBA’ lockout,’ he joined the ‘Zhejiang Golden Bulls’ of the ‘Chinese Basketball Association’ (CBA) after five years with the ‘Nuggets.’ In a 122–110 win over the ‘Qingdao Eagles,’ he set a ‘CBA’ career-high with 60 points and 14 three-pointers in 18 attempts off the bench. He won the ‘Foreign Player of the Week’ award while playing for the ‘Golden Bulls.’ During this time, he won numerous awards, including the ‘NBA Sixth Man of the Year’ for the 2013 season. He averaged a career-high 18.1 points per game, 5.3 rebounds, 2.7 assists, and 1.3 steals per game during that season.

Net worth

Regarding the net worth of the celebrity basketball star, he certainly has earned a hefty deal of wealth throughout his career. Likewise, he has earned a majority of his wealth through his basketball career and brand endorsements. In addition, he has a net worth of $20 million at the moment.

Relationship status

Reflecting upon the relationship status of a basketball player, he is a married man. Likewise, he is married to Jewel Harris. The pair have three daughters together and he also has another daughter from a previous relationship. The basketball player has been accused of having multiple extra-marital relationships.

Body measurements and Social media

As a basketball player, he certainly is tall and is muscular. For his height, he stands tall at 6 feet 6 inches and weighs 102 kg. Similarly, he also has a pair of black eyes and black hair.

The basketball player has a huge social media fan following. As of now, he has 791k followers on his Twitter account. He only has his Twitter account and is not active on any other social media platforms.

ncG1vNJzZmiamaS0s63PobCmmaOge6S7zGihZqpdqLqqwMdo