Darlington Borough Council plans to clad the exterior of its council chamber, which faces the town’s market square, with a blue screen featuring an updated logo formed of the county’s crest and name.

The works are part of a £20,000 ‘corporate rebrand’ at the council which, it says, will ‘provide a visible and symbolic signal to residents and other stakeholders that the council is undergoing a change’.

Cabinet papers say the cladding added to the town hall, which was designed in the 1960s and finished in 1970, will ‘complement the considerable transformation and attractive lighting investments’ across the town.

They also say the signage is needed ‘to reflect, and be consistent and complementary with, nearby buildings’ such as a Vue cinema and Premier Inn by the town hall.

However, plans to update the council chamber’s façade have been criticised by opposition councillors, who have argued that adding cladding associated with the leading party's political affiliation was a ‘dangerous precedent’.

Labour councillor Nick Wallis suggested the Tory councillors – who took control of the council earlier this year, for the first time in decades – are going about ‘cementing their power, and that is all about image’.

‘They’re going about their business in a very clever and very cynical way. I’ve never seen anything like this before. I don’t think in the long term, the people of this town will be fooled by it.’

He added: ‘This doesn’t paint, dare I say it, Darlington Council in a good light. We don’t want to be in the headlines for these reasons. It’s a misuse of the town’s fund money and I’m sure it won’t be the last occasion.’

But deputy council leader Jonathan Dulston said the colour of the signage would actually be teal rather than blue, and in line with other existing council sub-brands such as #LoveDarlo and Enjoy Darlington.

The move also provoked criticism for its effect on the Modernist town hall, with Patricia Brown, director of cities consultancy Central and former chief executive of Central London Partnership, suggesting the move would damage the building’s architectural significance.

Studio Octopi director Chris Romer-Lee, meanwhile, described the move as ‘yet more Tory vandalism of Brutalism’.

FaulknerBrowns was contacted for comment.