Darlington County Council Regular Meeting

Tuesday, January 05, 2021

6:00 PM

Courthouse Annex/EMS Building 1625 Harry Byrd Highway (Hwy. 151) Darlington, SC 29532 www.darcosc.com

AGENDA

Darlington County Council Meeting Room Restricted To Darlington County Council Members And Required Staff Until Further Notice - Due to the COVID-19 threat, public and media access will be accomplished by live video stream. Darlington County Council meetings will be live-streamed on Darlington County Council Live Meetings Facebook page and archived on Darlington County website at www.darcosc.com. To access the live stream, go to the County website at www.darcosc.com, scroll to the middle of the page to Feature, and click on the live stream link. To access the archived videos of Council meetings, go to the County website at www.darcosc.com, from the Government tab, click on County Council, then scroll to the Council Meeting Video tab on the left of the page.

Citizens' comments are accepted in writing via email to the Clerk to Council at jbishop@darcosc.net or mailed to the County Administrator's Office, 1 Public Square, Room 210, Darlington, SC 29532. Written comments must include your contact information and received by noon on the date of the meeting. Citizens' comments will also be accepted at the meeting via telephone at 843-398-4469 beginning at 5:50 p.m. Citizens' comments will be governed by Section 2-85 of Darlington County Code of Ordinances.

SWEARING IN CEREMONY FOR COUNTY COUNCIL MEMBERS -

Oath of Office Administered by The Honorable Judge Marvin I. Lawson Mrs. Angie Goldbold, Council District 1

Ms. Joyce Thomas, Council District 3

Mr. Marvin Le Flowers, Council District 5

Mr. J. Lewis Brown, Council District 7

CALL TO ORDER

ELECTION OF OFFICERS - County Attorney Presiding

2.A. Election of Chairman, Vice Chairman, & Chaplain Election of Officers.doc

INVOCATION AND PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE

CITIZENS' COMMENTS - Darlington County Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Section 2-85 governs Citizens Comments. The following rules shall apply:

(1) Any citizen will be allowed a maximum of 2 minutes during this 30 minutes.

(2) The order of speakers shall be on a first-come, first serve basis as recorded on a log provided before and

during the meeting.

(3) Input must be in the form of suggestions, information or comments pertaining to programs or activities of county government. Rules of order and conduct shall apply. Comments should not be made, either complimentary or critical, naming any citizen, board or commission member, employee, or councilmember.

(4) Speakers' comments will be received only as information. This time is provided for citizens to state their suggestions, information or comments, not for a debate or interrogation involving councilmembers or staff. If a member of council wishes to have discussion of a topic initiated during citizen comments, a member can make a motion to have the topic scheduled for council discussion and possible action at a subsequent meeting.

(5) Speakers desiring more time for a presentation should seek to make a scheduled appearance as provided for by section 2-83(d).

PERSONAL APPEARANCES - Darlington County Code of Ordinances, Chapter 2, Section 2-83(d-e) governs appearances other than for public hearings. The length of scheduled appearances before Council shall be 10 minutes total for both presentations and questions/answers. The length of time can be extended or permitted at the end of the agenda by the unanimous consent of council or by a 3/4 vote; council may refer those wishing to communicate further to the county administrator or a committee of council; or individuals may be asked to come back at a later meeting. The purpose of appearances before council is for citizens to present their views and concerns in a manner consistent with the rules of order. This is not a forum for councilmembers to be interrogated or for a debate between parties to take place.

CONSENT AGENDA (RECEIVE AS INFORMATION)

APPROVAL OF MINUTES

7.A. Minutes Of Public Hearing & Regular Meeting, December 7, 2020 December 7, 2020, minutes.pdf

8. ORDINANCES

8.A. Ordinance No. 20-06, An Ordinance Authorizing Pursuant To Chapter 44 Of Title 12, South Carolina Code Of Laws, 1976, As Amended, The Execution And Delivery Of A Fee Agreement Between Darlington County, South Carolina And Project Dark Star And Certain Affiliates And Matters Relating Thereto - THIRD READING -- CARRY OVER REQUESTED.

FILOT Project Dark Star, Ord 20-06.docx

Affidavit of Publication.pdf

8.B. Ordinance No. 20-07, An Ordinance Approving An Amendment To The Agreement For Development Of A Joint County Industrial And Business Park By And Between Darlington County, South Carolina And Lee County, South Carolina, And Other Matters Relating Thereto - THIRD READING -- CARRY OVER REQUESTED

MCIP. Project Dark Star, Ord 20-07.docx

Affidavit of Publication.pdf

8.C. Ordinance No. 20-08, Ordinance Authorizing The Execution And Delivery Of A Fee Agreement By And Between Darlington County, South Carolina And Project Team Providing For A Payment Of A Fee In Lieu Of Taxes And Other Matters Related Thereto - THIRD READING

FILOT, Project Team, Ord 20-08.doc