Rose Tremain collected the 'Bessie' award

Author Rose Tremain has been named as the winner of this year's Orange Broadband Prize for Fiction for her tenth novel The Road Home.

She won through a shortlist of six writers to take the prize, together with a £30,000 cheque, at London's Royal Festival Hall.

Author Joanna Kavenna won the new writer's award for novel Inglorious.

The awards were set up in 1996 to celebrate novels in English by women throughout the world.

Tremain, 65, who was also shortlisted for the prize in 2004, dedicated the award to Penny Hoare, her editor of more than 30 years.

She said her award added to a series of literary wins for female authors in the past year, including Doris Lessing's Nobel Prize.

"There is a lot to celebrate," proclaimed Tremain to cheers from the audience.

ROSE TREMAIN TIMELINE

1943: Born in London

1976: First novel, Sadler's Birthday, is published

1984: Wins Dylan Thomas Award for four short stories

1990: Restoration shortlisted for Booker Prize for Fiction

1999: Wins Whitbread Novel Award for Music and Silence

2004: The Colour shortlisted for Orange Prize for Fiction

2007: Awarded CBE in the Queen's birthday honours

Her winning novel tells the story of Lev, an Eastern European migrant worker who travels to England to seek a better life for his mother and daughter.

Chair of judges Kirsty Lang said: "The judges felt that this was a powerfully imagined story and a wonderful feat of emotional empathy told with great warmth and humour."

Tremain, whose first novel Sadler's Birthday was published in 1976, has also written a number of radio and television plays including the award winning Temporary Shelter.

Three debut novelists - Sadie Jones, Heather O'Neill and Patricia Wood - missed out on the award along with Charlotte Mendelson and Nancy Huston.

Previous winners

Winning new writer Joanna Kavenna's novel Inglorious tells the tale of a woman on the edge of a nervous breakdown.

Lauren Groff's The Monsters of Templeton and Lauren Liebenberg's The Voluptuous Delights Of Peanut Butter And Jam were also shortlisted.

The panel to decide the new writers prize was chaired by Shami Chakrabarti, director of human rights group Liberty.

Previous winners of the main Orange Prize include Zadie Smith's On Beauty and We Need to Talk About Kevin by Lionel Shriver.

Last year, Nigerian author Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie scooped the prize for her book Half of a Yellow Sun.