Selected FIMI Funds I, II, and III Investments

Lipman Electronics, acquired by VeriFone in 2006, makes electronic payment systems. Lipman's offerings include fixed and wireless point-of-sale terminals, personal identification number (PIN) pads, cash registers, and automated teller machines (ATMs).

Retalix Ltd., acquired by NCR Corp in 2012, a global provider of innovative retail software and services. Retalix's software and services are deployed in over 70,000 retail locations with more than 400,000 customer touch points in over 50 countries that transact billions of dollars in annual sales across its platform.

Tadiran Communications Ltd. designs, manufactures, and markets leading edge communications products for civilian and military applications. It provides state-of-the-art, comprehensive solutions to the Israel Defense Force and military organizations in over 40 nations. With innovative technological resources, quality customer support and over 30 years of field experience, Tadiran Communications ranks among world leaders in its field. Tadiran Communication went public (TASE: TDCM) in 2001, and control holdings were sold to Koor Industries in 2004.

TANA Industries, an Israeli-based leading international water company that developed the Tami4 line of water purification, was acquired by Strauss Group in 2009. Strauss Water is a merger between H2Q and Tana Industries.

Medtechnica, a part of Ilex group, is Israel’s leading distributor and service provider of medical equipment around the world. Medtechnica is the exclusive representation of leading suppliers, including Philips Medical, Olympus, 3M Medical, Maquet and Hill-Rom.

Orian is one of Israel’s major logistics services companies. Orian's strategic partner, DB Schenker Logistics, is considered one of the world leaders in the provision of overall logistics solutions.

Scope Metal is one of the largest industrial metal supply and global distribution centers in the Eastern Mediterranean, with subsidiaries in Europe, China and the US. Scope supplies stainless steel, aluminum, steel and steel alloys, magnesium, plastics, nickel alloys, brass, bronze, copper, lead and titanium.

Hamat Group, formerly Merhav, develops, manufactures, imports and exports, markets and sells products such as faucets, soap dishes, bathroom products, shower stalls, pipe systems, sanitary products, toilet tanks, seats and bowls for markets in Israel, Europe and North America. Hamat Group was acquired by Nior Holdings in 2011.

More FIMI Funds I, II, and III investments: