Here are the player grades from the Cleveland Cavaliers win over the Detroit Pistons:

Larry Nance Jr.: A+

This one should be no surprise. Nance looked like the love child of Amare Stoudemire and Draymond Green and pulled down a career-high 15 rebounds. More minutes with LeBron James really benefited Nance, who probably isn’t relinquishing his starting role.

LeBron James: A+

The other kid from Akron was also pretty good. 31 points, seven rebounds and seven assists. Just another night at the office for LeBron, who looked energized with the Cavs more athletic starting lineup.

Kyle Korver: B+

When the Cavs are going, Korver usually follows. While he may not bail them out on nights where shots aren’t falling, he’s nearly impossible to account for when surrounded by other threats.

Jordan Clarkson: B

He was pressing at times, but once again provided the team with valuable energy off the bench. His activity on the boards was a pleasant surprise, pulling down six rebounds in 20 minutes.

Ante Zizic: B

Signs of life from Zizic! He looked out of place in his prior showings with the team, but it’s clear that his time with the Canton Charge has helped him feel more comfortable with the North American game. He is very mobile for his size and has a good feel for the game. While he’s more of a long-term option for the team, it’s great to see progress from him.

Cedi Osman: B

Speaking of energy off the bench, Osman also helped in providing a lift to the team. While his shot wasn’t falling until the second half, he still made an impact with his energy.

Rodney Hood: B-

Hood still has been struggling with his jumper, but isn’t taking bad shots. After missing outside shots in the first half, he attacked the basket and had a very productive second half.

George Hill: B-

A steady contributor for the Cavs, Hill made a positive impact on this game without scoring. He moved the ball without turning it over, got the team into their sets, and was disruptive on defense.

Jose Calderon: C

Like Hill, Calderon was a steady presence without scoring. He didn’t provide the same defense, but I liked having him as a second ball handler with Clarkson. As electric as Clarkson can be, it’s nice to have a change of pace guy alongside him.

J.R. Smith: D

The only starter to put forward a disappointing performance. With Hood and Nance in the starting lineup, Smith’s days as a starter are probably limited to however long it takes for Kevin Love to return.

John Holland: D

I’m not going to write analysis about John Holland. Not today, Satan.

London Perrantes: D

See above.