Spain. He was especially famous for his amazing planetary clocks, which he both designed and physically crafted (thanks to the invention of the first known machine-tool to cut gears), and for his hydraulic device of Toledo, the first giant machine in history that elevated water over a slope of ninety metres a distance of three hundred meters. Given this multifaceted professional profile, Torriani has been considered a Renaissance polymath and a genius. This article goes beyond the anachronistic understanding of these two categories, which it deconstructs, by analyzing Torriani's education and the context of the mathematical professions during the sixteenth century. Janello Torriani, aussi connu sous le nom espagnol de Juanelo Turriano (Crémone c. 1500-Tolède 1585) fut d'abord au service de l'empereur Charles Quint comme forgeron, serrurier, facteur d'ins-truments scientifiques, inventeur célèbre pour ses dispositifs mécaniques, constructeur d'automates et horloger ; au service du roi Philippe II d'Espagne, il fut ingénieur hydraulique, mathématicien, astronome, concepteur de cloches, arpenteur géomètre et auteur de traités de mathématiques. Il est surtout connu pour ses étonnantes horloges astronomiques qu'il a à la fois conçues et construites (grâce à l'invention des premières machines à couper les engrenages), et pour ses dispositifs hydrau-liques de Tolède, dont la toute première machine permettant d'amener de l'eau vers le haut d'une pente sur une distance de 300 mètres. Pour ses multiples compétences professionnelles, Torriani est considéré comme un véritable polymathe et un génie de la Renaissance. Cet article cherche à dépasser une compréhension anachronique de ces deux catégories, qu'il pour déconstruit, en analysant la formation de Torriani et le contexte de la profession de mathématicien au XVI e siècle.

Early Modern military engineers are obvious 'shadow agents' of war: not necessarily present on the battlefield, their impact on the art of war was nevertheless considerable. The complexity of the professional profile of Renaissance military engineers during the 'military revolution' still makes their identity a historical riddle. In this chapter, I will try to address two issues concerning Renaissance military engineers from the standpoint of the history of science and technology: the cultural models behind their apparent polymathesis-here intended as a wide-ranging learning freely pursued independently from cultural models-and their agency in lesser-known military affairs such as technological propaganda, intelligence and astrology.

This book reproduces the lectures delivered during a course held at the National Distance University’s associated facility in Segovia and co-sponsored by the university and Fundación Juanelo Turriano. Renaissance engineers is the second volume of a collection launched in 2012 with Roman engineering as a platform for the publication of the lessons authored by reputed specialists on the occasion of these courses. The book analyses the decisive contribution made by Renais sance engineers to land use planning and modern knowledge. It reviews the oeuvre of renowned engineers associated with the Spanish monarchy during that pivotal period and describes how they acquired the high esteem in which they were held by the governing class: building fortifications,​ channelling rivers, inventing devices and machines, writing treatises and describing the cities and territories visited in their travels. [A course coordinated by Alicia Cámara Muñoz and Bernardo Revuelta Pol; Texts: Daniel Crespo Delgado, Fernando Cobos-Guerra, Juan Luis García Hourcade, Nicolás García Tapia, Pedro Cárdaba Olmos, José María Izaga Reiner, Jorge Miguel Soler Valencia, José Ignacio de la Torre Echávarri, Alicia Cámara Muñoz]

Martin Altman (also known as Martin Alteman and Martín Alemán) (1530-1600?) was a prominent clockmaker and engineer to the Hapsburgs, including Emperor Ferdinand I and King Philip II of Spain. Despite of his connections with the most influential rulers of the period, Altman was almost unknown until the recent discovery of different sources about him in Spanish archives. The aim of this article is to summarise these known available sources, to trace the different places he lived and to offer an overview of the different works he did during his life. My intention is not to exhaust the research possibilities about Altman, but to offer a starting point for future research.