See other formats

SOUTHERN INDIA, CHARLES E. GOVEK, vrunm or ttt* hotal nurtc want or rnr *ocittt or aivt«, fsuow or thk *icTWAoroix>a!CAr ioctm. THE FOLK-SONGS OP SOUTHERN INDIA, DY CHARLES E. GOVEH, MADRAS: HIGGINBOTHAM AND CO., 1871 . About half of the songs in the following pages were collected and translated for the Royal Asiatic Society, and were read before that learned body about two years ago. Tho essays containing them were thought worthy of publication in the journal of the society, * hut . not. yd boon issued, as the journal cannot keep pace with the more valuable demands upon its aptce. A few have also appeared in The CornhiU Maga- tine. Beyond. this the present publication is original. Looking to tho K?*lc in wif c h tho hoc* has been composed, it may be said that it consists of Eat'avs written in intervals of business.’’ Tho portions r '*‘ presented by the papers read before tho Royal AsiiUSk Society were written and their materials oaUectcd daring occasional sick or other leave, and the pleasant labor thus involved added fresh zest to tho enjoyment which a holiday always brings to an overworked Indian official. The remaining portions have been written at times when arduous occupation made change of work a necessity. These facts are not mentioned as a plea ad misericordiam, for no author has a right to inflict a bad book on the public on tho ground that ho is not able to write a good one, but to explain the INTRODUCTION' unequal character of the renderings of the songs and account for certain sudden breaks in the narrativo. Two great objects have been kept in view through- out. First, to exhibit irrefragable evidence of the real feelings of the mass of the people, and thus enable Europeans to see them as they are. Second, to draw public attention to a great body ot excellent vernacular literature, in the hope that other persons, far better qualified for the task than myself, will follow the enquiry and publish critical editions and translations of the groat ethical works of the Dravidian Augustan period. It is almost impossible now to obtain a printed copy of any early Tamil book that has n»t boen systematically corrupted and mutilated, to intei the views of those whose livelihood depends on the rejection by the public of Dravidian literature and cceptithce of the Paranic legends. •e first- principle is of vital importance in connoc- with a subject that has never hcen thoroughly lined tho race to which the Dravidian nations jawiig. •Since the learned book by Dr. Caldwell — Comparative Cmumiar of the Dravidian languages" — was issued, it has been taken for granted that the Tamils, Ac., aro a Turanian people. The progress of philological enquiry and the new means of analysis furnished by the great German writers on language have shown the error of this classification. Driven at a very early period into tho extreme south, and cut off by vast oceans from intercourse with other peoples, the Dravidian nations have preserved with singular CONTENTS THE FOLK-SONGS OF SOUTHERN INDIA CANARESE SONGS RAI'A'JA SONGS V)K(J SONG.? TAM 1 1, SONGS THE CURAL UALAYALAM SONGS TELUOU SONGS INTRODUCTION. VII purity the vocabulary they brought with them ; and it r is probably not extravagant or untrue to say tliat there is not one true Dravidian root common to the three great branches, Tamil, Telugu and Can arose, that cannot bo clearly shown to be Aryan. As an interesting example both of the true character of the language and the linguistic progress made since the publication of Dr. Caldwell’s book, it may be noted tbat the learned doctor gives an appendix containing a considerable number of Dravidian words which lie asserts to bo Scythian, and most efficient witnesses to prove the Turanian origin of the language. It is • J vn that every word in this list is distinctly A ■ r:iii, .in' ini' of them have representatives Kinni'li gi-ip of Tiii:iiii:ih tongues — the group which liar fio-l 'iii-.Uihtly e\|rfwei! to Aryan influences. TIm greater i*orti< ; ;, . * c . m ,i.v in«''i.iod in Kick’s l <ira—> • \ ryan roots, although Kick docs not appear to ti,i-> sc ’ 1 ' Caldwell's work. This however is a digression. Tim song- do n««t f touch the question of roots or derivatives. On another side of the same argumet® their evidence is decisive. It has always been noted that the true Turanian peoples are inferior to the Aryan in everything con- nected with the moral nature of man. One recent writer lays it down as a rule that the Turanian peoples display “an utter want of moral elevation.’’ Mr. Farrar, th« learned and eloquent author of “ Families of Speech,” asserts (page 1 55 ) — ' " We may say'ge-. VIII INTRODUCTION. nomlly that a largo number of them (the Turanian (►copies ; — he has previously stated that the exceptions are the Chinese, Finns, Magyars and Turks.) belong to the lowest palceozoic strata of humanity peoples whom no nation acknowledges as its kinsmen, whose languages, rich in words for all that can be eaten or handled, seem absolutely incapable of expressing the reflex conceptions of the intellect or the higher forms of the consciousness, whoso life seems confined to the glorification of the animal wants, with no hope in the future and no pride in the past. They nro for the most part peoples without a literature and without, a history, and many of them apparently as impoifciUihlc as the Ainos of Jesso or the Vuddahs of t.VvI.iii, — peoples whose tongues in some instances have t\vn>J** names for murder, but no i.uuo for love. i<a name lor gratitude. : —I Tbi* but a fair dcbciij . -i ■, • wh.-a ate -aid to belong the writer- aa.l am ._■% of tlic songs this li.-h contains. It will be seen that the Dra- vid: i i oples possess ono of tho noblest literatures, from a moral poiut of view, the world has seen. Compare with the above, tie remarks of the Rev. P. Percival, in his excellent book — 4 ‘ The land of the Veda. " — “ Perhaps no language combines greater force with equal brevity ; and it may be asserted that no human speech is moro close and philosophic in its expression aa an exponent of the mind. ...the language, thus specific, gives to the mind a readiness and clear- ness of conception, whilst its terseness and philosophic INTRODUCTION. idiom afford equal means of lucid utterance.” The Kev. W. Taylor, the well known Dravidian scholar, declares of Tamil, the representative Dravidian tongue, — “ It is one of the most copious, refined and polished languages spoken by man." And again in his Catalogue Baiaonnfe of Oriental MHS. (vol. I. p. v,) “ It is desirable that the polish of the Telugu and Tamil poetry should bo better known in Europe: that so competent judges might determine whether the high distinction accorded to Greek and Latin poetry, as if there were nothing like it in the world, is perfectly just." Dr. Caldwell asserts “ It is the only vernacular literature in India which has not been content with imitating the Sanscrit* but has honorably attempted to emulate and outshine it. In one department, at least, that of ethical epigrams, it is generally maintain- ed, and I think must be admitted, tliat the Sanscrit has been outdone by the Tamil.” Three such witnesses, added to the hundred this book contains, suffice to sliow that, whether as regards literature or morals, the Dravidian pooplo arc deserving of and entitled to the honor of omission from the Turanian family. This is no unimportant matter. Looking to the necessity that the governing race should not he dis- qualified from performing its noblo task by laboring under a complete mistake as to the nationality, as- pirations, feelings and errors of the people it rules : seeing that the Dravidian peoples distinctly claim unity of race and origin with the yet more cultivat- ed Sanscrit nation that has settled among them : IHTUODUCTION. knowing that Orientals look as much to points of etiquette, which require in their observer an accurate knowledge of popular social ideas, as to matters of stern fact — would as soon bo robbed as lose a title : it is indisputable that there can scarcely bo a more serious and interesting question than that which would enquire of the true character and position of the subject nation. All this is over and above that interest and value which is everywhere inherent in all attempts to learn the true life and the inner feelings of any portion of the great human brotherhood. To show how a simple error in such matters may lead to gigantic mistakes, and because the subject lias a close connection with the question under discussion, it will be profitable to esnuiino one feature of the theory stinted by Dr. Caldwell regarding the South I ndian dcuionolatry. He shows truly enough that the SI u» liars worship malignant beings, pure devils, and proceeds to note that there is ample proof that the Shanars, and the argument includes the Tamils also, cannot be related to the Sanscrit race. He aaya — • “ Evorv word used in the Tamil country relative to the Bmhinonical religions, the names of the gods and the words applicable to their worship, belong to the Sanscrit, the Brahmanical tongue ; whilst the nnmea of demons worshipped by the Shanars in the South, iuvii, iinu me various worua :vil-worsliip are as uniformly od with reference to devil- y Tamil, we arc obliged to Ulu UtnilTTill INTRODUCTION. xi assign to this superstition h high antiquity, and refer its establishment in the arid plains of Tiunuvelly and amongst the Tmvancore jungles and hills, to n period long anterior to the influx of the Brahmans and their civilization of the primitive Tamil tribes." The most important word thus noted is PC or as Ziegenbalg correctly writes it l'Cy. It means a devil. The places of worship are called Pi-Coils. Another form of the word in Tamil is peuam, a devil. Now let us follow up this word. It appeals in Khond ns Pet mu, the name of the deity. But the object of worship is the sun or the light. Macpherson says — "There is one Supreme Being, self-existing, the source of good, and Creator of the universe.’ This divinity is some- times called “ the God of Light," by others “ the Suu- God, and the sun and the places from which it* rises beyond the sea, are the chief seats of his presence." Again Macpherson says— "The Supreme Being and sole Source of Good is styled the God of Light” It is true there are other gods to whom the name Peimu is genetically given, and even the sun-god takes a pre- name and is known as Delhi Pennu, literally the "light of tho sun." But this, it is clear, does not touch the question, for there are kinds of light which require an adjective lor definition. Then subordinate deities arose, to whom, though not representing light, the name was attached. This has happened everywhere. The San- scrit word "deva" means the deity. But there are Siva Leva, Vishnu Leva, Agni Deva and so on. Peimu ex- actly corresponds with Deva and both mean "the light." INTRODUCTION. But how came Pen mi or it 1 ) root form Pey to ho reduced till it menus a devil * Maephereon again gives the answer. Ho distinctly states that this worship of light is "common to all the tribes.” But the Khonds are divided into north, middle, and south con- federations. Tlio former has degraded its worship into a demonolatry. The deity exhibits nothing but “ pure malevolonco towards man, and they believe that while no observances or course of conduct can change her malignant aspect into benignity, her male- volence may still bo placed iu partial or complete abeyance by the sacrifice of human life, which she has expressly ordained." He describes the rites of this horrid superstition, and they are tlio exact counterpart of the Shanar devilry, where, by the way, the male god has also been changed into a female devil. The Khonds of the middle region have maintained the true and earlier doctrine. Macpherson says of their deities, the same as tlioso worshipped in the north — "No malevolence towards mankind is ascribed to them. On the contrary they arc merciful and benign towards those who observe their ordinances and discharge their rites. Instead of delighting in cruel offerings, they abhor the inhuman ritual of the northern, southern and western districts ; and they would resent with detesta- tion any semblance of participation in it by their This teaches us two things. First, that demonola- try may surround deities that were originally good, — human passions and fears may change a good IXTROl.t'CHOS. Xiii into an evil spirit- Second, that the true meaning of the word Pey or Permit is not “ devil" but “ light.” But Dr. Caldwell asserts that the word is neither Sanscrit nor related to Sanscrit- This is a strange error. Before Caldwell wrote, it had been frequently noted that the Dra vidian Pe or Pey is identical with the root of the Sanscrit pi-sachu, meaning a devil, a malevolent being. The words are interchangeable. There is no reason to suppose that the Tamil word is derived from Sanscrit or vice versa, yet the roots are identical. But Sanscrit, authorities ascribe pisacha to a root pis, to adorn, and this, as given by Bonfey, lias the parallel form pimsn from the root pirns to sliine. This exact coincidence in both Dravidian and Sanscrit forms proves thoir identity beyond a doubt. The Sanscrit forms just quoted probably belong to the great cluster of important roots that has its centre in Bhd, to shine. Thus the Tamil Pey and the Khond Pcnnu find their exact equivalents in the Greek phod and phuinb, from the root pha. The same derivative appears in the gods Phonos and Phaethon. But the Dravidian tongues do not need these foreign analogies to bHow that pey, a devil, comes from a root meaning light. In Madi pey-al, in Rutluk piy-al, in Madia biy-ar, in Tamil pag-al, in Tuluva pag-il, all mean day, the light time. Al and il are merely sub- stantive terminations. In ancient Tamil pi-rei was the moon, and in modem r ey-il is the sunlight. In another dialect peymot'o is tho light. A hundred other ex- XIV INTRODUCTION. aniplca might bo given, proving beyond doubt that the Tamil jh->j originally meant the bright one, that is, the deity. As someKhond tribes mode I’cnnu the god of light a devil, so some of the Tamils, when cut off from the better teaching of the fathers of their race, degenerated in their worship and degraded their deity to match their superstition. Tt has always been easy to change a god into a devil. The last word used is nn illustration, for devil is a clear derivative from <7em, and is closely related to “deity?" Opposing nations have ever called the gods of their adversaries devils. But enemies are not needed for this change. Ignorant sinful man niu.st ever look upon God ns a being to be propi- tiated rather than loved, and when such propitiation becomes an instrument in the hands of ignorant and poor but greed)' priests, it pays well to make the deity a a dreadful os possible, that offerings may lie the more readily made to appease it. Out of Hiuduism cauic the devilry of Sakti. Kali the protector and avenger is now Durga the devil. The name of the devil-god of Tinnevelly, when thus carefully examined, proves the exact opposite of what Dr. Caldwell would learn from it. Ho asserts — “of elementary worship there is no trace whatever in the usages of any portion of the Tamil people.” The word shows, in reality, that the acmonolatry ia corrupted from an early worship of the element light. In the Khond country all the elements are worship- ped. Caldwell asserts that the Tamila are not related INTRODUCTION. XV to the Aryan race, and adduces the name and worship of devils as evidence. Tho name proves that tho deity is Aryan, and there is every reason to believe the worship to be but one example of a process that hap- pened in many Aryan races. Caldwell employs the facts under notice to prove the Turanian origin of tho people. Their evidence is entirely on the other side, though by no means conclusive either way. The composers, teachers and, generally, the singers of the songs belong to a distinct class in Hindu society. The better castes will seldom sing, although most liberal in their treatment of tho professional singers. Women will sing to their children, boys will in their lightness of heart hum the moru popular melodies botli in the street and at homo, and there arc merry housewives who are fond of exercising their sweet voices while performing their ordinary domestic duties. As a rule, however, and iu variably in public, the singers belong to the religious meudicant frater- nities, who make their chants subservient to their fortunes, and sing for tho scanty livelihood which falls to tho beggar 'r lot in a land where beggars ore plentiful as blackberries in Epping Forest. Tho greater part of the singers now a days belong to the anomalous class called Mttuwn, the sons of dancing girls, knowing nothing of their fathers and, therefore, of tho caste to which they should bolong. Formerly they were rigorously shut out of the Hindu body politic, yot, as their mothers, they were not despised or treated as outcastos. They were the property of IKTUODUC'flON. xvi the God, bound to his service, entitled to a share in his offerings. They grew up as inuaiciuns, as lighters of lamp9, as stewards and general servants in the pagodas. In modem times the English law has made a vast difference in their condition. If the mother be well-to-do and can givo her son a good education, she tacks the caste title “ Muodelliar" after his name and sonds him away from the place of his birth to a district where his antecedents are not known. In his new position none can deny that ho is a Vellalo. If ho become rich none would wish to refuse him thu privilege. Choosing the daughter of some poor Vellaln who finds it prudent to ask no questions, ho marries into his assumed caste. Tho issue of the marriage are as good Vollalas as those who came in the train of A gas tv a. In this way the sons of the temple women are constantly absorbed. Formerlj' such things could not ho done. The nattui'an found himself an outsider, civilly treated it is true, but yet without a privilege and almost without a right. Their numbers were constantly increased. Wives wore always ready to their hands in the female offspring of the dancing girla that were not well favor- ed enough to follow the profession of their mothers. Tlius the race was perpetually recruited. Things might have gone badly both for them and the caste people had not a door been open for their entrance into decent life. There has always existed a class of devotees named datas or slaves to the . deity. A man in deep trouble vowod that if God should spare him he would iNTitnnucnoN. xvn devote himself te God's service. Sick men in fear of death vowed themselves te the life of a dnsa if they but recovered. Women longing for children vowed their firat-hom to the deity that would give them issue. Rebels in imminent danger of a horrible death fled te the temple to find sanctuary in the life of a slave. Brah- mans who had infringed the laws of their caste found a safe haven and an accustomed life in the same state. No questions of caste entered into the matter. Any man might become a dam, and any woman might enter the ranks of the dad. The dnsa’s duty was to serve God at all hazards, at all loss. The Sanyassi was a dnsa, the Yogi was a dnsa, hut the class included many who had small claim to sanctity. They must have no worldly occupation but begging, they could have no home but the forest or the pyalls of houses in the villages. Their service was, first of all, poverty ; secondly, singing ; thirdly, forgetfulness of caste. Their reward lav in human honor and the certainty of a living. None dared to despise the "slave of God," none could refuse him a handful of rice or a couple of oppams or chu patties. At weddingB and feasts, at fasts and funerals, at sowing and harvest, at full moon and sankranti (the passing of the oquator as the sun changed its tropic,) the dasa must be invited, listened to, and rewarded. At weddings, he must sing of Krishna ; at burnings, of Yama ; before maidens, of Kama ; before men, of Rama. As be begs he sings of right and duty ; when he hoars the clink of copper in his shell, of benevolence and charity. INTRODUCTION xviii Hero then was the centre to which the nattuY»n converged, whore lie stood shoulder to shoulder with Brahmans, Vellalas and Chatties. If he loved liberty he left wife and child to live as an ascetic. If he loved ease ho set up as poojnri or director of some wayside shrine to Hanumon, Vighncswara, or Krishna. If ho loved profit he learned to read the Purnnaa and some- times even the Vedas, and came before the world as a pundit skilled in logic and perfect in ritual and sacrifice. In either case he hocanie the hard of his neighbourhood, emphatically “the singer." If such men be worshippers of Vishnu they are called Satani or C 1m tali, and, in the Tamil country, Tadon. 1 f they adore Siva they are known as Paudarams ; while if tlioy belong to the uncompromising reformers known as Vira Saivas or Lingayets they receive the title of Jongams. There can bo few more pleasant scenes than when, in the cool of the evening, the dasa enters some quiet country village to find and cam his food and quarters for tho night. Marching straight to the manUpam or many-pillared porch of the pagudu ho squats on tho elevated basement, tunes his vina, places before him his huge begging shell. The villagers are just return- ing from the fields, weary with their labors, anxious for some sober excitement. The word is quickly passed round that the singer has come, and men, women and cliildrcu turn their steps towards the mantapam. There they sit on the ground before the bard and wait his pleasure. He begins by trolling out some INTRO DUCTIOX. xix praise to Krishna, VUlinu or Pillaiyarswami. Tlien lie starts witli a pada or short song such as those with which this book commences. There is chorus to every verse. If the song be well known, before the bard has finished the long-drawn-out note with which ho onds his verse, the villagers have taken up their part, and the loud chorus swells on the evening breeze. If the song be new they soon learn the chorus, and every fresh verso bears a loudor and louder refrain. Then the shell is carried round and pice me showered into it. When darkness closes in, the headman of the village invites tho singer to his house, gives him a full meal and then leaves him with mat, vina and shell to sleep on the pyall. In busy towns the singer squats by tho roadside and soon collects a crowd to hear his song. Tho chorus here is less frequently heard. Tho people oannot stay, their children are at home, they hear a little and then pass on. The contents of tho following pages will give samples of almost every kind of songs that thus catch the public ear and dwell in tho national heart. The only exceptions of which I am aware arc the episodes of the great epics and the erotic chaptera which I dare not translate. Neither belong to our subject, for both are purely Brahmanic, entirely foreign to tho Dravidian literature and mind. The word " samples" is advisedly used. There is a great mass of noble writing ready to hand in Tamil and Telugu folk literature, especially in the former. Total neglect has fallen upon it. Overborne by Brahmanic legend, hated by tho INTUODl'CTIOX. Brahmans, it has not liad a chance of obtaining the notice it so much deserves. The people cling to their songs still, and in every py all-school the pupils learn the strains of Tiruvalluva, Auveiyar, Kapiln. Pattunatta and the other early writers. To raise those books in public estimation, to oxhibit the true products of the Dravidian mind, would be a task worthy of the ripest scholar and the most en- lightened government. I would especially draw atten- tion to the eighteen books that are said to have received the sanction of the Madura College, and are among the oldest specimens of Dravidian literature. Any student of Dravidian writing* would be able to add a score of equally valuable books. If tlieso were carefully edited they would form a body of Dravidian classics of the highest value. If the syndicate of the university could be persuaded to lend themselves to a task so noble, they could with case ensure that pub- lication should meet with a demand sufficiently ex- tensive to pay for the cost of editing. In the Rev. P. Pereira], Madras, has a scholar of remarkable powera who yet has vigor and leisure enough to accomplish a task so great. It may not be considered a digression to protest againBt the Christian mutilation to which the Tamil classics are now liable, an offence not inferior in demerit to that Brahmanic mutilation which has been so fre- quently referred to in the text. A school of Christians has arisen bo forgetful of what is due to the great laws of right as to be desirous of compelling a Tamil author INTllODL'CTIOJC. XXI to ran in a Christian groove. They object to that most praise-worthy net by which the author of a Dra- vidian book dedicates his book to the god he serves. Mon who learnt Ju venal at college and who send their sons to England, to become learned in all the wisdom and vice of Greece aud Home : who are proud when their sons gain prizes for proficiency in Ovid or Terence : aro so unconscious of the puerility and incon- sistency of their acts as to think it a sin to read and explain the humble dedication of hia work to his god by some poor Hindu. Would to God that Christians were equally mindful of the duties they owe their Maker I A learned and estimable missionary has been publicly condemned because he would faithfully trans- late a noble poem without a really impure thought in it, and was, therefore, compelled to oommit the awful crime of likening a woman’s bosom to a pome- granate. Aye, condemned by men who read the song of Solomon in their families and from their pulpits. A mere conventionality has tabooed all verbal reference to matters that enter into the life of every sentient being. It is perhaps well that it should be so, but nothing is more absurd than to carry such conventionalities into our estimation of foreign lite- ratures, where such rules are unknown. This princi- ple is always borne in mind with regard to tho European classics, but is forgotten when Indian classics arc in question. A large portion of modern Dravidian literature carries freedom into license, but of such books we noed know nothing. In the early literature 3X11 INTBODDCTIOX. there is little that so sins, and it is unpardonable that Christian*, who ought to be above fashionable conventionalities and free from any suspicion of wrong- doing, should deliberately mangle a fine work of art because it will not fit modern. English proprieties or modem narrow-minds. At the risk of unduly extending this preface, it will be well to prove this point by quoting the following from the "Classified Catalogue of Tamil printed books" by that laborious, energetic and wandering genius, Dr. Murdoch, whom to know is to respect. " The Vixliw havo never been translated iuto Tamil ; tho writings of Auvaiyar, Tiruvailuvar, and other poeta, form tho rod moral and religious code. They are taught in every native school, and their dicta are received oi infallible truth. Tho bulk of the verse* are unobjectionable ; some of them are of great beauty and excellence. There a re, however, inter- mingled puatages, Inculcating idolatry and superstition of vari- ous kinds. The following may be quoted as specimen* from tho edition of the Tamil Minor Poet*, printed at the Public Instruction Press for use in Government Schools.— Jnvoealuvns . — “ Milk, tweet honey, syrup, and grain, these four mixed together, to thee will I give. Do thou 0 majeitici noble, elephant-fnoed one. thou holy' jewel, grant me the three kinds of Tamil common in tho world."— p. 26. “ let us ornament our heads with the wonderful flower, tho foot of the five-handed glorious one, who i» the mystic syllable, Oil" — p. 1*. Worship of Fiaimt— " Servo Vishnu."— p. C. Wortltip of Siva.—" To those who inedidate on Si-va-yo-na- ma, there will be no suffering at any time : thi* is the way of INTRODUCTION xxiii overcoming the decree of destiny; this is true wisdom; but fate will be the cause of all other occurrences to men."— p. 31. Rubbiug qf Sacral A shea.— a Tl>e forehead without attend ashes is void of beauty."— p. 31. Panlhtigtn. — " He will not make any distinction saying, ' Tli is is good and this is bad,' * I did this and ho did that/ ' This is not and this is but in his state of jx'rfection, it will be true of him that ‘ he himself is that,' ” (meaning God.) — p. 3G. Fatalism ami Transmigration . — “ Each must enjoy the fruits of his actions done in former births according to what Brahmn has written (on the forehead. > Oh king, what shall wo do to those who me angry with us l Though the whol® town together be op[io*ed to it, will destiny 1* frustrated T — p. 3*. Although in these days of religious indifference, the worship of “ Jehovah, Jove, or Ixird.” may be regarded with opial eye, every right-minded Christian will shudder at countenancing in the slightest degree the crime of high trwsson against tire God of heaven. The British Government rightly puts down, with a strong hand, rebellion against itself; it forbids the teaching in its schools of the blessed words, n Believe in the Ixird Jesus Christ, and thou limit Lo saved;’’ yet in Govern- ment school-books youths arc taught to worship the gods of the Hindu pantheon, and to believe that their foreheads are void of beauty unless they hear the mark of rebellion against their Creator.” In tho extracts given by Dr. Murdoch, wo have the worst ho could find, and there is not one that is in the slightest degree objectionable, rememhering that we read Tamil authors. There is not a word that can ho compared with the impropriety of the “Christian” paragraph with which Dr. Murdoch closes. Such XXIV introduction. forgetfulness of cliarity is always next door to mis- representation. He would have it that, because Hindu boys are required in school to read a Hindu book embodying certain phrases, they are "taught to believe that their fore-heads are devoid of beauty unless they bear the mark of rebellion agaiust Christ.” This is just as true as a similar assertion that, because in school wo read the Metamorphoses of Ovid, we are thereby taught to believe that Proteus or Jove is the true God, and that their disguises are true in- carnations of the deity. I candidly profess that 1 can see no difference in guilt or folly between those who would modify Siva- vakyer in a Christian direction, and those who would make him speak Puranisin. There is no better way of perpetuating evil, or what is deemed evil, tLan to treat it evilly, and the expurgated and improved editions of some missionaries only load Hindu enquirers to rush to the genuine book and seek for the suppressed passages. Every man of ordinary experience knows that tho very beat inode of advertising a thing, be it good or bad, is to cause it to be suppressed. Thus " improved” editions seldom gain their end. It was at first intended to issue with this book the vernacular originals of certain of the songs. This design has been abandoned for the following reasons : 1st. — It was deemed of primary importance to mako tho selection ofaonga as wide as possible, so as to cover the greater part of tho Dravidian peoples. This mado it necessary to occupy tho whole book with English INTRODUCTION XXV Tenderings. Not only so, but the book is now consider- ably larger than was at first intended and announced. 2nd. — So many languages are represented that low readers would be able to follow more than a small portion of tile originals, and the rest would be so much waste paper. 3rd. — It is hoped that an attempt will be made to issue the genuine critical editions referred to on page xx., and it will be better in every way to have com- plete series of the songs and poems of which specimens only liavo been given in this book, than to allow an important literature to continue represented by a few examples. It remains to spool: of the great assistance with which I have been favored. No mention is niado in the toxt of tho liolp to which I am »o much indebted with regard to the Canarese songs. It was intended to speak in this place of tho kindness which has been so bountifully exhibited in the collection :uid trans- lation of the songs generally ; but, while tho book was passing through tho press, a discussion arosu in tlio English press regarding tins Ix3t mode of expressing the obligations duo to frieudly aid in literary work. It was there decided that such obligation should bo ac- knowledged iu the text where it is exhibited. From tho Badagn songs onwards, the help afforded mo lias been gratefully acknowledged. I regret that* one amendment is necessary, with regard to the Coorg songs and explanatory toxt. 1 have spoken strongly and justly of Mr. Richter* kindness, but now learn xxvi (rnmi an orticlo and letter in the Mat hit* Time.#) that Mr. Richter hud himsulf employed the language of an eminent mudoiiary, Dr. Muuglitig, to whom therefore niv first thanks are due. Dr. Moegling’a book con- tain** the whole of the explanatory prose inserted a# quoted from Richter's Manual, but dues not contain a lino of any of the soil"'. The unfortunate mistake made hv Mr. Richter will not invalidate any one of the many service* he luw tendered t<» C'norg. Of the C.umrcKO Mings it i.*; necessary to h| s-nk at greater length. I owe the originals to the kindness of two excellent and able missionaries, the Revs. A. J. O. Lylo and S. Dolicll. They followed in the foot- stoiw of the Revs. T. Ilodoon and J. Stephenson, and thus u considerable hoely of the Dasuiapadas has been Collected. The two gentlemen first named gave mo litoral translations of most of the songs, and these 1 ren- dered as they now appear. I am not nwaru that they have over before been tmntiatcd into English, except tlmt some five or six, put into metre by the ltov. Messrs. Stephenson and Greenwood, appeared in a magazine now extinct, the “ IlarceH Field? After tire first paper for the Royal Asiatic Society was sent homo, 1 learnt through Mr. Eggcling, the secretary of the society, that Dr. Mocgling bad previously pub- lished tho text and a German translation of many of tire songs in VoU. 14 and 1-S of tho Jonnml of tho German Oriental Society. Before this 1 had como across a ruio Cannroso text of twenty-four songs litho- gmphed by Dr. Mocgling. 1 1 is a pleasure to ascribe INTRODUCTION XXVII to Dr. Mongling tlio credit of having first drawn atten- tion to this very interesting literature, and to follow in his footsteps. I-est however he should lie held responsi- ble for such errors ns may have erupt into those pages, it is necessary to state that the only portion of Dr. .Movgli tig's labore that has been before lire is the litho- graphed Canarese text above referred to, and this not till tho greater part of my renderings were complete. For the text of the Malayalam songs T am indebted to my brother, A. G. Cover, Esq., Barrister «t-Luw, who was kind enough to make diligent search at my re- quest. Sonic of tho Tamil songs, nud much aid through- out, 1 owe to n young native friend, Mr. T. Davumju Piilai, it. a., to whom my warm thanks are due. It would bo wrong to conclude without publicly and gratefully acknowledging bow much of whatever merit this book may possess is owing to the kind encourage- ment of tlio Lord Napier, K.V., who has taken tho greatest interest in the work from its commencement, and whoso suggestions and criticism have been of material benefit. But for the liberal subscriptions of His Lordship and of the Madras Government, the book would not have been published, nor would the col- lection of songs have been so complete. The Madras Government has shown of recent years a most earnest desire to obtain and publish all available information concerning the condition and wants of the great people it mice, attd if this work should throw any light on so important a subject tlio pleasant labor of its composi- tion will not havo been in vain. xxviii INTHOIHX-TIOX Nor must I omit tn mention the generous aid of Colonel Meade, the Chief Commissioner of Mysore, and of Sir Seymour Fitzgerald, the Governor of Bombay. Both gentlemen have, on the part of their respective governments, done all that lay in their power to forward an enquiry which cannot fail to bo interesting and may bo productive of very impor- tant results. November I5f/., 1871 ffiiff Wn rs^iuBB iktojv IHJC- I.R vCllf: si>'« >iCuli934 THE FOLK SONGS or SOUTHERN INDIA. It has often been said that there is no better way of discovering the real feelings and ideas of a peoplo than that afforded by the songs that pass from lip to lip in their streets and markets. None know from whence they come. Verses are added to or sub- tracted from them as new ideas come in or old ones pass away. Thus they keep up to date, as it were, the expression of those inner feelings which never rise to tho surface of a set literature, but are in reality tho very essence of popular belief. Their satire is often sharp, and never fears to attack shams, however vener- able they may be. Such satire is often the only means left to the illiterate and obscure of showing that the priestcraft, tho outer polish, the grosser abuses as well as the showier fabrics, which to outsiders seem to bo the life of the natron, are in no senso the life or even a portion of the life of the millions who in reality form the mass of the nation, but who are far too often utter- ly forgotten by those who judge a people by its upper ten thousand. A lengthened residence in India Iras shown that the Dravidians or Hindus of Southern 2 THK KOI.K SOSOS OK India, and probably all others, are not what ordinary descriptions of Hinduism would make them out to be. With the exception of a few monographs like Hunter's Rural Annals, and occasional descriptions of village life, almost all books that have come before the public pro- ceed upon the assumption that, as are the Brahmans, so are the Hindus. They are filled with descriptions of Brahman ceremonial. They comprehend only Brahman literature. The vices and the virtues of the priesthood are ascribed to the nation as a whole. There seldom seems to dawn upon the mind a single suspicion that perhaps so exclusive a caste, so jealous of contact with the impure masses around, so determined to keep to itself all the religious books, so pertinacious in main- taining its own essential superiority, is not a fair representative of the masses it despises, and with whom it will have no dealings. As a matter of fact the Brahmans aro as different from the people in social habit, religious practice, and mode of thought, as the Greek philosophers from the vulgar crowd in Thessaly or Sicily, who plodded in their fields sublimely indif- ferent to the wrangles of Epicurean and Stoic, Peripa- tetic and Platooist. Even in religious Hinduism the same truth holds good. The modern representative Brahman scorns the service of the temples, and looks upon the actual priests as a lower caste. In hundreds of pagodas the poojari is not a Brahman at all ; and the church- wardens, under the system recently introduced by the Indian Government, are seldom Brahmans, even in the SOUTHERN’ INDIA larger and more sacred shrines. While the lower castes flock to the temple festivals, the Brahman dis- courses in his houso-upon the Vedanta, or criticizes the doctrines of Sancaracharya, Ramanuja and Mndhva- cliarya — systems in which idolatry and polytheism, have as small a share as in the works of Berkely, Mill, or Spinosa. Even the purohita, formerly the highest dignitary in the Aryan economy, is now degraded into an inferior,— one who must minister to the ignorance and superstition of the crowd. The Brahmans of Southern India are divided into three great sects— those who believe that there is but one soul, in short, that everything is God, (adwaita) — those who believe that there are two souls, God and Man, (dwaita) - and those who take a medium course and believe that there is but one soul, which in man and created things is somewhat different from the divine soul, (visishta adwaita). To those who are not Brahmans these philosophical distinctions arc almost unknown, and men worship a being to whom they give the puranic names of Vishnu and Siva, Krishna and Hanuman. While so many names are given and acknowledged by ovory Hindu, as if each referred to a separate deity, each person acknowledges but one as his own God and ascribes to him all the attribute! of the Godhead. It will be seen, however, that while the philosophy of the schools is unknown to the crow-d, the strong tendency of the popular mind is towards monotheism of a character not unlike that of the Visishta Adwaita THE FOLK SOW1S OP school. Vishnu and Siva are, according to books, members of n triad of equal Cods, but in popular theology the worshipper of either scorns the others. One of tho songs that follow condemns as utterly foolish the man who honors Siva when his professed God is Vishnu. In social life and act the worshipper of Vishnu acknowledges but ono god. He 6peaks of Vishnu as if there were no other god. So with the devotee of Siva, even in a greater degree. Ho transposes the name into the neuter, Sivaui ; and expresses thus his belief that his deity is the ono great essence, without sex or corporeal shape. This distinction has been abundantly and accurately explained by many great writers. Yet the truth has never come home to the European mind, because, os such works went through the press, they were accom- panied, and much more than out numbered, by other books on India— chiefly written by missionaries. The latter dilated upon the enormities of vulgar Hinduism, its millions of deities, the obscenities, quarrels, defeats, and victories of the gods themselves. Clubbing these together under the shade of the old proverb-—" as arc their gods so are the people"— these authors have ascribed utter abominations to the mass of the people, until it has become the general idea that all under the ranks of tho higher Brahmans is one seething mass of impurity, polytheism, and the grossest superstition. Far bo it from pie to reflect upon the self-denying and able men who have done so much to renovate India. The greater tho earnestness with which such men as SOUTH CUN INDIA. a Ward, Arthur, Heber, Ziegenbalg, Duff and a liost of worthy compeers, applied themselves to their great work, the more were they driven to abhor the religious system that stood in their way, that is, the puranic ritual of the pagodas. They naturally looked to the priests and temples as representing Hinduism. The temple Brahinans, excluded from the society of their more intelligent brethren, have undoubtedly given ample cause for every reproach. The traditions of the gods as repeated in the templeB are, to the present day, too often hideous beyond conception. The literature floated by the same class is obscenity itself. 'Hie gods are viler than devils elsewhere. But it has not boon noticed how great is the gulf between even the low class Brahmans and the higher members of the Sudra caste. The Sudra hears theso stories in the temples, receives them without a bluBh and passes them on to his sons ; but, out of the temple, he is another man. The Brahman cannot come to his house except to perform certain religious ceremonials, may not eat with him, may not even touch him, dares not speak to the women who are moulding the next generation, does not even see him again until he goes to some festival, which may not come for another month. Meanwhile the Sudra lives, works, rules his house, performs his daily dovotions. He scos wherever he goes, and in whatever he does, that truth and chastity, honesty and industry, and all those other virtues that the gods despise, are the keys of peace and happiness. He knows that obscenity at home will Tilt KOLK SONCS UK only bring ruin, and keeps his wife almost under lock and key. Ho soon learns that, however it may be among the gods, industry and skill are better things than idleness and begging. He is as sure as he is of his lifo that ho cannot do business, cannot provide fur his family, unless he keep his promise and meet his bond. If such be the case, there cun be no hesitation in his choice— the gods perhaps have a different rule of life, because they are gods ; but that is their look-out. As for him he will listen to and applaud the amorous tricks of a Krishna and the thefts of other divinities, but they must not shape bis life. But these Vaiayas and Sudras form the people. The Brahmans, all told, are not more than a fraction of the population. Even in Madura, a stronghold of the faith, they are but one to fifty of the other castes. In Northern India they are ipuch more numerous, but in the North-west Provinces they are only one in seven. Everywhere it is the other castes that form the working population, and it is they that have the right to be considered the. people of India. Close observation for several years, and the extended friend- ship with Hindus with which 1 have been honored, have long shown that in all matters of daily life the popular Hinduism of the priests is not found among the lower castes. If such an illustration may be per- mitted it might be said that modem Hindu life in Southern India much resembles that, of Europe just before the Reformation. Instead of ascendancy on the side of the priest and deference on the part of the SO! TIIKKN* HIM A 7 people, there was antagonism, not only in act but much more in thought and word. The priest** were necessary evils, not to be got rid of, but existing an the mark of satire, and a vast proof that religion and moralR need not coincide. Church festivities became fairs rather than times of worship, and even the very churches were given over to “ Lords of Misrule while the most sacred mysteries of religion were made the means of murder and the sport of those who were most bound to revere them. Yet everywhere there was the feeling that, after all, the church was something that at times ought to he dreaded. A man might live scorning the priests, but he dared not. die without abso- lution. He might break every commandment when it suited him, but lie must be prepared for penance or pilgrimage when his sins made him uncomfortable. Such is really popular Hinduism now, and so has it been for many generations past. It will be said that such a state of things could not continue ; that the Reformation was the necessary result of the time of Erasmus ; and that some such movement must have happened in India had the above description been true. Precisely, and just such a revolution, modified by nation and locality, has taken place ; except that it has worked itself out so silently that few Europe- ans have been aware of its existence. Religious Hindu- ism in Southern India is now a thing of sects, each under its own guru. It requires the acuteness and learning of a Colcbrooke to describe the bearings and specialities of each sect. Every Hindu below the THE FOLK SON<iS OF Brahman caste chooses his sect, distinguished by certain “arks and signs. He promises unhesitating obedience to the guru, who is seldom a Brahman, und gives him divine honors. Every year he pays a certain proportion of his income for the maintenance of his guru, and the support of the sect. Occasionally tho guru travels in great state through the districts which contain the most of his adherents. Everywhere he collects his dues, receives offerings and gifts, teaches the peculiar doctrines of the soct, initiates new members and, in short, performs in an Indian fashion the functions of a Pope. Very little is known of the inner workings of these sects, but as a general rule it may be accepted as a fact that while they do not absolutely reject the ordinary puranic system— that is, tho Brahmanic tra- ditional system described above — theirgeneral tendency iR to import the results of tho philosophical systems of the higher Brahmans, and present a scheme, more moral than religious, in which idolatry is unknown, and the divinity is always spoken of as the great soul of the universe, one and indivisible. There has been no open breach between the old and the new systems, and few members of a sect will condemn the most flagrant instances of immorality oxhibited in the temples. Nor will they refuse to join in the ordinary temple services. The excuse always given is that those things aro fit for the vulgar crowd, and it is not right to depart from the customs of their sires. This silent revolution has been, as far as can now be seen, altogether independent of European influence and agency. In fact, by giving SOUTH E11S INDIA. to the people a more refined system of religious thought, it has greatly tended to hinder the spread of Christianity. It had begun long before the rise of tho British power. All this points to the fact, with which we started, that the people of India are not accurately described from Brahiuun sources ; and that in thought and habit they are, in a marked sense, different from the sacred caste. This has ofton boon noticod ; but there has always boon a great lack of material for proving it to those who have not lived in India or, having lived there, took their knowledge from Brahmans. It is necessary that the proof should be really popular uud purely indigenous. The dramas published by the Rev. J. Long have done much to reveal local feeling in Bengal, but Madras has not been so fortunate as to possess an enquirer of like character. The following pages con- tain the result of an attempt to fathom the real fool- iugs of tho masses of the people, by gathering and collecting tho folk songs of each family of the groat Dravidi&n nation. It has been the pleasant labor of years to make this collection — in the plains where dwell tho Tamil and Telugu peoples : on tho Mysore plateau, tho home of Canareso : among the hills and valleys of the Neilgherries and the Western Ghauts, sheltering tho stalwart tribes of Coorg and tho humble Badagaa of Ootacamund : along the narrow strip of low-lying coast that parts the sea from the Western Ghauts and gives a home to the Malayalim tongue. It would bo unwise to describe the songs beforehand, THE FOLK 80X08 OF M when the reader will find them for himself in the pages that follow. It is, however, permitted to point out the more salient features that mark them all. First and foremost we see deep aversion to the lower Brahman ic system, and a vigorous clinging to the love and goodness of the deity. I say the deity, for there is no trace of a plurality of gods. Vishnu, Purandala Vithala, Brahma, Yuma may bo named, yet they are but epithets for the one Ooil and his minister, death. The temple storic* find no place hero except, now and then, like Jannes and Jambres in the New Testament epistle, as refer- ences to a popular legend, legend really. No one can fail to be struck with the sadness that prevails. The world and even- soul in it are so sinful, so full of all evil, that man should give up all to save his life ; and even then can hardly hope to succeed. “ How to cross the sea of sin ?" becomes the great question. Its current is so strong, its waves so high, its hidden rocks so many, that none but a strong swimmer can dare to hope to reach the other side. Even he is so battered by storm and rock, so exhausted by the contest or worn by exertion, that when ho seems able to touch the shore his strength may fail, his heart grow weak, and he sink back into the roaring tide. If things be so with the vigorous manful few, how can the feeble trembling many ever hope to see the golden feet of the god whose help they crave ? It is inexpressibly saddening again and again to note such songs as these, and know that they represent the inmost feelings of the better part of a great nation. SOUTHERN INDIA. II It is not hard to find the cause of 90 much sorrow. To the great mass of the nation there is positively no way open towards religious peace, except in that hardest of all courses — abstract faith in an abstract deity. Virtue is its own reward, it is true ; but sin has its pleasures m well, and they are near. Who knows what is virtue’s reward in a Hindu country ? Bruhnmnisni has little hold of the national wind in Dravida. The Brahmans are foreigners, their doctrines or rather legends, as taught in the temples, are repulsive or else vicious, and no man can rest a troubled heart in them. The philosophical systems of the thoughtful Brahmans are jealously kept from the masses. What then have they ? Many of the songs would seem to show that the crowd lean tenderly towards the Buddhist doctrines of absorp- tion and anniliilation. “It is better to die than live,” — better to die and never again know life, than to run the risk of a new birth that may only produce fresh sorrow, increased pain, and plunge the soul into another series of hirth3 each worse than the last. If to live ;s but to suffer such fears, doubts, and pangs as man lias, it is better not to live,— better to forfeit the possibility of one day entering into the higher life, than to meet the certainty of what soems a never-ending cycle of forfeitures and penalties induced by that omuipresent sin which not one out of u million can successfully resist. But future nothingness, though better than constant pain, is not a hopeful prospect- It is an escape to be grateful for, not a pleasure to be proud of. To be merely free from pain is but a very low goal for the 12 7HK FOI.K SONfiS OF human soul to aspire to, and cannot give that zest and glory to life which are required to make a man joyous whilo he suffers, peaceful when surrounded by anxie- ties, triumphant when he dies. He who would live righteously in this present life is driven back on every side. No repentance opens his way to pardon. A par- don bought by offerings to despised priests and immoral shrines will give no peace when Death draws nigh. The sorrowing man is too ignorant to fathom the philosophy of the schools, and too old to begin to learn. The songB divide into several classes. 1st, Moral songs, dealing with the subjects described in the last para. 2nd, Proverbial philosophy. This is a very large class. 3rd, Songs representing the Adwaita system, filled with high morality but strongly pantheistic, and henco exhibiting the most curious paradoxes regard- ing human conduct 4 th, Ancient Tamil songs of the period when Dravidianism and Brahmanism wore struggling for the mastery — when men like Tiruvalluva and Sivavabyer used their tongues and pens in favor of deism and against the ceremonial polytheism of the Brahmans, — when the best men poured out what are distinctly called “songs of sorrow," and were very J eremiahs in weeping over the corruptions that surged upon the land. 5th, Theological chants of considerable length that can scarcely be called songs at all, contain- ing as they do regular ethical essays. 6th Ceremonial songs, belonging chiefly to the Hill tribes. The Badaga and Coorg songs of this cluas aro especially worthy of SOUTHERN INDIA. 13 attention. Interesting examples will appear in the following pages. 7tli, Labor songs, only met with among the working classes. They are generally com- posed in the vulgar dialect, and scorn the restraints of grammar and the nice rules of poesy. 8th, Mothers' songs, composed for and sung to children. There are many such, but it is not easy for a European to gather them. All of these classes are represented in the following pages. Thoro is another class of songs, or rather chanted poems, which has not come within the sphere of this book — the episodes from the Bhagavatam, Mahab- harata, Ramayana and the Puranas, which form so large a portion of the public amusements. These are distinct Brahman importations and are in no sense indigenous. They are eagerly listened to, and form the chief means by which the Brahmans plant in the national mind the evidences of their own greatness. Many writers, and notably Mr. Griffiths of Benares, have given attention to and translated thorn. They do not represent pure Dravidian feeling and therefore do not belong to this subject. It is the common remark of all who study Dravidian literature that the oldor it is the purer it is. The fact is induced by the growing influence of the Brahmans. At first warmly repelled, because of the pretensions of the priesthood, it gradually forced its way to the front, as the influence of an educated and closely united class ever will, mainly because it embraces all the higher literature. For a while the fight was evenly THE FOLK SONGS OK 14 maintained, but tho foreign element progressed till almost the whole written literature of tho country became Brahmanic. Indigenous poetry fell into undeserved contempt or, where that was not possible, was edited so unscrupulously, that tho original was hidden under a load of corruption. Take for example tho songs of Sivavakyer. Purely dcisticnl and strongly opposed to idolatry and cumbrous ceremonial, they were so vigorous as poetry, so fervid in expressing the inmost feelings of every honest heart, and took such a hold upon the people, that they could not be burked. What followed ? The Brahmans have corrupted what they could not destroy. The editing of all books gradu- ally fell to them, because they alone had the leisure and knowledge that literary labor required. To the public demand for Sivavakyer they responded by issu- ing “ expurgated aud improved” editions. Each editor added new names and references to Siva or Vishnu, left out further verses from the original, and softened still more the many vigorous phrases. This process was continued till it became almost impossible to dis- cover the original. The Mackenzie MSS. contain but one mutilated copy of a decently pure collection. The only copies that I have been able to purchase are as obscure and overloaded with puranic superstition as the legend of any pagoda. The same thing has occurred with all the best Dravidian poetry. The Gnona Venba cannot be obtained at all, though in the 15th century it was one of the most popular of books. The Tiruvalluva Chari tra haa been remodelled till it appears that every early SOUTHERN* INDIA. 15 Dravidian writer was a Brahman, although the very object of the book was to show that Tiruvalluva and his fellows were pariahs. Still the book is looked upon as something almost heretical, and this because it seems to show that Brahmans could marry even Pariah women in past ages without loss of caste, and that early literature was chiefly cultivated by the indigenous races. In the Malayalim country, where Brahmanic influ- ence is most powerful, the greater part of the popular songs have perished without leaving a trace of their existence. Even iti the tc-inple services translations from Tamil puranic chants are constantly used. At the other extreme of the social scale, whore Brahmanism is only now forcing its way, the hill tribes are musical with ballad, lyric and dirge. They have songs for every event in life. They cut the first sheaves of harvest to a eong. They come into life, are married, and die to the music of some chant, song or requiem. As far as my information extends at present, ballads proper do not exist, except among the bill-tribes. By ballads I understand songs containing a story, in which the catastrophe or triumph is the key to the whole piece. The tendency of the national mind ia ethical. The Brahmanic importations are usually vio- lently amorous, or extravagantly wild. In neither case is there room for the simple pathetic ballad. Modern Dravidian literature (poetic) iB almost confined to the three classes of amorous poems, pagoda sthalams or the legends on which the temples claim sanctity or honor, THE FOLK SONGS OF 1C and songs or rather poems in praise of a particular per- son or deity. The second class is very numerous, and the demand for them is great. Each pagoda has a grand day or days, the anniversary of the event that is sup- posed to have led to its foundation, and on theso occa- sions the legend is publicly recited or sold for a few pice to the cfowd. Now and then plays are published, and there is now living a Tamil author whose works are very popular. But ihoy arc so dreadfully long, requiring several days for their representation, that they cannot possibly be brought within the class of songs. The Tahsildar Natakam (Natakam-play, drama) is the most admired of this clasa. But it is now time that the songs should speak for themselves. They are arranged in order of lauguage and subject. As my first introduction to this literature was through the Canarese “ Dasarapadas," I give them first. Pada is our English word pad, Latin ped-is, and means a foot, corresponding with the English term of the same meaning. It means a song or poem, because it is composed of feet or goes by paces. Dasa means a servant or slave, and is the name given to those who devote themselves or are devoted by their parents to the service of God. They are usually attached to some pagoda or temple and perform all menial duties there. In process of time the Dasas or Dasara have become a singing caste and have traditions and customs as other castes. Those not attached to a pagoda usually obtain a livelihood by begging. Not that they are despised or counted disreputable. Far THK XBAHNK&* or UK Mil 17 from it. To bo a mendicant in the Pumviic system is to serve God in the must acceptable method politic. Tlie first three or four non#* describe the attacks of death and the uncertainty of life. The next point out that inward purity »* required by God rather than outward service The third class contain outpouring* against the sorrows of life, its pain and darkness, i Lastly aro several collections of proverbs. THE MUKNLSs or dkavil 1 "Oil! uluiL ks f.Khl Cm nil Ik'sill* iimN m> nuai .Mom, noon and night liis angel* ch*<c Bpjieai'. In one short day they snatched, a* past they ran. My fiiend, my foe, tin? youngs the grey -haired nmn. Their wealth doth stay behind, Although *o dear. There i* no jo y for me. my life is drear." Chorus . — How near l< death ! Mercy he cannot bring. Then, oh my heart, cca.se from tlie world, and cling With nil thy power to tender Lakshini's* king. 2- 1 Two days ago tlie marriage feast was mine. And only yesterday 1 Insight milch kino Wherewith to start my undent home. My field Ik blight with corn, with gold my coffers yield, 1 cannot die.** While yet thou speakest, fool, Dread Ynma’st Htop cornea near. Farewell, vile soul. Chorus . — How near in death ’ &c. * Ltkvhmi the goddc* of bciuty ami wife of Vaalmii. f Varna, the god of the region » of the dcul-thc agent employed by the higher Codi for carrying roortnh away fr<*n earth to llidw. 7111. XKAKSfc.'A «l» IlKATII. 3. “ My house is newly built. E’en no'' they siy The mantra- * Hut linve pow- r to drivu awny All evils from my home. My wile in great With ebilil. Tlio <!ny lli.il wed- my son wc wait. I-il'e is *og<*nl. I omr.iit, will not, rli»." Viiin fool : Dentil - hand now shades thy glazing eye i Lurur. — How near is death 1 Arc. To-day the milk boils with the rice. We feast 'Hi.* birth-day of on.- son. The next bright east Will mc tin- Miens! tlarradf by priest- thrown nVr The shoulders of my heir/' Oh. tumble wire ; Than say at, " TIiou const not die." Boliind thy back Death stands and laughs, and fears nc* to attack. CTorus. — How near is death ! kc. 5. He will not give you time. You may not eat The rice that now stand* rooked. Your eager feet May bring no helping friends Accounts must stay Unpaid. In short, tny friend, you mu-t obey When death doth call. Oh, heart, my flvmbling heart, Think well on Vishnu's god-like feet From him ne'er port Clones. -How near is death ! be. • Magic trnMorea, generally unintelligible lo tlie people. ThaMsratM- e« arc raid to have the raorf rairacnlout fewer. Even the Hindoo trinity lie vupporad unablf to resist their operation. t Brahmans, Vainw and the higher Sudra eaitc* alwavi carry a number of threads loosely lavlcned together, forming a airing which hangi over the left shoulder down to the waiat. Investiture with the thrrad i* the entrance Into manhood nml convey* pcratiwlon lo join in all rcligioua ceremonies. It ia aid to repreK-nl a Dew hlrlh. wenelhing Ike the hoptinnal regenera- tion of rertain Christian tecta. After the ceremony, thejoung Biahman receive. Ura till* of ~ the twice born." DEATH ID HEATH. 1. He will not give yon time to cal cooked rice. Nor dun the gull whose note you’ve filed ; No jewels fivnn the box may make yon nice Fur Yauui* given no time. rfont*.— Although you love your l*ody, trust it not, But strive to gain due merit for thy lot. Tliy lusty strength cannot avail one jot. 2. You winh to call your sister to your side, And bid farewell to wife and child: To shed salt tears for fact* from ilioanr* ^ wide . — But Yuma tpw* no time. Utui'H *. — Although you love yu«ir limly, l\. You cry that friends must not be kdlsOMgli, That pulse and glioe to private yuull scud. The marriage of thy ton waits but new moon : — Yet Yama gives no time. CAorno. — Although you love your body, fcc. 4. Your house is high, it' scorns the skies to touch — Your purse is full, you ought to spend— Your elephant* and men want watching much Still Yuma gives no time. Chorua . — Although you love your body, &c. 5. Your strength, you think, will over stand your part; .Yet worse than useless will it prove. Lei 1’urandula see a loving heart: — Then Yaxua brings no fear. Chorua . — Although you love yonr body, See. 0 Yuna. the find of (loath and the internal region*— the Indian repre- sentative of Hut© TUB MUST MUB.VD. tiik hist viimu . 1. Oho !*•£* of other* lor a wife. On Im'I Icntows Ihitli rule and Lome. Ho counts her half of all hi* life. Hut when death come*. lie dies nlone- 4 fi">v a. Of nil good tiling tike Irast me three — Wives land#, nml cunntlm gain. W hit It is | lie <hurc4 friend to fhoc * 2 One mount* tin* tlironu of mighty kings Hi* palace gird* with toit mid wall ; Of his gTcat [lower the whole world riugft. His lifeloflB tone to dogs will fall. fcWwi— Of all good tilings, kc. ft King'll grace, good luck, hard work and trade. May loud with wealth of coin or land. What ty nints leave, the mothu invade ; For riche* Hv like de^it sand. * kontf . — Of all good thing*, kt. I. In vain wive* mourn, in vain soas weep, Wealth Iwiljis ten less in death* bust scene. Two things alone live gulf (an leap— The sin. the good, our life has seen. rAortf*— Of all good things ire. In this weak frame put not your tmst But think on Him with inward calm. Is your Inn ii rlwirf y For Him >ou lust ? Tien Vishnu i> n h fading halm. Of all good tilings, kt. 1.1 PF. 21 I LIFE. 1. If mt'it have no hcnlth, Sir, Wluit good in their would) ! If men linvo no wealth, Sir, Wind good is their health l If both of the twain hlmuld o’er him reign I)o you think n goo*! wife lie will gain ? Chorntt. — Oh, Vishnu, thou wilt never give Thy grace — the good man’s vital breath — To those who still in sin do live. Whose f.vt nm in the way to dentil 2 Oui li'.uur is :i house. Sii Short nutieo wo get. Our wives have the notl\ Sir, Exiunjilu* they set Our houses wo quit, like smoko we flit. But the next is as bad or worse fit. OAoiw.— Oh, Vishnu, 4tc. :i. If life you will trust. Sir. Old Scratch will you nab. To death gn you must, Sir, Your alms he will grab.* “ To-morrow" you «ty — 'tin just your way — My advice is hut this, give to-day. ChoruK — Oh, Vishnu, Ate. * Tlit Tott refer, to the world-wide practice of trying to buy off death •nil future punishment hy ■ charity that only begins when the hind cm no longer hold the ncalth that it ha. laid up He graphically dcterili** how the dying ninn W -till rrluetmt to pay the Tory tx-ibc be proml‘C‘-h« will give “ to-morin* " 22 urn \ Oli, where will you ho, Sir, In twenty-four hours } Grim death you will sec. Sir, Your pleasure it sours. You roy you wont go ! I'm sure you know llow they® grin i* tiiey hear you say so, fiorw#.— Oh. Vishnu, &c. •V You sen (lint men die, Sir. Hon* «H*k you snon grow ' Yon cunnut Cell why, Sir, In turn you must go. “That's mine, this is thine" — such is his whine Belter pray, so I say, while there's time. Chorus. — Oh, Vishnu, 4c. 6. Oh man, only clusit, Sir, A weak broken r*cd ! If flesh you wouhl trash Sir, A friend you will need. In Vishnu you'll find a tender mind, Take lib feet to your heart — bell be kind Charwk — Oh. Vishnu. 4c. We now come to a scrios of the highest moral charac- ter, exhibiting a purity of doctrine which is the last thing most persons would expect to see in Hindoo literature. The thought will often intrude itself that here we find a standard of religious duty almost unknown to tlio world, as intended, for the masses, except in the Now Testament Equally frequent will be' The ingtb of death, «nt forth to gather in the loeC K»ul TRUE IIIltlTY. 23 the reflection that Brahmanism, that is Puranism, never could (froduce such works, and that the songs exhibit a spiritual tone which makes one deeply regret that there is so little left of indigenous Dravidian literature, ’llie songs that follow are hut samples of a considerable mass. It is odd indeed to hear them chanted, as 1 first did, in the entrance hall of a pagoda dedicated to Hanu- inan, the monkey deity who so greatly aided Hama in his search for Sita. The Bhngavnt Gita contains noble descriptions of the deity, but has no conception of faith. On the contrary it teaches that the highest human duty is that of meditation and the strictest ceremonial ob- servance. The first of the series fitly introduces the rest, in strains that, even in a feeble translation, send a thrill of pleasant recognition through the Christian mind. TJtUE PU1UTY. 1. Oh, wouldst thou know in what consists The purity which keeps the soul ? Behold the things the good resists, The works that make the wounded whole. Chorus. — 0!i man, why boosted thou in pride, The small ne» of thy mind to screen ? Go, lmthe thy vile polluted hide In meditation's sacred stream. 2, Thy parents honor and obey. Release the prisoner from Iris chain. In Heaven’s road for ever stay, And think on Vishnu’s wondrous reign. Chorus . — Oh mnn, &«*. nii’K mtm*. 3. The common woman hate and scorn, At neighbours head no hard words semi, With honesty thy life Adorn, Desire tint things which pluurc tliy friend. Oh man, kc. i Examine nft thy inner self. Deal justly in the hmrkrt ftficit, Proclaim the Until at loss of |ndf. Think long on Mari* gulden feet. f’Am'itx — Oh man, Av. j. With gold men lot thy life be spent. True wisdom strive to understand, Read oft the ShasM* God bath sent. And wk fur good from Vishnu's hand. Chews. — Oh man. Arc. il Pay soon thy vow* at sacred shrine. Despise not cun the lowliest thing. Of evil eye fen r not the shine. But meditate on Lakshwi’s king. CAotm— O li man, kc 7. Abhor the pride that falsely tells That thou art good and clean. And bathe thy soul in sacred wells From meditation’s stream. Chcrrv*.— Oli man, Arc. The next song contains an attempt to render into English one of the most characteristic Dravidian metres. A certain consonaut is selected to begin the first line of FIJIIITY IN THK SIOHT OF COD. 25 the verse. In the next line that consonant heads the second syllable. To the third line it commences the third syllable, and so on. To employ this metre lite- rally would bo both difficult and useless, as English readers rely upon accent or rhyme alone and the repetition of the letter would catch neither eye nor ear. I have, therefore, substituted accent, and it will lie found that with each line of the song the accent moves forward ono syllable. The chorus is excepted. — PURITY IN Tilt SHill r OF ti»b. 1. Purification before tin* Ureal God Is greater than life and i* stronger than death — ' TU the hope of the wise, ’ti* tlic prize of the «int. Where is Uio fount from which comes the pure stream ' Chorus .—' Wlut profit can tl>c sinner find In washing oft ? How vain the care ! Ood knows ftill well— He sees the mind— That true devotion dwell* not there. 2. Alms-giving lies at the basis of the steps That lead lo the height from which purity flows. To know wisdom and truth, and thy lasts to forsake, Trust in thy God — meditate on His grace. Chorus . — What profit, &C. 3. Drink the foul water in which have been washed The feet of thy guru, and honor the words Of thine elders and priests; to thy guests give thy b»t; Cling above all to the feet of thy God. Chorus .— What profit, 4c. THE NAME OK GOD. h Purification must bring in its course Tl»c Imtc of tlic bad ami the love of the good. Twill bring freedom from prick of the conscience for tin Union with Ctxl in hi* mercy and lovo. Chxmvs .— What pmllt, Ac. Tlie two songs that follow arc pure metaphor, adapt- ed to a high religious purpose. The first deals with the w<me of God, which is described as being sweeter than aught else to the man who loves and fears tliu deity. THE NAME OP GOD. 1. My stcck is not packed on tho backs of strong kinc. Nor pressed into bags strongly fastened with twine. Wherever it goes it uo taxes doth pay. But still is most sweet* and brings profit. I say. Chorus. — Oh. buy sugar-candy, my candy so good, For those who have tasted sav nought is so sweet As tho honey-like name of the Godlike Vishnu. 2. it wastes not with time, never gives a bad smell. You’ve nothing to pay, though you take it right welL White anU cannot eat the line sugar with me. The city resounds as its virtues men sec. Chorus. — Oh. buy sugar-candy, Ac. 3. From market to market it is needless to run, The shops know it not, the hsaaiar can have none. My candy, you see, ia the name of Vishnu, So sweet to tho tongue that gives praise as is due. ChcA'u*. — Oh, buy sugar-candy, Ac. COOKED HICK. COOKED DICK 1- Take virtno fur your boiling put. Pour water demised with holiness. With speed — a mind that wavers not — Let honor strain the steaming mess. Chorus . — Be sure you take cooked rice with you. Take pain* to jack cooked rice, pray do. Your joy will be beyond all price If you but jack enough cooked rice. 2. Spread wisdom’s cloth, so free from taint, And sprinklo curds of manner grave. Then with the grace of finu restraint To Hnri offer all Ho gave. Chorus . — Br sure you take. i:c. 3, Groat Vishnu is my stock of food. My hag of rice so oft untied. Each day I eat— tis always good. All those who cat arc satisfied. * f&orun —Be sure yon take. See. We now' turn to one of the bitterest pieces of satiio that can anywhere be uiet with. The contrast of style and matter with those that have preceded it is very stri king ; yet it cannot bo called illnatured, for it points at a class and not at individuals. Each verse contains an antithesis, comparing sinful deeds with the hypocritical religious fervour so often employed either to conceal or expiate a sin which is still continued. The first two lines contain the vice, the last two the sanctimonious zeal which is intended to hoodwink both God and man. wrrv i laoo'm. W 11 V 1 LAUGH 1 One flight I *n w a man Kiting a harlot* lijys. Next morn to bathe he ran, Ami prayed on finger tip* !♦ Chor <t* — Oh, how I laugh ! I laugh out loud. It make* me laugh to see the crowd, Such tricks tlvv »h>. I oft liavo vowed I'd In ugh no more: with it I'm bowed. 2. A woman left her house And joined a man a* moan. She made a thousand vow* And washed at holy stream 1 Chorus.— Oh, how I laugh! At 3. I Raw one live in luat, Hi* gentle words wore few. Ho fed uf»on a crust-, And thought upon Vishnu l Chorus. — Oh, how I laugh ! Arc. CEREMONIAL NOT RELIGION 1. You bathe, in meditation pass Urn day. And sit or stand as still as any crane l You meditate ? A foolish dream, 1 say ! Can Krishna, who himself cut short the reign Of demons and their imps, love aught but deeds ? • He wonted on bii fingers tie prayers be uttered tbit be might be rare U omiUid none and thus performed hit full religion* duty. GOD SAVIOUR Chorus . — 'Tis surely worse (bnn fool wuuld do. To flog and starve thy fleshly part ; When thou hast never set thy heart On Lnkuhmi'* Lord, the great Vishnu. 2. What good can come from sitting like a bear And crying over—" I will pray, will pmy;” Yet. to escape a bore, will count each prayer I One prnyer alone yields fniit, and that for aye — Tlic great and goodly name, Naihyana. Chorus .— Tis surely worn than fool would do, tc. 3. Oh God, didst thou not in the former time Forgive Jamila's sins, in that hie tongue* Gave forth thy name > Oh Soul, what doubts arc thine And fears ' 0 stay not, flee at once, as slung By snake or ho*. Keep Vishnu in thy view. Chorus — 'Tis surely worse than fool would do, &c. <J0D THE SAVlOl'K. 1. When piety! Komava raised the robe That covered Draupad’H charms, + Her five brave husbands, mad with rage. Were helpless to protect. Oh, Hari, thou wast near to save. How strong art thou and brave 1 • Thil refer* to a popular legend regarding n notoeiot** thief. Ho to one day aurpriacd by a tiger, and in hii fright ejaculated the word* “Oh Hari. Hart" The Qod immediately tent help and whored Jamila from ba danger. The robber «u mi grateful for the divine interpoeitioo that he erected a shrine on the apot and became an a*;etic. t Tbit ii a well known incideot in the itery of the Feodor u related in the Mahabbarata. Kerb rerae that followt eootalna a atimlar reference. The Draridian port draua a useful IctKO from the Brahmanie legend* OtTVTAM) RITES NOT RFJJOTOX. Ch&rtti . — If Han be in>t mine. Who else can help or ace ? Oli, Hari. grace and strength are thine. Be ever near to me I 2. If thou, oh father, lmdst not come, Gi**t Vishnu's sword in hand, And split the gaping monster's mouth The friendly king had died. Oh Vishnu, who can savo like thee? So great thy help and free « Clioras.— If Hari be not mtoe, 4*e. 3. When Agmilanu broke his caste Death's Angels shadowed him. Yet thou, O Lord of worlds, didst hear His weeping children's ciy. How swift thy Angels flew to help ! His life was from thyself. Chorus ,— If Haii be not mine, Sic. OUTWARD RITES NOT RELIGION. 1. Oh Soul I What good cun flanges give ? Can water cleanse, or thinking long On God ? When still thy feet choose sin, And merit springs not from thy deeds. Chorus .— Oh heart ! My heart: How vile art thou I No hound more mad than thou art now. Can foil}* bring thee peace or probe ? Then turn, oh fool, and lift thy gaze To never dying Vishnu's feet. OUTWARD BiTtS NOT RELIGION, 31 2. When guile o'ersprvods thy crooked pith, And inward sin kills holy oral, Can prayer make dean thy soul, or whips Drive out the foulness from thy heart ’. C fonts. —Oh heart ! ire. .1. Why hide thy fare- or pull thy nose,* Do all that Brahman law commands ? When He who on the serpent rests Can hear no praisP, no worship see. CTorux.— Oh heart ! kc. ♦. "A priest I am. My life is spent In searching long for sacred shrines." Go to. Oh fool 1 A priest is he WI»o humbly learn* and holy I i Vi's. C fonts.— Oh heart ! kc. 5. Not in the smoke of sacrifice, Nor in the chant of Vcdic hymns. Does God look for the lowly inind That fitly enters into bliss. Chorus .— Oli heart ! kc. 6. The fiery God is found by thoso Who lust no more — who feel no pride — Whose senses clow ’gainst sin and self— Who humbly walk before their God. Chorus.— 1 Oh heart I kc. • Ikrth phraw* describe . portion of the daily ceremonial of «hc Brahman.. In Urn morning ablution, it ii necewary lo cknc every aperture of the body i the., among other thlngv, the Brail nan cover* hi* face. «o that he may l* «ure he ha. eloeod eye, now, mouth and rar*. A nitaopmt ritual requires that the devotee ibocld pan hi* thumb and forefinger down both Bdet of the OOK. Tbe author inBnuate* that, to be quit* .ure that be hm duly tainted hi* note, the Thiritoic derocee firmly grup* the orgiu, pulling it smartly and frequently. BODY AND SOUL 7. What good can come from earthly toil ? Whence can the root of merit spring ? If, oh my soul, thy grasp be weak. Or wandering thoughts let Vishnu slip. Chorus .— Oh heart S 4 m. BODY AM) SOUL 1. Skin covet* flesh and blood and lione : Within arc worms, excretions vile. Disease and spirits evil, pain and moan. Thy strength, oh moo, U death and hell. Chorus .— Think not this flesh will hide, On earth shall find it* goal. But love the lotua-eyed ; In him find peace, O soul. 2 You love your child, your friend, your wife, — 'Tin joy you say ; ’tU ain you know. Forego this joy, it steals your life, And think on Him who saves from woe. Chorus — Think not this flesh will bide, &c. 3. Serve Brahma* first> your neighbour love, Avoid a harlot as a sword ; Go where they probe the Lord above. And shout — “ Oh, Uari, Hari, Lord P Chorus .— Think not this flesh will bide, fcc. • In thb and radar phrase*. t I k won! Brahma mult not be «nppc*«j to filer to the first prton of tho Hindu Triad. It is always used in Lbc twuur Miwtof sotatiSc terra for the Deity, and has ao connection with the prmoal masculine Brahna. 33 4. Pnrandala Vitli&la, help ' If thou linil o'er extended gran*. Give it to mo, give ino thyself. For this is joy — to we thy fare. '/«> ioi»- Think not this Hc-di will hide. A’i*. The song “ How to cross the sea of sin" introduces a group perhaps the most characteristic of Dravidian literature and character. Tt has been common among westom thinkers to look upon the theory of the trans migration of kouIs as eminently comforting to those who trust in it. Hero wo see the direct contrary taught by the most convincing testimony. It gives no rest either in the present or the future. But the human soul craves for rest, even in suffering, as the highest good. 1 venture to say “ even in suffering," because every heart that fears the future instinctively erica “ let mi? know the worst.” Transmigration can never reveal the worst. The punishment of sin in this life is a more degraded life still. That inevitably leads to something yet more to he dreaded. Thus the future is a long cumulation of woe, almost without one redeeming ray of light ; for where mercy can only be earned by merit the wicked have no hope. Note the bitter cry : — " How many birth* ore pant I cannot UdL How many yet may be, no man may say. But this alone I know, and know full well, That pain and grief embitter all the way. - 34 Still more grievous is the opening of another np|>eal against tlio fate that has made man what he is - A weary anil broken down man, With sorrow 1 come to thy feet ; Subdued by the fate and the ban That hide* tiro long future 1 meet 1 Miffer, withont ceasing, the pain Of 'XXTOwful infinite life” And again “ Esrth'i pjun'i I raunot bear Mom still await me them." In these and similar expressions wo seem to meet the utmost of human woe— despair. If transmigration could give ultimate hope it might bo well ; but it robs such hope as might otherwise be. A bad man may become a dog or a horse or perhaps a lizard. Let the soul do well there, and it may enter the human frame again. This sounds like hope, but it gives none. It is a million times easier to be a good dog than a good man, and down again goes the poor lost soul, lower than ever before. Life is a “sea of sin." With sin come trouble aud pain. Life is agony and sorrow. There is no rest, now and hereafter. Such is the sad Diavidian creed. The Tamil “ Songs of sorrow" have already been refer- red to. The Telugu Vemana in some thousands of voree3 does not contain one broad laugh. Some minds cannot bear such darkness. If virtue can bring no rest, if abstinence in this world cannot ensure pleasure in 3A the next, and anyhow the soul must jfo down into the dark abyss of the future, why not fly to the pleasure that is within our reach ? While wo live, let us live. Out of this reaction has grown a glorification of pleasuro, of sexual enjoyment, of every kind of sensual gratification. Even the great and gond Tituvalluva has written in “ Praise of lust." Let us pity rather than blame. Puranism grasped the worse school, deified vice ami created a Krishna. It conquered l>ecause it w’as aided by three potent allies — the superior intelligence and knowledge of the Brahmans, the ignorance and necessary hfsitiiion .>1' their victims, and its glorification of human liivnri The Tamils arc tlie most oiviligedj Jnividuin people, —among them chiefly do wc liud outspoken rampant sensuality under the guise of religion. It is, however, necessary to boar in mind that sensual enjoyment is not neces- sarily immoral. Tiruvalluva's “ Praise of Lust" would be grievously misunderstood if it wore supposed to exalt indiscriminate harlotry. He constantly requires that men should live with their own wives and "-hate a harlot as a sword." Where pleasure of any kind may I legitimately be enjoyed, Tiruvalluva and many other writers believe that it may l*e eulogized, may he de- scribed in detail. They act on the principle that it. cannot logically be wrong to describe what every one may experience. The hill tribes are the least Brah manizod, .among them sensuality is never glorified. Between, these extremos arc the Cannreso, — their songs will allow their views. HOW TO CROSS THE SEA OF SIX. now TO CROSS THE SEA OF SIN. A father's advice. 1 Our life n but a sc* of sottow, This come*. that goc*. the old old way. No joy will last beyond to-morrow, Ken grief and pain — they will not slay. Why should we run such things tn meet. Or set our hearts on things so fleet t Olio tiling alone is worth u nod — To touch the heart of Lnksluni * (5ud. ffcruA— Oil, sons of mine, how shall we wan Acres* the fearful sea of sin ? Oh sons, shout loud Nariymn* bikslum h king, my *ons, Naruyana. 2. The strength obtained by footWwill tail, So will the gold which fills your pun*. Tlie glories of your house will palo. Your lofty fort may prove n cur. Not one of these will servo yun well To fight n gainst the king of hell. Then. roiw of mine, your voice* ittise In world-renowned Vishnu’s praise. Chorus — Oh. sons of mine, ire. 3. Some play at dice, and some at chess. Some plague the wife and she plagues some Some with great wealth their souls would bless. To one sure end they all will come The infernal God will catch them all, Who Vishnu** name furget to ealL In Nirasimlms lovely fare Lav all your hope* of future grace. Chonts. — Oh, son* of mine, ire. HOW TO CROSS 71IK SKA OF S!K 4. Don't be too fond of wife or girb Or laugh beauise tlij sons nrc throe. For when grim Heath his life-wheel twirls* The storn demand will come for thee. Of Mayaf never be the slave Else thou wilt not the death-god brave. Adoro the God that sleeps on son, And endless bliss thy lot shall be. Charm— Oh, sons of mine, kc. V In pride or strength, in luatc or love. In wealth or goods pit not your trust. Embrace the fitet of God above. Or else your ho|K:H will turn to dust tong thought on (hid will steel the mind Against the ill* wliidi nil meu find. And if thy sorrows thou wouldst heal To glorious Vishnu ever kneel. Cfrtrm. — Oh. sons of mine. &c. • This it on old Aryan figure. l>eatii it a lottery. How cl»c ran he explained the scorning cruelty which ukc* the yoemg and have* the old ; that cottIc* away the bread winner and permit* the lircad -eater to continue hi* u*rlf« life f Our name* arc shaken together in a whirling box, and that which con** out firK belongs to the neat victim of the griily king. ♦ Tbr proper meaning of the word ia 41 that whieh i» not adf-cxiitcnt " As all thing* depend on Ood, can be made or unmade at Hit pleasure, it it a mirtako to look upon matter at having any goodneai or power. Q <*1 it all in all. Every thing i* hut a shadow of Him. But ignorant men cannot we tbit. They live for the wodd. To them the world it everything and God i« nothing. They arc victim* of Maya. 38 A CRY KOI! HELP. A CRY FOR HELP. 1. How many birth* arc past I cannot toll. How many yet uuy be, no man may say. Cut thisabne I know, And kuow full well, That [aih and grief embitter all the way. My woes aro more than 1 can bear, but thou. Great Gi*I, who once didst blew eon Ibbavvj,* Of elephant* the king, canat help me now. Be pleased lo grant my prayer— my *o«il enlarge. Chorus .— Oh Vishnu, help! Great Vishnu, Save A wretched aoul liko mine ! Thou boldest up the earth and wave, Oh, send thy aid in time. 2. Great Lard, my boyish years were ono long pain, Although they seemed to pass in play. For play Is nought but pain, in thal it brings disdain Of God and holy thing*. This very day, Thou happy Naraiiniha,+ hear my prayer And freely, from thy heart, on me bestow The help that now to ask I humbly dare. Oh, help and save before from life I go ! Chorus . — Oh Vishnu, help 1 Great Vishnu, Save, A*c. 3 But now. in age and feebleness extreme, Distress and pain are harder still to bear. I cannot bear such woe. Tw like a stream That surges over-head. Dost thou not care, • Tbt ttory of Ibhartj the ki»$ of clephanti it limiUr to tbit of Jamils, t Ntruioihm, th* ramn-iioo. tbe fourth iixtnttioa of Viahno lira's sorrow Pureodala Vithnln. •« whose eye All men an* one and e>|ual > On U»y throne, Oh king of birds, how swiftly dost thou fly 1* List. hear with joy. and take me for thy own Chwua . — Oh Vishnu, help ' Great Vishnu, Save, &c. L I P )!’S SO Know. 1 . A weary and broken down man. With sorrow 1 onne to thy f<-et. Subdued by the fit to and the ban That hide* the long future 1 meet. I sutler, without ceasing, the pain Of sorrowful infinite life. Thou never canst listen in vain To earnest and soul-yearning strife. Chorus .— Govindaf thy feet are my part. Couie, tread on the ground of my heart. I'll always remain where thou art. f . I counted as dearest on earth Fair women, great wealth and wido land And saw not the joy and the worth Of merited grace from thy hand. • AH the l*u nnic deities ore seated on some animal, showing figuratively that *11 nsture serra them. Viihnn'j throne >• »» eagle. Gaueaa it always seated on a rat. t A name of Krishna, the eighth incarnation of Vishnu. It mean.-" He that loot i after the cows"— and refers to Krishna's infancy, when he. was brought up by a tribe of cowherds. 40 THIS TROl' RI.F.SOM K WOR1.U Kell Maya* came in with my birth — Wlint physic enn cure or can save ? With wntera of wisdom begirth. Oh, drown my poor soul in the wave. CLnv/t& — (ioviuda, thy feet ore my part, Ac •1 All sins I have done in the past Now, now make them clean and forgot. And long as the future may last bet hmvnily lifo 1* my lot On Vishnu's bright foot ever cast A longing and confident glance : And thus wilt thou gnin and hold fast A taste of Uve bliss in advance- Chorue.— Govinda, thy feet are my part, Ac. THIS TROUBLESOME WORLD. 1. If thou sliouldst have a wife, Trouble is thine. If none should bless thy life, Troublo is thine. If neither wise nor witty, Sorrow will come. Still more if she 1« pretty, Sorrow will come. * The doctrine usually though incorrectly rendered "iUluion. , • It Mdin that this eartli lords its inhabitants lUriv, causing them to forget Cod, seeing that U teems n math nearer and ii ao much dearer to the sinful ami See note on page 37. THIS TROUBLESOME WORLD. 41 For then, all guarding vain. Sore trouble this. She bring! unmeasured pain. Sore trouble thi*. ChOYM — Never, oh my soul, enn pence lie thine Until great Run gas* grace lie mine. If angry He, nil hope resign. If children come to thee, Sorrow comes too. But if no heir should fce.f Sorrow comes ton. With earning wealth and power, I"nin till.-* the cup. Bui when the wretched poor — I’am fill' the cii|«. Complains he Isa* no rice — Tift dolor MK. Wherewith to sacrifice — T» dolor we. No sorrow, pain, or care. E'en sorrow deep. Can be so hard to bear. E'en sorrow deep. (■home — Never, oh my soul, Ac. . • Yet soother name for Vishnu ami meaning probably “ he that die* swiftly referring to the wonderful speed of light st it iisucs from the run. Vishnn under the name of llari b both the sun and the ligbL f English renders oia hive little iden of the yearning of every Hindoo couple for a aw. It b universally believed that the fbtore of the dead is without hope if certain ceremonies are rot performed at the cremation and on cieb •occecding annirtraary of that occasion. These eeroroooitfl can only be perfectly performed by a aon. If there be no aoa, the whole scries of income* is debarred from abrorpeion and rest throughout all agin Hence the necessity of adopting a tan if naoe be bom to the house. THE PAINFUL SERVANT. 3. When men are sick and poor. Sorrow outers. Though wealth should bar the door, Sorrow enters. If, gained by strength and euro, Pain is in store. Great hoards the shelves should hear, Pain is in store. But if each day you pray. No sorrow conics. To him who hoars nlway. No sorrow comes. The excellent Vishnu, Your joy is great. Groat peace will dwell in you. Your joy is great Chorus — Never, oh my soul, &e THE PAINFOI SERVANT. 1. Some pair.* may not be seen, They show no wound, I ween, Although so deep and keen Oh, fearful pain 1 No woman some hath wrought, Some come from want of thought, A few go soon as brought. Such pains arc mine. Chorus. — Oh, dreadful (lain ! I can’t bear pain. In mercy, Vishnu, save me ! THE PAINFUL SERVANT. 43 2. My stomach gives roc pain, Bad friends bring it like lain. Deep troublo leaves the stain. Oh, cruel pain I Great pain may corao from friend, Abuse no balm can mend, Bad men doop pain will send. Such pains are mine. Chorus.— Oh r dreadful pain, &c. 3. What pain comes to tbe poor, Breached promise addeth more. To rule oneself is sore. Oh, biting pain 5 Earth’s pains 1 cannot bear, More still await mo there, Distress must follow care. Such pains arc mine. Chorus.— Oh, dreadful pain, kc. 4. To be, and not to be. To see, and not to see. Arc troubles sore to me. Oh, burning pain ! Oh, Vishnu, lot me know Why pain doth plague nv? r,o, And joy so soon doth go. Hear my prayer. Chorus. — Oh, dreadful pain, Sic. h'ATK. I Each house within the village bounds Contains some early friend. Cut though in each the food-gong sounds No rico to me they lend. When md I walk the village street To mo they come not near, And when 1 strive my priest to meet He starts from me in four. Oh *Hari, Haii, Lakalitui a King, Their stare is maddening. Cboritf. — Oh, whither enn I flee for aid f For ein I now am cursed. The dread decree by Brahma mode’ May never be reversed. 2. When hunger gnaws iny life away To dearest friend I go, For food and drink I humbly piny — Oh God. why lmtc me so ?— They fleo from me, their food they hide, An empty house I find. • Itari ti one of the most popular names of Vishnu and hit Incarnation Krishna. It originally meant “ green.* and then was used to dexribe anything bteutifnl and bright Thai it came to mean the ran. Vishnu has superseded Sorya as the sun -god. and in some of the songs that follow is called " the disc of the sun.” t Is consequence el sin ia a former birth the unfortunate man ia doomed by Brahma to be an oateastr. It nos unalterable fate that drove him to commit the deed for which he has been cursed and rejected by both Ood and man. This curse mat be worked out. rx TK. 45 The sugar-cane which then I spied — What joy was in my mind ! — Oh Ilari, Hnri, Lnkshmi's King, How poisonous the thing! Ckvru*.— Oh. whither, fee. 3. In dreadful heat, for shade I pine. And sit beneath a tree. Still worse on mo the sun doth shine. The curse is there on me. With burning thirst about to die I flee to well and lake Before my eyes they fail and dry. No comfort may 1 take. Oh Hari, Havi, Iak*hmis King, Sweet death to me soon bring. Cfterua— Oh, whither, 4. Before my house rich plantains grow, I may not eat of one. My fate u» written on my brow* And cannot be undone To thee I turn, for refuge seek, And cry — " Have mercy. Lord I" To stem the water flood too weak — Oh save me by thy word. Oh Hari, Hari, Lakahmi’s King, Let me of pardon sing. CAorua.— Ob, whither, &c • The cone noted above is written by t he finger of Gcd on the forcbctd oC the unhappy tinner. M an cannot retd it Coroptrc the murk of the bttat in the Apocilyptc. •IG THE COURSE OF LIFE. 5. No money con I give to llioc, No breath linve I to pray. So tore distress lin» come to me To live I see no way. Oh God, most perfect God, looKdown On one so poor as I. No other hope 1 have. I drown While thou, Oh God, art nigh. Oh Hnri, Hnri, Lnkslnni’s King, Close to thy feet I ding. Chorus.— Oh, whither, Sic. THE COD USE OP LIFE. 1. Within my father's frame three months I passed,* And then, unknowing, came to mothers womb. For nine long months — each day was ns the last — I burned with pain within my living tomb. Before I knew my fate a year hail gone— A year of pain. Oh India, Hear my moon ! Chorus.— Oh, Sir, my youth is past, my youth is paat ! 2. Immured in darkness, vows I mad: to thoe j But sorrow in my birth made me forget Wien childhood came, not yet from sorrow free, To ease my pain my earnest mind was set. The filth of self made hell to gape around ; Yet still I knew thee not — to earth was bound. Chorus. — Oh, Sir, rny youth is past. Sic. • II ti a populir idea that life commences tveelr# months before birth, ind lb»t the lime is spent in the wanner described in the text THE COURSE Of UFK 47 3. My boyhood came. Tlic dreams of sixteen years Ran through my soul. The sports of l>oya Drew me from thee. My follies drowned iny ftanc, And last enticed me on. 1 drew my joys From earth. Oh Vishnu : God : whose feet I left, My sorrow hear, who aiu of hope bereft Choru*.— Oh, Sir. my youth is past, he. 4. I grew to manhood, tall and straight as palm, Made friends with eldere, middk-aged and youth. 1 went from house to house. Without a qualm My life I spent, nor feared nor sought the truth. I foil — the sea of sin was ever nigh— And !a*t the sweetness «>f thy locus *eyc. Cftoflu. — Oh f Sir, my youth is past. &c. 5. Now, old and imbecile, 1 groan with pain,* And sink beneath the swelling of the wave. Patindalhf Vithiila, Lord, disdain Me not> but take me in the ship 1 crave — The sturdy ship, by meditation built. Save quickly, Lord of lakshmi * Cleanse my guilt ! Chm% Oh, Sir, roy youth is pad, iic. • The whole of this wag detent* notice. Flo* direct i* it* coloring ! How cod must they be whose feeling* it represent* 1 Every ttage of life b full of evil— of evil that cannot be avoided, although if? penalty i* exacted to the utteraoit farthing. It ■hould be noted that the one drily n Invoked under three nnm«. Indrm ii the old Vtdic deity, bat i« only known now to the V»l»hn»T» i« mother nune (or Vbfcno, who h»* owrptd the dignity ot bU mtjraic predeertwr. 1 A local uat (or Viihou. no huli* Birr IN COD. fiO HELP BUI IK GUI). 1 . I worshipped a atone I could see and could feel, And therefore have now neither strength nor ally. I visited oft with the fool and the rogue. And, like n mad elephant, wounded my friends. Was wine but for folly; in sinning was brave. Oh Viahnu, Lord, speedily save ! Chorus . — I see how foolish 1 have been And cry against the dread Vishnu — 41 Oh, wilt thou never mark Uieaccno Of strife and sorrow ao uudue.” 2. I made many vows and am weary of sin, For nothing delights or can profit me now. Each temple I've circled and circled again * Till, wt?ary and worn, I am wowc thun before, And nothing is left but thy love or the grave. Oh Hari, Lord, speedily save ! Chorus . — 1 see how foolish I have been, &c. 3. The quack and the fool were as gurus to me. So simple was I, sk> defiled and unclean. Purindala h grace I now strive to obtain, So pure and so good, ever worthy of praise. Thou canst not refuse the protection I crave. Oh Hari, lord, speedily save ! Chorus . — I see how foolish I have been, he. KOI.I.V There follow a series of songs which 