The 'American Idol' alum and his wife are also parents to son Olivier, 3

Ruben Studdard and his wife Kristin are sharing the first look at their newborn daughter!

The American Idol alum, 45, and his wife stopped by The Sherri Shepherd Show on Wednesday, May 1, revealing the first photos of their baby daughter Henri, whom they welcomed in March.

Cuddled in a white blanket, baby Henri rests in a wicker basket in one adorable photo, with a pink satin bow resting on her stomach. On one side of the bow, Henri's initials are monogrammed in white thread, draped over the side of the basket.

Never miss a story — sign up for PEOPLE's free daily newsletter to stay up-to-date on the best of what PEOPLE has to offer, from juicy celebrity news to compelling human interest stories.

Related: Ruben Studdard and Wife Kristin Welcome Baby No. 2, Daughter Henri: 'We Are Thrilled' (Exclusive)

Another adorable photo shows Studdard's 3-year-old son Olivier posing next to his baby sister, wearing pink shorts that match her bow. Olivier also has on a blue and white checkered shirt, smiling for the camera while Henri sleeps.

Other photos show new big brother Olivier bending down to kiss Henri on the head as she's tucked away in her basket.

In March, Studdard and his wife announced that they welcomed their baby daughter, exclusively confirming the news to PEOPLE. Baby Henri, named in honor of Kristin's late father Henry, arrived weighing 6 lbs., 14 oz. at birth.

"We are thrilled to welcome baby Henri into our lives. Big bro Olivier can’t contain his excitement,” the couple told PEOPLE.

Back in November, the couple first revealed their exciting baby news with a video of their son Olivier wearing a “BIG BRO” sweatshirt while waving excitedly to the camera.

“Soon to be a family of four 2024,” a wooden block read alongside a baby onesie that featured the words, “Baby Studdard.” A baby scan was also placed on display.

In February, the singer shared a carousel of maternity photos on Instagram showing Studdard and his wife all dressed up as Kristin cradled her baby bump in a rust-colored gown.

“Celebration of Life, Love and New Beginnings,” Studdard wrote. “We can’t wait to welcome the newest addition to Team Studdard. @kristin_studdard I love you darling!!!”

For more People news, make sure to sign up for our newsletter!