Katy Perry and her fiancé Orlando Bloom looked every inch the doting parents while taking their adorable daughter Daisy to a park in Beverly Hills on Tuesday afternoon.

As the family enjoyed some quality time together, the Dark Horse singer, 39, and her longtime partner, 47, supervised their three-year-old as she rode her scooter around, before hitting the swings.

The Grammy nominee was in full mom mode as she made sure Daisy's helmet was on securely as Bloom filmed their tot climbing up rocks and frolicking around.

For their laid-back outing, the American Idol judge sported a grey sweatsuit, Nike sneakers, a mustard yellow crossbody and black sunglasses.

She opted to wear her dark brown locks in two braids under a beige baseball cap.

In addition to carrying a bottle of water, Perry arrived to the park with a warm beverage from Starbucks in her hand.

Bloom also rocked a casual look, consisting of a black t-shirt, grey pants, a baseball cap and tennis shoes.

The Pirates of the Caribbean star held onto his pooch's leash as they walked around the grass and made the most of the warm spring weather.

His and Perry's latest sighting comes after he reflected on how he first 'fell in love' with the performer on the podcast What Now? With Trevor Noah.

'One of the things that I fell in love with with Katy was like, I didn't really - she hates when I say this, so I have to word it carefully - but her music was everywhere, right?' Orlando recalled on Trevor's podcast.

'When I came up, it was just on every radio station, but I wasn't conscious of - like, it wasn't what I was listening to,' he admitted.

'But I fell in love with Katheryn, this girl from Santa Barbara - and by the way, parents, pastors, living on food stamps. We're not talking glamorous, Montecito,' he noted.

Katy has spoken candidly about growing up in a poor family, falling back on food banks and at times even busking when she was a teenage girl.

Orlando had a boarding school upbringing in England before landing his star-making role in The Lord Of The Rings when he was two days out of drama school.

He reflected that he and Katy 'both meet each other with understanding where we came from, what we worked to do, what we had to do to get to where we got to.'

Orlando explained that the Firework hitmaker 'definitely demands that I evolve, right? And I feel I do the same for her. And that makes for fireworks, pardon the pun, but it also makes for a lot of fun and a lot of growth.'

He added: 'And, you know, I wouldn't change it for anything, even when sometimes it feels like: 'How do we do this?' Because we've got these two giant careers and lives and hers is even, you know, there's even – it's like a universe sometimes.'

Orlando has in the past been remarkably frank about his relationship, including when Daisy was an infant and he told the Guardian that he and Katy were having 'not enough' sex, before clarifying: 'We just had a baby, though.'

Last year, he noted that he and Katy work in 'two very different pools' of the entertainment industry, which can lead to difficulties between them.

'Her pool is not a pool that I necessarily understand, and I think my pool is not a pool that she necessarily understands,' he told Flaunt.

'Sometimes things are really, really, really, challenging. I won't lie. We definitely battle with our emotions and creativity, [but] I think we're both aware of how blessed we are to have uniquely connected in the way that we did at the time that we did, and there's definitely never a dull moment,' shared Orlando.

The pair got engaged in 2019, and the following year they welcomed their daughter, who will turn four in August.

Previously, Perry had been married to Russell Brand, from 2010-2012.

The pair did not have any children.

Bloom, meanwhile, was previously married to Australian supermodel Miranda Kerr, from 2010 until 2013.

Kerr gave birth to their son, Flynn Christopher Blanchard Copeland Bloom, on 6 January 2011.

In February, Kerr welcomed her fourth child - a baby boy named Pierre Kerr Spiegel.

She and her husband, Snapchat CEO Evan Spiegel, who she wed in 2017, have three sons together - baby Pierre, five-year-old Hart, and four-year-old Myles.

Her and Bloom's son, Flynn, is 13.

Last year, Kerr raved that her former spouse has been a great co-parent over the years while appearing on Stellar's podcast Something To Talk About.

'From day one, Orlando and I really made a commitment to put Flynn's needs at the forefront of everything that we do. So that's how he has grown up – with two loving parents that want the best for him,' the 41-year-old said.

'[Flynn] sees that in the way that we communicate and in all of the special moments that we have together, celebrating different milestones and when we go on holidays together,' Miranda continued.

'I think it makes him feel safe knowing that we are always going to put his needs first, and also that we naturally all get along so well. It's pretty special. I feel very lucky.'

The catwalk star went on to explain that she gets along so well with Orlando's fiancée Katy Perry that she sees the American pop star as 'a sister'.

'I literally say how thankful I am for Katy every day,' the beauty gushed, adding that the women often exchange parenting tips.

'I feel very blessed to have that relationship with her. She really is like a sister to me and we've kind of connected from day one,' she said.