Katy Perry's short lived marriage with Russell Brand lasted just 14 months, ending abruptly when the comedian told the pop star over text he was divorcing her.

Brand, 48, has now been accused of rape, sexual assault and emotional abuse by four women who said the alleged incidents took place in the height of his fame, between 2006 and 2013.

The father-of-two has vehemently denied the claims made by The Sunday Times and Channel 4, insisting during his 'time of promiscuity the relationships I had were absolutely always consensual'.

His former wife Perry, who is now engaged to her long term partner Orlando Bloom, has remained silent on the issue so far but questions have been raised about what she might have known, following claims she knew the 'real truth' after their divorce.

Speaking in an interview with Vogue in 2013, the California Gurls singer said she had initially taken 'a lot of responsibility' for the split until she 'found out the real truth'.

Perry said she would keep this 'truth', which she could not 'necessarily disclose', locked in her safe 'for a rainy day'.

It has prompted renewed speculation about what secret the singer had been referring to following the divorce.

The allegations made against Brand last night, one of which includes sexually assaulting a 16-year-old school girl and raping a woman against the wall of his LA home, shortly after he split with Perry.

She said at the time: 'He's a very smart man, and I was in love with him when I married him.

'Let's just say I haven't heard from him since he texted me saying he was divorcing me December 31, 2011.'

Perry added: 'I felt a lot of responsibility for it ending, but then I found out the real truth, which I can't necessarily disclose because I keep it locked in my safe for a rainy day. I let go and I was like: This isn't because of me; this is beyond me. So I have moved on from that. '

In her documentary Part of Me, the singer also reflected on her marriage with Brand, at one point showing her tearful before going on stage at a concert following a row with her then spouse.

After first meeting in 2008, the couple held a lavish wedding in India at the Ranthambore Tiger Sanctuary in Rajasthan in 2010.

Less than two years later they revealed they had divorced citing 'irreconcilable differences'.

Last month, Brand also reflected on their marriage during an episode of Running Wild with Bear Grylls: The Challenge.

He said: 'Some aspects of it were, like, amazing. She's an amazing person, and it was kind of incredible to live for a moment in that eye of the cyclone-type aspect of fame.

'Aside from my sort of feelings of affection for Katy, it's a time that I remember being a little bit chaotic and a bit, for me, to speak for myself, a little disconnected.'

Brand married his current wife, and mother of his two children, Laura Gallacher in 2012.

Meanwhile Perry shares a three-year-old daughter Daisy Dove with her long-term partner Bloom, who she became engaged to in 2019.

Following the claims of abuse made last night the Metropolitan Police has urged any alleged victims to come forward.

The devastating allegations range from when Brand worked at BBC Radio 2 and Channel 4.

Preempting the bombshell report, Brand took to his social media channels on Friday night to strongly deny all the claims.

Refuting the allegations and insisted relationships at the time of his promiscuity' were 'consensual'.

Questions have also been raised about how much BBC and Channel 4 bosses knew about Brand's alleged behaviour, after they were accused of taking female staff members off his shows after concerns were raised.

One woman, who says she was abused by the comic when she was 16 years old and later worked at Channel 4, has alleged that in a meeting in late 2013 or early 2014, Brand's name came up as a potential host for a show.

The woman - who was given the fake name 'Alice' during the investigation, alleged that in response to the claims about his behaviour, bosses suggested removing all female members of staff instead of the comic.

She told The Sunday Times: 'The solution that was offered was that we would take the female staff off the crew - women that have worked hard to get into this industry - now can't work on particular shows because of fear that they might be assaulted or harassed. I was in disbelief.'

Both broadcasters, who have been accused of turning a blind eye, insisted they took all necessary steps over him, but executives could still be called before a Government select committee where MPs will grill them over what they knew.

A BBC spokesperson said: 'The circumstances of the breach were reviewed in detail at the time. We hope that demonstrates that the BBC takes issues seriously and is prepared to act.

'We will always listen to people if they come forward with any concerns, on any issue related to any individual working at the BBC, past or present.'

Brand left the broadcaster following a serious editorial breach in 2008 after he and Jonathan Ross called Fawlty Towers actor Andrew Sachs during Brand's show.

The pair left crude messages on his answerphone - including bragging about sex with Sachs's granddaughter Georgina Baillie, with whom he had a brief relationship.

In Channel 4's documentary, two other women said they felt production companies had 'enabled' Brand's behaviour.

In a statement, Channel 4 said: 'Channel 4 is appalled to learn of these deeply troubling allegations, including behaviour alleged to have taken place on programmes made for Channel 4 between 2004 and 2007.

'We are determined to understand the full nature of what went on. We have carried out extensive document searches and have found no evidence to suggest the alleged incidents were brought to the attention of Channel 4. We will continue to review this in light of any further information we receive, including the accounts of those affected individuals.

'We will be asking the production company who produced the programmes for Channel 4 to investigate these allegations and report their findings properly and satisfactorily to us.

'In the many years since the alleged incidents took place, there has obviously been extensive change in Channel 4's management and commissioning teams. Today, Channel 4 has a zero-tolerance approach to unacceptable behaviour and has a robust Code of Conduct. We require all suppliers to have in place rigorous safeguarding policies and provide whistleblowing support, including Channel 4's Speak Up facility.

'We are committed to ensuring our industry has safe, inclusive and professional working environments.'