Last summer, Wilkinson College student Kiana Kalahele (24′ B.S. Business Administration Marketing, B.A. English Journalism) interned at Hawaii News Now, having been selected to participate in the prestigious Dow Jones News Internship Program. “I was able to cover and report on stories of my own interest, which was a lot of fun,” Kalahele said. “One

Each weekend, “Local Lens” in the Voice of OC features photo essays by Wilkinson journalism students who have covered and engaged with a wide swath of Orange County life, from civic engagement events such as The Great American Write In, to walking Orange County’s coastline. Recently, Visual Journalism student Jack Sunblad published Orange County Debuts

Wilkinson College alum, Scott Marshutz ‘87 (English major with a journalism emphasis) started Marshootz Productions in 2017, producing documentary films that have tackled subjects such as the desalination project in Huntington Beach, endangered marine life on Mataking Island in Malaysia, and Let ‘Em Play, the story of four Southern California para-athletes who advance into the

Angelina Hicks (‘23, Strategic and Corporate Communications, Journalism) was selected as the inaugural Tracy A. Wood Fellow for the Voice of OC. “Angelina represents the best of what Wilkinson’s journalism program has to offer,” said Director of the Journalism Program Dr. Susan Paterno. “As a high school senior, Angelina won the English Department’s Talent Scholarship

Susan F. Paterno, Professor of English and Director of the Journalism Program, unravels the hunger games of higher education’s opaque rules in her forthcoming book, Game On: Why College Admission is Rigged and How to Beat the System. How is it possible that Harvard is more affordable for most American families than the local state

The Panther, the digital daily, PantherBuzz and Prowl magazine are accepting applications for all paid editing positions next semester. Previous academic or professional journalism experience required. Current weekly rate of pay for editors follows… (To calculate semester pay, multiply weekly pay by 18 weeks, e.g. Editor in Chief is paid $9,576 per semester, plus additional

The Orange County Press Club board has selected journalism professor and English internship manager Dennis Foley to receive its highest honor, the Sky Dunlap Award. The award recognizes significant service to Orange County journalism, the Press Club and the community. Foley worked 26 years for the Orange County Register as an assigning editor, the newspaper’s ombudsman,

Adjunct journalism professor, Scott Martelle, published an interview this week in Esquire with the editor of Norman Mailer’s essay collection “Mind of an Outlaw.” Check it out!

Through the Editor-in-Residence program, journalism students work with Orange County Register staff members to report, write, photograph and shoot video for publication on the Register website and in its daily and community newspapers. Dennis Foley, veteran journalism professor; Register editor; and coordinator of newsroom internships, recruitment and training programs, is Chapman’s Editor-in-Residence. Since the program’s inception

Chapman Alumni Mary Plummer (’10, B.A. In English and journalism), former Editor-in-Chief of the Panther, is currently a reporter on NPR’s KPCC education team, having served as an associate producer for KPCC’s “Take Two” and “The Madeleine Brand Show.” Plummer began her career in broadcast at ABC News in London, where she worked on TV