Els Quatre Gats

Workshops and entertainment, 8pm – 11pm

This experimental cabaret and late-night bar, whose activity encompassed exhibition, salons, puppet shows was the city’s answer to Paris’s Le Chat Noir. It also published a journal which encouraged the artistic and literary collaboration characteristic of Modernista activity. The limited exhibition opportunities within established institutions inspired new creative forms of self-promotion for this new generation of artists, and it t was here that the teenage Picasso held his first solo exhibition, which featured charcoal portraits of his artist friends.

We invite you to experience our recreation of Els Quatre Gats, with portrait sketching hosted by artist Gideon Summerfield, with more experiences to be revealed.

El Paral·lel

Immersive experiences, pop-up bars, dance and choir performances, 7pm - 11pm

Our historic Fine Rooms will be transformed to recreate the night-life haunts of Barcelona's newly opened El Paral·lel avenue.

Opening in 1894, El Paral·lel became the home to the city's emerging entertainment industry of cabarets, music halls and theatres, popular with the city's new immigrant community. By 1900 it had developed the nickname 'Montmartre Barcelones'.

We invite you to stroll through our re-imagined Barcelona avenue to meet and mingle with the city's characters while watching dance performances, cabaret, pop-up choir performances and take part in discussions and singalongs.

Experiences include:

Flamenco and Danse Serpentine performances by Lucia Lucidez.

Immersive actors produced by Wilson & Hart.

More to be revealed...

Circo del Espectáculo

Circus shows from 7.30pm

Barcelona’s underground circus scene was growing in the early 1900s, with performances gaining popularity in the new bars across the city.

Tonight, we invite you to experience a glorious troupe of circus acts from the interactive theatrical production company, Gypsy Disco, who will bring to life the energy, sound and style of bohemian Barcelona.

Starting a new life in a loud, liberated and radical city, a flamboyant family of outlandish dreamers roll into Barcelona bringing with them a flurry of tricks, tales and tantalizing performances. Expect dare devilish entertainment, outlandish behavior and spectacular performances as this glorious group of outliers and misfits take the stage. From hoops, contortionists, burlesque and flamenco this show is not to be missed.

Gypsy Disco present their unique Barcelona-inspired circus show at 7.30, 8.30, 9.30 and 10.15pm (performances last approx. 25 minutes)

El Salon

Pop-up talks and discussions

Join in a series of pop-up talks from a range of speakers to hear more about Picasso's formative years in Barcelona, the Modernisme art scene and literary circles.

Picasso's teenage vision of Barcelona

Dr Jacqueline Cockburn, Art Historian and lecturer on Spanish art tells the story of Picasso leaving Malaga for Barcelona by boat aged 14 where he became part of the bohemian avant-garde among the writers and philosophers of Els Quatre Gats.

Talks at 7.15 and 8.15pm, last approx. 10 minutes

Barcelona and the performing arts: the popular and the avant garde

Prof. Maria Delgado explores the avant garde initiatives which shaped Spanish theatre in the pre-Civil War years. Popular entertainments of the 1900s later served as a model for the underground club culture that defied the 1939-75 dictatorship. Maria Delgado tells the story of how Barcelona emerged as a dynamic and experimental space for theatre between 1900 and 1936.

Talks at 7.30 and 8.30pm, last approx. 10 minutes

Modernisme and the media: Picasso's periodicals

Dr Rhiannon McGlade explores how the artist-run cabaret, Els Quatre Gats not only catered to the movers and shakers of the Catalan Modernist movement through its exhibitions and salons, but also kept its clientele up to date on the latest artistic talents and happenings in its eponymous journal. This magazine, as well as its sister publications Pèl & Ploma and Forma, provided a platform to Picasso and his contemporaries to air their views through the medium of essays, satirical cartoons and a range of sketches and paintings. Hear more about the literary circles inhabiting Els Quatre Gats at these talks.

Talks at 7.45 and 8.45pm, last approx. 10 minutes

Dress code: Modernista artiste vs Picasso reinterpreted

We invite you to chose your tribe and channel the avant-garde artist looks of 1900s Barcelona – colourful ruffles, long dresses and vintage suits or painterly smocks or boiler suits. Think modern long flowing gowns in rebellion to bourgeoisie corsets, incorporate colour, opulent details and go big with accessories. Use headpieces, hats, statement earrings and jewellery to channel the art-nouveau aesthetic of the bohemian Modernistas.

Or, get creative and reinterpret some of Picasso’s famous works in costume. Consider geometric shapes, bold colours and textures to become a living art work. Paint bold Picasso-inspired colours on a white gown or shirt, add a headpiece that references his elaborate ballet costumes or simply use make-up or face-paint to reference your favourite Picasso artwork.

Share photos using #RALates and check out our Pinterest board for more inspiration.

£75 - VIP

Make your Saturday night with us extra special with a VIP ticket which includes:

– Access to all RA Lates curated entertainment, experiences, performances and activities.

– After-hours private view and tour of Picasso and Paper.

– Exclusive access to the RA's private members bar The Academicians' Room where you'll receive a complimentary glass of champagne plus access to a secret DJ set with DJ Kobayashi bringing his lively and eclectic set of Middle Eastern funk and R 'n' B.

– Plus you'll receive a goody bag of gifts from the RA upon arrival.

Sold out.