On November, 2-3 within the framework of the exhibition IN THE VISIBILITY ZONE the lecture program will be held: the project participants will speak about their artistic path and bring up the problems exciting them at the moment, involving audience in the dialogue on matters of contemporary art, street art and graffiti.

November, 2

Moskvich Cultural Center, room 115

14:00 – lecture of Viktoria Marchenkova

“Comprehend Chinese Sensuality – you are to live with it”

China as a country of present and future attract that much attention that the problem designated in the title of the lecture has already become obvious. To solve it is to provide a soft bed and bright future for ourselves. Artist Viktoria Marchenkova will speak about her path in artistic diplomacy and search for sacred Chinese sensuality.

16:00 – Dima Filippov. Meeting with the artist.

Dima Filippov is a young talented artist from Altai Krai (Gornyak town). He has graduated Altai State Academy of Culture and Arts (city of Barnaul), after that having moved to Moscow he has followed the courses in the Institute of Contemporary Art. Dima will speak about his artistic path and share secrets concerning art.

November, 2

Moskvich Cultural Center, fireplace room

14:00 – lecture of Alexander Lysov “Art and Technology”

As for me the artistic process is a research that is always connected to the trial and error method, so it is more interesting to analyze their consequences than to create something perfect. The research lies in the area of new technologies, their social effect and possible visual interpretation. Using the latest technologies for creating art also puts the authorship problem in the research area. Unlike the completely handmade art and by virtue of fair self-sufficiency of technology not merely “human” but more likely some kind of “human+technology” complex comes to be an author.

16:00 – lecture of ZukClub “Monumental painting”

The exhibition draws attention to the way of the space constructing by the artist, to the relationship of each work not only with the interior, but also with the exterior. This creates a reflection of the urban landscape in the exhibition. The unifying architectural space of the Moskvich Cultural Center provides an opportunity to play with internal and external perspective.

Street-art and contemporary art, displaying in the exhibition space, in this project interact with each other at the level of the material, scale and idea. Selected directions have their own specific angle of view, finally limiting the field of vision, which has an inner circle and a distant prospect. The title of the exhibition - "WHERE VIEWABLE" - raises the question what locates in our field of view, what is its structure and properties, which nodal points make it an unified space.

We are focused on making visible the common elements in artists’ working with composition. While the differences acquire a maximum contrast.