The Art of Perfection

16+

On October 18, in the pop-up space of Winzavod "Moskvich Mag" with the support of the company Dunlop will present the exhibition The Art of Perfection, which will show the projects of artists selected through an open competition.

The stated topics - reflections on speed of life, movement and perfectionism - attracted a lot of ideas. The response of artists working in various genres, from painting to installation and performance, impressed the expert group headed by the project curator Marina Fyodorovskaya and representatives of "Moskvich Mag", Winzavod and Aidan Studio. The participants of the exhibition were chosen in accordance with the main idea of the project, so the authors, whose works are the closest to the stated topic, were on the long list of finalists.

The announced open call was responded to by 85 authors, the preliminary long list included 20 artists: Evgeny Geguzin; Ekaterina Georg; Irina Grigorieva; Pavel Zudanov; Anton Ketov; Ekaterina Kozina (Vasat); Lyubov Kuzmina (Kukudra art group); Victoria Marchenkova; Alexey Mikulin; Arseniy Neskhodimov; Sergey Oksake; Alyona Repkina; Nelya Rubleva; Gleb Solntsev and Lev Pikalev (Node-Art group); Alexander and Svetlana Roshchenko.

Outside the competition, the curator selected the following artists: Varenye Organism, Veronika Georgieva, Ilmira Bolotyan, Anna Shanaeva, Anton Polsky and Polina Sokolova.

Marina Fedorovska, curator of the exhibition project: "The idea of the exhibition is interpreted by us broadly, which allows us to combine projects built around the theme of human striving for self-improvement, philosophical, dynamic, meditative and sound-art concepts. The shape of the circle inspires artists to reflect on energy circulation, seasonality, joy of life and burnout. And we are pleased that the request that we addressed to the artists was received very vividly. As a result, we had a lot to choose from, creating an exposition for the pop-up space of the Winzavod".

"The Dunlop Tyre Company of the CIS is glad to support such a bright event as the Art Project The Art of Perfection. Participation in the project emphasizes the connection of DUNLOP brand with the speed, movement and rhythm of life through the prism of contemporary art. It is incredibly interesting to learn how talented Russian contemporaries perceive the elusive time, pointing to its essence, to immerse themselves in the history and life of bright and original artists", - said Natalia Dargis, Head of Marketing Department of Dunlop Tyre CIS.

You can follow the project on a special page The Art of Perfection on the site of the media partner of the project "Moskvich Mag".