Cahill (Carroll) Family

After searching for some considerable time for my relatives all originating from Dublin, I think I have finally been able to locate some information which might help in my search. My family name now is Carroll and, after locating the Liverpool census records for the family, they apparently also used the names Caryl and Cahill. I assume that these differences were down to transcription errors at the time. I now think that back in Dublin they were known as Cahill. Father: Terence Cahill (born abt 1827) Sons: Thomas Cahill (born abt 1852) and Cormack (Born abt 1859) all born in Dublin One Dublin Baptism record (St Pauls Arran Quay) that I have found for Cormack Cahil (born 1 September 1859 and baptised 5 September 1859), it shows the mother as Mary Anne Byrne (birth date unknown) and the father as Terence Cahil. It would be great if I had could link any of the other family records together (marriage or Birth/Baptism) and see if that might help me go back down the Cahill and the Byrne lines. (If correct) On the 1881 Liverpool census, Terrance was shown as a widower and Mary Anne was not shown on the 1871 census either and he was just shown as a boarder. This seems to indicate that Mary Anne died in Dublin before they moved to Liverpool and there would also be a death record if this was the case. I would be very grateful for any assistance that might help in our search. It also states on the baptism record that they lived at 48 Bow St at the time of the baptism. Many thanks in anticipation. Best Regards Terry Green Meurant family

Looking for information about the Meurant family, Dublin. Ferdinand Charles Meurant escaped to Belgium during the French Revolution of 1789, and worked in Dublin as an engraver/jeweller/silversmith/watchmaker. However, when he used his skills to forge banknotes, he was tried in Kilmainham, in March 1798, and sentenced to death ; on November 2nd, 1798, this sentence was commuted to transportation for life to Australia. He arrived in Botany Bay on the Minerva on 6th January 1800. He left a wife, Sophia, and 2 children, Edward & John, behind in Dublin. Edward married Anne Richardson in April, 1820, and had 6 children : Arthur, Edward, William, Eliza, Anna & Frances. Arthur Ludd Angel Roberts

This is a 'needle in a haystack' now.Has anyone ever hear of grandad Ludd? Born either Liverpool,or Ireland,poss Dublin,in 1868. I feel after 7 years of searching I have to have one last 'go' to find where he WAS born,and who his Mother was.We think she was Josephine Bartolozzi nee Anderson,later Roberts ,having married Edward Angell Roberts,in Islington London,Ludd's father. We have Ludd 's whereabouts and marriage to Grandma,1900,but the years before that are blank,no census at all until 1901. His daughter (my mother) said Ludd attended Dublin uni: but that isn't confirmed .Thank you. I am looking for my deceased Fathers Family in Dublin

I am looking for my deceased Fathers Family in Dublin. His name was Thomas Oliver Hughes, born 12/07/1950 at Rotunda. Mother Kathleen Hughes (maiden name Smith) and Father Thomas Hughes who was a Dock Porter at the time. I believe they lived at 32 Lr. Kevin St Dublin. He moved to Australia in the late 80's as his brother Brendan lived there. If anyone has any information or advise into how I can track his family I would like to hear from you. Many Thanks. Gibney

Jane Gibney married Henry Willoughby 1851 in Drumcondra, Parish Clonturk, Dublin. Her occupation on marriage certificate is 'dressmaker' and father shown as John Gibney occupation some sort of ...smith but of course no mother is shown. I am trying to find out her mother's name. Also family hearsay understand Jane was sent to a convent in France for her education and I have tried various outlets to find out where but to no avail. (I guess she learnt her dressmaking skills at the convent.) I'd be grateful for any help please. Wm Magrath & Eliza Crowe, Dublin

Looking for info on the siblings, parents, birth dates, places of my g-grandparents. I have their 10 children logged (inc my grandfather Robert Francis) but about William and Eliza's families only guesses. They married in 1862 in Dublin. Both their fathers were Law Clerks - his William, hers James. William may have had a brother Robert Charles Magrath, also a Law Clerk(mCecilia Flynn nee Rich Donnybrook 1865). I have found William's father also William (and possibly Wm snr's brother Christopher) giving evidence to the House of Lords in 1846 and 1854 because of changes at the Court of Chancery that affected their income. In 1846 a Clerk was employed called George Magrath - could be William senior's father? William junior was born in Co. Dublin, but no idea where. Eliza Crowe (b1843?) probably had siblings Hannah (m John Lawler 1855), &Mary Jane (m widower George Graham 1884). They lived mostly in St George's parish. They seem to have had connections with Huguenot descendants/church. Edward Henry Murphy

Edward Henry Murphy is listed as the father of William Murphy who married Mary Sewell in Chelmsford, Essex in 1859. William's home address is listed as only Dublin and William put his (William's)proffesiom, as agent- usually a recruitment agent. Edward is listed on the Marriage Certificate as 'deceased'. William was Anglican (and the Christian names confirm this). Does anyone have any ideas about Edward? The Irish records are horrendous, owing to the burning of the Records Office in 1922. I have no idea of even what parish Edward may have resided in. William also vanishes from the records after his marriage (and just you try to search for a death certificate for the right William Murphy between the dates of 1861 to maybe 1910, or that of a lady now called Mary Murphy!) and the next I can find is that William and Mary's son, (Alfred Sidney) born 1861 in Chelmsford in Essex, England is in Mauritius (1878) and then goes to Australia. So, I have lots of information post Mauritius, but would like to follow up Edward Henry Murphy and maybe find the name of William's mother, which is not listed on the Marriage Certificate. Why did they have to have a common name like Murphy? TUTTY

any one have any ancestors from Dublin, by the name of 'Tutty'. I have been researching these ancestors for a few years, now. But have hit a brick wall, some time back, with this family The last I have is John Tutty born 1822, he came to England to marry, here, and lived in Croydon, Surrey. But his father, also a John was still living there, in Ireland. Can anyone give me any info on him. All I have is from his son's marriage record and that is that John snr was a valet. He would have been born around 1790-1800 I would welcome any details for this family, please, also any info on any Tuttys still there, David Weyman

I have been researching into David Weyman (d. 1822) who composed a book called 'Melodia Sacra' (1812-19). Weyman was a vicar choral at both St Patrick's and Christ Church cathedrals in Dublin in the early 1800s. He had a sister who lived in Cork Street in Dublin and a brother (I think), Edward who was parish clerk at Delgany, Co Wicklow. Edward married Esther Fox from Delgany and they had 5 children. I have searched for previous family history but to no avail. Has anyone heard of them or does anyone know of any Weymans in England or Wales in the 18th century who may have moved to Ireland? William Phillips, house painter

I am searching for family of my grandmother Mary Phillips, born around 1880. The 1911 census of Canada says she was born October 1879 in Ireland. An Irish researcher located a birth certificate for Mary Margaret Phillips born on Upper Kevin St. in Dublin to William Phillips and Mary Brady. I have found William and Mary living at 23 Aungier St. in Dublin in the 1911 census with children, Bridget, 16 and Patrick 20. This census states that Mary had 7 children who were all still living. I would like to prove or disprove that this is my grandmother's family. Mary was known as Minnie. She married Neil McGee in Pueblo, Colorado in 1904, came to Canada about 1906, and died in 1916. SINNOTT/CARSON

I am looking for information on my 3 x Gt Grandfather John Sinnott. All I know is that he was a journeyman upholsterer and was born in Dublin circa 1800. His son was called James (born circa 1825) and he was also a journeyman upholsterer. He married Maria Carson (from Armagh)and they came over to England (Leeds). They had 3 children - Maria (b.1862), James Thomas (b.1864) and John George (b.1866)all born in Leeds. Would be pleased to hear from anyone who has any knowledge of either of these families. Walsh / Allen

Richard Allen married Bridget Walsh 6th Dec 1904 in Registrars Office Dublin. Richard was noted as a Private in East Lancs Regiment - address given was 117 Turners Cottages Ballsbridge. His father named as William Allen (deceased).Father's occupation given as House Painter Bridget Walsh address was given as 11 Pembroke Park. Clyde Road. Her father was noted as James Walsh (deceased) Father's occupation given as Constable in RIC. The marriage was witnessed by Michael Murphy and Mary Duffy. From this marriage it is understood that the married couple eventually moved to Lancashire and had a daughter Christina Mary born in 1906, they lived in Bolton. Lancs. Does anyone have any connection either to the Allen's or Walsh family. Knowing how big families were produced in Ireland, it is more of less impossible to think that Bridget Walsh was an only child, although we know she had a cousin (Bridget Walsh) living in Cleator Moor. Cumbria, who we visited many years ago and who now sadly has passed away. Delplanque of Ballybough County Dublin

On the 1901 Dublin City census Rotunda Ward were a family of three brothers and a sister transcribed as Delplangue. They were living in Great Britain Street and all shown as born Dublin. Adolphe (Head)31 Charley/Charles 21 Eva 18 who kept house for them and Joseph 22. Charles joined the Irish Guards and was killed in action October 1914. The military records show he was born in Ballybough and next of kin Joseph Delplanque USA which means that Joseph emmigrated to USA between 1901 & 1914. My son in law has the name Delplanque in his family and would be interested to find out if there is any link between this family and his English/French ancestors. TRINITY COLLEGE LOOK UP PLEASE!

My G G G G Grandad, Charles Kohler, was apparently at Trinity College in Dublin. He became a merchant regimental tailor with businesses or homes in Sackville Street, Harbour Court (both in Howth),College Green, Dublin, Howth Lodge (about which I can find nothing!) and in London. I can't find when or where he was born or his parents but have been told that this might be shown on his Trinity College records. He is on the registers in Ireland variously from 1848 to 1860 and because he used the .. style dots known as the umlaut over the "O" in the spelling of Kohler it is believed he may have been a German speaker and thus possibly not have been in Ireland too long prior to the time on which he showed up on record. Therefore it would be especially helpful to find his date of birth or his parents names... or anything else! It's said in the family that he was Jewish but I have no evidence to support this. Does anyone have access to the Trinity alumni archives please? I am in County Durham, England, and simply can't afford to purchase them or visit Dublin myself as much as I would dearly love to. Thank you so much. KOHLER, O'DELL in Howth

I am searching for cemetery and death details on Charles Kohler, my G G G G Grandad, who was a tailor in Howth and Dublin central. He is on record from 1848 to 1860 then disappears! My Dad has always believed our ancestry to have been Jewish but the Kohlers aren't on any Irish/Jewish records. Can anyone help please? Oddly, one of Charles' sons, Charles junior, married an Anne ODELL or O'DELL in a Church of Ireland ceremony at St Peters in 1853. My direct ancestor, Thomas, also a son of Charles senior, was born in Dublin but moved to and married in London. If anyone can help I would be forever grateful. Thank you Keating - James & William

These brothers came to New Zealand in about 1863. The only reference we have to Dublin is that James uses Dublin on all the certificates we have - marriage, births of his children, and death. On James death certificate his parents are given as Elizabeth and James with his father's occupation given as Merchant. He died in an accident and we don't know whether his wife had accurate information about him in Ireland.The fact that both James and William obtained miner's rights at the same time makes us assume that they are brothers. tyrrell cardiff campbell

looking for information on my dads parents and their ancesters my father was william tyrrell(born april 1902).his parents were john tyrrell and anne nee cardiff. at one stage they lived in dorset st dublin john(my grandfather) was a plumber and in his latter years worked for the little sisters of the poor ,kilmainham dublin his brothers were hugh(1892)married to haddie mcgonnell ,jack (ex police force)lived in west kensington married catherine,sister cissie, married frank dutton from the u k maggie married frank buckley and connie married to henry noel wright,and lived in fleetwood uk all born in 1800s.my father was a well known butcher in dublin and had shops in moore street dublin.also looking for anne campbell nee tyrrell ,the 1911 census shows her living in balbriggan with her sister rebecca tyrrell