Republic of Ireland

See also

County Tipperary Burials

County Tipperary - Main Page

County Tipperary Monumental Inscriptions, Cemeteries and Graveyards

Historic Buildings of County Tipperary

People Connected to "Ireland" - unknown Specific Place or County

They came from Ireland - Origin Unknown

Irish Families Researched by Geni Users

How to use this Page

Please link any GENI Profiles with links to County Tipperary to this project.

You can ALSO add the earliest heads of families to the list of County Tipperary Families on Geni below (don't forget to link their profiles to the project as well). These would usually be male! Please restrict people added to the list to the earliest head of family!

Note People with links to County Tipperary can be linked to the project but not necessarily added to the list below.

People connected to County Tipperary can also be linked to the following projects.

Historical and Political People

Accommodated by the project Historical County Tipperary (to follow) which covers the History of County Tipperary and historical/political people. Some of these are also listed in the Famous people category.

Famous or Notable People

Those people of note with connections to the county are listed below. Some of these connections are a little tenuous - counties like to lay claim to people of renown! Please visit Famous People of County Tipperary (to follow) and add them to the listing there.

Emigrants

People from County Tipperary who went to the "New world" and were early progenitors in those countries. Where the earliest ancestor is known please add them to the list of "County Tipperary families on Geni" below if that was their roots, or to the appropriate county project.

Where the earliest known ancestor is the emigrant add them to the list below. In some cases if there is a project that covers them in detail please link the project.

Getting Involved Free to follow, request to collaborate

To join the project use the request link under "actions" at the top right of the page.

Visit

Geni's Project Plaza

Working with Projects

Wicked Wiki

Geni Wikitext, Unicode and images which gives a great deal of assistance.

See the discussion Project Help: How to add Text to a Project - Starter Kit to get you going!

Heads of County Tipperary Families on Geni

Names with Bold links are to Geni profiles. Other links take you to external biographical web pages.

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

J

K

L

M

N

O

P

Q

R

S

T

U

V

W

X-Y-Z

Emigrants from County Tipperary

Please add the names of people from County Tipperary who settled in the "New World"

Australia

New Zealand

John Joseph Carroll (ca.1856 Tipperary - 1941 Auckland)

Canada

Mary Anne Cowan (1812 Tipperary - 1907 Newfoundland)

South Africa

James Roach (1790 Tipperary - 1859 Jansenville)

1820 British Settlers in South Africa

South America

Brazil

United States

Other Pages for People Connected to Republic of Ireland Counties

People Connected to County Carlow

People Connected to County Cavan

People Connected to County Clare

People Connected to County Cork

People Connected to County Donegal

People Connected to County Dublin

People Connected to County Galway

People Connected to County Kerry

People Connected to County Kildare

People Connected to County Kilkenny

People Connected to County Laois

People Connected to County Leitrim

People Connected to County Limerick

People Connected to County Longford

People Connected to County Louth

People Connected to County Mayo

People Connected to County Meath

People Connected to County Monaghan

People Connected to County Offaly

People Connected to County Roscommon

People Connected to County Sligo

People Connected to County Waterford

People Connected to County Westmeath

People Connected to County Wexford

People Connected to County Wicklow

this project is in History Link

CWGC - Casualties'

- result of search with "Tipperary" in extra field. Not checked for GENi profiles.

Where the specific location of "Tipperary" hasn't been given I have left the entry in the list.

surname, forename/initials, age, DOD, additional information