The following text is transcribed from a conversation with Gloria Cleary, granddaughter of the late Ellie Cahill (1901–1961), who was a midwife around Gort between approximately 1919 and 1928.

Early Life:

Ellen Cahill, my grandmother, was born on 7th September 1901. She lived in Cloughnakeva, Gort, Co. Galway.

Ellie’s older sisters moved to America and sent money back to help her study medicine. We heard that she wanted to be a doctor, but we don’t know if she was stopped from doing so or if money for training became an issue. We think that Ellie attended Convent School in Gort. She was the youngest in the family, all of whom were born in Gort. Her six sisters had emigrated to America. There was one bachelor brother, Peter, who stayed at home. Her sisters were Katie, Nora, Cis, Delia, Mary Ann, and Rita. All her sisters, except Katie, married. Her mother’s maiden name was Mary O’Connell.

Career:

Ellie trained in nursing at the Coombe Hospital in Dublin. We recall seeing a picture of her in her nurse’s uniform with a head dress that was “short” like a nun’s veil and a crumbie coat. We were told that she delivered Oliver Roache, who was a mechanic in Gort. We might assume that she also knew the Tubber area, as she was close to these districts, but we have no stories from those times. We know that she also worked around Flagmount, Co. Clare.

Family Life:

Ellie met her husband, Thomas Sweeney, when he broke his leg, and she was nursing him. At the time, he was a guard stationed in Killenena, and they moved to Castleconnell, Limerick.

Our mother (Ellie’s daughter) was born in 1932, and she had two older siblings at that point, so we think Ellie had left Gort by 1928. Ellie and Thomas had five children: four girls and one boy. She passed away from cancer on 28th November 1961.

Additional Information:

We don’t think she practiced after marriage for various reasons, but we know that if a guard intended to marry, his prospective wife would have to be vetted and her background checked. Finally, in speaking with the family, there were always plenty of medical books around the house. We know that she liked to play the piano and the accordion, and that Thomas played the violin.