A Brampton Catholic school has been under fire after posting a picture of its new principal with a controversial book on her desk.

A Brampton Catholic school has been under fire after posting a picture of its new principal with a controversial book on her desk.

Cardinal Ambrozic Catholic Secondary School, located in the area of Castlemore Road and The Gore Road, posted a photo of its new principal on Twitter, which sparked many debates.

The photo has then been circulating across platforms and has garnered the attention of mainstream media.

The book, “The Guide for White Women Who Teach Black Boys,” has a provocative title, which has caused confusion about the content.

The Dufferin-Peel Catholic District School Board says the book is a helpful resource on tackling racial and cultural oppression in education.

According to the official summary of the book, it is meant to empower black boys to dream, believe and achieve.

“Schools that routinely fail Black boys are not extraordinary. If we are to succeed in positively shifting outcomes for Black boys and young men, we must first change the way school is “done…” This urgently needed resource is written specifically for [most white women] as a way to help them understand, respect and connect with all of their students,” states Writers Eddie Moore Jr., Ali Michael and Marguerite W. Penick-Parks in the book’s summary. “The Guide for White Women Who Teach Black Boys brings together research, activities, personal stories, and video interviews to help us all embrace the deep realities and thrilling potential of this crucial American task.”

Despite the book’s message, many people took to Twitter to share their concerns.

Though, many people have also praised the principal.

Cardinal Ambrozic’s principal sent home letters on September 6 to parents/guardians explaining the incident.

“The book is written by three educators, one of whom is a Black male author named Dr. Eddie Moore. Dr. Moore has dedicated his life’s work to challenging systemic racism within education and beyond,” says M. Battaglini, principal of Cardinal Ambrozic. “The book’s title has been misinterpreted by some as a book that is there to harm. In actuality, the objective of the book is to address the real problems and challenges associated with racism towards a specific identifiable group and to give real solutions to addressing anti-Black racism. The book is about empowerment and creating a school environment where no one is left behind and where all students can succeed.”

What do you think about Cardinal Ambrozic’s principal reading “The Guide for White Women Who Teach Black Boys?”

INsauga's Editorial Standards and Policies