Kenny Wollesen, a fixture in the downtown New York music scene and most known for his fabulous drumming with the likes of Bill Frisell, John Zorn, and Steven Bernstein, unveils his latest project, Latrala. Here, Wollesen showcases his mastery of mallet instruments, including marimba and vibraphone, alongside a simpatico quintet comprising drummer Nasheet Waits, guitarist Tony Scherr (also known for his bass prowess), keyboardist Anthony Coleman, and bassist Christopher Thomas. It all feels electric, alive, and spirited as Wollesen sonically recreates the energetic vibes of his hometown, Santa Cruz, California.

The album’s leadoff track, “Agora” is one of the loveliest pieces, exuding a sense of bliss and liberation in a full-of-life, tropicalia-infused fusion with guitar and marimba at the center. In their support, there’s delightful synth effects, funky bass groove, and a magnetic syncopated rhythm. The following cuts, “Fifty-Five” and “Sam” are also standouts. The former, a tribute to the emblematic and now extinct New York venue 55 Bar, is rooted in blues and funk rock, hitting at a gut level with a crunchy wah-wah guitar. The latter, inspired by an intriguing neighbor, offers an airy jazz with sleek stylings, featuring a nice simple melodic drive and scorching drumming.

While the playful “Empress” is soaked in slinky jazz funk, evoking the warm and dry summers of Santa Cruz, “Heart in Hand” tenderly embraces R&B balladry, being gently brushed and tactfully layered with exotic touches. “Serious Drinking” offers a whimsical journey through inebriated sounds, syncopation, and shifting rhythms, akin to a hazy dream. The album closes out with the breezy, folk-infused surf music of “Cavalier Da Baton”, where Wollesen plays the saxophone, conjuring the euphoric confidence of The Lounge Lizards.

Throughout the album, Wollesen's compositions exude emotional depth, while the ensemble's joyful performance breathes life into his captivating storytelling. This is fun music.