When Roy O. Disney’s brother Walt Disney died in 1966, he was ready to retire. But his brother’s death kept him on the job to tackle the biggest project the Walt Disney Company had ever done – the creation, building and opening of Walt Disney World.

Roy Disney set about that task by first getting the legislation passed in Florida’s legislature to create a separate quasi-governmental agency for the 41-square-mile property that the company had amassed. Second, he secured financing for the inital project — $400 million — one of the largest and costliest private construction projects at the time.

He also announced a slight change in the name from Disney World to Walt Disney World saying, “So people will always know that it was Walt’s dream.”

RELATED: Remembering Walt Disney’s legacy, 50 years after his death

Roy Disney was seen at times when driving around the rough terrain in a Jeep on the construction site looking skyward and saying “Walt, what have you gotten me into?”

Where Walt was the dreamer, Roy was the doer. He would find the ways to get things done, or get the money to do things like finish “Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs,” the first feature-length animated movie ever made.

Roy Disney helped put together the group of companies, including the then-fledgling television network ABC, to finance one of Walt’s crazy dreams: Disneyland.

Walt and Roy would frequently argue about things that Walt would want to do, but in the end, Roy would find a way to get those things done.

Walt Disney World opened on Oct. 1, 1971 with Roy and Mickey Mouse on the platform for the dedication speech. Soon after, Roy Disney returned to California – intending to work half-time at the company, planning to fully retire in 1973 – when he would have been at the company for 50 years.

But that was not to be, as just a few days before Christmas that year, he was found on the floor of his bedroom. He was taken to St. Joseph’s Hospital in Burbank, the same place Walt died, where he died of a cerebral hemorrhage on Dec. 20, 1971, at age 78.

Today, there is a statue of Roy and Minnie Mouse that stands in Town Square of the Magic Kingdom at Walt Disney World honoring the man that Walt called “the real Disney.”