SUNNYVALE, Calif., [March 1, 2005] - Overture Services, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Yahoo Inc. (NASDAQ: YHOO) today announced that it will be re-branded Yahoo! Search Marketing Solutions and will bring together its sponsored search offerings and Yahoo!'s listings submit products under the new banner. Through Yahoo! Search Marketing Solutions, advertisers of all sizes will enjoy convenient access to the industry's most comprehensive suite of search marketing and related products and services.

Yahoo! Search Marketing Solutions' suite of offerings will include the following products:

Sponsored Search Listings, the flagship search advertising product

Content Match™, Yahoo!'s contextual advertising listings

Local Match™, Yahoo!'s local sponsored search offering

Site Match™ Self Serve and Site Match Xchange™, Yahoo!'s search URL submission products

Yahoo! Product Submit™, the Yahoo! Shopping URL submission program

Yahoo! Express™, the Yahoo! Directory URL submission program

Marketing Console™, which enables advertisers to track campaign performance across multiple online channels

Search Optimizer™, which allows advertisers to improve their campaign performance and reduce the amount of time spent managing their listings

The group will also continue to enhance and expand Yahoo's network of sponsored search distribution sites.

In conjunction with Overture's re-branding, Yahoo! will launch a new Advertising Solutions Center in the U.S., through which businesses can plan and buy Yahoo! Search Marketing Solutions products. In addition, the new center will offer marketers information about Yahoo!'s customized, creative media solutions, providing them access to the largest set of search marketing and brand advertising solutions on the web.

"Our mission is to be essential to marketers of all types around the world," said Ted Meisel, Senior Vice President, Yahoo! Inc. "Unifying all of our search marketing and related products under one banner and one common approach reflects our commitment to integrate and simplify online advertising, allowing businesses of all sizes to take advantage of the Yahoo! search marketing solutions that best fit their marketing goals."

Overture will formally change its brand in the U.S. early next quarter. After the U.S. re-branding is complete, Overture's international markets will be re-branded at a later date - except for Japan and Korea, where the Overture brand will be maintained. Several products within the suite will be re-named once Overture assumes the Yahoo! brand in the U.S.

About Yahoo!

Yahoo! Inc. is the No. 1 Internet brand globally and the most trafficked Internet destination. Headquartered in Sunnyvale, Calif., Yahoo!'s mission is to provide online products and services essential to consumers' lives and offer a full range of marketing solutions to enable businesses to connect with Yahoo!'s hundreds of millions of users worldwide.

Yahoo! Media Contact:

Gaude Lydia Paez

310-749-4963