Early in October, Yahoo! made big news by acquiring Overture, a global leader in commercial search services on the Internet. Just before then, I had spoken with Matt Strain about how marketing can work effectively within a technology-driven company. Matt is the former Director of Strategic Marketing for Overture's Web Search Division, AltaVista.

Matt spoke about how he brings the customer perspective inside the company. Whether working with Engineering, Finance, Sales or the Executive Team, he credits the unique value that marketing brings to the company to its understanding of the customer.

In addition to his role in strategic marketing at AltaVista, Matt is an instructor in the e-commerce program at San Jose State University. (He also teaches an online seminar on e-metrics for us here at MarketingProfs.com.) Matt cites his years with Apple's development in countries throughout South and Southeast Asia as his formative marketing experience. Here is an excerpt from our discussion.

Young: What role does marketing play at Overture's Web Search Division, AltaVista?

Strain: It's an interesting time for us because we're in the process of merging three companies: Overture, AltaVista and the Web search unit of the Norwegian company Fast Search & Transfer. Overture has been primarily a B2B brand; AltaVista has been a consumer brand; and Fast has both a consumer and a B2B side, providing search results to business partners. So there's an exercise now: how does the branding play out?

Young: I imagine there is strong brand recognition for both Overture and AltaVista in their respective customer segments. What are your considerations for developing an integrated solution?

Strain: We are looking at how customers perceive the various companies and their strengths and weaknesses, as well as the emotional ties that people have to a company they've been with for years. If we make a change, we must consider how Overture will be perceived, which the advertising world now sees as one of the strongest successes on the Web, and how AltaVista will be perceived by consumers, which has the legacy of being one of the first great search engines. We are also trying to analyze the issue from a stockholder perspective. Then the question is, Do you go with one brand, or do you do a combination of the two? One area being discussed is the creation of an ingredient brand—an “Intel Inside” approach.

Young: Do you, as a marketer, participate in strategy discussions?

Strain: Yes. I came here at the beginning of the year looking at how we can grow traffic and users at AltaVista. To a novice user, most search engines look fairly similar—a page of text search results. So, with that in mind, I started working with an engineer who had technology that presented search results in a very different way, on about four different dimensions. We looked at what was going on with the leading search engines and asked ourselves what could be done to add significant value and differentiation to the search experience.

Young: What is the role of marketing in this product development process?

Strain: It's critical. We were designing the new search product from the point of view of what would benefit specific segments of customers. In technology, this can be challenging. So what we try to do is work out a couple of different areas looking at the traditional search area, but also combining that with some of the things that are happening in the online community and self-publishing space. Working with Engineering and customer advocates from the outside, we identified the intersection of those three needs.

Young: How have you worked with Product Development and Engineering?

Strain: The engineers had products that were about 85% complete—very exciting, functional prototypes. You have to remember that AltaVista was the pioneer in search and holds an incredible portfolio of search patents. As a marketer, I could quickly identify a project or two and take an almost completed product to market. With one of the engineers, a product manager and a user experience guru, our small nimble group of four set out to complete the product. Working together as a team, we have taken a product that was sitting on someone's hard drive to what I think will be one of the more interesting products to be launched in the search space.

Young: At what point does Finance come into the picture to evaluate investment decisions? How do you make an argument for financial support?

Strain: In this case, it was done in a nontraditional way. Because this product is so different from anything on the market, we could not apply the approach of basing adoption and revenue projections on similar products that had been introduced in the past. Also, we were looking to develop a product that would generate buzz and change the discussion of what is important in the search space. So, my recommendation was that we position the product as having as much value in driving awareness and traffic as in generating short-term revenue.

Young: Did top management understand the need to emphasize efforts to invest in awareness and use?

Strain: Top management definitely understands the need to increase brand awareness and position the company as a leader in the space. Fortunately, because we think it will be a hot product, I believe there will be an excellent opportunity for monetization. However, one option in a case like this is not to burden a new technology with heavy revenue expectations, but to release the product and carefully observe adoption and usage patterns before forcing decisions on how it can best be monetized.

Young: In the post-dot-com era, investors are less patient than they were. Does that make it more difficult for you?

Strain: Yes and no. The nice thing about being a public company is that we don't have traditional VC [venture capital] investors who we need to answer to. So we're able to take a more strategic approach. I suggest thinking of it as having a portfolio of products: some are stable products and we know how they are going to perform, and other products carry a very different risk/reward profile. So far, all senior management is very excited about the opportunity for this type of new product. They see it as a way for AltaVista and Overture to redefine how search is used.

Young: For you, personally, what does it mean to have respect as a marketer in an organization?

Strain: It's a couple of things. As a marketer, it means that others believe that you understand the market and that you can appropriately represent the customer within the company. That's the source of credibility.

Before I came to AltaVista, I was working with Apple and Palm to help them understand specific customer segments. My approach was to conduct in-depth, one-on-one interviews with customers from a specific segment. I recorded these conversations, edited them, and presented [to managers] customers talking about why they did and didn't buy from the company. This made managers uncomfortable.

It did, however, get their attention in a way that a survey or traditional market research couldn't. It also helped to bridge the gap between Sales, Marketing and Engineering by reducing the issues to individuals with faces and personalities.

So I think respect from a marketing standpoint is if the company feels the marketer understands the customer and can represent the customer in those conversations; that's probably the most important thing that they can do. There are the strategic and the tactical marketing things that need to come into play, but if you're able to really understand who your customer is and how they perceive your product and company, that's the source of respect.

Young: How do you know that you have respect?

Strain: A good sign is when others in the company seek out you—especially others from non-Marketing groups. This may range from [attending] Engineering staff meetings through to interviewing non-Marketing staff or representing Marketing in skunk-works projects. I also take being invited out to lunch or drinks as a good indicator of the respect that others have for you. And, lastly, when others come with contentious issues, I take it as a sign that they believe you're the one that will listen and get something done.

Young: You're coming from a company with a B2C perspective and now marrying that with a B2B perspective. Is there any difference between the two in what it means to have respect?