Ben Affleck joined the five-timers club as host, but departing castmember Bill Hader stole the show on Saturday Night Live’s season 38 finale.

Hader gave a cinematic sendoff to Stefon, that perennially irritating scenester kid. During Weekend Update, he faced his usual dressing down from Seth Meyers. Stefon had finally had enough and announced he’d met someone else and was leaving Meyers. Meyers, joined at the Update desk by former co-anchor Amy Poehler, ran after Stefon and found him in a church. What came next was a fantastic (and surprisingly emotional) Graduate-themed segment featuring surprise guest Anderson Cooper as Stefon’s fiancee.

VIDEO: ‘Saturday Night Live’: Watch Bill Hader’s Finest Sketches

In the show’s final sketch, Hader, Fred Armisen, Jason Sudeikis and Taran Killam played a British rock band saying goodbyes on the last night of a tour.

“It’s the last night here,” Armisen said.

“But we’re going to keep playing together,” Hader said.

The band began playing a song and were eventually joined on stage by Armisen’s Portlandia co-star, Carrie Brownstein, Sonic Youth’s Kim Gordon, the Sex Pistols’ Steve Jones, singer-songwriter Aimee Mann, and Dinosaur Jr.’s J Mascis.

Earlier in the week, a report emerged that Armisen and Sudeikis would be leaving the show, and while NBC has not commented on the report, it’s worth nothing that Armisen played the leader of the band. The focus was actually more on Armisen than Hader. Based solely on the sketch, signs point to an Armisen exit in addition to Hader’s.

PHOTOS: From Live TV to the Big Screen: 12 ‘SNL’ Sketches Made Into Movies

But lest we forget the host, it’s time to circle back to Affleck. During his opening monologue, the actor-director addressed his odd Argo Oscars speech in which he thanked wife Jennifer Garner but went on to talk about how marriage takes a lot of work. On SNL, Affleck brought Garner out to discuss what he really meant. What followed was a marital game of ping-pong, with Garner saying she would have described their marriage as “a gift,” not work, and Affleck fumbling for a better explanation.

Affleck finally found his footing: “I want to tell you how I wish I had ended that speech: I couldn’t do any of the things I do without you, without your support. You’re my angel, my wife, my world.”

The moment was shattered when Garner pointed out that he was reading the speech off of a cue card.

SNL moved on to imagine what would happen if Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad (Armisen) were to make a movie about Affleck directing Argo. The result was spectacular. Bengo F— Yourself saw Ahmadinejad wearing a Red Sox cap, doing a Boston accent and pitching his idea for a totally false CIA story. Affleck himself had a role in the movie as a sound technician.

“Why would I appear in this movie? Well, to be honest, I’ve long been looking to appear in a movie worse than Gigli,” Affleck said.

VIDEO: ‘SNL’ Recap: Zach Galifianakis Plays ‘Game of Game of Thrones’

Affleck sported a mustache and a paunch to play a member of a family of emotionally repressed police officers attempting to toast the engagement of a young female relative. In a less-than-successful sketch, he portrayed a counselor at a camp designed to turn gay kids straight.

SNL was on a gay sketch kick, apparently, with a prerecorded segment advertising anti-anxiety medication for people feeling worried about attending perfect gay weddings over the summer. One man (Hader) feared that he was an inadequate dancer at gay weddings, where he said guests knew choreographed Beyonce dances. Another (Bobby Moynihan) never had clothes that were good enough, and a third noted that President Barack Obama had called to congratulate his gay friends at their wedding, yet at his wedding, his grandmother had called Obama the N-word. Not quite as classy of an event.