Pictures show the British birth place, schools, hospitals, art and statues linked to Hollywood star Cary Grant - as ITV launch a series about his life. Actor Grant was born Archibald Leach in Bristol in 1904 - living in the city as a boy before becoming an Oscar winner.

Photos show where he was born, grew up, and the mental hospital his mother was placed in by his father - falsely telling his son she had died. Photo today show 15 Hughenden Road in Bristol where Grant was born and Bishop Road Primary School and the former Fairfield Grammar School he attended.

The 14-year-old Grant was expelled from Fairfield - several explanations were given including being discovered in the girls' lavatory. Images also show Glenside Hospital where when he was nine his alcoholic father placed his depressed mother telling him she was dead.

READ MORE: 'Cary Grant gave me a lift back to work in his chaffeured limo'

READ MORE: Meet the Bristol boy playing Archie, the young Cary Grant in ITV's new drama series

'North by Northwest' star Grant did not learn his mother was still alive until he was 31 - his father confessing shortly before his own death.

The pictures also show a mural to the actor in Bristol and his statue in the city's Millennium square. Grant's dad worked as a tailor's presser at a clothes factory, while his mother worked as a seamstress.

His older brother John William Elias Leach died of tuberculous meningitis a day before his first birthday. He became attracted to theatre at a young age when he visited the Bristol Hippodrome.

At 16, he went as a stage performer with the Pender Troupe for a tour of the US and later decided to stay there. He then found fame and later made arrangements for his mother to leave the institution in June 1935 shortly after he learned of her whereabouts.

He visited her in October 1938 after filming was completed for Gunga Din. Grant died on November 29, 1986 - aged 82. ITV's Archie is an 2023 British television drama series about his life starring Jason Isaacs in the lead role.