Cary Lee Grant passed away on Friday, June 28, 2024. Cary was born in Thomson, GA, the son of Edward Lee Grant and Mary Jean (Moore) Grant on September 11, 1953. Cary always liked to say that he was his mother’s 21’st birthday present as her birthday was September 10th. Cary attended schools in Thomson and graduated from Thomson High School as valedictorian. He then attended Mercer University in Macon, GA, graduating with a B.S. in Business Administration. During his time at Mercer, Cary was a member of SAE fraternity. After graduating, he went to work in Jacksonville, FL, Orlando, FL and Houston, TX for several years. On July 18, 1994, Cary was hired as the first employee for Prestage Farms in SC. Cary was very proud of working for Prestage and enjoyed watching the company grow and become an industry leader over his thirty years. This job, his work family and his growers were his second family. There was never a moment when he did not light up when speaking of them. Cary was recognized and honored in 2023 by Prestage for his years of service and received an engraved watch that he absolutely treasured. Without a doubt though, Cary’s greatest accomplishment in life was becoming a father to his daughters, Madison, and Faith. He was the quintessential “girl dad” and loved and supported his girls every day. Those girls are the thing in life which he loved most and of whom he was most proud. They have adored him back. Cary married Mary Margaret in 2014 and became a stepfather to her two children and a special nephew.

To know Cary was to love him. Cary was known for his kindness, gentleness, selfless nature, compassion, and willingness to help others. Cary had a smile that could brighten a room. Cary never met a stranger and was always willing to lend a hand to someone in need and offer a word of encouragement. He loved the Georgia Bulldogs and was ecstatic when they won the National Championship back-to-back. Cary, Madison, and Faith bleed black and red. Outside of football season, The Master’s Tournament was another passion. He enjoyed attending and loved walking Augusta National. Cary was happiest spending time with family, enjoying his new home in Georgetown, SC, loving on his animals and enjoying a cold beer and fellowship with friends and family.

Despite his serious health condition that arose in March 2024, Cary remained hopeful, always believing that tomorrow would be better. He fought valiantly and rarely complained. His perseverance and compassion for others remained unwavering.

Cary is survived by his wife, Mary Margaret, of Camden, SC, daughters Madison Grant of Clover, SC and Faith Grant of Camden, SC, brothers Tim Grant (Eileen) of Woodstock, GA and Thomson, GA, and Eddie Grant of Camden, SC. Additionally, Cary is survived by stepson, Clay Hopkins (Lainey) of Johns Island, SC, nephew Hunter Grant (Lexi) of Seven Springs, NC, nephew Travis Grant (Hannah) of Philadelphia, PA and nephew Will Camp of Cayce, SC. Other much loved family members are granddaughter Catherine “Cricket” Reynolds Hopkins of Johns Island SC and a host of dear family and family-like friends in South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Texas, and North Carolina. Cary is predeceased by his beloved parents.

A celebration of Cary Grant’s life will be held on Saturday, July 13th from 2 PM – 5 PM at 1011 Galleria in Camden, SC. The family asks that you wear red and black in honor of Cary’s love for the Georgia Bulldogs. Kornegay Funeral Home, Camden is supporting the family.

The family would like to extend their gratitude to Drs. Garman, Christenberry and Gill with MUSC Health along with special friends Christi Atkinson Johnson, Katie Morris and Grace Bertram for their loving and compassionate care and support of our family while Cary was at MUSC Health Kershaw Medical Center.

In lieu of flowers, the family requests memorials to be made to the Kershaw County Humane Society or the SC Cotton Museum in Cary’s name.

1 Peter 3:8 “Finally, all of you, be like-minded, be sympathetic, love one another, be compassionate and humble”.