The Cairo Evening Citizen, Tuesday, 2 Jan 1912:

John White, an aged negro employed by Dr. Cary for about twelve years, died Monday. It is thought his death was the result of a wound he received several days ago by being kicked by a horse.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Wednesday, 3 Jan 1912:

DEATH CLAIMED E. J. AYRES TUESDAY

Former Resident of Villa Ridge Passed Away in California

News came today of the death of Mr. E. J. Ayers, formerly a prominent fruit grower of Villa Ridge. He passed away at Artesia, Cal., where he and Mrs. Ayres were living with their daughter.

Mr. Ayres leaves besides his widow, a son and two daughters, Dr. Phillip Ayres and Mrs. Ruth Phillips and Mrs. Jenning Mannington.

Since Mr. Ayres left southern Illinois for California, he has been in extremely poor health.

(Henry N. Mannington, 27, of Stewart, Iowa, banker, born in Genesco, Ill., son of John Mannington and Mary Nourse, married Jennie Y. Ayers, daughter of Elias Ayers and Ardelia Wheelock, on 6 Sep 1894, in Pulaski Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

Mrs. Grace D. Barnard was taken to St. Mary's Infirmary Tuesday afternoon, where she underwent a surgical operation this morning. She appeared to stand the operation well, but her recovery is doubtful.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Thursday, 4 Jan 1912:

SOL FARNBAKER STRICK BY DEATH

Passed Away Wednesday Night after Long Illness

The sudden death of Solomon Farnbaker, who died at 10:30 o'clock last night at his home at 422 Seventh Street, was a great shock to his relatives and friends. He died while sitting in a chair, conversing with his physician, and appeared to be in good health.

The deceased has been ill since October 26, with complication of heart and lung trouble. For sixty-four days and nights he has been unable to lie in bed and was compelled to sit up in a chair. The last ten days he improved and was able to be out.

The deceased was 61 years of age and was born August 31, 1850, at Natchez, Miss. He received his education in the clothing business in New York, Paducah, and Evansville. He came to Cairo from Evansville in 1873 and engaged in the clothing business in connection with his father. In 1887, he engaged in the newspaper business and published the Cairo People. Recently he engaged in the wholesale mail order business and for the last eighteen months prior to his illness was traveling salesman for the Cairo Brewing Company.

The surviving members are a wife, three brothers, John, of California; Joseph, of Memphis; and Maurice J., of 420 Seventh Street, of this city.

The funeral will be held tomorrow afternoon. Services will be held at the house by Rev. James Downey of St. Patrick's Church, and a special train will leave the foot of Fourteenth Street for Villa Ridge cemetery.

Mrs. W. A. Spann Dead

Word was received here (Vienna) Wednesday of last week that Mrs. W. A. Spann had died at her home in Marion. Her former name was Mrs. Mollie Goodall, and she had been married to Mr. Spann some two months or more. Mrs. L. J. Smith and Mrs. R. E. Gillespie, daughters of Mr. Spann, left here Monday afternoon for Marion, in response to the information that their stepmother was very low.

(Levi J. Smith married Lula Spann on 29 Apr 1895, in Johnson Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

OMISSIONS MADE IN CITIZEN'S REVEW OF THE YEAR 1911

In the necrology of the year, published in The Citizen, the name of Mrs. Anna M. Parks, who died in St. Louis, on Feb. 15, was unintentionally omitted. Mrs. Parks was one of the old residents of Cairo.

FUNERAL NOTICE

FARNBAKER—Died, Wednesday evening, Jan. 3, Solomon Farnbaker.

Funeral services will be held at the family residence, No. 422 Seventh Street, Friday, at 1:45 o'clock, conducted by Rev. James Downey. Remains will be taken by special Illinois Central train leaving Second Street at 2:45 p.m. for Villa Ridge cemetery, where interment will be made in Calvary Cemetery.

Friends of the family are invited.

Mr. and Mrs. S. O. Bowles left this week for Madisonville, Ky., where they attended the funeral of the latter's mother. (Mound City)

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Friday, 5 Jan 1912:

FARNBAKER FUNERAL WAS HELD TODAY

The funeral of Solomon Farnbaker was held this afternoon. Services were held at 1:30 o'clock at the residence at 422 Seventh Street, conducted by Rev. James Downey. A special train left the Illinois Central station at 3 o'clock for Villa Ridge cemetery, where interment was made. The pallbearers were: Guy Eichenberg, N. Sandler, M. J. Howley, James Barrow, F. Teichman, and John Sanders.

Seymore Hutchison left Thursday for Des Moines, Iowa, after attending the funeral of his mother, Mrs. B. Hutchison. (Mound City)

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Saturday, 6 Jan 1912:

GRAND JURY PROBES WICKLIFFE HOMICIDE

Frank Turner in Jail for Murder of John Clay

The Ballard County grand jury today began investigation of the shooting Friday afternoon of John Clay, aged 24, by Frank Turner, which resulted in the death of the young man. Turner is in jail awaiting the action of the grand jury.

The homicide, which was prompted by jealousy, occurred on the street. Turner called Clay from his home and shot him as they were walking along the street. As Clay started to run, Turner followed him firing. In all it is said five bullets were lodged in Clay’s body.

It is stated that Mrs. Turner appealed to Clay for money to buy a pair of shoes. This angered Turner and he planned the murder of Clay. Clay is a laborer, but Turner does little to make a living for his family.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Monday, 8 Jan 1912:

FUNERAL NOTICE

Smith—Died Sunday, January 7, 1912, Mrs. Mary E. Smith, aged 73 years.

Funeral services will be held Wednesday morning at St. Joseph's Church, at 8:30 o'clock. Remains will be taken to Villa Ridge cemetery for interment. Funeral train will leave foot of Fourteenth Street at 9:45 a.m. Friends of the family are invited to attend.

FUNERAL NOTICE

Brackey—Died this morning, of pneumonia, the infant child of Mr. and Mrs. Ed. Brackey.

Funeral services will be held at the family residence No. 727 Thirty-fifth Street, Tuesday afternoon at 1 o'clock, conducted by Rev. James Gillen. Remains will be taken to Beech Grove Cemetery for interment by special interurban car, leaving Thirty-fourth and Highland. Friends of the family are invited.

INFANT SON OF ED BRACKEY FOUND DEAD THIS MORNING

Edward Brackey, the four-month-old son of Mr. and Mrs. Edward J. Brackey, of No. 727 Thirty-seventh Street, was found dead in bed at 6 o'clock this morning. Coroner McManus was notified and held the inquest at the residence. The verdict of the jury was that the child had come to its death from natural causes. The remains were taken in charge by Mrs. M. E. Feith, and the funeral will probably be held tomorrow. The body will probably be taken to Beech Grove on an Interurban car.

MRS. IDA PRUITT PASSED AWAY TODAY

Mrs. Ida Pruitt died this morning at her home No. 324 ½ Thirty-Second Street. The remains were taken in charge by E. A. Burke. Services will be held tomorrow at noon at the residence conducted by Rev. L. G. Graham. Special interurban car will leave at 1:30 o'clock for Beech Grove Cemetery.

OLD RESIDENT DIED SUNDAY

Mrs. Mary Smith, Aged 63 Years, Passed Away after Brief Illness

Mrs. Mary Smith, aged 63 years, died at 10:20 o'clock last night at the home of her daughter, Mrs. F. O. Johnson, No. 2702 Sycamore Street. She was an old resident of Cairo and resided here nearly all of her life. Death was caused by a complication of diseases of which she had been suffering the past week.

The deceased was born in Ireland and came to this country and direct to Cairo when she was 10 years of age. She is the widow of John Smith and before her marriage, she was Miss Mary Hughes. John Smith was a prominent merchant of Cairo and an old resident. The deceased was a member of St. Joseph's Church and the Catholic Knights. For some time she has been making her home with her daughter, Mrs. Johnson.

Surviving members are two children, Mrs. F. O. Johnson, of this city, and son, Martin, of St. Louis, a sister, Mrs. E. C. Smith, of East Prairie, Mo. The out-of-town relatives have already survived. Mrs. James Sullivan, a sister-in-law of East St. Louis is expected to arrive today.

The funeral arrangements have not been completed.

(John Smith married Mary Hughes on 3 Feb 1870, in Alexander Co., Ill. James C. Sullivan married Hannah Smith on 11 Sep 1883, in Alexander Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN

Notice is hereby given that I, Sadie Hardin, who was tried and convicted in the Circuit Court of Alexander County on May 23rd A.D. 1906 for the alleged murder of Albert Brown, will at the January session A.D. 1912 of the Board of Pardons of the State of Illinois make application to the Board to be pardoned and liberated from the Illinois State penitentiary at Joliet, Illinois.

Sadie Hardin

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Wednesday, 10 Jan 1912:

FUNERAL OF MRS. SMITH HELD THIS MORNING

The funeral of Mrs. Mary Smith, who died Sunday at the home of her daughter, Mrs. F. O. Johnson, of No. 2702 Sycamore Street, was held today. Services were held at St. Joseph's Church and mass at 8:30 o'clock this morning and a special train on the Illinois Central departed from the foot of Fourteenth Street for Villa Ridge, where interment was made. The pallbearers were: Louis Zanon, Tom Galvin, David Barry, S. Chapman, Arthur Magner, Frank Thomas, A. F. DeBaun, P. T. Langan, P. J. Purcell, Patrick Mahoney, James Galligan, and W. P. Greaney.

CARD OF THANKS

We desire to extend our sincere thanks to our friends and neighbors for their kindness at the death of our baby, Edward T. Brackey.

Mr. and Mrs. Edward J. Brackey

The infant baby of Mr. and Mrs. Will Britt died on last Sunday afternoon after a long illness. (Pulaski)

A. M. Crawford, an old man of about ¾ Cherokee Indian, and who lived alone and was quite feeble, was found dead in his home here (Pulaski) early Monday morning. He had evidently frozen to death, as he was found lying on the floor very thinly clad. Esq. J. B. Kennedy empaneled a jury and held an inquest which rendered a verdict of dead from cold and exposure.

NEGRO CAUGHT IN MACHINERY AND SERIOUSLY INJURED

Henry Lewis, colored, an employee of the Roberts Cotton Oil Mill, was seriously injured last night by being caught in the machinery while working on the night shift. He is confined at St. Mary's Infirmary and is in a very critical condition.

Lewis was caught in a pulley of the rapid moving machinery and was carried around several times before he could be rescued. He was rushed to the office of Drs. Gorden and McNeimer and given immediate attention. Both legs and his right arm were broken. His left leg was badly lacerated and the arm was broken at the shoulder. He also has a number of bruises about the body.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Thursday, 11 Jan 1912:

Charles Miller has been called to Iowa to answer questions relating to a will that he was remembered in by his father. We are informed that the property left him is very valuable. (Tamms)

Cyrus (Bud) Miller was called to Mill Creek Saturday to the bedside of his father, Paul Miller, who is very sick. Mr. Paul Miller is one of Union County's prominent farmers. (Tamms)

Died, January 8, Guy Cruse, aged about 19. He had suffered from scarlet fever for about 6 weeks and fought hard for life until Monday morning, when it became too much for him, when he had to give up. The sympathy of all is with the parents and brother, which survive him. (Mill Creek)

The baby of Scott Warren, living in the country east of town (Thebes), is dead.

The Italian farmer in the hills, who lost two children by diphtheria a short time ago, lost another child the first of the week and one more is very low. (McClure)

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Friday, 12 Jan 1912:

OBITUARY

Ida, the beloved wife of Alonzo Pruitt, departed this life Jan. 8th after a long illness of tuberculosis. She was 34 years of age. She lived a sweet, patient Christian life, although she was a great sufferer, yet she never murmured on account of her affliction. She leaves besides her husband, one sister, Mrs. Roger Barbee, four aunts and a host of friends to mourn her death. Her funeral was preached by Rev. L. G. Graham, pastor of the Calvary Baptist Church, of which she was a member, and the body was laid to rest in Beech Grove Cemetery.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Saturday, 13 Jan 1912:

SECTION FOREMAN FROZEN TO DEATH

Henry Hacke, Aged 35 Years, Succumbs to Cold Weather near Olive Branch

REMAINS FOUND BY FRIENDS LAST NIGHT

On Railroad Track between Olive Branch and Fayville—Deceased Unmarried—Has Sister in Iowa.

The first fatality, as a result of the cold weather, reported in this section, is that of Henry Hacke, section foreman for the C. & E. I. Railroad.

Mr. Hacke left Olive Branch Thursday morning for Fayville, where he was going to clean out some switches. He was on his way back to Olive Branch, when he succumbed to the cold and his remains were picked up by friends Friday evening about 6 o'clock.

The deceased is said to be unmarried and made his headquarters at Olive Branch. He has a sister residing at Muscatine, Iowa, and another in New York. The sister at Muscatine has been notified of her brother's death, but the exact location of the other sister had not yet been learned. The deceased was about 35 years of age.

Coroner McManus left this morning for Olive Branch to hold an inquest over the remains.

Judge J. B. Collins was called to Belknap by the death of his sister, Mrs. Fannie Adams.

Henry Lewis, the negro who was injured Tuesday night at the Roberts Cotton Seed Oil Mill, died this morning at St. Mary's Infirmary. The remains were taken in charge of E. A. Burke. Lewis was suffering from two broken legs, a broken arm and badly lacerated limbs. He was working on the night shift and was caught in a pulley. He was pulled around a number of times before the machinery could be stopped.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Monday, 15 Jan 1912:

OLD RESIDENT OF CAIRO PASSED AWAY SUNDAY

John A. Nickles, one of the oldest residents of Cairo, aged 84 years, died Sunday morning at 3:35 o'clock at his home, No. 2814 Commercial. Death was caused by a paralytic stroke, of which the deceased had been suffering for some time.

The deceased was born in Clinnenburg, Germany, October 1, 1827. He came to this country in 1848 and in 1877 came to Cairo. Immediately after his arrival here, he opened a shoe shop on Ohio Street above Eighth and has been in the shoe repairing business ever since. From Ohio Levee he moved his shop to No. 1109 Washington Avenue and later to a store next to his residence at No. 2814 Commercial Avenue.

The surviving members are a wife and three sons, John, Joseph, and Theodore, the latter of Paducah, Ky.

Funeral services will be held Tuesday afternoon at the residence, conducted by Rev. M. H. Loar of the First Methodist Church. Interment will be held at Villa Ridge cemetery.

The deceased was a member of Cairo Lodge No. 237 A. F. & A.M., who will have charge of the funeral.

FUNERAL NOTICE

Nickels—Died Sunday morning, January 14, John A. Nickles, aged 84 years.

Funeral service will be held at the family residence, 2814 Commercial Avenue, Tuesday, January 16, at 1:30 p.m. Remains will be taken by special train leaving Fourteenth Street at 2:45 o'clock for Villa Ridge cemetery. Friends of the family invited.

MASONIC NOTICE

All members of Cairo Lodge No. 237 A. F. & A.M. and all visiting brothers are requested to meet at the Masonic Hall at 1 p.m. Tuesday, January 16th, 1912, for the purpose of attending the funeral of our late brother, John A. Nickles.

C. S. Bourque, Worthy Master

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Tuesday, 16 Jan 1912:

COTTON BELT OFFICIAL KILLED

Guy L. Stewart, Industrial Agent, Burned to Death in His Car

ACCIDENT OCCURRED NEAR THEBES BRIDGE

Cotton Belt and C. & E. I. Trains Collided and Crashed into Iron Mountain Freight

Kelso, Mo., Jan. 16.—Guy L. Stewart, of St. Louis, agricultural and industrial agent for the Cotton Belt, was burned to death today in a wreck near here. The Cotton Belt passenger train and a Chicago & Eastern Illinois passenger collided and both of them crushed into an Iron Mountain freight train in the railroad yards. Stewart was in his private car which took fire. It was telescoped and rescuers were unable to reach him. One Pullman car was also telescoped, but the passengers escaped injury. Three trainmen were injured. The C & E. I. train was running late when the collision occurred.

REPORT THAT MAN DROWNED BELIEVED TO BE HOAX

The report that a man was drowned in the Mississippi River, while walking over on the ice, alarmed the relatives of Albert Norris, operator for the Cotton Belt at Bird's Point. He could not be located at the Point, but it was learned later that he went over on the transfer, which was late. It is believed the story was a hoax.

Friends of Rev. and Mrs. A. S. Buchanan, of Indianapolis, formerly of Cairo, will be sorry to hear of the serious illness of their son, Milo, who has been suffering for the last ten days with an attack of typhoid fever. His condition is considered critical.

PATRICK CARMODAY PASSED AWAY TODAY AT INFIRMARY

Patrick Carmoday, aged 36 years, passed away early this morning at St. Mary's Infirmary, of pneumonia. The deceased is survived by a brother, Thomas Carmody, two aunts, Mrs. Ellen Levitt, and Mrs. Mary Driscoll, and two uncles, Peter Doud and Patrick Carmody.

The funeral services will be held tomorrow morning at St. Patrick's Church and interment made at Villa Ridge cemetery.

The deceased was formerly employed at the Andrew Lohr Bottling Company.

(Michael Driscoll married Mary Doud on 22 Sep 1887, in Alexander Co., Ill. Martin Carmody married Bridget Doud on 31 Jan 1869, in Alexander Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

FUNERAL NOTICE

Carmoday—Died, Monday, January 16th, 1912, aged 36 years. Funeral services will be held Wednesday morning at 8:30 o'clock at St. Patrick’s Church. Cortege will leave the residence of Mrs. Ellen Levitt, No. 410 Cross Street, at 8 o'clock. Interment will be made at Villa Ridge. Friends of the family are invited to attend.

Died, in Anna, on last Monday night, Mrs. M. M. Veach, at the age of 72 years. She leaves only one child, Mrs. Eugene Leonard, at whose home she died. The remains were brought to Vienna on the 10 o'clock train Thursday morning for interment, accompanied by relatives and friends. The funeral services were held Thursday afternoon at the home of Miss Emma Rebman, who is a niece of the deceased, conducted by Eld. I. A. J. Parker, followed by interment in the Masonic Cemetery.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Wednesday, 17 Jan 1912:

FORMER CAIRO BOY AT DEATH'S DOOR

The condition of Milo Buchanan, son of Rev. and Mrs. A. S. Buchanan, of Indianapolis, formerly of Cairo, is more serious today. M. Easterday received a message this morning from Rev. Buchanan. The message stated that Milo was very low with an attack of typhoid. He has been ill since before Christmas. Two nurses are attending him. The patient is delirious and has a temperature of 104 and pulse 108.

The funeral of John Nickles, who died early Sunday morning at his residence at 2814 Commercial Avenue, was held Tuesday afternoon. Services were held at the residence by Rev. M. H. Loar and a special train left Fourteenth Street for Villa Ridge cemetery where interment was made.

Patrick Carmoday, who died early Tuesday morning at St. Mary's Infirmary, was buried this morning. Services were held at St. Patrick’s Church at 8:30 o'clock conducted by Rev. James Downey. A special train left Fourteenth Street for Villa Ridge cemetery, where interment was made.

Mrs. Harmon, of Des Moines, Ia., who has been visiting at the home of B. Hutchison and family since the death of her sister, returned to her home Tuesday. (Mound City)

Little Hallie Upchurch, son of Mrs. John Upchurch, of this place (Olmsted), died Sunday afternoon at his home at 4:25, the cause of death being pneumonia in both lungs. Hallie was a bright little fellow of three years and loved by all who knew him. Mr. and Mrs. Upchurch have the heartfelt sympathy of the community in their sad bereavement.

Died, at his home in Ullin, Jan. 11, 1912, Charles H. Kruse, son of G. B. Kruse, of this place (Olmsted). Death was caused from catarrh of the stomach, which had given him considerable trouble for about two years. He was brought to Olmsted Friday afternoon, where the funeral was preached Saturday afternoon at 2 o'clock by Brother J. L. Martin, at the home of John Johnson. Burial at Masonic Cemetery. Besides his many friends, he leaves a wife and three children, an aged father and sisters to mourn his death. An abundance of beautiful carnations with lilies and hyacinths were presented by C. G. Willard, of Mound City.

The pallbearers were Hiram Calvin, J. W. Cook, George Lilly, Charles Kratz, Dan McDaniels, and Rudolph Dick.

(His marker in the Masonic Cemetery at Olmsted reads: Charles H. Kruse Died Jan. 11, 1912 Aged 31 Years.—Darrel Dexter)

Mr. and Mrs. Farnbrough from the south were here Saturday to attend the funeral of Charles Kruse, brother of Mrs. Farnbrough. If it had not been for the timely assistance of Lige and Fred Goines, Friday night of last week, Uncle George Kruse, who is quite aged and dead, would have probably perished in the snow and blizzard that was raging at the time. Mr. Kruse had fallen the second time in the snow, but the boys happened along in time to get him up and into a neighbor's where he was revived.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Thursday, 18 Jan 1912:

CAIRO MAN KILLS SELF AT SIKESTON

George Cleige Took Dose of Carbolic Acid Wednesday with Fatal Effect

TRIED TO SLAY WIFE WITH A KNIFE

Deceased Member of Knights Pythias Lodge of This City—Worked at Singer

Sikeston, Mo., Jan. 18—George Cleige, of Cairo, Ill., killed himself here last night by taking carbolic acid. In the early part of the evening, he went to the home of his wife from whom he was separated and tried to slay her with a knife. Later, he took his own life. He was dead when found this morning. Cleige is said to have been a member of the K. of P. Lodge at Cairo.

The deceased is a cousin of Henry Etz, engineer at the Halliday Mill and of Mrs. Rosena Elias. He was about 40 years of age and was formerly employed at the Singer. Deceased went to Sikeston only a few days ago with the intention of bringing his wife back to Cairo, but it is said she refused to accompany him, which resulted in his rash act.

(The 19 Jan 1912, issue reported his name was George Kruge. Harry Elias married Rosina Ward on 15 May 1900, in Alexander Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Friday, 19 Jan 1912:

FUNERAL OF CAIRO MAN WAS HELD AT SIKESTON TODAY

The funeral of George Kruge, who ended his life at Sikeston, Mo., Wednesday night by taking carbolic acid, was held this afternoon and the remains interred at Sikeston.

Cairo Lodge No. 173 Knights of Pythias of which the deceased was a member, made arrangements with the Sikeston Lodge to take charge of the remains. Fred Dauksch, chancellor commander of the local lodge, made arrangements last evening and several of the members from Cairo went to Sikeston today to attend the funeral.

The name of the deceased was not George Cleige, as has been stated. The name was misspelled in the dispatch received from Sikeston. The deceased and his wife formerly resided at No. 215 Thirty-fourth Street in this city. He had been married about a year and until recently was employed by the Singer Manufacturing Company.

NEGRO CONFESSES TO ULLIN MURDER

Otis Meals, Arrested at New Orleans, Confesses to Shooting of Marshal Chastine on August 19th

Otis Meals, a negro arrested at New Orleans, has confessed to the killing of Marshal Robert Chastine of Ullin on August 19th. Sheriff Wehrenberg, of Mound City, received a message today from the Chief of Police at New Orleans, starting that the negro had been captured there and that he had confessed to the crime. An officer has been sent after him and he will be brought here in a few days as he does not demand a requisition.

The father and brother of Meals were arrested after the shooting and were sentenced to the penitentiary. They were implicated, but Otis was the one who did the shooting. He has been tracked by an officer for some time and was finally located at New Orleans.

Immediately after his arrest, he confessed to the killing and was willing to return.

THREE KILLED IN WRECK

North and South Bound Frisco Freight Trains Crash Together near Wittenberg, Mo.

Cape Girardeau, Mo., Jan. 19.—Three trainmen were killed and one injured fatally in a head-on collision between two freight trains on the Cape Girardeau division of the Frisco Railroad near Wittenberg.

The dead are: Engineer Charles Baird, Fireman W. Clark, and Brakeman G. Sutton, all of the northbound train.

Brakeman H. Hilthouse of the southbound train probably will die.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Saturday, 20 Jan 1912:

OLD RESIDENT OF CAIRO PASSED AWAY FRIDAY

Mrs. Catherine Cooper, an old Cairoite, died Friday afternoon at 4:40 o'clock at the home of her daughter, Mrs. Fred Strautz, of No. 2003 Washington. Death was caused by old age. The deceased has been ill for the past six months, but only last week did her condition become serious.

She was born at Buffalo, N.Y., and came to Cairo with her parents, while she was very young. She has resided here all of her life and is very well known among the old Cairoites. The deceased was a member of St. Joseph’s Church and the Catholic Knights of America. She is survived by two daughters, Mrs. Fred Strautz, of Cairo, and Mrs. John Hook, of East St. Louis. Charles Strautz, of Cairo, and Mrs. John Hook, of East St. Louis, Charles Strautz, of St. Louis, a nephew, arrived last night to attend the funeral.

(Frederick W. Strautz married Katie Cooper on 16 Nov 1882, in Alexander Co., Ill. John Hook married Susan L. Cooper on 14 Aug 1888, in Johnson Co., Ill. Her marker in Calvary Cemetery at Villa Ridge reads: Catherine Cooper Died Jan 19, 1912.—Darrel Dexter)

FUNERAL NOTICE

Cooper—Died Friday afternoon, January 19, Mrs. Catherine Cooper.

Funeral will leave the residence, 2003 Washington, at 1:30 o'clock Sunday afternoon for St. Joseph's Church where services will be conducted by Rev. James Gillen. Cortege will leave Fourteenth Street on a special train for Villa Ridge cemetery where interment will be made.

Friends of the family are invited to attend.

Died, at his home about 3 ½ miles south of Vienna, on Tuesday morning, Asa C. Atherton, at the age of 79 years. Death was caused from senility and a breaking down of the system. Mr. Atherton was a good man and well respected by his neighbors and friends. His daughter, Mrs. E. E. Mathis, lived with him and kept house for him—his last wife having died some years ago. The remains were shipped to Hodges Park in Alexander County for burial Tuesday evening, accompanied by his daughter, Mrs. Mathis, his son-in-law Charles A. Parker, and perhaps others.

Dr. F. A. Snell, a well-known physician of Columbus, Ky., died at the home of his daughter, Mrs. A. M. Wilson, in Columbus Monday afternoon of meningitis. He had been in ill health since last fall when he had a stroke of apoplexy.

The deceased is survived by two daughters, Mrs. A. M. Wilson and Miss Laverne Snell.

Wesley Webb, an aged citizen of Oscar, Ballard County, Ky., died last Sunday afternoon of the infirmities of old age. He was a former resident of Carlisle County.

Mrs. Noonon, wife of Jailer Noonan, of Hickman, Ky., died Tuesday morning at her home in Hickman, from injuries received a few days ago from a fall on the ice.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Monday, 22 Jan 1912:

NEGRO BOY WAS FATALLY BURNED

Died Sunday from Injuries Sustained in Fire Late Saturday Night

FIRE WAGON COLLIDES WITH TELEPHONE POLE

In Running to Fire This Morning—Firemen Kept Busy During Past Few Days

Fred Robinson, the negro boy who was burned Saturday night in the fire at Thirty-first and Commercial Avenue, died Sunday morning, and an inquest was held this afternoon by Coroner McManus.

The fire is said to have started from an overturned lamp. The boy was asleep when the fire started and he was seriously burned when his father rescued him. The fire occurred about 9 o'clock.

Companies No. 2 and 3 answered to the alarm. No. 3 had a line of hose damaged by a street car, the motorman running over the hose before he saw it in time to stop his car.

ANOTHER OLD CAIROITE GONE

J. S. Metcalf Passed Away at Tampa, Fla.

J. S. Metcalf, an old resident of Cairo, passed away at his home in Tampa, Fla., last week. A Tampa newspaper just received gives the following notice of his death.

Following a period of ten days illness, James H. Metcalf, for the past thirty years a resident of Hillsboro County, succumbed yesterday to a stroke of apoplexy, at the residence of his daughter, Mrs. W. W. Nowotny, 702 East Frances Avenue.

The deceased born in Calloway County, Kentucky, March 4, 1826, but while still a youth moved with his parents to Southern Illinois. At the age of twenty years he enlisted in the United States Army and served during the entire period of the Mexican War following which he returned to Cairo Ill., where he engaged in the mercantile business and continued to make his home there until he moved to Florida in 1881.

Upon his arrival in this state, Mr. Metcalf located nine miles north of Tampa and set to work to raise an orange grove, no small undertaking for a man who had already passed the half century make in his life’s span. Here he continued to reside, doing his share of the work on the farm, until about six years ago, when he moved with the family of Mr. and Mrs. Nowotny to their present residence in this city.

Of splendid stature and powerful physique, as may be gathered from this sketch of his life, Mr. Metcalf was essentially a man in every sense of the word. Always considerate of the feelings of others, he spent his declining years passing a kindly word to all he met, trying to make the sun shine a little brighter and smooth out the troubles of everyone who came his way.

(William W. Nowotny married E. Monte Metcalf on 29 Sep 1886, in Alexander Co., Ill. James H. Metcalf was a private in Company B, 2nd Illinois Infantry during the Mexican War.—Darrel Dexter)

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Tuesday, 23 Jan 1912:

Sheriff Wehrenberg is expected home tonight from New Orleans with the prisoner Otis Meals who was recently arrested in that city on the charge of murdering the marshal at Ullin some time ago.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Wednesday, 24 Jan 1912:

A Former Resident of Mound City Dies in Chicago

Word was received this morning of the death of H. M. Perks, formerly of Mounds, who was run over by a street car in Chicago about a week ago. From the time of the accident, there were only faint hopes of his recovery and he has remained in a comatose condition until the end came early this morning. He was a brother of L. C. Perks, of Mound City.

DOUBLE KILLING AT MARION LAST NIGHT

Marion, Ill., Jan. 24.—Authorities today are making a searching investigation of the double killing at Carterville near here last night. When the wife of Sam Pulliner refused to leave a dance and go home with him, Pulliner procured a shotgun and killed her. Within a few minutes a general battle was in progress outside the house and this morning Pulliner was found dead.

C. H. Kruse died at his home in Ullin Jan. 11, from acute indigestion and heart failure, from which he was a sufferer for about three months. Besides his many friends he leaves a wife and three children, an aged father and sister.

Mrs. Catherine Guild died at her home four miles northwest of Ullin Jan. 17. She was born in Cary County, Ireland, in 1852 and was married to James Guild in 1870, coming to Alexander County about 30 years ago. From that time until her death she resided in the community of Beech Grove. She was a good neighbor, loving wife, and mother. She was the mother of ten children, seven of whom are left to mourn her loss. Those living are Maude Short, Millie, Nellie, Mary, John, Dan, and Will. Millie, living in Wyoming, could not be present. John is in Wisconsin. Miss Nellie teaches school at Mounds. The remains were laid to rest at Mt. Pisgah Cemetery. Jan. 20. Rev. Bumpas, pastor of the M. E. Church, conducted the funeral.

(Ed Short married Maude Guild on 8 Sep 1895, in Alexander Co., Ill. Her marker in Mt. Pisgah Cemetery near Wetaug reads: Catharine Guild 1852-1912.—Darrel Dexter)

Card of Thanks

Please allow us as members of her family to extend our sincere and heartfelt thanks for the help and kindness shown us by our friends and neighbors in the sad hours of the death of our wife and mother.

James Guild and Children

Mrs. Mary A. Burris, administrator of the estate of her son, Arthur B. Burris, deceased, who sued the Murphysboro Telephone Company for damages for the death of A. Bert Burris, who was electrocuted on a pole while he was working as a lineman for the company in that city, has been settled and plaintiff took a non-suit. The sum agreed upon was $1,250, which includes plaintiff's attorney's fees.

Thomas B. Powell, who has been confined to his home with a severe spell of lagrippe, and who has for some years been suffering from an attack of paralysis took a change for the worse Monday morning and it was thought for a while that he could not recover. He is now suffering from heart failure. (Vienna)

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Thursday, 25 Jan 1912:

The remains of little Walter Moyer were brought here (Grand Chain) last Saturday to the home of his grandfather, Mr. Aliff. Funeral services were held at the home Sunday after which the body was laid to rest in the Grand Chain Cemetery. Little Walter was six years old and lived in Poplar Bluff, Mo. He died Jan. 19, of pneumonia.

CARD OF THANKS

We desire to extend our very deep gratitude to the friends and neighbors who were so attentive during the illness and at the death of our son and brother, Charles Michamp.

E. F. Michamp and family

Grandma Martha Elwood has been affected with a goiter for more than fifty years. It has assumed enormous proportions and the doctors can do nothing to relieve her. She suffers intensely with no hope of relief, but death from the pain.

The funeral of the late Mrs. Del. Gaines was held Wednesday afternoon in the Baptist church, services being conducted by Rev. Ferrill and interment at Beech Grove Cemetery. (Mound City)

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Friday, 26 Jan 1912:

OBITUARY

Asa C. Atherton

Asa C. Atherton was born in what is now Pulaski County, Nov. 21, 1832. He was the second of six children and the son of Aaron and Elizabeth Atherton, both natives of Kentucky, who immigrated to this state in 1816 and settled where the subject of this sketch was born. His father was a soldier in the Mexican War and was killed in the Battle of Buena Vista, Feb. 27, 1847, thereby limiting the opportunities for an education for this son, as he resumed the responsibilities of the home and conducted the farm for his mother until he was eighteen years old. Entered the mercantile business in what was known as Valley Forge, Pulaski County, and acted as postmaster six years, at which is now Villa Ridge, before the Illinois Central Railroad was built. Then he returned to the home farm where he lived about twenty years, farming and sawmilling. He also put in a flour mill, which he ran in connection with the saw mill about one year, when it was destroyed by fire, losing the mill and its contents as he had no insurance in 1879. Soon after Hodges Park was started, he put up a saw mill and store at that place in which he remained engaged as long as he stayed in Alexander County and some six or seven years after coming to Johnson County. After closing out the milling business he settled down on his farm three miles south of Vienna and spent his declining years peacefully and apparently perfectly contented, enjoying the reward for his score years of usefulness.

He married Elizabeth Kelly Dec. 16, 1856, and to this union nine children were born: John H., Ellen Mathis, Edward J., Hannah C., Grace T. Parker, George C., Anna A., Fanny M. and Violet E. His daughter, Ellen E. Mathis, has lived with him since the death of his last wife and has been untiring in her devotion to his every need.

His second marriage was to Emily A. Brown, June 29, 1883. In 1891 he married to Mary E. Norton, Nov. 15, and was again married Dec. 17, 1899, to Mary J. Parker, formerly a well-known resident of Vienna, who died May 16, 1904.

He united with the Shiloh Baptist Church near Villa Ridge Aug. 12, 1852. He was very faithful to his church and was a tireless Bible reader. He enjoyed good health up to within a few days before his death, when he contracted a cold which he was unable to throw off on account of his old age. He passed away Jan. 16, 1912.

He was a good father, a generous friend and will be greatly missed by those who knew him best.

Funeral services were held at Shiloh Baptist Church, a mile and a half west of Villa Ridge and near his old home, Jan. 17th, conducted by Rev. W. A. Ridge, of Dongola, a personal friend and once pastor of Shiloh Church. The services were very touching as he recalled many incidents of the past, showing the generosity and interest taken by the deceased in the up building and maintenance of Shiloh Church.

(Asa Coleman Atherton, 50, miller, from Hodges Park, Ill., born in Pulaski Co., Ill., son of Aaron Atherton and Elizabeth Atherton, married Mrs. Emily Alvina Brown, 43, born in St. Louis, Mo., daughter of Samuel Music and Elizabeth Walker, on 27 Jun 1883, in Union Co., Ill. Asa C. Atherton married Mrs. Mary E. Morton on 15 Nov 1891, in Pulaski Co., Ill. Asa Atherton married Mary J. Parker on 17 Dec 1899, in Johnson Co., Ill. James P. Mathis married Ellen E. Atherton on 6 Jul 1878, in Pulaski Co., Ill. Charles A. Parker married Grace T. Atherton on 19 May 1889, in Alexander Co., Ill. His marker in Shiloh Cemetery near Villa Ridge reads: Asa C. Atherton Born Nov. 21, 1832 Died Jan. 16, 1912 Baptized Aug. 12, 1852. Mary E. wife of A. C. Atherton Born Dec. 23, 1842 Died Feb. 28, 1899 Aged 56 Ys., 2 Ms., & 5 D. Violette A. daughter of A. C. & Elizabeth Atherton Died Oct. 4, 1880 Aged 8 Ys., 6 Ms., & 14 Ds—Darrel Dexter)

Card of Thanks

To the friends and neighbors who so kindly assisted us during the sickness and death of our father, we express our sincere thanks.

John H. Atherton

Ellen E. Mathis

Edward J. Atherton

Charles A. Parker

"POOR" RECLUSE DIES RICH

Mrs. Rosa Tyler, of Near Centralia, Ill., Leaves $20,000 Property

Centralia, Ill., January 26.—Although she lived alone for years in a little one-room log cabin in a clump of woods near the Bowman Schoolhouse, several miles from Centralia, and was thought exceedingly poor, Mrs. Rosa Tyler, aged 75, died Wednesday, worth $20,000.

It was discovered after her death that she owned property and had wealth, and two nieces, who lived in Kansas City, Mo., were not aware of the fact. In the bedding was found considerable money and certificates of deposit worth $10,000.

Mr. and Mrs. Brown, of Olive Branch, and Miss Keeler, of Cairo, all attended the funeral here (Mound City) of the late Harry Perks.

CARD OF THANKS

We wish to thank our many friends who so kindly attended us during the illness and death of our little daughter, niece, and granddaughter. We pray heaven's choicest blessings on each and every one.

Respectfully,

Mr. and Mrs. Sol. Hicks

Miss Georgia Bugg

John Bugg

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Saturday, 27 Jan 1912:

The funeral of the late Harry M. Perks was held today at the residence of Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Higgins at 1 o'clock conducted by Rev. Joseph Buie. Interment at Cairo City Cemetery at Villa Ridge.

(His marker in Cairo City Cemetery at Villa Ridge reads: Harry M. Perks Born Feb. 22, 1869 in Petersburg Died Jan. 23, 1912, in Chicago.—Darrel Dexter)

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Monday, 29 Jan 1912:

Mrs. J. B. Collins, left this morning for Murray, Ky., called by the death of her sister-in-law, Mrs. A. B. Spencer, who died Sunday afternoon.

OLDEST RESIDENT OF CAIRO DIES

Bernard Smith, Aged 79 Years, Passed Away at Home of Daughter

J. Bernard Smith, an old resident of this city, passed away at the home of his daughter, Mrs. George Fischer, at No. 529 Center Street at 7:50 o'clock this morning. The deceased took sick with an attack of pneumonia Saturday and this, with infirmities of old age, hastened death. He was 79 years of age.

The deceased was born in County Connaugh, Ireland, and came to America when a lad of twelve years and to Cairo during the Civil War. For over fifteen years, he was employed as section foreman for the Illinois Central Railroad. His wife died seventeen years ago this month.

He is survived by a sister, Mrs. Margaret Kennedy, of No. 2036 Pine Street, besides three sons and four daughters, as follows: Jerry Smith, of Cairo, John Smith, of Slayton, Texas, James Smith, of Omaha, and Mesdames George Fischer, of Cairo and G. E. Baldwin, of Boston, and Misses Mary Smith, of Boston and Miss Anna Moren, of Chicago.

He is also survived by relatives in St. Louis and four grandsons in this city.

The funeral services will be held Wednesday morning at St. Joseph's Church. Mrs. M. E. Feith the funeral director having charge.

NEGRO OFFICER KILLS BAD MAN

Napoleon Lipe, Young Negro Desperado, Shot by Officer Gus Johnson

CREATED DISTURBANCE IN UPTOWN SALOON

And Ran Occupants Out with Winchester Rifle—Later Made Gun Play at Police

Napoleon Lipe, a young negro desperado, aged about 25 years, was fatally shot by Officer Gus Johnson, about midnight Saturday and died from his wounds Sunday evening at 6:30 o’clock at St. Mary’s Infirmary.

Lipe was a son of former Officer Green Lipe, colored. The young negro is said to have been intoxicated and went into the saloon at Thirty-second and Commercial and engaged in a quarrel with another negro. Later he left the saloon and, going to the home of his father, not far distant, he seized a Winchester rifle and went back to the saloon, where he made the negroes step lively. The bartender managed to get Lipe out of the saloon and called the police.

Officers Johnson and Griffin, colored, responded to the call. They encountered Lipe and another negro at the corner of Twenty-seventh and Commercial. Seeing the officers, Lipe is said to have made a gun play, trying to shoot the officers, who dodged behind a telephone pole. The negro Patterson, who was with Lipe, managed to get the rifle away from him, whereupon Lipe started on a run up Commercial with the police in pursuit. Lipe made a motion towards his back pocket as if to pull a gun and Johnson was too quick for him and shot at him. He was then arrested and taken to police headquarters. It was not known that the shot had taken effect until sometime later. He was then taken to the infirmary, where he died Sunday evening about 6:30 o'clock.

Officer Johnson has always been a fearless officer and killed a "bad negro" named Frank Conners several years ago for which he was exonerated.

Johnson was placed under arrest after Lipe's death and is being held pending the result of the coroner’s jury this afternoon.

Lipe had had trouble with a number of officers in the past, including former Officer Jim Casey and Special Officer Ed Moore.

The coroner’s inquest was held this afternoon in the council chamber.

The jury was composed of Samuel Green, Charles DeBaun, James Barrow, Gus Osterloh, Joe Berbling, and Ed Halliday.

Mrs. Elmer Clymore, who has been in bad health for several months and finally her mind became effected so much that it was deemed best to take her to the hospital for treatment. Accordingly she was adjudged insane before Judge Hight on last Monday morning and her husband and Ike L. Morgan took her to the Southern Hospital at Anna. This is a sad affair indeed. The little son, Bradley, only child, has gone to stay at his grandfather's, Dan Clymore, in the country, and Elmer still remains here (Vienna) as clerk in Boyd’s store. Another sad thing is that Mrs. Clymore's mother, Mrs. Bradley Farmer, is slowly dying with cancer. They are all good people.

(Elmer Clymore married Daisy M. Farmer on 6 Aug 1899, in Johnson Co., Ill. Daniel H. Clymore married Louella Albriton on 13 Jan 1878, in Johnson Co., Ill. Bradley Farmer married Nancy C. Moor on 7 Apr 1871, in Johnson Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Tuesday, 30 Jan 1912:

CAPT. WILLIAM McCLATCHEY DIES

Veteran Riverman's Last Trip Was with Taft Flotilla

Cape Girardeau, Mo., Jan. 30.—Capt. William McClatchey, 67 years old, died here Monday. He had followed river life fifty-four years. He lived in St. Louis thirty years, being captain of the old Anchor line, and had charge of some of the best boats between St. Louis and New Orleans. He was in charge of the City of Cairo, which was in the St. Louis harbor during the cyclone and for two days was mourned as dead.

His last trip on the river was on the steamer Cape Girardeau, during the Taft flotilla to New Orleans in October 1908. For two years he made his home in Cape Girardeau with his son, Sam F. McClatchey.

VETERAN OF MEXICAN WAR PASSES AWAY

Edward Smith, aged 91 years, died Monday afternoon about 4:30 o'clock of old age at St. Mary's Infirmary, where he had lived the last eighteen years. He came to Cairo at that time and having no place to go he was taken in as a charity patient and worked around the infirmary until, his eyesight failing him, he became totally blind. He had been practically helpless the past fifteen years and had to be led around the place.

The old gentleman was a reticent frame of mind and would talk little of his affairs. It is not known whether or not he has any surviving relatives. He was born in New York and spent a time in Canada. He was a veteran of the Mexican War and often told of several battles in which he participated.

The funeral will be held Wednesday morning at St. Patrick's Church, services being conducted by Rev. J. Downey and interment will be at Villa Ridge in Calvary Cemetery.

CORONER'S JURY EXONERATED JOHNSON

Officer Gus Johnson was exonerated by the coroner's jury Monday evening for killing Napoleon Lipe, the young negro whom the officer shot Saturday night. About fifteen witnesses were examined and their testimony was to the effect that Johnson was justified in the shooting.

Claude Winter went to Clinton, Ky., today to attend the funeral of Mr. Bussey, which occurred there today. Mr. Bussey was with the late Claude Winter, Sr., at the time of his fatal accident over a year ago.

Harry Becker went to Clinton, Ky., today to attend the funeral of Mr. Bussey.

DOUBLE TRAGEDY OCCURRED AT GALATIA

Husband Kills Wife and Then Ends His Own Life

The little town of Galatia, in Saline County was highly wrought up on Saturday about noon by a double tragedy, which was enacted there in the local telephone central office. James Goodman, slipping up behind his wife while she was answering calls at the switchboard, fired a bullet through her brain. He then turned the weapon on himself and blew out his own brains. His body fell across that of his victim.

Family troubles combined with ill health is said to have been the cause of the tragedy. The couple were not living together. They separated recently and on Sunday last when together to talk over their differences had a violent quarrel. This is believed to have been directly responsible for the act.

Goodman had been in ill health for some time, being a victim of tuberculosis and this was caused him to be very unhappy.

The murdered woman was formerly Miss Etta Rieter. She had been married twice, the first time to Joe Pemberton from whom she was separated. She leaves one child by Pemberton. She later married Goodman and at the time of the double deed, was separated from him. Since being separated from him she had been working as central girl at the village telephone office. She is said to have come from a good family.—Marion Post

(Joseph T. Pemberton married Etta Ritter on 4 Oct 1899, in Saline Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

James R. Thornton, son of Mr. and Mrs. C. W. Thornton, died at their home Jan. 23, age 21 years. The deceased has been a sufferer of curvature of the spine since a child. He was bedfast three weeks. He leaves a father, mother, one brother and two sisters, besides a host of friends and relatives. The funeral was held at the house and the remains were laid to rest near Anna. (Ullin)

CARD OF THANKS

We wish to thank our many friends in Ullin and Pulaski for their helping hand and sympathy shown us in the sad hours of the sickness and death of our son and brother, James.

Yours with thanks,

C. W. Thornton and family

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Wednesday, 31 Jan 1912:

FUNERAL OF OLD RESIDENT HELD THIS MORNING

The funeral of J. Bernard Smith, who died Monday morning at the home of his daughter, Mrs. George Fischer, on Center Street, was held this morning at St. Joseph’s Church, Rev. James Gillen officiating. The cortege left the foot of Fourteenth Street on a special I. C. train for Villa Ridge, the burial being held at Calvary Cemetery.

The following were the pallbearers: Thomas Galvin, Peter Doud, Thomas Fuller, David Barry, Thomas Keefe, James Barrow, Daniel Kelly, Sr., M. J. Howley, P. T. Langan, H. Walbaum, Patrick Egan.

Funeral of Edward Smith

The funeral of Edward Smith, who had been a patient at St. Mary's Infirmary for nineteen years and who died at that institution Monday afternoon, was held Tuesday morning at St. Patrick’s Church, the burial being at Calvary Cemetery at Villa Ridge. Rev. J. J. Downey was the officiating priest.

James E. Cunningham, in response to word that his mother was seriously ill at her home in Detroit, Mich., left for that place last Saturday afternoon. Mr. Cunningham on Monday sent a telegram to his wife that his mother was dead and she and son, Charley, left for Danville, Ill., Monday afternoon to attend the funeral. The mother was rather old and had been living with her daughter in Detroit, Mich., for some time. (Vienna)

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Friday, 2 Feb 1912:

WELL KNOWN RIVER MAN DIES AT MEMPHIS

Joseph Depress, a well-known river engineer, died at the Marine Hospital in Memphis last Wednesday of spinal meningitis. He was employed on the transfer boat Charles Merriam that was recently sent to Memphis from Belmont, Mo., in the service of the Iron Mountain. He leaves a wife and four children.

Died, at his home in Ullin, Jan. 23, James Thornton, oldest son of Mr. and Mrs. Neal Thornton. His illness was of short duration, being an attack of pneumonia following partial paralysis of the lower limbs. James was a young man of sterling quality. He was ambitious to accomplish something in life and took great interest in his studies at school, he was a favorite among his classmates, was ever cheerful and happy and an inspiration to all with whom he was associated. His classmates acted as pallbearers and during his illness were solicitous. The family have the deepest sympathy of their friends and neighbors in this their sad affliction.

James W. Newton was in Jonesboro for several days this week called by the illness of his father, who is very low. (McClure)

Mrs. H. B. Cartner, of Thebes, received a telegram today announcing the death of his aunt, Elizabeth Casper, aged about 85 years.

(Henry B. Cartner married Ailsy S. Davault on 11 Apr 1867, in Union Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Saturday, 3 Feb 1912:

OLD CITIZEN OF MOUND CITY DEAD

William P. Rouse, of Mound City, died Friday at his home after a lingering illness of dropsy. Deceased was 50 years of age. He leaves two sisters, Mrs. Kate Scott, of Decatur, and Mrs. Eva Bowling, of Mound City, besides two brothers, James Rouse, of Memphis, and Thomas Rouse, of Brazil, Ind.

The funeral services will be held Sunday at 1:30 o'clock at the house, the Rev. Mr. Anderson of the Episcopal Church officiating. Interment will be made at Beech Grove Cemetery.

(William P. Rouse married Josie Cragitt on 29 Nov 1884, in Jackson Co., Ill. Jesse L. Bowling married Eva M. Rouse on 23 Apr 1873, in Pulaski Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

OFFERS $50 REWARD

A reward of $50 will be paid for the recovery of the body of Henry Decker, who is supposed to have been drowned Saturday night off wharf boat at Cairo. He was 6 ft. 1 inch in height, wore brown corduroy trousers, dark brown woolen shirt and blue jumper, had on heavy shoes which appeared black because of grease.

Mrs. Sidney Decker

2504 Sycamore Street

(Henry Decker, 24, married Sidney Butler, 24, married on 8 Aug 1875, in Union Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Monday, 5 Feb 1912:

FORMER CAIROITE DIES AT CENTRALIA

H. T. Gerould, formerly connected with the gas works here, died at his home in Centralia last Thursday. The Centralia Democrat says of his death:

H. T. Gerould, one of Centralia’s most highly respected citizens, passed away at his home on North Poplar Street, Thursday night at 10:30 o'clock.

Mr. Gerould was born in Gilson N.H., May 14, 1837, and spent his youth in the east. He came west at the age of thirty years and soon attained his success as manager of various gas companies. He spent 10 years in Cairo, seven years in Mendota and about fifteen years in Centralia in that capacity.

Mr. Gerould retired from active business five years ago. Three years ago he suffered a paralytic stroke from which he recovered only to succumb to chronic heart trouble. He leaves a widow, Mary S. Gerould, and two sons, Dr. T. F. Gerould, of this city, and L. Ernest Gerould, of St. Louis.

Mr. Gerould was a member of the St. John's Episcopal Church.

NEGRO BARBER DROPPED DEAD

Sam Anderson, a negro barber, dropped dead on the corner of Twenty-sixth Street and Commercial, Sunday night about 7 o'clock. His death is attributed to heart trouble. He leaves his mother and two brothers. The funeral will be held tomorrow, William Hughes, the undertaker, having charge.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Tuesday, 6 Feb 1912:

MAN AND HORSE FREEZE TO DEATH NEAR BARDWELL

Paducah, Ky., Feb. 6—Sterling Lovelace, 25 years old, a young farmer of Cunningham, in Carlisle County, and his horse were found frozen to death early Sunday morning. They were found near the farm of Tom Carroll, who resides between Cunningham and Bardwell. When found, Lovelace was under his buggy and his head was frozen to the ground.

While the deaths of Lovelace and his horse were due to the excessive cold weather, a runaway was indirectly the cause. Lovelace was in Bardwell Saturday on business and started to return to his home Saturday night. It is believed that the horse ran away and ran into a tree. The horse was badly injured and was unable to move. Lovelace was in the buggy alone and it is believed that he was stunned from the buggy and never regained consciousness.

When found, he was under his buggy. The lines were looped around his neck, while both hands were clutched tightly to the lines. It is believed by friends that he placed the reins over his head and was dozing while driving home. Mr. Carroll heard a noise early Saturday night and went to his front porch. He heard no more noise and retired. Early Sunday morning he discovered the overturned buggy, the horse and dead master on the road near his house.

Mr. Lovelace was a well-known young farmer of Carlisle County. His father also survives. Two sisters, Mrs. Florence Bennett, of Graves County, and Mrs. A. C. Lynn, of Carlisle County, and three brothers, Lute Lovelace, Will Lovelace, and Virgil Lovelace, all of Carlisle County, survive.

The funeral and burial took place Monday at Zoar Baptist Church.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Wednesday, 7 Feb 1912:

STEPHEN BIRD PASSES AWAY

Old Resident Died at St. Mary's Infirmary This Morning

SPENT MOST OF HIS TIME AT BIRD'S POINT

Where He Owned a Sawmill and Farm—Was One of the Early Settlers There

Stephen Bird, an old resident of Cairo and Bird's Point, Mo., died at St. Mary's Infirmary this morning after a brief illness due to the infirmities of old age. The deceased was 75 years old. He was brought over from Bird's Point last Monday and placed in the hospital.

Mr. Bird was born in Louisiana in 1837. He came to Bird’s Point with his parents when he was a boy and has practically resided there ever since. His father conducted a sawmill at Bird's Point and during the war it was removed to where Bird's Mill is now and the deceased had charge of it ever since the death of his father. His uncle, William Bird, was one of the early settlers at Bird's Point and who afterwards settled in Cairo.

Although the deceased kept his residence in Cairo, he spent most of his time in Missouri, where his sawmill interests and farm are located.

He was educated by private tutors, as was the common practice with families of means at that time. He did not enlist in the war, although the soldiers were encamped at Bird's Point. He belonged to no lodge or church.

The deceased is survived by his wife and two sons, Abraham, of Bird's Mill, and City Attorney Hunter Bird, of this city. He also has a brother, Andrew Bird, residing at Tampa, Fla., besides two sisters, Mrs. Clara Edwards, of Union City, Tenn., and Mrs. Nannie Hunter, of Marion, Ky.

The relatives have been notified of his death and are expected to arrive and attend the funeral.

The funeral will be held at the family residence at Twenty-fifth and Sycamore streets tomorrow at 12:30 p.m. The remains will be interred in the family burying grounds at Bird's Point, Mo.

FUNERAL NOTICE

Died—Stephen A. Bird, age 75 years. Funeral services will be held at the family residence on Twenty-fifth and Sycamore streets, Thursday, February 8th at 12:30 o'clock, conducted by Father James Gillen, pastor of St. Joseph's Church. The remains will leave the residence at 1:00 p.m. for the Iron Mountain wharf boat at Eighth and Ohio streets. Interment will be held in the family burying grounds at Birds Mill, Mo. Friends of the family are invited to attend.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Thursday, 8 Feb 1912:

FUNERAL OF STEPHEN A. BIRD HELD TODAY

The funeral of the late Stephen A. Bird, who died Wednesday morning at St. Mary's Infirmary, took place this afternoon from the family residence on Twenty-fifth Street.

Interment was held at Birds Point in the family burying ground and the remains were taken over on the Cotton Belt at 2 o'clock.

The following were the pallbearers: Active—Alex Wilson, Ross C. Bates, M. J. O'Shea, Q. E. Beckwith, and Fred Lihd. Honorary—William White, John C. Gholson, Joseph Wenger, John M. Lansden, Al Lewis, M. H. Howley, Reed Green, M. F. Gilbert, E. A. Smith W. F. Grinstead, and H. S. Antrim.

UNTIMELY DEATH OF BRIGHT YOUNG MAN

Frank Blotkin Passed Away in Chicago at Age of 21.

Frank Blotkin, son of Mrs. Theresa Blotkin, of No. 826 Twenty-third Street, died Wednesday at Chicago after a two-week illness of typhoid fever. Mrs. Blotkin had been at her son's bedside the past two weeks having been called to Chicago on account of his serious condition.

The deceased had lived in Cairo nearly all his life, receiving his education in the Cairo public schools. He was an exceptionally bright young man and graduated from Cairo High School in 1908, being regarded as one of the most apt students ever finishing at that institution. His zeal and energy led him to enter the University of Chicago upon his own resources, his ambition being to fit himself for the U. S. Consular Service. To accomplish this, he received his B. S. degree and at the time of his death was striving for the Master of Arts title. He received several scholarships which none other but a bright person could achieve.

He was just entering upon the zenith of his career, and it seems one of the peculiar ironies of fate that he should be stricken down at this time. The burden of his untimely end will rest heavily upon his mother, to whom he was deeply devoted and who went through many sacrifices that her son might have the educational advantages he deserved. He also leaves a sister, Miss Minnie, and a brother, Abe, who is assistant manager of the Kress Store in this city.

Miss Nellie Kibbels, of East Cape Girardeau, who died in the hospital at Cape Girardeau while under an operation, was buried here (McClure) in the Lindsey Cemetery Saturday. She is the oldest daughter of James Cotner.

(The 9 Feb 1912, issue reported her name as Mrs. Nellie Tippet.—Darrel Dexter)

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Friday, 9 Feb 1912:

FUNERAL OF FRANK BLOTKIN SUNDAY AFTERNOON

The remains of Frank Blotkin, who died Wednesday in Chicago, were brought to Cairo this morning, accompanied by his mother, who was at his bedside at the time of his death.

The funeral will be held Sunday afternoon at 1:30 o'clock at the family residence on Twenty-third Street conducted by Rabbi Meyer Lovitch, of Paducah.

MRS. JOHN CAIN PASSES AWAY

Old Resident of Cairo Died Early This Morning at Age of 68.

Mrs. Honora Cain, wife of John Cain, an old and respected resident of Cairo, died at 2:40 o'clock this morning at her home, No. 421 Fourteenth Street. The deceased suffered a paralytic stroke three days ago and this coupled with the old age of the sufferer prevented her recovery. This was the third stroke of its kind that Mrs. Cain experienced in as many years.

The deceased was born in County Cork, Ireland, in 1844, and was at the time of her death 68 years of age. Her maiden name was Honora O'Neil and she came to this country with her parents when quite a young girl. During the Civil War in 1862, she came to Cairo and resided here ever since. She was married to Mr. Cain in this city in 1865.

Although of a quiet and unassuming nature, she had a wide circle of acquaintances. She leaves besides her husband, four daughters, Mrs. Frank Jaeckle, of East St. Louis, Mrs. Kate Shea, and Misses Mayme and Ida Cain, of this city, and one son, Alex Cain, of Murphysboro, and five grandchildren.

Mr. Cain is the venerable watchman at the First Bank and Trust Company. He has been ill for some time and the sudden death of his wife and subsequent shock makes his recovery doubtful.

The funeral will be held Sunday afternoon from St. Patrick’s Church, of which the deceased was a member. Interment will be at Villa Ridge in Calvary Cemetery.

(John Cain married Hanora O’Neal on 16 Dec 1863, in Alexander Co., Ill. Frank Jaeckle married Margaret E. Cain on 30 Jun 1891, in Alexander Co., Ill. Francis F. Shea married Catherine Cain on 13 Nov 1889, in Alexander Co., Ill. Her marker in Calvary Cemetery at Villa Ridge reads: Hanora Cain 1847-1912.—Darrel Dexter)

A strikebreaker was found dead in Claude Bailey's saloon last Wednesday evening. The coroner came over from Mound City on the 7 o'clock car. We are informed that the verdict was "heart failure and alcoholism," and that he had been working under an assumed named. (Mounds)

Mrs. Nellie Tippet, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. James Cotner, died at St. Francis Hospital in Cape Girardeau, Friday, February 2nd, at 10:20 a.m. The deceased was 23 years of age. She leaves a husband and two children, father, mother, four sisters and one brother. Interment at Lindsay Cemetery near McClure. (East Cape Girardeau)

(James Cotner married Mary Hinson on 14 Jul 1884, in Alexander Co., Ill. The 8 Feb 1912, issue reported her name as Nellie Kibbels.—Darrel Dexter)

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Saturday, 10 Feb 1912:

SIX-YEAR-OLD BURNED TO DEATH

Glascow, Ky., Feb. 10—Mary Troxel, 6-year-old daughter of John Troxel, was burned to death here this morning, her clothing catching fire while she was playing in the yard.

J. E. JENKINS DIED THIS MORNING

Passed Away at Home of His Parents from Effects of Pneumonia

J. Edward Jenkins, son of Mr. and Mrs. J. S. Jenkins, died at the home of his parents this morning at 1:15 o'clock of pneumonia. He had only been ill a week and death ended much suffering.

The deceased had been in the Pullman service about twelve years and it was on his regular run from New Orleans to Chicago last Monday that he took sick. His wife was accompanying him at the time and, on account of Mr. Jenkins' illness, they stopped here Monday to spend a few days with the parents of the deceased.

Mr. Jenkins was born March 17, 1861, at Fort Dodge, Iowa, and came to Cairo with his parents when quite a young man. He was 51 years of age. Besides his wife, he is survived by his parents and one brother, W. A. Jenkins, of Chicago, and one sister, Mrs. Mary Slone, of Huron, South Dakota.

W. A. Jenkins and Mrs. Slone will arrive for the funeral which will probably occur Monday.

The infant child of Mr. and Mrs. Adams, living on C. W. Wheeler's farm west of town (Mounds), died yesterday morning and the funeral is fixed for today at Dongola.

FUNERAL NOTICE

Blotkin—Died Wednesday in Chicago, Frank Blotkin.

Funeral services will be held at the family residence, No. 826 Twenty-third Street, Sunday afternoon at 1:03 p.m. Remains will be taken by special train leaving Fourteenth Street at 2:45 for Villa Ridge cemetery.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Monday, 12 Apr 1912:

OLD CAIROITE DIED IN MEMPHIS

J. H. Morehead received a long distance message this morning advising him that his brother, William Morehead, had passed away in Memphis at 7:30 this morning. The deceased, who left Cairo twenty years ago, will be remembered by residents of that date. He was two years the senior of his brother. Mr. Morehead and his sister, Mrs. Phil Irby and Mrs. Arthur Thistlewood, leave for Memphis tonight to attend the funeral.

The deceased left a widow and one son.

DYNAMITE EXPLODED IN MAN'S POCKET

J. M. Stille, editor of the Charleston Republican, who was in town today, says that last Thursday, George Willard, foreman of the B. F. Marshall Investment Co., of Blodgett, Mo., was fatally injured in the explosion of a dynamite cap and died from loss of blood in two hours. He had some caps in his pocket and in moving a wagon the caps exploded, tearing out the right side of his body and shattering his leg. He leaves a widow and four children.

REMAINS OF FRANK BLOTKIN BURIED SUNDAY

Funeral services over the remains of Frank Blotkin, who died Wednesday in Chicago, were held Sunday at the family residence on Twenty-third Street, being conducted by Rabbi Meyer Lovitch, of Paducah. The funeral was largely attended and the floral pieces were very profuse. The class of 1908 of Cairo High School, of which the deceased was a member, attended in a body.

The following served as pallbearers:

S. J. Michaelson, N. Sandler, M. Goodman, D. Rosenberg, J. Sullivan, S. Gruskin, Lee J. May, and N. Goldsmith.

FUNERAL OF MRS. CAIN HELD SUNDAY

The funeral of Mrs. Hanora Cain, wife of John Cain, who died Friday, was held Sunday, services being conducted at St. Patrick’s Church by Rev. J. J. Downey. Interment was made at Villa Ridge in Calvary Cemetery. Many friends of the deceased attended and the floral tributes were numerous.

Jenkins Funeral Tuesday—The funeral of J. Edward Jenkins, who died Saturday, will be held tomorrow morning. Mrs. Clyde Slone, a sister of the deceased, and William Jenkins, a brother, have arrived to attend the funeral.

UNKNOWN MAN DROWNED TODAY

Fell Off Georgia Lee at Wharf This Forenoon—Inquest Held

An unknown white man was drowned off the steamer Georgia Lee this morning about 10:30 at the Halliday-Phillips wharf boat. He went on the boat in an intoxicated condition and inquired of one of the roustabouts the fare to Dorona, Mo., which is a landing opposite Hickman, Ky. In coming off the boat, he stumbled across the gang plank and fell into the river.

He fell on his face and floated about 30 feet, in between the Lee boat and the wharf boat. The body did not sink and was picked up by one of the rousters with a grappling hook. He was taken aboard the boat and his body rolled on a barrel in the hopes of resuscitation, but the man was already dead.

Coroner McManus was called and he summoned a jury composed of Capt. Elmer Emery, Capt. George Clark, Jesse Fitch, Sam Wessinger, John Foley and John Wichert. They found that the man met death by accidental drowning. Coroner McManus explained that the reason the body did not sink was because falling as the man did on his face his lungs filled rapidly with water and stopped the action of his heart. The cold water may also have had something to do with it as the man was very drunk.

The man has been seen around the wharf boat for several days and it is presumed that he either lived at Dorena or was going there to work. He was about 60 years of age. Nothing to identify him in the way of papers or letters were found upon his person and no one seemed to know who he was.

FORMER CAIRO BOY DIES IN THE WEST

Frank Thornton, aged 25 years, a former resident of Cairo, died in California last week after an illness of several months' duration. Deceased was well known here. The remains were shipped to Jackson, Tenn., for interment. He was survived by his father and two sisters, Mrs. Mattie Belle Clark and Mrs. J. E. Melton. The latter was Miss Lutie Thornton, who was only recently married. She resides at Chattanooga.

FUNERAL NOTICE

Died—J. Edward Jenkins, aged 51 years. Funeral services will be held at home of his parents, No. 2502 Sycamore Street, Tuesday morning at 8:30 o'clock, conducted by Rev. A. M. Eeles, pastor of the Presbyterian Church. The Knights of Pythias will have charge of the services at the grave. Funeral train will leave Fourteenth Street at 9:45 o'clock for Villa Ridge cemetery. Friends of the family are invited to attend.

(A marker in Cairo City Cemetery near Villa Ridge reads: J. Edgar Jenkins Born March 27, 1861 Died Feb. 10, 1912. Charles E. Jenkins Born Aug. 28, 1863 Died March 11, 1888. John S. Jenkins Born Sept. 22, 1836 Died Jan. 26, 1924. Sarah J. Jenkins Born May 22, 1840 Died Jan. 6, 1926.—Darrel Dexter)

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Tuesday, 13 Feb 1912:

INVESTIGATING KILLING OF LIPE

It is said that the grand jury will investigate the killing of Napoleon Lipe, a young negro, by Officer Gus Johnson, of the Cairo police force, on Saturday night, January 27th. Relatives and friends of Lipe contend that the killing was not justifiable despite the fact that the colored officer was exonerated by the coroner’s jury.

The contention is that Lipe was not armed when he was shot by Johnson and was running from the officer at the time.

Witnesses have been called to testify before the grand jury and an attempt will be made to secure an indictment against Johnson from the grand jury now in session.

IDENTITY OF DROWNED MAN MADE KNOWN

The identity of the unknown white man, who was drowned off the steamer Georgia Lee Monday morning, was made known this noon when advices were received by Mrs. L. C. Falconer, the undertaker, from relatives at Madisonville, Ky. The telegram received did not state who the dead man's relatives were in that city, but that the expenses incurred in preparing the remains for burial would be taken care of by the bank there.

The man's name was J. Dunkerson, this information being furnished by Edward Maley, who saw the man several days before the accident and who was in conversation with the deceased at his restaurant on Ohio Street. The man told Maley his name and that he had relatives in Madisonville, Ky.

The remains will be sent to Madisonville this evening via the I. C.

COLLEGE PAPER PAYS TRIBUTE TO LATE FRANK BLOTKIN

The following tribute to the memory of the late Frank Blotkin appeared in the "Maroon," a college paper published by the University of Chicago.

Frank E. Blotkin, who was graduated from the university at the last convocation, died Wednesday night at St. Luke's Hospital. Blotkin’s death came four hours after an operation made necessary by typhoid fever, contracted six weeks ago. While at the university, Blotkin specialized in the study of economics. He lived at 5628 Jackson Avenue.

"Mr. Blotkin was a promising student in the political economy department and we expected a great deal of his work," said Assistant Professor J. A. Field. "He was working with great success toward his master’s degree, despite hardships against which he has had to struggle while in the university. We will feel his loss deeply."

The remains of Lon Randle (col.) were shipped here (Wetaug) from Chicago Friday and buried in Pea Ridge Cemetery, Saturday.

The remains of Mrs. Elizabeth Hahl, who died at Mill Creek Feb. 8th, were brought here (Wetaug) to Mt. Pisgah on Friday for interment. Funeral services were conducted by Rev. Weigel of the Congregational church.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Wednesday, 14 Feb 1912:

GRAND JURY HELD POLICE OFFICER

Gus Johnson, Who Killed Napoleon Lipe, Held for Manslaughter

CHARLES M’CANN HELD FOR MURDER

Jury Discharged This Morning after Making Final Report for Term

Police Officer Gus Johnson, colored, was held by the grand jury on a charge of manslaughter, for the killing of Napoleon Lipe, on the night of January 27th, the details of which were published in The Citizen at the time.

As exclusively stated in The Citizen, relatives and friends of the young negro Lipe were much incensed over the fact that the coroner’s jury exonerated Johnson from all blame. They took the matter before the grand jury and after examining witnesses, an indictment was returned against the police officer as above stated.

Gus Johnson has been released on $2,000 bail. His bondsmen are B. McManus, Jr., E. Bucher, and Mike Egan.

Charles S. McCann was held on a charge of murder for the killing of B. H. Hollingshead on the evening of January 24th.

Other indictments were returned as follows:

Albert Johnson, alias "Sonny,” murder.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Thursday, 15 Feb 1912:

The eldest daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Walter Lewis died Saturday night of scarlet fever, it is reported. (Olive Branch)

The infant son of Mr. and Mrs. Glen Lewis died last Thursday night and was buried Friday.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Friday, 16 Feb 1912:

FATAL FALL DOWN AN ELEVATOR SHAFT

Edward Howard, Cashier of Jackson, Mo., Bank Met Sudden Death

ACCIDENT OCCURRED IN ST. LOUIS

Fell from 7th Floor to Basement in National Bank of Commerce Building

St. Louis, Feb. 16.—Edward Howard, 42, cashier of the Cape County Savings Bank of Jackson, Mo., was instantly killed here when he fell from the seventh floor to the basement of the National Bank of Commerce building today. Howard attempted to leave the elevator while it was in motion and fell down the shaft.

JESSE SPIES, JR., DIED THIS MORNING

Jesse W. Spies, Jr., eldest son of Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Spies, died at 3 o’clock this morning of paresis.

Deceased was 34 years of age and is survived by his parents, Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Spies, of No. 316 Twenty-seventh Street, besides three sisters, Mrs. F. R. Place, of Caledonia, N. Y., Mrs. J. L. Wray, of Denver, Colo., and Miss Blanche Spies, of this city. Two brothers, George and Albert, also survive him.

The deceased had been associated with his father in the lumber business at Sikeston, Mo., until four months ago, when he was stricken with illness. He was a native of this city.

He was a member of St. Joseph’s Parish and the funeral services will be announced later. Interment will be made at Villa Ridge.

(Jesse W. Spies married Mollie Mugge on 13 Jan 1875, in Gallatin Co., Ill. A marker in Calvary Cemetery at Olive Branch reads: Jessie W. Spies Jr. 1878-1912.—Darrel Dexter)

FORMER CAIROITE COMMITS SUICIDE

Louis Wilmot, a former Cairoite, committed suicide in St. Louis Wednesday morning. Domestic trouble, followed by his wife’s refusal to live with him, caused the man to commit the rash deed. He leaves, besides his wife, two children and two brothers, John “Peg” Wilmot, of Obar, N.M.Wilmot resided in Cairo about ten years ago and was employed by Henry Hasenjaeger.

OLD SOLDIER DIED THURSDAY

Rufus Hutchinson, a white man and an old soldier, who has been living in a shack near the Farmer’s Hand Wagon Company, opposite the bridge, died Thursday morning and was buried at the expense of the county. His wife survives him.

Mr. and Mrs. G. C. Evans and children, who were called to Cairo recently by the death of Mrs. Evans’ uncle, the late J. E. Jenkins, returned to their home in Waynesville, Ill., today.

Mrs. Furlow, an old lady 80 years of age, living with her son, E. J. Furlow, on Dr. A. E. McKenzie’s farm west of town (Vienna), died of old age Sunday and was buried in the Fraternal Cemetery north of town on Monday afternoon.

Benjamin F. Cagle, 80 years of age, living with his son, J. H. Cagle, on a farm five miles northwest of Goreville, committed suicide by drowning or strangulation in spring on the farm last Saturday. It is said that there was only some two or three feet of water in the spring and was a small one. He had been missing about thirty minutes when a small boy found him with his head and shoulder submerged in the icy waters. Coroner Hood was called to the scene and held an inquest over the body. The jury, of course, returned a verdict of suicide by drowning. Mr. Cagle for some time had been in feeble health and it is thought his mind had become deranged. He had on several occasions threatened to take his life. He leaves several grown children to mourn his departure.

Mrs. Emeline Acorn, aged 84 years, accidentally fell Monday morning, receiving injuries making her recovery doubtful. She lives with her brother, Pence, near Fayville. (Thebes)

Cletus, the infant child of Mr. and Mrs. Glenn Lewis, died Thursday morning at 9 o’clock after a few days’ illness. Little Cletus was nearly two months old and the only child. The mother also has been very low with pneumonia. (Thebes)

On Sunday morning, Feb. 11, Little Oma, the three-year-old daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Walter Lewis, passed away. Death caused by scarlet fever. Little Oma was laid to rest in the Twente Cemetery Monday at 11 o’clock. The parents have the sympathy of their many friends in their sad bereavement. (Thebes)

(Her marker in Twente Crossing Cemetery reads: Oma Mattie Lewis Born Oct. 3, 1909 Died Feb. 11, 1912.—Darrel Dexter)

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Saturday, 17 Feb 1912:

FUNERAL NOTICE

Spies—Died, Friday, Feb. 16, Jesse W. Spies, Jr.

Funeral will be held Sunday afternoon, Feb. 18. Cortege will leave family residence No. 316 Twenty- seventh Street, at 1:30 p.m. for St. Joseph’s Church, where services will be held. Remains will be taken by special train from Fourteenth Street at 2:45 o’clock to Villa Ridge cemetery, where interment will be made.

Friends of the family are invited.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Monday, 19 Feb 1912:

RESIDENT OF VILLA RIDGE DIED SUNDAY

Mrs. Elizabeth Sherrick, widow of the late E. M. Sherrick, died Sunday night at Villa Ridge, after a brief illness of apoplexy. Deceased was 78 years old and had resided near Villa Ridge for nearly fifty years.

She was born in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, and her maiden name was Elizabeth Metzger. She is survived by two daughters, Mrs. Martin McBride, of Villa Ridge, and Mrs. Mary Helman, of Fort Worth Texas. Two sons also survive her, W. H. Sherrick, of Pine Bluff, Ark., and Andrew Sherrick, of Villa Ridge.

The funeral will be held tomorrow.

(M. J. McBride married Lizzie A. Sherrick on 16 Jan 1884, in Pulaski Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

MRS. G. M. PALMER DIED SUNDAY AT ST. LOUIS

Mrs. G. M. Palmer died very suddenly Sunday at the home of her sister, Miss Eliza Beardsley, at St. Louis, Mo. The deceased went to St. Louis last Thursday morning on a visit and was taken suddenly ill Sunday morning and died a few hours later.

The deceased was the wife of G. M. Palmer, of Eleventh Street, and mother of W. B. Huette, Sr. She was 69 years old.

The funeral will be held at St. Louis tomorrow afternoon. Relatives of deceased in this city will leave for that city tonight to attend.

She is survived by her husband, one son, W. B. Huette, and one daughter, Miss Rosalie Huette, of St. Louis, besides two sisters, Mrs. Amy Coleman and Miss Beardsley, of St. Louis and one brother, Robert Beardsley.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Tuesday, 20 Feb 1912:

MURDERER SAFE IN PADUCAH JAIL

White Man Who Murdered Milburn, Ky., Farmer Was Threatened

THREE JAILS IN THREE DAYS

Killed Man Who Accidentally Jostled Him and Apologized

Paducah, Ky., Feb. 20—Confined in the county prison under extra guard, where he was hurriedly delivered Monday evening from Wickliffe, is Will Richardson, 30 years old, an alleged “bad man” and gunfighter of Carlisle County, who is accused of the alleged cowardly murder of John B. Violet, 45 years old, a prosperous planter of Milburn, Carlisle County. Violet was shot and instantly killed by Richardson late Saturday evening at Milburn and the Paducah jail is the third prison in which the alleged murderer has been an inmate since that time to keep him safe from the hands of a mob.

According to reports that reached Sheriff Jim Burnely and Deputy Sheriff Wright, who made a record run to Paducah Monday evening, planters of Carlisle County have sworn to avenge the death of their friend and neighbor.

According to the officers’ version of the killing, Will Richardson went to Milburn Saturday afternoon with the avowed purpose of “getting him a man,” as the alleged slayer is said to have expressed it.

Violet, who is credited with having been a peaceful and inoffensive farmer, in leaving a store entrance is said to have accidently brushed against Richardson. The latter, according to reports, cursed and upbraided Violet in a rough manner.Violet is said to have turned and humbly apologized, ending with the words “excuse me.”

“By God, I’ll excuse you,” Richardson is said to have growled and making a quick draw of his pistol, fired at Violet. In his rage his aim was bad and he came near hitting a woman who was across the street. Once more Richardson worked the trigger. The flame flashed against Violet’s breast, as his body was almost in reaching distance. He toppled to the ground a corpse.

Before Richardson could shoot again, Violet’s son, a youth of 20 years, had grappled with Richardson and held him until other men came to his aid.Richardson was turned over to Deputy Sheriff Wright who hurried him to the Bardwell jail. Before dawn Sunday, the prisoner was transferred to the Wickliffe jail. Even then the officers were uneasy that he was not out of reach of the rumored mob, and Richardson was brought to Paducah by order of Judge Sanderson, who convened court at Bardwell Monday morning in the absence of Judge Bugg.

CARD OF THANKS

This token of heartfelt gratitude to the many kind and helpful friends for their sympathy and kindness during the illness and sad bereavement of their eldest son and brother is extended by Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Spies, sisters and brothers. May the Good Father in heaven, give you strength to bear up when like affliction comes upon you.

Parents, sisters and brothers.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Wednesday, 21 Feb 1912:

OFFICER BRADLEY NOW ON TRIAL

Police Officer under Indictment for Murder Facing Trial

JURY COMPLETED THIS AFTERNOON

All But One from Cairo and Eleven of the Twelve Are White Men

The trial of former police officer Ben Bradley for murder opened in circuit court this morning, and when the noon adjournment was taken, eight jurors had been secured.

The remaining four jurors were secured shortly after court convened this afternoon. Three of the number are from Cairo, and all are white men.

The men chosen for duty follow:

Isaac Cohn, Cairo

E. W. Jones, Cairo

Charles Wunderlich, Cairo

James M. Ice, Willard

J. H. Woodward, Cairo

Ralph Minton, Cairo

P. J. Howischer, Cairo

Rivers White, Future City

J. Harvel, Delta

F. C. Holloway, Cairo

Joseph Bucher, Cairo

H. C. Mulcahy, Cairo

White is the only negro on the jury.

State’s Attorney Wilson made the opening statement for the People and M. J. O’Shea for the defendant.

Mr. and Mrs. E. A. Burke have returned from St. Louis, where they attended the funeral of the late Mrs. G. M. Palmer.

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Thursday, 22 Feb 1912:

McCANN PLEADS GUILTY

C. S. McCann pleaded guilty to manslaughter this afternoon and was sentenced to the penitentiary for an indeterminate sentence.

BEN BRADLEY IS ACQUITTED

Arguments Completed Before Dinner and Case Went to the Jury

DEFENDANT TELLS OF THE CRIME

Claiming that He Mistook Negro He Killed for a Chicken Thief

Bradley was acquitted at 3:30 this afternoon, when the jury returned a verdict of “not guilty” after having been out for three hours.

Albert Johnson, alias “Sonny” pleaded guilty to manslaughter this afternoon and was sentenced to fourteen years in the penitentiary at hard labor. Johnson killed another negro on the steamer John A. Wood last November.

The fate of Ben Bradley, negro and former police officer, rests in the hands of the jury. The attorneys completed their arguments at noon today, at which time the case went to the jury.

The evidence in the trial of Ben Bradley, former police officer, was presented to the jury Wednesday afternoon, but the closing arguments of the attorney were not made until this morning, after which the instructions were given to the jury.

Seven witnesses were examined by the prosecution and four for the defense, among the latter being Bradley himself, who took the stand in his own behalf.

Ben Bradley then took the stand. He testified that he was awakened on the night of Sept. 8, 1911, as he thought, about 10 o’clock, and heard someone enter the gate to his yard. He had been missing many chickens from his hen house and thinking this probably was the thief, went out to apprehend him. When he came out, the man started to run and Bradley followed, catching up with him just outside the gate. A scuffle ensued, the man holding to him with a tight grip, kicking him and biting his hands. He managed to free his right hand in which he held his pistol and struck the man over the head with the gun. This seemed to have no effect on the aggressor and in attempting to strike a second time the man grabbed the gun and in the struggle it went off and the man fell to the ground a corpse. Bradley testified that the man was unknown to him, that he had never seen him before, and that it was after the shooting that he first learned the identity of the deceased. That he didn’t seem to have his senses was his declaration to the jury and he didn’t remember the questioning by Chief Egan shortly after the killing.

PIONEER CITIZEN HAS PASSED AWAY

F. D. Rexford, One of Early Settlers of Illinois, Died Tuesday Night

F. D. Rexford, a former Cairoite, died Tuesday night at the home of his daughter, Mrs. Laura Hartman, at Centralia, Ill., at the age of 83 years. The deceased had been in poor health for over a year.

Until a few months ago Mr. Rexford and his wife made their home in Cairo with their daughter, the late Mrs. W. R. Halliday.

About thirty-five years ago, they resided in Cairo and Mr. Rexford during that time was proprietor of the Planters House and also of the old St. Charles Hotel and was one of the best known hotel men in this part of the state.

Leaving Cairo, he went to Centralia, where, up to the last few years, he was proprietor of the Illinois Central Depot Hotel in that city. He had not been actively engaged in business for over a year.

Mr. Rexford was one of the earliest settlers of Chicago, going there at the time when the only building was the old Fort Dearborn. Because of the swampy conditions of that place, he settled at a place called Blue Island, a few miles north of the Fort Dearborn site, and probably knew more about the early history of Chicago than any man living up to this death and having a remarkable memory, he could picture the sights and happenings at that time, with much interest to his hearers. He was also one of the pioneers that crossed the prairies in 1849, when the gold rush to California occurred and told of many stirring events in the encounter with the Indians.

He is survived by his daughter, Mrs. Hartman, and one son, Norman Rexford, of Chicago. Funeral services were held in Chicago today and interment made in the Blue Island Cemetery.

(William R. Halliday married Frances A. Rexford on 21 Sep 1882, in Marion Co., Ill. Edwin Hartman married Mrs. Laura R. Rexford Pink on 22 Nov 1894, in Marion Co., Ill. Charles Pink married Laura Rexford on 22 Feb 1876, in Alexander Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Friday, 23 Feb 1912:

ONE ACQUITTED; TWO PLEAD GUILTY

Three Murder Cases Disposed of in Short Order Thursday

CASE OF GUS JOHNSON IS CONTINUED

Outcome of McCann Case a Surprise—Petit Jury Discharged for the Term

Criminal business was completed in circuit court Thursday when Judge Butler discharged the petit jury, thanking them for their prompt and efficient service. Today the court listened to several appeal cases and disposed of other minor cases.

Three murder cases were disposed of in the court Thursday afternoon all within a half hour. All morning and part of the afternoon was given over to the trial of Ben Bradley, charged with killing another negro named Henry Smith. The case went to the jury at 1:30 o’clock and after being out about two hours, a verdict exonerating the defendant was returned.

Shortly after this came the plea of guilty on the part of Albert Johnson alias “Sonny” Johnson, for manslaughter and he was sentenced to the Chester penitentiary for an indefinite term from one to fourteen years. In less than fifteen minutes after this Charles McCann, indicted for murder of Bennie Hollinshead, pleaded guilty and was given a like sentence.

McCann shot and killed a river man by the name of Hollinshead in the saloon conducted by Myers Bros. Sixth and Commercial Avenue on the evening of January 27th, the particulars of which are doubtless still fresh in the minds of the people.

According to the eye witness the crime was a cold blooded affair. It is alleged the police were forewarned that McCann was out looking for Hollinshead, but they failed to arrest McCann until after he had fulfilled his mission by killing the man who eloped with his wife a number of years ago.

McCann’s action came as a complete surprise, as it was generally believed that he would fight the case.McCann is said to have been without sufficient funds to engage competent attorneys to defend him.

Gus Johnson Case Continued

The case of police officer Gus Johnson, indicted for the killing of Napoleon Lipe by the grand jury, was continued until the next term of the circuit court which convened in May

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Saturday, 24 Feb 1912:

DEATH SENTENCE FOR RICHARDSON

Will Be Electrocuted at Eddyville on April 19th

A long distance message from Bardwell this afternoon stated that Richardson was sentenced to death in the electric chair. His pleas of guilty failed to save his life.

All Quiet at Bardwell

Bardwell, Ky., Feb. 24.—Willis Richardson, slayer of John Violet, the Milburn farmer, today threw himself upon the mercy of the court in the hopes that it would save his life. The court sentenced him to the electric chair.

Richardson’s electrocution will occur at Eddyville on April 19th. He will be taken to Eddyville tonight.

All was quiet in Bardwell today. The militia was on duty to prevent any outbreak.

Will Scherrick of Pine Bluff, Ark., was here (Villa Ridge) Tuesday, attending the funeral of his mother, Mrs. Elizabeth Scherrick.

(Her marker in Cairo City Cemetery at Villa Ridge reads: Elizabeth Scheirich 1834-1912.—Darrel Dexter)

John Cheniae came in today from Los Angeles Calif., where he has been since last fall. He was called home by the serious illness of his sister, Inez. (Villa Ridge)

The Cairo Evening Citizen, Monday, 26 Feb 1912:

PROMINENT CITIZEN OF BALLARD COUNTY DIED SUNDAY

John Cocke, one of the most prominent citizens of Ballard County, Ky., died Sunday morning at 1 o’clock at the home of his brother-in-law, John R. Harkless, at Wickliffe, of apoplexy. He was taken suddenly ill while attending to some matters at the courthouse Friday afternoon and grew worse until death ended his suffering Sunday morning.

He was interested in the banking business at Wickliffe and also had extensive farming interest in Ballard County. He was well known in Cairo, making frequent business trips here. The members of his family, who are also well known here, are his wife, two daughters, Misses Gussie and Fannie, and two sons, John and Richard.

The funeral was held this afternoon conducted from the Harkless residence, interment being made in the Wickliffe Cemetery. E. A. Burke of this city had charge of the funeral.

FORMER CAIRO LADY DIED SATURDAY

Mrs. H. W. Popejoy, formerly Miss Kate Atcher, of Cairo, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. G. E. Atcher, died at her home in Chicago Saturday after an illness of three months. The funeral will be held Wednesday at Lexington, Ill. She leaves a husband and two little boys.

Mrs. Popejoy was here at the time of her father’s death last November, but was in very poor health at the time.

(Herbert Popejoy married Catherine Atcher on 12 Oct 1904, in St. Clair Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

STORY OF TRIAL AT BARDWELL

In Which Willard Richardson, Desperado, Was Sentenced to Death

CONFESSED TO TWO OTHER MURDERS

To a Fellow Prisoner and Bragged about His Deeds—Weakened at Trial

The following account of the trial of Willard Richardson, who was sentenced to be electrocuted on April 19th, by a jury in the circuit court of Bardwell, Ky., Saturday (as stated in The Citizen Saturday evening) is taken from the Paducah News-Democrat of Sunday.

In the presence of about two hundred spectators who crowded the dingy court room until almost every passage was blocked, Willard Richardson, indicted for murdering John Violett, a prosperous farmer of near Milburn, took the stand in his own defense and threw himself on the mercy of the jury, which had been empaneled after a venire of one hundred and fifty men had almost been exhausted. Less than two hours later, the jury marched up the aisle before Special Judge Sandridge and passed to the clerk their verdict, which sends the slayer to death in the electric chair.

The Trial

At 10:15 o’clock, after one hour and a quarter of hard labor, a jury finally was chosen from the venire of 150 men. But two witnesses took the stand for the prosecution. Each told how Richardson ran against Violett, cursed the dead man and then emptied the contents of a revolver into his body. Throughout all testimony, the crowd sat quietly.

At 10:30 o’clock, with head bowed, and almost too weak to reach the witness stand, Richardson told his story of the murder. Contrary to the general opinion, Richardson did not put up a plea of insanity. Instead, he acknowledged the crime in anything but a steady voice. “I was drunk,” he said “and didn’t know what I was doing. I didn’t know what I was doing and wouldn’t have shot Violett. I was not at myself.”

In defense of Richardson, Attorney Shelbourne made a powerful appeal for the murderer on the plea that he was drunk and did not realize the enormity of the crime he committed. Following this, Commonwealth’s Attorney Robert L. Smith, of Clinton, in a slow but impressive argument, told the jury the prosecution’s side of the case. He said the crime was one of the worst committed in Carlisle and that the death sentence must be imposed on such a character as that which Richardson had proven himself to be.

After the Trial

Following the pronouncing of the sentence, Richardson asked that he be allowed to speak with Judge Sandridge. With tears in his eyes, the judge listened to the man’s story at the conclusion of which he thanked the court. After a handshake he left the courtroom.

When he arrived at the jail for the second time he played several games of cards.

Shortly after news of Richardson’s conviction had been received at the county jail, County Jailer Henry Houser and Deputy Jailer Charles B. Whittemore were called to the door which opens in the iron cage, wherein white male prisoners are kept. After ascertaining that Richardson had confessed to the murder of John Violett and that he had been sentenced to the electric chair, Jerry Moran, an aged man in jail for an alleged petty theft, told the jailers of the murderer’s confession, in which he (Richardson) had killed Violett because of an old grudge he had held against Violett for several years.

“I killed two men down in Texas ten years ago.” Richardson is said to have remarked “and if I could have got something to kill a nigger with, I’d got away from Bardwell. The nigger was guarding me by himself.”

The murderer also told Moran why he had killed Violett. “It’s like this,” Richardson said. “Some time ago Violett and me had some trouble about a trade about a sow and some pigs. I made up my minds I was going to get him. Saturday afternoon I was full of whiskey and drunk. When I saw Violett coming down the street, I thought I just might as well kill him then as any other time, and I pulled my gun and fired.

“I don’t care about dying for it. I got my man and I’m satisfied. The ___ ___ ___ ought to have died long time ago.”

Following this, Richardson, according to Moran, asked him to write his mother, who is blind, and tell her “that I died game. Tell her not to worry about me. Tell her I was in the big ring to the last.”

Richardson also confessed he was a dope fiend and that he used morphine excessively. He claims to escape conviction for one of his Texas murders by an insanity plea and the second by establishing an alibi. Another man, innocent, is serving a term for the second crime. A full confession from Richardson probably will be forwarded to Governor Colquitt, of Texas.

FORMER VIENNA CITIZEN DEAD

William C. Simpson, formerly of Vienna, Ill., but late of Evanston, Ill., died Saturday afternoon at Asheville, N.C., of pneumonia. He went to Asheville in January following a nervous breakdown and was steadily recuperating when he took down with a severe cold and died suddenly.

Mr. Simpson married a niece of Mrs. Walter Warder, of this city, and was well known here. He was a son of the late F. M. Simpson and was one of the best known citizens of Johnson County, where he spent most of his life. He was mayor of Vienna for several years and was also a member of the board of education. He was prominent in pharmaceutical affairs of the state and was at one time resident of the state board of pharmacy. He was one of the chief promoters of the Johnson County fairs and was quite an amateur turfman.

He has been located in Evanston for about 18 months where he conducted the Northwestern Pharmacy, having removed there from Vienna.

He leaves a wife and four children, three girls, Janet, Frances, Florence, and one son, William, all of them being under age. He also leaves his mother, Mrs. Margaret Simpson, of Vienna, and Marion Simpson, a brother, who is an instructor at the University of Illinois at Champaign.

Mr. Simpson was a member of the Cairo Commandery No. 13 Knights Templar, who will probably have charge of the funeral, which will be announced on the arrival of the body.

The remains will pass through Cairo in the morning and funeral will be held at Vienna tomorrow afternoon, in charge of the Masonic lodge of Vienna. Cairo Commandery No. 13, K. T. will act as an escort of honor. Friends will go to Vienna on the morning train to attend the funeral.

(Francis M. Simpson married Maggie A. Copeland on 24 Oct 1871, in Massac Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

Mrs. Elizabeth Tinsely died at her home here (Unity) Monday night 