In the Middle Eastern-spiced, new age “Romeo and Juliet” story “Cairo Time,” middle-aged actors Patricia Clarkson and Alexander Siddig show the youngsters how it’s done.

She’s Canadian Juliette (check) Grant, the wife of a United Nations bureaucrat doing yeoman’s work at a refugee camp in Gaza while she waits for him in the city of the title. He’s Tareq Khalifa, coffeehouse owner and translator who is the husband’s good friend and sometime colleague. When the husband is delayed at the camp, he asks Tareq to show his wife around the city with the proviso they do not visit the Pyramids because the husband and wife want to share it together.

Now, I can give you a Freudian exegesis of all this, but I don’t think reasonably aware adults will require one.

Because this is such an old story, “Cairo Time” has unique requirements all its own. It requires fine actors (check), a location lavishly romantic and sensual (check) and sparks of longing and desire to fly fast and furious (check and check).

Arab-Canadian writer-director Ruba Nadda (“Sabah”) has dealt with this theme of semi-forbidden Muslim-non-Muslim love before. But her treatment of it here is so gentle and her actors so obviously in tune with her cautious and informed approach that they give the film a languid sensuousness that grows on you. To paraphrase Juliette, “The heat is remarkable.”

As Juliette walks alone in the street, Egyptian men brush her body as they pass or glare. Clarkson exudes glamour and gentility, while Siddig (“Syriana”) is a kind of Middle Eastern Cary Grant, chivalrous and obviously enchanted.

The film, shot on location over several weeks, has a very sophisticated sense of the spaces. Scenes set in the White Desert recall John Ford’s Monument Valley, a vast wasteland scoured and scored by eons of wind. The sunsets are pink and scorching. The Middle East-infused score by Dublin, Ireland-born Niall Byrne adds immeasurably to the intoxicating atmosphere.

If “Cairo Time” is finally too restrained for its own good, it will nevertheless transport you to a world probably more exotic and romantic than the one you ordinarily inhabit.

Rated PG. At the Kendall Square Cinema.

(“Cairo Time” contains lots of heat, but no sex or anything objectionable.)