Friday, 1 Jan 1904:

DEATH OF ADMIRAL WHITE

Commander of the Concord on Her Memorable Visit to Cairo Dead.

Cairoites will never forget the visit of the gunboat Concord, which ascended the Mississippi to Cairo, the head of deep-water navigation in May 1892. And those who met the commander of the boat, Commander Edwin White, will remember him as the very impersonation of courtesy and kindliness. His death occurred at the Brooklyn Navy Yard on Dec. 23, coming suddenly as he was making a social call upon a fellow admiral, and was the result of heart trouble.

Saturday, 2 Jan 1904:

Miss Elsie Jenkins, a graduate of the Sumner High School and a daughter of Milton Jenkins, died Wednesday night of consumption and the remains were buried this afternoon. She was 27 years of age and had taught school in Bird’s Point, Mo., and Mayfield, Ill.

(Milton Jenkins married Louiza Anderson on 17 Oct 1864, in Alexander Co., Ill. He married Anna Davis on 17 May 1866, in Alexander Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

Mrs. Kate Broadway, of 412 Union Street, died this morning at 6 o’clock at the age of 78 years. She was the mother of Mrs. Marsh Miller. The funeral services will be held tonight at 8 o’clock, conducted by Rev. Baldridge. The remains will be taken to Anna for interment. Anna and Cobden papers are requested to copy.

Tom Stephens, a young colored man, who was formerly in the post office, died yesterday afternoon of consumption after an illness of several months. He resided at 1514 Cedar Street and is a son of J. M. Stephens, who is employed by the Woodward Hardware Company.

Ruth, the 2-year-old daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Frank Russell, died today at noon after an illness of several days of spinal meningitis. The funeral will probably take place Monday at the residence of Mrs. Russell’s parents, Mr. and Mrs. Walter B. Pettis, 320 Eighth Street. The friends of Mr. and Mrs. Russell extend their sympathy to them in their sad bereavement.

Monday, 4 Jan 1904:

Mrs. Adelia Axley, widow of E. P. Axley, a former resident of this city and Pulaski County, died in St. Louis yesterday. She was a sister-in-law of W. F. Axley, of this city. The remains will be brought here tomorrow afternoon where the funeral will be held and the interment will take place at Villa Ridge.

(The 5 Jan 1904, issue refers to her as Mrs. Perry Axley.—Darrel Dexter)

Fred Kinner was arrested at Caruthersville Saturday and brought to this city and lodged in the county jail by deputies Bob Moore and George Durham. He is charged with being connected with the Thebes lynching and will probably be given his preliminary hearing next Thursday.

The funeral of little Ruth Russell, the 2-year-old daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Frank L. Russell, occurred this afternoon from the residence of Mrs. Russell’s parents, Mr. and Mrs. W. B. Pettis, 320 Eighth Street. The remains were interred in the Villa Ridge cemetery.

The funeral of Michael Hickey, father of Mrs. P. C. Scullin, took place this morning. The deceased was 65 years of age and lived with his daughter and family at 515 Walnut Street. The remains were buried in the Villa Ridge cemetery.

(Patrick C. Scullin married Anna Hickey on 27 Apr 1890, in Alexander Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

Tuesday, 5 Jan 1904:

CARD OF THANKS.

Mr. and Mrs. Milton Jenkins and family wish to return thanks to all (white and colored) who showed kindness and respect to them during their daughter’s illness and death. And to Dr. Dickerson, who has waited upon her for the past five years, we owe much gratitude as he done all he could to give ease to an incurable disease.

LIVED IN MOUND CITY.

Manager Davis of the Iroquois Theater Was on Steamer Black Hawk.

Manager Davis, of the ill-fated Iroquois Theater in Chicago, was a resident of Mound City years ago. He and Attorney Henry G. Carter were on the steamer Black Hawk which blew up near the mouth of Cache about wartime.

FORMER CAIROITE DEAD

J. F. Keeney, of Murphysboro, Died at 6:30 This Morning.

Resided in Cairo for 12 Years Then Removed to Paducah.—Has Resided in Murphysboro About a Year Ago.

J. F. Keeney, a former resident of this city, residing here for about twelve years, died at 6:30 this morning at his home in Murphysboro.

Mr. Keeney was a railroad contractor and removed his family from this city to Paducah several years ago and has been a resident of Murphysboro for only about a year, going there last spring.

The funeral will be held tomorrow afternoon and the interment will take place at Essex, Ill. The deceased leaves a widow and five children, Mrs. Keeney and one child residing in Murphysboro. Mrs. Irene Abell, of this city, is a daughter of the deceased.

DIED SUDDENLY.

Mrs. Phil Brennan Died Very Suddenly Last Night at Her Home on Twenty-first Street.

Mrs. Phil Brennan, wife of Engineer Phil Brennan, of 724 Twenty-first Street, died very suddenly last night about 6:30 of pneumonia.

Mrs. Brennan had been in poor health for some time, but only confined to her bed about a week and her illness was not regarded as serious. Her sudden death, leaving four young children, makes the incident unusually sad. The deceased was a niece of Mrs. T. Gorman. Her husband, Phillip Brennan, and four children, Tom, Willie, Grace and Phyllis survive her. The funeral will probably be held tomorrow afternoon from St. Joseph’s Church with interment at Villa Ridge.

(Phillip Brennan married Catherine Naughton on 3 Oct 1887, in Alexander Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

The remains of Mrs. Perry Axley were brought here (Villa Ridge) Tuesday this week for burial. Mrs. Axley was for many years a resident of this place, but a few years ago removed to St. Louis where her death occurred.

Thursday, 7 Jan 1904:

The funeral of Mrs. Phil Brennan occurred this afternoon from St. Joseph’s Church, with interment at Villa Ridge.

Judge W. A. Wall, of Mound City, passed through Cairo today en route to Farmington, Ill., to attend the funeral of Judge Cadwallader, who was the member of the state board of equalization from the Peoria District.

The funeral of Murray Flautt was held from St. Patrick’s Church, Columbus Ohio, Thursday, Dec. 24, with interment at Mt. Calvary. Mr. Flautt was killed in a railroad wreck at Wellsville, Ohio, Sunday, Dec., 20th. Besides his wife and child, he leaves a father and mother, Mr. and Mrs. J. A. Flautt, two sisters, Misses Leta and Fannie, and one brother, Ferdinand, all of Columbus, Ohio. Mrs. Flautt was formerly Miss Stella Clutts of this city.

James Y. Sloan, of Mound City, a man about twenty-five or thirty years old, tried to commit suicide last night on lower Commercial Avenue by taking the contents of a small bottle of morphine. He was found this morning and taken to St. Mary’s Infirmary. It is expected he will be all right in a few days.

Saturday, 9 Jan 1904:

FEAT WAS ACCOMPLISHED

James Y. Sloan, Who Took Morphine with Suicidal Intent, Dies from Effects.

Act Caused by Family Quarrels.—His Wife Suicided in Springfield a Few Days Ago.

James Y. Sloan, the man who tried to commit suicide a few days ago by taking morphine, mention of which was made in The Citizen at the time, died yesterday afternoon from the effects of the drug in St. Mary’s Infirmary.

The cause for this rash act is supposed to be the result of family quarrels and the suicide of his wife in Springfield a short time ago.

Sloan is about 25 or 30 years of age and resided in Mound City, where it is said he has a mother and sisters.

Coroner McManus held an inquest over the remains last night and the jury’s verdict was in accordance with what has been stated above.

(James Y. Sloan married Oma Garrett on 26 Nov 1899, in Pulaski Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

The funeral of Mrs. John D. Sander occurred this morning from St. Patrick’s Church, with interment at Villa Ridge.

(Her marker in Calvary Cemetery at Villa Ridge reads: Elizabeth wife of J. D. Sander Died Jan. 17, 1904 Aged 38 Yrs., 6 Mos., & 15 Dys.—Darrel Dexter)

Monday, 11 Jan 1904:

Mrs. Louise Dushinger, aunt of Mrs. Fred Hofheinz, died yesterday afternoon about 1 o’clock at St. Mary’s Infirmary. The deceased was in her 76th year and had been ill for several weeks. The funeral was held this afternoon from the residence of Mr. and Mrs. Hofheinz, 220 Sixth Street.

Tuesday, 12 Jan 1904:

The remains of John Y. Sloan, the man who committed suicide last Friday by taking morphine, were buried at Beech Grove Cemetery today. A sister of the deceased at Mound City took charge of the remains.

Miss Nellie Kendall, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. William Kendall, of 429 Twenty-third Street, died Sunday at the age of 17, after several years of illness. Funeral services were held yesterday morning with interment at Villa Ridge. Mr. and Mrs. Con Curran, Miss Maymie Scully, of St. Louis, attended the funeral.

(William C. Kendall married Kate Scully on 24 Oct 1878, in Alexander Co., Ill. Her marker in Calvary Cemetery at Villa Ridge reads: Elena Daughter of William & Katie Kendall Born Jan. 4, 1885 Died Jan. 9, 1904.—Darrel Dexter)

COL. W. H. OWEN DEAD

Government Engineer Well Known in Cairo Passes Away.

Col. William H. Owen died at his home in Washington on December 31st.

He will be remembered by Cairo people as the engineer in charge of the construction of the National cemetery roads.

Col. Owen belonged to a prominent Maine family, was a graduate of Bowdoin College, served in the Civil War and rose to the rank of colonel, then followed his profession of civil engineer and assisted in the construction of the Northern Pacific Road, and was later appointed a civil engineer in the quartermaster general’s office of the United States government.

Friday, 15 Jan 1904:

Miss Kate Hoffman, of Sixth Street, went to Jonesboro, Ill., yesterday to attend the funeral of her niece, Miss Clara Smith, who died Wednesday evening.

(Her marker in Jonesboro Cemetery reads: Clara Schmitt Born Feb. 24, 1872 Died Jan. 13, 1904.—Darrel Dexter)

The funeral services of Sister Mary Galatia were held this morning at 8:30 o’clock at St. Joseph’s Church. The remains will be accompanied tonight by Mr. J. C. Crowley, to St. Mary’s Notre Dame, Ind., two miles from South Bend, for interment.

Fatal Accident at a Mine.

Benton, Ill., Jan. 16.—The hoisting engine of the West Frankfort Big Muddy Coal mines exploded. Engineer Sells was instantly killed and Night Engineer Nickerson and Pit Boss Seymour were probably fatally injured. The mine is a new one and had been down to coal only ten days.

The Sisters of the Holy Cross tender their most grateful thanks to their many kind friends of all religious denominations whose sympathy and tender offices were so generously extended on the occasion of the last illness and the funeral of their lamented Sister, M. Galasia. To the reverend clergy, to the physicians, and to the press, they especially tender heartfelt gratitude.

THEBES LYNCHING CASE

Up Again This Afternoon in Judge Robinson’s Court.

Fred Kenner, of Santa Fe, Ill., was given a preliminary hearing this afternoon in Judge Robinson’s court for murder in connection with the Thebes lynching case. He was represented by Hon. Reed Green and Thomas B. Whitledge, of St. Mary’s Mo. The attorney general’s office, which is conducting the prosecution, was represented by Assistant Attorney General George B. Gillespie, Judge W. A. Wall, of Mound City, and State’s Attorney Wilson. The trial in Judge Robinson’s court was by agreement.

OLD RESIDENT DEAD

Mrs. Anna Kaha Passed Away Saturday Night at Age of 89 Years.

Mrs. Anna Kaha, one of Cairo’s old residents, died about midnight Saturday at the home of her daughter Mrs. Charles Frank, 910 Walnut Street, at the age of 89 years. Her death was due to old age and the end came peacefully.

The deceased was the mother of seven children, three of whom are living, and two of them, Mrs. Charles Frank and Louis Kaha, in this city. The third, Mrs. J. A. Jennelle, resides in St. Louis.

The deceased children are Mrs. Charles F. Nellis, Mrs. Henry Gossman, Mrs. Christiana Albreacht, and a son who died nearly forty years ago.

The funeral will probably be held tomorrow morning.

Memorial services were held Saturday afternoon by the bar of Pulaski County on the death of Judge Joseph P. Robarts. Each attorney present briefly made appropriate remarks, which closed with an address by the court, Judge Vickers. Resolutions were ready by Judge William A. Wall and adopted by the bar. A large number were present at the session, among them being Mrs. Robarts.

W. S. Sanderson is in Joplin, Mo., attending the funeral of his father.

Tuesday, 19 Jan 1904:

Mrs. T. M. Howley left last evening for Lima, Ohio, where she was called by the condition of her mother, who was recovering from a serious illness and suffered a relapse.

J. C. Crowley has returned from Notre Dame, Ind., where he accompanied the remains of Sister Galasia.

HELD UNDER $1,000 BOND

Fred Kenner, of Santa Fe, Waived Examination Before Judge Robinson.

Fred Kenner, of Santa Fe, was held under $1,000 bond Monday in Judge Robinson’s court, to await the action of the February grand jury to answer to the charge of having participated in the Thebes lynching case. His father went on his bond and he was released.

The funeral of Mrs. Anna Kaha occurred this afternoon at her home, 910 Walnut Street, with interment at Villa Ridge cemetery.

Wednesday, 20 Jan 1904:

VETERAN ENGINEER DEAD

T. H. Smith Passed Away in Jackson, Tenn., Yesterday

Served the Mobile and Ohio for More than Thirty Years.—Drew Pension from Railroad.

T. H. Smith, better known as “Pap” Smith, died Tuesday morning at his home, Jackson, Tenn. He bore the distinction of being the oldest engineer in the Mobile and Ohio railroad service. The immediate cause of death was flux. The veteran engineer went out upon his final run, with Paradise as the termination, at the good old age of 76 years.

“Daddy” Smith had been in the M. & O. service for something over thirty years. Some time ago he felt his health failing and resigned. He was later made “pump man” in Jackson and was afterwards given a place as oil supplier at the shops. For some time he has been given a pension of $20 per month by the road, which he served so long and faithfully. Some months ago Mr. Smith was taken ill and had not been well since, but it was only two weeks ago that his condition became alarming.

Thursday, 21 Jan 1904:

Little Alice Scott, daughter of Mr. C. Scott, died Tuesday of pneumonia. The funeral occurred last evening conducted by Rev. J. M. Sutherland, of Mound City, and the burial was at Villa Ridge. She was 14 months old.

Friday, 22 Jan 1904:

DEATH OF MRS. CASEY

Passed Away Yesterday Afternoon at Her Home on Twenty-Seventh Street.

Mrs. Thomas Casey, wife of Thomas Casey, superintendent of the cooper shops at the Halliday Milling Company, died yesterday afternoon at the age of 41 years, at her home, 315 Twenty-seventh Street.

The deceased had only been ill for about two weeks, but her health has been gradually for the past several months suffering from consumption.

Mrs. Casey was a member of the order of Catholic Knights and Ladies of America, and the Ladies’ Auxiliary of the Ancient Order of Hibernians. She carried life insurance in former order and the funeral services will be conducted under its auspices.

The deceased is survived by her husband and one son, Gilbert, a young man about 20 years of age.

The funeral services will probably be held Sunday afternoon from St. Joseph’s Church with interment at Villa Ridge cemetery.

Judge Dickey, cashier of the Wickliffe National Bank, died there yesterday of pneumonia. He was the founder of the bank several years ago, the first and only one that town had for a number of years. He was a prominent, public-spirited citizen, and his loss will be greatly felt by the entire community. He had many friends in the city who will be grieved to learn of his death.

A negro died in Crawford’s saloon early this morning of neuralgia of the heart. His name was Ed Stevens and his home was in Missouri. The remains were buried by the county. (Mounds)

C. K. and L. A. NOTICE

The members of St. Joseph Branch No. 23 C. K. and L. of A. are requested to attend a special meeting to be held at their hall at 7:30 o’clock this evening, for the purpose of making arrangements to attend the funeral of their deceased sister, Mrs. Thomas Casey. By order of the president.

Miss Etta Kennedy

Saturday, 23 Jan 1904:

It is reported that Miss Idalia Neblette, formerly of this city, now residing in St. Louis, has been named as beneficiary in the will of a wealthy relative who recently died in Texas.

Harrison Owens and Joseph Blakemore, charged with the killing of James Muskyvalley at Mounds last summer, were sentenced to 40 years in the penitentiary. The former is 17 years of age and the latter 24 years. They acknowledged the shooting but each claimed not to know that the gun was loaded. A motion for a new trial was overruled by the court.

Monday, 25 Jan 1904:

JOSEPH BOURGOIS DEAD

Passed Away Last Night about 9 O’clock of Consumption.

Joe Bourgois, a brother of John Bourgois, died suddenly last night about 9 o’clock of consumption.

The deceased was 36 years of age and was a widower, his wife having died some years ago. He was well known in this city and is a stepbrother of Mrs. Helena Barth, of Sixteenth and Locust Streets.

Mr. Bourgois has been the manager of his brother’s gardens on the west side of the city for a good many years and was a very successful gardener. He resided on the Mississippi levee near Twenty-eight Street.

(Joseph Burgois married Mary Ruser on 7 Jul 1887, in Alexander Co., Ill. Sebastian Barth married Salina Burgois on 9 Aug 1870, in Alexander Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

L. H. Myers received a message Saturday announcing the death of Mrs. Wilson, mother of H. G. Wilson, Mrs. Meyers’ son-in-law, which occurred in St. Louis Saturday at noon. Mr. Wilson is general freight agent for the Frisco system in St. Louis. He formerly resided in this city. The funeral of Mrs. Wilson occurred today, with interment at Crown Hill Cemetery, Indianapolis.

He Gets Off Pretty Cheaply.

Charleston, Ill., Jan. 25.—The jury in the W. K. Honn wife murder case has rendered a verdict of guilty and Judge Thompson sentenced the prisoner to the penitentiary from five to twenty-one years. The prisoner is a son of W. S. Honn, a banker of Ashmore, and about 25 years of age. He was forced to marry the woman of whose murder he is convicted.

FUNERAL NOTICE.

Died, January 24, 1904, Joseph Bourgois, aged 39 years.

Funeral services will be held tomorrow morning, at St. Joseph’s Church, at 8:30 o’clock and the remains will be taken to Villa Ridge cemetery for interment. Funeral train will leave foot of Eighteenth Street at 9:30 a.m. Friends of the family are invited to attend.

Tuesday, 26 Jan 1904:

PULASKI COUNTY CITIZEN

Matt Roach, a Prominent and Prosperous Farmer Passes Away.

His Death Occurred Very Suddenly Sunday Morning.—Attacked with Acute Pains and Death Followed.

Matt Roach, of Levings, Pulaski County, one of the thriftiest and best-known farmers in Southern Illinois died very suddenly Sunday morning at his home.

He was attacked with violent pains Saturday and after applying hot water bottles to his side he seemed to feel relieved. On rising early Sunday morning he was seized with an acute pain and fell to the floor and died before a physician could be called.

His death is a great shock to his wife and seven children who survive him. He has a sister, Mrs. Sarah O’Shea, of 414 Eighth Street.

The deceased was a stockholder of the First State Bank of Mounds City and prominent in the business affairs of the county. He was a large raiser and shipper of grain and owned one of the handsomest residences in the county.

The funeral was held this morning and a number of his Cairo friends went up to attend.

(Matthew Roach married Sallie Worthington on 30 May 1874, in Alexander Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

Passenger train No. 26, which passed north on the Illinois Central railroad Saturday afternoon, killed a man 140 miles below Cairo. He was sitting on the rail with a jug of whiskey in his hands and the train was so near when it was discovered that the engineer, who did his best, could not stop in time and the pilot hit him throwing him quite a distance. When picked up he was already dead. The jug was not injured. The remains were brought to the next village, where he was identified as a carpenter and belonged there. He had been on a spree for several days. There was still about three inches of whisky in the jug.

The funeral of Joseph Bourgois occurred from St. Joseph’s Church this morning, with interment at Villa Ridge cemetery.

Wednesday, 27 Jan 1904:

The late Matt Roach had a $5,000 life insurance, which he took out only a month before his death. The policies are in the Northwestern and Frank H. Lombard of Dongola wrote them.

Died, January 23, 1904, Mrs. Lillian May Read, aged 31 years, 1 month and 8 days. The funeral services were conducted by Rev. J. M. Sutherland at the Congregational church and interment took place at Beech Grove Cemetery. She leaves a husband and two small sons.

Thursday, 28 Jan 1904:

Mrs. Holderby, mother of Andrew Holderby, is reported to be very low and not expected to survive. Mr. Holderby has been notified to return home.

Judge Alfred Comings received a dispatch this afternoon notifying him of the death of his brother, Uriel L. Comings, at 8 o’clock this morning at his home in Windsor, Vt. The deceased was nearly 75 years of age and for several months had been a sufferer from heart trouble. He was postmaster at Windsor for twelve years and last winter served as doorkeeper of the Vermont House of Representatives. He visited Cairo sixteen years ago and two years ago Judge and Mrs. Comings visited him in Vermont. He leaves a widow, two daughters and a granddaughter.

Died at her home three miles west of Sandusky, on the 19th, Mrs. Clarence Brown. (Sandusky)

(Clarence H. Brown married Dory Bell Dunning on 25 Jan 1896, in Alexander Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

Friday, 29 Jan 1904:

ANOTHER CITIZEN GONE

H. B. Ellis Passes Away Suddenly Last Night at 11:15

Had Been Ill for Some Weeks and Was Getting Along Nicely When a Change for the Worse Came.

Another old and well-known citizen has passed from earth, but his memory will linger.

Last night shortly after eleven o’clock, L. B. Ellis died at his residence, corner of Eleventh and Walnut street, after an illness of some weeks. He has been ailing for some years with Bright’s disease, which has caused him considerable suffering. For the past several weeks he has been confined to his bed and his recovery was doubtful, but during the past few days he seemed somewhat better and his death, which occurred last night, was rather sudden to the members of this family. He died peacefully with no apparent suffering.

The deceased was born in Exeter, England, Nov. 14, 1828, and was brought to this county in his infancy. His parents, Richard and Mary Ann Ellis, settled in Rock Island, Ill. In his youth he learned the trade of marble cutter in Cincinnati and followed this trade for several years, when he became interested in the iron foundry business in St. Louis, which he conducted for nearly fifteen years. During the war he removed to Mound City, where he established a foundry and did work for the government on its ironclad vessels. In 1867, Mr. Ellis removed to Cairo.

In March 1858, Mr. Ellis was married to Miss Otteline Waugh, of Rock Island, who with five sons and two daughters survive him.

The deceased was associated with his brother, T. B. Ellis, in a steam boating in Cairo and ran the first regular ferryboat here. They also owned steamboats in the Ohio and Mississippi and White River trades, retiring in the 70s from this business.

He was for years actively connected with the Telegram, but owing to poor health retired from active business several years ago. The wide circle of friends and acquaintances join in extending their sympathy to the bereaved relatives. Interment will be held at Bellefontaine Cemetery, St. Louis, in the family lot.

Mrs. C. B. Hill, of Warshaw, Ill., a sister of the deceased, and T. B Ellis, a brother, of Rock Island, Ill., have been notified and will attend the funeral.

(Henry B. Ellis married Ottilive Waugh on 7 Feb 1858, in Rock Island Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

LET OUT ON SMALL BOND.

J. H. Shoemaker Is Free.—Acted Only in Self Defense, It Is Said.

Word was received this morning by the Sondheimer Lumber Company from Mr. Ranger, manager of the company’s plant near Shepard, Tex., that J. H. Shoemaker, who shot and killed a man named J. W. Vaughan, Tuesday night, has been released on a small bond and it is believed that he will be cleared. Mr. Ranger stated that Shoemaker acted in self-defense and that the company would stand by him and see that he received justice.

Mrs. Shoemaker received the following message from the sheriff at Shepard this afternoon: “Your message signed ‘Shoemaker’ sent out to camp. Our friend Shoemaker is all right and free.”

Mr. Shoemaker is superintendent of the Sondheimer Company’s business at Sheppard and owns the photograph gallery here formerly owned by F. S. Sloan.

Saturday, 30 Jan 1904:

SHOEMAKER TELLS STORY

Of the Killing of J. W. Vaughn in Letter to His Wife.

Statement Shows the Affair was Committed in Self Defense and that He Was Justified.

Mrs. J. H. Shoemaker received a letter from her husband this morning relating the circumstance of the killing of J. W. Vaughn. The story as told by Mr. Shoemaker is as follows:

“J. W. Vaughn is a drinking man usually does about as he pleases when under the influence of liquor. Last Sunday he became intoxicated and began to abuse me and every one else about here. I talked nice to him and tried to avert trouble and he took this as cowardly and tried to run over me. He went up and down the street swearing and blowing and had everyone in their houses. He said he intended to run everyone out of the camp and was going to kill everyone. After saying this he started to his house saying to me, ‘I am going to kill you.’ He then began to call me all kinds of foul names. I went to my office and got a revolver in case he carried out his intentions I would have some means of protection, little thinking at the time, however, I would be forced to use it. Now this was after sundown, but I could see things around me. I was standing in front of the cook tent when he came out of his house. In the tent were some women and children, who seemed much alarmed. He came near me and with his hands behind him said with an oath, ‘I have you now where I want you.’

“At this junction I shot, killing him instantly.

“They did not arrest me but put me under $500 bond. Even the man’s own father-in-law said, ‘You did right,’ while his wife said that he was a hard man to get along with.”

The funeral services were held over the remains of H. B. Ellis yesterday afternoon at the family residence, 1014 Walnut Street, conducted by Rev. E. Roland. The remains were taken to St. Louis this morning at 2:25 accompanied by his sons, Messrs. Eugene and Clarence Ellis. Other members of the family were prevented from going on account of illness. The pallbearers yesterday were Mayor Claude Winter, Postmaster Sidney B. Miller, T. J. Kerth, Capt. George Clark, T. B. Reese, Capt. John W. King. Interment was made this afternoon in Bellefontaine Cemetery, St. Louis, the funeral being conducted from the residence of his daughter, Mrs. Luther S. Taylor.

(Luther S. Taylor married Daisy M. Ellis on 15 Apr 1891, in Alexander Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

Monday, 1 Feb 1904:

MORTUARY.

Mrs. Mary McTigue, mother of Officer Anthony McTigue and Mrs. Kate Thomas, died this afternoon about 3 o’clock at the home of Mrs. Thomas, 311 Twenty-first Street.

The deceased was over 90 years old and her death was due to old age. Her husband died during the yellow fever.

The funeral will probably be held Wednesday morning at 8 a.m. from St. Joseph’s Church.

(James W. Thomas married Kate McTigue on 26 Oct 1880, in Alexander Co., Ill. A marker in Calvary Cemetery at Villa Ridge reads: Anthony McTigue Native of the Parish of Kong, County of Mayo, Ireland Died Oct. 21, 1878 Aged 69 Years. Mary wife of Anthony McTigue Died Feb. 1, 1903.—Darrel Dexter)

Marie, the infant daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Raymond Henderson, died about 1:30 o’clock this afternoon at St. Mary’s Infirmary. The child was only about three weeks old and had been in ill health since its birth. The funeral will probably occur tomorrow morning, the remains being conducted to Villa Ridge in carriages.

Tuesday, 2 Feb 1904:

EMORY ROGERS DEAD

Passed Away at Colorado Springs This Morning of Tuberculosis.

Emory Rogers, who married Miss Florence Halliday, daughter of the late Capt. W. P. Halliday, passed away at Colorado Springs this morning, of tuberculosis. He had been there a year seeking restored health.

The remains will be taken to Boston for interment.

The deceased leaves a wife and two children, a boy of 10 and a girl of 7 years.

(Emery H. Rogers married Florence Halliday on 24 Aug 1892, in Cook Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

Wednesday, 3 Feb 1904:

Sheriff Roche received a telegram this morning from Sheriff George A. Crain of Bloomfield Mo., authorizing the arrest of Fred Riddle, who is wanted by the supreme court, charged with murder. Riddle is a bartender at Riddle’s saloon, corner of Thirteenth and Commercial Avenue. He is under arrest and waiting the arrival of the sheriff.

The trial of J. H. Shoemaker for killing J. W. Vaughn, near Sheppard, Texas, is set for February 15. All indications point toward an acquittal. The people of that locality are glad to get rid of Vaughn, as he is said to have been a bully and a hard man to get along with.

The remains of Emory H. Rogers, who died at Colorado Springs yesterday, will be taken to Boston for burial. W. P. Halliday, of Memphis, will join his sister, Mrs. Rogers, in Chicago tomorrow and go on to Boston with the remains.

Clemens Schindler, father of City Treasurer August Schindler, died yesterday afternoon at his home near Beech Ridge. The deceased was 81 years of age and his death was caused by congestion and debility. He had resided in Alexander County for many years. Married three times, he is now survived by his third wife and several children. Three daughters and one son reside in St. Louis, and one daughter lives at Cape Girardeau, Mo. The remains were brought to Cairo today and the funeral will be held tomorrow morning at 8 o’clock at St. Joseph’s Church, with interment at Villa Ridge.

Thursday, 4 Feb 1904:

James Willard Mason, the little son of Mr. and Mrs. Lacy Mason, of Third Street, died at noon today, after an illness of several days. The child was nearly seven months old.

Capt. Frank Mooar of Bellevue, Ky., was drowned off the steamer Adele, Sunday night, January 24th, and Douglas Lodge No. 49 K of P., of Bellevue, is sending out circulars with his description in hopes that his body may be recovered.

The infant child of Mr. and Mrs. G. A. James, of 708 Twenty-third Street, died early this morning. It was only about two weeks of age. The remains will be taken to Arlington, Ky., and buried tomorrow.

Ira Miller came home from Carbondale to be at the bedside of his father, who was dangerously ill. (Wetaug)

Thomas Knupp, whose wife lately died, is now making his home at J. C. Knupp’s east of town. (Wetaug)

(Thomas Knupp married Mrs. Sarah Simpson on 18 Jan 1894, in Union Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

Died, at her home Monday, February 1, Mrs. William Slawson. (Thebes)

(William James Slawson married Mary Jane Waterman on 16 Oct 1870, in Alexander Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

Friday, 5 Feb 1904:

TO TRY TWO BIG MURDER CASES

Thebes Lynching Case and O’Neil Case to Come Up at February Term of Court.

Two important murder trials are on the docket for the February term of circuit court, which convenes at the courthouse next Monday with Judge Butler presiding. One is the trial of Grimes and O’Neil for the killing of Con Sheehan in the Brewery Saloon during the Modern Woodmen carnival last fall. The other is the trial of Dixon, Metcalf and Kenner for participating in the Thebes lynching. Both cases give promise of being hard fought trials.

Twenty-three prisoners are in the county jail waiting trial and the prospect is that the term will be given over largely to criminal business, as is usually the case.

Judge Butler has a number of cases and he will call in Judge Duncan to try them at some time during the term.

Thirty-one cases will be tried during the term.

Saturday, 6 Feb 1904:

Patrick Bannon, who died in Cook County, is reported to have had a brother, Adam Bannon, who is a priest in this city. The police have failed to learn anything about him.

Wednesday, 10 Feb 1904:

Yesterday afternoon about 3:30 o’clock, Belle Mason shot John Green in the stomach with a 32-calibre revolver, giving him a wound that may prove fatal. The affair occurred near Fourth Street on Lower Commercial. The woman has been employed as Green’s housekeeper until a few days ago, when she moved to 402 Commercial, claiming that Green had threatened to kill her. Yesterday afternoon Green went to her apartments and endeavored to pick a quarrel. It is understood that Green had been drinking and drove the woman into the street with a revolver. In a struggle she got possession of the gun and shot Green in the stomach. This angered Green and he pulled out a razor and slashed her across the wrist. She was arrested and lodged in the city jail and Green was taken to St. Mary’s Infirmary.

Thursday, 11 Feb 1904:

DIED AT COUNTY JAIL.

James Monahan, Brought From Thebes, Alleged Insane, Passes Away in the Jail.

A man named James Monahan was brought here yesterday afternoon from Thebes by Deputy Sheriff Hiller and Harry Pettit. He has been employed as a laborer on the bridge at that place until he began drinking, when he was lodged in jail. His actions were very strange and he was thought to be insane.

During his confinement he secured a stove leg and beat himself about the head and body with it. His condition becoming serious, he was brought to this city and lodged in the county jail, where he died in a short time.

Monahan is reported to have relatives in Wisconsin and Chicago.

Henry, the 2-year-old son of Mr. and Mrs. J. P. Peterson, of 2401 Washington Avenue, died on yesterday morning of bronchitis. The funeral was held this afternoon with burial at Villa Ridge cemetery.

John Green, who was shot Tuesday afternoon by Belle Mason on lower Commercial, died last night at St. Mary’s Infirmary. The coroner held an inquest over the remains today and the jury rendered a verdict acquitting the woman on the ground of justified homicide.

Emile Schlamer, brother of Mrs. Fanny Steger, of 2025 Washington Avenue, and brother-in-law to John Bourgois, died at his home at 11 o’clock yesterday at Beech Ridge of pneumonia. He leaves a wife and son and six daughters, Emile, Fannie, Caroline, Emma, Eugenia, Hattie and Louise. He was born in Hericourt, France, Hatue Soone, France, June 28th, 1852, and came to America with his parents on Sept. 18, 1871. In 1877 he married Mrs. Emma Marquard, daughter of Mrs. Marquard, of Twenty-fourth Street. The funeral will occur tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. at the cemetery at Beech Ridge.

(Emile Schlamer married Emma Marquard on 27 Sep 1877, in Alexander Co., Ill. Joseph Steger married Fannie Schlamer on 2 Apr 1877, in Alexander Co., Ill. His marker in Baumgard Cemetery reads: Emile Schlamer Born June 28, 1852 Died Feb. 10, 1904. Farewell my wife and children all, from you a father Christ doth call.—Darrel Dexter)

Thomas Beggs, a farmer who resided near Perks, died of dropsy, last week.

Friday, 12 Feb 1904:

AGED LADY DEAD

Mrs. Wilhelmina Boge, Mother of Mrs. Fred Hofheinz, Passed Away Yesterday Afternoon.

Mrs. Wilhelmina Boge, mother of Mrs. Fred Hofheinz, died at the home of her daughter on Sixth Street yesterday afternoon about 4:30 o’clock.

The deceased was 80 years of age and had suffered from catarrh of the stomach for several years from which she died.

Mrs. Boge was born in Berlin, Prussia. She married early to Charles Schmetzstorff, who brought his wife and children to Cairo, in 1854. Of eight children born, Mrs. Fred Hofheinz, is the only one now living.

The deceased has been blind for about twenty years, having contracted a severe cold which settled in her eyes and resulted in the loss of her sight.

The funeral will be held tomorrow afternoon with burial at Villa Ridge cemetery.

A brother of James Monahan, the man who was brought in from Thebes a day or so ago and who died at the courthouse, is here from Chicago. He will take the remains back to Chicago.

Saturday, 13 Feb 1904:

MET DEATH NEARING HOME

Prominent Cobdenite Passed Away Today on Illinois Central Train.

Was Homeward Bound from California.—Body Will Arrive Tonight.—Deceased Was Victim of Consumption.

R. F. Green, of Cobden, a prominent young man of that place and a member of the firm of S. R. Green & Son, died on an Illinois Central train near New Orleans today. He was returning from Southern California, where he had been for his health, and was accompanied by his wife, when death overtook him. The deceased had the consumption. The body will be brought up tonight for interment at Cobden.

(Robert Franklin Green married Susie Marion Brown on 1 Jan 1885, in Union Co., Ill. His marker in Cobden Cemetery reads: R. F. Green 1863-1904.—Darrel Dexter)

W. J. Wise died at his home, 1210 Washington Avenue, yesterday of empyaema at the age of 75 years. The deceased is the father of Mrs. Stewart, wife of the well known butcher. He leaves a wife and several daughters. The funeral will occur tomorrow with interment at Anna.

(William Joseph P. Wise married Louisa F. Thomas on 7 Oct 1849, in Johnson Co., Ill. James Stewart married Sarah A. Wise on 16 Mar 1880, in Union Co., Ill. His marker in Anna City Cemetery reads: William J. Wise 1829-1904.—Darrel Dexter)

Monday, 15 Feb 1904:

Mrs. Joseph Farnbaker, formerly of this city, died in Memphis, Saturday of apoplexy. The deceased was 51 years of age. Her husband, who is deputy sheriff at Memphis and a son of Isaac Farnbaker, of this city, survives her, also a daughter, Mrs. Jesse T. Kyle. She also leaves a sister, Mrs. N. E. Jacobs, of Memphis, and a brother, Wilton Trigg, of this city.

(Joseph Farnbaker married Mrs. Mollie Johnson nee Trigg on 8 Apr 1890, in Alexander Co., Ill.

The trial of Napoleon Hickson, the Thebes case, is set for Wednesday of this week. Attorneys Hubbard, of Essex, Mo., Taylor, of Elizabethtown, Ill., and John R. Magee will be on the defense.

SWITCHMAN BADLY HURT

Tom Whiteaker Run Over at Mounds This Morning.

Both Limbs Crushed by Engine No. 620.—Brought Down to Cairo and Placed in Infirmary.

Tom Whiteaker, a switchman for the Illinois Central at Mounds, was run over by engine No. 620 this morning, in front of the Y. M. C. A. building there. He failed to notice the engine which was backing up, and stepped backward upon the track. One limb was crushed below the hip and the other below the knee. The engine crew did not know that they had run over him until they had passed on down the track.

Whiteaker is a brother of Dr. Whiteaker, of Mound City, and has a wife and one child living at Mounds.

He was brought down to Cairo and taken to the infirmary.

Tuesday, 16 Feb 1904:

Mr. and Mrs. Julius Weber, have returned from Centralia, where they went to attend the funeral of Mrs. Weber’s father.

Tom Whitaker, who was run over by an Illinois Central train at Mounds yesterday, mention of which was made in The Citizen, last evening, died last evening about 4:30 o’clock.

Wednesday, 17 Feb 1904:

STATE WANTS MORE DELAY

In the Thebes Lynching Case, But It May Come to Trial Tomorrow.

In the Thebes case the state wants a continuance until the next term of court, and an affidavit is being made out and will be presented this evening.

Louis Blatteau, the eldest son of Mrs. Margaret Blatteau, of 1009 Walnut Street, died yesterday near Waco, Texas. The deceased was 38 years of age and had been in poor health for several years. He was formerly connected with the express company in this city and was considered a faithful and valuable employee. He left here several years ago for the south to seek benefit for his health, which gradually grew worse. A wife and two children survive him.

Thursday, 18 Feb 1904:

JOHNSON WAS RELEASED

State’s Attorney Entered Nolle in the Unity Homicide Case.

Hixon, in the Thebes Lynching Case, Admitted to Bail, but Has not Yet Furnished Bond.

Stephen Johnson, charged with murder at Hodges Park, was released this morning, State’s Attorney Wilson entering a nolle in his case. There was no evidence to show that he did not act in self-defense.

Napoleon Hixon, whose case was continued last evening until the May term, was admitted to bail in the sum of $2,000, but has not yet given bond. This is the Thebes lynching case.

J. H. Sydenstricher, well known here (Wetaug), died the 29th of last month at the Soldiers’ Home in Quincy, Ill. His son James was killed in the Philippines last July.

(James H. Sydenstricker was a private in Co. E, 35th Missouri Infantry, enlisting Aug. 21, 1862, at St. Joseph, Mo., and was mustered out June 28, 1865, at Little Rock, Ark.—Darrel Dexter)

Floyd, the 3-year-old son of Mrs. T. E. Barringer, died Friday of malignant typhoid fever. He was a bright little fellow and his death was a severe blow to his mother and to his grandparents, Mr. and Mrs. D. S. Richey. (Wetaug)

Reed Golf, formerly of this place (Curry), died at the Cairo hospital and was buried at Villa Ridge cemetery last Friday, but was removed by his partners to the New Hope Cemetery on Sunday.

(A marker in New Hope Cemetery near Ullin reads: Reed Gorf Died Feb. 11, 1904 Aged 23 Yrs., 5 Mos., & 28 Ds.—Darrel Dexter)

Mrs. Ida Stull died recently at her home at this place (Curry) and was buried at the New Hope Cemetery.

(Her marker in New Hope Cemetery near Ullin reads: Ida wife of J. A. Stull Born May 11, 1866 Died July 3, 1904—Darrel Dexter)

Friday, 19 Feb 1904:

Louise May Bechdel, the 8-year-old daughter of Thomas Bechdel, the painter, of Center and Pine street, died today at noon after an illness of only nine days of pneumonia.

(Thomas Bechdel married Katie Kaderli on 15 Apr 1891, in Alexander Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

The remains of Louis Blateau will arrive in Memphis tonight and the interment will be made in that city tomorrow.

Saturday, 20 Feb 1904:

CHARLES B. FAIR DEAD.

Former Cairoite Passes Away in Chicago Yesterday.—Death Result of Heart Trouble.

Mayor Claude Winter yesterday received word from Chicago announcing the death of Charles B. Fair, a former Cairoite, who was at one time in charge of the Galigher ice plant. He was an expert machinist and came to Cairo every year to superintend work on Winter Brothers Ice Factory.

The deceased leaves a wife and daughter, the latter about 15 years of age. The remains will be brought to Villa Ridge and services conducted by the A. O. U. W. or the Alexander Lodge I. O. O. F. as the deceased was a member of both orders.

Judge Duncan will be on the bench next week. The O’Neil case is set for Tuesday. O’Neil is charged with the killing of Con Sheehan and the shooting of Mike Egan, in the old brewery saloon during the carnival last October. State’s Attorney Wilson will be assisted in the prosecution by Attorney Reed Green, and Attorney Angus Leek will be one of the attorneys for the defense.

Thomas Whiteaker, who was killed at Mounds while engaged in switching for the Illinois Central, was a son of Capt. Mark Whiteaker, of Vienna.

Monday, 22 Feb 1904:

A HEAD-ON COLLISION

Occurred at Paducah Yesterday in which a Fireman Was Killed.

Paducah, Ky., Feb. 22.—The Cairo Hopkinsville train of the Illinois Central which leaves Cairo at 6 a.m., collided with a freight train here yesterday about 200 yards from the depot. Fireman Clarence Dazzell, of the passenger train, was killed and Engineer William O. Burch was injured. The passengers were badly shaken up, but the freight crew escaped without injury.

BOY FELL THROUGH SHAFT.

Felix Hartwig, 14 Years Old, Fatally Injured at Paducah This Morning.

Paducah, Ky., Feb. 22.—Felix Hartwig, 14 years old, fell down a shaft at the Consolidated Collar Company’s plant this morning in this city. He fell three stories and his spine was seriously injured and he suffered concussion of the brain. It is thought that he will die.

FUNERAL NOTICE.

BRANKEL—Died at St. Mary’s Infirmary, Sunday morning at 7 o’clock of pneumonia, Feb. 21, 1904, William Brankel, son of Joseph Brankel, of 2207 Walnut, aged 36 years. Funeral services will be held at St. Joseph’s Church at 8 o’clock Tuesday morning, Feb. 23.

The funeral of Charles B. Fair occurred this morning. A special train went up to Villa Ridge with the I. O. O. F. and A. O. U. W. lodges who had charge of the ceremonies.

The funeral of Louise May Bechdel, daughter of Thomas Bechdel, the painter, was held yesterday afternoon at the residence, 703 Cedar Street. Rev. J. T. M. Knox had charge of the services. The burial took place at Villa Ridge.

Frank A. Randall, a river man and son of Mrs. E. M. Randall, of 415 Thirty-fourth Street, died early Sunday morning of typhoid fever. The deceased was a nephew of Capt. James Higlen. The funeral was held this morning and the remains went to Michigan for interment. The deceased was unmarried and about 38 years of age.

William Brankel, who has been ill at St. Mary’s Infirmary with pneumonia, died yesterday morning about 7 o’clock. The deceased was foreman for Kelly Bros. and had long been with that firm. He was a son of Joseph Brankel, one of Cairo’s oldest contractors and carpenters, who resides at 2207 Walnut Street. The deceased was about 36 years of age and well known in this city. The funeral will be held Tuesday morning from St. Joseph’s Church with interment at Villa Ridge cemetery.

Tuesday, 23 Feb 1904:

O’NEAL CASE ON TRIAL.

Noted Murder Case Opening in the Circuit Court This Forenoon.

DIFFICULT TO SECURE A JURY

None Secured This afternoon Out of Twenty-five That Were Examined.

The trial of Thomas O’Neal and William Grimes, charged with the murder of Con Sheehan began in the circuit court this morning. The prosecution consists of State’s Attorney Wilson and Senator Reed Green, while Attorneys Lansden & Leek are counsel for the defendants. The plea of the defense will be self-defense.

The work of securing a jury is difficult. Twenty-five of the special venire of forty had been examined at 3 o’clock this afternoon and not a juror secured. Of the number, the State had peremptorily refused six and the defense two.

Mrs. N. L. Wickwire, of St. Louis, a former resident of Cairo, died today and the remains will be buried at Beech Grove Cemetery. Mrs. Wickwire was a sister of Mrs. Elizabeth Fraser and her husband was a contractor here many years ago. Funeral arrangements have not yet been perfected.

(Niles L. Wickwire married Margaret A. Morris on 22 Dec 1861, in Pulaski Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

Mr. and Mrs. A. K. Compton returned yesterday from Vienna, where they attended the funeral of Tom Whiteaker. (Mounds)

Wednesday, 24 Feb 1904:

SECURE EIGHT JURORS

Out of 91 Men Examined for Trial of the O’Neal Murder Case.

At 3 o’clock this afternoon eight jurors had been secured in the O’Neal murder case. They were:

Henry Bass, Delta. John L. Brown, Cairo. James Douglas, Cairo. John D. Stepp, Cairo. J. E. Foster, Beech Ridge. William Hepler, Beech Ridge. Reuben Fozard, Elco. John Allen, Elco.

Ninety-one had been examined in securing these eight and the prosecution peremptorily challenged 18 and the defense 11. A special venire for 20 men was issued this morning and sent to the country.

Yesterday Fred D. Nellis failed to answer a summons to appear for service as a juror and the court sent an attachment for him and fined him $5 and costs for contempt of the court.

The 6-year-old daughter of Mr. and Mrs. F. H. Kendall, of 2312 Washington Avenue, died at 5 o’clock yesterday afternoon of pneumonia. The funeral services will be conducted at the residence tomorrow afternoon by Rev. Robert A. Sickles, pastor of the Calvary Baptist Church.

A. Wilson, of Willard, who was very ill at the home of his son, W. C. Wilson, of 411 Thirty-fourth Street, died at 2 o’clock this afternoon.

(His marker in Hargis Cemetery reads: Armsted Wilson Born Oct. 26, 1846 Died Feb. 24, 1904. Farewell my wife and children all, From you a father Christ doth call.—Darrel Dexter)

FUNERAL NOTICE.

Died—Mrs. N. L. Wickwire, at S. Louis, Tuesday, February 23, 1904.

Special train will leave the Illinois Central depot, Cairo, for Mounds at 11:15 tomorrow morning and meet the train from St. Louis, which is due to arrive there at 12:15. The interment will take place at Beech Grove Cemetery. All friends of the deceased are invited to attend.

In our items of last week we spoke of Mrs. Barringer’s little child having died of malignant scarlet fever, the printer’s devil made it typhoid. He probably knew more about it than we did.

Thursday, 7 Apr 1904:

The funeral of Mrs. Rachel J. Phillis was held this morning at the home of her daughter, Mrs. Robert Hinkle, on Twenty-eighth Street. The service was conducted by Rev. J. T. M. Knox, pastor of the Presbyterian church, of which the deceased had been a member ever since 1869, and the remains were taken to Villa Ridge cemetery for burial. The pallbearers were George Parsons, Walter H. Wood, Claude Winter, H. H. Halliday, Miles S. Gilbert and Charles S. Carey.

(Robert Hinkle married Jessie B. Phillis on 21 Apr 1881, in Alexander Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

Friday, 8 Apr 1904:

O’NEIL AGAIN CLEARED

No Evidence to Hold Him for Assault to Kill Mike Egan.

This morning in Judge Ross’ court, the case of Thomas O’Neil, charged with assault upon Mike Egan with intent to kill, came up for trial and O’Neil was released. Attorney Angus Leek appeared for the defense.

The court held that O’Neil acted in self defense and that the evidence was not sufficient to hold him over to the grand jury.

The inquest over the remains of the unknown man murdered in “Wild Cat Chute” was held yesterday by Coroner McManus. Frank Lewis, the negro who escaped, is charged with the deed and John Garrett and Sallie Pittypat are held as accessories to the crime. The victim has not yet been identified and photographs will be taken of him and sent to surrounding points.

Engineer McKetchum, aged 83 years, died at his home in New Richmond, Ohio, last Saturday. He was one of the oldest engineers on the Ohio River and quit the Bonanza, his last boat, eight months ago.

Saturday, 9 Apr 1904:

Mrs. Earl Patier, who is at the bedside of her grandmother, Mrs. M. Wright, at Nashville, Tenn., writes that there is little hope of her recovery. She is 92 years of age.

Miss Bessie M. Turner left last night for Columbus, Ohio, where she was called by the serious condition of her uncle, Mr. J. C. Hoglan, who is suffering from heart trouble and is only expected to survive a very short time.

William M’CANDER DEAD

Passed Away This Morning after a Long Illness.

William McCander, janitor at the post office, died at 4 o’clock after a long illness. He was about 76 years old, was a veteran of the late war, and had been janitor at the post office ever since the building was erected over 35 years. He leaves a widow, a son, and daughter and four stepchildren, John and Jim Foley, Mrs. Wichert and Mrs. Hammell, of Chicago. The funeral will be held tomorrow afternoon with burial at Villa Ridge by the G. A. R. and C. K. of A.

(William McCander was a private, enlisting in Co. B, 18th Illinois Infantry on 21 Dec 1863, and was mustered out on 16 Dec 1865. His marker in Calvary Cemetery at Villa Ridge reads: William McCander 1833-1904 Father.—Darrel Dexter)

Monday, 11 Apr 1904:

Word has been received by Cairo friends of the death from consumption of Miss Kate Ward, which occurred at Greenville, Texas, on Easter Sunday. She was the guest of Miss Gussie Steinhouse, a few years ago, in company with Miss Allie Lewis.

Mrs. Louise Koehler returned today from St. Louis. She was called there by the announcement of the death of her brother, but learned upon arrival there that it was here brother’s brother who had died.

Tuesday, 12 Apr 1904:

MRS. HERMAN SCHUH

Passed Away This Afternoon at Her Home on Upper Sycamore.

Mrs. Herman Schuh died at her home on upper Sycamore Street, this afternoon about 1:30 o’clock, after an illness of two weeks. She had been in poor health for about six months, and went to Chicago, where an operation was performed, which brought some relief, but about two weeks ago she suffered a relapse, which resulted in her death today.

Mrs. Schuh was reared in Mound City, Ill., and was about 40 years of age. She is survived by her husband, Herman C. Schuh, and her two sons, Charlie and Niles, aged 8 and 6 years respectively; her mother, Mrs. E. Frazer, and two brothers, Alex and W. P. Fraser.

The deceased was a member of the Church of the Redeemer and was held in high esteem by her many friends who will regret to learn of her untimely death.

The funeral arrangements have not been entirely perfected, but will occur Thursday.

The many friends of the family extend their deepest sympathy in their hour of bereavement.

Miss Hattie Gibson and brother, Frank, and Mr. and Mrs. George Gibson left this morning for Mt. Carmel to attend the funeral of their aunt, Mrs. Robertson. Mr. and Mrs. W. F. Gibson went up a few days ago.

Monday, 18 Apr 1904:

Miss Edith Whitlock went to Mound City today to attend the funeral of her cousin, Mrs. Charles Carr.

The remains of Mrs. Charles Carr (Olive Campbell) arrived at Beech Grove Cemetery today from Kankakee where the funeral ceremonies were held and the remains interred.

Nioma, the infant daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Charles Cealey, of Twenty-seventh Street, died this morning at 6 o’clock. The funeral services were held this morning conducted by Rev. Sickles and the remains were taken to Jonesboro for burial.

Saturday, 30 Apr 1904:

YOUNG COUPLE DROWNED

Lost Their Lives While En Route to Mound City to Be Married.

John Ramer, of Hillerman, son of James Ramer, a wealthy farmer, and Miss Stella Curry, of Belknap, were drowned in Hess Bayou, at three o’clock yesterday afternoon while driving from Belknap to Mound City.

They had just crossed a bridge at Hess Bayou, which was covered with water, and in making a sharp turn after crossing the bridge, the buggy plunged into deep water and both occupants and the horse were drowned.

The bodies were recovered and taken to Olmsted where they were identified.

The affair is a very sad one. It is understood that the young couple were going to Mound City to get married and then attend the street fair.

Monday, 2 May 1904:

Mrs. Leuschen went to Mattoon Saturday to attend the funeral of her brother, John Rapp, who died Saturday morning. The deceased had been ill for almost a year. Miss Marie Leuschen went up to attend the funeral.

MURDER OF A CONSTABLE

Brothers Resist an Arrest and Use the “Gun” in Enforcing Their Resistance—Second Official Wounded.

Mount Vernon, Ill., April 30.—Albert Wood, a constable was killed, and Curtis Gregory, another constable, was seriously wounded in a fight in Farrington Township with two men, alleged to have been William and Robert Howard, brothers, one of whom the officers sought to arrest on a warrant. Robert Howard is alleged to have made threats against certain persons in this (Jefferson) County and a peace warrant was procured.

Constable Gregory states that they had arrested Robert Howard and had proceeded a short distance with him in their custody when his brother attacked them. Several posses are in pursuit of the officers’ assailants.

KILLED ON THE BRIDGE

Death Comes to Employee on the New Structure Going Up at Thebes

The first accident since the Kelly-Atkinson Construction Co., began the construction of the false work at the bridge occurred last Friday afternoon when a pile of ties fell on a man named K. K., killing him instantly. One other man was injured but not seriously. The man had only been here a short time. The remains were shipped to Minneapolis, Minn., Saturday for interment. The victim of the accident was a resident of Minneapolis.—Thebes Record.

Tuesday, 3 May 1904:

The funeral of John Daffin, who died Sunday morning at St. Mary’s Infirmary, occurred this afternoon and the remains taken to Beech Grove Cemetery for interment.

ACQUITTED OF CHARGE

Robert Barry, Cairo Boy, Acquitted of Charge of Manslaughter at St. Louis.

The jury at St. Louis in the case of Robert Barry charged with manslaughter, returned a verdict of not guilty yesterday. Barry is a Cairo boy who several weeks ago was attacked by a gang of drunken ruffians in front of a saloon in St. Louis, while he was passing. He was knocked down and used his pocketknife in self-defense. He was arrested and charged with manslaughter. State’s Attorney Alex Wilson, of Cairo, went up to St. Louis and appeared for the defense. Barry arrived in Cairo this morning with his mother.

Wednesday, 4 May 1904:

Barney O’Loughlin, son of Thomas O’Loughlin and brother of John, Thomas and James O’Loughlin, and Mattie E. Casey, died in St. Louis Tuesday night. The deceased was a member of the World’s Fair Department. Cairo papers were requested to copy the notice of his death, but inquiry failed to find that he was known to old residents here.

C. O’CALLAHAN IS DEAD

Father of Trixie and Bessie Friganza Passed Away at Cincinnati Saturday

Deceased was 68 Years of Age and Was a Former Cairo Resident.—At One Time an Alderman.

Word was received yesterday by Mr. M. J. Howley, announcing the death of C. O’Callahan, a former resident of Cairo, who died at his home in Cincinnati last Saturday of typhoid pneumonia, after an illness of only a few days.

The deceased came to Cairo in 1857 from Ireland. For several years he clerked in a hotel and store for Henry Winter.

During the Civil War he engaged in the hardware business in a building where McManus’ shoe store now stands. He was also a councilman during the ‘60s.

He suffered great loss from a fire a few years later and soon after left for Cincinnati, where he has since resided.

The deceased was 68 years of age and is survived by a wife and three daughters, Delia, Theresa and Kate. The two former are better known as Trixie and Bessie Friganza, and are leading members of the Prince of Pilzen Opera troupe.

The funeral occurred Monday.

Mrs. Clarence Wolf, nee Watson, died at her home north of Perks, Sunday, April 24th, after an illness of three weeks of heart disease. She was only 17 years of age and had been married just six weeks to Mr. Wolf who did everything possible for his young bride and who has the sympathy of his many friends in his bereavement.

Thursday, 5 May 1904:

Mary Osborn, aged 19 years, an inmate of 214 Thirteenth Street, committed suicide yesterday afternoon about 5:30 o’clock. The cause for her rash deed is said to have resulted from the fact that her lover was about to leave her. She became despondent and drank the contents of a bottle of carbolic acid. She has made several attempts to take her life before. She formerly resided in Paducah, but became too intimate with men whom she knew nothing of and they led her on a downward path, which resulted in a case of suicide.

H. B. Davison, Sr., father of Justice H. B. Davison, of this city, died at his home in Madison, Ind., Tuesday afternoon. The deceased was 87 years of age. Owing to poor health Mr. Davison was unable to attend his father’s funeral.

The friends of Mr. J. A. Woodson, who formerly resided in this city and has recently returned to St. Louis from Kansas, as stated in The Citizen a day or so ago, will regret to learn of the death of his father, which occurred after reaching Coulterville. The climate in Kansas did not agree with Mr. Woodson, Sr., nor with Mr. J. A. Woodson’s wife and on this account they returned to this state.

Tuesday, 10 May 1904:

IN THE CIRCUIT COURT

Murder Trial of Frank J. Walters and Robert Williams Continued

HICKSON CASE SET FOR TOMORROW

But Will Probably Never Come to Trial as Prosecution Has No Witnesses.

The murder case of Frank J. Walters and Robert Williams was continued until the next term of court and bond was fixed in the sum of $3,000. B. McManus, Jr., G. P. Crabtree, John Stoltz and Dan McCarthy went surety for Walters.

The Hickson case will probably not come to trial, as the prosecution has no witnesses. The case is set for tomorrow.

MISTAKEN FOR BURGLAR

Mrs. H. H. Cox, of Murphysboro, Accidentally Killed by Hance Cleland.

The Deceased Is a Niece of Charles S. Bouscher, of Douglas Street.—Jury Exonerates Cleland.

Mrs. H. H. Cox, of Murphysboro, a niece of Mr. Charles S. Bouscher, of 424 Douglas Street, met with a sad accident Saturday night, which resulted in her death.

Hance Cleland, a high school boy, who roomed with Superintendent Ellis H. Rogers, was about to retire when he heard someone prowling about the yard. Taking a revolver, he stepped out on the porch and asked who was there and, as he did so, saw the form of someone disappearing in the darkness. He called to the party to halt, and as the person failed to do so, he fired several shots.

He went in search of the supposed burglar and was sure that he saw him enter and hide in a coal shed in the next yard.

Again he called out to the party to come out or he would shoot, and hearing no response he again fired.

On investigation it was found that Mrs. Cox had entered her coal shed and the bullet had pierced her body, killing her almost instantly.

The theory is that Mrs. Cox went into her own back yard attracted by the shooting and had entered the shed when the boy fired. It is thought the burglar made his escape when the boy first shot.

The jury exonerated Cleland for the shooting. The boy is very much broken up over the deplorable affair.

Mr. and Mrs. Bouscher were unable to attend the funeral.

(H. H. Cox married Mollie Evans on 25 Nov 1896, in Jackson Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

CONNELLY IS VERY LOW.

Day Yardmaster for Illinois Central at Mounds Injured in Runaway.

Was Driving to Cairo Last Evening When Horse Became Frightened and Connelly Was Thrown from Buggy.

Martin Connelly, day yardmaster for the Illinois Central at Mounds, met with a painful accident last night about 7:30 o’clock.

He was driving to Cairo, and after crossing Cache bridge, his horse became frightened and plunged down the embankment. The buggy was overturned and Connelly’s leg was caught and twisted beneath it, and he also received a severe injury to his head.

Connelly was found by Ted Cochran and another young man who were out driving and were passed by Connelly’s runaway horse. When found he was unconscious and his leg broken.

He was brought to Cairo and taken to St. May’s Infirmary, where Drs. McNemer and Gordon attended him.

Mr. Connelly is very low this afternoon. Amputation of his leg may be necessary.

The wound in his head is also a dangerous one and may prove fatal.

OLD RESIDENT DEAD.

John Thompson Passed Away at Elco Sunday Night.

John Thompson, one of Elco’s old residents, died Sunday night at the age of 73 years, and was buried today.

(His markers in Hazlewood Cemetery reads: John Thompson Born April 8, 1833 Died May 9, 1904. We miss thee father from our home. We miss thee from thy place. A shadow over our life is cast. We miss the sunshine of thy face. Corp. John Thompson Co. A, 15th Ill. Cav. Born April 8,1833 Died May 8, 1904, Aged 73 Years.—Darrel Dexter)

Wednesday, 11 May 1904:

SIX MINERS KILLED

In an Explosion at Herrin, Williamson County, Today

DuQuoin, May 11.—Six men were killed and twenty injured in mine explosion at Herrin, Ill., today.

IN THE CIRCUIT COURT

Hickson Murder Case Nollied and Defendant Released from Jail.

Napoleon Hickson, charged with murder, in being a participant in the Thebes lynching, was given his freedom today. State’s Attorney Wilson entered a nolle in his case and that disposes of the last of the trials growing out of that unfortunate occurrence. There were not witnesses against the defendant.

DIED THIS AFTERNOON

Yardmaster Connelly, of the Illinois Central, Succumbs to Concussion of Brain.

Martin Connelly, day yardmaster for the Illinois Central, at Mounds, died at 12:30 this afternoon at St. Mary’s Infirmary, from concussion of the brain, which he received in a runway accident Monday evening.

The accident occurred on the Mound City road while he was driving to Cairo. His horse became frightened and he was thrown out of the buggy and down the embankment.

The remains will be sent to Mounds, his home, where the funeral will be held.

Alice Gardner’s infant child died on Monday night. (Wetaug)

Friday, 13 May 1904:

Died, May 8, 1904, John Thompson, aged 73 years, 1 month and 1 day. Uncle John joined the Fifteenth Cavalry, Company A, known as Captain Stewart’s company, and was with Capt. Stewart when he was killed and remained in the service until his term of enlistment expired. Afterwards he re-enlisted in the Sixtieth Illinois Infantry Volunteers and served faithfully until the close of the war. He was a member of the Elco G. A. R. post. Funeral services were conducted by Rev. Atchison at the Methodist church with interment at Hazlewood Cemetery, where the remains were laid to rest by a few of his remaining comrades. A brave soldier, a good citizen and a true comrade, is taken from us. (Elco)

(John Thompson, 28, born in Thebes, Alexander Co., Ill., enlisted as a private in Co. A, 15th Illinois Calvary on 10 Aug 1861, in Cape Girardeau, Mo., and was mustered out 25 Aug 1864, in Springfield, Ill. John Thompson, 32, born in Alexander Co., Ill., enlisted as a private in Co. E, 60th Illinois Infantry on 4 Apr 1865, and was mustered out on 31 Jul 1865, at Louisville, Ky.—Darrel Dexter)

Mrs. Joseph Gamble, one of the old resident of Villa Ridge, died on Tuesday morning. She had been a sufferer for many years at intervals. Last Monday morning she was seized with a violent attack and soon lost consciousness terminating in death. The funeral was held on Wednesday afternoon and the remains interred in the cemetery here. The services were held at the M. E. church, conducted by Rev. Fidler.

Grandma Calhoun was called to Metropolis this week by the death of a grandson. (Grand Chain)

TAKEN TO BOSTON

Remains of Late Martin Connelly Shipped There for Burial.

The remains of Martin Connelly, who died from concussion of the brain received in a runaway accident, were taken to Boston today for interment.

A sister of the deceased and the young lady to whom he was to have married this month and R. O. Barrett of the Illinois Central at Mounds, accompanied the remains.

Saturday, 14 May 1904:

IN THE CIRCUIT COURT

The jury in the case of Sallie Nearon, for murder, failed to agree after being out all night and were discharged at 10 o’clock this morning.

Monday, 16 May 1904:

The funeral of Mrs. Caroline Herbert occurred yesterday morning. The remains were brought down from Anna to Villa Ridge. A special train went up from here containing relatives and friends. The Germania Mannechor rendered several selections at the grave.

The aged father of C. C. Haynes, of the boat store was reported yesterday to be very low at his home at Smithland, Ky., and Mr. Haynes left for his bedside this morning. Miss Anna Lake Haynes was also notified to come.

PERHAPS SOLVED

Is the Mystery of the Murder in “Wild Cat Chute.”

The mystery which overhung the murder in “Wild Cat Chute,” which occurred a few weeks ago, is thought to be solved.

L. H. Meyers, who has been investigating the case, says he is positive the man’s name is Sullivan and that he had been at work on an island farm near Commerce, Mo. He says that Charles Anderson, of Ullin, contracted with a man named Sullivan near Commerce to work on a drug store he was building and that the man never made his appearance.

It is understood that a sister of this man Sullivan resides in St. Louis and steps will be taken to locate her and find out whether or not the murdered man is her brother.

Tuesday, 17 May 1904:

The second trial of Sallie Nearon, alias Pitapat, was taken up today.

Mrs. Eakin, mother of Mr. John Eakin, of Cairo, is quite ill from a stroke of paralysis, which occurred last week. She is 87 years old. (Villa Ridge)

(Her marker in Cairo City Cemetery reads: John A. Eakin Born Aug. 1, 1817 Died Nov. 16, 1900. Mary E. Eakin Born Jan. 15, 1818 Died May 21, 1904.—Darrel Dexter)

A CARD OF THANKS

We take great pleasure in thanking our many friends and acquaintances for the many kindnesses shown us during our late bereavement.

Mary B. Mooris

Minnie Webster

Mayme M. Polk

Wednesday, 18 May 1904:

The trail of Sallie Nearon for murder occupied the entire time of circuit court today and the case went to the jury this evening. This and one civil case will complete the work of this term. Court will probably not be in session tomorrow.

Thursday, 19 May 1904:

The remains of Mrs. Ellen Harder, whose death occurred Saturday, were laid to rest at Beech Grove Cemetery Monday. (Mound City)

BLED TO DEATH

“Big Fritz” the Well Known Butcher Died Last Night from Loss of Blood

Fred Voselsang, better known as “Big Fritz,” the well-known butcher, died very suddenly last night from loss of blood caused by the bursting of an artery in his left leg.

Several years ago Fritz sustained a broken leg and the fracture never entirely healed. It has given him much trouble and has bled often.

Last night he was walking out Douglas Street when the wound began to bleed and he stopped in Simmon’s Drug Store, when a doctor was summoned and the patrol wagon called. Before the wagon reached the infirmary, Fritz was dead.

The remains were taken to Falconer’s undertaking establishment.

Fritz has been employed by nearly every meat market in Cairo. He has a mother and two children in Cape Girardeau, who will attend the funeral. Deceased was a member of the local order of A. O. U. W. and the funeral will be conducted by that lodge.

Friday, 20 May 1904:

The condition of Maj. E. P. Haynes, father of C. C. Haynes of the boat store, remains very critical. Mr. Haynes telephoned from Paducah this morning that he would remain with his father at Smithland for the present.

Saturday, 21 May 1904:

Mrs. T. Gorman left for Vienna this morning to attend the funeral of Mr. McDwyer, who died there yesterday.

(His name is correctly recorded as W. T. Dwyer elsewhere in the same issue.—Darrel Dexter)

W. T. Dwyer, a prominent citizen of Vienna, died yesterday afternoon about 5:30 o’clock of heart failure. The deceased was about 42 years of age and was well known in Cairo. He is a brother-in-law of Engineer Mike Kiley of the Mobile & Ohio.

DEATH OF MRS. EAKIN

Passed Away at Villa Ridge Home as Result of Paralysis.

Mrs. Eakin, mother of Mr. John W. Eakin of the gas office, died at her home at Villa Ridge this morning as a result of a stoke of paralysis, which came a week ago. She had rallied from the first effects of the stroke, and Mr. Eakin, who visited her yesterday, had reason to believe she was recovering from its effects. Reports even as late as this morning were favorable, but he took a sudden turn for the worse and the end came this forenoon.

Mrs. Eakin was 86 years of age, and lived at Villa Ridge with her two daughters, Misses Maggie and Alma Eakin. Besides Mr. Eakin of this city, she had one other son, Horton Eakin, of Dallas, Texas.

(Her marker in Cairo City Cemetery reads: John A. Eakin Born Aug. 1, 1817 Died Nov. 16, 1900. Mary E. Eakin Born Jan. 15, 1818 Died May 21, 1904.—Darrel Dexter)

Monday, 23 May 1904:

SISTER MARGARET DEAD

Passed Away Sunday Morning at St. Joseph’s School After Only Few Hours’ Illness.

Had Been Housekeeper at St. Joseph’s School for About a Year.—Remains Taken to Jonesboro, Ark., for Interment.

Sister Margaret, one of the sisters of the order of St. Benedict, died very suddenly Sunday morning, about 8:45 at St. Joseph’s School.

The deceased had only been ill a few hours from a congestive chill and all efforts to restore her to a normal condition proved fruitless.

Sister Margaret came to Cairo about a year ago from the motherhouse at Jonesboro, Ark., and was engaged as housekeeper at the school. She had been in the order six years, having come to this country from Switzerland eight years ago. She was 23 years of age. Her real name was Ida Heig.

Funeral services were held at 9 o’clock this morning at St. Joseph’s Church. Father Gillen was the celebrant of the solemn high mass and Father Downey of St. Patrick’s Church preached the sermon.

The remains were taken to Jonesboro, Ark., at 3:15 over the Illinois Central where interment will be made Father Gillen and two Sisters accompanied the remains.

The pallbearers were: M. J. Howley, C. E. Hessian, William Oehler, P. T. Langan, Dan Kelly, J. H. Galligan, B. McManus, Jr., and C. A. Petit.

GERMAN SCHOLAR DEAD.

Emil Rieber, Brother of Mrs. Jacob Baur, Passed Away Saturday Night.

Death Due to Heart Failure.—Deceased was 62 Years Old and Single.—Was a Great Scholar and a Daily Visitor to Public Library.

Emil Rieber, an old German citizen of Cairo, died Saturday night at St. May’s Infirmary. He was 62 years of age and heart failure was the cause of his death. He will not be known to many by name, but he is the brother, of Mrs. Jacob Baur and was a daily visitor to the reference and reading rooms of the Cairo Public Library, where he studied and read and could give information in almost any subject of importance. He was a great friend to the students of the public schools and delighted in helping them in finding references and giving them information. He spoke several different languages. The deceased never married. He lived with his sister, Mrs. Jacob Bauer, and family.

His funeral was held Sunday afternoon. Rev. Sickles, pastor of the Calvary Baptist Church, conducted the services.

(His marker in Cairo City Cemetery reads: Emil Rieber 1842-1904.—Darrel Dexter)

John Trampert, an old and prominent businessman of Mound City, died Saturday night at the age of 70 years. The deceased was a shoemaker by trade and enjoyed a liberal patronage. He added to his business a large stock of ready-made shoes and finally increased his business so as to include dry goods, notions, clothing, etc.

A wife and two children, a son and daughter, survive him, his son being city clerk of Mound City.

John Martel, a carpenter formerly employed in Cairo and a member of the local carpenters’ union, died at Anna Sunday and the remains were taken to Murphysboro where the funeral was held this morning. Several of the Cairo carpenters went to Murphysboro and attended the funeral.

Tuesday, 24 May 1904:

The body of Lon Miller, the carpenter, who fell from the wheel of the Harry Brown a few days ago and was drowned, was discovered floating in the Ohio yesterday afternoon by some men employed on the Barrett fleet. The body was removed to Mrs. Feith’s undertaking establishment. The remains were shipped to Louisville this afternoon for interment.

Mrs. Adeline Buggs, a well known colored woman residing on Thirty-second Street, died yesterday at the age of 104 years. She has three children all advanced in years. John Buggs, a son, is employed by the Illinois Central at the freight depot.

OLD RESIDENT DEAD.

William Etz Passes Away at Age of 77 Years.

William Etz, one of Cairo’s oldest residents, died this morning about 1 o’clock of a complication of diseases caused by old age.

The deceased in former years conducted a blacksmith shop but has been unable to work for some time.

His wife, one son, Henry Etz, and three daughters, Mrs. Harry Elias, Mrs. T. L. Richarson and Mrs. Edith Rushing, of this city, survive him.

The funeral will be held tomorrow afternoon with interment at Villa Ridge.

(Thomas L. Richinson married Emma C. Etz on 18 Jun 1890, in Alexander Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

WILLARD HOMICIDE

George Willis Struck on Head by His Brother-in-Law, John Waugh.

DEATH RESULTED IMMEDIATELY.

Waugh Escaped into Missouri, but Was Brought Back and Lodged in the County Jail.

John Waugh and his brother-in-law, George Willis, who reside near Willard, became engaged in a quarrel Sunday and Waugh struck Willis on the head with some dull instrument, which resulted in his death immediately.

According to witnesses before the coroner’s jury, the cause of the act is as follows:

Willis and Waugh were at the store of George Roth, settling up their accounts. Waugh came out and climbed into his buggy intending to drive away. Willis came out of the store and went to the buggy and asked Waugh if he could pay the money that he owed him (Willis); it seems if was about $10. Waugh said that he intended to pay it, but could not at the present time. Willis became angry and used an oath, calling Waugh vulgar names. The latter resented this and Willis repeated it. This angered Waugh and he picked up some dull instrument, which was wrapped up and lying in the buggy and stuck twice at Willis with it. The first blow, Willis warded off, but the second struck him behind the left ear, causing concussion of the brain, from which he died in a few minutes. Waugh then escaped and went over to Missouri, but was captured by H. Rumfelt, and brought to Cairo last night and lodged in the county jail.

At the coroner’s inquest the jury decided from the evidence that Waugh was guilty of manslaughter and recommended that he be held to await the action of the grand jury.

The funeral of Mrs. Eakin, whose death was noticed in The Citizen of Saturday last, occurred from the family residence here (Villa Ridge) last Sunday afternoon at 4 o’clock. Rev. Mr. Fidler of the Methodist church conducted the service and her remains were buried beside her husband in the cemetery at this place. Mrs. Eakin’s maiden name was Mary E. Van Zandt, and she was born January 13, 1818. She married John Eakin in Cheshire, Ohio, in 1844. Removed from Ohio to Fairfield, Illinois, on October 1878, and to Villa Ridge in May 1892. All of her children, two girls and two boys, survive her. She became a member of the Methodist church, of which her father was minister, when she was 15 years of age, and remained in the church until her death.

Wednesday, 25 May 1904:

DIED FROM INJURIES

J. B. Dupoyster, of Wickliffe, Who Was Accidentally Shot, Succumbs to Injuries.

J. B. Dupoyster, of Wickliffe, Ky., who was accidentally shot while out riding Monday with his friend, Will Hawthorne, died Monday night.

The young men were riding horseback near Fort Jefferson when Hawthorne’s shotgun was accidentally discharged and the contents entered the abdomen of Dupoyster, making a horrible wound in his body, which exposed his intestines.

Dupoyster could not be removed to his home in Wickliffe and died near where he was wounded.

Hawthorne and his aged mother are nearly prostrated by the terrible calamity.

The funeral was held yesterday afternoon with interment at Fort Jefferson. Dupoyster was the son of old settlers in the section of Kentucky near Wickliffe.

Marion Garner, son of Perry Garner, died Saturday of Bright’s disease and was buried Sunday in the Thebes cemetery. He was 34 years of age and a widower. (Thebes)

Andrew Clutts, who died Saturday of pneumonia was buried Sunday in Cauble Cemetery. He leaves a widow and several children.

Thursday, 26 May 1904:

The sisters of St. Benedict extend their most heartfelt thanks to the press, the pallbearers, and the many friends, Catholic and non-Catholic, for the sympathy and kindness shown them in their late bereavement.

Conductor Clinton Wood of the Big Four was fatally injured at Marshall Tuesday morning, having been caught between his train and a mill switch stood near the track.

Mrs. Mary Carmody died at the Southern Illinois Hospital at Anna yesterday morning. The deceased was 70 years of age. She is survived by a son, John Carmody, who resided in this city and is employed at the Illinois Central roundhouse. Funeral services were held this morning at St. Joseph’s church with interment at Villa Ridge cemetery.

VAN B. MILLER IS DEAD

Passed Away at St. May’s Infirmary This Afternoon After Short Illness.

Deceased Was about 26 Years of Age.—Remains Will Probably Be Taken to Henderson Ky., for Interment.

After an illness of only about six days, of appendicitis, Van B. Miller, died this afternoon about 2 o’clock at St. Mary’s Infirmary.

The deceased was working last Thursday, but was taken ill Friday. An operation was performed Saturday but did not give the necessary relief.

The deceased was about 26 years of age and formerly lived in Henderson, Ky., where his parents still reside.

He married Miss Juanita Nellis last November and she survives him. Besides his father and mother and two brothers Arthur and Ray, the latter residing in Denver, Colo.

Mr. Miller was an employee of the Illinois Central at the stone depot.

He was conscious until the end and knew that death was coming. The remains will be taken to Henderson tomorrow for interment.

His young wife is nearly prostrated with grief and has the sympathy of her friends.

Friday, 27 May 1904:

A FINE MONUMENT

Has Been Placed Over Grave of the Late Judge William Green

C. E. Gregory has returned today from Metropolis where he had the contract for the placement of a very fine monument over the grave of the late Judge William H. Green. The monument is made of red Missouri granite and is of rustic design, fashioned after Judge Green’s own idea. It is one of the finest in this end of the state.

The late Van B. Miller was a member of the Order of Railway Clerks of America. His remains were taken to the home of his parents at Henderson, Ky., this morning, where interment will be made. About forty of the Order of Railway Clerks accompanied the remains to the train in a body.

Saturday, 28 May 1904:

Leland M. Fisher, the gifted young colored man who was editor of the Cairo Standard until ill health drove him south, died at Humboldt, Tenn., this week. He was the author of a little book of verse entitled “Happy Hollow Ballads,” mention of which was made in these columns. He was a victim of consumption.

DEATHS.

Miss Minnie E. Whitaker, wife of J. H. Whitaker, of Beech Ridge, died at St. Mary’s Infirmary at 9:30 o’clock this morning of congestion of the bowels. She had been ill only twelve days and was brought down to the hospital Thursday and placed under care of Dr. Sullivan. Her death is peculiarly sad as she leaves three little children in the care of her husband. All are boys, the oldest 7 and the youngest but six weeks old. She was 28 years old and her maiden name was Minnie E. Upchurch. The funeral will be held at Elco Sunday evening.

(Joseph N. Whitaker married Minnie E. Upchurch on 18 Feb 1894, in Alexander Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

Monday, 30 May 1904:

FORMER CAIRO LADY DEAD

Miss Mary Higgins Passed Away at Mound City Sunday Morning.

Deceased Formerly Conducted a Millinery Store Here.—Was a Sister of Thomas Higgins.

Miss Mary Higgins died at her home in Mound City Sunday morning, after an illness of several weeks. The funeral occurred this morning at the Catholic Church, with interment at Beech Grove Cemetery.

Miss Higgins formerly conducted a millinery store in Cairo with Mrs. Wild and removed from here to Mound City, where she has since been in the same business. She was a sister of Thomas Higgins of the well-known firm of Perks & Higgins and was 47 years of age. her father, Patrick Higgins, died only a few weeks ago.

Tuesday, 31 May 1904:

DEATH OF MRS. WILLIAMS

Wife of Capt. W. M. Williams, of the Mobile & Ohio.

Passed Away Last Night after Protracted Illness.—Deceased Was 59 Years of Age.

Mrs. William M. Williams, wife of Capt. “Billy” Williams, of the Mobile & Ohio, died last night at 8:30 o’clock after a protracted illness, at their home, 438 Ninth Street.

The deceased was 59 years of age and was a native of Charleston, W. Va. She married Capt. Williams at Covington, Ky., in 1863, after which they went to Vicksburg, Miss., to reside.

At the close of the war they removed to this city and have resided here ever since.

Mrs. Williams is survived by her husband and one daughter, Miss Mary L. Williams, the many friends of the family extend their sympathy to them in their bereavement.

The funeral will be held tomorrow morning with burial at Beech Grove Cemetery.

The funeral of Miss Mary Higgins took place from the Catholic church Monday morning and interment occurred at the Catholic cemetery at Beechwood. The deceased was an exemplary Christian character and was believed by a large host of friends. She was for many years the leading milliner of our town. One brother, Thomas Higgins, of the firm of Perks & Higgins, survives her.

FUNERAL NOTICE.

WILLIAMS—Entered into eternal rest, Monday, at 8:30 p.m., Rachel Williams, beloved wife of William M. Williams, and mother of Mary Louise Williams. Funeral from her late residence, 438 Ninth Street, Wednesday, June 1st, 1904, 8:30 a.m., Rev. Roland officiating. Friends of the family invited to attend. Interment at Beech Grove Cemetery. Special train leaves foot of Tenth Street at 9:45 a.m.

Wednesday, 1 Jun 1904:

The last sad rites over the remains of Mrs. W. M. Williams were held this morning. Funeral services were conducted at the family residence, No. 438 Ninth Street, at 8:30 o’clock by Rev. E. L. Roland, rector of the Church of the Redeemer, and the remains were taken to Beech Grove Cemetery for interment. The floral offerings were very beautiful and profuse, one piece in particular being a large pillow from the Mobile & Ohio railroad employees. Mrs. Williams in her lifetime, believed in bestowing flowers upon the living rather than saving them for the dead. It was because she practiced this that she made a wide circle of friends, who could not refrain from paying tribute to her memory. The pallbearers were Charles Pink, Frank Cassidy, Samuel White, W. S. Simpson, George E. Ohara, N. B. Thistlewood, John A. Miller, Frank Armstrong, I. Cohen.

DEATH OF MRS. W. P. JUNE

Passed Away at 2:30 This Afternoon After Long Illness.

Mrs. W. P. June passed away at 2:30 o’clock this afternoon after a long illness. Her death was sudden as this morning she seemed no worse than usual. Up to within a week she had been able to sit up but she had been an invalid for about seven years. Her death was the result of heart failure.

Mrs. June was in her fifty-third year. She was a native of Battle Creek, Mich., and her maiden name was Charlotte Williams. She was married to Mr. June at Battle Creek thirty years ago in August next, and they came to Cairo in 1877. She leaves a husband and two children, Marvin and Miss Katherine.

Mrs. June joined the Methodist church in her girlhood.

Funeral arrangements have not yet been made, but the remains will be laid at rest in the cemetery at Cobden beside those of her sister.

Mrs. June leaves two brothers, one at Cleveland, Ohio, and the other at Creston, Iowa.

(Her marker in Cobden Cemetery reads: Charlotte M. wife of W. P. June Born July 25, 1851 Died June 1, 1904.—Darrel Dexter)

FORMER PIONEER DEAD

Moses Walder Passed Away at Chicago Tuesday.

Moses Walder, one of Cairo’s early settlers, died at Chicago about noon yesterday, at the age of 75 years.

The deceased was the last of three brothers and came to Cairo in 1839, and resided here some time.

He married Mrs. Garson, mother of Ike Garson, of this city, in Colorado some years later. Returning to Cairo, he engaged himself in the grocery business at Tenth and Washington.

About four years ago he removed to Chicago. He was one of the charter members of the Cairo Masonic Fraternity.

The deceased was an uncle of Ike and Louis Walder and Mrs. William Hodge, of this city.

The time of the funeral could not be learned at this writing.

(William W. Hodge married Clara Walder on 15 Jan 1890, in Alexander Co., Ill.—Darrel Dexter)

Thursday, 2 Jun 1904:

FUNERAL NOTICE.

Died, Wednesday, June 1, at 2:30 p.m., Mrs. Charlotte M. June, wife of W. P. June. Funeral services will be held at the family residence, No. 313 Twentieth Street, Friday, June 3d, at 12:30 p.m. Interment at Cobden, Ill., leaving on the regular train on the Illinois Central railroad at 2:20 p.m. Friends of the family are invited to attend.

Friday, 3 Jun 1904:

Mrs. Lizzie Watkins, widow of the late T. C. Watkins, of Cairo, has been spending several days as the guest of friends in our city, where she and her husband formerly lived in the 60s. It is her custom to spend every Decoration Day in DuQuoin. Capt. Watkins lies buried in the Odd Fellows Cemetery. Mrs. Watkins is an active worker in the W. R. C. and last year attended the encampment in California. One day last week she attended the reunion of the 18th Regiment at Benton.—DuQuoin Tribune

The funeral of Mrs. W. P. June was held this afternoon at the family residence, 313 Twentieth Street, and the remains taken to Cobden for burial. The pallbearers were Messrs. E. W. Rees, James Milne, J. B. Gillespie, Mr. Baldwin, Henry Etz, Thomas Casey, P. E. Powell, and Henry Price. The floral offerings were many and profuse. The music was furnished by the Methodist choir.

Miss Annie Malinski and Mesdames Walsh, McNulty and Fitzgerald of Cairo attended the funeral of Miss Mary Higgins in this city (Mound City) Monday.

Saturday, 4 Jun 1904:

Rev. Philip H. Kroh died at Anna Tuesday at the age of 80 years, after a few days’ illness, which was due to old age. The deceased was well known in Southern Illinois and was a member of the lower house of the Illinois legislature at one time.

(His marker in Anna City Cemetery reads: Rev. Philip H. Kroh 1824-1904.—Darrel Dexter)

Monday, 6 Jun 1904:

The friends in this city of Miss May Foley will regret to learn of her death, which occurred Saturday at East St. Louis. The deceased had been ill for some time and when her mother died a few weeks ago, the young lady was unable to attend the funeral. She suffered from a complication of diseases. The funeral was held yesterday afternoon and services were conducted at St. Patrick’s Church with interment at Villa Ridge. The deceased was 19 years old and a daughter of D. J. Foley, formerly city clerk and councilman of this city.

The preliminary hearing of John Waugh charged with killing George Willis at Willard, was being held this afternoon before Judge Robinson.

Tuesday, 7 Jun 1904:

The preliminary hearing of John Waugh charged with the killing of George Willis at Willard, a few weeks ago, was completed late yesterday afternoon. Waugh was bound over to await the action of the grand jury in the sum of $2,000, and to being able to give bond he was taken to the county jail.

Mrs. N. A. Duty died at her home at Center Station, one and one half miles west of this city (Mound City), Friday, June 3d. Interment occurred at Beech Grove Cemetery June 5th, services conducted by Rev. A. J. Littell.

Mrs. Duval was called to Bardwell, Ky., Monday by the serious condition of her sister. (Mound City)

Wednesday, 8 Jun 1904:

DIED OF HEART TROUBLE

Julius May Passed Away at His Home on Eighteenth Street Last Night.

Had Been in Poor Health for Several Months.—Deceased Formerly Conducted Bakery on Lower Commercial Avenue.

Julius May died at his home on Eighteenth Street last night about 7:45 o’clock of heart trouble.

The deceased had been ill for several months and had just returned a few days from West Baden Springs, where he had been for the benefit of his condition. He received little good, so he returned home.

He seemed to be feeling in good spirits at suppertime, but after the meal complained of being tired. He seated himself in a large rocker and fell into a sleep from which he did not awake.

Mr. May was born in Hesse, Darmstadt, Germany, and came to the United States in his boyhood. He has been a resident of Cairo for many years and formerly conducted a bakery on lower Commercial several years ago.

The deceased was a member of the I. O. O. F., Modern Woodmen and Improved Order of Red Men. He holds a membership in the Cairo lodge of the latter, but is a member of the Kansas, Ill., lodges of the other orders.

A wife and three sons, Gerson, Morris and Lee survive him. The second named son is a resident of Paducah. Four brothers and one sister also survive him.

The remains will be taken to Paducah for burial at 6 o’clock tomorrow morning over the Illinois Central. The I. O. O. F., Red Men and Modern Woodmen lodges will have charge of the funeral. Friends of the family are invited to attend.

Grandpa Scruggs died at his home at Mt. Pleasant last week. He was a veteran of the Civil War and suffered terribly for a long time before death relieved him from his torture. His remains were interred at Liberty Cemetery in the presence of a large number of his friends and relatives. (Curry)

(His marker in Liberty Cemetery reads: William H. Scruggs Born March 16, 1832 Died May 31, 1904.—Darrel Dexter)

FUNERAL NOTICE.

DIED—Julius May, aged 56 years, June 7, 1904, at 7:30 p.m. Funeral will be held tomorrow morning, when the remains will be taken to Paducah for burial. Friends of the family are invited to attend. Remains will leave the house at 5 a.m.

NOTICE TO WOODMEN.

All Modern Woodmen are requested to meet at the home of Neighbor May on Eighteenth Street tomorrow morning at 5 o’clock to accompany remains to Illinois Central depot. As many as can go to Paducah are urged to do so.

Friday, 10 Jun 1904:

DEATH ENDED SUFFERING.

Miss Rica Dauksch Passed Away After an Illness of Three Years.

Miss Rica Dauksch died at 10:45 o’clock this morning at the home of her sister, Mrs. Emmet Atherton, at Twenty-sixth Street and Commercial Avenue. The deceased had for three years been a sufferer from tumor of the brain and for two years had been totally blind. Frequent trips were made to St. Louis with her, and she was in the infirmary here for treatment at other times, but received no permanent benefit. Her home was at Olmsted, where her parents Mr. and Mrs. Carl Dauksch reside. The deceased was 24 years old.

FUNERAL NOTICE.

Died Thursday, June 9, 1904, George Gibson, aged 26 years.

Funeral services will be held tomorrow, Saturday afternoon. The remains will leave the family residence at 1 o’clock for the Calvary Baptist Church, where services will be held, and will be taken to Beech Grove Cemetery for interment. Funeral train will leave foot of Fourteenth Street at 2:40 p.m. Friends of the family are invited to attend.

The remains of the late John Brewster, who was killed in the wreck yesterday on the Big Four, were taken this afternoon to Pulaski, where the funeral services were held. The funeral of George Gibson will occur tomorrow afternoon, as will be seen from a notice elsewhere.

Saturday, 11 Jun 1904:

Miss Anna Vaughn Pell was attacked with a hemorrhage of the lungs this afternoon and is in a very precarious condition.

The funeral of George Gibson was held this afternoon and the remains were interred in Beech Grove Cemetery. Services were conducted by Rev. Sickles and Porter, and the church was more than filled with friends of the deceased who attended as a mark of respect to his memory. The floral emblems were very beautiful and profuse.

LAID TO REST

Remains of Late John Brewster Interred Friday Afternoon.

Representatives of Safford Lodge accompanied the remains of their Brother Brewster to Pulaski yesterday afternoon. At Villa Ridge they were joined by a large delegation of Meridian Lodge I. O. O. F., of which deceased was a member and proceeded to Pulaski, near which place was the home of the deceased.

Egypt Lodge 789 united with them in procession to convey the remains to Liberty Church cemetery, where they were laid to rest. Both of the above lodges united in performing the beautiful and impressive ritual ceremony for the dead, which was conducted with touching solemnity.

Through the courtesy of Francis Stringer, “Egypt” male quartette rendered two most appropriate selections in very impressive manner—”In the Beautiful Land” and “Silently Bury Our Dead.” The esteem in which deceased was held is attested by the fact that more than 40 Odd Fellows and a large number of friends and relatives attended the funeral obsequies.

The sudden and tragic death of Mr. Brewster in the wreck on the Big Four Thursday morning has caused profound gloom and sorrow in his home community.

Monday, 13 Jun 1904:

DROWNED IN OHIO

Ernest Merce Fell Off Towboat Exporter Last Thursday Night.

Ernest Merce, a white deckhand on the towboat Exporter, fell off the boat as she was backing down here last Thursday night, and was drowned. News of the accident did not reach here until yesterday; the boat did not land after the accident occurred. Merce lived in St. Louis, but his home was in Toledo, Ohio. The body has not been recovered.

The funeral of Miss Rica Dauksch was held yesterday afternoon at the residence of her sister, Mrs. Emmett Atherton, Twenty-sixth and Poplar streets. The funeral was largely attended by friends of the deceased and the floral offerings were many and beautiful. The remains were taken to Olmstead for interment.

William E. Jones, brother of Capt. Richard Jones, of Fire Station No. 1, dropped dead Sunday morning about 2 o’clock. He was employed as bartender at Hixon’s Saloon, 3215 Commercial Avenue, and had closed up and started or home, when he died. The deceased was about 36 years of age, and is survived by a wife and three children. The funeral will be held tomorrow and the Bartenders Union will attend in a body.

Mrs. Jessie J. Roberson, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Milton Jenkins, died this morning at 1:50 o’clock at her residence, 823 Twenty-fourth Street, aged 22 years. She is survived by a father, mother, three sisters, two brothers and a baby. She was a member of Ward’s Chapel A. M. E. Church where the funeral will take place probably Wednesday.

CARD OF THANKS.

We most sincerely desire to express our deep and heartfelt thanks to all our friends and neighbors for their kindness and sympathy in our sad bereavement which came upon us so suddenly in the untimely death of our son and husband, George R. Gibson.

We know that the sympathy of true friends cannot bring back to us our precious loved one, but it helps us to bear our grief. So with a deep feeling of gratitude in our hearts for one and all, we humbly lay our sorrow at the feet of our kind Heavenly Father and trust him for guidance, comfort and support until the dawn of that better day, when we shall fully know and understand what is now dark and mysterious.

Sincerely,

W. F. Gibson, Father

Mary E. Gibson, Mother

Roxie M. Gibson, Wife

Tuesday, 14 Jun 1904:

Little Alice Dublin, the five-year old daughter of Mr. and Mrs. John Dublin, of East St. Louis, died yesterday afternoon after an illness of three months. Mr. John Dublin formerly lived here and is quite well known, while Mrs. Dublin, was formerly Miss Maggie Stack. The remains will be brought down to Villa Ridge tomorrow morning for burial and a special train will leave here at 11:30 a.m. with the relatives and friends of the little one.

(John Dublin married Margaret Mary Stack on 24 Nov 1891, in Alexander Co., Ill. Her marker in Calvary Cemetery at Villa Ridge reads: Alice Dublin Born March 4, 1899 Died June 13, 1904.—Darrel Dexter)

Wednesday, 15 Jun 1904:

The condition of Miss Anna Vaughn Pell who has be