Editor's note: This story is an excerpt from , the autobiography of American marathoner Kim Jones. When Jones ran her PR of 2:26:40 in 1991, she was the third fastest American in history. Here she describes placing second in the 1989 New York City Marathon just four weeks after winning the Twin Cities Marathon.

After winning the 1989 Twin Cities Marathon, I went home to enjoy a week of snacking and eating the many chocolates sent by friends, family and fans. My daughter Jamie loved that part of my marathons, and we ate box after box of chocolates.

Kim Jones in action at the Phoenix 10-K. Photo courtesy Kim Jones

With three good marathons, including 2:29:34 in Boston, the fastest time by an American so far that year, I could have ended 1989 satisfied. Then, a week after Twin Cities, American Lisa Weidenbach ran 2:28:15 in Chicago. Hmmm. I put away my chocolates.

The New York City Marathon was just three weeks away. It is absurd to compete in another major marathon just a month after running 2:31. It’s even more ridiculous to think of competing in New York, a tough course that I’d never even seen but was told had potholes; five bridges, with climbs as long as a mile; and a final three miles of serious hills in Central Park.

Why not? I thought.

“Go for it. It’ll be fun to visit New York and see everyone, then go to my friend’s art show,” said my husband, Steve.

“Go ahead if you think you’ll be happy with a 2:36 marathon,” my coach, Benji Durden, said sarcastically.

“You’ve run three fast marathons already this year,” said advisor and friend Don Kardong. “Do you think you can run another marathon so soon?”

“I feel a conviction that I’m going to do well,” I told them all.

I called Fred Lebow, the race director, who said he would be thrilled to have me join the elite field but that he was out of appearance money.

No worries, Fred,” I told him cheerily. “All I ask is that you fly Steve, Benji and Amie Durden in with me and put us all up in the race headquarters hotel. That’s it.” He agreed.

Then I added, “If I place in the top three and run under 2:30, you double my prize money.”

“Kim,” he said, “If you place in the top three and run under 2:30, it will be well worth it.”

Once we arrived in New York, the bold Kim who told everyone, “I’m ready to go, no problem!” wasn’t so brave anymore, wondering, How in the world am I going to pull this off? My shins were throbbing for the first time since slicing my tibias while running with Benji in Florida, years before. My carbo-loading and hydrating were magnifying my aches and pains. To make matters worse, reporters at the press conferences questioned my decision. “I am going to explore the unknown,” I told them. They didn’t look convinced.

When I was about to walk into the elevator the night before the race a respected agent pointed his finger at me. “You shouldn’t be here,” he said.

Now I had to run the marathon. Hmmm.

Fred and his New York crew were taking excellent care of my entourage and me. I had their support, and that’s just what I needed. “Don’t worry, Kim, we’ll have you back even if it doesn’t work out for you this time,” the elite athlete coordinator said. I felt reassured. All I had to do was run.

I planned to carry $20 for cab fare, just in case.

New York is always alive with energy, and in running circles it’s buzzing during marathon weekend. For an elite athlete, it’s like being at the Oscars, or as close as it gets. “There’s Kim Jones! I hope she wins,” people would say, pointing. Others asked for my autograph, or gave me good-luck cards. Even before the race, I was given flowers and presents galore.

On the morning of the race, I was sitting on the elite-athlete bus on the way to the start thinking, If I don’t do well, it’s not the end of the world. Nobody expects me to run well. I have 20 bucks in my pocket. It would be a miracle to run a sub 2:30 on this course after running a fast marathon four weeks ago. I won’t feel badly if I run poorly; I’m not getting appearance money. No problem. I’ll just hope for the best.

When we arrived at Fort Wadsworth, near the starting line, we were led off the bus and into a huge, heated tent stocked with all kinds of snacks, coffee and anything else a marathoner could possibly need. While waiting to be taken to the start, I sat with Benji, stretching, sipping coffee and watching the elite runners scurrying about.

“Hello, Mrs. Jones. I’m surprised to see you here,” a familiar voice said, in an ever-so-pleasant Welsh accent. I turned and said, “Hello, Mr. Jones.” Steve Jones, friend and marathon world record holder was back in New York as the defending champion.

“You ran a great marathon in Boston and then another good one just four weeks ago,” he said. “Don’t you think you should rest now?”

“I really think I can run another fast marathon. I know it sounds crazy but I feel it. I know it. And for some reason if it doesn’t work out, I have 20 bucks right here in my shorts pocket for cab fare!” I said, showing him my $20 bill.

He gave out a big laugh, “Only you, Mrs. Jones.”

Just before the start I was led on to the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, where I waited with Ingrid Kristiansen, Laura Fogli and the rest of my competitors. There were so many good elite runners there that I figured I’d be lucky to place in the top 20. I stayed relaxed, enjoying the magnificent view of the Statue of Liberty and buildings off in the distance. It was an overwhelming sight, something I never thought possible to see years ago when living in my little town on the Olympic Peninsula in Washington. I was in awe, feeling empowered with that big-city energy flowing though my veins.

Suddenly, I knew I wouldn’t need the cab fare.

The gun went off and I was running as I had never run before – relaxed, elated, feeling in the moment. Everyone went out so fast that I was way behind, yet I didn’t care. The conditions were perfect for me. No wind, no rain, a cool and cloudy day.

At 10 miles I passed 44-year-old Priscilla Welch of England, one of the top marathoners in the world, who had won two years before. She gave me a thumbs up as I went by. As I crossed the Queensboro Bridge, not even noticing the uphill at 15 miles, I was alone. The bridge is one of the few spots on the New York course that isn’t lined with spectators, and it was so quiet I heard nothing but my own heart pounding.

Then I heard one loud, exuberant voice. “Keep it going, you’re running strong! It’s your day!” It was Benji.

As I turned off the bridge onto First Avenue in Manhattan, I ran out of the silence into the most deafening roar I had ever heard, even louder than the crowd at Wellesley College in Boston. It felt like the ground was shaking. Spectators called out my name, shouting, “You’re in fifth place.”

I was shocked. The course was so crowded with fast men that I hadn’t been able to keep track of how many women I passed.

There was a lull in the noise, and I could think again. Why was Benji on the bridge? He’s supposed to be racing. And he sure seemed enthusiastic for Benji. I put it out of my mind and focused on passing Laura Fogli near 19 miles. Laura was an Italian runner who had run under 2:30, and had placed second twice in New York. At 21 miles I passed the Russian star Zoya Ivanova, who had won the Los Angeles Marathon that spring and was a 2:27 marathoner.

I was in second place, running so effortlessly that I couldn’t feel my feet hitting the ground. It was a dream race, why we run, what propels us to a new level.

From the slowest to the fastest, marathoners dream of their perfect race. Every now and then I was startled when I realized I wasn’t in a dream, but reality. I ran into Central Park, floating over the challenging hills, not realizing that I was working even though I was running as fast as I could. Thousands of spectators crowded both sides of the street, screaming and yelling, thrilled to see an American run so well. It was as if New York City had closed down just for me. As I crossed the finish line, the ground was vibrating with the noise of thousands of people cheering – for me! It was surreal, as if I were in a place closer to heaven.

That was my day, but Ingrid Kristiansen had a better one. She won, in 2:25:30. I finished in second place in 2:27:54.

I was taken immediately for drug testing to Tavern on the Green, where Benji was waiting; he was so worried about me that he gave up his own race on the quiet Queensboro Bridge to be sure I was OK, then ran to the finish line.

I called my daughters, who had watched the race on TV, before being whisked off to a press conference packed with reporters from all over the world. The top three finishers – Ingrid, Laura and me – answered questions for more than an hour. Everyone was stunned by my time, which made me the fastest American female ever on the New York course and the fourth-fastest American of all time. I was asked about everything imaginable. Someone asked, “What do your daughters think of your amazing effort today?” I replied, “Rachel was thrilled and Jamie said second is pretty good, that it’s a lot better than third.”

The top three runners had photos taken with the charming Fred Lebow before being driven back to our hotel.

After a shower, I lay on the bed, my body pulsating with pain, waiting for room service to bring up my ever-so-needed post race meal: two bacon cheeseburgers, two plates of fries and two chocolate milkshakes. I was finally able to think about what just happened. An intoxicating rush of relief and pride flooded through me. I realized what I’d accomplished with the odds against me, having the courage to go through with it and make it all happen.

Steve was sitting in a chair reading the newspaper, exhausted from the stress he went through running all over New York, worrying about me and hoping I would come through OK. “I can’t believe I just ran a 2:27 in the New York City Marathon! It’s a dream come true,” I told him, proudly.

I went home to another chocolate-eating heyday for Jamie and me. Fred Lebow and the New York Road Runners sent two dozen roses, several presents, more chocolates and a nice card. It was the perfect ending to my 1989 season.