They’re two of the biggest rappers in the world, but separated almost by a generation. Are Wiz Khalifa and Snoop Dogg related in any way?

Wiz Khalifa is not related to Snoop Dogg. There were rumours that Wiz was the nephew of Snoop Dogg, but this was discredited and debunked.

Read on to learn more about these two fantastic performers.

Rapping Across Generations

When Snoop Dogg was finding fame as an up and coming rapper, Wiz Khalifa was barely five years old. The Long Beach rapper, also known as Snoop Doggy Dogg, released his first album in 1993. He sold almost a million copies in his first week on the charts.

This essentially cemented Snoop as one of the key players in the hip hop industry. As a teenager, Snoop had fallen in with street gangs. He would rap in the hallways at school, drawing a substantial following.

He became an obvious member of the Crips gang in Long Beach, but denied his affiliation frequently. After he left high school, he was in and out of jail. When attempting to straighten his life out, he performed a solo freestyle that ended up on a mixtape. This mixtape coincidentally ended up in the position of the already-established Dr. Dre.

It was Dr. Dre and The D.O.C who would teach Snoop to better structure his lyrics. As time went on, Snoop Dogg would become known as one of the greatest rappers. He associated himself with many artists and collaborated with some huge names.

By 2020, Snoop Dogg would be worth around $125 million. He’d released a staggering seventeen full studio albums, and collaborated on another seven. He’d starred in dozens of movies and television shows, and even voiced characters in video games.

Wiz Khalifa, on the other hand, had an altogether quite different upbringing and early life. He was born into a military family, and traveled the world with his parents when he was young. He resided temporarily in the UK, Japan and Germany. Ultimately, the family settled in Pittsburgh in 1996, when Wiz was around nine years old.

It was in Pittsburgh that Wiz began writing and performing his own lyrics. As a teenager, he worked on his music and tried to create his earliest songs. In 2004, he contributed towards a collaborative mixtape, earning him attention at just sixteen years old.

Joint

In 2011, Snoop and Wiz starred together in a ‘stoner film’. The movie, titled Mac and Devin Go to High School, featured both rappers in main roles. They worked together to create the soundtrack for this movie, marking their first official collaboration.

Although Wiz had released a small collection of music prior to that point, Snoop was an industry legend. The two became infamous for their consumption of marijuana. This commonality almost bound the two together on occasion.

For example, in 2016 the pair starred in a bizarre episode of Martha Stewart’s cooking show. In this episode, the pair were cooking chicken, along with Seth Rogan, while reportedly high. The episode was a hit, and very entertaining by all accounts. You can see this video on YouTube below.

In an article published in 2017, Snoop opens up about his smoking habits. In 2016, he and Wiz engaged in a “smoke-off” on stage in Houston, Texas. Snoop emerged victorious, claiming that the only person to ever out smoke him was Willie Nelson.