(1987-)

Who Is Wiz Khalifa?

Rapper Wiz Khalifa was only a kid when he started writing and recording songs. In 2011, he scored his first big hit with “Black and Yellow.” Khalifa also co-starred with Snoop Dogg in the comedy Mac and Devin Go to High School around this time. He went on make such popular rap albums as O.N.I.F.C. (2012) and Blacc Hollywood (2014). In 2015 Khalifa enjoyed huge success with the song “See You Again,” which he performed with Charlie Puth.

Early Life and Career

Wiz Khalifa was born Cameron Jibril Thomaz on September 8, 1987 in Minot, North Dakota. He moved around a lot as a kid because his father was in the military. At an early age, Khalifa discovered his love for making music. He started writing lyrics around the age of nine and began recording his own tracks a few years later.

Spending his high school years in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Khalifa attracted a local following as an artist. Soon he was garnering national attention with his 2006 mixtape Prince of the City: Welcome to Pistolvania. The following year, Khalifa had his first hit rap single with “Say Yeah.” He also released more mixtapes, including Grow Season (2007) and How Fly (2009) with Curren$y, around this time.

Albums

'Rolling Papers'

Khalifa’s career reached new heights with his ode to the Pittsburgh Steelers, his hometown team, with 2010’s “Black and Yellow.” He also made headlines for his arrest on drug-related charges. Approximately 60 grams of marijuana was found on his tour bus while he was in North Carolina for a concert.

While his team didn’t win the Super Bowl, Khalifa made it to the top of the charts with the song in 2011. “Black and Yellow” was featured on his Rolling Papers record, which climbed to the number two spot on the album charts. The album also included a bonus track, “Taylor Gang,” which is the nickname of his fans. Reportedly the name comes from the Chuck Taylor Converse sneakers that Khalifa is famous for wearing.

'O.N.I.F.C.'

In 2012 Wiz Khalifa teamed up with Snoop Dogg for the comedic film Mac and Devin Go to High School. His next album, O.N.I.F.C. (2012), featured such singles as “Word Hard, Play Hard” and “Remember You.” Khalifa worked with a number of other rappers on the record, including Juicy J and Pharrell Williams. He also launched his own concert series called the Under the Influence of Music tour. As a guest artist, Khalifa had another hit with Maroon 5 on their song “Payphone.”

'Blacc Hollywood'

In 2014 Wiz Khalifa released Blacc Hollywood. The album featured such tracks as “We Dem Boyz.” Guest artists on this song included Rick Ross and Nas. He also collaborated with Raw Rolling Papers on a line of smoking-related products. Khalifa reached the top of the charts again in 2015 with his collaboration with Charlie Puth entitled “See You Again.” The ballad, a tribute to late actor Paul Walker, appeared on Furious 7 soundtrack and was nominated for several Grammy Awards.

Personal Life

Khalifa was married to model Amber Rose. They had one child together, son Sebastian, before divorcing in 2014.

QUICK FACTS

Birth date: September 8, 1987

Birth State: North Dakota

Birth City: Minot

Birth Country: United States

Best Known For: Rapper Wiz Khalifa is known for such songs as "Say Yeah," "Black and Yellow" and "See You Again."

Astrological Sign: Virgo