In this article, we will investigate if Wiz Khalifa is the nephew of Snoop Dogg.

Who is Wiz Khalifa?

Wiz Khalifa is most known for his rapping career as an American rapper who has steadily produced rap music for almost two decades now.

His most well-known songs include “Black and Yellow” and “See You Again.”

He has also made several appearances in movies and on TV. Wiz Khalifa also won a few awards for his talents.

Childhood

Cameron Jibril Thomaz was born on September 8th, 1987, to his parents, Laurence Thomaz and Peachie Wimbush.

He had an older sister named Dorien “Lala” Thomaz.

They lived in Minot, North Dakota, when Cameron “Wiz Khalifa” was born, but they didn’t stay there very long.

Both Laurence Thomaz and Peachie Wimbush were in the military, so Wiz Khalifa never stayed in one home too long.

As a military brat, he moved from place to place, including Pittsburgh, Germany, the UK, Japan, South Carolina, Georgia, and Oklahoma.

His parents didn’t stay together long after his birth, as they got a divorce while he was a preschooler.

Wiz Khalifa was interested in music from an early age.

He started writing his own songs when he was just nine years old. Only a few years later, at twelve, he began recording them in his father’s studio located in Oklahoma.

Both of his parents supported his interest.

He went to the recording studio, so regularly he got the attention of Benjy Grinberg, who had started up an independent label company called Rostrum Records.

Success

Khalifa went to Taylor Allerdice High School in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

He was gaining traction in his career at this point. Khalifa worked hard to produce his first mixtape in 2006, when he was 19 years old, called Prince of the City: Welcome to Pistolvania. It wasn’t long after that his first album, “Show and Prove,” was released.

There was a steady incline in his career from the moment Khalifa started recording.

He hit the top 20 rap tracks in 2007 and moved around between record companies.

In 2010, he released a song in tribute to the Pittsburgh Steelers called “Black and Yellow.” It topped the charts in 2011. He was getting attention from other well-known rappers and gaining a massive fanbase.

In 2015, he produced his next most significant title, “See You Again,” as a tribute to Paul Walker.

This single hit the top 10 in the Billboard 200 albums chart. He was also producing other songs for soundtracks in famous movies at this point. Khalifa has been able to maintain a steady production of songs throughout his career.

Who is Snoop Dogg?

Snoop Dogg is also a very famous American rapper. His most well-known albums include “Doggystyle,” “Tha Doggfather,” and “Reincarnated.”

Snoop Dogg made his way onto screens as well, staring in a couple of films and guest appearances on TV shows.

He even produced his own reality show in 2007 called Snoop Dogg’s Father Hood. Snoop Dogg has so far acquired almost 30 awards in his musical career.

Family & History

Cordozar Calvin Broadus Jr. was born on October 20th, 1971, to his parents Vernell Varnado and Beverly Tate. At the time Cordozar “Snoop Dogg” was born, his family lived in Long Beach, California.

Jerry Wesley Carter is Snoop Dogg’s older half-brother.

Bing Worthington, another half-brother, was born eight after Snoop Dogg.

Snoop Dogg’s father was an actor, a singer, and an active military member.

He chose not to stay with Beverly after Snoop Dogg was born.

Instead, he ended up abandoning the family.

He has since come back into Snoop Dogg’s life and plays an active role as grandfather.

Beverly Tate was a single mom for a while before she remarried. She was known as an author and a loving mother to her children. Beverly actually gave Snoop Dogg the nickname “Snoopy” when he was a child.

Snoop Dogg’s musical talents started in his childhood. He was heavily involved in his family’s church, influenced by his mother, singing and playing the piano.

He started rapping in middle school. Snoop Dogg’s musical career started a little more slowly than Wiz Khalifa’s, as he was arrested several times in his teen years for drug charges.

Success

Snoop Dogg graduated from Long Beach Polytechnic High School in 1989 and spent the next few years in and out of prison.

At this time, he was creating mixtapes, but he wasn’t really getting anywhere with his music until Dr. Dre discovered him.

He chose to call himself “Snoop Doggy Dogg” in the early days of his career.

The first album to become successful was “Doggystyle,” and Snoop Dogg released it in 1993.

His next album was called “Tha Doggfather,” and it was also successful, though it never gained as much fame as the one before it.

He steadily released music to mixed success ever since his first album, “The Chronic.”

Snoop Dogg goes by a couple of other aliases, including Snoop Lion. He’s managed to win Billboard Music Awards, MTV Video Music Awards, and several others over his career. He married and had three children with his high school sweetheart before they finally divorced in 2004.

READ MORE: Snowbird Brown Net Worth

So, is Wiz Khalifa Snoop Dogg’s nephew?

Snoop Dogg is sixteen years older than Wiz Khalifa, and some people have speculated that they could be related.

Snoop has even referred to himself as “Uncle Snoop,” but he’s done this with other men than Wiz Khalifa.

It may be because of this that the two highly successful rappers have been theorized to be uncle and nephew. However, despite this, it appears that there is no relation between the two men.

They have made evident success for themselves in the rapping world, rising to stardom from childhood, but they did it in different ways.

Snoop Dogg was known for making some music with some of his cousins, who are also unrelated to Wiz Khalifa. However, Snoop and Wiz have worked together multiple times.

READ THIS NEXT:

Is Nick Cannon the nephew of Snoop Dogg?

How much is Snoop Dogg’s net worth?