Archive 1 Archive 2 Archive 3 → Archive 5

Hello, Arsenikk, and welcome to Wikipedia! Thank you for your contributions. I hope you like the place and decide to stay. Here are some pages that you might find helpful:

The five pillars of Wikipedia

How to edit a page

Help pages

Tutorial

How to write a great article

Manual of Style

I hope you enjoy editing here and being a Wikipedian! Please sign your name on talk pages using four tildes (~~~~); this will automatically produce your name and the date. If you need help, check out Wikipedia:Questions, ask me on my talk page, or place {{helpme}} on your talk page and someone will show up shortly to answer your questions. Again, welcome! Sjakkalle (Check!)

Hei! Welcome to Wikipedia. And welcome to Wikipedia:WikiProject Norway; we can use all the help we can get.

Just made a very minor edit to the excellent article you contributed, Vildanden (airline). Overall an extremely nice bit of work (and especially exceptional for a new contributor). The last sentence of Vildanden puzzles me though; could you perhaps confirm it is correct as written?

Tusen takk - Williamborg

Thanks. What I meant anyway is that the aircraft has www.vildanden.no on the side and the duck logo on the tailplane. Fixed up the sentence a litte. Hope its ok now, if not, be bold. Otherwise I will be trying to go through all the norwegian airport and airline articles and upgrading them, and the odd local bit on Trøndersk stuff Arsenikk

Your current edit reads very well now! Appreciate your taking the time to make it clear. I look forward to seeing more of your work. Williamborg

The Military history WikiProject coordinator election has begun. We will select seven coordinators to serve for the next six months from a pool of eleven candidates. Please vote here by August 26!

This is an automated delivery by grafikbot -

The August 2006 issue of the Military history WikiProject newsletter has been published. You may read the newsletter, change the format in which future issues will be delivered to you, or unsubscribe from this notification by following the link. Thank you.

This is an automated delivery by grafikbot --

Thanks for uploading Image:Alcoa logo.gif. Wikipedia gets thousands of images uploaded every day, and in order to verify that the images can be legally used on Wikipedia, the source and copyright status must be indicated. Images need to have an image tag applied to the image description page indicating the copyright status of the image. This uniform and easy-to-understand method of indicating the license status allows potential re-users of the images to know what they are allowed to do with the images.

For more information on using images, see the following pages:

Wikipedia:Image use policy

Wikipedia:Image copyright tags

This is an automated notice by OrphanBot. If you need help on selecting a tag to use, or in adding the tag to the image description, feel free to post a message at Wikipedia:Media copyright questions. 20:07, 4 September 2006 (UTC)

Nice to see another Norwegian join the Wikipedia. Good to have someone who understands Norwegian topics well.

I modified your Trøndelag edit, citing what I thought the relevant Wikipolicy (see discussion page for Trøndelag). If you've got an alternate policy to cite, let's talk; we need to get it straightened out (i.e., get the policy requirements consistent). Skål - Williamborg (Bill)

On 14 September, 2006, Did you know? was updated with a fact from the article Coop NKL, which you created. If you know of another interesting fact from a recently created article, then please suggest it on the "Did you know?" talk page.

Congratulations! Keep up the good work! --Srikeit (Talk | Email)

Hi. I see you recently created Iran Air destinations. Did you know there was also Iran Air Destinations? (I think your spelling is better.) Do you have a view what is best to do about this? (I won't be editing either - I just noticed Qeshm was linked to by both, and thought that odd.) 195.128.251.215

The Original Barnstar For your hard work and dedication to improving Wikipedia, I, Sharkface217, hereby award you this Original Barnstar. Good job! Sharkface217

I noticed you've been adding the infobox to a bunch of airlines. There are quite a few to do, so any contributions in that area are great. However, there have been a couple discussions on putting flags next to city names and the decision was to leave them out, so please just put the city (and country) name in the infobox, but not the flags. Thanks. DB (talk)

Hi there. First of all, thank you for improving the article. It's in much better shape. I was going over some of the citaions you've provided, and I'm concerned about their credibility. Wikipedia can only use sources as described by WP:RS. Sites like UrbanRail.net should generally be avoided because they're self published. Thanks! -- Selmo (talk)

BTW, if you're interested, feel free to join WikiProject Rapid transit.

On December 7, 2006, Did you know? was updated with a fact from the article History of Rapid transit, which you created. If you know of another interesting fact from a recently created article, then please suggest it on the "Did you know?" talk page.

Thankyou Arsenikk for helping to give transportation content representation on DYK! Happy editing, Blnguyen (bananabucket)

Greetings! While reviewing the assessment change log for Wikipedia:WikiProject Airports, I noticed that you created the article Berlevåg Airport. You contribution to improving Wikipedia's collection of airport articles is greatly appreciated. If at all interested, I'd like to extend an invitation to join the project. You can join by simply adding your name to the list of participants. If not interested, please disregard this message. Thanks! thadius856talk|airports|neutrality

On 9 December, 2006, Did you know? was updated with a fact from the article Lysaker Station, which you created. If you know of another interesting fact from a recently created article, then please suggest it on the "Did you know?" talk page.

--GeeJo (t)⁄(c) •

On 14 December, 2006, Did you know? was updated with a fact from the article Rjukanbanen, which you created. If you know of another interesting fact from a recently created article, then please suggest it on the "Did you know?" talk page.

Yomanganitalk

In case you hadn't noticed, Aeroflot Don destinations has been proposed for deletion. NickelShoe (Talk)

Hei, fin artikkel om Verran Sparebank, men jeg måtte skrive den om pga av fusjon med Grong Sparebank. Tar du den også? De har jo blitt en interessant regional faktor i Nord-Trøndelag.

Hello, I've enjoyed your article on Verran Sparebank, but had to rewrite it as they've merged with Grong Sparebank, whom You also might want to write about!? --Orland

I moved the template you created into template space at Template:Infobox tunnel. Cheers!--Kchase T

On January 18, 2007, Did you know? was updated with a fact from the article Trondheim Tramway, which you created or substantially expanded. If you know of another interesting fact from a recently created article, then please suggest it on the "Did you know?" talk page.

Thanks for your contributions! Nishkid64

Hi Arsenikk! You may be interested in this AFD debate, and wonder if you have anything to add about it. From what I can see, the justification for the article is dubious, but there may of course be supporting sources which I have failed to find and which would justify a Wikipedia article. I have seen that you frequently have better sources than I do on transportation issues so any contribution to that discussion would be welcome. Sjakkalle (Check!)

Thanks for uploading Image:Flytoget logo.gif. The image description page currently specifies that the image is non-free and may only be used on Wikipedia under a claim of fair use. However, the image is currently orphaned, meaning that it is not used in any articles on Wikipedia. If the image was previously in an article, please go to the article and see why it was removed. You may add it back if you think that that will be useful. However, please note that images for which a replacement could be created are not acceptable under fair use (see our fair use policy).

If you have uploaded other unlicensed media, please check whether they're used in any articles or not. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that any fair use images not used in any articles will be deleted after seven days, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. Thank you. This is an automated message from BJBot

Thanks for uploading Image:Alcoa logo.gif. The image description page currently specifies that the image is non-free and may only be used on Wikipedia under a claim of fair use. However, the image is currently orphaned, meaning that it is not used in any articles on Wikipedia. If the image was previously in an article, please go to the article and see why it was removed. You may add it back if you think that that will be useful. However, please note that images for which a replacement could be created are not acceptable under fair use (see our fair use policy).

If you have uploaded other unlicensed media, please check whether they're used in any articles or not. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that any fair use images not used in any articles will be deleted after seven days, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. Thank you. This is an automated message from BJBot

An editor has nominated Nexus Trafikk, an article on which you have worked or that you created, for deletion. We appreciate your contributions, but the nominator doesn't believe that the article satisfies Wikipedia's criteria for inclusion and has explained why in his/her nomination (see also "What Wikipedia is not"). Your opinions on whether the article meets inclusion criteria and what should be done with the article are welcome; please participate in the discussion by adding your comments at Wikipedia:Articles for deletion/Nexus Trafikk and please be sure to sign your comments with four tildes (~~~~). You may also edit the article during the discussion to improve it but should not remove the articles for deletion template from the top of the article; such removal will not end the deletion debate. Thank you. Please note: This is an automatic notification by a bot. I have nothing to do with this article or the deletion nomination, and can't do anything about it. Jayden54Bot

hello, please change the name of 'TGS-NOPEC Geophysical Systems' to 'TGS-NOPEC Geophysical Company' as that is the correct company name...

thank you!

Shannon —The preceding unsigned comment was added by Smorolez (talk • contribs) .

The March 2007 issue of the Aviation WikiProject newsletter has been published. You may read the newsletter, change the format in which future issues will be delivered to you, or unsubscribe from this notification by following the link. Thank you. Trevor MacInnis (Contribs)

An editor has nominated Stavanger Station, an article on which you have worked or that you created, for deletion. We appreciate your contributions, but the nominator doesn't believe that the article satisfies Wikipedia's criteria for inclusion and has explained why in his/her nomination (see also "What Wikipedia is not"). Your opinions on whether the article meets inclusion criteria and what should be done with the article are welcome; please participate in the discussion by adding your comments at Wikipedia:Articles for deletion/Stavanger Station and please be sure to sign your comments with four tildes (~~~~). You may also edit the article during the discussion to improve it but should not remove the articles for deletion template from the top of the article; such removal will not end the deletion debate. Thank you. Please note: This is an automatic notification by a bot. I have nothing to do with this article or the deletion nomination, and can't do anything about it. Jayden54Bot

Thanks for uploading Image:SpareBank_1_logo.gif. I notice the image page specifies that the image is being used under fair use but there is no explanation or rationale as to why its use in Wikipedia articles constitutes fair use. In addition to the boilerplate fair use template, you must also write out on the image description page a specific explanation or rationale for why using this image in each article is consistent with fair use.

Please go to the image description page and edit it to include a fair use rationale.

If you have uploaded other fair use media, consider checking that you have specified the fair use rationale on those pages too. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that any fair use images uploaded after 4 May, 2006, and lacking such an explanation will be deleted one week after they have been uploaded, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. If you have any questions please ask them at the Media copyright questions page. Thank you. MER-C

Thanks for uploading Image:Gardermoen Braathens and SAS.jpeg. The image description page currently specifies that the image is non-free and may only be used on Wikipedia under a claim of fair use. However, the image is currently orphaned, meaning that it is not used in any articles on Wikipedia. If the image was previously in an article, please go to the article and see why it was removed. You may add it back if you think that that will be useful. However, please note that images for which a replacement could be created are not acceptable for use on Wikipedia (see our policy for non-free media).

If you have uploaded other unlicensed media, please check whether they're used in any articles or not. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that any non-free images not used in any articles will be deleted after seven days, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. Thank you. Aksibot

Thanks for uploading Image:Aeroflot Don logo.gif. The image description page currently specifies that the image is non-free and may only be used on Wikipedia under a claim of fair use. However, the image is currently orphaned, meaning that it is not used in any articles on Wikipedia. If the image was previously in an article, please go to the article and see why it was removed. You may add it back if you think that that will be useful. However, please note that images for which a replacement could be created are not acceptable for use on Wikipedia (see our policy for non-free media).

If you have uploaded other unlicensed media, please check whether they're used in any articles or not. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that any non-free images not used in any articles will be deleted after seven days, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. Thank you. Aksibot

I have tagged Image:Mesta_logo.png as {{no rationale}}, because it does not provide a fair use rationale. If you believe the image to be acceptable for fair use according to Wikipedia policy, please provide a rationale explaining as much, in accordance with the fair use rationale guideline, on the image description page. Please also consider using {{non-free fair use in|article name}} or one of the other tags listed at Wikipedia:Image copyright tags#Fair_use. Thank you. ShakespeareFan00

I have tagged Image:SIVA_logo.gif as {{no rationale}}, because it does not provide a fair use rationale. If you believe the image to be acceptable for fair use according to Wikipedia policy, please provide a rationale explaining as much, in accordance with the fair use rationale guideline, on the image description page. Please also consider using {{non-free fair use in|article name}} or one of the other tags listed at Wikipedia:Image copyright tags#Fair_use. Thank you. ShakespeareFan00

I have tagged Image:Argentum_logo.gif as {{no rationale}}, because it does not provide a fair use rationale. If you believe the image to be acceptable for fair use according to Wikipedia policy, please provide a rationale explaining as much, in accordance with the fair use rationale guideline, on the image description page. Please also consider using {{non-free fair use in|article name}} or one of the other tags listed at Wikipedia:Image copyright tags#Fair_use. Thank you. ShakespeareFan00

The fair-use rationle has to be IN DEPTH, 1-2 lines is NOT suffcient. You might want to see what other uploaders have used. ShakespeareFan00

Hi Arsenikk. You are off to such a great start on the article Regional Health Authority that it may qualify to appear on Wikipedia's Main Page under the Did you know... section. Appearing on the Main Page may help bring publicity and assistance to the article. However, there is a five day from article creation window for Did you know... nominations. Before five days pass from the date the article was created and if you haven't already done so, please consider nominating the article to appear on the Main Page by posting a nomination at Did you know suggestions. If you do nominate the article for DYK, please cross out the article name on the "Good" articles proposed by bot list. Again, great job on the article. -- Jreferee (Talk)

Thanks for uploading Image:Aker Finnyards Helsinki Aerial.jpg. The image description page currently specifies that the image is non-free and may only be used on Wikipedia under a claim of fair use. However, the image is currently orphaned, meaning that it is not used in any articles on Wikipedia. If the image was previously in an article, please go to the article and see why it was removed. You may add it back if you think that that will be useful. However, please note that images for which a replacement could be created are not acceptable for use on Wikipedia (see our policy for non-free media).

If you have uploaded other unlicensed media, please check whether they're used in any articles or not. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that any non-free images not used in any articles will be deleted after seven days, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. Thank you. BetacommandBot

On 7 July, 2007, Did you know? was updated with a fact from the article Regional Health Authority, which you created or substantially expanded. If you know of another interesting fact from a recently created article, then please suggest it on the Did you know? talk page.

--Carabinieri

On 14 July, 2007, Did you know? was updated with a fact from the article First cabinet Gerhardsen, which you created or substantially expanded. If you know of another interesting fact from a recently created article, then please suggest it on the Did you know? talk page.

--Carabinieri

Thanks for uploading Image:Osllogo.gif. The image description page currently specifies that the image is non-free and may only be used on Wikipedia under a claim of fair use. However, the image is currently orphaned, meaning that it is not used in any articles on Wikipedia. If the image was previously in an article, please go to the article and see why it was removed. You may add it back if you think that that will be useful. However, please note that images for which a replacement could be created are not acceptable for use on Wikipedia (see our policy for non-free media).

If you have uploaded other unlicensed media, please check whether they're used in any articles or not. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that any non-free images not used in any articles will be deleted after seven days, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. Thank you. BetacommandBot

Thanks for uploading Image:Gardermoen_Aerial_View.jpeg. I notice the 'image' page specifies that the image is being used under fair use, but its use in Wikipedia articles fails our first fair use criterion in that it illustrates a subject for which a freely licensed image could reasonably be found or created that provides substantially the same information. If you believe this image is not replaceable, please:

Go to the image description page and edit it to add {{di-replaceable fair use disputed}}, without deleting the original Replaceable fair use template.

On the image discussion page, write the reason why this image is not replaceable at all.

Alternatively, you can also choose to replace the fair use image by finding a freely licensed image of its subject, requesting that the copyright holder release this (or a similar) image under a free license, or by taking a picture of it yourself.

If you have uploaded other fair use media, consider checking that you have specified how these images fully satisfy our fair use criteria. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on . Note that fair use images which could be replaced by free-licensed alternatives will be deleted 7 days after this notification, per our Fair Use policy. If you have any questions please ask them at the Media copyright questions page. Thank you. Rettetast

Welcome to Wikipedia. It might not have been your intention, but your recent contribution removed content from Trondheim. Please be more careful when editing pages and do not remove content from Wikipedia without a good reason, which should be specified in the edit summary. Take a look at the welcome page to learn more about contributing to this encyclopedia. If you would like to experiment again, please use the sandbox. Thank you. Gscshoyru

Hi Arsenikk. You are off to such a great start on the article Diplom-Is that it may qualify to appear on Wikipedia's Main Page under the Did you know... section. The Main Page gets about 4,000,000 hits per day and appearing on the Main Page may help bring publicity and assistance to the article. However, there is a five day from article creation window for Did you know... nominations. Before five days pass from the date the article was created and if you haven't already done so, please consider nominating the article to appear on the Main Page by posting a nomination at Did you know suggestions. If you do nominate the article for DYK, please cross out the article name on the "Good" articles proposed by bot list. Also, don't forget to keep checking back at Did you know suggestions for comments regarding your nomination. Again, great job on the article. -- Jreferee (Talk)

Hi Arsenikk,

I would like to ask you a favor, since I am planning on starting a wikiproject by the name WikiProject Trains in Europe if you could consider developing it. Takk for your time! --Hirohisat Talk

Thanks for uploading Image:Statkraft Logo.gif. The image description page currently specifies that the image is non-free and may only be used on Wikipedia under a claim of fair use. However, the image is currently orphaned, meaning that it is not used in any articles on Wikipedia. If the image was previously in an article, please go to the article and see why it was removed. You may add it back if you think that that will be useful. However, please note that images for which a replacement could be created are not acceptable for use on Wikipedia (see our policy for non-free media).

If you have uploaded other unlicensed media, please check whether they're used in any articles or not. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that any non-free images not used in any articles will be deleted after seven days, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. Thank you. BetacommandBot

On 2 August, 2007, Did you know? was updated with a fact from the article Alfathi, which you created or substantially expanded. If you know of another interesting fact from a recently created article, then please suggest it on the Did you know? talk page.

--Yomanganitalk

Hello, this is a message from an automated bot. A tag has been placed on Midtnorsk Helikopter, by Russavia (talk · contribs), another Wikipedia user, requesting that it be speedily deleted from Wikipedia. The tag claims that it should be speedily deleted because Midtnorsk Helikopter seems to be about a person, group of people, band, club, company, or web content, but it does not indicate how or why the subject is notable: that is, why an article about that subject should be included in an encyclopedia. Under the criteria for speedy deletion, articles that do not assert the subject's importance or significance may be deleted at any time. Please see the guidelines for what is generally accepted as notable.

To contest the tagging and request that administrators wait before possibly deleting Midtnorsk Helikopter, please affix the template {{hangon}} to the page, and put a note on its talk page. If the article has already been deleted, see the advice and instructions at WP:WMD. Feel free to contact the bot operator if you have any questions about this or any problems with this bot, bearing in mind that this bot is only informing you of the nomination for speedy deletion; it does not perform any nominations or deletions itself. --Android Mouse Bot 2

Midtnorsk Helikopter, an article you created, has been nominated for deletion. We appreciate your contributions. However, an editor does not feel that Midtnorsk Helikopter satisfies Wikipedia's criteria for inclusion and has explained why in the nomination space (see also "What Wikipedia is not" and the Wikipedia deletion policy). Your opinions on the matter are welcome; please participate in the discussion by adding your comments at Wikipedia:Articles for deletion/Midtnorsk Helikopter and please be sure to sign your comments with four tildes (~~~~). You are free to edit the content of Midtnorsk Helikopter during the discussion but should not remove the articles for deletion template from the top of the article; such removal will not end the deletion discussion. Thank you. Russavia

Hello, this is a message from an automated bot. A tag has been placed on Petter Jansen, by Marwood (talk · contribs), another Wikipedia user, requesting that it be speedily deleted from Wikipedia. The tag claims that it should be speedily deleted because Petter Jansen seems to be about a person, group of people, band, club, company, or web content, but it does not indicate how or why the subject is notable: that is, why an article about that subject should be included in an encyclopedia. Under the criteria for speedy deletion, articles that do not assert the subject's importance or significance may be deleted at any time. Please see the guidelines for what is generally accepted as notable.

To contest the tagging and request that administrators wait before possibly deleting Petter Jansen, please affix the template {{hangon}} to the page, and put a note on its talk page. If the article has already been deleted, see the advice and instructions at WP:WMD. Feel free to contact the bot operator if you have any questions about this or any problems with this bot, bearing in mind that this bot is only informing you of the nomination for speedy deletion; it does not perform any nominations or deletions itself. --Android Mouse Bot 2

Thanks for uploading Image:Midtnorsk Helikopter logo.jpg. The media description page currently specifies that it is non-free and may only be used on Wikipedia under a claim of fair use. However, it is currently orphaned, meaning that it is not used in any articles on Wikipedia. If the media was previously in an article, please go to the article and see why it was removed. You may add it back if you think that that will be useful. However, please note that media for which a replacement could be created are not acceptable for use on Wikipedia (see our policy for non-free media).

If you have uploaded other unlicensed media, please check whether they're used in any articles or not. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that all non-free media not used in any articles will be deleted after seven days, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. Thank you. BetacommandBot

It's a fine box you have made for Norw. hospitals! Som proposals: State-Run agencies could be Government agencies, to make clear that these are not enterprises like the HF. Eastern and Southern was fusioned by June 1 this year into South-East. Norw. Board og Health ... is now named Norwegian Board of Health Supervision. Should the enterprises within each region be alphabetized? Helge Høi

Did you remove the {{prod}} tag I put on this article without discussion? Murderbike

Thanks for uploading Image:SeaDrill logo.png. The media description page currently specifies that it is non-free and may only be used on Wikipedia under a claim of fair use. However, it is currently orphaned, meaning that it is not used in any articles on Wikipedia. If the media was previously in an article, please go to the article and see why it was removed. You may add it back if you think that that will be useful. However, please note that media for which a replacement could be created are not acceptable for use on Wikipedia (see our policy for non-free media).

If you have uploaded other unlicensed media, please check whether they're used in any articles or not. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that all non-free media not used in any articles will be deleted after seven days, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. Thank you. BetacommandBot

Thanks for uploading Image:Petrojarl logo.png. The media description page currently specifies that it is non-free and may only be used on Wikipedia under a claim of fair use. However, it is currently orphaned, meaning that it is not used in any articles on Wikipedia. If the media was previously in an article, please go to the article and see why it was removed. You may add it back if you think that that will be useful. However, please note that media for which a replacement could be created are not acceptable for use on Wikipedia (see our policy for non-free media).

If you have uploaded other unlicensed media, please check whether they're used in any articles or not. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that all non-free media not used in any articles will be deleted after seven days, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. Thank you. BetacommandBot

Thanks for uploading Image:Fjord1 logo.jpg. However, there is a concern that the rationale you have provided for using this image under "fair use" may be invalid. Please read the instructions at Wikipedia:Non-free content carefully, then go to the image description page and clarify why you think the image qualifies for fair use. Using one of the templates at Wikipedia:Fair use rationale guideline is an easy way to ensure that your image is in compliance with Wikipedia policy, but remember that you must complete the template. Do not simply insert a blank template on an image page.

If it is determined that the image does not qualify under fair use, it will be deleted within a couple of days according to our Criteria for speedy deletion. If you have any questions please ask them at the Media copyright questions page. Thank you.BetacommandBot

A tag has been placed on J. Ludwig Mowinckels Rederi, requesting that it be speedily deleted from Wikipedia per CSD a7.

Under the criteria for speedy deletion, articles that do not meet basic Wikipedia criteria may be deleted at any time. Please see the guidelines for what is generally accepted as an appropriate article, and if you can indicate why the subject of this article is appropriate, you may contest the tagging. To do this, add {{hangon}} on the top of the article and leave a note on the article's talk page explaining your position. Please do not remove the speedy deletion tag yourself, but don't hesitate to add information to the article that would confirm its subject's notability under the guidelines.

If you think that this notice was placed here in error, you may contest the deletion. To do this, add {{hangon}} on the top of the page (just below the existing speedy deletion or "db" tag) and leave a note on the page's talk page explaining your position. Please do not remove the speedy deletion tag yourself. Phgao

Thanks for uploading Image:KrasAir logo.gif. The media description page currently specifies that it is non-free and may only be used on Wikipedia under a claim of fair use. However, it is currently orphaned, meaning that it is not used in any articles on Wikipedia. If the media was previously in an article, please go to the article and see why it was removed. You may add it back if you think that that will be useful. However, please note that media for which a replacement could be created are not acceptable for use on Wikipedia (see our policy for non-free media).

If you have uploaded other unlicensed media, please check whether they're used in any articles or not. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that all non-free media not used in any articles will be deleted after seven days, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. Thank you. BetacommandBot

Thanks for uploading Image:Air Moldova Logo.gif. The media description page currently specifies that it is non-free and may only be used on Wikipedia under a claim of fair use. However, it is currently orphaned, meaning that it is not used in any articles on Wikipedia. If the media was previously in an article, please go to the article and see why it was removed. You may add it back if you think that that will be useful. However, please note that media for which a replacement could be created are not acceptable for use on Wikipedia (see our policy for non-free media).

If you have uploaded other unlicensed media, please check whether they're used in any articles or not. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that all non-free media not used in any articles will be deleted after seven days, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. Thank you. BetacommandBot

A tag has been placed on Scandinavian Bunkering, requesting that it be speedily deleted from Wikipedia per CSD A7.

Under the criteria for speedy deletion, articles that do not meet basic Wikipedia criteria may be deleted at any time. Please see the guidelines for what is generally accepted as an appropriate article, and if you can indicate why the subject of this article is appropriate, you may contest the tagging. To do this, add {{hangon}} on the top of the article and leave a note on the article's talk page explaining your position. Please do not remove the speedy deletion tag yourself, but don't hesitate to add information to the article that would confirm its subject's notability under the guidelines.

If you think that this notice was placed here in error, you may contest the deletion. To do this, add {{hangon}} on the top of the page (just below the existing speedy deletion or "db" tag) and leave a note on the page's talk page explaining your position. Please do not remove the speedy deletion tag yourself. -- WebHamster

Thanks for uploading Image:HydroTexaco logo.jpg. The media description page currently specifies that it is non-free and may only be used on Wikipedia under a claim of fair use. However, it is currently orphaned, meaning that it is not used in any articles on Wikipedia. If the media was previously in an article, please go to the article and see why it was removed. You may add it back if you think that that will be useful. However, please note that media for which a replacement could be created are not acceptable for use on Wikipedia (see our policy for non-free media).

If you have uploaded other unlicensed media, please check whether they're used in any articles or not. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that all non-free media not used in any articles will be deleted after seven days, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. Thank you. BetacommandBot

A tag has been placed on ErgoGroup requesting that it be speedily deleted from Wikipedia. This has been done because the article appears to be about a person, group of people, band, club, company, or web content, but it does not indicate how or why the subject is notable: that is, why an article about that subject should be included in an encyclopedia. Under the criteria for speedy deletion, articles that do not assert the subject's importance or significance may be deleted at any time. Please see the guidelines for what is generally accepted as notable.

If you think that you can assert the notability of the subject, you may contest the deletion by adding {{hangon}} to the top of the page (just below the existing speedy deletion or "db" tag), coupled with adding a note on the article's talk page explaining your position, but be aware that once tagged for speedy deletion, if the article meets the criterion it may be deleted without delay. Please do not remove the speedy deletion tag yourself, but don't hesitate to add information to the article that would confirm the subject's notability under Wikipedia guidelines.

For guidelines on specific types of articles, you may want to check out our criteria for biographies, for web sites, for bands, or for companies. Feel free to leave a note on my talk page if you have any questions about this. Blanchardb

A tag has been placed on Nor-Cargo, requesting that it be speedily deleted from Wikipedia. This has been done under the criteria for speedy deletion, because the article seems to be blatant advertising which only promotes a company, product, group, service or person and would need to be fundamentally rewritten in order to become an encyclopedia article. Please read the general criteria for speedy deletion, particularly item 11, as well as the guidelines on spam.

If you can indicate why the subject of this article is not blatant advertising, you may contest the tagging. To do this, please add {{hangon}} on the top of the article and leave a note on the article's talk page explaining your position. Please do not remove the speedy deletion tag yourself, but don't hesitate to add information to the article that would help make it encyclopedic, as well as adding any citations from reliable sources to ensure that the article will be verifiable. Feel free to leave a note on my talk page if you have any questions about this. Blanchardb

Sorry about that

As you probably know already, the new page patrol is entirely voluntary and I decided to give it a shot. I have nominated, I believe, about 30 articles today for speedy deletion, and all but three of them have been deleted - two of those being kept were yours, the third one had been substantially modified by the time the tag was removed. In many other articles I have added the {{clean}}, {{unsourced}}, and/or {{wiki}} tags which are not requests for administrator intervention, but rather an invitation for article improvement. Sometimes, in this kind of work, we are to exert judgment - and sometimes judgment fails.

I once had one of my own articles marked for speedy deletion, only to see the request declined. All I can tell you is, that sort of things happens. That it happened to the same person twice on the same day is... well... not particularly enjoyable for that person. But I am happy, under the circumstances, after reviewing what I was asking for, that my request was declined. --Blanchardb

Your requested move from Nycomed Holdings A/S – Nycomed was successful. Apologies for the lengthy request response time. Rudget Contributions

Thanks for uploading Image:Luftfartsverket Norway logo.jpg. However, there is a concern that the rationale you have provided for using this image under "fair use" may be invalid. Please read the instructions at Wikipedia:Non-free content carefully, then go to the image description page and clarify why you think the image qualifies for fair use. Using one of the templates at Wikipedia:Fair use rationale guideline is an easy way to ensure that your image is in compliance with Wikipedia policy, but remember that you must complete the template. Do not simply insert a blank template on an image page.

If it is determined that the image does not qualify under fair use, it will be deleted within a couple of days according to our criteria for speedy deletion. If you have any questions please ask them at the media copyright questions page. Thank you.BetacommandBot

Thanks for uploading Image:Norwegian Property logo.gif. However, there is a concern that the rationale you have provided for using this image under "fair use" may be invalid. Please read the instructions at Wikipedia:Non-free content carefully, then go to the image description page and clarify why you think the image qualifies for fair use. Using one of the templates at Wikipedia:Fair use rationale guideline is an easy way to ensure that your image is in compliance with Wikipedia policy, but remember that you must complete the template. Do not simply insert a blank template on an image page.

If it is determined that the image does not qualify under fair use, it will be deleted within a couple of days according to our criteria for speedy deletion. If you have any questions please ask them at the media copyright questions page. Thank you.BetacommandBot

Hitra Wind Farm, an article you created, has been nominated for deletion. We appreciate your contributions. However, an editor does not feel that Hitra Wind Farm satisfies Wikipedia's criteria for inclusion and has explained why in the nomination space (see also "What Wikipedia is not" and the Wikipedia deletion policy). Your opinions on the matter are welcome; please participate in the discussion by adding your comments at Wikipedia:Articles for deletion/Hitra Wind Farm and please be sure to sign your comments with four tildes (~~~~). You are free to edit the content of Hitra Wind Farm during the discussion but should not remove the articles for deletion template from the top of the article; such removal will not end the deletion discussion. Thank you. – Mike.lifeguard | @en.wb

Thanks for uploading Image:Braathens logo.png. The media description page currently specifies that it is non-free and may only be used on Wikipedia under a claim of fair use. However, it is currently orphaned, meaning that it is not used in any articles on Wikipedia. If the media was previously in an article, please go to the article and see why it was removed. You may add it back if you think that that will be useful. However, please note that media for which a replacement could be created are not acceptable for use on Wikipedia (see our policy for non-free media).

If you have uploaded other unlicensed media, please check whether they're used in any articles or not. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that all non-free media not used in any articles will be deleted after seven days, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. Thank you. BetacommandBot

A tag has been placed on K7 Bulletin requesting that it be speedily deleted from Wikipedia. This has been done under section A7 of the criteria for speedy deletion, because the article appears to be about a person or group of people, but it does not indicate how or why the subject is notable: that is, why an article about that subject should be included in an encyclopedia. Under the criteria for speedy deletion, articles that do not assert the subject's importance or significance may be deleted at any time. Please see the guidelines for what is generally accepted as notable, as well as our subject-specific notability guideline for biographies.

If you think that this notice was placed here in error, you may contest the deletion by adding {{hangon}} to the top of the article (just below the existing speedy deletion or "db" tag), coupled with adding a note on the article's talk page explaining your position, but be aware that once tagged for speedy deletion, if the article meets the criterion it may be deleted without delay. Please do not remove the speedy deletion tag yourself, but don't hesitate to add information to the article that would would render it more in conformance with Wikipedia's policies and guidelines. Ridernyc

A proposed deletion template has been added to the article Institute for Research in Economics and Business Administration, suggesting that it be deleted according to the proposed deletion process. All contributions are appreciated, but this article may not satisfy Wikipedia's criteria for inclusion, and the deletion notice explains why (see also "What Wikipedia is not" and Wikipedia's deletion policy). You may contest the proposed deletion by removing the {{dated prod}} notice, but please explain why you disagree with the proposed deletion in your edit summary or on its talk page. Also, please consider improving the article to address the issues raised. Even though removing the deletion notice will prevent deletion through the proposed deletion process, the article may still be deleted if it matches any of the speedy deletion criteria or it can be sent to Articles for Deletion, where it may be deleted if consensus to delete is reached. If you endorse deletion of the article, and you are the only person who has made substantial edits to the page, please add {{db-author}} to the top of the page. DGG (talk)

Hi, it's time to appreciate your focus on Norway-related articles, particularly the many companies, agencies, organizations etc. It helps readers understand Norway better. It is a real shame that you have to put up with the widespread speedying, prodding and afd'ing of your articles. If you like, feel free to let me know in case of an AFD etc.

As you might have noticed I like to create articles on Norwegian things as well, but I mostly concentrate on various biographies and sports. After seeing your last creation (Terra) I started to think about other similar topics we need, i.e. Finance Credit, Carl Fredrik Seim, The 5 Percent Community. I don't really like to "pile" tasks on other editors, but you do these things well, so... If you have no objections I might bring some future requests to your attention. Feel free to do the same the other way around. Punkmorten (talk)

Hello, this is a message from an automated bot. A tag has been placed on Stein Ole Larsen, by another Wikipedia user, requesting that it be speedily deleted from Wikipedia. The tag claims that it should be speedily deleted because Stein Ole Larsen seems to be about a person, group of people, band, club, company, or web content, but it does not indicate how or why the subject is notable: that is, why an article about that subject should be included in an encyclopedia. Under the criteria for speedy deletion, articles that do not assert the subject's importance or significance may be deleted at any time. Please see the guidelines for what is generally accepted as notable.

To contest the tagging and request that administrators wait before possibly deleting Stein Ole Larsen, please affix the template {{hangon}} to the page, and put a note on its talk page. If the article has already been deleted, see the advice and instructions at WP:WMD. Feel free to contact the bot operator if you have any questions about this or any problems with this bot, bearing in mind that this bot is only informing you of the nomination for speedy deletion; it does not perform any nominations or deletions itself. To see the user who deleted the page, click here CSDWarnBot (talk)

A tag has been placed on Geir Waage requesting that it be speedily deleted from Wikipedia. This has been done under section A7 of the criteria for speedy deletion, because the article appears to be about a person or group of people, but it does not indicate how or why the subject is notable: that is, why an article about that subject should be included in an encyclopedia. Under the criteria for speedy deletion, articles that do not assert the subject's importance or significance may be deleted at any time. Please see the guidelines for what is generally accepted as notable, as well as our subject-specific notability guideline for biographies.

If you think that this notice was placed here in error, you may contest the deletion by adding {{hangon}} to the top of the article (just below the existing speedy deletion or "db" tag), coupled with adding a note on the article's talk page explaining your position, but be aware that once tagged for speedy deletion, if the article meets the criterion it may be deleted without delay. Please do not remove the speedy deletion tag yourself, but don't hesitate to add information to the article that would would render it more in conformance with Wikipedia's policies and guidelines. Whitstable

Hi,

I noticed that your talk page is starting to get rather large.

If you would like, you can Archiveyour page so that it not so crowded. For more information click here

The Helpful One (Talk) (Contributions)

Hi... this time I'm very sorry to nag on you like everyone else, but I really don't reckon Norwegian mayors are notable (and worthy of inclusion) unless they did something special. I think I will actually AFD Ole Tronstad. WP:AFDP says "Municipal politicians: Municipal politicians are not inherently notable just for being in politics, but neither are they inherently non-notable just because they're in local politics — evaluate each case on its own individual merits. Mayors of major cities have usually survived AFD, although the article should say more than just "Jane Doe is the mayor of Cityville". Mayors of smaller towns, however, are generally deemed not notable just for being mayors, although they may be notable for other reasons in addition to their mayoralty". I unfortunately believe Tronstad fails. The similar case could be made for the mayors of Hemnes, Hattfjelldal etc although they are more borderline. Punkmorten

Concerning Ole Tronstad I would claim that he is on the right side of the border because of his length of term and involvement in other aspects of politics, but I have understanding if you disagree. Concerning the mayors of Hemnes and Hattfjelldal though, their notability is not related to their position as Mayor of their respective hamlets par cet, but for being involved in the Terra Securities scandal. Because of the massive, excessive and prolonged intensity of this case in the media, the four "Nordland-mayors" have all became notable through this case. Per this mid-week there were more than 7,000 media articles related to the case published, and a significant number of them refer to these mayors. Arsenikk

Which other aspects? But yeah I will probably leave the "Terra mayors" alone. Hope this won't be a big setback for your productivity here :) Punkmorten

On 4 December, 2007, Did you know? was updated with a fact from the article Terra Securities scandal, which you created or substantially expanded. If you know of another interesting fact from a recently created article, then please suggest it on the Did you know? talk page.

--Royalbroil

Hi, I'm proposing to redirect a lot of the House of Justice member pages, see here: Talk:Universal House of Justice#Merge proposal Cuñado ☼ - Talk

Thanks for uploading Image:Gjensidige NOR logo.gif. However, there is a concern that the rationale you have provided for using this image under "fair use" may be invalid. Please read the instructions at Wikipedia:Non-free content carefully, then go to the image description page and clarify why you think the image qualifies for fair use. Using one of the templates at Wikipedia:Fair use rationale guideline is an easy way to ensure that your image is in compliance with Wikipedia policy, but remember that you must complete the template. Do not simply insert a blank template on an image page.

If it is determined that the image does not qualify under fair use, it will be deleted within a couple of days according to our criteria for speedy deletion. If you have any questions please ask them at the media copyright questions page. Thank you.BetacommandBot (talk)

Thanks for uploading Image:Kongsberg Automotive logo.gif. The media description page currently specifies that it is non-free and may only be used on Wikipedia under a claim of fair use. However, it is currently orphaned, meaning that it is not used in any articles on Wikipedia. If the media was previously in an article, please go to the article and see why it was removed. You may add it back if you think that that will be useful. However, please note that media for which a replacement could be created are not acceptable for use on Wikipedia (see our policy for non-free media).

If you have uploaded other unlicensed media, please check whether they're used in any articles or not. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that all non-free media not used in any articles will be deleted after seven days, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. Thank you. BJBot (talk)

placed on talk pages of all participants

I wanted to get a notion of the level of activity of people who are members of WikiProject Companies with respect to monitoring the WikiProject Talk page and participating in discussions of interest and/or responding to requests for input.

Could you please visit Wikipedia talk:WikiProject Companies/Member information#2008 Quarter 1 (Jan-Mar): Talk page monitoring survey and adding yourself to one or more of the several groupings listed?

Thanks for your assistance.

--User:Ceyockey (talk to me)

An image or media file that you uploaded or altered, Image:OVDS logo.gif, has been listed at Wikipedia:Images and media for deletion. Please see the discussion to see why this is (you may have to search for the title of the image to find its entry), if you are interested in it not being deleted. Thank you. —PNG crusade bot (feedback)

Thanks for uploading Image:OVDS logo.gif. The media description page currently specifies that it is non-free and may only be used on Wikipedia under a claim of fair use. However, it is currently orphaned, meaning that it is not used in any articles on Wikipedia. If the media was previously in an article, please go to the article and see why it was removed. You may add it back if you think that that will be useful. However, please note that media for which a replacement could be created are not acceptable for use on Wikipedia (see our policy for non-free media).

If you have uploaded other unlicensed media, please check whether they're used in any articles or not. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that all non-free media not used in any articles will be deleted after seven days, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. Thank you. BJBot (talk)

Hej!

Jag har ändrat lite på några artiklar som du skrivit ang. Meråkerbanen och Nordlansbanen. Eftersom du skriver i många järnbaneartiklar vill bara göra dig uppmärksam på att Nordlandsbanen går mellan Hell och Bodö (ej Trondheim - Hell) och Meråkerbanen går mellan Trondheim och Storlien (inkl Trondheim - Hell). —Preceding unsigned comment added by 83.255.67.152 (talk)

I utgangspunktet ville jeg vært enig med deg, men ifølge denne linken [1] fra Jernbaneverket går banen fra Hell til Storlien, og ikke fra Trondheim. Jeg prøver egentlig å unngå å skrive spesifikt om dette, men vil forholde meg til denne referansen med mindre jeg kommer over en annen en som motbeviser det (følgelig fra Jernbaneverket). Arsenikk (talk)

Thanks for uploading Image:Södra logo.gif. However, there is a concern that the rationale you have provided for using this image under "fair use" may be invalid. Please read the instructions at Wikipedia:Non-free content carefully, then go to the image description page and clarify why you think the image qualifies for fair use. Using one of the templates at Wikipedia:Fair use rationale guideline is an easy way to ensure that your image is in compliance with Wikipedia policy, but remember that you must complete the template. Do not simply insert a blank template on an image page.

If it is determined that the image does not qualify under fair use, it will be deleted within a couple of days according to our criteria for speedy deletion. If you have any questions please ask them at the media copyright questions page. Thank you.BetacommandBot (talk)

Hi there. I see you've removed my addition of "AS" from the opening line for the Vitusapotek article; the article title "Vitusapotek" is correct, and should not change, but I always understood that the full name (of "Vitusapotek AS" in this case) should be included in the title sentence in bold (see Wikipedia:NC-CORP, 4th paragraph). The rest of the article then reverts to the common name, Vitusapotek. Examples are Royal Bank of Scotland and Wal-Mart.

What do you think? Carbonix (talk)

Hi. I agree with you on your interpretation of the rules. The reason I did this was that as I see it that while the article Norsk Medisinaldepot is about the company, the article Vitusapotek is about the chain, and not about the company. And since 2007 Norsk Medisinaldept, NMD Grossisthandel and Vitusapotek have been merged into one legal entity. As such I have also added 'AS' to Norsk Medisinaldepot's heading, but removed it from Vitusapotek. Arsenikk (talk)

Right. I can see what you mean and eventually found the 'merging' you refer to; I was relying too heavily on the company's website and even their contact address, which still use AS! Carbonix (talk)

Kristins løftebrudd er relevant for artikkelen, akkurat som Watergate skulle være relevant for Richard Nixon. Nastykermit (talk) —Preceding comment was added at

There are a number of critical errors to the comment added about Halvorsen. First, the election was in 2005, not in 2006. Second, there are used a number of wiesel words that should be avoided in Wikipedia. But the most critical part, and the reason for me reverting your edit was that the last sentence, "and this is today seen as one of the biggest lies and broken promises made a Norwegian politician." cannot under any way be seed as encyclopedic. The problem lays in that the claim cannot be verifiable for the population as a whole. And even if some people feel this way, it would be incorrect to generalize about the topic as such. Further, you should be careful (even if it is difficult sometimes) when writing about living people, even if they are politicians. This whole claim should be verified through independent third-party sources. Don't be surprised if it is removed if this claim cannot be verified. Thanks for contributing to Wikipedia; remember to be bold. Arsenikk (talk)

You cant have one without the other. Halvorsen failed to honor her promise and its vital for an objective WIKI biography thayt we mention all sides. Lets try to keep party politics outside this. Nastykermit (talk) —Preceding comment was added at

Thanks for uploading Image:Vildanden Logo.png. However, there is a concern that the rationale you have provided for using this image under "fair use" may be invalid. Please read the instructions at Wikipedia:Non-free content carefully, then go to the image description page and clarify why you think the image qualifies for fair use. Using one of the templates at Wikipedia:Fair use rationale guideline is an easy way to ensure that your image is in compliance with Wikipedia policy, but remember that you must complete the template. Do not simply insert a blank template on an image page.

If it is determined that the image does not qualify under fair use, it will be deleted within a couple of days according to our criteria for speedy deletion. If you have any questions please ask them at the media copyright questions page. Thank you.BetacommandBot (talk)

Thanks for uploading Image:Cresco logo.png. However, there is a concern that the rationale you have provided for using this image under "fair use" may be invalid. Please read the instructions at Wikipedia:Non-free content carefully, then go to the image description page and clarify why you think the image qualifies for fair use. Using one of the templates at Wikipedia:Fair use rationale guideline is an easy way to ensure that your image is in compliance with Wikipedia policy, but remember that you must complete the template. Do not simply insert a blank template on an image page.

If it is determined that the image does not qualify under fair use, it will be deleted within a couple of days according to our criteria for speedy deletion. If you have any questions please ask them at the media copyright questions page. Thank you.BetacommandBot (talk)

Thanks for uploading Image:Comair Limited Logo.png. However, there is a concern that the rationale you have provided for using this image under "fair use" may be invalid. Please read the instructions at Wikipedia:Non-free content carefully, then go to the image description page and clarify why you think the image qualifies for fair use. Using one of the templates at Wikipedia:Fair use rationale guideline is an easy way to ensure that your image is in compliance with Wikipedia policy, but remember that you must complete the template. Do not simply insert a blank template on an image page.

If it is determined that the image does not qualify under fair use, it will be deleted within a couple of days according to our criteria for speedy deletion. If you have any questions please ask them at the media copyright questions page. Thank you.BetacommandBot (talk)

Hello,

Can you please provide me with the reference to the birth date of Farzam Arbab? I have changed it to the date found here: [2] for now.

Regards, T0lk (talk)

My source was http://bahaikipedia.org/Farzam_Arbab which agrees with your date. So this has probably been a transcription error from my side. Arsenikk (talk)

No problem, I find that I make tons of mistakes when I do this kind of work :p T0lk (talk)

Hi I was wondering if you could help save this article from deletion. Its currently up for afd. I;m certain something in Norwegian can be translated to expand it. I think it is notable but google is lacking. Could you consider seeing (this and This ) and try to expand it. Brynjar Å is also another form of the name. Could you help mate? ♦Blofeld of SPECTRE♦ $1,000,000?

Hello, this is a message from an automated bot. A tag has been placed on Category:Oil fields by operator, by another Wikipedia user, requesting that it be speedily deleted from Wikipedia. The tag claims that it should be speedily deleted because Category:Oil fields by operator is very short providing little or no context to the reader. Please see Wikipedia:Stub for our minimum information standards for short articles.

To contest the tagging and request that administrators wait before possibly deleting Category:Oil fields by operator, please affix the template {{hangon}} to the page, and put a note on its talk page. If the article has already been deleted, see the advice and instructions at WP:WMD. Feel free to contact the bot operator if you have any questions about this or any problems with this bot, bearing in mind that this bot is only informing you of the nomination for speedy deletion; it does not perform any nominations or deletions itself. To see the user who deleted the page, click here CSDWarnBot (talk)

Another editor has added the {{prod}} template to the article Student Union of the Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration, suggesting that it be deleted according to the proposed deletion process. All contributions are appreciated, but the editor doesn't believe it satisfies Wikipedia's criteria for inclusion, and has explained why in the article (see also Wikipedia:What Wikipedia is not and Wikipedia:Notability). Please either work to improve the article if the topic is worthy of inclusion in Wikipedia or discuss the relevant issues at its talk page. If you remove the {{prod}} template, the article will not be deleted, but note that it may still be sent to Wikipedia:Articles for deletion, where it may be deleted if consensus to delete is reached. BJBot (talk)

This is an automated message from CorenSearchBot. I have performed a web search with the contents of NSB BM65, and it appears to include a substantial copy of http://www.prescriptiondrug-info.com/drug_information_online.asp?title=NSB_BM65. For legal reasons, we cannot accept copyrighted text or images borrowed from other web sites or printed material; such additions will be deleted. You may use external websites as a source of information, but not as a source of sentences.

This message was placed automatically, and it is possible that the bot is confused and found similarity where none actually exists. If that is the case, you can remove the tag from the article and it would be appreciated if you could drop a note on the maintainer's talk page. CorenSearchBot (talk)

This is an automated message from CorenSearchBot. I have performed a web search with the contents of NSB BM87, and it appears to include a substantial copy of http://www.prescriptiondrug-info.com/drug_information_online.asp?title=NSB_BM87. For legal reasons, we cannot accept copyrighted text or images borrowed from other web sites or printed material; such additions will be deleted. You may use external websites as a source of information, but not as a source of sentences.

This message was placed automatically, and it is possible that the bot is confused and found similarity where none actually exists. If that is the case, you can remove the tag from the article and it would be appreciated if you could drop a note on the maintainer's talk page. CorenSearchBot (talk)

This is an automated message from CorenSearchBot. I have performed a web search with the contents of NSB BM89, and it appears to include a substantial copy of http://www.prescriptiondrug-info.com/drug_information_online.asp?title=NSB_BM89. For legal reasons, we cannot accept copyrighted text or images borrowed from other web sites or printed material; such additions will be deleted. You may use external websites as a source of information, but not as a source of sentences.

This message was placed automatically, and it is possible that the bot is confused and found similarity where none actually exists. If that is the case, you can remove the tag from the article and it would be appreciated if you could drop a note on the maintainer's talk page. CorenSearchBot (talk)

This is an automated message from CorenSearchBot. I have performed a web search with the contents of NSB BM91, and it appears to include a substantial copy of http://www.prescriptiondrug-info.com/drug_information_online.asp?title=NSB_BM91. For legal reasons, we cannot accept copyrighted text or images borrowed from other web sites or printed material; such additions will be deleted. You may use external websites as a source of information, but not as a source of sentences.

This message was placed automatically, and it is possible that the bot is confused and found similarity where none actually exists. If that is the case, you can remove the tag from the article and it would be appreciated if you could drop a note on the maintainer's talk page. CorenSearchBot (talk)

Hey Arsenikk, I asked a question about what some of the parameters at Template:Infobox tunnel mean, maybe you can help. Cheers, --Commander Keane (talk)

Hi! Why did you change the link to Tore O. Sandvik to Tore Sandvik? Tore Sandvik seems to be another person, an orienteerer. Punkmorten (talk)

Sorry about that, my mistake, I though I checked that out a few days ago when I was converting some other red links, but I must have gotten things mixed up. Thanks for letting me know though. Arsenikk (talk)

Finally we have pages for all the current ministries. Hurra! And thanks. Punkmorten (talk)

Category:Directors of government agencies of Norway - new category. Punkmorten (talk)

Thanks for uploading Image:Norwegian Police University College logo.gif. The media description page currently specifies that it is non-free and may only be used on Wikipedia under a claim of fair use. However, it is currently orphaned, meaning that it is not used in any articles on Wikipedia. If the media was previously in an article, please go to the article and see why it was removed. You may add it back if you think that that will be useful. However, please note that media for which a replacement could be created are not acceptable for use on Wikipedia (see our policy for non-free media).

If you have uploaded other unlicensed media, please check whether they're used in any articles or not. You can find a list of 'image' pages you have edited by clicking on the "my contributions" link (it is located at the very top of any Wikipedia page when you are logged in), and then selecting "Image" from the dropdown box. Note that all non-free media not used in any articles will be deleted after seven days, as described on criteria for speedy deletion. Thank you. BJBot (talk)

On 29 April, 2008, Did you know? was updated with a fact from the article Norwegian Ministry of Local Government and Regional Development , which you created or substantially expanded. If you know of another interesting fact from a recently created article, then please suggest it on the Did you know? talk page.

--Bedford

If sources are added, Norwegian Universities and Colleges Admission Service could be a DYK too. Punkmorten (talk)

Thanks for uploading Image:AirBridge Cargo logo.gif. You've indicated that the image is being used under a claim of fair use, but you have not provided an adequate explanation for why it meets Wikipedia's requirements for such images. In particular, for each page the image is used on, the image must have an explanation linking to that page which explains why it needs to be used on that page. Can you please check

That there is a non-free use rationale on the image's escription page for each article the image is used in.

That every article it is used on is linked to from its description page.

The following images also have this problem:

Image:Cultura Bank logo.png

Image:Aker American Shipping logo.png

This is an automated notice by FairuseBot. For assistance on the image use policy, see Wikipedia:Media copyright questions. --

Hi! I took a stab at creating business bios Wenche Kjølås and Annette Malm Justad. I hope they are satisfactory. The business world is important and your contributions have been most valuable. We need Jens Ulltveit-Moe. Happy 17 May! Punkmorten (talk)

By the way: A group of editors spearheaded by Knut Olav Åmås will release a Who's Who book in late 2008 or early 2009, with profiles of 1000 influential Norwegians. Rather exciting. Our coverage of politics is approaching a fair level of broadness now, but we need to develop the fields of academia, the legal system, bureaucracy, (interest) organizations (including LO, NHO), industry and business, religious life.. You just keep up your great work :) Punkmorten (talk)

You're on a roll! Punkmorten (talk)

The Editor's Barnstar For your substantial and dedicated efforts in creating new work, it is my pleasure to award you this barnstar. Editors like you strive to make this work more complete and your efforts are deeply appreciated. Pedro : Chat

Thanks for uploading:

Image:AirAland logo.gif.

Image:AirFinland logo.gif

Image:Air Norway Logo.png

Image:Aker Floating Production Logo.gif

Image:Aker Seafoods Logo.png

Image:Aker drilling logo.png

Image:BAA Aberdeen logo.png

Image:BaneTele Logo.gif

Image:Bank DnB Nord logo.png

Image:Bergen Air Transport Logo.png

Image:Bergen bank logo.gif

Image:Blom ASA logo.png

You've indicated that the image meets Wikipedia's criteria for non-free content, but there is no explanation of why it meets those criteria. Please go to the image description page and edit it to include a fair use rationale. If you have any questions, please post them at Wikipedia:Media copyright questions.

Thank you for your cooperation. NOTE: once you correct this, please remove the tag from the image's page. STBotI (talk)

The Hidden Page Barnstar I award you one for finding User:Trekphiler's page for people who always think that "new message" bar is real. Aren't you glad you checked your mail? Trekphiler (talk)

BTW, what brought you to my page to begin with? Trekphiler (talk)

If it's tagged wrong, you need to fix the page, 'cause it said Sweden. (Or I thought it did... I may well have misread it, I was tagging a few in a bit of a hurry.) Trekphiler (talk)

Hi! Any idea which English name to use for the defunct government agency Statens Informasjonstjeneste? Cf. the new article Odd Strand. Punkmorten (talk)

You're right in that there's a number of different things going on in different cases. Some types are approved "speedily", and some (at least in theory) take five days. Add to which, some are only proposed as upmerged templates, and some already exist as such. In the case of your proposal, I assumed you were already aware of (some of) the distinction(s), given your "based on S2" comment -- which is indeed, I think, a sufficient condition for speedy creation, if there is indeed at least 60 such stubs at present, hence my support. (If there's not, I'd instead suggest creation of an upmerged template.) Hope that helps somewhat. Alai (talk)

On 31 May, 2008, Did you know? was updated with a fact from the article Lutvann, which you created or substantially expanded. If you know of another interesting fact from a recently created article, then please suggest it on the Did you know? talk page.

--BorgQueen (talk)

Dear friend. Transportation Demand Management is a technical term widely used in transportation engineering, usually refered as TDM, and similar to the term Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS), so I think your unconsulted change of the name is wrong. I kindly request you undo it and raise the issue for discussion in the Talk page. Mariordo (talk)

On 4 June, 2008, Did you know? was updated with a fact from the article Finse Tunnel, which you created or substantially expanded. If you know of another interesting fact from a recently created article, then please suggest it on the Did you know? talk page.

--BorgQueen (talk)

Thanks Alasdair. You should also know that I like, and spend some time watching your contributions list. I like to read your great contributions to Norwegian related articles. Rettetast (talk)

And your recent 19th-century bios inspired me to create a slew of notables from the Skien and Porsgrunn area. Good sources are lying around, fortunately. Most of them were related in some way, through intricate marriages. Punkmorten (talk)

Haha, just like my hometown—where everyone is everyones second cousin. Good work on these ancient people, and amazing good references you have found. Personally I was just removing red links on Bergensbanen with some library books. Arsenikk (talk)

Hello there!

On the page Metro-Airport (VTA), you removed Category:Airport rail links and added Category:Railway stations serving airports in the United Kingdom.

I've reverted this change as this light rail station is located in the United States, not the United Kingdom. If you've made similar changes to other articles, you may want to check them to ensure that those changes are acurate.

Take care.

--Brianvdb (talk)

Thanks; I was having some problems with HotCat, and went through an extra time to double check all the UK/US articles, but I guess one just slipped through. Thanks for fixing it up and letting me know :) Arsenikk (talk)

I've categorized the Mountain View - Winchester (VTA) article as Category:Airport rail links and the station serving the airport in Category:Railway stations serving airports in the United States. Hope that is to your approval. Arsenikk (talk)

Looks great. Thanks! --Brianvdb (talk)

Hello!

I found your name on the list of WP:WikiProject Trains participants where I also noticed you're from Norway. I thought you'd maybe be interested in taking a look at something that I think someone like you could fix easily.

Škabo is an article about a Serbian rapper. One of the redirects to this article is Skabo which seems to be a short version of Skabo Jernbanevognfabrikk and I'm led to believe that this was a Norwegian manufacturer of trains. There seem to be a few articles that link to Skabo but they are then incorrectly redirected to the article about the Serbian rapper.

I took an educated guess that you might be one of the better qualified people on here to write at least a stub on Skabo Jernbanevognfabrikk so that train articles that contain a link to Skabo are not redirected to Škabo. I would have done it myself but a Google search on Skabo Jernbanevognfabrikk brings up almost exclusively Norwegian articles so I really can't come up with any verifiable material.

Let me know if this is something you might be able to do or if, maybe, I should bring it up to the WPTrains community in general.

Peace! SWik78 (talk • contribs)

Thanks for the note. Skabo Jernbanevognfabrikk is on my mental list of articles to write "some day"; at present it is not near the top, partially due to lack of good sources. Since I am responsible for most of these links myself, what should be done is that Skabo becomes a disambiguation page and that links to Škabo and Skabo Jernbanevognfabrikk, and that I try to get better at not linking directly to Skabo. I can not promise to get around to this immediately, but I can look into it soon. Arsenikk (talk)

That sounds like a workable solution. I was hoping to avoid a disambiguation page with a red-linked entry but I guess, acording to WP:MOSDAB, there's no harm in it until we gather up enough material for a stub.

Thanks for responding.

Peace! SWik78 (talk • contribs)

There seems to be an article on the Norwegian Wikipedia (with references), so translation should be imminent. I will do some dabbing, and get around to it soon. Arsenikk (talk)

I have fixed the incoming links to Skabo. Rettetast (talk)

Thanks Rettetast. I've written the article now; it has about as many lines with reference as content. Might look around for more tomorrow and see if I can get it up to DYK standards. Arsenikk (talk)

On 10 June, 2008, Did you know? was updated with a fact from the article Ringeriksbanen, which you created or substantially expanded. If you know of another interesting fact from a recently created article, then please suggest it on the Did you know? talk page.

--BorgQueen (talk)

Apax Partners acquired Telenor Satellite Services which was a subsidiary of Telenor for which there is no article on Wikipedia. If you think it is not productive or confusing to keep it on there it can come out. |► ϋ r b a n я e n e w a l ◄| (talk)

By the way if you are interested in private equity I having been working on a history of private equity and venture capital that I am trying to get someone to read and provide comments / edits. |► ϋ r b a n я e n e w a l ◄| (talk)

That is one impressive article you have written. I will most certainly look into it; private equity is one of my interests. Arsenikk (talk)

Given your comments earlier, would love to get your help on Wikipedia:Categories for discussion/Log/2008 June 10#Category:Companies with current or prior private equity ownership|► ϋ r b a n я e n e w a l ◄| (talk)

The Norwegian Barnstar of National Merit For your fine contributions to Norwegian articles, in particular Norwegian rail transport and politics. Manxruler (talk)

Thank you as well. I enjoy the fact that you use good referencing in your articles, and user boxes, those are always good to have. Keep filling in those gaps and continued good luck with the editing to you too. Manxruler (talk)

Hi, when you add categories to articles, as with Travel, please make sure that the article is not already in the category via a parent. In the case of Travel, that article is in Category:Travel, which is itself a member of Category:Transportation, so it is not necessary (or desirable) to add the article directly to Category:Transportation. Happy editing! --MCB (talk)

They seem to be to be more general than trucks. Trailers hooked to cars have them, for example. So please think more widely when you remove a category. I believe you are mistaken in your categorisation. Fiddle Faddle (talk)

Thanks for the feedback. I am attempting to clean up Category:Transportation that was a mess, and remove all topics not in the core to subcategories. I appreciate your concerns, and I will look a little harder for a good category for this; I hope you understand I do not consider it a central topic in transport, even if it is used between modes. Arsenikk (talk)

Oddly not central, but strangely universal. A paradox. Fiddle Faddle (talk)

Not that I've looked, but is there a cat "Transportation Equipment"? That might suit better. I see where you're headed. A drawbar is also used in aviation, to link the tug to the nosewheel for pushing back. They get everywhere! Fiddle Faddle (talk)

Thanks for the review, but I'd like to counter some of your points which don't quite make sense: 1a) Infoboxes are not mandatory, and in this case, there would be very little information to add to one (making it pointless adding one...) 2a) Ref 1 is fixed, and ref 9 has no title because it is the same book as ref 4. You obviously don't understand how citing books works. See WP:CITE. 3a) There is little information in the article because the information simply doesn't exist. If you had read the article, you would have found that: "Little is known about the company's designs." As you can see, I used a wide range of books for the research, but indeed found little information. — Wackymacs (talk ~ edits)

On 15 June, 2008, Did you know? was updated with a fact from the article Skabo Jernbanevognfabrikk, which you created or substantially expanded. If you know of another interesting fact from a recently created article, then please suggest it on the Did you know? talk page.

--Gatoclass (talk)

Hi again. Did you realise your latest DYK, Skabo Jernbanevognfabrikk, isn't listed at Wikipedia:Recent additions? Strange. Manxruler (talk)

Thanks for letting me know. I have asked the good man who administrated the DYK look into the matter. Arsenikk (talk)

Thanks for the heads up. Another admin left a note to say he didn't have time to do the credits but I didn't realize he hadn't updated the archive either. Problem is now fixed. Gatoclass (talk)

Hi. I saw that you removed Personal Rapid Transit from the Transport category, and added it to the Rail category, which wasn't quite correct. I presume this is because you are trying to rationalize the Transport category, and PRT isn't really appropriate as a top-level category? If that's the case, then I agree, but it does need to be categorized in the hierarchy somewhere. To that end, I've created a new category, Automated Guideway Transport, which includes PRT, Dual-Mode, and Automated People Movers. I'm taking my queues from the American Public Transportation Association, which classifies all of these modes under the AGT label, and in turn seems worthy of top-level inclusion in the Transport category. What do you think? Skybum (talk)

Good idea. To be quite honest I know very litle about PRT, so I was a little confused as to the categorization. The general rule seems to be that if it considered a mode of transport, it can go in Category:Transportation; if it is not a separate mode it goes under the modes respective category.

There does seem to be a category called Category:Alternatives to conventional railways with the description "The articles in this category describe transportation technologies that are like railways in that vehicles move along fixed structures that guide their movements (and typically restrict it to either backwards or forwards), but which differ from conventional railways in that the vehicles do not rest on steel wheels that roll along two parallel rails. Both existing and hypothetical technologies belong here." I would claim that this would be the proper category to stick PRT and similar into. Concerning rail transport as a mode, it is related to the guiding, rather than use of actual tracks. Unfortunately the mode has a somewhat misleading name for this understanding.

My final concern is the categorizationcapitalization of the category; only proper nouns are to be categorizedcapitalized using only capital letters, see WP:TITLE#Lowercase second and subsequent words in titles. The link you provided is filled with capitalization errors, in case you wondered. Arsenikk (talk)

Okay, I'll definitely fix the capitalization errors, and thanks for pointing that out. It seems to me, based on what you're saying, that PRT should indeed be included in the root transportation category, as it is a distinctive mode of transit that is almost entirely unlike rail. It does use guideways that superficially resemble rails, but this is no more indicative of its functionality than the fact that cars, buses, and trains all use wheels. Unlike trains -- or any other "alternatives to trains" -- PRT does not do fixed-route, fixed-schedule, line-haul operations. Rather, it uses small vehicles that are available on demand, which can self-navigate through an ad-hoc mesh network -- much more like cars on roads than trains on rails. Functionally, the closest to PRT would be taxis, rather than trains. Since PRT, by definition, can never use large vehicles, human drivers, scheduled service, or line-haul configurations, I don't feel that it is appropriate to categorize it with other systems that generally have all of these features.

(If you're having some difficulty picturing how PRT works, based on my description, check out this 3.5-minute promotional video from PRT vendor, which illustrates the technology fairly well.)

The only potential problem with including PRT as a top-level transit category -- and the reason I thought that you'd removed it -- is that is currently exceedingly rare, and hence potentially not notable enough for top-level categorization. Although a number of prototype systems have been built over the years, there is only one quasi-PRT system currently in public use, another full-PRT system under construction, and several more in the late planning stage. If you don't think that rarity is a disqualifier, then let's put it as a top-level category. If it is a disqualifier, then automated guideway transport definitely seems like the place to put it. Even though the network structures and service capabilities of AGT and PRT bear no similarity to each other, at least it would then be lumped in with other transit systems that are always fully-automated, and generally use much smaller vehicles than rail systems (although not as small as PRT). Skybum (talk)

Thanks for a good video :) From what I could see, it is structurally such as maglev: "like railways in that vehicles move along fixed structures that guide their movements" (note: guide, not dictate). I fear that if PRT was included in Transportation, a lot of other stuff would have to; not that I as such have anything against many top-category articles. To compare: a bus, automobile and an electric forklift all belong to the same mode, since they have wheels on a a (sort of) flat surface, and can control themselves, yet their operation can be of immense difference. My opinion is that PRT belongs in Category:Alternatives to conventional railways, not Category:Transportation. If you feel the former category should go straight into the latter, that might be a correct solution; I do not know. I also notice there is no top level article for the former (preferably with a better name). Arsenikk (talk)

Glad you liked the video! I see your reasoning in regards to the top-level Transportation category, but I still have qualms about including it in Category:Alternatives to conventional railways. Possibly I'm biased; I've been studying PRT for almost a decade, and have come to believe that one of the most striking things about it is how completely unlike a train it is -- so defining it relation to trains just kind of rankles, if you don't mind me saying so. It's almost exactly midway between being an alternative to a train and an alternative to a car. On the other hand, many kind of non-PRT AGT systems absolutely do functions as train alternatives, so the AGT category definitely belongs there, even if PRT does not. So, I don't know -- the problem with category trees is that they imply singular rigid ontological hierarchies on things that actually are very multifaceted, fuzzy, and overlapping. Perhaps the best way to organize the transportation categories would be in several parallel streams: one covering the physical aspect (roads / rails and other guideways / animals / water / wings / et cetera), and another covering the usage (public transport / private transport / Industrial / et cetera)? Just a thought. Skybum (talk)

Hi! At the new Minister of the Navy and Postal Affairs (Norway), I made up a system to distinguish between different names of ministries without making new tables for every "era" (like it's done on e.g. Minister of Finance (Norway)). It certainly looks cleaner. Do you like it? Punkmorten (talk)

Looks good :) Arsenikk (talk)

I hope you don't mind terribly, but I just moved your article on the ferry named Hydro to SF Hydro in order to conform with English language conventions. Dampferge is after all steam ferry in English. A similar thing was done when DS Donau was moved to SS Donau. Congratulations with MF Storegut, by the way. A lead article with its image on the main page and everything. Great work indeed. :) Manxruler (talk)

I have no idea as to the naming conventions to ships; I presume you are better informed and trust your decision. All I have ever written on ships is the Tinnsjø ferries. Arsenikk (talk)

I presume that DF Ammonia and DF Rjukanfoss should be moved too then? Arsenikk (talk)

I would recommend that, yes. For more on the naming of ships, see Wikipedia:Naming conventions (ships), although that article deals mostly with military ships. Manxruler (talk)

Sorry to bother you of all the project members but i`ve a question and i liked the fact that i`ve been here only one day longer than you (And i have no barnstars. Sad)

In the Spanish wikipedia there is a template that allows long Refferences lists to be put in a text box with scrollbar, really useful, i think.

Here is an example http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mexico

How can that be added to the tools in the english wikipedia?

I`ll apreciate an answer, wheter on my talk page or here. Thanks Zidane tribal (talk)

Hi. I am sorry, but there is no such template on the English Wikipedia. The reason is that Wikipedia:Citing sources states: "Scrolling lists, for example of references, should never be used because of issues with readability, accessibility, printing, and site mirroring. Additionally, it cannot be guaranteed that such lists will display properly in all web browsers." What I recoment instead is using {{reflist|2}} to create a references list over two or three coulombs (depending on the average length of each). This usually reduces the length by a fair amount. I am sorry I gave your the answer you did not want, but I believe it is for the better. Happy editing Arsenikk (talk)

On 19 June, 2008, Did you know? was updated with a fact from the article MF Storegut, which you created or substantially expanded. If you know of another interesting fact from a recently created article, then please suggest it on the Did you know? talk page.

--Gatoclass (talk)

Nice work with the Big Boy! --Orland (talk)

Thanks for the compliments :) Arsenikk (talk)

Hi. Can't find this either on Wikipedia:Recent additions. Lead article and all, nowhere to be found in the recents. Manxruler (talk)

I am somewhat glad you keep checking the recent additions ;) Thanks, Arsenikk (talk)

You're welcome. I do like to keep track on the recent Norwegian DYKs. I've just prodded the folks over at Portal:Norway to update the Portal:Norway/DYK. We've got, by my count, nine DYKs not yet listed there. Manxruler (talk)

Thanks very much for the barnstar. Greatly appreciated, especially from such a redoubtable editor as yourself. Best, Gr1st (talk)

Dear Arsenikk,

I read your poisonous message and would like to make it clear to you that I did NOT propose to merge the transport and shipping articles. What I DID propose is to merge shipping INTO transport. Before you say it’s all the same, let me point out to you that there are TWO different templates, one for each case. You may read all about it at Wikipedia:Merging_and_moving_pages.

I did NOT stated any reason for the proposal, because I have more important things to do, like educating young students.

Your happiness is of no concern to me whatsoever, but I already wrote a justification for the merger, as short as I could, just to humor me.

I do not care to discuss my proposal with you or anyone else. Again, I have better things to do. You or anybody else can do with my proposal whatever you see fit.

Fear not. You are welcome to remove those two banners or anything else that you feel like, if you believe that by doing so you are providing a service to the Wikipedia readers.

My further advice to you is that you should NEVER write a message to any registered user invoking rules that do not exist and that you are unable to cite. You statement that a merger proposal has no function without an accompanying discussion is FALSE. Proof?

It made you write that message to me, wich

made me write a brief justification, and

compelled me to give you a piece of my mind, hoping that you’ll learn something from the experience (better now and here, than on the job, believe me!)

Further evidence?

What you find in Wikipedia:Merging_and_moving_pages is After proposing the merger, place your reasons on the talk page. That is not QUITE the same thing as you wrote. Although the editor of that phrase, obviously, left out the word PLEASE, it is clearly assumed that whoever made the proposal is interested in invoking a response and proceed with the merger. Well, I’m NOT. If I was, I would have proceed with it, as explained on the same Wikipedia page. As it is also made plainly clear there, I do NOT need to discuss that with you or anybody else, much less ask for your or anybody else’s permission to do it.

Being a student of Business Administration, a native speaker of English, having studied logistics and economics, whose main areas of interest on Wikipedia are within transport (including rail transport, aviation, public transport and shipping) it baffles me that you had to ask ME for a reason to merge those two articles. You ought to know that yourself.

Furthermore, you might consider changing that link on your user’s page from shipping to ship transport. Just a thought. Rest assured that my happiness does not depend on you doing it or not.

Good luck in your studies. Take as much advantage of them as you can (one final, unsolicited but also free advice).

Best regards,

Virgilio A. P. Machado

vapmachado talk.cw

Thanks for pointing that out, especially since that update had one of my own hooks in it as well!

The problem is that User:Bedford has not been archiving the previous hooks when he posts an update. I don't know why he is not doing this, I'll have to have a word to him about it. Regards, Gatoclass (talk)

WOW. In one edit! Rettetast (talk)

On 27 June, 2008, Did you know? was updated with a fact from the article Norwegian Industrial Workers Museum, which you created or substantially expanded. If you know of another interesting fact from a recently created article, then please suggest it on the Did you know? talk page.

--EncycloPetey (talk)

On 27 June, 2008, Did you know? was updated with a fact from the article Norsk Hydro Rjukan, which you created or substantially expanded. If you know of another interesting fact from a recently created article, then please suggest it on the Did you know? talk page.

--BorgQueen (talk)

On 30 June, 2008, Did you know? was updated with a fact from the article Norsk Transport, which you created or substantially expanded. If you know of another interesting fact from a recently created article, then please suggest it on the Did you know? talk page.

--BorgQueen (talk)

On 30 June, 2008, Did you know? was updated with a fact from the article Trondheim Central Station, which you created or substantially expanded. If you know of another interesting fact from a recently created article, then please suggest it on the Did you know? talk page.

--BorgQueen (talk)

The English Wikinews is going to be organizing an interview with the former Norwegian Culture Minister Åse Kleveland. She was also the head of the Swedish Film Institute and is now the chairwoman of the Norwegian Humanist Association. I am asking Wikipedians from all of the Scandinavian languages to contribute questions to her upcoming interview with Wikinews in Oslo. The page is here; please leave questions there and comments to me either on my en.wikinews talk page or my en.wikipedia talk page. Thank you very much! Mike H. Fierce!

Whenever you have a chance to respond to me, please do. :) Mike H. Fi