Forerunners of the modern gender equal cooperate model

04th May 2021, Colombo: JAT Holdings, Sri Lanka’s trusted leader of wood coatings, proudly presents its gender balanced leadership, inclusive of 3 ladies of distinction who have been appointed to its high-powered Board of Directors. With the visionary aim to enhance the quality of management decisions, the mixed representation of the Board will bring about a variety of perspectives, ideas, expertise and problem-solving – further positioning JAT Holdings as a game-changer in the corporate world.

With this specific prescience as its mission, Dr. Siva Selliah, (Chairman, JAT) and Mr. Aelian Gunawardene, (Managing Director, JAT) unanimously determined the tremendous advantage of acknowledging the enormous aptitude in females of power. Moreover, in granting them the platform, authority and freedom of creativity with which to utilize the expertise of each individual, this verdict would further pave the way for women of equal stature to gain the distinction they deserve.

By bringing a wealth of diversity, not only in providing gender equality, panache and cutting-edge proficiency to the Board, Mrs. Priyanthi Peris, Mrs. Joyce Gunawardene and Mrs. Anika Williamson eloquently herald a vision of the compelling influential role which modern women will play in the future of the Sri Lankan business model.

Mrs. Priyanthi Pieris, Attorney-at-Law of the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka, encompasses nearly 40 years of expertise in the field of Corporate/Securities Law. Currently serving on the Boards of LOLC Finance PLC, Associated Electrical Corporation Ltd and MTN Corporate Consultants (Pvt) Ltd, Mrs. Pieris also brings in a wealth of experience gained as the Legal Adviser for the Ministry of Finance from 2004 to 2011.

Mrs. Joyce Gunawardene currently serves as an Executive Director to Brush Master (Pvt) Ltd. With over 15 years of experience in the field of Advertising and Promotion, Mrs. Gunawardene was appointed to the Board of Directors of JAT Holdings in 2015. She holds a B.Sc. Degree in Psychology from the University of NSW Australia.

Mrs. Anika Williamson currently serves as an Executive Director to JAT Global (Private) Limited and was appointed to the Board of JAT in 2020. She has over 8 years of experience working in finance, import, export and banking industries. In the year 2020, Mrs. Williamson was appointed as the Finance Director of JAT Property Group (Private) Limited. She holds a Double Degree in Accounting and Entrepreneurship from Curtin University, Australia and was a member of the prestigious Pro Vice Chancellors Chapter.

The appointment of a well-balanced, diversified Board of Directors will enable a larger pool of ideas, perspectives and expertise, which will further allow the organization to explore more convenient and efficient methods of obtaining overall organizational goals. Therefore, it is a forgone conclusion that JAT Holdings will continue to carve even more innovations onto the rock-solid fabric of their business model.