Dr. Sivakumar Selliah

Chairman | Non-Executive Director | Independent

Dr. Selliah was appointed to the Board of Directors of JAT Holdings in 2014 and has been the Chairman since 2014. Dr. Selliah holds an MBBS degree and a Master’s Degree (M.Phil).

He has over two decades of diverse and extensive experience in serving on the Boards related to varied fields including Manufacturing, Healthcare, Insurance, Logistics, Packaging, Renewable Power, Plantation, Retail etc. He serves on the Boards of many Public listed and Private companies. Has extensive experience on serving on Board sub committees as Chairman or Member which include Audit committee, Human Resource and Remuneration committee, Investment committee, Strategic Planning committee, Related Party Transaction committee, Nomination committee, Risk Management committee etc.

Dr. Selliah is currently the Deputy Chairman of Asiri Hospital Holdings PLC, Asiri Surgical Hospital PLC and Central Hospitals Private Ltd. He also serves on the following listed companies as a Director: Lanka Tiles PLC, Commercial Bank of Ceylon PLC, Lanka Walltiles PLC, ACL Cables PLC, HNB Assurance PLC, Swisstek (Ceylon) PLC. He has also served on many other Listed company Boards in the past.

Dr. Selliah has served as a Senior Lecturer in the Faculty of Medicine, University of Kelaniya for many years in the past and served on several committees. He has also been Head of the Department of Physiology for many years during this period at the faculty. He has also served as a Member of the University Council at the University of Colombo in the past.

Aelian Gunawardene

FOUNDER AND MANAGING DIRECTOR/EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR

Aelian Gunawardene is the founder and Managing Director of JAT Holdings PLC and has been the driving force of the company ever since. As a Marketing professional he has pioneered new innovations while increasing JAT’s presence both locally and internationally and has built unequivocal brand equity. He has successfully led JAT to the recognition of being the only private company in Sri Lanka to be awarded a Moody’s ICRA rating of ‘A+ (Stable)’ outlook for five consecutive years. Gunawardene is one of Sri Lanka’s most respected corporate leaders, contributing more than 27 years of leadership experience and strategic expertise to the Board. In the year 2017, he was awarded the honour of Sri Lanka’s Entrepreneur of the Year and was also recognised among LMD’s ‘Top 23 Business people of the Year.’ In addition, he has been on the LMD’s A List for five consecutive years commencing in 2018; a list that features the top leaders of the business world in Sri Lanka.

Nishal Ferdinando

Chief Executive Officer | Executive Director

Nishal was appointed to the Board of Directors during 2021 and has served as the CEO of the Group since 2017, under whose leadership the Company witnessed a remarkable period of growth and expansion amidst many external adversities. He has over 13 years of experience in functioning as an Executive Director and over 18 years of experience in the construction, manufacturing and trading industries. He currently serves as a Director of Flexospan Steel Buildings (Pvt) Ltd and Flexospan Bangladesh (Pvt) Ltd.

During his tenure, the Company listed on the Colombo Stock Exchange has won many accolades and was listed among the fifty most awarded companies and was the most awarded in the diversified sector. He was instrumental in setting up a state-of-the-art Research and Development Facility in Sri Lanka and a manufacturing plant in Bangladesh.

His academic background extends to Finance, Project Management and Business Administration. He is an Alumni at the Harvard Business School. He further holds an MBA from the University of Wales, an Advanced Diploma in Management Accounting from CIMA (UK) and a Post Graduate Certificate in Project Management from University of Southern Queensland.

He was an Executive Director serving on the Board of a leading construction company in Sri Lanka at the age of 27 until he joined JAT.

Hussain Akbarally

Non-Executive Director | Independent

Hussain holds a degree in Science from the University of Melbourne, and an MBA from Harvard Business School. Hussain currently serves as an Executive Director of Akbar Brothers (Pvt) Ltd and its subsidiaries. Akbar Brothers is Sri Lanka’s largest exporter of Ceylon Tea to the international market and has diversified interests in the areas of pharmaceuticals, import trading, renewable energy, property management, manufacturing, hospitality, agriculture and environmental control. Hussain has spearheaded the Group’s ventures into the avenues of solar power, hospitality and agriculture amongst others.

He was honoured as one of the New Energy Leaders by the Asian Development Bank in 2018 for his work in the renewable energy sphere. He is the outgoing Chapter Chair for YPO Colombo and serves as the treasurer of the Ceylon Motor Sports Club.

Devaka Cooray

Non-Executive Director | Independent

Devaka is a Fellow Member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Sri Lanka and the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants of the United Kingdom.

He has worked with Ernst & Young for over 40 years of which 30 years was as a Senior Assurance and Talent Partner. He functioned as the Deputy Managing Partner from 2016 to 2019 and served as a member of Ernst & Young’s Management Committee from the time the Management Committee was established in 1998 until his retirement in 2019. He was instrumental in establishing the Ernst & Young Practice in the Republic of Maldives in 1995 and functioned as the Partner responsible for the overall management of the Maldivian Practice from its inception. He represented Sri Lanka and Maldives for a number of years in the EY ASEAN Regional Partner Forum. He was seconded to EY USA for a year, where practical experience was gained by being part of assurance teams that performed audit engagements on several large enterprises.

Devaka also spearheaded the Ernst and Young Sri Lanka/Maldives Family Business Centre for Excellence which was instrumental in sending several eminent second generation family members to business schools worldwide. He has also served as a member of the Council of the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants UK.

Devaka is the Chairman of United Motors PLC and its subsidiaries. He is also the Managing Director of Management Systems (Pvt) Ltd and its subsidiaries. He serves as Director of Hatton National Bank PLC, HVA Foods PLC, JAT Holdings PLC and George Steuart & Company Limited.

Priyanthi Pieris

Non-Executive Director | Independent

Priyanthi is an Attorney-at-Law of the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka, a Solicitor of England and Wales. With over 42 years of experience in the field of Corporate/Securities Law, Priyanthi’s expertise spans across handling corporate restructuring, privatisations, capital market transactions, takeovers, mergers, and amalgamations. Priyanthi also serves on the Boards of Kapruka Holdings PLC, Associated Electrical Corporation Ltd, MTN Corporate Consultants (Pvt) Ltd and is the current Chairperson / Consultant of P W Corporate Secretarial (Pvt) Ltd – a firm that provides capital market-related services to listed companies. Priyanthi has also served as the Legal Adviser to the Ministry of Finance from 2002 to 2004. She was a Legal consultant to the Colombo Stock Exchange (2004- 2011). She also served as a Member of the Committee of the Securities and Exchange Commission of Sri Lanka on Takeovers and Mergers Code and as a Member of the Corporate Governance Committee of the Institute of Chartered Accountants; she is a Member of the Law Commission. She has served on the Boards of Asia Asset Finance PLC (2012-2021), Abans Electricals PLC (2012-2021), and LOLC Finance PLC (2012-2021).