Mano Ramanathan Rev. Father Ivan Perera

Two more members of the Council of the University of Colombo have resigned over the recent appointment of the new Vice Chancellor, thereby increasing the number to five.

The latest resignations came from Rev. Father Ivan Perera and Mano Ramanathan. Previously longstanding Council member Thilak Karunaratne along with Ajit Gunewardene and Sumith Cumaranatunge stepped down in protest.

Controversy arose after Senior Prof. H.D. Karunaratne was appointed as Vice Chancellor replacing Prof. Chandrika Wijeyaratne who served for three years. Colombo University Council comprises 27 persons of whom 14 are appointed members. Among the remaining appointed members are Mahinda Madihahewa, Deepthi Lamahewa, Padmini Ranaweera, Dr. Siva Selliah, Sanjeeva Jayawardena, Indrani Weeratunge, Ariyarathna Hewage, J.M.U.B. Jayasekara and Prof. Sam Karunaratne.

Rev. Perera, who is the Emeritus National Director of Catholic Education, Archbishop’s House, in his resignation letter said Senior Prof. Wijeyeratne was selected as the best candidate according to written guidance issued by the University Grants Commission.

“I am surprised that the final appointment has been a different person. It therefore means that you have lost confidence in me as well as others in the Council and I have no option but to resign from the Council and hereby I do so,” Rev. Perera states in his letter to UGC Chairman Senior Professor Sampath Amaratunga.

Attorney-at-Law, former Senior Deputy Legal Draftsman and Monetary Board member Ramanathan has said the Council undertook a very professional approach in the selection of VC and the Prof. Wijeyeratne was the clear front runner. “However, it is disappointing that Prof. Wijeyeratne who had the highest ratings by far in the transparent selection process was overlooked for reasons best known to the appointing authority,” she said in her letter of resignation to the UGC Chief.

“The appointment of the Vice Chancellor did not follow the principles of good governance. Hence, as a law-abiding citizen of this country I am deeply disturbed and greatly disappointed,” she added.

Noting that University of Colombo is the jewel in the crown of the university system in Sri Lanka, Ramanathan said in the important field of university education it will bring more negative results to higher education if the due process is not followed where the country’s best students are learning and the academia is teaching. “Under the circumstances my conscience compels me to submit my resignation though I very much regret doing so,” her letter added.

Thilak Karunaratne, who served the Council for almost 15 years, in his resignation letter (See https://www.ft.lk/front-page/Colombo-Uni-Council-trio-step-down-over-new-VC-appointment/44-733885) recalled that the selection process resulted in Prof. Wijeyaratne obtaining 90%, Prof. Karunaratne 66% and Dr. Prathiba Mahanamahewa 64% of the total marks, and making Prof. Wijeyaratne as the clear front runner as the suitable person to be appointed to the post of VC.

“Unfortunately, it was not to be the case,” Karunaratne said, adding that sadly meritocracy had to make way for mediocrity. “This decision made by the appointment authority, President Gotabaya Rajapaksa as with many of his other decisions was horrendously wrong,” added the departing Council member Karunaratne.