The Grand Duchy of Lithuania is a formable of Lithuania located in Eastern Europe , encompassing Lithuania, Belarus, and Ukraine. Its predominantly difficult, as it requires a small Baltic state to take two nations that a near superpower, Russia requires.

Background[]

The following is taken from Wikipedia which is licensed under CC-BY-SA 3.0. You can view the article it was taken from here.

The Grand Duchy of Lithuania was a European state that lasted from the 13th century to 1795, when the territory was partitioned among the Russian Empire, the Kingdom of Prussia and Austria. The state was founded by Lithuanians, which was at the time a polytheistic nation born from several united Baltic tribes from Aukštaitija.

The Grand Duchy expanded to include large portions of the former Kievan Rus' and other neighbouring states, including what is now Belarus and parts of Ukraine, Latvia, Poland, Russia and Moldova. At its greatest extent, in the 15th century, it was the largest state in Europe. It was a multi-ethnic and multi-confessional state, with great diversity in languages, religion, and cultural heritage.

History[]

Base Statistics[]

The Grand Duchy of Lithuania has a base income of $1,602,434, with most of it coming from taxation. The Grand Duchy has a manpower capacity of 528,204 and a manpower gain of 2392.

Geography[]

Carpathian Rus is Mountainous. The rest of the formable is flat. It experiences Mild Winter and Severe Winter throughout the entire formable in the early and deep winter months, respectively.

The Grand Duchy has 69 cities, with 4 of those being square cities. These make up its population of 24,840,369.

Resources[]

Resources of Grand Duchy of Lithuania Aluminum +1.22 Copper +6.08 Gold +1.11 Iron +4.88 Oil +12.58 Phosphate +1.22 Titanium +7.32 Uranium +1.22

Threats[]

Russia needs every nation included in the formable for both of its own formables, and so will likely invade one of them early on.

Poland, for the same reason.

Ukraine wanting to form Kievan Rus.

Strategy[]

When you join the server, justify on countries like denmark or sweden so that russia doesnt realize you exist. Start making factories as well (electronics, steel motor, etc). After annexing and taking their treasury, start justifying on belarus or kievan rus (if ukraine takes belarus). If russia took it, either restart or take up the challenge.

KIEVAN RUS

Immediately spam tanks in the new square cities you have. Spam as much as you can and make a decent airforce. Dont forget to buy oil. If they are allied to russia or other world powers, just white peace them or truce block. Once you declare war on kievan, kill off the big stacks (tanks, infantry, etc) by using your attackers.

They will try to defend their capital but just pressure them with some artillery and your airforce. Bomb their factories with bombers if needed. After taking their capital, just auto-capture and spam more tanks. After that, just peace them.

RUSSIA:

For Russia, it will be a little bit tricky. Instead of making an airforce, you make a navy to defend the baltic sea. You can make an airforce but just make a small one because you need the oil for your tanks and navy. Its either russia or you declare war. Once war happens, they will try to rush you down with everything. When this happens, just camp in the cities you want to defend and dont forget to fortificate.

Try to take Kaliningrad to prevent them from invading from that area. They will be fed up after attacking and just rage quit (or just scorch). Take moscow and auto-capture everything until you can force peace.

Trivia[]

The Grand Duchy of Lithuania is one of many nations/formables/releasables that does not have a rectangular flag. It shares this category with:

North America Antillean Confederation • Confederation of Northern States • Empire of Haiti • Golden Circle • Lucayan Federation • Mayan Empire • Mexican Empire • North American Union • Pacific States of America • Patria Grande • Pirate Republic • Republic of Central America • Union of Saint Martin • West Canada • West Indies Federation South America Banda Oriental • Empire of Brazil • Federation of the Andes • Gran Colombia • Inca Empire • Patria Grande • Peru-Bolivian Confederation • Rio de la Plata Europe Albanian Empire • Almighty Don Host • Angevin Empire • Austrian Empire • Austro-Hungarian Empire • Balkan Federation • Belgian Empire • Benelux • British Empire • Bulgarian Empire • Byzantine Empire • Caucasian Imamate • Celtic League • Cossackia • Courland-Livonia • Crimean Khanate • Crown of Aragon • Czechoslovakia • Danish Empire • Duchy of Milan • Duchy of Normandy • Dutch Empire • European Union • Finnic Union • Franco-British Union • Frankish Empire • French Empire • Gallic Empire • German Empire • Grand Duchy of Lithuania • Grand Principality of Circassia • Helvetic Republic • Holy Roman Empire • Iberian Union • Idel-Ural State • Illyria • Intermarium • Italian Empire • Kalmar Union • Khanate of Kazan • Khazaria • Kievan Rus • Kingdom of Bohemia • Kingdom of Bosnia • Kingdom of Croatia • Kingdom of Dacia • Kingdom of Hungary • Kingdom of Northumberland • Kingdom of Romania • Kingdom of Sardinia • Kingdom of the Two Sicilies • Knights Hospitaller • Kryvdonbass • Kuban People's Republic • Macedonian Empire • Napoleonic Empire • Norgesveldet • North Sea Empire • Northern Caucasus Republic • Ostrogothic Kingdom • Padania • Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth • Portuguese Empire • Princedom of Duklja • Principality of Moldavia • Republic of Genoa • Republic of Venice • Roman Empire • Russian Empire • Serbian Empire • Shamkhalate of Tarki • South German Confederation • Soviet Union • Spanish Empire • Swedish Empire • United Baltic Federation • Yaik Cossack Host • Yugoslavia • Zapadoslavia Asia Aceh Sultanate • Afsharid Dynasty • Akkadian Empire • Alam Melayu • Arab League • Assyrian Empire • Babylonian Empire • Bangsamoro Republik • Bashkiria • Bruneian Empire • Chola Dynasty • Cossackia • Durrani Empire • Emirate of Bukhara • Emirate of Diriyah • Empire of Japan • Federation of Southeast Asian States • Goguryeo • Hephthalite Empire • Hotak Dynasty • Islamic Caliphate • Johor Sultanate • Karakalpak Khanate • Khanate of Khiva • Khmer Empire • Khwarazmian Dynasty • Kingdom of Arabia • Kingdom of Armenia • Kingdom of Georgia • Kingdom of Israel • Kingdom of Kandy • Kingdom of Syria • Korea • Kushan Empire • Lan Xang • Maphilindo Confederation • Maurya Empire • Mongol Empire • Mughal Empire • Nguyen Dynasty • Omani Empire • Ottoman Empire • Pala Empire • Palmyrene Empire • Persian Empire • Phoenicia • Promised Land of Zion • Qing Dynasty • Raj of Sarawak • Rasulid Kingdom • Rattanakosin Kingdom • Republic of China • Samanid Empire • Seljuk Empire • Siam • Sikh Empire • Srivijaya Empire • Sultanate of Sulu • Tibetan Empire • Timurid Empire • Toungoo Dynasty • Transcaucasia • Tungus Republic • Turkestan • Turkic Khaganate • United Provinces of China • United States of North Asia • United Turkic States • Yaik Cossack Host • Yuan Dynasty Africa Adal Sultanate • African Union • Alam Melayu • Almohad Caliphate • Arab League • Carthage • East African Federation • Ethiopian Empire • Eweland • Fatimid Caliphate • Ga'na Empire • Guine e Cabo Verde • Hafsid Dynasty • Islamic Caliphate • Kaabu Empire • Kanem Empire • Khedivate of Egypt • Kilwa Sultanate • Kingdom of Aksum • Kingdom of Kongo • Kingdom of Lunda • Kingdom of Mutapa • Kong Empire • Kush • Mali Empire • Mamluk Sultanate • Maravi Empire • Marinid Dynasty • Senegambia Confederation • Senusiyya • Sokoto Caliphate • Songhai Empire • South African Union • Sultanate of Ifat • Sultanate of Zanzibar • Tamazgha • United Republic of the Comoros • United States of Latin Africa Oceania Alam Melayu • Australasian Federation • Polynesian Confederation • Tongan Empire • Tui Manu'a Confederacy • United Papua