Voruta in English dictionary

Sample sentences with "Voruta"

Declension Stem

Voruta (in Lithuanian).

In 1252, Tautvilas and the remaining allies attacked Mindaugas in Voruta, sometimes considered to be the first capital of Lithuania.

In 1252, Tautvilas and his remaining allies attacked Mindaugas in Voruta, sometimes considered to be the first capital of Lithuania.

Voruta may have been the capital city of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the Kingdom of Lithuania during the reign of king Mindaugas in the 13th century.

Others argue that Voruta was not an actual city, but just a misinterpretation of a word that means capital.

Internal conflicts persisted; during the spring or summer of 1251, Tautvilas and his remaining allies attacked Mindaugas's warriors and the Livonian Order's crossbow-men in Voruta Castle.

A single sentence in the Hypatian Chronicle mentions Mindaugas defending himself in Voruta against his nephews and Duke Vykintas; two other sources mention "his castle".

Voruta is mentioned briefly only once in written sources and its exact location is unknown.

In the opinion of Kazimieras Būga, one of the prominent Lithuanian philologists, the word voruta simply means castle.

The location of Voruta is not specified, and this has led to considerable speculation, along with archeological research, concerning the seat of his court.

Despite all the uncertainties, the concept of Voruta is well-known and popular in the Lithuanian imagination.

Historian Romas Batūra identifies the city with Voruta, one of the castles of Mindaugas, crowned in 1253 as King of Lithuania.

The hillfort of Šeimyniškėliai near Anykščiai (which was called Varutė Hill by the local people) is the most reliable site of the castle of Voruta.

You’ll find here more information on the history of the castle of Voruta, the project of the construction of the wooden castle and investigations of the Šeimyniškėliai hillfort.

Anykščiai Regional Park (ARP) is unimaginable without the Forest of “The Light of Happiness”), Rubikiai Lake, Voruta Mound and many other objects of natural and cultural heritage.

During the traditional festival of Anyksciai dwellers on the Voruta hillfort, devoted to the State Day, the castle bridge on the rivulet Varelis was opened.

The growing popularity of our products shows that Lithuanian beverages, which are produced from high quality fruits and berries, are favoured by customers, and Voruta wine has established itself as a symbol of the Lithuanian national food heritage, being presented abroad and winning awards at international and local expos,” points out Mr Kanopa.

Residents of Anykščiai welcome you to taste the fruit wine Voruta, produced from raw material of local farmers, here the excursions to the winery, tastings are being organised.

Some historians believe that it is the place where King’s Mindaugas Voruta Castle used to stand.

In the vicinity of the town of Anykščiai there stretches the Rubikiai Lake (the area of which is almost 1,000 hectares) surrounded by three mounds, boasting 16 islands, in the western part of Anykščiai there is the famous Puntukas Stone, the second largest stone in Lithuania, in the vicinity of the town there is the Šeimyniškėliai Mound that is famous for its history for there used to stand the Voruta Castle of the first Lithuanian King, Mindaugas.

The hypothetical manors of 13th-century Lithuanian dukes and the itineraries of their travels may perhaps be reconstructed from the data of Mindaugas' acts (Samogitia, Selonia, and partly Yatvingia) and from some other sources of the 13th century (Latava, Kernave, Voruta).

20 December, 2003 - „„A Medal created in commemoration of the 750th anniversary of Mindaugas coronation“, “Voruta”;

Authors