The Grand Duchy of Lithuania was one of the largest and most linguistically, ethnically and religiously diverse polities in late medieval and early modern Europe. In the mid-1380s the Grand Duchy of Lithuania entered into a long process of union with the Kingdom of Poland. Since the destruction of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1795, the history and memory of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania have been much contested among its successor nations. This volume aims to excavate a level below their largely incompatible narratives. Instead, in an encounter with freshly discovered or long neglected sources, the authors of this book seek new understanding of the Grand Duchy, its citizens and inhabitants in "microhistories." Emphasizing urban and rural spaces, families, communities, networks, and travels, this book presents fresh research by established and emerging scholars.

Introduction

Wioletta Pawlikowska and Richard Butterwick

Part I: Urban Spaces and Communities

1. What’s in a Name?: Conflict and the Common Weal, Unity and Diversity in the Early Modern City

David Frick

2. A History of One House: The Microcosm of the Jurydyka of the Vilna Cathedral Chapter in the Sixteenth and Early Seventeenth Centuries

Wioletta Pawlikowska

3. The Poor and the Community: The Lutheran Charitable System in Eighteenth-Century Wilna

Martynas Jakulis

4. A Town After a Fire: Losses and Behaviour of Jewish Communities

Jurgita Šiauciunaite-Verbickiene

5. The Attempts of the Bernardines to Influence the Society of Kowno in the Second Half of the Seventeenth Century: The Case of a Miraculous Image

Vaida Kamuntaviciene

Part II: Families and Networks

6. Noble Names: Changes in Lithuanian Aristocratic Name-Giving during the Late Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries

Rimvydas Petrauskas

7. The Sphragistics and Heraldry of Three Representatives of the Radziwill Family

Agne Railaite-Barde

8. Noblemen’s Familia: The Life of Unfree People on Manors in the Sixteenth Century and the First Half of the Seventeenth Century

Neringa Dambrauskaite

9. Noble Community and Local Politics in the Wilkomierz District During the Reign of Sigismund Vasa (1587–1632)

Arturas Vasiliauskas

10. From Clientage Structure to a New Social Group: The Formation of the Group of Public Servants in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania in the Late Eighteenth Century

Ramune Šmigelskyte-Stukiene

Part III: Texts and Travels

11. "An Earnest Gospeller" and "a Dignified Martyr": Networks of Textual Exchange between the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and England, 1560s-1580s

Hanna Mazheika

12. Terrible Reality?: Cannibalism in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and in Livonia in the Sixteenth to Eighteenth Centuries – Between Chroniclers’ Invective and the Findings of Cultural Anthropology

Aleh Dziarnovich

13. A Lithuanian Nobleman’s Mapping of Poland: The Itinerary of a Peregrination by Stanislaw Samuel Szemiot (1680)

Jakub Niedzwiedz

14. Propaganda in the Parishes: Local Communication During the Insurrection of 1794

Richard Butterwick

15. The Route Map of Dean Szymon Waraxa’s Courier

Michal Gochna