Discussion here: https://www.academia.edu/s/d60b0875c5?source=link -Please, join the discussion! -- The Beginnings and Unfolding of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania - Litvanya Büyük Dükaliği'nin başlangici ve ortaya çikişi” // 3rd International Black Sea Modern Scientific Research Congress March 23-24, 2023 - Samsun, Turkiye From the Baltic Sea down to the Black Sea, on a huge territory spread the lands of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania (furthermore GDL), which was a powerful and dynamically developing state in Eastern Europe from the early 13th up to the late 14th cc. It conquered the former territories of Kyivan Rus, thus deliberated them from the Mongol yoke, and administered them using the local variation of the Church Slavonic language. The beginnings of the GDL are the subject of debate. Some authors begin its history with the foundation of the Gediminas dynasty and the establishment of Vilnius as a new capital by Gediminas. Albeit he was not the first Lithuanian ruler and much earlier the Lithuanian state was already such powerful that the Halych-Volhynian Principality made a peace treaty with it in 1219. Therefore, the author of the paper is of that opinion the very beginning of the GDL must be counted since 1219 because it is the first documented date referring to the existing Lithuanian state in the sources. Those who begin the history of the GDL in the last years of the 13th century, such as Rowell, mean that the activity of Gediminas was a state-grounding process. On the contrary, we think the peace treaty can be made by existing real powers, hence the state-like entity of the Lithuanians was necessary to exist in 1219. Another turning point was the coronation of Grand Duke Mindaugas for a Lithuanian King in 1253 and it is usually regarded as the beginning of the Lithuanian state. This was however a single and unique act, and nothing followed, nor a dynasty nor any state building by new administrative districts and/or newly learned elite, in comparison with the European states. Mindaugas itself was murdered by his subjects, therefore he hardly was such a conscious and determined king as the state-founder king in Europe, nor as the Grand Dukes of the Kyivan Ruś before, such as Volodymyr the Great and Yaroslav the Wise, who had not been crowned but built a new state with physical buildings and organizing a new administration as well. Those historians regard the coronation of Mindaugas as a state-building, and seem to forget the state as such is not a consequence of a mere act but the coronation itself is the consequence of the state-building. On the other hand, the Grand Dukes of the GDL were rulers of a real state, which was administered by documents on the local version of the Church Slavonic, because the most of inhabitants of these lands were Slavs who followed the Byzantine form of Christianity, thus the Orthodoxy. Consequently, we compare the different views and approaches to the GDL in the paper, and we argue that it was a real state such as the contemporary European states, although it is evidenced not by the coronation of Mindaugas, which proves nothing, but by the real acts of the Lithuanian Grand Dukes.