Vaibhav S. Naidu

Computer & Information Sciences, University of Delaware

Software Engineer: GoldenSource Corporation

GoldenSource provides Enterprise Data Management (EDM) software and services to financial institutions globally. EDM allows its clients to collect, standardize, consolidate, and manage information about their securities, products, customers, transactions, and other operations, to better manage the distribution of critical data to business applications.

Duties:

I was part of the development team of the product “Connections”.

Job description included finding and fixing bugs along with development of new software programs using SQL and Java.

I was also assigned a task to develop an automated system to retrieve data from the vendor, process it, convert it to usable form and store in the database.

Graduate Research Assistant: University of Delaware

Worked as a Web Developer on the website Accelerating Clinical and Translational Research (ACCEL) which was created with support from the State of Delaware, the University of Delaware, the Christiana Care Health System, Nemours, and the Medical University of South Carolina.

Duties:

Customization of the website according to needs and adding additional functionality using JavaScript, Ajax and JQuery.

Testing the website’s features and fixing the bugs and glitches in the website.

Managing, normalizing and displaying the contents of the database using MySQL.

IT Support Technician: University of Delaware

The TechDeck at the Lerner Business School provides computing support for curriculum delivery, classroom technology, administration and research. TechDeck is the first point of contact for any technical difficulties.

Duties:

Provide on-site and remote support to faculty, staff, and students.

Responsible for critical systems used in the daily operation of the College.

Manage short term IT projects.

Deploy and manage operating system images, software, and updates for 100+ systems.

Develop technical documentation for new technology and procedures

Lab Assistant for CISC108030/31: University of Delaware

Computing and principles of programming with an emphasis on systematic program design. Topics include functional programming, data abstraction, procedural abstraction, use of control and state, recursion, testing, and object-oriented programming concepts.

Duties:

Help undergraduate students with programming and debugging in Dr. Racket

Answer the questions posted on Piazza