FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE (AUGUST 4, 2021) — Greater Vision is celebrating its fifteenth career #1 song on the Singing News Top 80 Chart. “Start With Well Done” hit the #1 position on the chart which will be featured in the Singing News Magazine’s September 2021 issue. The chart-topping single was written by long-time group member and perennial Singing News Fan Award Songwriter of the Year, Rodney Griffin. Jon Epley, Chris Allman, and Gerald Wolfe make up the rest of the group.

“Greater Vision has been a major part of our Daywind Family of artists for the last 25 years and hearing this news about their 15th number one song, absolutely thrills our entire team,” says Dusty Wells, Director of A&R for Daywind Records. “Gerald, Rodney, Chris and Jon have always made certain what they write, what they look for and the songs they pick are the best possible for a project that will touch hearts and lives. Once again, their latest project The Journey, continues with the best of the old and 5 amazing new songs. We are absolutely honored to walk alongside them on this “journey”, and we look forward to many more number one songs.”

“Success at the end of life will not be tallied by career, money, or accolades,” shares Griffin. “It will only be measured by hearing two words from the Father, ‘Well Done.’ When I first wrote this song, I thought it was just for me. Sometimes when we preach to ourselves, we whisper a private, “Amen!” and then strive to walk closer to the Lord. I’ve been so very encouraged to see and hear people “Amen!” this song publicly as they too are encouraged to finish this race well.”

This latest success comes as Greater Vision continues the celebration of Its 30th anniversary in ministry. This legendary group sets the standard for Gospel music and ministry.

“Start With Well Done” comes from the album The Journey, which released earlier this year and is available everywhere. Greater Vision is touring extensively this year in support of the album and in honor of its 30th anniversary. Greater Vision is booked for appearances by the Harper Agency.

Daywind Music Group is home to an award-winning roster of artists including Adam Crabb, Blackwood Brothers, Brian Free & Assurance, Crabb Family, Greater Vision, High Road, Jim & Melissa Brady, Joseph Habedank, Karen Peck & New River, LeFevre Quartet, Michael Booth, Nelons, The Sound, Southbound, Tim Menzies, Tribute Quartet, and Wilburn & Wilburn. Daywind is distributed to retail through New Day Christian Distributors and the Orchard, covering all major physical, digital, and streaming outlets.