a few words from cliff preston

There is a common theme in my life. I've been given so much grace. I used to sing the hymn “Grace Greater Than All My Sin.” I sang this song long before I knew what it meant or how much I would need its truth. I remember sitting in the darkest time of my life. I believed that my life was over. I believed that my family was over. I believed my ministry was over.

Oh, but that dreadful, beautiful cross.

Jesus' sacrifice is so great that it is undefeated and will remain so. His victory is more significant than all of the things we have done and could do. So, today, whatever you’re facing, and thinking is insurmountable…His blood is Greater Still!

Greater still lyrics

Verse 1

For great the fall that broke perfectio

And great the stain passed down through time

The sickness strong, the sorrow long, No peace to find

Verse 2

For great the void that separated

And great the heart of flesh and lies

But greater still the faithful will of Jesus Christ!

Chorus 1

Oh Lord, our Lord

How awesome is Your name In all the earth!

Forever we proclaim

"Greater still the power of our God!"

Verse 3

For great the cost of our salvation

And great the debt that must be paid

But greater still the blood

That spilled and Love displayed!

Chorus 2

Oh Lord, our Lord

How awesome is Your name

In all the earth!

Forever we proclaim

"Greater still the power of our God!"

Verse 4

For great the tomb that held our Savior

And great the stone that sealed the door

But a guilty grave cannot contain

Our Christ, the Lord! Oh!

Chorus 3

Oh Lord, our Lord

How awesome is Your name In all the earth!

Forever we proclaim

"Greater still the power of our God!"

Tag 1

Oh, Jesus Christ, the One who conquers all!

The Lamb of God has torn down every wall!

Greater still the power of our God!

Greater still the power of our God!

Cliff Preston Bio

“I try to see people through the lens of what God has brought me through and saved me from. I believe that if God can love and use even me, he can love and use anyone.”

It’s been said that what sets Cliff Preston apart is his raw authenticity and compassion. Preston’s music ministry began in 2002 as he began traveling with bands to bring awareness to the love of Jesus as well as the mental health crisis. With his father being a professional counselor and pastor, he was very aware of the effect that mental health was having on the generation, as well as the ultimate source of wellness - the finished work of the cross. He has spent the following twenty years traveling the country writing songs, leading worship, preaching, and even opening businesses geared towards Christ-centered clinical mental healthcare.

Cliff is proud to call Smackover, Arkansas his hometown. He is even prouder of God’s faithfulness through his marriage with his wife Leslie, and the wisdom God provides as they raise their daughter Kannyn (12), and their two sons Murphy (10) and Campbell (2).

Cliff brings over two decades of ministry experience and business development to his partnership with People & Songs. In that time, he has written songs for artists including Newsong, JJ Weeks, Carrolton and more. He has shared the stage with artists such as MercyMe, Jeremy Camp, and Natalie Grant among others. All while opening and building companies that develop platforms to display Christ to a lost and hurting world.

Cliff is excited for what is to come as he joins forces with this diverse team of artists, worship leaders, and writers for the glory of God.