Film: Fubar 2 (2010)

Director: Michael Dowse

Starring: Dave Lawrence, Paul J. Spence, Andy Sparacino

Written by: Dave Lawrence, Paul J. Spence, Michael Dowse

My favorite Canadian hosers of all time are back! (Sorry, Rowsdower.) The successor to the great Fubar reunites the world with Terry and Deaner, the Beavis and Butt-head of the Great White North. Their noble philosophy of partying their asses off and givin’r has not waned in the long years between the first film and the second, though the sequel does lead toward a resolution of sorts.

There is something confusing about this film. The first Fubar was presented as a faux-documentary in which the filmmaker died after performing the wussiest bellyflop in human history. I’m not sure if Fubar 2 is meant to be the same breed of Spinal Tap or not. Occasionally people speak to the camera, and their names are listed on-screen, but more often than not people act as though the camera is not there. There’s definitely no evidence of a camera crew. More disturbing, when the dead filmmaker pulls a Jacob Marley and appears before Deaner in a Christmas vision, it’s caught on tape. So if Fubar 2 is meant to be a documentary, it’s one that has evidence of the afterlife – which may or may not be more important than the misadventures of two rowdy Canucks.

The worst part of Fubar 2 is that Terry sells out for poontang. Here’s another thing I don’t get about the movie: he starts hooking up with a burly strip club bouncer who quickly becomes a shrieking, gold-digging shrew who screws around on him and gets pregnant with somebody else’s kid, but all of a sudden Christmas comes and she becomes a saint. There’s no transition in this; one minute she’s a bitch and the next she’s a sweetheart. Sadly, Terry puts up with it.

The best part of Fubar 2 is Tron, the whipped pal of Terry and Deaner’s from Fubar who flew off the wagon, ditched his bitch, and resumed his responsibilities as a one-man wrecking crew. He’s kind of a turd when Terry and Deaner come around his work buddies, but by and large the man does not screw around. The film’s opening scene shows Tron storming onto the scene by running over a tree with his truck, after which he has a rap attack and demolishes Stately Terry and Deaner Manor with a chainsaw. His slow decline into a drug-fueled depression over the story’s progress only makes him more awesome. Tron funkin’ rules.

Deaner is as sage as always, dispensing Socratic pearls of wisdom such as “Knowledge of non-knowledge is power.” He also sings a wicked cover of Boston.

While it doesn’t eclipse the first film, Fubar 2 is pretty goddamn epic.

July 31, 2011

Categories: Bizarro Masterpiece Theatre . . Author: Y

Leave a comment

No comments yet.