Tommy Savas is a well-known multi-talented American actor and producer. He has also acted in other television shows and movies, including Roger Dodger, Seven Days and Extra Butter, Please.

Savas rose to fame thanks to his roles in The Last Ship, Bad Roomies and State of Affairs. Her most recent work, Luv U Cuz, premiered in 2021 as an animated short film.

Where was Tommy Savas born? Ethnicity, Nationality, Family, Education

On December 20, 1984, Tommy A. Savas was born in Harlem, New York. Savas is a citizen of the United States and is Caucasian. He grew up in Cresskill, New Jersey, but was born in Harlem.

Tommy Savas is the fourth child and has not revealed the identities of his siblings. He has always had a fascination with theater and performances.

He has also steadfastly refused to reveal the names of his biological parents or their jobs to the public. Although it is impossible to know anything about his identity, his grandfather served in World War II.

Tommy Savas’ college of choice remains undisclosed. Although not much is known about his career, since he was six years old he studied acting and improvisation with Susan Dias Karnovsky. From an early age, Tommy has starred in commercials, HBO and PBS children’s shows.

In addition to her studies and sporting responsibilities, she studies privately at HB Studios in New York with Joseph Daly and Trudi Stable.

He split his time between New York and Los Angeles, studying acting with Lynette McNeil and comedy with Shari Shaw and Robert Lyons. Savas participated in comedy sketches on HA! Comedy Club of New York and regional theater plays, which helped further develop his acting skills.

What is Tommy Savas’s net worth? Salary, Earnings

Tommy Savas, an American television actor, has a net worth of $1.5 million as of 2024. He has not yet revealed the amount of money he earns every year or the value of his possessions, which include houses, real estate, and others. articles. He has not revealed the exact amount to the public.

Fast facts

Real name Tommy Savas Nickname tommy Birthdate December 20, 1984 Age 38 years place of birth Harlem, New York Nationality American Profession Actor Height 6 feet 5 inches Weight 65 kilos Hair color Black eye color Brown Heritage 1.5 million dollars

Is Tommy Savas single? Relationship

The Savas family is a dedicated couple. Tommy is dating Angie Simms. The number of images this couple has shared on Instagram suggests that they are a couple. However, little is known about how and where they first met and fell in love.

December 5, 2022: Savas Tommy from Los Angeles, California. Disney+’s “National Treasure: Edge of History” debuted at the El Capitan Theater. Billy Bennight/AdMedia/Sipa USA is the photographer. Alamy file photo

Tommy is dating Angie Simms. via Alamy

Additionally, she shared photos of herself with him regularly. He recently shared a video and photo of them along with a happy birthday message for her, hinting that they are dating her.

How tall is Tommy Savas? Weight, hair color

Tommy Savas is six feet and five inches tall. His waist, biceps and hip measurements have also been kept secret from the public. He has protected these acts from the media.

It could be that you are reluctant to reveal your shoe and clothing sizes to the press. From the outside, he appears to have brown eyes and black hair, and has maintained good physical health.

How did Tommy Savas start his Professional Career?

Tommy Savas began acting at the age of six in commercials, but his big break came when he was chosen from among 15,000 actors to play the character of Xavierin in the hit HBO series The Sopranos.

He was a member of Law & Order: Special Victims Unit after this series. To advance her career, she moved to Los Angeles after graduating high school.

Soon after, he was cast as a guest star in several television series, including Cold Case, Without a Trace, Shark, General Hospital, The New Adventures of Old Christine, and many more. Tommy can also appear in national advertisements for Subway, Pizza Hut, Nesquik and Gillette.

He was selected to star in the 2016 comedy pilot The Fluffy Shop about Tommy Savas, written by Gavriel Iglesias.