Privilege Ibiza is known as the world largest nightclub, according to the Guinness Book of Records, selected in 2003, with a capacity of 10 000 people!

Like most of Ibiza clubs, also Privilege was founded in the early ‘70s, first as a restaurant, and than, including a bar and a swimming pool became a Club San Rafael, because of its location which is close to the small village San Rafael. In 1979 the club was sold to the “Real Sociedad” footballer José Antonio Santamaría, with the creative team of Brasilio and Gorri, changing the name in KU. In the ‘80s KU had a reputation of a predominately gay place – compared with the famous club Studio 54. After changing the owner in 1995, the name of the club was changed in Privilege.

The club hosted the biggest and one of the world’s most famous parties. In the middle of the club is the Main Room which looks like a huge hangar, while the other parts are projected layered – in levels, so you can explore this huge space for hours. The part named Vista Club, projected as a pyramidal glass structure, is a favorite part for those who adore house and techno music, enjoying at the end in spectacular dawns, with beautiful views of Ibiza Town.

Privilege was the “witness” to numerous events, happenings and scandalous sex shows, especially during its KU period, in the ‘80s. The first early live performances during the KU period were related to the groups such as Spandau Ballet, Kid Creole and the Coconuts. In 1987 Freddie Mercury and Montserrat Caballé filmed the video inside the club for their song “Barcelona”. The Channel 4 presented the club during its KU period in a documentary called “A Short Film about chilling”, and KU was labeled as “the mirror of Ibiza”.

Other famous live performances were made by: Adamski, Divine, Duran Duran, 808 State, Gloria Gaynor, Grace Jones, James Brown, José Feliciano, Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark (OMD), Sylvester, and the famous persons that had been visiting the club for a decades were Boy George, David Bowie, Grace Jones, Jean Paul Gaultier, Joni Mitchell, Led Zeppelin, Moschino, Tina Turner, Valentino. It is a very impressive number of celebrity names.

The club is seen in the online racing game Test Drive Unlimited 2, and it is mentioned in the film Kevin & Perry Go Large.

The most visited Privilege summer parties are: Resistence, the event held in every continent, was organized in Privilege in 2017 and will be organized also in 2018. You can hear some of the most famous DJs in the field of underground electronic music, such as Adam Beyer, Carl Cox, Dubfire, Eats Everything, Jamie Jones, Joseph Capriati, Loco Dice, Maceo Plex, Nicole Moudaber, Paco Osuna, Pan-Pot, Richie Hawtin, Sasha & John Digweed and Seth Troxler. I am a rich bitch party is a global party, held in the cities such as London, Miami, Turin and on Formentera Island, which is scheduled for Ibiza in 2018. The music ways such as hip-hop, R&B, reggaeton, trap and moombahton will gladden lovers of those sounds. The initiator of this event, an Italian Ale Zuber, will be the resident host. Line-ups are still not updated. Last year the guests of the party were Danny Romero, Lil Paul DJ, Big Fish, DJ Polin, Federico Kay, Juan Cuba, Manuel Ribeca and Sweet FlowSpecial.

The party called Shine Ibiza is scheduled for 11 weeks summer period. You can hear the sounds of trance, with Paul van Dyk at the helm, Bryan Kearney Jordan Suckley, Liam Wilson, Ben NickyWill Atkinson, Neelix, Alex M.O.R.P.H., James Cottle and others, inside the amazing Vista Club.

Fantastic live shows, characterized by some weird scenes, visual effects and choreography, famous as one of the biggest gay-friendly parties on the island, are integrated under the name SuperMartXé.

You can get Privilege by taxi from San Antonio or from Ibiza Town, from Playa d'en Bossa. Disco buses run all night from Ibiza and Playa d'en Bossa to San Antonio and vice versa. In Playa D'en Bossa, Ibiza Port and San Antonio, you can also find many promoters who will provide you the tickets, therefore you can take special free buses to get the destination.

THE DRESS CODE

The dresscode at Privilege club Ibiza is a classic one.

All white outfits are always a good option for both women and men.

As a girl you can mix it up with a skirt or pair of tight pants and a sexy blouse or a dress. High heels will always get you in but you can wear platform heels or flats if you're pretty tall.

Men don't need to worry too much, a pair of casual pants and a shirt with a pair of casual shoes will get you in.

Avoid swimwear and beach clothes, no flip flops or short pants.