College History

Fakir Chand College stands today at Diamond Harbour in the southern part of West Bengal. It is the culmination of the vision of one person to bring higher education facilities to the people of this area. About 100 kilometres (62 mi) from south to north, there was no college before Independence. The academically-inclined would have to travel to Kolkata. This was a difficult proposition, physically and financially, for many.

The setting up of the College was envisioned as far back as 1925, but it was possible to set it up only in 1948 when Calcutta University planned decentralisation of higher education. Sri Jagadish Chandra Halder, a local businessman, set up Fakir Chand College in the memory of his father. The beginning was with intermediate courses in Arts and Science. In the 1955-56 academic year, undergraduate courses in Arts were introduced. The years from 1958 to 1966 were vital years when undergraduate courses in Science and Commerce, and B.Ed. Course was introduced during the tenure of Principal Sri A. C. Roy.

In 1969, Prof. Hari Rakhal Biswas took over as Principal and he introduced a sound system of administration, heralding a new era in the history of the College. Understanding and cooperation amongst all College administration, faculty, non-teaching staff and students led to the highly efficient running of the Institution. Goals were set and reached in a planned manner, and the development then started has never slowed down.

Under the leadership of Dr. Subires Bhattacharyya (who joined in April 2005), the College was accredited by the NAAC and the NCTE, and four postgraduate courses have been introduced. Several UGC-sponsored seminars have also been organised. The College now has 19 undergraduate courses (General and Honours) in Arts, Science and Commerce, a teacher-training course (B. Ed.) and five postgraduate (M.A., M.Sc. and M.Com.) courses in Bengali, History, Education, Pure Mathematics and Commerce. An eye remains on the economic and social exigencies in the introduction and conduct of courses. University results in different streams are quite satisfactory, and a good number of students are admitted regularly to the various postgraduate courses under Calcutta University and other institutions of higher learning. Educational excursions and field trips are arranged on regular basis.