LINCOLN, Neb. (KOLN) - There is a popular venue in Grand Island that’s always been a hub for entertainment, and there’s plenty of growth planned at Fonner Park in the near future.

We caught up with the CEO of Fonner Park, Chris Kotulak, on a late fall afternoon. “I wish you were here when the grandstands were full like they are during the racing season, but it can’t always be racing season,” Kotulak joked. He told us that Fonner Park has always had a positive impact on Grand Island through the years. “We have become the entertainment hub for central Nebraska, there’s no question about it. Our first race meet was conducted in 1954, so we are coming up on 70 years of Fonner Park. But really, it wasn’t until the last 20 years or so that Fonner Park became more than just a racing facility.”

Kotulak points out that the Heartland Events Center contributes to that concept of Fonner Park being an entertainment hub. He says the Eihusen arena and the Bosselman Conference Center brings concerts, rodeos, and other events to the city. He points out that the Nebraska State Fair is also held on the grounds. “So up pops all of these livestock and expo buildings. The Hall County Fair was always here, but the new buildings allow for more livestock shows throughout the year,” Kotulak said.

There is a big future ahead for Fonner Park. “Certainly the park got started with our horse racing product, the thoroughbred racing here is quite popular,” Kotulak said. “The reason why parimutuel racing was established in Nebraska was to benefit agriculture and horse breeding. We do that here at Fonner Park. But, there’s a new twist. With the casino initiative that passed overwhelmingly by those who voted for it, we will have casino operations in development here at Fonner Park.” Kotulak says Fonner Park will partner with Elite Casino Resorts LLC, for The Grand Island Casino Resort. “We plan to have a spectacular resort facility here, just adjacent to the north end of our existing clubhouse. We will have a boutique hotel with more than 100 rooms, a number of restaurants, we will have an indoor-outdoor pool, a parking garage, and a massive casino floor that will be able to offer a lot of entertainment value for those who seek it out.”