You’re invited to come to our Kindergarten Open House! Join us Tuesday, January 23rd, 5:00 p.m. – 7:00 p.m.

We ask that you please arrive according to your student’s last name | A-M from 5:00-6:00 p.m., N-Z from 6:00-7:00 p.m

Note: The backup date in case of inclement weather is January 30th, the times will be the same.

Kindergarten registration will open in April so be on the lookout for more information. Kindergarten is open to all students who will be 5 by August 1.

Due to the recent weather, we’d like to take a moment to remind families of our Inclement Weather Plan so you can be prepared should our school schedule change, you can find those plans on our website.

Make sure that you are signed up to receive PowerSchool notifications as that’s one of the main channels we use to communicate delays or eLearning days. If you are not signed up and would like to receive notifications, please email Renee Markoski at RMarkoski@gccschools.com.

Additionally, we will post information and updates on our social media, so make sure you’re following us on Facebook, Instagram, and X (formerly known as Twitter). Our social media will always have the most up-to-date information.

We are proud to announce and welcome Charlestown High School’s newest Principal, Mr. Bill Eihusen. Mr. Eihusen was officially brought on board after being approved by the Greater Clark County Schools Board of Education on January 9th.

“We are beyond thrilled to welcome Mr. Eihusen to Charlestown High School,” stated Mark Laughner, Superintendent. “His dedication to educational excellence, proven leadership skills, and passion for creating a positive learning environment perfectly align with the values and goals of our school community. We are confident that Mr. Eihusen will continue to elevate Charlestown High School as a beacon of academic achievement and personal growth.”

Get to know the newest GCCS Principal:

For over 25 years, Mr. Eihusen has dedicated the majority of his career to engaging with high school students. During this time, he served 23 years in the Air Force, with 17 of those years devoted to recruiting. He’s been in education a little over 8 years, 7 of which were spent at Jeffersonville High School before going to Texas. His involvement in education encompasses roles such as instructing Air Force JROTC, serving as an Academy Principal, and fulfilling the responsibilities of a Principal.

What brought him back to Jeffersonville you may ask? Coming from a military family along with being one, the 7 years they previously spent in Jeffersonville, were the longest his family has stayed anywhere. Shortly after moving to Texas they realized Indiana was home and decided to come back.

He looks forward to continuing the growth and excellence carried on from Mrs. Cook, former CHS Principal, and Mr. Laughner, GCCS Superintendent, and is excited to be part of the Charlestown High School traditions and start new ones.

When it comes to areas he’s hoping to impact first, his top priorities are safety and school culture. He’s also looking forward to getting to know the staff and students further along with letting them get to know him.

“I’m very thankful for this opportunity and am excited to join the Pirate Family,” said Mr. Eihusen, “We have a great staff and I’ve been impressed with the students. Charlestown High staff will always lead by example and strive for excellence in preparing our students to be successful in life after high school!”

We are happy to share that three of our Wilson Elementary students won the Clark County Health Department Emergency Preparedness Awareness Poster Competition.

The contest was a partnership between the Clark County Health Department, Clark County 911 Center, and Clark County Emergency Management Agency. Together they held an Emergency Preparedness Awareness Poster and Coloring Contest. The Coloring Contest was for Elementary students from Kindergarten through Second-grade and the Poster Contest was for Third-grade through Fifth-grade. One winner was selected from each grade through public voting at the Health Department from November 16th through December 1st, with winners announced right before winter break. Winners received a signed certificate from the Clark County Health Department Administrator and the Clark County Health Officer along with a swag basket!

You can see these fabulous posters on display at the Jeffersonville Public Library on the second floor until the end of January.

Going into the New Year we wanted to share some updates on the ongoing construction projects within the district along with the rough timelines for when we expect them to be complete.

The two NEWEST GCCS Elementary Schools, Charlestown Elementary and Pike Elementary both began construction in the summer of 2023 and have a targeted completion of the summer of 2025.

River Vally Middle School renovations and select remodels are underway as of August 2023. The updates include the demolition of the existing pool which will then be transformed into additional offices and classrooms in the space, a gym remodel, and multiple restroom remodels. At this time the targeted completion is this summer (2024).

Charlestown Middle School work began this past December of 2023, with the targeted completion of this summer (2024). We will be remodeling the music area, multiple restrooms, and the gym.

Northaven Elementary work began in March of 2023 where we are replacing the gym which is in its final touches, a cafeteria remodel, and a classroom addition; all work has the targeted completion of this month, January 2024.

Charlestown High School is receiving a whole new locker room building which is aimed at supporting athletics near the football stadium. As part of this Locker Room Project, we have added additional locker rooms, restroom facilities, a training room, concessions, additional storage, and other site improvements. This project began in June of 2023 with a targeted completion of early spring 2024.

New Washington is getting the final touches wrapped up on an athletic space upgrade which includes a new indoor hitting facility, new tennis courts, softball field upgrades, and track area upgrades.

We want to give a huge thank you to everyone who has been involved in the decision-making, planning processes, support, the schools, students, families, and communities for their continued support and patience as we work to get these projects completed. We can’t wait to share more dates and information about these projects as we complete them. There are plenty of things that make us Greater, and these projects will allow us to continue to grow and provide our students and community with the very best. We have a lot of exciting things ahead, so stay tuned!