The Pinnacle Bank Arena will be the centerpiece of the West Haymarket area, but if all things work as hoped, people will be living and spending far more hours in the privately redeveloped residential, commercial and retail space south of the arena.

Lead developer WRK LLC, better known as the Scott brothers, has been operating in downtown Lincoln for years. Robert and Will Scott are well-known locally, and their redeveloped buildings have become familiar features in the downtown landscape.

But it would be misleading to presume their co-developer is a junior partner.

Chief Industries Inc. has generations of manufacturing and construction history in Nebraska, plenty of presence in Lincoln and is stepping into commercial real estate development under new leadership.

Founded as a general contractor in 1954 by the late and legendary Virgil Eihusen and managed successively by his son, Robert, who is retired, and now his grandson, D J, Chief is an international business active in commercial, retail and institutional construction, agricultural and grain-handling buildings, trucking, prefabricated homes, structural steel, correctional building fixtures, wastewater treatment systems, metal fabrication and ethanol.

It has ag-building divisions in England and France and has put up grain-handling structures and other buildings at ports and cities all over the world.

Chief was a subcontractor on the new State Fair buildings in Grand Island and put up steel for the Kawasaki rail car plant and the University of Nebraska football, softball and baseball practice buildings and dormitories in Lincoln, among other projects. Chief's extensive list includes commercial, recreational, retail, educational, medical and other buildings in Nebraska cities outside of Lincoln and Omaha.

But the West Haymarket is its first commercial real estate development partnership, as such, a 50-50 deal in which the partners are responsible for the complex tasks that go with finance, acquisition, engineering, design, hiring contractors, building and guiding the project through public process obligations and owning it thereafter. When it's done, WRK would be leasing and managing the property, but Chief would remain as co-proprietor.

This opportunity came about by some peculiar and coincidental circumstances. Chief had been talking internally about getting into development and was ready to move as WRK and Woodbury, the original partners chosen to do the West Haymarket development around the arena, had a falling out over finances and control.

Woodbury, a high-powered Utah company with vast experience in urban development, parted ways with its smaller partner and is taking on other tasks, including NU's Innovation Campus and the Catalyst block in downtown Lincoln.

Collecting itself when it announced the WRK-Woodbury split, Lincoln city government said it would be performing due diligence on Chief. Arena coordinator Dan Marvin said that was just to make sure the company was in a position to seek the financing necessary for the West Haymarket partnership's multi-million-dollar obligations.

City officials, including Finance Director Steve Hubka and the city's financial adviser, Scott Keane of Ameritas Financial, went to Grand Island and looked Chief over in person and financially, in ways that aren't available to the public, and pronounced the company fit.

They met with the triumvirate that now leads the company: Chairman D J Eihusen, Roger Bullington, the new vice president of development, who has worked for Chief for more than 25 years, and Chief Financial Officer David Ostdiek. All three are native Nebraskans; all three are graduates of the University of Nebraska-Lincoln.

"We came back feeling they were a very satisfactory partner in the West Haymarket redevelopment," Hubka said. "We don't have any doubts about their wherewithal.

"The partnership will have to stand on its own, but as far as Chief being a viable partner, we're fully satisfied with that. They expressed a strong desire and commitment to this project."

First phase of the West Haymarket private redevelopment is estimated at about $30 million. Addressing any public doubts, Bullington said banks are competing to finance the project. The partners expect to submit a redevelopment plan to the city within weeks. He expressed confidence in Chief's compatibility with WRK.

Chief has had offices for five years in one of the old Haymarket buildings, a place from which to grow engineering and drafting and building services and a better place to recruit UNL engineering grads.

Since emerging from the "death and destruction" that accompanied the recession, Chief is growing and ready to go in the West Haymarket, its leaders said. Chief employs 1,350 permanent employees, including 900 in Nebraska and 20 in Lincoln.

"We had an interest in the city of Lincoln and it was mostly a matter of timing," Eihusen said. "We're very high on the leadership and the direction this city is going. Where else is a project like this taking place? Why not?"

Eihusen wouldn't disclose the company's size in terms of revenue, but said it's quintupled since 1990.

"We find ourselves on solid ground," he said. "We hang our hat on a financially stable, conservatively managed company. That's proved a good model for us."

Reach Richard Piersol at 402-473-7242 or rpiersol@journalstar.com.

Love

0

Funny

0

Wow

0

Sad

0

Angry

0

The business news you need

Get the latest local business news delivered FREE to your inbox weekly.

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.