We provide a wide range of professional services to meet your needs. We promise to provide every service with a smile, and to your highest level of satisfaction.

Fonner Park, located just off Interstate 80 in Grand Island, in the center of Nebraska, is Central Nebraska’s entertainment destination. A year-round facility, Fonner Park is host to the springtime tradition of live horse racing, and year-round events including national livestock shows, the Hall County Fair, the Nebraska State Fair, wedding receptions, sporting events, concerts and much more.

The heart of Fonner Park is the live thoroughbred race meet which runs from mid-February through early May. During the live meet, many events such as craft shows, family activities, recreational shows, and giveaways along with special races highlight the season.

Centrally located in Nebraska at the heart of the 220 acres Fonner Park Complex, the Heartland Events Center is the hub for much of the activity that takes place at Fonner Park and Grand Island throughout each year.

Concerts, entertainment, sports and athletic events, conventions, and trade shows are all annual events held in the Heartland Events Center’s Eihusen Arena.

The Bosselman Conference Center, located adjacent to the Eihusen Arena provides premier facilities for meetings, wedding receptions, and organizational banquets of all types and sizes.

Fonner Park is proudly ran and supported by individuals that truly have a passion for Fonner Park, the Grand Island community and everything it can offer to our neighbors.

Fonner Park was originally built in 1953 as a permanent home for the Hall County fairgrounds. The site was purchased by the Hall County Livestock Improvement Association. The park was named after August L. “Gus” Fonner, who donated the land.

The Old Reliable Hereford Show and Sale was held as its first livestock exhibition in September, before beginning its inaugural season of racing on April 29, 1954. In the years that followed, Fonner was expanded to include additional grandstand seating, expanded barn space, an indoor quarter-mile training track, and other amenities.

We encourage you to make Fonner Park and our amazing facilities the home of your next event. Click on the link below for our complete rental policies and guidelines.