Today, one of our translators for Imouto Paradise is proud to introduce and discuss your little sister, Michika!

Ahh… Michika. Through her route I feel like I’ve learned so much more about myself. The many facets of love one can experience and the many facets they can lead down. Let’s start with her personality. The kuudere is a very underplayed character type in recent years. I’ve seen a plenty of moe-archetypes and Onee-san roles deployed in various games which is all good in on itself, but I still have a soft spot for the calm and collected honest type. By no means am I saying that Michika is perfect, but the subtle changes in attitude are probably what I find most charming. Her being well read adds much flavor to her already well rounded personality and accentuates her story quite well.

I said I’ve learned much about myself through her route and honestly I am afraid of what I’ve become. She… opens new doors and teaches. Some of these doors I feel I may not have wanted open but I am a stronger human being by now seeing what’s behind them. I have verily enjoyed her route and the progression of her own feelings and boundaries.

Compared to the other imouto she may seem cold and caring little about them but is probably the second most considerate of the imouto. (Can’t compare to Aya since she cooks every meal.) I digress though, she understands each of their little quirks the best. In her route she uses this to her advantage more than once. I do hope you enjoy this route as much as it gave me joy to translate

Smile

Some parts may cause a few players to feel “uncomfortable” but I do feel that’s all part of the fun. Sit tight with an open mind and open heart and you too may experience the same feelings I had reading this piece.

It’s fine time we had another Translator’s Corner article. This time around, we’ll be talking about the translation of Imouto Paradise! and all the fun that entailed.

The first thing that really crossed my mind about working on Imouto Paradise! was the matter of Japanese honorifics. Some people may know that I am a fairly strong proponent of translating as much of the text as possible. Now, this isn’t the place to debate the merits of doing that but despite my stance I decided that to not leave in the honorifics in Imouto Paradise! would be impossible. No way around it.

For those that aren’t familiar with the game, Imouto Paradise! features five girls who are the little sisters of you, the protagonist and each have a way of addressing you. The English language really makes it hard to find translating equivalents of these variations so it made sense to just leave them in. You have the oldest of the girls, Aya who uses Nii-san which is workable but then you have one of the twins, Koharu, who uses Onii. All the bro-bro, big bro etc. just doesn’t seem to have the same nuance so what can you do?

Aside from the different ways each girl addresses you, their dialog also have differences as well. It was a bit of a challenge to still maintain the nuances in each of their speech patterns so that you could really appreciate the way they talk. For example, Aya being the most normal of the five has the most standard dialog. On the other hand, you have Rio who talks in a gruff manner, especially when dealing with you. Then you have someone like Michika who uses far more formal dialog than everyone else. Maintaining these differences are important in what makes the game really come to life.

Imouto Paradise! was an interesting project to tackle and although it certainly isn’t deep by any means, I think it’s still a great game. But as I’ve said before, if you love the imouto character-type, this is a must buy. However, if you absolutely hate imouto characters then this is by far the scariest game out there. You were forewarned.

–YukkuriS

For my first beta test with MangaGamer I was asked whether I wanted to do a moe nukige or a dark nukige, and I think you all can guess which one this is.

Imouto Paradise is exactly what it says on the tin, a game about a bunch of little sisters. The “plot” goes that our protagonist’s parents are out of the country, so he spends summer break alone with his five little sisters. And has sex with them. Fun fact: the full title of the Japanese version, 妹ぱらだいす！～お兄ちゃんと5人の妹のエッチしまくりな毎日, roughly translates to “Big brother and his five little sisters go on a perverted spree every day,” which is not so much a title as a plot summary.

The structure of the game is pretty simple, as you’d expect from a nukige. The first half of the game alternates between the common route and the character routes. At each switching point you choose a sister. Then the rest of the game focuses purely on the character route, assuming you met the conditions for one. This works pretty well since the common route is mostly comedy scenes and the first half character routes mostly h-scenes, and switching between them helps pace things nicely.

I really enjoyed the common route scenes, they were quite funny and a nice break from the h-scenes. They also establish everyone’s personalities, even if they don’t stray too far from the usual stereotypes. There were a fair number of puns and anime references, but sadly (as seen from the translator’s notes) a lot of the puns present in the original Japanese didn’t make it into the English version. The second half of the game is where most of the story progression happens, but the story is definitely not the focus of the game. It’s simple, predictable, and driven by hentai logic. Except the harem route, which throws away even hentai logic and kicks reason to the curb, transcending into its own new logic-free plane of existence.

Being a nukige, the h-scenes are the main focus. There are a whopping 77 of them, and they’re each fairly long. They also have quite a lot of variety, with fetishes like bondage, femdom, futa, intercrural sex, paizuri, pegging, public sex, threesomes, watersports (but no scat at least), etc. Aya’s route is fairly vanilla, and everyone else tends to have a recurring fetish or three. Depending on whether or not you like these fetishes, this can be a very good or a very bad thing. Personally, I was a big fan of Michika’s route with harem bringing up a close second. I was very much not a fan of Rio or Hiyori’s routes. This makes me sad because I love Rio for always being the first to call out Onii-chan when he does something stupid or perverted (which is roughly once every three seconds). In general, the art is very pretty and a few scenes in each route even have animations. It’s also uncensored, which is a nice bonus. The voice acting in the h-scenes was okay but nothing special. The voice acting in the rest of the scenes was pretty good, though.

As a summary, this game is all about sex and comedy. It does both pretty well and has no pretenses of being anything more than that. Go into it expecting to laugh and fap instead of a deep and complicated story, and you won’t be disappointed.

Thanks everyone for reading this review, and I hope you enjoy the game as much as I did!

Take it away Tuna Salad!

A year or so ago, shortly after we first announced ImoPara, I was having an intense discussion with a friend of mine as to why people got off on sister fetishes. Him having an older sister, he conjectured that perhaps for those who have no first-hand experience with how miserable it is growing up with an actual sibling, a fictional harem setting like ImoPara’s would be quite enticing. Me, being an only child, disagreed on the premise that I had an older sister fetish and found younger sister stereotypes to be quite annoying.

One year passes, ImoPara falls on my lap, Aya shows up in a naked apron, I’m sold.

In my defense, Aya’s the family caretaker, so she’s practically the doting older sister which is straight down my strike zone. Everywhere from at the dinner table, back of the bus, and even morning wood, Aya’s got you covered. Lest we not forget, everyone’s favorite, SOAPLAND! Not that there’s actually a soapland in game, but Aya provided the soapland services and with her tig ol’ bitties, it’s just–anyways…

Enough of the down and dirty H that I know all of you are going to get the game for. Other than the naughty, the filler material that guides you from H to H can be pretty amusing too. Aya’s the surrogate mother, nothing too fun about her. Rio is the physically abusive tsundere who is virtually all tsun in any route not her own. Hiyori is the red backpack who’s really cute in that almost normal little sister kind of way until you remember that she’s a heroine that gets boned at some point. Koharu is the sex kitten who’s sole purpose seems to be creating awkward situations for her big brother.

Then there’s Michika… no words can describe Michika and the sheer amounts of amusement I got from her with every story arc. Her H scenes weren’t quite my cup of tea, but everything in-between was solid gold.

Other than just the girls and the plot (lol, playing nukiege for the plot), there are some other token ‘features’ that are more novel than anything else. Some of the H scenes are mildly animated, Boob Wars level of animation. All H scenes come with an orgasm countdown (no screenshot available because I’m lazy), and I’m told that in the original there was a feature where you could press a button and it would tweet how many times you’ve squeezed one off via the game. We weren’t able to port that feature since Twitter’s changed since then…

This past year has been pretty eventful here at MangaGamer, so let’s take a look!

In the past year we’ve managed to publish 15 new titles to the English market–something that most would have never believed to be possible before our company came around–and we’ve managed to maintain our standards of high quality translations for every one of those releases. A change few of us ever expected for Visual Novels in 2014 though, was Steam. After Higurashi and Go Go Nippon were Greenlit on Steam, the sudden and instant success of the latter allowed our company to pave the way for Visual Novels on Steam and set a precedent our fellow Visual Novel publishers have chosen to follow. Even now, our own all-ages release of Cho Dengeki Stryker still stands as the only full-length Visual Novel localized for English release on Steam, and we have a lot of plans to continue adding high-quality content with volume to our Steam store in the future. So on that note, let’s take a look at what topped our digital charts this year!

Imouto Paradise

Ultimate Boob Wars!!

Demon Master Chris

Hypno-training My Mother and Sister

Eroge! ~Sex And Games Makes Sexy Games~

Cho Dengeki Stryker

Armored Warrior Iris

Valkyrie Svia

Really? Really!

Cum on! Bukkake Ranch!

Well, the trend from last year continues, with the nukige pulling strongly across the board. Our hopes from last year were rewarded, and every single one of our releases from Lilith placed on the charts. Little sisters definitely took the crown this year, with Imouto Paradise performing on par with Eroge and Boob Wars from years before! Perhaps most notable in this year’s ranking is the fact that many of last year’s titles are refusing to give way, with Eroge, Bukkake Ranch, and Demon Master Chris all returning to claim another spot this year. Also, while it didn’t manage to make the top ten, Cartagra did manage to climb up to 11th place.

Interestingly enough, however, has been the performance of our games on Steam. Go Go Nippon would clearly check in at #1, having sold several times more copies than Imouto Paradise. Meanwhile, Cho Dengeki Stryker, and eden*–despite its brief accidental launch–would both easily rank in at #2 on their Steam sales alone.

What about things on the hard copy front?

Kara no Shojo

Eroge! ~Sex and Games Makes Sexy Games~

Boob Wars

Tick! Tack!

ef -a fairy tale of the two.

Shuffle!

Koihime Musou

Go! Go! Nippon!

Harem Party

DEARDROPS

Wow! Most of these are returning titles, back to claim a spot again this year! It’s great to see that so many of them are still selling strong. Eroge, ef, Tick Tack, and Koihime are the only new claims on 2014’s top ten, though most of those were new to the year. It’s quite a pleasant surprise to see ef claiming such a high spot when it only had pre-orders to compete against the rest. Many of our other Limited Editions (such as Kara no Shojo) are now sold out, so if you’re interested in getting a Limited Edition of ef, you’ll want to act fast, because they’re selling quick! We’ve managed to sell out of quite a few other hard copies as well. Some we’ll be discontinuing, like Da Capo, and others we’ll be looking into potential reprinting for, like Kara no Shojo and Boob Wars; so be sure to grab your copy before it’s too late!

In other news, conventions have also continued doing well for us, and you can expect to see us coming back to all the usuals. We’re looking forward to seeing everyone again as Anime Boston and Sakuracon roll around!

Here at home, our localization team has been growing too, in order to keep bringing new games into the mix! We’ve added three new translators including bad end and koestl, multiple new editors including ritobito and Nellie, and lastly blackdragonhunt, who’s serving as both programmer and translator. It’s been lots of fun for us, working with all these new people who bring a lot of talent and passion into the company. Everyone here at MangaGamer remains dedicated to the quality of our work, and we have a lot of things in store for 2015 as well, but that we’ll talk about in our next post!

In the meantime, don’t forget to fill out our licensing survey for a chance to win a free copy of eden*: http://bit.ly/MG_LSurvey

Welcome to our fourth and final installment of our Women’s History Month interview series! If you missed our previous three installments, go check them out: Localization Staff Interview, Shigeo Hamashima Interview, Yuka Kayura Interview.

For anyone who may be unfamiliar with Women’s History Month, it’s celebrated in the US, UK and Australia during the month of March to bring attention to the contributions of women in our society. So, in the spirit of Women’s History Month, we decided it’d be a good opportunity to highlight some women creators among our eroge partners and let them tell us about themselves and their work.

This week, we talked to MILK, singer of Imouto Paradise‘s opening theme.

How did you get into the eroge industry? Were there any specific works or creators that inspired you to work on eroge?

I got my start as a cosplayer helping out at an event (I was dressed as Miki Tsukimura from MOONSTONE’s Clear). Though I guess the thing that first got me into visual novels was the Saturn version of Welcome to Pia Carrot. I really wanted to play Kita e. but I would have had to buy a Dreamcast for it.

I didn’t have a PC back then, so I think my desire to play proper visual novels some day was what motivated me.

I’m a big fan of Ashito Ooyari’s artwork and I was so happy when I finally got to meet him! I really felt like I was part of the industry I loved at that moment.

How do you think your experience as a woman has informed your work?

I guess I can give a motherly warmth to the job that helps things go well? More specifically, greeting people properly and listening to people with a smile are pretty easy things to do, but when you only have a limited time with people and there are new staffers you’ve never met before, it can be pretty difficult to create an atmosphere conducive to talking.

People can get pretty awkward if they’re worried about being selfish, but that’s not something you have to be worried about with your mother. I think being a woman kinda puts me in a similar type of position.

I want to be girly, even as a singer, so I like to decorate my sheet music with hearts, so I can have some visual cues to help create a cute mood too♪

I find myself privileged as a woman to be able to enjoy the useful aspects of both my girlish side and my motherly side at the same time.

What is your process like? Do you have any particular techniques for getting a feel for a game?

First, I’ll get the concept of the game and the plot from the client. If it’s a character song, I find out about how the character talks and look at the key illustrations.

If I’m writing lyrics, a lot of times I get the music first, so I set the words I come up with to the music, stressing the lyrical quality as I write. Then I set the lyrics aside for a day before looking them over again and if everything looks alright, it’s a go!

The client will check the lyrics over and then I just have to sing them. Though, I guess over-practicing is a no-no. If I don’t keep it flexible enough to make changes on recording day, I’ll have to fight against my instincts.

I always try to keep in mind that game songs might be my songs, but they’re not mine alone.

Imouto Paradise’s opening sequence. Song “Imouto Paradise” lyrics and performance by MILK. Please note that this video contains some nudity.

Are there any parts of the process of producing music for eroge that you find particularly difficult? What keeps you motivated when things get tough?

If it’s an opening theme, I always try to make sure it’s not too heavily associated with any particular girl. Everyone who plays the game probably has a different idea of which girl is most charming, after all.

I guess this is kind of related to the previous question, but while I may be singing someone’s feelings, I want the players to be able to decide just who those feelings belong to.

I like to think the songs are part of the game for the sake of the players, so I derive my motivation from the voices of those players. I like looking up player impressions of games on Twitter and stuff♪

Is there a song or other work you’ve worked on that you’re particularly proud of?

I was responsible for this one kind of sad character song that plays during the tearful climax of the game––even though I’d read the plot outline and knew everything that happened in the game, once I played the finished product I was really moved by the scene. It made me feel like I did a really good job!

What do you think about the state of the eroge industry as a whole? Is there anything you’d like to see change in the future?

Eroge are designed to entertain consumers and they aren’t the sort of thing you absolutely have to buy to survive, but life is kind of lonesome without games, isn’t it? I guess it’s not all that different from watching movies, but I guess visual novels have a somewhat stronger personal component and are a little easier to misunderstand.

Also, games are data so I guess people can obtain them illicitly too.

It’s an industry based around providing entertainment for adults, so I’d like to interact with the players as adults too.

Also, I think it’s important for the industry to stick to deadlines♪

How did you come up with your stage name? It’s very cute!

Thanks! My real name is Mio, so I wanted to come up with something that also start with “M”. And I like cats, so I wanted a name that had a feline feel. Me~ow♪

Are there any singers or voice actors you look up to in particular?

Lots of them! If I had to pick someone in particular, I guess I’d say Hiromi Satou. I think she’s amazing both as a person and in terms of her contributions to the industry. Her singing and speaking are both really mesmerizing♪

What do you find most rewarding about your job?

When the fans can finally get their hands on a finished product. Producing a physical product is really rewarding. Of course, with songs alone there are always CDs, but I feel especially proud of contributing to bigger products with lots of content and illustrations and everything fitting neatly together.

Are there any dream projects you hope to have the opportunity to work on some day?

It’s a secret, but, you know, I don’t think it’d be all that strange if a swim meet, or hot springs, or girl’s night out full of beautiful female characters were a reality. I’d love to join in. I’m a girl after all, so I can get into places boys can’t. I’m really looking forward to it♪

Is there anything else you’d like to say to your English-speaking fans?

I’ve never left Japan before myself! It makes me really happy to know that games with my songs in them are loved overseas too♪ I sang the opening theme to Imouto Paradise packed with the feelings of lots of little sisters. I hope you play it and let me know what you think of it♪ Thank you very much☆

I’d like to go overseas to sing some day☆

And that concludes our Women’s History Month interview series! I hope you all enjoyed hearing from all these talented women in the industry.

Hot off our panel at Anime Boston, we have our first set of announcements for the year!

First up, Free Friends! This sexy tale of blackmail, exploitation, and possible salvation will be coming to Hard Copy this summer! Fans of Noesis and dark, sexy titles will be able to own this great game on disc starting on May 20th for just $24.95! Pre-orders are open now.

Secondly, we’re proud to announce our expansion of the Kindred Spirits franchise, and our very first release of a new product–drama CDs! We’re excited to be breaking new ground with this first foray into the sale of localized drama CDs for fans to enjoy. It is our hope that the success of this endeavor will help pave the way for future drama CD releases as well.

Each of the four drama CDs tell sequels to the stories of each of the couples in the original games. The first follows Ano, as Yuna, Hina, and Nena pretend to be her girlfriends in order to throw off some stalkers. In the second, Youka and Kiri realize they’re repeating the same dates with their partner, so they both agree to have the other plan their next date. The third showcases Miki, Maki, Matsuri, and Miyu as they all share a vacation to the beach. Then, in the final drama CD, the broadcasting club hosts a radio show during a sale at the local shopping district.

All four drama CDs will be sold both on Steam and MangaGamer as subtitled videos for $9.99 each. The first Kindred Spirits drama CD will be available this April, and we hope to release the successive drama CDs roughly one month following the previous volume’s release. We will also be carrying limited copies of the original Japanese drama CDs at future conventions throughout this year for those who would like to own the originals in pure audio format.

And lastly, our brand new acquisition from Moonstone––Imouto Paradise 2! Fans of little sisters and Imouto Paradise will love this new addition to the series, since incest runs in the family! After Shoichirou and his little sisters shacked up in the wake of Imouto Paradise, they began raising their new family together. And now, with the parents away on an extended vacation, the new generation of siblings follow in their family’s footsteps, showing their love for each other in deep, heart-pounding new ways!

That’s it for Anime Boston! Our next stop on the con circuit will be Anime Central! Be sure to check out our panel on May 20th at 21:00 for even more announcements.