About

Natalie Mendoza is a 45 year old Australian Actress. Born Natalie Jackson Mendoza on 12th August, 1978 in Hong Kong, China, she is famous for her series regular role as Jackie Clunes in the BBC One drama series Hotel Babylon, and her role as adventurous Juno in the acclaimed The Descent horror film franchise. Her zodiac sign is Leo.

Natalie Mendoza is a member of the following lists: Australian women singers, Australian film actors and Australian television actors.

Contribute

Who is Natalie Mendoza dating? Natalie Mendoza boyfriend, husband list. Help us build our profile of Natalie Mendoza! Login to add information, pictures and relationships, join in discussions and get credit for your contributions.

Relationship Statistics

TypeTotalLongestAverageShortestMarried1 4 years - - Dating1 - - - Total2 4 years 2 years -

Details

First Name Natalie Middle Name Jackson Maiden Name Mendoza Full Name at Birth Natalie Jackson Mendoza Alternative Name Nutty, Natta Birthday 12th August, 1978 Birthplace Hong Kong, China Height 5' 7" (170 cm) Weight 121lbs (55 kg) Build Athletic Eye Color Brown - Dark Hair Color Brown - Dark Zodiac Sign Leo Sexuality Straight Ethnicity Multiracial Nationality Australian University Presentation Star of the Sea Secondary College Occupation Text Actress, Singer Occupation Actress Claim to Fame her series regular role as Jackie Clunes in the BBC One drama series Hotel Babylon, and her role as adventurous Juno in the acclaimed The Descent horror film franchise Year(s) Active 1995–present Talent Agency (e.g. Modelling) Conway Van Gelder Grant, Authentic MGT,, Buchwald and Associates, Sheree Cohen, Agent Brand Endorsement Voodoo Dolls surf/ski apparel clothing line Official Websites twitter.com/Natalie_Mendoza

Natalie Jackson Mendoza (born 12 August 1976) is an Australian-British actress, singer, and dancer. She is best known for her roles as one of the main characters, Jackie Clunes, in the British drama series Hotel Babylon (2006–2008) and as Juno in the horror film The Descent (2005), as well as its sequel, The Descent Part 2 (2009). Mendoza has also performed in various stage productions across the West End and Broadway, including Miss Saigon (role of "Gigi"), Here Lies Love ("Imelda Marcos"), and Spider-Man: Turn Off The Dark ("Arachne").