Natalie Mendoza is an Australian actress, singer, and dancer who started her career with stage productions. She is best known for the role of Jackie Clunes in the British TV drama Hotel Babylon (2008-2009).

In almost 3 decades of her career, some of her notable work credits include The Descent, The Descent Part 2, BeastMaster, Americana, and Blue Bloods.

Short-Biography: Age, Height, & Parents

Natalie Mendoza was born Natalie Jackson Mendoza on August 12, 1978, in Hong Kong. She was raised in Sydney Sydney, Melbourne, Australia.

Her father, Noel Mendoza is a jazz pianist while the mother, Robin Jackson is an Australian television personality. Her sister Rebecca Jackson Mendoza is an actress and singer while the identity of her other four siblings is missing.

Natalie holds an Australian nationality and belongs to mixed ethnicity. As of March 2021, she is 42 years old and her height id 5 feet 7-inch or 170 cm tall.

Related: Joan Severance Net Worth, Wiki, Bio, Husband & Kids

Natalie Mendoza Net Worth In 2021: Her Films & TV Series

Professional since 1995, she has 23 acting credits under her name. Natalie Mendoza has an estimated net worth of $1 million as of Celebrity Net Worth.

The 42 year old began her acting journey with stage productions. Some of her theatre credits are Spiderman: Turn off the Dark, Arms of Fire, Here of Fire. Here Lies Love, and Miss Saigon.

After that, she debuted in the industry with an episode in the television series Wildside in 1998. She then appeared in Fearless, Farscape, BeastMaster, South Pacific, Hard Knox, Muggers, Moulin Rouge!, Horseplay, and Code 46.

Finally, Natalie came to the spotlight after playing Jackie Clunes in the series Hotel Babylon (2006–2008) alongside Nigel Harman, Emma Pierson, and Max Beesley.

Furthermore, her other notable acting credits include The Descent, The Great Raid, Surviving Evil, The Descent: Part 2, Midsomer Murders, Americana, Blue Bloods, Holby City, and McDonald & Dodds. As per the IMDb, she is all set to star in post-production films Annette and Blood Drive.

Read More: Katie Daryl Married Husband, Kids, Age, Net Worth & Height

Natalie Mendoza’s Relationship History – Husband, Wedding, & Divorce

Mendoza was married to Eliot Kennedy in April 2006. Her then-husband is a record producer and songwriter by profession. After 4 years of marriage, the couple divorced in 2010. However, the actual reason for their split is yet not revealed.

Previously, Natalie was in a relationship with English actor Joseph Fiennes in early 2000s. The duo met during the shooting of the movie The Great Raid in 2002. Eventually, they started dating and Mendoza moved to London with Joseph and took acting classes at Bristol Old Vic.

Misconduct Issue

Back in October 2017, Natalie shared posts on her Facebook revealing about the sexual misconduct by Harvey Weinstein (former film producer & convicted sex offender).

As per reports, Weinstein placed on her with her permission in a hotel-meeting room during her early 20s. Later, in TMZ’s interview of January 2018, Mendoza said she forgave Harvey following months of the convicted film producer’s apology statement, stating that it can be a way to move forward to a new start.