Clarissa Name Meaning in English

What does the name Clarissa mean? What is the meaning of the name Clarissa, lucky number, lucky stone, origin and religion.

Clarissa is a name derived from the Germanic name Clarice, which is derived from the Latin word clarus, which means "bright, clear or famous". Clarissa is an English, Italian, and Portuguese name; Clarisa is the Spanish form of the name.

Clarissa Name Meaning, Origin & Details

Meaning: Bright and clear Short Info: Clarissa is the name of a novel written by Samuel Richardson and published in 1748. Details: A form of Clarice. From the Latin, clarus, meaning "bright, clear" or "famous". Gender: Girl Origin: English, Italian, Latin, Portuguese Religion: Christian Suitable for: Girls / Female / Women Hardness: Medium hard to pronounce Uniqueness: It is a common name Short & Easy: Not very short Syllables: 8 Letters and 1 Words

Related or Similar Names

If you like the meanings or synonyms of name Clarissa; we have created list of popular names that can be considered as alternative of the name Clarissa.

Below names are with similar meaning as Bright and clear. Explore the list below for names that not only share a similar meaning to "Bright and clear" but also encapsulate the essence and significance associated with the name "Clarissa."

Clarissa Name Lucky Number 8

Clarissa Name Numerology And Personality

Clarissa has the numerology 8. The gender of this name Clarissa is Girl. They are also thought to be practical endeavors. These people do not keep themselves in fascinating things rather they keep a practical approach towards everything.

Those who have the numerology 8 are not thought to be extremely positive because of some of their qualities. The meaning of this name is Bright and clear. These people are always seeking power, and they also have some really high goals but all are related to materialistic things.

These are the people who are very status-oriented and they also do not believe in coming out of that bubble for anyone. The religion is Christian. These people look at the status of the other person before knowing their personalities because that is how they are built.

Popular personalities with Clarissa Name.

Clarissa Name Wallpaper

Clarissa name 3D wallpaper and writing styles, Write Clarissa name on photo online, Clarissa name writing style online, Write Clarissa name on image online, Write Clarissa name pic & wallpaper, Clarissa 3D name wallpapers editing, Clarissa new wallpaper, Clarissa 3d name creator online, Clarissa name background maker, Create my name in style for Clarissa

See Clarissa Name Wallpaper ⟶

How People Search Clarissa