Clarissa Smith Williams was the daughter of George A. Smith and Susan West. Her mother’s sister wife was Bathsheba W. Smith (4th RS President), who was like a second mother to her. George A. was the Historian for the Church, so Clarissa was born and raised in the Historian’s office and home on South Temple in Salt Lake City. Clarissa grew up playing with Brigham Young’s daughters.

When Clarissa was still quite young, she showed some of the gifts that would set her apart. She was a natural born leader, kind, and intelligent. Bathsheba prophesied that young Clarissa would be the President over the Relief Society some day.

Clarissa would graduate with the first class at the University of Deseret (U of U), with a teaching certificate. Education would be a necessity in her eyes, not a luxury, for women. All eight of her girls would later graduate from the University of Utah.

William Williams’ family came from Wales. They were a faithful family and while Clarissa and William were dating, William would be called on a mission. Instead of waiting until after his return, they married the day before his departure. It was a long two years, but she spent the time teaching and establishing a private school. Independence was very important to Clarissa.

Upon William’s release, the reunited couple set up housekeeping in a house next door to her mother. All eleven of there children were born in this home. The family was happy, helpful, and comfortable. William worked in the furniture business and supported the family well. They would later move to a house in Federal Heights with a ballroom on the main floor and plenty of room for family and company gatherings, which they had often. In fact, Clarissa was known for her cooking expertise. She owned thirty-six place settings of fine china which were used often. She and her daughters would cook wonderful meals together.

It was impressive how eleven children could be so well behaved and cared for. The real mystery was how those children were washed clean, dressed, and smiling at the breakfast table every morning. Alice Merrill Horne, a niece, witnessed the method: “Uncle Will and Aunt Clarissa chose up sides and ran races to see which side should be dressed first…almost before I could say ‘Jack Robinson’”.

As well as serving in the Church, Clarissa served in many community organizations, clubs, and the Red Cross. Even while juggling heavy church assignments, and a large family, she never gave up her little sewing group.

Clarissa began her service in the Relief Society by being a Block Assistant (Visiting Teacher) at the age of sixteen. When she was married, with seven children, she was called to be the secretary in her ward Relief Society. She hesitated to accept the call, because of all the little children she was raising. But her husband urged her on and kept his word when he promised to help and care for the children while she was filling her assignment. She then served as president in her ward for eight years. In 1901, Bathsheba asked her to serve as Treasurer in the General Relief Society. When her stake split she was called as the Stake Relief Society President in the Salt Lake Stake. In 1911, Emmeline called her to be her counselor. At Emmeline’s death, in 1921, Clarissa was called as sixth President of the General Relief Society.

Clarissa was a general among women, pleasant to be around, happy, and intelligent. She traveled all over the United States and abroad, visiting Relief Societies. At this time, the Relief Society had membership in the National Council of Women, as well as the International Council of Women, and she attended many of the meetings held back east and in Europe.

At the end of WWI, the US government forbade groups or individuals to store large quantities of food. As a result, the Relief Society units had to sell all the grain that was stored; this led to a large accumulation of cash. From the interest made, the welfare and social services were set up. Her main contribution as General Relief Society President was in promoting these services: Health, Cleanliness, as well as care of handicapped and underprivileged children. The mortality rate dropped notably for mothers and new babies during her administration.

She was a woman of great dignity, humility, graciousness, and leadership ability. Most importantly, she had a sense of humor. Her vision and her supreme desire to have the work advance gave others a new stimulus to measure up to high ideals. Under-privileged children received her first attention. Womanhood and the cause of truth gave Clarissa her focus and purpose.

A memorial fund to honor past presidents was developed by Clarissa. These funds went to help sisters pursue further education or benefit according to the focus of each of the past presidents: Eliza’s poem fund, Zina’s nursing loan fund, Bathsheba’s temple grant fund, Emmeline’s education fund at BYU. Clarissa’s fund would help future nurses and social workers.

(Information provided by Elect Ladies and several articles from the Relief Society Magazine)