OANDO - Oando Plc

Oando Plc (formerly Unipetrol Nigeria Plc) is a Nigerian company engaged in the exploration, production, marketing, supply, and general energy services. The company, which was registered as a result of the acquisition of Esso Africa Incorporated by the Federal Government of Nigeria, was partially privatized in 1991 and fully privatized in the year 2000, following the disposal of the 40% shareholding of the Nigerian government to Ocean and Oil Investments Limited and the general public. In December 2002, the company merged with Agip Nigeria Plc following its acquisition of 60% of Agip Petrol’s stake in Agip Nigeria Plc. Oando is listed on the Nigerian Stock Exchange and the the Johannesburg Stock Exchange. The company's subsidiary, Oando Energy Resources Inc, is its main vehicle for all oil exploration and production activities.

Oando Plc is listed on the Nigerian Stock Exchange (NGX) since February 24th, 1992. Oando is traded on the NGX under the ticker symbol “OANDO”. The International Securities Identification Number (ISIN) of NGX:OANDO is NGOANDO00002. Oando Plc is currently the 21st most valuable stock on the NGX with a market capitalization of NGN 405 billion, which makes about 0.735% of the Nigerian Stock Exchange equity market.

Monetary values are quoted in Nigerian Naira (NGN) unless otherwise stated

OANDO Stock Market Performance

The current share price of Oando Plc (OANDO) is NGN 32.60. OANDO closed its last trading day (Thursday, August 15, 2024) at 32.60 NGN per share on the Nigerian Stock Exchange (NGX), recording a 9.9% drop from its previous closing price of 36.20 NGN. Oando began the year with a share price of 10.50 NGN and has since gained 210% on that price valuation, ranking it third on the NGX in terms of year-to-date performance. Shareholders can be optimistic about OANDO knowing the stock has accrued an outstanding 76% over the past four-week period alone—second best on NGX.

Oando is the 10th most traded stock on the Nigerian Stock Exchange over the past three months (May 16 - Aug 15, 2024). OANDO has traded a total volume of 1.01 billion shares—in 23,644 deals—valued at NGN 21.4 billion over the period, with an average of 16 million traded shares per session. A volume high of 73 million was achieved on July 26th, and a low of 1.43 million on May 24th, for the same period. The table below details the last 10 trading days of activity of Oando on the Nigerian Stock Exchange.

Profile of Oando Plc

Oando Plc was founded on August 25, 1969 and operates in the Oil & Gas sector, specifically, the Integrated Oil & Gas industry. Oando contracts an estimated total number of 137 employees. The company is led by Adewale J. Tinubu as its Group Chief Executive. The company's board of directors, chaired by HRM. Oba A. Gbadebo, is composed of 10 members whose names are listed below.

Gbadebo, Oba A. (HRM.)

Chairman

Tinubu, Adewale J.

Group Chief Executive

Boyo, O.

Deputy Group Chief Executive

Adeyemo, Olufemi

Group Chief Financial Officer

Osunsanya, B.

Non-Executive Director

Akpata, Oghogho

Non-Executive Director

Anthony, Sena (Chief)

Non-Executive Director

Yakubu, Tanimu

Non-Executive Director

Osakwe, Ike

Non-Executive Director

Akinrele, Ademola

Non-Executive Director

OANDO Industrial Market Competitors

Oando Plc, issuers of the OANDO stock on the Nigerian Stock Exchange, have six market competitors who are also engaged in the Oil & Gas sector and/or Integrated Oil & Gas industry. The table below presents an overview of their market standing.

Index of African Stock Exchanges: