Prince Rogers Nelson, known as “Prince,” was one of the greatest American musicians of all time. Pioneering a genre-bending sound out of Minneapolis as a singer, producer, songwriter and multi-dimensional artist of such hits as “Diamonds and Pearls” and “Little Red Corvette” redefined music for entire generations. Prince released 39 studio albums and hundreds of singles, won seven Grammys and sold over 100 million records worldwide before his death in April 2016 after an accidental drug overdose. He was 57 years old.

Known for leading an ideological shift within the music industry, pushing for artists’ creative autonomy and ownership over the rights to their own music, Prince changed his name to a symbol to distinguish himself legally as another entity and became recognized as “The Artist (formerly known as Prince).”

His mother was a social worker and his father a jazz musician. Prince’s music pioneered what’s known now as the Minneapolis sound, pulling from rock, soul, jazz, blues, R&B, hip hop, funk, gospel and electronic sounds. Prince wrote his first song at age seven on his father’s piano, and signed to Warner Brothers Records at age 19, soon releasing albums For You (1978) and Prince (1979).

Top Prince Songs

Stack ranking Prince songs should be illegal because there are hundreds of them, however, I’ve put together a list of the top 25 that should not be missed. From emotional to energetic, Prince’s greatest hits are never ending and timeless.

25. “So Dark (remix)” by Prince (1998)

The track “Dark” originally appeared on Prince’s fifteenth album, Come, in 1994. In 1998, the song was remixed and named “So Dark” for Prince’s Crystal Ball album, taking on the form and groove of R&B and neo-soul , stepping away from the song’s original jazz-forward notes and intonations. “So Dark” is a good place to start with Prince for listeners who are new to the sound, a solid entry point with a bouncy tempo.

24. “Controversy” by Prince (1981)

The bass- and synth-heavy song “Controversy” doubles down on the 1980s classic funk electronic sound Prince came to be known for pioneering. Layered with unique vocals, fun adlibs, and a tail end verse of rapping, “Controversy” is perfect for the dance floor at the club or at home.

23. “Mountains” by Prince and The Revolution (1986)

From the album, Parade, and the soundtrack to the romantic comedy film, Under the Cherry Moon, “Mountains” was written by Prince and The Revolution band members Wendy & Lisa. The song feels very much like an accompaniment to a visual story with a syncopated rhythm complimented by actors on a screen.

22. “Baby I’m a Star” by Prince (1984)

Originally released on Prince’s iconic Purple Rain soundtrack album, “Baby I’m a Star” is a song worthy of rockstar status. Purple Rain, the movie synonymous with Prince, is a 1984 rock musical very much mirroring the artist’s personal life through the lens of the movie lead, "The Kid." According to The Prince Vault, “in 1989, Tim Burton used “Baby I’m A Star” in a rough draft of the Batman movie, during a scene where The Joker leads a parade of large balloons, to indicate the kind of music he wanted in that scene. Once Prince was brought in to provide the music [for Batman], he provided “200 Balloons” as a replacement, which was eventually replaced itself by” “Trust.”

21. “Xotica” by Prince (20023)

“Xotica” is a sexy jazz instrumental tune from Prince’s Xpectation, an entirely instrumental album, released only as a digital download. The song itself features a laid back drum groove, soulful saxophone and a panning electronic piano.

20. “Black Sweat” by Prince (2006)

"Black Sweat" is from Prince’s 2006 album, 3121, and was nominated for Best R&B Song and Best Male R&B Vocal Performance at the 49th Annual Grammy Awards.

19. “Mr Nelson” By Prince with Lianne La Havas (2015)

A floaty sounding song with a reggaeton backbone sped to the bpm of electronic dance music, “Mr. Nelson” is a unique journey Prince takes with UK-based singer Lianne La Havas.

18. “The Beautiful Ones” By Prince (1984)

A love song on Purple Rain, "The Beautiful Ones" was originally recorded in the early 1980s, however many associate the song with Mariah Carey’s cover on her 1997 album Butterfly manifesting as a duet with R&B group Dru Hill.

17. “Delirious” by Prince (1999)

From the album 1999, "Delirious" gained serious momentum and traction, dropping right after Prince’s hit "Little Red Corvette" from the same album. "Delirious" follows a standard 8-bar blues, telling the story of lust through sneaky sexual metaphors.

16. “Sexy M.F.” by Prince (1992)

“Sexy M.F.” is an uptempo funky jam reminiscent of the James Brown sound. A confident and playful song with lyrical styles flowing from rapping to spoken word from the artist’s 14th studio album noted as an unpronounceable iconic symbol.

15. “Let’s Go Crazy” by Prince (1984)

“Let’s Go Crazy” is the ultimate energy opener and was in fact the lead song on both the album and the film Purple Rain, and for many live Prince concert performances. With a fun, upbeat and danceable rhythm, “Let’s Go Crazy” is a perfect unwind song.

14. “I Wanna Be Your Lover” by Prince (1979)

The lead single from his second album, Prince, “ I Wanna Be Your Lover” captures the true essence of the artist complete with a brightly backlit, disco-inspired video with Prince front and center singing into the camera with severe eye contact and emotive dances.

13. “Cream” by Prince & The New Power Generation (1991)

From the iconic Diamonds and Pearls album, “Cream” is a sexy number with a video to match the sentiment of a sexual revolution mainstream pop music elicited in the 1990s.

12. “Pop Life” By Prince (1985)

“Pop Life” is a playful look at the conundrum of being in the spotlight. The seventh song from the artist’s seventh album, Around The World In A Day, the track was written by Prince and The Revolution band.

11. “U Got Look” by Prince (1987)

A percussion-heavy song with both electric drums and hand drums performed by world famous drummer, Sheila E, “U Got The Look” is from Prince’s Sign o' the Times album.

9. “So Blue” by Prince (1978)

A beautiful acoustic side of Prince, “So Blue” is a somewhat unpredictable ballad that starts off fast and rolls out slowly, romantically even. A nice break from the multiple instrument the artist is known for using in his song, “So Blue” showcases Prince’s vocal talent and soul.

8. “Purple Rain” by Prince (1984)

Perhaps one of the most iconic songs by Prince as the name of his 1984 album and pop culture movie phenomenon with the same name, “Purple Rain” defines the artist’s sound at the height of his career.

7. “Sometimes It Snows In April” by Prince (2002)

Already 30 years into the music business by the time “Sometimes It Snows In April” came out in the early 2000s, Prince had a special skill for reemerging with something new and raw.

6. “Kiss” by Prince (1986)

"Kiss" is considered one of Prince's best songs by critics and fans alike. American Songwriter ranked the song number three on their list of the 10 greatest Prince songs in 2022, and in 2021, Rolling Stone ranked “Kiss” No. 85 in a list of the 500 Greatest Songs of All Time.

5. “The Most Beautiful Girl In the World” by Prince (1995)

A love song every lady wants to hear, “The Most Beautiful Girl in World” is an honest exclamation of love and beauty – something Prince is known for in all of his music.

4. “Little Red Corvette” by Prince (1983)

In 1983, Billboard called Prince’s hit song“Little Red Corvette” a “racy rock number” and it’s true – it is exactly that. A song for any generation, the melody and content speaks to real aspects of being human. The second single from Prince’s 1999, the song was, in 1983, Prince's highest charting track and the first to reach number six on the Billboard Hot 100 chart.

3. “Raspberry Beret” by Prince (1985)

As one might guess, the song is about a women — a woman who wears a raspberry-colored beret. In the iconic the video, the woman in question is played by actress Jackie Swanson who later played Kelly Gaines on the TV show Cheers. “Raspberry Beret” appeases every audience and the first single from was part of Prince’s seventh album Around The World In A Day.

2. “When Doves Cry” by Prince (1984)

Another hit from Purple Rain (the album and the film), “When Doves Cry” was written “to match the theme of a particular segment of the film that involved intermingled parental difficulties and a love affair” by the film’s director Albert Magnoli. "When Doves Cry" was Prince's first Billboard Hot 100 No. 1 single in the. U.S. and charted worldwide and was a top selling single in 1984 accordingly to Billboard.

1. Diamonds and Pearls by Prince

A masterpiece of a song, “Diamonds and Pearls” is a sprawling sonic composition that hits on every emotion only Prince could.

Bottom Line

An advocate for self expression, Prince presented as androgynous, pushing the boundaries of identity and sexuality through his music, lyrics, creative prowess and multi-genre sound. Prince’s music, cultural presence and influence has impacted decades of music lovers, changed the way the music industry and artists think about the business, and will forever be immortalized as one of the greatest musicians of all time.