The Bands

Formed in London in 1976, Bad Manners never signed to the 2 Tone label though they often played on the same bill as the 2 Tone bands. They are probably most famous for their long-tongued frontman Buster Bloodvessel. Special Brew and Can Can both reached number 3 in the UK charts, in 1980 and 1981 respectively.

Birmingham band The Beat consisted of three Black and three white members. Singer Ranking Roger used a Jamaican toasting style in his vocals while a brass element was added by Jamaican saxophonist Saxa. The Beat’s first single, a cover of the Smokey Robinson hit Tears of a Clown, was their only release on the 2 Tone label.

The only all-female group on the label, The Bodysnatchers formed after Nicky Summers placed an ad in Melody Maker. The band initially played covers but their original song, The Boiler, was released by Rhoda Dakar with the Special AKA after The Bodysnatchers had split up.

Madness formed in London and were originally known as the North London Invaders. Their ska inspired sound led Jerry Dammers to invite Madness to sign with 2 Tone. Only their first single, The Prince, was released on the label. Madness went on to enjoy chart success, reaching number 1 in 1982 with House of Fun.

The Selecter were the most diverse 2 Tone band, with multi-racial members and Pauline Black as lead singer. The name was first used by Neol Davies for the single released as the other side to The Specials’ Gangsters. The band left 2 Tone in 1980 but remained with the parent label Chrysalis Records until they broke up the following year.

The concept for The Specials, their music, message, look and the makeup of the band was the brainchild of Jerry Dammers. Along with The Selecter they were the founding band of the 2 Tone label. Originally formed in 1977 as The Automatics, they released their first single, Gangsters, as The Special AKA, a name they returned to after the original line-up split in 1981.

2 Tone bands played a number of gigs in support of the anti-racism movement. One of the most significant was the concert at the Butts stadium in Coventry on 20 June 1981.

The concert was a response to the murders in Coventry of an Asian student, Satnam Singh Gill, and an Asian doctor, Amal Dharry. The Specials topped the bill alongside other Coventry artists Hazel O’ Connor and the Reluctant Stereotypes. Rumours that the National Front would attempt to disrupt the concert affected the turn out, but it was an important statement of support.

On 4 July The Specials also headlined the Carnival Against Racism in Leeds. This would prove to be the last Rock Against Racism concert.

“At that gig everything came together. People were there because they needed racial harmony in a city that had seen violence, senseless murder…”

— Cathy Hunt, historian