"You're over-analyzing every word I say"

This page lacks references of one or various claims. You can help the Melanie Martinez wiki by adding citations.

Blue Boys are characters created by Melanie Martinez for her debut album, Cry Baby and her sophomore album K-12, along for the film with the same name. They are portrayed by Lucas Mogerley in "Pacify Her" and by Adrian Jurics and Gergely Kiss in K-12.

Life[]

Cry Baby[]

Blue Boy is a friend of Cry Baby who comes over to her house with his new girlfriend, Basic Bitch. Blue Boy is unhappy with his relationship with Basic Bitch, and Cry Baby, aware of this, tries to seduce Blue Boy to get him to leave Basic Bitch. Blue Boy is initially alright with being in a relationship with Cry Baby, but Basic Bitch wins him over by showing him her breasts and they leave Cry Baby alone.

K-12[]

Two blue boys from K-12 are students who attend K-12 Sleepaway School. Both appear in "Wheels On the Bus". Blue Boy 1 throws a paper airplane at Cry Baby which Angelita reads and calls him "real mature". Cry Baby later finds out the the note calls Cry Baby a gapped tooth bitch. Blue Boy 1 and 2 continuously mock and make fun of crybaby throughout the scene. They begin to pick on Celeste but stop as soon as Blue Boy 1’s hands begin to swell.

Only Blue boy 1 reappears in the rest of the movie. He again appears in "Lunchbox Friends" and yells “food fight!” after Cry Baby throws a sandwich at another student. Blue Boy 1 then appears in "Recess" where he asks Angelita to dance but is told to "fuck off". When first trying to escape, he finds the doors locked and alerts everyone. He is then pulled into a dance before Cry Baby frees them and is lastly seen escaping the school with the rest of the students.

Gallery[]

Trivia[]

Lucas confirmed on his Instagram story that he would not be playing Blue Boy in any future Melanie Martinez projects. [citation needed]

The correlation between the Blue Boy in "Pacify Her" and the Blue Boys in K-12 is unknown. It has been assumed that having blue skin is a race in the Cry Baby universe.

These characters may be inspired by the nursery rhyme "Little Boy Blue".

The Blue Boy pin is based on the official illustration of Johnny in "Training Wheels".