Vin GetzCorrespondent I

New York Knicks: Is Raymond Felton an Elite Point Guard?

0 of 11

Jonathan Daniel/Getty Images

After years of relative obscurity in Charlotte, Raymond Felton is suddenly on the big city map.

He's helping serve up a winning record for the New York Knicks in what could be their first over .500 season in a decade.

The co-captain has equally impressive numbers to match. He's scattered all over the top 10 in numerous statistical categories amongst NBA point guards this year.

So far, Felton has "made it" in New York, but can he make it anywhere else? Is he one of the league's elite point guards today?

There's good points to be made on both sides of the fence.

Photo: Raymond Felton and Derrick Rose. Is that two elite point guards or one?

YES: Felton's Offense Speaks For Itself

1 of 11

Chris Trotman/Getty Images

Raymond Felton is having the best offensive year of his career—by far.

He has jumped into the "elite" discussion by averaging 17.5 points and 8.9 assists per game. His career bests before this season were 14.4 and 7.4, respectively.

Against the Golden State Warriors he scored 35. His high for assists this year, 17, came against the Denver Nuggets.

Felton also has 19 double-doubles and one triple-double in just half a season.

In 44 games, he has had 10 or more assists 22 times and scored 20 or more 16 times.

NO: He Still Has a Number Of Offensive Deficiencies

2 of 11

Streeter Lecka/Getty Images

Felton is 60th amongst all guards (shooting and point, minimum 200 FGA) in field goal percentage.

He's 69th in three-point field goal percentage (minimum 50 3PA), hacking an uncalled for 76 of 221 treys.

His efficiency rating (PER) is just under 20, which is probably the minimum for an elite player.

He also turns the ball over too much and could use a little practice at the line (87%).

YES: Felton Plays Some Mean Defense

3 of 11

Ezra Shaw/Getty Images

Felton manages both ends of the floor well: offense and defense.

He has 82 steals already and averages nearly two a game. He should finish the season with over 325 rebounds, playing above his 6'1" height.

Felton is also adept at creating turnovers.

NO: Minus This Year, Felton's Career Numbers Are Average

4 of 11

Al Bello/Getty Images

Before landing in the biggest media market in the country, Raymond Felton was a relative unknown. He still flies a little under the radar.

His career shooting percentage hovers around 41% and he averages about 1,000 points and 500 assists a year. He turns the ball over 200 times a season and sports a below 80% free-throw percentage.

These are not elite numbers.

YES: He Runs The No. 2 Offense In The NBA

5 of 11

Streeter Lecka/Getty Images

For most of the season, in fact, he was running the No. 1 offense in the league. Denver recently overtook the top spot.

The Knicks are averaging 106.7 points per game, thanks in great part to Felton's smart play, ball handling and floor management. He's quick and fits perfectly into Mike D'Antoni's hyper offensive scheme.

You can credit Felton for making everyone around him better, especially the Knicks young players—Wilson Chandler and Danilo Gallinari are being fed the ball and having breakout years. Landry Fields is maturing quickly behind Felton's lead.

And Amar'e Stoudemire is having the best year of his career, after playing with Steve Nash for six years. Hmm.

NO: Felton Goes Into Offensive Slumps That Affect The Knicks' Ability To Win

6 of 11

Nick Laham/Getty Images

If you're trying to find an answer for the Knicks' current woes, take a look at Felton's line.

In the Knicks' recent six game losing streak, Felton averaged under 14 points a game. His assists and steals were both under his season averages.

The same held true when the Knicks went 3-8 to start the season.

Felton shot just 36% in January.

YES: Felton Rises To The Occasion Against Better Teams

7 of 11

Streeter Lecka/Getty Images

On the other hand, Felton's numbers against some of the best teams in the league are above his season averages. He's a big-game player.

Against the Celtics: 10 apg / 21.5 ppg

Against the Spurs: 7 apg / 25.5 ppg

Against the Bulls: 11 apg / 20 ppg

Against the Nuggets: 14.5 apg / 19 ppg

Against the Hornets: 13 assists / 17 points

NO: Lack Of Rings, Hardware, Honors and Playoff Experience

8 of 11

Doug Pensinger/Getty Images

It's tough to be considered elite when, in five and a half years, you've appeared in only four playoff games.

Felton will possibly (likely? hopefully?) have the chance to raise his postseason stock in 2010-11.

Until then, he has 11.8 ppg in the playoffs and no playoff wins.

He didn't win Rookie of the Year or any other NBA award and has no first team honors or league leaderships, either.

YES: Felton Hits Clutch Shots That Keep The Knicks In Games

9 of 11

The game-winner against the Toronto Raptors was probably Felton's biggest bucket of the year, but less spectacularly though just as important, he consistently keeps the Knicks in the game by pacing opponents.

In the win against the Spurs, for another example, it was Felton's play that staved off a late charge from San Antonio.

NO: He's Not As Good As The True Elite Point Guards

10 of 11

Conclusion: Is Raymond Felton an Elite Point Guard?

11 of 11

Christian Petersen/Getty Images

So, is Raymond Felton an "elite" point guard?

No. But he could be.

He is a very good point guard. He is at times an excellent point guard. Knicks' fans think, and rightfully so, that he is a great point guard. Sometimes he's the best point guard in the league on a particular night.

But until the name "Felton" is mentioned in the same sentences as the other elite NBA point guards, past and present, he will not be considered one of them.

A strong playoff run, or even a ring, would help, but the Knicks will take a double-double against the Heat Thursday night to start.

X