Miles Davis, 65, the celebrated trumpet player who was one of the most original and influential figures in the history of jazz, died yesterday in Santa Monica, Calif.

An enigmatic man who sought success on his own terms, giving few interviews and sometimes refusing even to face his audiences while on stage, Mr. Davis spoke lyrically and eloquently through his trumpet.

His sound, technique and restless innovation as an individual performer and as a leader of jazz bands and groups won him recognition as perhaps the foremost setter of style and fashion in what is often called America's only indigenous musical art form.

The Associated Press reported that Mr. Davis died at St. John's Hospital and Health Center of pneumonia, respiratory failure and stroke.

Injuries and health problems had plagued Mr. Davis for years. He had undergone treatment for diabetes, had problems with a hip joint that were attributed to sickle cell anemia and broke both legs in a 1972 automobile accident. According to his autobiography, he overcame heroin addiction in the 1950s, but later used cocaine for a time.

Advertisement

A man of vivid contradictions who at times was described as angry and arrogant, and on other occasions as generous and introspective, Mr. Davis was described as a jazz genius who discovered and encouraged talent in others.

He was credited with hiring such figures as Tony Williams and Herbie Hancock when both were young unknowns. John Coltrane first won fame for his work in Mr. Davis's band; the list of those with whom Mr. Davis played reads like a who's who of modern jazz.

Sent to New York after high school to study classical music at the Juilliard School, Mr. Davis spent much of his first year in the city under the spell of legendary jazz saxophonist Charlie Parker.

As a member of a Parker-led quintet, Mr. Davis helped give life to bebop, or bop, the 1940s successor to swing. Later, he was a major figure in a variant, known as hard bop.

Advertisement

In the latter part of the 1940s, with a nine-member group he established, Mr. Davis became one of the founders of cool jazz, and in the 1960s, he was a pioneer of fusion, a blend of jazz and rock that embraced new electronic instruments that were revolutionizing music. He was a trailblazer in other new jazz idioms as well.

"To be and stay a great musician you've got to always be open to what's new, what's happening at the moment," Mr. Davis said in his 1989 autobiography, "Miles," which was written with Quincy Troupe.

"I want to keep creating, changing," he said. "Music isn't about standing still and becoming safe."

Miles Dewey Davis III was born May 25, 1926, in Alton, Ill., and grew up in East St. Louis, Ill. His father was a dentist, his mother taught music, and the family lived comfortably. As the story is told, his mother wanted the violin for him; the trumpet was his choice.

Advertisement

Enrollment in the Juilliard School, with an eye toward classical training, also was his family's idea. But in New York, Mr. Davis's true school was the heady world of the 52nd Street jazz clubs.

An important milestone for him was collaborating with arranger Gil Evans, who was credited with providing the setting for the moody and melodic sound of Mr. Davis's trumpet.

With the album "The Birth of the Cool," arranged by Evans, Mr. Davis and his nine-member group inaugurated the cool jazz era.

Evans once called Mr. Davis "the first man to change the sound of the trumpet since {Louis} Armstrong."

In all, Mr. Davis was heard on almost 200 recordings, many of which sold briskly for years. Those recordings included such major releases as "Miles Ahead," "Porgy and Bess" and "Kind of Blue." He won three Grammy Awards, the most recent coming last year.

Advertisement

He also wrote the soundtracks for several movies.

In 1970, many years and several stylistic changes after the "cool" album, Mr. Davis recorded the landmark fusion album "Bitches Brew."

Its half-million-copy sale, described as unusual for a jazz recording, reflected the durability of a popularity that had been highlighted in 1954, with the tumultuous reception Mr. Davis received at the Newport Jazz Festival. Mr. Davis appeared at the festival after years of struggling with heroin addiction.

By the early 1960s, he had seen the cheap-hotel underside of the jazz world and had reached international fame and sports-car prosperity. He owned a brownstone in Manhattan. But he said he played not for affluence alone, nor for the audiences whose applause he often did not acknowledge.

"I play for myself, and I play for musicians," he said. In a 1985 interview, he told writer Ira Gittler: "I enjoy the money I make. I enjoy playing. I enjoy every note that I play."

Advertisement

He was married and divorced three times, to dancer Frances Taylor, singer Betty Mabry and actress Cicely Tyson, according to the Associated Press. He had a daughter and three sons.

WILLIAM B. HANBACK

Army Attorney

William Brecht Hanback, 81, a retired attorney with the Department of the Army who served on the Court for the Correction of Military Records and as an appellate judge for the Ryukyu Islands, died of a stroke Sept. 27 at George Washington University Hospital.

A lifelong resident of Washington, Mr. Hanback was a past president of the West End Citizens Association and the D.C. Federation of Citizens Associations. He was a former head of the board of deacons of Western Presbyterian Church.

Mr. Hanback graduated from the old Central High School and George Washington University, where he also received a law degree. In 1934, he established a law practice in Washington.

Advertisement

In 1942, he went into the Army and served in the Judge Advocate General's Corps. After World War II, he returned to his law practice, but he was recalled to active duty in the Army during the Korean War.

About 1953, Mr. Hanback went to work for the Department of the Army as an attorney. He was named an appellate judge for the Ryukyus when those Pacific islands were a U.S. protectorate, and he served on the Court for the Correction of Military Records for about 10 years before he retired in 1974.

He was a past commander of the Washington chapter of the Military Order of Foreign Wars, a past secretary of the Colonials, which is the athletics booster organization of George Washington University, and a member of National Masonic Lodge No. 12.

Survivors include his wife, Hazel S. Hanback, whom he married in 1942, of Washington; a son, Christopher Brecht Hanback of Bethesda; and two grandchildren.