QUICK FACTS

Activities Actress , Music of the credits

Real name Cherilyn Sarkisian La Pierre

Nationality USA

Birth May 20, 1946 (El Centro, California – United States)

BIOGRAPHY

Singer, actress and songwriter, Cherilyn Sarkisian, better known as “Cher”, was born on May 20, 1946 in El Centro, California, USA. Her parents divorced when she was 10 months old but they would marry and divorce two more times. The third of her mother’s eight marriages was to actor John Southall and although they divorced when Cher was nine, she considers him her real father. As her mother married and divorced eight times, the family moved from city to city and had a difficult economic situation. At some point her mother had to leave her in an orphanage and although they saw each other every day it was a very difficult situation. .

Cher wanted to be famous since she was a child and she achieved it in 1960 as part of the duo Sonny & Cher, with her partner and later her husband Sonny Bono. She ventured into television with her own shows The Sonny & Cher Comedy Hour and The Cher Show , which made her an icon of the small screen. The singles Bang Bang (My Baby Shot Me Down) , Gypsys, Tramps & Thieves, Half-Breed and Dark Lady made her a star and, from 1975, she continued as a solo artist, becoming one of the most successful attractions. In Las Vegas.

During the 1980s she ventured onto Broadway and the big screen, participating in films such as Silkwood , The Witches of Eastwick and Moonstruck , for which she won the Oscar for best actress. Starting in 1987, she resumed her musical career, releasing a series of albums that soon hit the charts. In 1998 she released the most successful production of her career, Believe , a Eurodance song that topped the charts worldwide and became one of the best-selling singles of all time.

He retired from the stage in 2005 at the end of his Living Proof: The Farewell Tour , cataloged as the most successful tour of those times. In 2013 he released Closer to the Truth , his first studio album in twelve years, his most commercial debut. successful of his career. He has won the highest recognitions in the entertainment industry; She has an Oscar, a Grammy, three Golden Globes, an Emmy and the award for best actress at the Cannes Film Festival (for her participation in Máscara, 1985), in addition to two BAFTA nominations. She has sold more than 200 million records throughout her career, making her one of the best-selling artists of all time.