TY - CHAP

T1 - The global petroleumscape in the Dutch Randstad

AU - Hein, C.M.

N1 - Green Open Access added to TU Delft Institutional Repository 'You share, we take care!' - Taverne project https://www.openaccess.nl/en/you-share-we-take-care Otherwise as indicated in the copyright section: the publisher is the copyright holder of this work and the author uses the Dutch legislation to make this work public.

PY - 2021

Y1 - 2021

N2 - This chapter explores how oil companies with the support of public planning and private corporations have co-shaped the landscapes and mindscapes of the Randstad through transformation, transport, consumption, administration, and promotion of petroleum in parallel with other actors. It argues that in parallel with the physical construction of oil landscapes the oil companies (with the help of car manufacturers and other enterprises including design) promoted the emergence of a very different mindscape. Through four sections—industrial, retail, ancillary, and imaginary—the chapter examines how oil companies and the public sector established the foundations for the Randstad oil cluster in the early years of the industry and established a petroleumscape that shapes spatial practices and mindsets. Parallel to the industrial petroleumscape, with its spaces of production and transport that includes elements such as refineries with a long span of life, another petroleumscape emerged that was more short-lived and much closer to the consumer: gas or petrol stations.

AB - This chapter explores how oil companies with the support of public planning and private corporations have co-shaped the landscapes and mindscapes of the Randstad through transformation, transport, consumption, administration, and promotion of petroleum in parallel with other actors. It argues that in parallel with the physical construction of oil landscapes the oil companies (with the help of car manufacturers and other enterprises including design) promoted the emergence of a very different mindscape. Through four sections—industrial, retail, ancillary, and imaginary—the chapter examines how oil companies and the public sector established the foundations for the Randstad oil cluster in the early years of the industry and established a petroleumscape that shapes spatial practices and mindsets. Parallel to the industrial petroleumscape, with its spaces of production and transport that includes elements such as refineries with a long span of life, another petroleumscape emerged that was more short-lived and much closer to the consumer: gas or petrol stations.

U2 - 10.4324/9780203383346-7

DO - 10.4324/9780203383346-7

M3 - Chapter

SN - 9780415826099

T3 - Series 'Regions and Cities'

SP - 100

EP - 123

BT - The Randstad

A2 - Zonneveld, Wil

A2 - Nadin, Vincent

PB - Routledge - Taylor & Francis Group

CY - London

ER -