Demographics of Armenia

The total population of Armenia is 2,934,152 people. People in Armenia speak the Armenian language. The linguistic diversity of Armenia is vaguely diverse according to a fractionalization scale which for Armenia is 0.1291. The median age is approximately 33.7 years. Life expectancy in Armenia is 74.44. The female fertility rate in Armenia is 1.5. Around 24% of the population of Armenia are obese. The ethnic diversity is almost uniform according to a fractionalization scale which for Armenia is 0.1272. To find out specifics of language, religion, age, gender distribution, and advancement of people in Armenia see the sections below, as well as visit the section concerning the education in the country.

Population

In Armenia, the population density is 101.5 people per square kilometer (264 per square mile). Because of this statistic, this country is considered to be densely populated. The total population of Armenia is 2,934,152 people. Armenia has approximately 317,001 foreign immigrants. Immigrants in Armenia represent 0.2 percent of the total number of immigrants in the world. Immigrants in Armenia represent 10.6 percent of the total number of immigrants in the world. The ethnic diversity of Armenia is almost uniform according to a fractionalization scale based on ethnicity. Ethnic fractionalization (EF) deals with the number, sizes, socioeconomic distribution, and geographical location of distinct cultural groups, usually in a state or some otherwise delineated territory. Specific cultural features might refer to language, skin color, religion, ethnicity, customs and traditions, history, or other distinctive criteria, alone or in combination. Frequently, these features are used for social exclusion and the monopolization of power. The index of ethnic fractionalization in Armenia is 0.1272. This means that the people living in Armenia are coming from a narrow group of ethnicities, all of which are related to one another. EF is usually measured as 1 minus the Herfindahl concentration index of ethnolinguistic group shares, which reproduces the probability that two randomly drawn individuals from the population belong to different groups. The theoretical maximum of EF of 1 means that each person belongs to a different group. Read below for statistics of Armenia on median age and gender distribution at various ages.

Age

The median age is approximately 33.7 years. The median age for men is 31.8, while the median age for women is 35.8.

Gender

The sex ratio, or the number of males for each female (estimated at birth), is 1.124. It can be further divided into the following categories: sex ratio under 15 - 1.15; sex ratio from 15 to 64 - 0.88; sex ratio over 64 - 0.62; total sex ratio - 0.89. Total sex ratio is different from sex ratio estimated at birth. This is due to the fact that some newborns are considered in the sex ratio estimated at birth but pass away within the first weeks of their life and are not included in the total sex ratio.

Religion

The majority religion of Armenia is Christianity, the followers of which comprise 98.5% of all religious believers in the country. Christianity is an Abrahamic monotheistic religion based on the life and teachings of Jesus Christ as presented in the New Testament. Christianity is the world's largest religion, with over 2.4 billion adherents, known as Christians. Christians believe that Jesus is the Son of God and the savior of humanity whose coming as Christ or the Messiah was prophesied in the Old Testament. The religious diversity of Armenia is diverse according to a fractionalization scale based on the number of religions in Armenia. The index of religious fractionalization in Armenia is 0.4576. This score means that within the country there is one major religion and several other minor beliefs.

General development

Armenia is considered to be a developing nation. The developmental stage of a nation is determined by a number of factors including, but not limited to, economic prosperity, life expectancy, income equality, and quality of life. As a developing nation, Armenia may not be able to offer consistent social services to its citizens. These social services may include things like public education, reliable healthcare, and law enforcement. Citizens of developing nations may have lower life expectancies than citizens of developed nations. In Armenia, 39.16 in every 100 people use internet. Armenia has a Human Development Index (HDI) of 0.73. Armenia has an upper medium HDI score. This indicates that the majority of citizens will be able to attain a desirable life, though some citizens will not be able to achieve high living standards. The migration rate in Armenia is -5.8%. In Armenia, 32% of the population lives below the poverty line. The percentage of citizens living below the poverty line in Armenia is fairly high, but is not reason for complete concern with regard to investments. Potential financial backers should look at other economic markers, including GDP, urbanization rate, and strength of currency, before making any decisions regarding investments.

Language

People in Armenia speak the Armenian language. The linguistic diversity of Armenia is vaguely diverse according to a fractionalization scale based on the number of unrelated languages spoken in Armenia. The index of linguistic fractionalization in Armenia is 0.1291. This means that within the country there is one major language and several minor languages. Unrelated languages share few characteristics of grammatical structure, vocabulary, and etymological heritage. Linguistic diversity often results in issues of social and cultural fractionalization that can impact a country’s political circumstance and public policies.