One of the world’s oldest centers of civilization and once the smallest republic of the Soviet Union, Armenia is an independent republic in the Caucasus Mountains. Area 11,483 square miles (29,743 square kilometers). Population (2024 est.) 3,009,000.

Armenia is situated in the southern part of the Caucasus, the region between the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea (see Caucasus). Armenia borders on Azerbaijan, Georgia, Turkey, and Iran. Yerevan, near the Turkish border, is the capital and chief city, with a population of about 1.2 million.

The land is a lofty plateau, crossed by mountain ridges and cut by valleys. The highest peak is Mount Aragats, an extinct volcano 13,418 feet (4,090 meters) high. The climate is cool in the highlands and warm in the lowlands.

About 90 percent of the people are ethnic Armenians. The remainder of the population is made up primarily of Azerbaijanis and Russians, with a small number of Kurds, Ukrainians, and other groups. The Armenians belong mainly to the Armenian Apostolic church or the Armenian Catholic church.

The chief agricultural and industrial region is the Araks River valley. Irrigated fields produce wine grapes—the most important crop—figs, olives, pomegranates, cotton, and fruits. In higher altitudes grains, sugar beets, tobacco, potatoes, and hay are grown and cattle, sheep, and goats are pastured. Mineral resources include metal ores.

The development of hydroelectric power transformed ancient Yerevan into a major industrial city. Its chief products are chemicals, clothing, precision instruments, and machinery. Other Armenian industries include food processing and textiles.

In ancient times Armenia was conquered by Assyria and by Persia, but it continued to be governed by native kings. Following conquest by Alexander the Great, it was ruled by a Greek dynasty.

In ad 300 the Armenian king Tiridates III was converted to Christianity. He at once made Christianity the state religion and took steps to stamp out the old Persian religion, Zoroastrianism. In the 5th century a separate Christian church was established. In 653 Armenia fell to the Arabs, who were spreading their new Islamic religion. Persia took Armenia again in 1502, but the Turks soon wrested most of it from them and brought it into the Ottoman Empire. Both the Persians and the Turks oppressed their Christian subjects. The Armenians began to leave their homeland and scattered over Asia and Africa.

In 1828 Russia took from Persia the region later known as Russian Armenia. In 1878, at the Congress of Berlin that followed the Russo-Turkish War, Russia gained part of Turkish Armenia. Kurds, who had been resettled on Armenian land, massacred thousands of Armenians in 1894, 1895, 1896, and 1909. During World War I the Turkish government systematically began to annihilate the Armenians. Many fled and immigrated to Russia, Syria, Egypt, the Balkans, Western Europe, and the United States.

The Treaty of Sèvres (1920) between Turkey and the victorious Allies recognized the independence of Armenian territories in both the Soviet Union and Turkey. In December 1920, however, the Soviets sent troops to Yerevan and set up a Soviet government over Russian Armenia. In 1922 Russian Armenia became part of the Transcaucasian Soviet Federated Socialist Republic. In 1936 the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic was made a separate constituent republic of the Soviet Union.

Since 1988 violent ethnic riots and armed demonstrations have been common between Armenians and Azerbaijanis. The unrest followed a vote in 1988 by the Nagorno-Karabakh Autonomous Oblast, which is mostly populated by ethnic Armenians but is part of Azerbaijan, to secede and be united with Armenia. Soviet troops were sent to restore order in the disputed region and in Yerevan. Azerbaijanis blockaded Armenia’s rail lines to the region, and fighting continued to break out along the border even though the Supreme Soviet voted to return control of the region to Azerbaijan.

A massive earthquake, measuring 6.9 on the Richter scale, devastated a widespread area near the Turkish border on Dec. 7, 1988. About 25,000 people were killed and more than 500,000 left homeless. The cities of Spitak, Kirovakan, and Leninakan were partially or totally destroyed.