Posted in Kenneth Branagh

Love's Labour's Lost is a 2000 British musical romantic comedy film written, directed by and starring Kenneth Branagh, based on the comic play of the same name by William Shakespeare. The first feature film to be made of this lesser-known comedy, Branagh's fourth film of a Shakespeare play was a box-office and critical disappointment.

The cast includes Shakespearean veterans such as Timothy Spall, Richard Briers and Geraldine McEwan, alongside Hollywood actors Alicia Silverstone and Matthew Lillard and Broadway and West End stars such as Nathan Lane, Adrian Lester and Jimmy Yuill.

As a result of its poor commercial performance, Miramax shelved its three-picture deal with Branagh, who subsequently returned to Shakespeare with As You Like It in 2006.

This recording is for educational purposes only and is covered under Fair Use doctrine - Copyright - All rights reserved to their respective owners.

Read the unabridged plays online: [ LINK ]

Support Us - Donate Now !

Enter Amount:

£

Why Donate?

Donations to Shakespeare Network help sustain free knowledge and educational programs on Shakespeare Network and our ecosystem of Shakespeare Network projects. Your contributions ensure these resources remain accessible and valuable for all. Thank you.

25% Direct support to website:

Keeping the Shakespeare Network websites online is about more than just servers. It also includes ongoing engineering improvements, product development, design and research, and legal support.

25% Administration and governance:

We manage funds and resources responsibly to recruit and support skilled, passionate staff who advance our communities and values.

Our operating budget:

Transparency is core to our organization. The Shakespeare Network develops our annual plan and operating budget through open processes, which are subject to feedback from our volunteers and

Board approval.

50% Direct support to communities:

Shakespeare Network projects exist thanks to the communities that create and maintain them. We strengthen these communities through grants, projects, and training programs.

Contact us for further info.