Kenneth Branagh's Love's Labour's Lost (2000) can justifiably be called the De Lorean of film: something that looked good on the drawing board, but just didn't work in the execution. Presumably Branagh was hoping to appeal to a larger audience by including songs from the Golden Age of Hollywood musicals in his film version of one of Shakespeare's lesser-known comedies. Unfortunately, this ungainly hybrid is unlikely to satisfy either "Bardolators" (to borrow Harold Bloom's term) or lovers of Hollywood musicals. To quote the lyrics of a song, although mercifully not one from Branagh's film, this movie could be described as "Too much, too little, too late."

The first instance of "too much" concerns the performances. Evidently Branagh hoped that if the cast appeared to be having a marvelous time, the viewers could be convinced that they, too, were enjoying themselves. Thus Branagh has carefully coached the cast in the showbiz admonition to show plenty of "eyes and teeth." The rictus-like grins with which the performers go through their paces, unfortunately, fail to convince that they really, really are deliriously happy. Worse, the perpetual smiles can and often do undermine the performances. Without doubt, the performer most guilty in this regard is Alicia Silverstone. This Valley Girl in Princess's clothing is Clueless when it comes to portraying the smallest degree of emotional depth or of comprehension of her character's personality. For example, when she arrives at the court of the King of Navarre (Alessandro Nivola), he commits a serious breach of protocol, refusing to allow her party entry into the palace. Although the text makes it perfectly clear that the Princess is indignant at the slight, Silverstone smiles sunnily at the King throughout her lines. Later in the same scene (Act 2, scene 1), she shows her deep displeasure concerning the dispute over Aquitaine by briefly ceasing to smile; moments later, with no indication that a significant affair of state hangs in the balance, she resumes her flirtatious simper. No royal umbrage has received a more inadequate treatment.

Other performances also give us "too much," although in a different way. The character of Don Adriano de Armado as portrayed by Timothy Spall is a case in point. Apparently Branagh counted heavily on the character of Don...