For other uses, see Misrata (disambiguation).

See also: Battle of Misrata

Misrata /mɪzˈrɑːtə/ (Arabic: مصراتة‎ Mişrātah, Libyan Arabic: IPA: [məsˤˈrˤɑːtæ]), also spelled Misurata or Misratah,[3][4] is a city in the Misrata District in northwestern Libya, situated 187 km (116 mi) to the east of Tripoli on the Mediterranean coast near Cape Misrata.

With a population of just over 350,000, Misrata is the third largest city in Libya, after Tripoli and Benghazi. It is the capital city of the Misrata District and has been called the business capital of Libya. The harbor is at Qasr Ahmad.

Contents

1 Etymology

2 History

2.1 Civil War

3 Geography

4 Economy

5 Education

6 Football clubs

7 Transport

8 People born in Misrata

9 See also

10 References

11 External links

Etymology

Semitic etymology for Misrata is related to its location on the east of the Punic, Semitic-speaking Carthage. Using East as a name for a place is common in other Semitic languages, i.e.: Mishrak in Arabic, Misurata in Sabaean, Mizrakh in Hebrew.

History

Misrata was established around the 7th-century during the beginning of modern Libya's rule by the Islamic Caliphate.[5] It began as a major caravan supply center and was referred to "Thubaqt".[5] Some contemporary sources say the town existed before Islamic rule, during the Roman Empire era and that its initial Arabic name derived from its Roman name "Thubactis." D. J. Mattingly, author of Tripoltania, a comprehensive reference book on northwestern Libya, stated that identification of Misrata as the ancient "Thubactis" is particularly problematic, complicated and "defies an easy answer." Nonetheless the Roman town is variously located somewhere on the oasis which the modern city sits on. The two common identifications are at the eastern and western anchorages of modern Misrata or south and inland of the city. The Roman town was recorded as one of the six municipia (small city) of the Tripolitania province, a rank below coloniae (major city.)[6]

It is possible to reconcile the two theories by assuming that the city was initially founded by the Romans and was then known as Tubartis but later (after a period of disappearance or in a slightly different location) it was refounded by the Muslim conquests and named Thubactis. In any case, in the 7th Century, it served as a caravan supply centre.[5]

Civil War

Main article: Battle of Misrata

On 24 February 2011, early in the 2011 Libyan civil war the city fell under the control of the Libyan opposition.[7][8] The battle was renewed with shelling on 20 March as pro-Gaddafi tanks pushed forward, and, according to an eyewitness report aired on BBC News, razing the city to the ground. Eyewitnesses also reported that pro-Gaddafi soldiers were shooting, killing and injuring unarmed civilians.[9] For over 70 days, the city was shelled by artillery, tanks, and snipers, and for over 40 days had its water supply intentionally shut off by Muammar Gaddafi's forces. As supplies ran short, hundreds of thousands were at risk of death.[10] With NATO support, the rebel forces managed to fight off loyalist troupes and secure control of most of the city by mid-May. Thereafter, forces from Misrata played an important role in other theaters of the war, such as the Battle of Tripoli and the Battle of Sirte.

Geography

Misrata lies on the coast of the Mediterranean Sea 187 km (116 mi) east of Tripoli and 825 km (513 mi) west of Benghazi. The location of the city creates a dualism of sea and sand, bounded by the sea to the north and east and to the south by golden sands dotted with palm and olive trees. Green plains encircle the center of the town, which contains modern buildings, wide streets, large factories such as the iron and steel complex and carpet and textile factories and a number of establishments, companies and trade centers.

Aside from its distinct location, which makes it a centre for the exchange of commodities and materials with the rest of the cities of the country, Misrata enjoys a modern infrastructure, including new roads, electricity and communications. It is also the seat of many national companies such as the Libyan Ports Company, Libyan Iron and Steel Company, the Libyan publishing, distribution and Advertising Company. Besides that it has branches of public and private sector banks and one locally and privately owned bank.

Economy

Misrata today is a modern prosperous city and is known to be the richest city in Libya income wise, with light industries (carpets, dairy products and textiles among many others) and heavy industries (iron and steel industrial complex). The city has a great potential for expansion since it attracts a lot of internal immigration and is surrounded by uninhabited flat land with no obstacles. There is a port in the neighbouring town of Qasr Ahmad.

Education

Misrata University, with its 15 faculties, is located in the city. There are several higher education institutions including a number of university faculties that are administratively linked to universities of other cities in Libya (e.g. Al-Tahadi University of Sirte and Al Fateh University of Tripoli).

Asswehly (founded 1944)

Alhiyad (founded 1965)

Transport

A railway line and port is proposed in 2008. It is also served by Misrata Airport.

People born in Misrata

Daniel Bogdanović, footballer

See also

List of cities in Libya

Transport in Libya

Tripolitania

Railway stations in Libya

References