The city and district of Misrata, Libya’s third-largest urban centre, is situated on the Mediterranean coast roughly 200km east of Tripoli and 800km west of Benghazi. As the single largest port of entry for goods arriving into the country, Misrata has long had a reputation for being the trade capital of Libya. It has historically been regarded as the country’s business capital, particularly in terms of commodities trading between other cities in the Mediterranean.

Similar to many sites situated along the coast of North Africa, the roots of human settlement in Misrata can be traced as far back as the Phoenician and Carthaginian eras. During this time and the subsequent Roman period, the city – then known as Tubartis – was an important centre in the Mediterranean grain trade. It was also a hub for transporting agricultural products from North Africa to Rome, with this activity centred around the old harbour at Qasr Ahmed on Cape Misrata.

With the advent of Islam in the region, Misrata underwent another transformation, this time emerging as a significant centre of Islamic civilisation and learning. Several Muslim dynasties ruled the city, including the Aghlabids, Fatimids and Zirids, each of which left their own distinct imprint on the city’s culture and architecture. In subsequent centuries Misrata came under Ottoman rule, during which time the city assumed the role of a regional administrative centre, once again benefitting from its strategic location.

The period of Italian colonisation brought significant changes to Misrata, with a substantial amount of the city’s infrastructure built during this period. Following Libya’s independence in December 1951, Misrata experienced rapid urbanisation and population growth.

In February 2012 Misrata held Libya’s first free elections after the fall of President Muammar Gaddafi. A notable trend that has developed since then has been the close relationship between the local government and the business community. The local administration consists of a municipal council headed by the mayor, Mahmoud Al Sougatri. The most recent elections were held in September 2020, and the current administration began its term in October that same year.

Apart from its strategic location on the Gulf of Sirte, Misrata is also situated on a coastal oasis and above an underground water table, which provide it with advantageous conditions for food production (see Agriculture chapter). The terrain becomes more arid to Misrata’s south and southeast, as the city is situated on the edge of the Libyan Desert.