As a partner with Databricks Inc., Impetus Technologies Inc. has been active over the past year in legacy data migration of large-scale environments to the Databricks platform.

It is important work for many organizations seeking to rapidly transition from legacy systems and realize the value of data analytics and generative AI.

“We’ve built IP that’s helped Databricks consume much, much faster,” said Anand Raman (pictured, right), chief revenue officer of Impetus Technologies. “We’ve been the fastest accelerator for Databricks consumption … because we have a tool that helps enterprises migrate off of their legacy platform and transform all their 20-year or 30-year code into the new enterprise platforms like Databricks.”

Raman spoke with theCUBE Research’s John Furrier at the Data + AI Summit, during an exclusive broadcast on theCUBE, SiliconANGLE Media’s livestreaming studio. He was joined by Jeff Veis (left), chief marketing officer of Impetus Technologies, and they discussed how customers are migrating data from legacy systems to take full advantage of AI. (* Disclosure below.)

LeapLogic fills the legacy data migration gap

A core offering for Impetus Technologies is LeapLogic, an automated cloud migration accelerator that transfers mission critical data and analytics workloads to Databricks with 100% business logic preservation. The accelerator was developed to fill a gap between the needs of enterprises and what Hadoop was providing at the time, according to Raman.

“That’s where we saw the open gap between the old technology and new, which started our journey of building this product called LeapLogic,” Raman said. “It helps enterprises leap from the legacy world and take that logic as is and bring it and make it work on the new platforms.”

That transition has become a priority for many enterprises as generative AI adoption places more urgency on accessing and managing key data stores. Impetus Technologies is helping customers as they turn to open governance solutions for data and AI such as the Databricks Unity Catalog.

“You need to have your data foundation ready to move into the generative AI world,” Veis said. “That’s easy to say [and] really hard to do. Only 30% of Databricks customers are on Catalog today, so there is a ‘Grand Canyon’ that we have to get people through. What we’re focused on is that join to bring the right automation technology that can do it in a smart way, but then bring the services around it so you can get the job done.”

The publicity surrounding generative AI today makes it tempting to view it as another part of the hype cycle history that is part of the technology world’s story. However, as Veis and his colleagues talk with customers, this movement has a different feel.

“Is it different or is this just another hype cycle?” Veis asked. “Getting to the cloud or getting to big data, there was inertia. What’s happening now is there’s inertia with legacy hardware, but there’s no vendors that are saying, ‘Oh no, you don’t need AI.’ Everybody from the smallest to the biggest seems to be moving.”

Here’s the complete video interview, part of SiliconANGLE’s and theCUBE Research’s coverage of the Data + AI Summit:

(* Disclosure: Impetus Technologies Inc. sponsored this segment of theCUBE. Neither Impetus Technologies nor other sponsors have editorial control over content on theCUBE or SiliconANGLE.)

Photo: SiliconANGLE