Rex Balsom conned his way into Llanview in 2002. After being taken away from his mother, Roxy Balsom, as a child, Rex grew up with big dreams. However, he wasn't willing to take the hard road to make them come true. When Rex learned that Jessica Buchanan was claiming to be Roxy's daughter, he saw his opportunity to strike it rich quick! Eagerly wanting to bond with his new sister, Rex went to Llanview with Jessica and out of pity, Jessica moved Rex into Llanfair! However, all dreams come to an end as it would turn out that Jessica was not the biological daughter of Roxy, therefore no longer Rex's long lost sister.

Back where he started, Rex stayed in Llanview with Natalie, who grew up with Rex as his sister, and his mother Roxy. After getting a job at the Palace, Rex found his next conquest in Jennifer Rappaport. The two were a match made in heaven with both enjoying the thrill of a good robbery or scam. Shortly after, Rex and Jen married but that soon dissolved after Jen had an affair. Although Rex refused to give Jen a divorce, he couldn't pass up a bribe of money from Kevin Buchanan and ended the marriage. Finding that he truly loved Jen, Rex found a way to not only stay close to her, but make Jen jealous, too. He began a steamy affair with her mother Lindsay! However, just as Jen realized that she, too, loved Rex, tragedy struck when Rex found Jen murdered in her car by Daniel Colson.

Rex later tried his hand at being an entrepreneur. However just when he'd opened a new club, Rex found it ripped out from under him after being late on a loan to RJ Gannon. After borrowing from RJ to open a restaurant, Rex lost his beloved club Ultra Violet when he couldn't find the means to pay RJ back. As luck would have it, Rex came across a missing Asa Buchanan who paid him a hefty reward and Rex was able to mix that with a little blackmail and get his club back!

During the rampage of the Killing Club killer, Rex and Marcie Walsh were strung up by their throats and left to die. After Rex was rescued, it was then that Bo Buchanan realized how much he cared for Rex and treated him as a son. After Bo allowed Rex to work on a few investigations for him, Rex found that he had a talent and became a private investigator, which ultimately turned his life around for the better!

The people of Llanview now seek Rex out to dig up deep dark secrets of the past. Most recently, Rex found Paige Miller's long lost son, and was then asked to locate Todd Manning's son who was kidnapped and given away by Spencer Truman. Since finding out that Todd's son is little Tommy McBain, Rex has been struggling to keep the secret, with the help of his girlfriend Adriana, in hopes of giving Tommy a better life in the home of Michael and Marcie McBain.

Once Llanview's money hungry bad boy, Rex is now a dependable friend to many who will give them the shirt off his back and has reconnected with his high school love, Gigi, again, to which they share a son, Shane. Though he's asked for a divorce from his wife, Adriana, Rex wants nothing more than to start a family with Gigi and Shane and put the past - and the lies - behind him.

However, when Gigi's sister Stacy came to town, she set her sights on Rex and used Shane's Leukemia to get him! Once Rex found out that Stacy had forced Gigi into making Rex believe she'd slept with Brody, Rex and Gigi reunited with a plan to stop Stacy once and for all!

That plan would come to an end when Stacy announced she was pregnant with Rex's baby, who they conceived while Rex was feeling rejected from Gigi. Gigi, not being able to handle the stress of Stacy's pregnancy, and Rex decided to call it quits.

It wasn't until months later that Rex found out the baby girl, Sierra Rose, who Stacy had before falling to her death beneath an ice covered lake, wasn't his - and that she lost Rex's baby due to a miscarriage. Rex tried to save Stacy, but couldn't, and was faced with dealing with the fallout - and the fact that Schuyler Joplin was Sierra Rose's father... so he thinks.

It took a longtime, but Rex and Gigi reunited while on the hunt for his real parents. Proof led him to Echo, who admitted being his mother. However, Echo lied about Rex's father and claimed he was Charlie, who Clint rigged the DNA results to back up.

Rex was forced to stay quiet about Clint kidnapping David, due to Clint blackmailing Rex with threats of destroying his family. Rex finally admitted the truth to Bo then helped him rescue David. He also brought proof to Bo that Clint had been at the Minute Man Motel the night Eddie Ford had been murdered, the same night Rex rescued Nora, which lead to a car accident and Nora losing her memory of that time.