Spanish history:

Maria Christina of Austria (1858 – 1929)

Known to her family as Christa, she was born at Židlochovice Castle (Groß Seelowitz), near Brno, in Moravia, a daughter of Archduke Karl Ferdinand of Austria and his wife, Archduchess Elisabeth Franziska of Austria.Various sources attributed good traits to Maria Christina before her marriage. One states she was “tall, fair, sensible, and well educated”. She was abbess of the Noble Ladies of Saint Theresa when, because of her virtues, intelligence and elegant education, Maria Christina was selected as second wife of the King Alfonso XII of Spain.

Maria Christina married King Alfonso XII on November 29, 1879 at the Basilica of Atocha in Madrid. In 1880 she gave birth to her first child, Maria de las Mercedes. Two years later, Maria Christina had her second daughter, Maria Teresa. She was madly in love with Alfonso but he did not love her. Alfonso XII was unfaithful to Maria Christina several times, and he had extramarital sons.

By the summer of 1884, Alfonso XII’s health deteriorated; he had tuberculosis. After a brief improvement, the 27-year-old king died on 25 November 1885, and Princess Mercedes became the extant Head of the State of Spain under the regency of her mother. She was not proclaimed queen, however, because her mother was pregnant. The birth of another sister would have made her queen, but the sibling proved to be a boy, who became King Alfonso XIII. Queen Maria Christina continued as regent until Alfonso XIII attained his majority.

During the long minority of her son, the queen-regent acted in a way that obliged even the adversaries of the throne and the dynasty to respect the mother and the woman. The people of Spain, and the ever-restless civil and military politicians, found that the gloved hand of their constitutional ruler was that of a strong-minded and tenacicus regent, who often asserted herself in a way that surprised them much, but always, somehow, enforced obedience and respect. Her rule is described as well balanced and in accordance with respect for the constitutional rights, and many political reforms were instated during her regency to prevent political conflicts and chaos. Universal suffrage and the Law of Associations were both passed during the regency and signed into effect by Queen Maria Christina on behalf of her young son. However, there was at least one very major foreign policy crisis that arose during the regency and that was the Spanish-American War. It was a crisis the Queen met with admirable courage and determination. Spain lost its colonial rule over Cuba, Puerto Rico, Guam and the Philippines.

When Alfonso XIII came of age in 1902, the week of his majority was marked by festivities, bullfights, balls and receptions throughout Spain. Queen Maria Christina withdrew from the halls of power and devoted her time to charity work. After her son’s marriage in 1906, Maria Christina lost her position as first lady at court and became Queen dowager and Queen mother. She remained a familiar and respected figure in Spanish society for the rest of her life. On the night of February 5, 1929 Maria Christina retired to her bedroom and after midnight felt a sharp pain in her chest. A maid asked if she should call for the King but the Queen mother said no, not wishing to disturb anyone. A short time later she had another pain in her chest and passed away. She was buried in the royal monastery at El Escorial. (x)(x)(x)(x)

Marga López played her in the film “¿Dónde vas, triste de ti?” (1960)