This product is for companies with up to 50 employees and up to 10 NetSuite super users. It comes with sales, inventory, procurement, general accounting and timesheets as well as employee expenses and reporting functionalities. Specific additional features can be added to the license, for a recurring fee

Mid-market edition is for companies that have less than a thousand employees and more than 10 users. It comes with the same features as the limited edition but has the added benefit of additional features, such as the ‘Oneworld’ option, which allows you to manage multiple subsidiaries on NetSuite.

Enterprise edition is hosted on the most powerful servers and granted most bandwidth in order to provide the best respose times for your multiple users. This license offers similar functionalities to the Mid-market version but outshines it’s processing speed, enabling large volumes of transactions to be processed.

A super user access is a term used by NetSuite to describe a role which allows its user to create/ modify/ delete records such as leads, prospects or customers, items, currencies, accounts. A super user will also be able to create transactions such as opportunities, estimates, sales orders, invoices, journal entries or reports.

The employee center access allows your employees, such as resources (consultants and technicians) to see access NetSuite to see the tasks, cases, tickets they are assigned. The resources will be able to update these records and access reports that have been shared to them. Time sheet entry as well as employee expense claim are also included in this access.

You can buy add-ons to NetSuite based on your needs (Or develop your own). Here is a list of the bundles offered by NetSuite: Advanced financials, Advanced inventory, Advanced Manufacturing, Advanced procurement, Contract renewals, Dunning Letters, OneWorld, POS, Project costing, Project management, WMS and more.

Cloud at Work relies heavily on its exerienced consultants who have specialised in distribution, software, manufacturing and service industries across continents. Cloud at Work offers a unique experience in defining, project managing and implementing SAP and Oracle solutions in France and Africa.

Our Group Business at Work is a Platinum Oracle partner since 2000 and SAP VAR since 2011 and is also certified “Partner Center Of Expertise”.

The PCOE program was initiated by SAP on a global level in order to guarantee the quality of service and support of its partners.

Certified partnership is obtained through a thorough audit of the business, processes and solutions.

This certification insures the ability of our group to offer support of highest quality standards.