Are you looking for a space to record music? The Greater Pittsburgh area does not disappoint when it comes to options for music studios. We’ve gathered a list of recording studios in or around Pittsburgh where you can crank the audio, create, and collaborate.

This list is a resource for our community. Mentions do not equal endorsements.

Did we miss a studio space? Send an email to Sarah Schreck at sschreck@pittsburghartscouncil.org with more details and we will include it on this list.

YMCA Lighthouse Studio | @ymcalighthouse | Homewood

Located in Homewood, "The YMCA Lighthouse Recording Studio is a community-based recording facility providing a professional, comfortable and creative environment for young musicians and seasoned recording artists. Our staff and engineers specialize in hip-hop, jazz, and R&B, and have recorded a wide range of genres including rock, pop, gospel, EDM, contemporary classical, and singer-songwriter. Studio rates include a professional engineer, file delivery, and server backup of all recording sessions."

The Church Recording Studio | @thechurchrecordingstudio | Carrick

Record, mix, and master in this unconventional space. “Our vaulted ceilings and a vast collection of vintage instruments are just a few reasons to pay us a visit. Whether you set up to track together or take advantage of our three isolation booths, we can accommodate bands and ensembles of all shapes and sizes in our 1,800 sq. ft. live room. Work from one of our two control rooms, both equipped with state-of-the-art analog gear as well as the newest in digital trends.”

Breakout Sound Productions | @breakoutsoundproduction

According to their website, Breakout Sound's "multi-genre production and songwriting team based out of Pittsburgh is here to craft and bring your artistic vision to life. Whether it be a single, EP or full album we will never fail to deliver high quality radio ready productions."

Fire K Studios | @firekstudios | Whitehall

“Designed from the ground up, Fire K Studios features two isolation booths, a spacious live room, a pristine control room, and a comfortable lounge area. We offer an array of services, including recording, mixing, mastering, lessons, and more.”

Heidi Studios | Aspinwall

Heid Studios describes themselves as "where the finest Jazz artists have record for over 82 years," home to a Steinway Grand Piano.

ID Labs | @idlabsmusic | Etna

“Located 5 minutes outside of downtown Pittsburgh, ID Labs is southwestern Pennsylvania’s premier urban music recording and production facility. Founded by Pittsburgh-based producer/engineer E. Dan in 2004, ID Labs has become a nationally recognized production collective and recording studio with numerous recording, production, and mixing credits on critically acclaimed albums over the last decade.”

Imagine Audio and Media | @imagineaudioandmedia | Ingram

Imagine Audio and Media offers video production, recording studio, CD, DVD and USB drive duplication, graphic and web design, and transfer to digital services. Their recording studio produces voice-overs, speeches, any music genre, and can remix and create music for dance or cheer. They also offer mixing and mastering for tracks recording at your home studio.

Just Records | @justrecordspgh | Dormont

"Just-Records is an intimate home studio, with professional attention to detail. A place for tracking, mixing, editing, and mastering your music or audio projects. We are LGBTQ+ friendly, and we do not tolerate hate speech. We welcome any genre to work in our space, we only ask you come with respect and kindness. We are proud to call Pittsburgh home, where we continue to support and contribute to the growing music scene."

Little Giant Recording Studio | @golittlegiant | Allentown

"Little Giant is a smart rehearsal studio in Pittsburgh, PA built to offer professional gear & the environment you need to take your performance to the next level.”

MCM Studios | @mcm_recording_studio | Allentown

In the words of owner Mike Hitt, “MCM Studios was always meant to help the smaller artist get on their feet and through that, the bigger opportunities just started to call.” MCM Studios is a place to record, mix, master, and develop your music, and operates on the idea of “No Job Too Big, No Artist Too Small.”

Mr. Smalls Recording and Mastering | @mrsmallsrecording | Allegheny West

“Mr. Smalls Recording and Mastering Studio provides a professional, creative, and comfortable environment for recording, mixing, and mastering in the heart of Pittsburgh's Northside.”

Nightfall Records | @nightfallrecordspgh | Allison Park

“We are a multi-genre label focused on distribution, management, artist development, publishing, visual & audio production, and much more.” You can DM them on Instagram or message them on their website to book their studio.

Plus Minus Recording | @plusminusrec | Southside Flats

“+/- Recording is a full-service recording studio located on Pittsburgh's historic South Side. We offer recording, mixing, and mastering for bands, musicians, film postproduction, video, and voice-over."

Studio 22 | @studio22_pgh

"We offer recording, mixing, mastering, production, beat making, session musicianship, and photography in-house, and have a long list of connections for outsourced photography, videography, graphic design, social media promotion, album art, and more."

StudioME | @studiomellc | East Liberty

StudioME is a hub for media production offering studios, podcasts, equipment, and workstation rentals in East Liberty. “The soundproof audio studio is perfect for your podcasts, audiobook recordings, voice recordings, audio editing and screen captures and is available for hourly and daily rental.”

Tuff Sound Recording | @soysostuffsoundrec | Lawrenceville

“Tuff Sound Recording (TSR) is located in a former industrial foundry in the Lawrenceville neighborhood of Pittsburgh. TSR features high-quality analog and digital gear, including a large modular synthesizer system. Our close working relationship with Pittsburgh Modular Synthesizers allows us to bring in any modular process, as well as a range of vintage analog synthesizers.” Studio owner and Head Engineer, Herman “Soy Sos” Pearl, is a prolific DJ who specializes in hybrid electronic and analog recording, mixing, and sound design.

Tonic Recording Studio | @tonicstudiopgh | McKeesport

This McKeesport studio “was originally designed for country music legend George Jones. The company was founded more than 25 years ago by Doug Kasper, a sound engineer by training. He and his brother, Greg a successful businessman own the company, where many talented musicians, bands and recording artists have produced superior work, some of which has received national acclaim.”

The Vault Recording Studio | @thevaultrecording | Neville Island

The Vault is a family-run business, boasting a label as well as a support fund for musicians. “We can assist with all aspects of the music creation process, including; writing, arranging, producing, recording, mixing, and mastering. We can provide access to professional session musicians, if needed, and can also consult with you on release, distribution and promotion strategies for your music.”

Very Tight Recordings | @mattverytight

Matt is an engineer who makes his intentions clear: “This is not your typical, cookie-cutter studio where the engineer sits back and pushes buttons, providing zero input, interest, or insight into the project at hand. I work with you step-by-step through the big ideas (and the tedium) to bring your best work to life – not as an indifferent technician, but as an invested collaborator.”

Bonus round! Here are some music producers that are not necessarily tied with a studio.

Burdock Productions | @burdockproductions

“Stephen Buzzell started Burdock Productions with the vision to help develop Pittsburgh's working musicians and establish their place in the industry. Having grown up in Pittsburgh as a musician, he saw the difficulties of musicians finding work. He also focuses on music production, helping bands and artists take their projects to the next level.” This studio’s website has a “Find a Gig” mailing list!