Southend machete fight RECAP: Eight arrested and weapons seized after violence on seafront

Video posted to social media has captured a machete brawl in Southend as police descended on the scene which sent hundreds of people fleeing the area.

Link copied Bookmark

Eight people have been arrested seven weapons seized after machete mayhem broke out in seaside resort.

A huge knife brawl broke out in Southend sending hundreds of onlookers running while a police helicopter circled the area.

Police had reportedly cordoned off the seafront while ambulances arrived at the scene.

It comes as violent protests break out in the wake of a horrific knife attack in Southport, Merseyside, on Monday that left three children dead.

An eyewitness told local news outlet Your Southend he saw a young man running through the High Street holding a “big carving knife” amid the chaos.

Video shared on social media appeared to show at least two men swinging large knives and stabbing at one another on the seafront.

Officers have now arrested eight people in total and seized seven weapons after a number of incidents of disorder and violence.

A dispersal order has been put in place by Essex Police due to concerns over anti-social behaviour.

THIS LIVE BLOG IS NOW CLOSED...

KEY EVENTS

Essex Police update 23:40

2 weeks ago18:58 Rosie Jempson

Home Office considering English Defence League as terrorist organisation

The Home Office is considering proscribing the English Defence League under terror laws after the Southport riot last night.

Deputy PM Angela Rayner: "I'm sure that that will be something that the Home Secretary will be looking at as part of the normal course of what we do and the intelligence that we have."

2 weeks ago18:29 Rosie Jempson

'Thugs and hooligans' condemned by policing minister

Policing minister Dame Diana Johnson has slammed the "thugs and hooligans" responsible for the chaos in Southport, insisting they "must be held to account for their actions".

Taking to social media, she echoed Merseyside Police Chief Constable Serena Kennedy's earlier statement that many of the officers at the scene were "first responders who attended that awful scene on Monday".

Johnson expressed her dismay, saying: "This is shocking to hear from a chief constable that so many of her officers were injured in the line of duty last night".

2 weeks ago17:57 Rosie Jempson

Tributes laid out for victims

Bouquets of flowers, heart shaped balloons and teddy bears are being laid outside the Atkinson Art Centre for the victims of the stabbing.

2 weeks ago17:38 Rosie Jempson

Council says rumours of more disorder 'completely untrue'

Sefton Council has said suggestions about more disorder are untrue.

"We have confirmed that there is NO disruption or disorder in Southport at this time and the town centre remains fully open for business," it says in a statement.

"We urge people to remain calm and if they need, to please seek advice from official channels such as Sefton Council and Merseyside Police."

2 weeks ago17:20 Rosie Jempson

Locals come together to rebuild wall outside mosque

Locals have been spotted removing the damaged wall at the mosque in Southport. Children also helped to sweep away the debris.

A team of builders are also putting cement and bricks down to rebuild it.

People from the local community are coming out with cold drinks and packets of crisps for the workers.

2 weeks ago16:01 Rosie Jempson

Fourth people arrested

Merseyside Police have releasaed the names of the four men arrested:

A 31-year-old man from St Helens, Merseyside, was arrested on suspicion of violent disorder

A 31-year-old man from West Derby, Liverpool, was arrested on suspicion of violent disorder

A 39-year-old man from Southport was arrested on suspicion of violent disorder

A 32-year-old man from Manchester with a probation address in Southport was arrested on suspicion of affray and possession of a bladed article

2 weeks ago15:46 Mieka Smiles

Hotelier says she saw thugs running around 'like a herd of bulls'

A hotellier said she witnessed thugs running around "like a herd of bulls" before machete madness in Southend.

Nicola Tiney, who runs the Borough Hotel on the seafront, told the PA news agency that she believed around a thousand young people descended on the resort town, many from London, in an organised meet-up during the hot and sunny weather.

Ms Tiney said groups began arriving in the afternoon, before pockets of violence and disorder started at around 7pm.

She went on: "Lots of them had their hoods up and were wearing masks and hats, just coming to the seafront resort to cause trouble.

"They congregated at the other end of the seafront and they started kicking off amongst themselves and running around...there were machetes out in the middle of the road.

"I had to get all of my customers in from the front, it was just disgusting.

"I didn't see anyone get hurt but you could see the machetes flying about at each other and then lots of them ran off down the beach with families around, I think one of them threw their machete into the sea.

"Towards the town centre they were fighting with knives and machetes as well, and it's just them amongst themselves, it's nothing to do with Southend."

Ms Tiney also described seeing large groups running in the area "like a herd of bulls", stopping traffic as they went.

2 weeks ago15:31 Rosie Jempson

More arrests are expected to follow

Merseyside's top cop, Chief Constable Serena Kennedy, has dished the dirt on the chaos that erupted last night, revealing a mere three have been arrested so far but warning "more will follow".

She admitted, "It's impossible to say [how many will be arrested]. It's really early days in the investigation," but reckoned a hefty 200 to 300 hooligans were involved.

Kicking off with about 70 troublemakers veering off from a vigil and heading mosque-wards, the mob swelled to 200 before even more joined the fray.

2 weeks ago14:05 Mieka Smiles

Police appeal for witnesses and footage

Police have launched an appeal for witnesses and footage of a machete brawl in Southend yesterday.

An Essex Police spokesperson said: "Our enquiries continue and we would appeal for any of the witnesses to this incident to speak to us and share any information or video footage they have.

"If you have any information or dashcam footage of disorder in the city centre at about 7pm, please contact us quoting incident number 1094 of Tuesday 30 July."

2 weeks ago12:44 Mieka Smiles

Southend locals savage police and warn knife culture 'out of control' after machete chaos

Locals in Southend haves spoken out after knife-wielding youths ran riot in the seaside town. Six people have been arrested and weapons seized after disorder rocked the resort on Tuesday night (July 30).

A business owner who runs an eatery on Western Esplanade, who asked not to be named for fear of reprisals, told Express.co.uk: "We're all a bit shocked.

"We're small businesses down here. It's affecting us - this knife culture is getting out of control. It's just ridiculous."

2 weeks ago12:40 Mieka Smiles

Two of the people detained were injured say police

Police say two of the people detained after a shocking machete street fight have sustained injuries.

An Essex Police spokesperson said: " Two of the people detained had sustained injuries and were taken to hospital for further treatment.

"Their injuries were not life-threatening or life-changing."

2 weeks ago11:50 Mieka Smiles

One man stabbed in machete brawl

One man was stabbed and rushed to hospital after the machete fight in Southend last night.

An East of England Ambulance Service spokesman said: “We received several 999 calls at approximately 7pm on Tuesday with reports that a man had been stabbed in Southend on Sea.

“Due to the large-scale disorder taking place in the city centre at the time, multiple resources were sent to the scene including two ambulances, two ambulance officer vehicles, four Hazardous Area Response Team (HART) vehicles and the Essex and Herts Air Ambulance.

“One patient was transported by air to Royal London Hospital. Essex Police transported another patient to Southend University Hospital.”

2 weeks ago11:36 Mieka Smiles

Top Essex cop says the machete mayhem was 'appalling'

A top Essex police officer has called the machete mayhem that broke out in Southend last night "appalling".

Chief Superintendent Leighton Hammett said: “These incidents are appalling – we will not tolerate this dangerous and violent behaviour on our streets.

“We responded quickly, with officers already deployed on the sea front and arrests made to keep the public safe.

"We have multiple lines of enquiry to identify more suspects and bring them to justice.

"Early indications are groups of young men and women have travelled into Southend and the conflict has occurred within these groups.

"I’d like to reassure the wider public that these were targeted attacks involving just a small fraction of the visitors to Southend yesterday.

“I’d also like to thank our partners in the British Transport Police and the security teams working in Southend for their support in dispersion the crowds and ensuring the public left the area covered by our dispersal order.

“The stop and search powers in place have already taken weapons off the streets of Southend and we will not hesitate to stop anyone we suspect is carrying a weapon. If you carry a knife in Essex you will not get away with it.

“Our officers will be in the city and on the seafront again today, so please speak to one of our officers if you have any information about last night’s disorder.”

2 weeks ago11:30 Mieka Smiles

What is a dispersal order?

A dispersal order is now in place in Southend following machete chaos that broke out yesterday.

But what exactly does that mean?

In summary, dispersal orders provide the police with the extra powers to break up groups of two or more people, where they believe their behaviour is causing a nuisance, harassment or distress.

It also allows police officers to stop and search members of the public.

The Southend dispersal order is limited to the area on the below map until 8pm this evening.

2 weeks ago10:41 Mieka Smiles

Fresh police update

Essex Police force has issued an update after last night's shocking seafront events.

Taking to social media site X the force tweeted that eight people have been arrested and seven weapons seized.

You can see the full update below.

2 weeks ago10:01 Mieka Smiles

Where did machete fight take place?

The machete brawl that broke out last night in Southend took place on the seafront and near the Adventure Island theme park - hugely popular with families as the school summer holidays are in full swing.

It was recently dubbed the UK's "most affordable" theme park.

2 weeks ago09:18 Mieka Smiles

Southend MP comments on 'distressing scenes'

Southend MP Bayo Alaba has issued a statement about the "distressing scenes" on the seafront.

He took to social media site X to share his thoughts.

The MP for Southend East and Rochford said: "Some distressing scenes in my city of Southend last night. I drove around in the evening to see the issues. There are some active crime scenes but the disorder had ceased. Multiple arrests and some critically injured people.

"Thank you to the emergency services for the speedy response in protecting our community.

"It's an active case and so I cannot comment much further. I am due to meet the Police for a briefing this morning and more details may follow.

"My thoughts go out to all the people affected by this disturbing event.

"The safety of the community and putting measures in place so that does not happen again are top priorities of mine.

"Will share updates as and when I can."

2 weeks ago09:10 Mieka Smiles

Eight people arrested

Eight people have been arrested after a machete fight in daylight yesterday.

Weapons have also been seized and serious injuries reported after the chaos erupted on the seafront and high street.

Essex Police said a Section 60 dispersal order would remain in place in Southend-on-Sea until 8pm today, Wednesday, July 31.

Chief Supt Morgan Cronin said: "We have a zero-tolerance approach to violence, disorder and carrying weapons in Essex."

The force added: "While our work is ongoing there will be a large and visible police presence across the city centre, and further disorder will not be tolerated."

2 weeks ago09:01 Mieka Smiles

Leader of Southend Council issues statement

The Leader of Southend Council, Daniel Cowan, has released a statement following last night's chaos.

He said: "Last night we saw some hugely upsetting incidents in our city, the likes of which I never want to see again.

"The actions of those involved were deplorable, disgusting and people intent on acting like this are not welcome in Southend-on-Sea.

"We cannot tolerate this kind of behaviour and whilst I have received regular briefings on this, I have asked to meet senior colleagues at Essex Police for a full debrief which will consider what happened, the response and any lessons learned.

"I do also want to thank the council's community safety and transport safety teams and police colleagues who last night faced up to an intimidating situation, and also our CCTV team who ensured our teams on the ground and police colleagues had the right intelligence and information to deal with this."

2 weeks ago08:56 Mieka Smiles

'We cannot accept this lawless society any longer'

Brits have been venting their fury online about the Southend carnage.

Many have taken to social media site X to share their thoughts about the incident.

One said: " Southend sea front tonight.

"A working theme park with kids screaming in enjoyment during the summer holidays in the background.

"Something needs to be done. We cannot accept this lawless society any longer."

2 weeks ago08:53 Mieka Smiles

GB News presenter Darren Grimes asks is this the 'new normal'?

TV presenter and political commentator Darren Grimes has vented his frustration online.

Taking aim at authorities he asked "Where's the condemnation for this?".

You can see his full tweet below.

2 weeks ago01:33 Paige Ingram

An eye-witness account

A man who wishes to remain anonymoys has described the scenes on the High Street at around 6pm last night.

He said: "At around 6pm someone pulled a machete near JD Sports and there were people running about by the college with machetes as well, there was no police at all on the High Street until later in the evening.

He went on to say he feels like the crime is "getting worse and worse in Southend".

He concluded: "I didn’t stick around but I saw the police turn up around 9.30pm but it was at a distance. The police did okay but I think more could of been done, it was advertised all over social media that it was happening so I think more resources could of been used at train stations."

2 weeks ago00:43 Paige Ingram

Councillor Matt Dent comments on 'horrifying scenes'

Councillor Matt Dent has taken to X to share his concerns following the 'horrifying scenes' in Southend-On-Sea yesterday evening.

2 weeks ago23:40 Paige Ingram

Essex Police update

An Essex Police spokesperson said: "Officers have dispersed members of the public from the Southend seafront and High Street, with additional patrols continuing their work in the city overnight.

"We are now continuing our investigations into the incidents of disorder in the city this evening, with several lines of enquiry to identify further suspects in addition to the six people arrested.

"The Section 60 dispersal order, which gives officers the power to stop and search individuals for offensive weapons, remains in place until 8pm Wednesday 31 July.

"While our work is ongoing there will be a large and visible police presence across the city centre, and further disorder will not be tolerated."

2 weeks ago22:38 Chris Samuel

Southend MPs urged people to 'keep away' from seafront and city centre

Local MPs have urged people to “keep away” Southend's seafront and city centre amid disorder on the streets of the Essex city.

David Burton-Sampson, MP for Southend West and Leigh and Bayo Alaba, Labour MP for Southend East and Rochford said: “We are aware of the ongoing incident in Southend City Centre.“A dispersal order is currently in place. We encourage all residents to keep away from the area for the time being.

"Essex Police will provide more information in due course. This dispersal order gives police officers the power to direct people suspected causing anti-social behaviour and disorder to leave the area or face arrest.”

2 weeks ago22:34 Chris Samuel

Authorities launched dispersal zone ahead of 'beach party'

A dispersal zone was launched in Southend after reports hundreds of people were descending on the city for a "beach party" promoted on TikTok, according to reports.

Areas such as Marine Parade, Pier Hill, High Street, Western Esplanade and both the city’s train stations are included in the order.

2 weeks ago22:28 Chris Samuel

Alarming footage shows a group running out Southend swinging large knives

Footage shared on social media shows a group running around a street in Southend street with large knives.

A Twitter user that shared the video read: "Southend sea front tonight. A working theme park with kids screaming in enjoyment during the summer holidays in the background. Something needs to be done. We cannot accept this lawless society any longer."

2 weeks ago22:23 Chris Samuel

'Large-scale disorder' in Southend amid carnage on Merseyside

Large-scale disorder broke out in Southend on Tuesday night, according to local media, as a huge group of young people refused to disperse.

"Police officers have been attacked by some of the people in the crowd," Your Southend reports.

"Police dog units and approximately 50 officers are currently dealing with the crowd in the High Street."

Invalid email

We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. Read our Privacy Policy