HENDERSON, William “Bill”…

It is with great sadness that the family of William “Bill” Roy Clarence Henderson “Cheesie” announce his passing, peacefully at home, on Friday, March 31st, 2023 following a valiant fight against cancer, in his 83rd year. Bill is survived by his loving wife Margaret (nee Smith), of 58 years and daughters Melanie McKellar (Scott), Nicole Murphy (Jason) and Janine Chown (Michael Long) and his pride, grandchildren Kendra (Matt) and Connor McKellar, Analiese Murphy, and Cody, Benjamin and Tatum Long. Bill was predeceased by grandparents Sarah and James Henderson, his mother, Frances Soilleux (William), Bessie Cornish (Ernie), and Roy. Extended family includes Shirley (Adam), Susan Power (Barry), Karen Wadsworth (Ross) and their families. Also missed by Marg’s many siblings and their families.

Bill graduated from Chesley Ave. P.S. and attended Beck Collegiate and graduated from Wheable High School where he met the love of his life, Marg.

He attended Ryerson Polytechnical, along with graduating from the General Business Program and the Human Resources Program at Fanshawe College.

Bill enjoyed a full life. He was an active member at Knox United Church where he was an executive member of the Men’s club, with Marg served as presidents of the Couple’s club, was the Clerk of Session, was Scouter Bill, Venturer Advisor and Rover Skip to the 62nd group. He was very involved in the merger with Wesley Church where he served as Chairs of Communication and the Christian Education committees and as Sacrament Secretary as well as again together with Marg, as Presidents of the Friendship Club.

In the Boy Scouts he served as a member of the South Division Service team, and as a member of the Headquarters Outdoor Adventure Committee where he moved the motion of cabooses to Camp Sylvan.

Bill spent 29 years in the Research Department of Labatt Breweries. During that period, he spent time in the Pilot Brewery, wet chemistry, operated the Masspectrometer, and served for almost 10 years as Department Administrator. While with the company, Bill was President of the Recreation Association and as either Vice-President or President of the Labatt London Employees Credit Union. He played industrial fastball and hockey and later coached both the Ladies and Mens fastball teams.

As a second career, he formed a home-based business, Henderson Video Enterprises, producing video productions for several years.

With family, he enjoyed traveling and for 49 years were active members of NCHA (National Campers and Hikers Assoc.) later becoming FCRV (Family Campers and RVers). Bill and Marg held various positions in the chapters to which they belonged. Within this association, they served for 11 years as Ontario Teen Directors, along as Field Directors and then Retiree Field Directors. They were involved in chairing or assisting in numerous chapter or provincial campouts. Together, Marg and Bill participated on the organizing committees for Ontario 1979, 1986, 1999, and 2006 Campventions and the 1996 Hamburg, New York Campvention. Bill & Marg were honoured to receive the National Plaque and the Merit Award and Carling Trophy from the Ontario Provincial Association.

Bill and Marg have RV’d coast to coast in Canada including the Yukon, and covered all U.S. states including Alaska except Texas, Oklahoma, and New Mexico.

Bill enjoyed sports and participated in most levels from peewee up to adult recreational and industrial leagues. During high school he played football, basketball, and hockey. Up to the time of his illness, he continued to use his recumbent bike and treadmill.

Bill’s family wishes to thank the Staff, Nurses (C7 100-113), medical teams and specialists of LHSC for their compassion, care, and support. Thank you to friends and family, who were part of Bill’s life and the journey through his illness. Your kind words, actions and love so often sustained us.