If there's any county which could produce its very own dictionary of words, then it is Essex.

For the last few decades, we have collected a whole host of slang words and phrases which make perfect sense to us.

You don't bat an eyelid when someone drops the Baz Vegas bomb, refers to a trip to Chelmo or even declares that their mate is an utter weapon - but people outside of Essex just don't seem to understand.

Some of them are a little rogue, but there's nothing wrong with a bit of slang to lighten the mood.

Particular words were made famous by the hit reality show, TOWIE, (The Only Way is Essex) which has been on our screens for several years.

Whether the term was used by Joey Essex or your best friend, there are some occasions that a perfect Essex slang word completely changes the dynamic in the room.

It doesn't matter what part of the county you are from, north or south, mid-Essex or the sunny coast, most of these words have been heard by residents from all over.

Here are 27 Essex slang words which make perfect sense to us, but confuse people outside the county:

1. Baz Vegas

We've all said it, we all know it.

It's the leisure and entertainment capital of the British new town of Basildon.

Famous for its restaurants, night clubs and probably, being one of the locations for people with fake tan.

2. Chelmo

It's quite simple - you don't go on a night out in Chelmsford, you go out-out in Chelmo.

Known for being the birthplace of radio but also for a first-class boogie in Popworld.

3. 'Aaaaaaht aaaaht'

Speaking of out-out, it is absolutely crucial that you pronounce it as the appropriate 'aaaaht aaaaaaht'.

If you don't, how will anyone know if you're going just out, or out-out, you see?

4. Saafend

Fancy a trip to Saafend? For those of you not in the know, this is of course our beloved seaside spot, the coastal town of Southend-on-Sea.

It has the longest pleasure pier and three Greggs on the high street. Lovely jubly.

5. Daggerz

Daggerz is of course slang for Dagenham, infamous for being voted the worst place to live in the UK in 2015.

Doesn't stop it having a classic slang nickname though.

There is also the iconic Dagenham market.

6. Shu'up!

Not the phrase used to tell someone to be quiet, but an exclamation of disbelief.

You only say this if you are truly shocked, so shocked in fact, that you forget to pronounce some of the letters.

7. Clackers

Southend isn't the only seaside town, Clacton-on-Sea is often fondly referred to as Clackers, as a term of endearment and banter.

8. Aite Geez

Hello, hiya, aite geez - all the same thing but one is a sure sign that you're from Essex.

Usually used between men, it's a greeting or a way of agreeing with someone.

9. Sick

For probably the younger generation in Essex, we have all had that moment where you have declared something as 'sick' and had some rather odd looks.

Sick is obviously not the unfortunate byproduct of a heavy weekend, but instead something very, very cool.

10. Melt

Basically the opposite of cool, if you have been called a melt in Essex, you are a loser.

11. Innit

Probably the most well known slang from Essex is innit, a simple and clear way to say isn't it.

12. Geh'aht!

We don't simply exclaim 'get out!', we say 'geh'aht'.

Much like shut up, it is an expression of shock, which some outsiders may not appreciate.

13. Well Jel

Another memorable Essex slang term - if we tell you we are well jel, we are very jealous.

14. Butters

Someone outside of Essex may think this is merely just the act of spreading butter on toast, but it also has another Essex slang term that has come up over the years.

You can only hope that it is not directed at you, because if you are butters, you are reportedly not attractive.

15. Reem

Another Essex compliment to dish out - if you are reem, you are very cool.

16. Literally/actually

These are of course, two actual legitimate words. But in Essex, they have developed into a slang that it often used in the middle of sentences or as pauses.

17. Muggy

It may have been a few years since you heard someone say it, but if you're from Essex, you'll know that muggy is a pretty hefty insult.

If you have been 'mugged off' then someone has done you dirty.

19. Dutty

Perhaps another one that has been tucked away in the back of your head since secondary school, 'dutty' is just a synonym for dirty or scummy.

20. Babs/babes/hun/luv/darlin'

Whether its ironic, sarcastic or a loving nickname for your friends or partner, these phrases are some of Essex most loved slang terms of endearment.

24. Emosh

Simple - we don't get emotional, we get a bit emosh.

25. On fleek/fleeky

A spectacular eyebrow deserves to be crowned with the slang 'on fleek'.

But it's also just a compliment we use to tell each other when someone's outfit or look is on point.

26. Hinchers

We are proud to be the county of Hinchers.

Taken after the one and only Mrs Hinch herself, this is slang for the ones of us who love a good clean. If you Hinch something then you've cleaned it to perfection.

27. Lakey

Or Laaaaaaakeside. Thurrock's Lakeside Shopping Centre is a firm favourite in Essex, which is why it has donned the affectionate slang nickname, Lakey.

How many of these words have youheard?