Michael Welch‘s ex-wife Marissa Lefton is a former child actress who is best known for her work in the movie named Father of the Bride. She played the character of 3-year-old Annie in the very movie back in 1991.

Marissa Lefton got married to her ex-husband Michael Welch back in 2008. But the things didn’t work out between the former couple so the ex-pair got separated in December 2011 after 3 years of marriage. The two don’t share any children together.

Marissa Lefton Has Worked As A Child Actress

As mentioned earlier, Michael Welch’s ex-wife Marissa Lefton has starred as the role of a 3-years-old Annie in the movie Father of the Bride which was released in 1991. Even though her role was quite short, the role was quite praised and recognized by her fans.

The former child actress, Marissa has remained low-key and she is not active on any of the social media accounts. Looks like, Marissa doesn’t want the media limelight and has not been seen on any media since her divorce.

Marissa Lefton Got Separated On Valentine’s Day

Generally, people tend to find love and be together with their valentine on Valentine’s Day. However, this is not the case for the ex-pair. The Twilight star Michael Welch and his ex-wife Marissa Lefton. Unfortunately, the very couple decided to part their ways on the 14th of February 2011 according to TMZ.

Marissa Lefton’s ex-husband Michael Welch is a veteran actor who is known for his role in the movie Twilight. He has booked nearly 100 films and television credits to his name. The Twilight star continues to build his career, as he always has a new project on the line. The most recent project of his includes Syfy’s hit original zombie series named Z Nation.

There is no information regarding the recent relationship, dating, and affairs of Michael Welch’s ex-wife Marissa Lefton. As mentioned earlier Marissa wants to limit her personal space to herself. However, it is not the same case for Michael as he started dating model Samantha Maggio and got married in 2016.

Michael shares a daughter with his wife Samantha named Parker Welch. Michael Welch’s wife Samantha is quite active on her Instagram sharing her baby girl pictures.

For latest updates on Entertainment, Celebrity Babies, YouTuber follow eCelebrityMirror.