Who is Pannarai? Biography, gossip, facts?

Phra Ong Chao Pannarai (May 9 1838 - June 22 1914) formerly Mom Chao Ying Chae Siriwongse was one of the consorts of Mongkut of Siam fourth King of the Chakri dynasty. Chae Siriwongse was a daughter of Prince Siriwongse (a son of Nangklao) and Lady Kim). Mom Chao Chae and her sister Mom Chao Rampoei Siriwongse became the consort of King Mongkut in 1851 (Mom Chao Rampoei later became Queen Debsirindra).

When is Pannarai's birthday?

Pannarai was born on the 9th of May 1838, which was a Wednesday. Pannarai's next birthday would be in 260 days (would be turning 187years old then).

What was Pannarai's zodiac sign?

Pannarai's zodiac sign was Taurus.

♉

The ruling planet of Taurus is Venus. Therefore, lucky days were Fridays and Mondays and lucky numbers were: 6, 15, 24, 33, 42 and 51. Blue and Blue-Green were Pannarai's lucky colors. Typical positive character traits of Taurus include: Practicality, Artistic bent of mind, Stability and Trustworthiness. Negative character traits could be: Laziness, Stubbornness, Prejudice and Possessiveness.

Was Pannarai gay or straight?

Many people enjoy sharing rumors about the sexuality and sexual orientation of celebrities. We don't know for a fact whether Pannarai was gay, bisexual or straight. However, feel free to tell us what you think! Vote by clicking below.

0% of all voters think that Pannarai was gay (homosexual), 0% voted for straight (heterosexual), and 0% like to think that Pannarai was actually bisexual.

Advertisement

Was Pannarai hot or not?

Well, that is up to you to decide! Click the "HOT"-Button if you think that Pannarai was hot, or click "NOT" if you don't think so. 0% of all voters think that Pannarai was hot, 0% voted for "Not Hot".

Did Pannarai do drugs? Did Pannarai smoke cigarettes or weed?

It is no secret that many celebrities have been caught with illegal drugs in the past. Some even openly admit their drug usuage. Do you think that Pannarai did smoke cigarettes, weed or marijuhana? Or did Pannarai do steroids, coke or even stronger drugs such as heroin? Tell us your opinion below. 0% of the voters think that Pannarai did do drugs regularly, 0% assume that Pannarai did take drugs recreationally and 0% are convinced that Pannarai has never tried drugs before.

Who are similar royalties to Pannarai?

Peleuli, Ælfflæd wife of Edward the Elder, Ælfgifu wife of Eadwig, Fenenna of Kuyavia and Duke Xuan of Qi are royalties that are similar to Pannarai. Click on their names to check out their FAQs.

What is Pannarai doing now?

As mentioned above, Pannarai died 110 years ago. Feel free to add stories and questions about Pannarai's life as well as your comments below.

Are there any photos of Pannarai's hairstyle or shirtless?

There might be. But unfortunately we currently cannot access them from our system. We are working hard to fill that gap though, check back in tomorrow!