Two brothers, one in Michigan and the other in Germany, separated during childhood talk for the first time in 40 years.

69-year-old Gary Griesbach reached out to 7&4 News several weeks ago, asking for help with finding a way to speak to his only living brother.

Gary lives in Rudyard, which is located in the Upper Peninsula. His brother, Bernd Rambalski, lives in Germany.

Gary, Bernd, and their oldest brother, Dieter, were born in Germany. When Gary was around the age of three, they were all placed in a German orphanage.

"It was just after the war," Gary said. "My real dad fought on the German side and he was off to war. And my mom I guess was sick."

At the age of five, Gary's aunt adopted him and brought him to live with her in Wisconsin. His two brothers were left behind in Germany.

"She wanted the youngest one out of the orphanage, which was me," said Gary.

He grew up as an only child, but always knew his two brothers and one half brother named Arnold, were somewhere else.

Then in 1976 Bernd came to the U.S. and for a short time Gary finally got to know one of his siblings.

"That was nice," Gary smiled.

But after his brother left, Gary says he didn't see or talk to him again. For 40 years, Gary never knew what became of Bernd or his other brothers, until about one month ago when the name, 'Rambalski' popped up on Facebook.

"I got on messenger and I said, 'I have a brother named Bernd, is he your dad?' And he answered me and he said, 'yeah.'".

But because Gary speaks very little German, and his brother doesn't speak any English, the two weren't able to speak to one another.

7&4 News contacted Ralf Wilhelms, a professor from Lake Superior State University who grew up in Germany before moving to the U.S..

Wilhelms offered to help translate a conversation for the two brothers.

The phone call was set up for March 2. Wilhelms drove to Gary's home and translated the brothers' long awaited conversation. It was filled with smiles, laughter, and tears.

Gary asked now 72-year-old Bernd about their other brothers, Dieter and Arnold. Bernd explained that the two had passed away several years ago.

"He said the feelings are like overwhelming because you're the only one left in the family," Wilhelms translated from Bernd to Gary.

Bernd expressed his desire to see Gary, telling him he unfortunately couldn't come to the U.S. because of his wife's medical expenses. He asked Gary to visit him in Germany.

Gary says he'll do whatever it takes to get himself there this summer, but because he is retired, he also has some financial difficulties.

"I want to see my brother. Other people have brothers and sisters and family, blood family," Gary said. "I'm not talking about married family or I'm not talking about adopted family. They've got family. And I found out I've got family and I want to see him. I don't know if that's selfish or not but I want to get to know my brother."

A Go Fund Me Page has been set up to try and help Gary with the cost of traveling to Germany.