What is the currency in Mali?

The official currency in Mali is the West African CFA Franc, which is issued and overseen by the Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO). If you’re buying your travel money online you may also see the official code being shown - XOF. In stores and restaurants, West African CFA Franc prices are likely to use the currency symbol CFA.

Once you’re in Mali you’ll see costs of items shown in XOF and you’ll need to start paying for things in local coins and notes which are often found in the following denominations:

banknotes - 500, 1,000, 2,000, 5,000 and coins - 1, 5, 10, 25, 50, 100, 200, 250.

Can you officially pay in AUD when you are in Mali?

You’re unlikely to be able to officially transact in AUD in Mali, which is why it’s time to start getting used to XOF and learning more about the currency exchange rates so you’ll know what you’re spending on your trip.

This guide will walk through all you need to know, including Australian Dollar/West African CFA Franc rates and where best to get your travel money from.

West African CFA FrancCurrency nameWest African CFA FrancISO codeXOFSymbolCFASubunitCentimeCentral BankCentral Bank of West African States (BCEAO)Best travel cards to take to MaliWise

West African CFA Franc coins and banknotes

Here’s a full rundown of the XOF coins and banknotes you’ll need to be familiar with when you’re in Mali.

XOF banknotesXOF coins500, 1,000, 2,000, 5,0001, 5, 10, 25, 50, 100, 200, 250

Is AUD accepted in Mali?

As we’ve seen, the official currency in Mali is XOF. If you carry Australian Dollars with you on your trip, you’ll probably need to exchange it before you can spend.

Sometimes when you’re away on a trip abroad you’ll find that merchants will take payments in a selection of major foreign currencies. However, the chances are that where this is offered, you won’t get a good exchange rate for your AUD. Planning smart and convenient ways to spend in XOF when you’re away is likely to mean you save on costs in the end.

Usually, having a few different ways to pay and get cash is the best option for travellers and tourists. That’s because you’ll have a back up plan in case one payment method isn’t accepted for any reason, and you can pick the method that’s best suited to the specific transaction. Having a multi-currency card from a provider like Wise, plus your normal bank debit card, and some local cash in XOF should mean you’ve always got options. You can use your cash for small purchases and tipping, and make low cost payments and cash withdrawals with your multi-currency card, while keeping your bank card in reserve for emergencies.

Use a travel card on your next trip to Mali

Using a travel debit card in Mali is usually cheap, safe and convenient. A few providers in Australia offer multi-currency cards which come with a linked payment account that lets you convert, hold and spend in XOF. That allows you to add a balance in AUD and switch over to XOF to lock in the exchange rate and set your travel budget.

Once you have XOF in your account there are no extra fees to make payments, and you’ll not have foreign transaction charges to worry about, either.

Here’s a quick overview of a couple of handy travel debit cards you may want to order and use in Mali.

What is the currency exchange rate for £ 1 AUD/XOF?

It’s helpful to get to know the live AUD/XOF rate so you can easily calculate how much things are costing you while you’re on your trip abroad.

The rate you need to focus on is the mid market rate, which is the one banks and major currency services get when buying and selling currencies. This rate isn’t always passed on to customers. Instead you may find that the AUD/XOF rate you get when exchanging travel cash includes a markup - an extra fee.

Find the AUD/XOF mid-market rate from a currency conversion site or a website like this, so you can keep an eye on the market and compare the rates you’re offered as you travel against the mid-market rate easily.

Should I exchange AUD to XOF before traveling to Mali?

It’s a good idea to exchange Australian Dollars to West African CFA Franc before you head off to Mali, as you can often find a better exchange rate and lower overall costs before you travel.

When you’re in Mali you may need XOF in cash for some of your spending - particularly when tipping or making smaller value purchases. Buying your XOF travel money in advance can get you better AUD/XOF exchange rates, and saves you wasting precious time shopping around for a good deal once you arrive in Mali.

Get familiar with the exchange rates offered locally to you, and online, so you can decide whether it’s worth switching some funds in advance of travel, using a card to pay while you’re away, or converting cash on arrival. Both in Australia and in Mali, steer clear of exchanging currency at the airport. A captive market means that AUD/XOF rates are often worse in the airport than in city centers.

Tips for exchanging money in Mali

At merchants and ATMs, make sure you’re charged in XOF. If you’re asked if you’d rather pay in AUD instead, say no. That’s a sign of dynamic currency conversion, which usually means extra costs. Withdrawing money in target-currency can be easy, particularly in big cities and Bamako, here’s a few other tips if you want to exchange money in Mali

Avoid using exchange providers at airports or hotels in Mali as they usually offer pretty poor exchange rates because they have a captive market and little competition nearby

Use a travel debit card like the Wise card while you’re in Mali for fast and cheap conversion between currencies and easy ways to manage your money from your phone

Best place to exchange currency in Mali

You can get your XOF in Mali in a couple of ways.

You’ll be able to use a travel debit card from a provider like Wise to make convenient payments and cash withdrawals and to convert funds online.

Or if you prefer an offline solution you can carry some cash in AUD to exchange when you arrive. Currency exchange providers are often in airports and hotels, although the exchange shops in a city centre are likely to be cheaper overall.

How to pay in Mali?

You’ll need to have XOF to spend in Mali. However, generally having a few different payment methods is a good plan. That means that if a merchant won't accept one, you’ve got a back up. It’s also reassuring to know you have a different way to pay if you were unlucky enough to have a card or some travel cash stolen. Here are your key payment options in Mali.

Debit or credit card

Card payments can be helpful in shops, restaurants and hotels but there will be places where cash is also important. Order a travel card from a provider like Wise for cheap and fast transactions, including card payments and cash withdrawals as and when you need travel money in XOF.

West African CFA Franc cash

You’ll usually find you can use a card to make payments in Mali, but carrying some cash in XOF is also reassuring. It’s often easier for tipping and making smaller purchases, plus you’ve got a nice backup if your card is ever out of action for some reason.

It’s a smart idea to have both a card and some cash in XOF when you’re in Mali. Some merchants will prefer cash, but having a card for higher value payments and in busier more tourist places is also convenient. Consider using a travel card from a provider like Wise alongside your cash for flexibility.

Paying for the trip in AUD

If you’re paying for things in Mali with a AUD bank card you might find a foreign transaction fee is added. This pushes up your costs when you spend in a foreign currency, and can be tricky to calculate.

Travel debit cards don’t always work this way. When you make purchases in Mali using the Wise card you can either choose to convert your account balance to XOF in advance in the Wise app, or just leave your balance in Australian Dollars and let the card handle the transaction when you pay. You’ll always get the lowest available fee and there are no extra foreign transaction charges.

Conclusion - Currency in Mali

You won’t be able to pay in AUD when you visit Mali - so learning about the currency you need is essential. Whether you decide to use a travel debit card from a service like Wise , or stock up on XOF in cash in advance, knowing the mid-market exchange rate can help you get the best available deal. Use this guide to learn all you need to know about the options, rates and fees for exchanging AUD to XOF, and make your money go further while you’re away.

The official currency in Mali is XOF. You can’t usually pay in Australian Dollars in Mali, so you’ll need to plan in advance to get your travel money sorted. Consider ordering a travel debit card from a service like Wise, for low cost conversions to XOF and convenient spending and withdrawals - and remember that knowing the AUD to XOF mid-market exchange rate is essential to check you’re getting a fair deal on currency exchange.

FAQ - Currency in Mali

What is the currency in Mali called?

The official currency in Mali is the West African CFA Franc. You may also see the code XOF and the currency symbol CFA.

What's the currency in Bamako?

The official currency in Bamako is the West African CFA Franc. You’ll only be able to spend in XOF while you’re there.

What is the old Mali currency?

Today the currency in Mali is the West African CFA Franc. If you’re worried about currencies changing, why not get a travel debit card from a service like Wise which will automatically pick the currency needed in your destination when making a payment - with no penalties or inflated fees.

What is the best currency to take to Mali?

You’ll only be able to spend in XOF while you’re in Mali. Carrying some money in cash and using a travel debit card from a service like Wise is usually the best way to spend while you’re away from home.