What's it like Living in Lompoc?

Located in the state of California, Lompoc is a medium-sized city with a population of 42,753 residents. With a population density of 3,678 people per square mile, Lompoc is well above the nation's average density level. More than a quarter of the residents of Lompoc identify themselves as Hispanic or Latino, and 40% of the population speak Spanish as their primary or secondary language. With an average age of 33 years old, Lompoc could be a great place to live for young adults as this age is well below the national average. Lompoc is not known to have a high population (over 15 years old) of married people. At only 50% married, this city falls well below the national average. The average American spends about 26 minutes on their one way commute to work each day. Lower travel times can increase overall happiness and allow for more time to be spent with family and friends. While living in Lompoc, your commute times will be about average, with a one way commute time of 27 minutes.

If you’re considering moving to any new city, it could be a very discouraging task. However, it could also be a fulfilling experience if you are willing to get to know the city before actually living in Lompoc, California. When searching for a new neighborhood, several key items should be considered. Safety is of utmost importance, ensuring a secure environment with low crime. Proximity to your workplace or school helps reduce commuting time and offers convenience. Access to amenities such as parks, grocery stores, and healthcare facilities enhances your daily life. Public transportation options contribute to easy mobility. A sense of community fosters a supportive and engaging environment. Lastly, the overall atmosphere should align with your desired lifestyle, ensuring a fulfilling living experience. Considering these items will guide you towards finding the perfect neighborhood that fits all your needs. With useful information like commute, health & safety, housing and other key data points, finding the best places to live in Lompoc and in the areas around Lompoc is a much easier task.

Using data and statistics Lompoc has received a livability score of 56/100. This score is ranked in the 26th percentile when compared to all other cities. This score ranks well below the US average. With such a low livability score, it might be worth investigating a little further. For each of the livability categories, we see that Lompoc ranks very well for housing (B-). Unfortunately for Lompoc, there are some categories for which it does not score well, this includes: amenities (F), crime (D-), cost of living (F) and education (F).

Finding affordable real estate and housing in Lompoc can be tricky. Having said that, this area might be the place to get the best of both worlds. Based on factors like home/rental affordability and appreciation rates, this area has received an above average score in the housing category. A healthy real estate market can lead to wealth appreciation for property owners, as rising property values can contribute to homeowners' equity, financial stability and the ability to build long-term wealth.