Non-stop flights to Östersund (OSD)

Åre Östersund Airport is a small airport in Sweden. It is an international airport. In total there are 4 airports around the world that have direct flights to Östersund in 2 countries. Currently, there are 3 domestic flights to Östersund.

Östersund is mainly known for sightseeing & culture and family fun.

This month, there are 55 flights arriving at Östersund Airport, which are 14 flights per week or 2 flights per day.

The most frequently departed flights to Östersund are routes from Stockholm (Arlanda) (ARN) in Sweden and Stockholm (Bromma) (BMA), also in Sweden. These two routes together are operated 55 times this month, and make up for 100% of all monthly arrivals at Åre Östersund Airport.

The longest flight to Östersund OSD is departing from Copenhagen (CPH). This non-stop flight takes around 1 hour and 35 minutes and covers a distance of 327 miles (527 km).

List of all direct flights to Östersund

Below you can find a list of all cities and countries that have direct flights to Östersund, ordered by popularity.

Top 200 flights with a stopover

This list contains the 200 most popular airports from which flights depart that require just one stopover to get to Östersund.

Airlines flying to Östersund

Currently, there are 3 airlines that fly to Östersund. Below you can find the list of airlines that operate all OSD flights:

Business class flights to Östersund

There are 2 airports that have flights to Östersund in Business Class. All airports that offer business class flights to OSD are listed below:

International flights to Östersund

Domestic flights to Östersund

Alternative airports near Östersund

Flying to an alternative airport near Östersund could give you other options to reach your destination. For example, the possibility to fly with a different airline or alliance, or finding a cheaper airfare. For this reason, alternative airports near to Östersund (OSD) are listed below. The closest alternative airports are Sveg (EVG) and Kramfors / Sollefteå (KRF).

Frequently asked questions - FAQ