Östersunds FK: key details about the team in 2024

This is your one-stop shop for finding all the important facts and figures about Östersunds FK in the 2024 season. From recent results and upcoming matches to squad members and team statistics, you and other APWin users can have all the information needed to get a more complete and accurate picture of a team's current state.

You can check out crucial data such as recent form, trends, home and away records, goals scored, and goals conceded, which are all quickly and regularly updated, along with other useful facts about Östersunds FK.

Read on for all the important Östersunds FK information for Superettan 2024 to date.

Basic information about Östersunds FK

Below are the main Östersunds FK statistics from the Superettan 2024 season to date.

Information about Östersunds FK

Below is relevant information about Östersunds FK.

Östersunds FK squad in 2024

Östersunds FK's current squad includes the following players arranged by position:

Get to know more about the Östersunds FK players in an instant. Click on the players’ names to check out more of their personal information as well as statistics from different competitions.

Östersunds FK's latest matches

Östersunds FK's last match in Superettan was against Öster, which was played on 10/08/2024. The result of the match was Östersunds FK 0 vs 0 Öster

You can look up the complete list of Östersunds FK results throughout the season. Meanwhile, you can also select any match to view a detailed match summary.

Östersunds FK's upcoming matches

Östersunds FK will be taking on Trelleborg in the Superettan on 17/08/2024. See more information about the upcoming Trelleborg vs Östersunds FK match here.

Find all the statistics you need to preview that upcoming Östersunds FK match here. From recent form and trends to average goals scored and conceded, head-to-head history, and so much more, you'll have plenty of numbers to help you prepare for the match.

How to watch Östersunds FK live

Don’t settle for watching only Östersunds FK highlights, since there are a host of different options for watching Östersunds FK matches live online. Users can conveniently check out match times, locations, and other broadcast details, along with directions for how to watch the match live.

Just visit our Live Stream page to learn where to watch Östersunds FK match online.

Predictions for Östersunds FK matches

You can also view predictions for upcoming matches from football championships and competitions across the globe. That includes the Östersunds FK prediction for their next match, which is made by top betting experts.

These predictions are primarily data-driven and include the odds of those matches as set by bookmakers.

Take a look at all of today's predictions and see what the probabilities are for your preferred matches, as well as the prediction for Östersunds FK’s next match.

Östersunds FK performance in Superettan 2024

In their 18 matches in Superettan 2024, Östersunds FK has compiled the following record:

So, Östersunds FK is currently averaging 1.28 points per match in the championship (counting all phases of the tournament). And based on the results in all stages of the competition (whether knockout or not), Östersunds FK has a ranking of 9th in Superettan.

For a more detailed look at the Superettan table and where Östersunds FK stands compared to others in a number of different stats, check out the ‘Standings’ tab.

Östersunds FK statistics in the championship

To get a better idea of how Östersunds FK has been playing thus far in the Superettan, here is a quick summary of their goals scored, goals conceded, and goal averages in the championship.

Frequently asked questions about Östersunds FK - FAQ

Here are some of the most popular questions people are asking about Östersunds FK.