It is with heavy hearts that the family announce the passing of their mother, mother-in-law, Nana, Great-Nana, and step-sister, Dorothy June Gibbs, who passed away peacefully on Friday, June 14, 2024.

Mom was born on April 26, 1936 in McAdam, New Brunswick. A proud Maritimer who was quick witted and would throw people off with her eastern slangs.

She was the only child of Guy and Mary Trimble. Losing her mother at a young age, instilled in June the importance of family. Guy was eventually remarried to Bertha, and had two children, Susan and Ronnie, her step-siblings.

After high school, June went on to become an elementary teacher. She taught at Blossom Park in Ottawa and finally for The Lakehead District School Board here in Thunder Bay, teaching primarily at Kingsway Park and Balsam St Schools. Her passion was art and she utilized her skills to teach her love of painting and drawing at school. She also coached many students over the years in Three Pitch and Track and Field.

June married Robert Gibbs on March 31, 1956, and their love story began. Robert joined the Armed Forces and the two set off on their adventure across Canada. Living in Barrie, Ottawa, Holberg, B.C., and finally settling in Thunder Bay,

At a time when most people are slowing down in life, June and Bob decided to buy Birch Point Resort, a fishing resort in Kashabowie, ON. The resort introduced them to many of their life long friends who also had a love for fishing and the outdoors.

Left behind to mourn this tremendous loss are children, Roberta Davies, Doug (Suzanne), and David (Pat) Gibbs; grandchildren, Carole (Erik) Leroux, Val (Barry) Chezick, and Lindsey Davies (Chris Abey), Whitney, Michael (Yuna Gweon), Jackie, and John Gibbs; great-grandchildren, Brynnly, and Jase Leroux, Addison, and Rylan Abey; step-siblings, Sue Rogers, and Ronnie Trimble, and their families.

Services will be held beginning at 1pm on Friday, June 21, 2024, in O’Connor Free Methodist Church – 293 SITCH RD, O’CONNOR TOWNSHIP. Interment will be held at the Church cemetery, following the service.

Condolences may be made through www.nwafinc.com