Beirut was occupied by the Allies at the end of World War I, and the city was established by the French mandatory authorities in 1920 as the capital of the State of Greater Lebanon, which in 1926 became the Lebanese Republic. The Muslims of Beirut resented the inclusion of the city in a Christian-dominated Lebanon and declared loyalty to a broader Pan-Arabism than most Christians would support. The resultant conflict became endemic. The accelerated economic growth of Beirut under the French mandate (1920–43) and after produced rapid growth of the city’s population and the rise of social tensions. These tensions were increased by the influx of thousands of Palestinian refugees after the 1948 war in Palestine. The political and social tensions in Beirut and elsewhere in Lebanon, coupled with Christian-Muslim tensions, flared into open hostilities in 1958 and even more violently in 1975–90 (see Lebanese Civil War). In the violence that marked those years, Beirut became a divided city, depleted of the large, varied, and long-established community of foreigners that had once enriched its social and cultural life and given it the distinctive cosmopolitan character for which it was famed.

West Beirut was largely destroyed by heavy fighting between Israeli forces and members of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) in 1982, when Israel launched a full-scale attack on PLO bases operating in the city. Israeli troops surrounded West Beirut, where most PLO guerrilla bases were located, and a series of negotiations brought about the evacuation of PLO troops and leaders from Lebanon to other Arab countries.

Divisive sectarian loyalties only increased after the Israeli withdrawal. Neither the continued Syrian military presence nor the formation of coalition governments could defuse the violence. The shelling persisted, and much of the population fled.

In early 1984, following a failed attempt by the Christian-led Lebanese army to consolidate its control in West Beirut by force, the division between the two sides of the city became complete. In East Beirut, order continued to be maintained until 1990 by the army, working in cooperation with the unified Christian militia of the Lebanese Forces (LF). In West Beirut, however, the situation drifted to near total anarchy, as the different Muslim militias repeatedly clashed with one another in the streets to settle sectarian or partisan scores. Security collapsed under these circumstances, and many Lebanese and resident foreigners were taken hostage by different political groups, to remain their prisoners for months or years. Some of the hostages were even killed by groups determined to make a political point. In 1986, leaders in West Beirut pleaded with the Syrians to reenter the city in force and bring the situation under control. Three years later, in 1989, the Lebanese Army in East Beirut subjected West Beirut to months of heavy shelling, ostensibly to liberate the Muslim parts of the capital from Syrian occupation. In the last stage of the civil war, large parts of East Beirut and its Christian suburbs were destroyed or heavily damaged when the Lebanese Army clashed with the LF. The issues leading to the estrangement of these former allies and their eventual confrontation involved the question of whether or not the Ṭāʾif Accord, arrived at in 1989 to restore peace to Lebanon, was acceptable to the Christian side. Unlike the LF and other Christian Lebanese leaders, General Michel Aoun, the Lebanese army commander, maintained that the accord was totally unacceptable in principle. The clashes between the troops under his command and the LF were finally stopped by Syrian military intervention, followed by the forced departure of General Aoun to France.

Kamal Suleiman Salibi The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica

Britannica Quiz

Countries and Capitals Quiz

In the years after the end of the civil war, a major effort was begun to reconstruct Beirut’s devastated infrastructure. The city developed a plan to modernize its transport facilities, restore many of its historic buildings, and revive its economic sectors through a model driven by private investment. After surviving more than a decade of civil war, Beirut hosted the Pan-Arab Games in 1997 and entered the 21st century with a sense of renewed optimism as reconstruction of the city took off.

Still, Beirut found itself affected by the many tensions faced by both Lebanon and the region. The city witnessed violence again during the July 2006 war with Israel. Two years later, after the government attempted to outlaw the private telecommunications network of Hezbollah, the latter took control of large swathes of Beirut in a violent show of force. The standoff was resolved only after mediation from Qatar. Development of the city, which had been rapid in the first decade of the 21st century, slowed as the Syrian Civil War began to affect Lebanon and as a decline in oil prices reduced foreign investment from Gulf Arabs. Years of relative calm, meanwhile, were disrupted on November 12, 2015, when a suicide bombing by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL; also known as the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria [ISIS]) killed more than 40 and wounded some 200 others.

The slowing investment in the city, together with the enormous debt taken on for its postwar reconstruction, contributed to a severe financial crisis in the late 2010s. The government, strapped for cash and plagued by protracted political wrangling, proved unable to respond to a massive wildfire south of Beirut in October 2019; when a new tax was introduced days later, demonstrations broke out in Beirut and other cities across the country. On August 4, 2020, the city suffered extensive damage after a mushroom cloud explosion, which officials said was caused by the neglected storage of ammonium nitrate in the port district. Political polarization over a judicial investigation of the incident led to factional violence along the city’s former Green Line in October 2021.