Summer in Europe is one of the best times to visit Europe, even if it can get quite busy! Which is why these curated European summer destinations are the prettiest and worth a visit! Make sure to include a few of these summer destinations in Europe on your itinerary!

Planning a vacation to Europe this summer?

Here are the 20 best Europe summer destinations that you can visit to enjoy the warmth and vibrance of this stunning continent.

Summer is the best time to visit Europe, as it is easy to get around, the weather is comfortable, and the attractions are open for longer hours. Check this summer packing list with all the essentials before you pack your bags.

For me, Switzerland is always a go-to European summer destination and this tour of Mt. Pilatus Cable Car, Cogwheel Train & Lake Cruise was a memorable part of my vacation.

Be it the popular Greece and France or lesser-known Liechtenstein, these European summer destinations have something for everyone; offering everything from a relaxing beach vacation to an exciting urban adventure!

Popular tours in Europe –

Scenic train ride to Jungfraujoch in Switzerland

Half-Day Great Vineyards Tour in France

Windsor Castle, Stonehenge & Bath Full-Day Tour in England

Recommended hotels for Europe trip –

Peninsula Resort & Spa in Crete

The Collector in the Netherlands

Hotel Euro Moniz in Madeira

20 Fab European Summer Destinations

Here are some of the best places to visit in summer in Europe.

European Summer Destinations #1 – Spain

Spain’s sunny Mediterranean climate makes it one of the best European summer destinations. The country has some of the most gorgeous beaches, captivating towns, and cultural attractions in the world.

The two best summer destinations Europe to visit in Spain are Barcelona and the Costa Brava when visited during March.

Explore Barcelona’s stunning architecture, including Gaudi’s iconic Sagrada Familia and Park Guell.

Go to the Gothic Quarter and saunter along the famed La Rambla, stopping at cafes and shops. Then, take this guided full-day tour of the Montserrat mountain range and enjoy wine tastings and lunch at a picturesque winery.

Other places to explore are Barceloneta Beach, Camp Nou (home of FC Barcelona), Picasso Museum, and the La Boqueria Market.

Costa Brava is an idyllic coastal region in north-eastern Spain with breathtaking beaches, clear waters, and fishing villages such as Cadaqués and Llafranc.

You can go on this sailing trip from Lloret de Mar and enjoy snorkelling and swimming. You can also take a coastal hike at Camí de Ronda or Cap de Creus Natural Park, which provides breathtaking views of the coastline.

Other places to explore are the Salvador Dali Museum in Figueres and the historic city of Girona. You can stay at Hotel Spa La Terrassa, which is minutes away from Platja d’Aro Beach.

Madrid, Costa del Sol, and Ibiza are some other top cities in Europe to visit in summer located in Spain

Where to stay in Barcelona?

Magatzem 128 is a great place to stay in Barcelona, just 1.9 kilometres from Boqueria Market.

European Summer Destinations #2 – Italy

Next in this list of European summer destinations, is Italy with its clear skies and warm temperatures some of the world’s most iconic landmarks, historic sites, and cultural attractions.

Some of the top Italy summer destinations are Rome, Venice, and the Amalfi Coast.

Rome is known for its historical landmarks, art, and architecture. You can take this guided tour of Vatican Museums, the Sistine Chapel, and St. Peter’s Basilica.

Explore ancient ruins like the Colosseum and the Roman Forum, and stroll through charming neighbourhoods like Trastevere and Monti, exploring the Pantheon, the Spanish Steps, and the Trevi Fountain.

Venice is a magical city especially preferred by couples, where you can take a gondola ride down the Grand Canal, explore the city’s historic centre’s narrow streets, and see famous landmarks like St. Mark’s Basilica and the Doge’s Palace.

During the summer, Venice also hosts several cultural events and festivals, such as the Venice Biennaleand the Festa del Redentore, making it one of the best Europe summer destinations.

You can also take this day trip to the islands of Burano, Murano, and Torcello.

With its stunning coastline, colourful villages, and turquoise waters, the Amalfi Coast is one of the most beautiful European summer destinations. April is the best time to visit the Amalfi Coast.

You can visit charming towns like Positano, Amalfi, and Ravello, hike along the the ‘Way of the Gods’ (Sentiero degli Dei in Spanish) coastal trails and see historic landmarks like the Villa Rufolo and the Cathedral of Amalfi.

You can also go on this boat cruise to explore Capri Island. Stay near the beach at Palazzo Vingius, a beautiful property offering cosy rooms and breakfast.

Florence and Sicily are other best places to spend summer in Europe, located in Italy.

Where to stay in Rome and Venice?

If you wish to stay in the Barcelona city centre, Le Scalette Al Vaticano B&B has gorgeous rooms and is less than a kilometre away from St. Peter’s Basilica.

When visiting Venice, you can stay at a 19th-century building at the Ca’ Santo Spirito B&B.

European Summer Destinations #3 – France

France is a popular tourist destination all year, but summer is especially appealing. With warm weather, long days, and various outdoor activities and events, it is among the best summer vacations in Europe.

Apart from Paris, Provence and Côte d’Azur are also among the popular cities to visit in Europe in summer.

You can visit the Eiffel Tower, the Louvre Museum, and Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris. You can also take this boat tour of the Seine River, stroll along the Champs-Élysées, and explore the bohemian neighbourhood of Montmartre.

Provence is a beautiful region in southern France known for its lavender fields which bloom from June to August. You can explore the enchanting villages of Gordes and Roussillon, visit the Pont du Gard which is a Roman aqueduct and take this vineyard tour to sample some of the delicious local wines.

Remember to explore Avignon a historic city, famous for its Palais des Papes and the annual Avignon Theatre Festival.

The Cote d’Azur, or French Riviera, is a glamorous destination where you can enjoy the warm Mediterranean sunshine while relaxing on the beautiful beaches of Cannes, Nice, and St. Tropez.

Visit the historic Fort Carré in the charming seaside town of Antibes and the hilltop village of Eze. Take this boat tour to the Calanques of the Esterel, a stunning series of limestone cliffs and rocky inlets along the coast.

Some other European sun destinations in France are Bordeaux and Normandy.

Where to stay in Provence and Nice?

In Provence, stay at Mas des Tourterelles, a stunning property located in Saint-Rémy-de-Provence.

You can stay at Hôtel Nice Azur Riviera, an elegant hotel located in Nice and within walking distance from the beach.

European Summer Destinations #4 – Monaco

Monacois a tiny but glamorous principality on the French Riviera, known for its luxurious lifestyle and stunning scenery, and is one of the unusual European destinations.

Explore the Prince’s Palace, the official residence of the ruling monarch of Monaco, and see the Changing of Guard Ceremony.

You can test your luck at the Monte Carlo Casino, visit the Oceanographic Museum, walk the Formula One Grand Prix track, and relax on Larvotto Beach with stunning views.

Stroll through the streets of Old Town and visit the Saint Nicholas Cathedral and the Fort Antoine Theatre.

You can also take this hop-on hop-off bus tour to explore the quaint city of Monte Carlo in Monaco.

Where to stay in Monaco?

Stay at Novotel Monte-Carlo, offering cosy rooms and walking distance from Casino de Monte-Carlo

European Summer Destinations #5 – Greece

Next on this list of best European destinations in summer is Greece with its beautiful beaches, ancient history, delicious cuisine, and laid-back lifestyle.

Popular European summer destinations in Greece are Athens and its beautiful islands, including Santorini, Mykonos, and Crete, best visited during September.

You can check this 7-day Greece itinerary to plan your trip.

Athens is rich in history and ancient ruins, such as the Acropolis and the Parthenon. Book this guided tour to explore the Acropolis Museum, Ancient Agora, Kerameikos, Olympieion, Roman Forum, Hadrian’s Library, Aristotle’s Lyceum, and the National Archaeological Museum.

You can also stroll around the charming Plaka district and experience Greek nightlife in the Gazi area.

Here’s an Athens itinerary if you’d like more details!

In Mykonos spend your days relaxing on the Psarou beach, and your nights partying at the famous beach club, Cavo Paradiso. Take this guided Mykonos walking tour, and explore its winding streets, traditional architecture, and chic boutiques.

Here’s a detailed Mykonos itinerary if you’d like one!

Crete is Greece’s largest island and is one of the summer sun destinations in Europe that has something for everyone. You can visit the ancient city of Knossos and the beaches of Elafonisi and Balos.

You can also hike through the rugged terrain of the Samaria Gorge, one of Europe’s longest gorges.

Take this day trip to Santorini from Crete and enjoy the views of the Aegean Sea while strolling through the villages of Oia, Fira, and Imerovigli.

Don’t pass up the chance to see the Akrotiri Archaeological Site and visit the popular black sand beaches of Perissa and Kamari.

Where to stay in Athens, Mykonos, and Crete?

A great and affordable place to stay in Athens is Athens Edition Guesthouse, which is within walking distance of the National Archaeological Museum.

In Mykonos, stay at Eleni’s Village Blends, a luxurious property with Mykonian architecture blended with modern amenities.

If you plan to stay in Crete, Peninsula Resort & Spa is a great option.

European Summer Destinations #6 – Croatia

Croatia’s warm weather, stunning beaches, crystal-clear waters, and rich cultural heritage, make it a popular summer destination. Dubrovnik and the Dalmatian Islands are two must-visit European summer destinations in Croatia.

Dubrovnik is a centuries-old city on the Adriatic Sea. The famous St. Blaise Church, the Rector’s Palace, and the Franciscan Monastery can all be visited.

Book this guided tour that will take you to all the sites where the popular show Games of Thrones was shooted. ake a cable car to Mount Srd or sunbathe at the beautiful Banje Beach.

The Dalmatian Islands, including Split, Hvar, and Zadar are known for their pristine beaches, turquoise waters, and rich cultural heritage.

Split is a lively city with a long history. You can explore the historic Old Town and visit the ancient Diocletian’s Palace, a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

You can also sample the local cuisine and wine while strolling along the Riva promenade or visiting Marjan Hill for a panoramic view of the city.

You can also book this Day Trip by a speedboat from Spiti and explore the Islands of Bisevo, Vis, Budikovac, and Hvar, where you can explore caves, swim and snorkel.

In Hvar, the famous Pakleni Islands, as well as lavender fields, olive groves, and vineyards, can be visited.

Another island worth visiting is Zadar, a historic town that holds ancient Roman ruins as well as medieval churches.

Visit the Sea Organ, a one-of-a-kind sound installation, and take in the breathtaking sunsets at the Greeting to the Sun.

You can also take this Plitvice Lakes National Park Tour and spend a day in nature.

Where to stay in Dubrovnik and Hvar?

Stay in the Old Town district in Dubrovnik, at Dominus Little Palace, a cosy property, within walking distance from Banjo Beach.

Stay in Split at Riva Palace, a 4-star property with sea-view rooms.

European Summer Destinations #7 – Portugal

Portugal is one of the most popular summer destinations in Europe, due to its warm weather, stunning beaches, and rich cultural heritage. Two places worth visiting during the summer are Porto and Madeira.

Porto is a historic city in northern Portugal. You can explore the narrow streets and colourful houses of the city’s historic riverside quarter, the Ribeira.

Book this tour of Douro Valley and sample wine at the historic Port Wine cellars located across the Douro River. Visit the magnificent Cathedral and the Clérigos Tower, offering a panoramic view of the city.

Don’t forget to try the famous Francesinha, a meat sandwich covered in cheese and a special sauce.

Madeira is a lovely Portuguese island in the Atlantic Ocean. You can explore the historic Old Town of Funchal as well as the colourful market of Mercado dos Lavradores.

Book this tour to swim in the Porto Moniz Volcanic Pools, and explore the Laurissilva Forest and its centenary trees. Enjoy the stunning views of the island by visiting the Botanical Garden and the Monte Palace Tropical Garden.

You can also participate in water sports like scuba diving and snorkelling, as well as visit the nearby Porto Santo Island, which has beautiful beaches.

Other European summer destinations in Portugal worth visiting are Lisbon, Algarve, and Sintra.

Where to stay in Porto and Madeira?

Stay near the Porto city centre at the PipaD’oro by YoursPorto, a stunning property offering modern rooms and both international and Portuguese meals.

Hotel Euro Moniz is a great accommodation option in Madeira, with views of the ocean.

Places to visit in summer in Europe #8 – Switzerland

Switzerland is a gorgeous country, with pristine Alpine landscapes, crystal-clear lakes, and scenic towns. Interlaken and Lucerne, both in central Switzerland, are two of the best places in Europe to visit in summer

Interlaken is a lovely town nestled in the Swiss Alps. you could take a stroll along the Hoheweg promenade, visit the historic St. Beatus Caves or go canyoning or rafting on the Lütschine River.

If you’re feeling daring, try paragliding or bungee jumping. You can also take this scenic train ride to Jungfraujoch, Europe’s highest point, and enjoy breath-taking views of the Swiss Alps.

Lucerne is a beautiful city in central Switzerland.

Some of the top things to do in Lucerne are walking across the famous Chapel Bridge, Europe’s oldest covered wooden bridge, exploring the historic Old Town and seeing the Lion Monument, a sculpture honouring the Swiss Guards who died during the French Revolution.

Take this boat ride on Lake Lucerne and the cogwheel train to Mount Pilatus and enjoy the panoramic view of the region.

Other Europe summer destinations in Switzerland are Zurich, Geneva, and Zermatt.

Where to stay in Interlaken and Lucerne?

When in Interlaken, stay at Hotel Bernerhof, a centrally located property featuring rooms with mountain views.

In Lucerne, a great accommodation option is Hotel Central Luzern which is within walking distance from the Old Town.

Places to visit in summer in Europe #9 – Liechtenstein

Liechtenstein s a small and charming Central European country that is often overlooked by visitors but is among the best Europe summer destinations.

The Best way to explore this country is to book this guided tour from Zurich.

You can explore this beautiful country by visiting Vaduz Castle, the residence of the Prince of Liechtenstein. Go to the Kunstmuseum Liechtenstein and the Liechtenstein National Museum, to learn about the culture and history of the country, the Red House, and the Cathedral of St. Florin.

You can also head to Balzers and visit the Gutenberg Castle.

Where to stay in Vaduz?

Residence Hotel at Vaduz is a very good stay option, located in the heart of the city and very close to the major spots in Vaduz.

Places to visit in summer in Europe #10 – Netherlands

Next on this list of European summer destinations is The Netherlands, with its warm weather and long days providing a great opportunity to explore the cities of Amsterdam and The Hague and enjoy the local culture.

In Amsterdam, a worth-visiting attraction is the Van Gogh Museum, housing the world’s largest collection of Van Gogh’s artworks.

Learn about Anne Frank’s life and the history of the Holocaust at Anne Frank House. Visit the Vondelpark or take a stroll in the Jordaan neighbourhood. You can also book this canal cruise to get a unique perspective of the city.

The Hague is known for its beautiful beaches, and one of the most popular is Scheveningen Beach.

Visit Hague’s many museums including the Mauritshuis Museum, The Peace Palace, which houses the International Court of Justice. You can also visit the Binnenhof, which is the heart of Dutch democracy and home to the Dutch parliament.

You can book this guided walking tour to explore all these spots.

The Hague is also a great place to try traditional Dutch dishes like stroopwafels, herring, and bitterballen.

Other best summer European destinations in the Netherlands are Utrecht, Rotterdam, and Groningen

Where to stay in Amsterdam and Hague?

Book your Amsterdam stay at Ruby Emma Hotel to enjoy a sustainable yet luxurious stay.

When visiting Hague, stay at this stunning property called The Collector Hotel featuring fully equipped rooms and free Wi-Fi.

Places to visit in summer in Europe #11 – Austria

Austria is a beautiful country famous for its rich history, stunning architecture, and breathtaking scenery. Two of the most popular Summer destinations in Europe are Vienna and Salzburg.

Vienna, Austria’s capital city, is known for its imperial grandeur and cultural heritage.

The Hofburg Palace, housing the Imperial Apartments and the Sisi Museum is a must-see attraction. You can also take this guided tour of the UNESCO World Heritage-listed gardens of Schönbrunn Palace.

Take in an opera or ballet performance at the Vienna State Opera or visit the Musikverein concert hall to get a sense of Vienna’s cultural scene.

You can also visit the local market, Naschmarkt, and try traditional Austrian food.

In Salzburg, you can immerse yourself in Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart’s birthplace and take a stroll through the UNESCO World Heritage Site of the charming, Salzburg Old Town.

Book this guided Original Sound of Music Tour Visit locations used in the film, such as the Mirabell Palace and Gardens, Mondsee Cathedral, and Nonnberg Abbey, among other locations.

Take advantage of the opportunity to visit the Hohensalzburg Fortress, one of Europe’s largest and best-preserved castles. Take the funicular to the top of the Untersberg mountain for a breathtaking view of the city.

You can also take a scenic drive through the Austrian Alps at the Grossglockner High Alpine Road to enjoy spectacular views of the surrounding mountains and valleys.

Where to stay in Vienna and Salzburg?

You can book a Vienna stay at Motel One Wien-Hauptbahnhof featuring modern rooms and an on-site bar.

A great option for staying in Salzburg is Motel One Salzburg-Süd, just a few kilometres from the city centre.

Best Europe summer destinations #12 – Hungary

Hungary, located in Central Europe is a gorgeous country with a rich history and culture. Budapest, the capital city of Hungary, and Lake Balaton are two of the most popular European summer destinations to visit in the country.

In Budapest, visit the Hungarian Parliament Building, Fisherman’s Bastion, and Buda Castle, a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

Another must-see attraction is the Széchenyi Thermal Bath, which is one of Europe’s largest thermal baths and provides a relaxing and rejuvenating experience.

Take this Evening Sightseeing Cruise on the Danube River and enjoy panoramic views of the city.

Lake Balaton is the largest lake in Hungary surrounded by Beautiful towns and villages, vineyards, and beaches. You can take this guided day trip to the lake from Budapest.

Explore Balatonfured, known for its healing waters and beautiful promenade, and Tihany, a charming town with a Benedictine Abbey and stunning lake views.

Have a one-of-a-kind bathing experience at The Tapolca Cave Bath, a unique thermal cave system. If you’re interested in history and culture, go to the Herend Porcelain Factory or the Festetics Palace in Keszthely.

Where to stay in Budapest and Tihany?

Book your Budapest stay at the Emerald Hotel, a 4-star property just 14 kilometres from the airport.

Stay in Tihany at the OliverLux Aparthotel, featuring condos with a lake view and a fully equipped kitchen.

Best Europe summer destinations #13 – Czech Republic

The Czech Republic, a beautiful country in Central Europe, is home to many scenic towns, beautiful countryside, and stunning architecture.

Prague and Český Krumlov are two of the best Europe summer destinations in the country, with plenty of sights and activities to explore.

In Prague, you can stroll across the iconic Charles Bridge, which offers fab views of the Vltava River and Prague Castle. Take this guided tour of Prague Castle which is home to St. Vitus Cathedral and the Golden Lane.

Explore the Old Town Square and visit the famous Astronomical Clock and the Gothic-style Church of Our Lady before Tyn. For a break from the city’s hustle and bustle head to Petn Hillwhich and enjoy stunning views of the city. For something quirky take a walk around and check the monuments in Prague.

The Jewish Quarter, the Municipal House, and the Prague National Museum are other noteworthy attractions.

Český Krumlov is a small town in Southern Bohemia known for its beautiful castle, charming streets, and stunning scenery.

You can explore the Český Krumlov Castle which also houses the Museum of the Region of Český Krumlov, which provides information about the town’s history and culture.

Take a stroll on Latrán, the town’s oldest quarter, and the main square, which houses the Town Hall and the Church of St. Vitus. You can book this walking tour to explore this beautiful city.

Don’t forget to try out traditional Czech Cuisine such as the Marinovaný bůček and the Vajíčková pomazánka.

Where to stay in Prague and Český Krumlov?

A great accommodation option in Prague is the Pytloun Old Armoury Hotel, featuring elegant rooms with free Wi-Fi.

Located right on the banks of the Vltava River, Hotel Mlýn is a great stay option in Český Krumlov.

Best European countries to visit in June #14 – England

With its vibrant cities, historic landmarks, and beautiful countryside, England is among the best Europe summer destinations. London and Brighton, both in southeast England, are popular European summer destinations.

In London, you can visit the iconic landmarks of the Tower of London, Big Ben, the London Eye, and Buckingham Palace, the Houses of Parliament. Explore the British Museum, which houses an impressive collection of world art and artefacts.

Take a stroll through Hyde Park or a boat ride down the River Thames to see the city from a different perspective. Visit the well-known West End theatre district and see a performance at one of the many theatres in the area.

You can also book this Windsor Castle, Stonehenge & Bath Full-Day Tour.

Brighton is a vibrant and energetic seaside city in southeast England and among the most popular Summer destinations in Europe. You can visit Brighton Pier and Brighton Beach, for stunning views of the sea.

Explore the Lanes, a historic shopping district filled with independent shops and cafes. Visit the Royal Pavilion, a beautiful 19th-century palace built for King George IV.

You can also take this day trip to beautiful South Downs National Park and the Seven Sisters.

Cornwall is another great spot if you have more time on your hands!

Where to stay in London and Brighton?

For your London hotel, this Radisson Blu Edwardian Vanderbilt Hotel makes for a perfect stay option.

An excellent stay option in Brighton is The Grand Brighton, located on the seafront and just a 5-minute walk from The Lanes shopping street.

Best summer destinations Europe #15 – Scotland

With its beautiful landscapes, rich history, and distinct culture, Scotland in spring is beautiful but a must-visit summer destination. Edinburgh and the Isle of Skye are two of the most popular European summer destinations in Scotland.

In Edinburgh, you can visit Edinburgh Castle, the National Museum of Scotland, and the Scottish Parliament Building.

Walk down the Royal Mile a historic street lined with shops, restaurants, and historic buildings, including St. Giles Cathedral. You can also take this day trip to Loch Ness, Glencoe & the Scottish Highlands.

The Isle of Skye is a stunning destination located off the northwest coast of Scotland. A must-visit place is the Quiraing, a dramatic landscape offering some of Scotland’s most spectacular views.

Visit historic sites like Dunvegan Castle, the ancestral home of the Clan MacLeod, and the Museum of the Isles, which displays the history and traditions of the Highland clans, to learn about the island’s rich cultural heritage.

Other spots to explore are The Fairy Pools, the Old Man of Storr, and the Cuillin Mountains.

A great way to explore is to book this 3-Day Isle of Skye and The Highlands Tour from Edinburgh

Where to stay in Edinburgh?

Stay near the Edinburgh city centre at the No. 11 Boutique Hotel & Brasserie, an elegant property with an onsite restaurant.

Best summer sun destinations in Europe #16 – Germany

Next on this list of best Europe summer destinations is Germany, having warm temperatures and plenty of sunshine. You can explore the vibrant cities of Berlin and Munich in Germany.

In Berlin, you can learn about the city’s rich history and culture by visiting landmarks like the Berlin Wall, the Brandenburg Gate, and the Reichstag building.

Visit the Pergamon Museum and Museum Island, which provide a diverse range of cultural experiences, while the vibrant neighbourhoods of Kreuzberg and Neukölln provide a taste of Berlin’s alternative and bohemian culture.

A great way to explore the sights in Berlin such as the Government District, Berlin Central Station, and the Holocaust Memorial is by booking this bike tour.

Munich, in southern Germany, is famous for its beautiful architecture, rich history, and lively beer gardens. You can explore the city’s many landmarks, such as the Nymphenburg Palace, the Marienplatz, and the Frauenkirche.

During the summer, the city’s famous beer gardens, such as the Hofbräuhaus and the Augustiner-Keller, come alive, serving a variety of traditional Bavarian beers and cuisine. Munich hosts the popular festival of Oktoberfest in September and October.

You can also take a day trip to Neuschwanstein & Linderhof Castle.

Other popular German summer destinations in Europe are Hamburg, Cologne, and Heidelberg.

Where to stay in Berlin and Munich?

Grimm’s Potsdamer Platz is a classy property to stay in Berlin, located in the city centre.

You can book a stay at Hotel Am Moosfeld, a 4-star property in southeast Munich.

European Summer Destinations #17 – Denmark

Denmark enjoys mild summers with temperatures averaging around 20°C, making it one of the best European summer destinations. Copenhagen and Aarhus are great cities to visit in Denmark during the summer months.

Copenhagen, Denmark’s capital, is a vibrant, cosmopolitan city with a rich history and culture. You can explore the city’s many parks and gardens, such as Tivoli Gardens and Kongens Have.

Many museums and galleries in the city, such as the National Museum and the Ny Carlsberg Glyptotek, provide various cultural experiences.

You can also stroll along the picturesque Nyhavn harbour, with its colourful buildings and lively bars and restaurants. This Roskilde, Frederiksborg & Kronborg Day Tour from Copenhagen is also recommended.

Book this Culinary Experience Tour and try out a range of traditional Danish dishes.

Aarhus, located on the east coast of Jutland, is known for its stunning coastline.

You can explore the Aarhus Cathedral, the Old Town, Marselisborg Palace, and the ARoS Art Museum. The city’s many beaches, such as the Moesgaard Strand and the Bellevue Beach, are perfect for swimming, sunbathing, and relaxing.

Visitors can also engage in a variety of outdoor activities in the surrounding countryside, such as cycling, hiking, and kayaking.

Where to stay in Copenhagen and Aarhus?

When in Copenhagen, Hotel Skt. Annæ is a good place to stay. This boutique hotel is housed in 17th-century buildings offering modern rooms with stylish interiors.

The Radisson Blu Scandinavia Hotel is a great option to stay in Aarhus. It is nearby several tourist spots in Aarhus, such as the Aarhus Old Town.

European Summer Destinations #18 – Sweden

Sweden truly comes to life during the summer months, with long days of sunshine and warm temperatures. Sweden has some of the best Summer destinations in Europe: Stockholm and Gothenburg.

In Stockholm, you can explore Stockholm’s Old Town, or Gamla Stan featuring cobbled streets, colourful buildings, and charming cafes and shops, and visit the Royal Palace, Storkyrkan Cathedral, and the Nobel Museum.

Visit Skansen, the world’s first open-air museum, and the Vasa Museum, featuring the well-preserved 17th-century warship, the Vasa.

Stockholm is often called the ‘Venice of the North’ because of its many waterways. You can book this Under the Bridges Boat Tour and see the city from a different perspective and explore the archipelago of over 30,000 islands that surrounds Stockholm.

In Gothenburg, you can explore the Haga district, the city’s oldest neighbourhood which is known for its picturesque streets, cosy cafes, and antique shops.

Visit the Liseberg amusement park, offering a range of rides, attractions, concerts, and events. You can also go to the Gothenburg Museum of Art which features works by artists such as Rembrandt, Monet, and Picasso.

A unique way to explore this city is this Land & Water Amphibious Bus Sightseeing Tour.

Where to stay in Stockholm and Gothenburg?

The centrally located Downtown Camper by Scandic is a good place to stay in Stockholm. It offers rental services for bicycles, skateboards, and kayaks.

A great accommodation option in Gothenburg is the Radisson Blu Scandinavia Hotel, located within 2 kilometres of major tourist attractions.

European Summer Destinations #19 – Iceland

Next on this list of Summer destinations in Europe is the stunning country of Iceland. During the summer months, Iceland experiences relatively mild weather which makes exploring the country more comfortable.

Iceland’s Reykjavik and Blue Lagoon are popular destinations to visit in Europe in the summer.

Iceland’s capital, Reykjavik, is a charming city with colourful buildings, cosy cafes, and interesting museums.

Strolling through the streets, you check out art galleries and shops and visit attractions such as the Hallgrimskirkja church, Reykjavik City Museum, Perlan Museum, and the Harpa concert hall.

Don’t miss out on this Northern Lights Bus Tour from Reykjavik to experience the stunning phenomenon. You can also go whale watching by booking this tour departing from the harbours.

Book this guided tour from Reykjavik, to explore the Blue Lagoon, Golden Circle, and Kerid Crater, among other spots

The Blue Lagoon is a geothermal spa located about 50 kilometres from Reykjavik and is one of Iceland’s most popular attractions.

The lagoon is known for its warm, milky blue waters, which are heated by volcanic activity. You can unwind in the mineral-rich waters, which are thought to have skin-healing properties. The Blue Lagoon also has a restaurant, a bar, and a spa with various treatments.

Here’s an Iceland itinerary if you plan on spending more time in this gorgeous destination!

Where to stay in Reykjavik?

Grandi by Center Hotels is a good stay option located near major points of interest such as the Hallgrímskirkja Church, Reykjavik Old Harbour, and Harpa Concert Hall.

If you wish to stay near the Blue Lagoon, Reykjanes Guesthouse is a great option, located just 8 kilometres from Blue Lagoon.

European Summer Destinations #20 – Belgium

Belgium is a charming and picturesque country and is among the perfect Summer destinations in Europe. With its mild weather and long daylight hours, you can grab the opportunity to visit the cities of Brussels and Bruges.

In Brussels, you can visit the Grand Place, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, and the Atomium, an iconic structure, which resembles a giant atom.

Go to the Royal Museums of Fine Arts and look at a vast collection of Belgian and international artworks. Don’t forget to look at the iconic statue of Manneken Pis.

You can also book this day trip to Luxembourg and explore the historic sites of Luxembourg City and the picturesque village of Dinant.

Bruges is a beautiful and historic city, known for its charming canals, medieval architecture, and delicious chocolate. Take this boat tour along the canals and appreciate the city from the water.

A must-see attraction in Bruges is the Belfry, a medieval tower that offers breathtaking views of the city from the top.

Learn the history of chocolate and its production in Belgium at the Choco-Story Museum. You can also explore the area of Beguinage, the Church of Our Lady, Groeningemuseum, and Minnewater Lake.

Where to stay in Brussels and Bruges?

Book a stay in Brussels at the Appart’City Confort Bruxelles Centre Midi, featuring cosy rooms and a buffet breakfast.

A cosy stay option in Bruges is the Hotel Ter Brughe, located within walking distance from the Belfry.

When it comes to summer vacations, Europe has a plethora of stunning destinations to suit all tastes and preferences. There’s something for everyone, from beach towns to historic cities.

I hope that this list of 20 best Europe summer destinations has inspired you to plan your next adventure.

Whether you’re looking to soak up the sun on a Mediterranean beach, explore the rich history and culture of Eastern Europe, or indulge in the culinary delights of Western Europe, there’s a destination out there that’s perfect for you.

European Summer Destinations FAQs

What are the best European countries to visit in June?

Many European countries have great summer weather, but some of the best destinations Europe summer include Spain, Portugal, Italy, Greece, and Croatia.

What is the coolest city in Europe in summer?

If you’re looking for a city with mild temperatures, then some of the coolest cities in Europe in summer are Edinburgh, Scotland; Reykjavik, Iceland; and Dublin, Ireland. These cities tend to have cooler temperatures and refreshing breezes during the summer months making them the best places to visit in Europe during summer.

Which month is best for Europe trip?

Generally, the summer months offer pleasant weather but come with higher prices and larger crowds. Spring and fall are good shoulder seasons with mild weather and fewer tourists. Winter offers winter sports and holiday markets.

Lavinia Dsouza

Award-winning Analyst, multi-nominated digital content creator and photographer Lavina Dsouza's words capture stories about culture and tradition mainly through its food and people. She has written and contributed to publications such as The Washington Post, Lonely Planet and Matador Network, to name a few. She is the editor of UntraditionalHumans.com, a non-profit created to share inspiring stories from women of colour who break free from traditions and choose happiness.

She's also a speaker passionate about DEI and champions solo travel. She has collaborated with numerous renowned brands such as Intrepid Travel, TripAdvisor, Travel and Leisure and Adobe, to name a few.

She can be found on Twitter and Instagram.

PIN FOR LATER!

What’s your favourite European destination?

I’d love to hear them in the comments below!

EXPLORE MORE OF EUROPE

Some of the links on this post are affiliate links. These do not cost you extra to use, but will help provide Continent Hop with a small commission if/when you purchase through them, to recover some of the costs of running this website and providing free content to help you plan your travel. I appreciate your support!