Dentons, the world’s largest law firm, announces today that it has officially established an office in Portland, Maine, and named Andrew C. Helman as office managing partner. The creation of this office demonstrates the importance of the Portland market to our clients.

Helman, who is based in Portland and Boston, joined the Firm in January 2021 and has led the Firm’s growth in Portland since that time. Dentons currently has three lawyers in Portland and anticipates further expansion in the near future.

“Andrew has been integral in the growth of our Portland office this year, which includes the addition of talented lawyers Hannah King and Malina Dumas. He is intimately familiar with the business climate and culture of Maine and the New England region, and his leadership will be a tremendous asset to our Firm and our clients as we continue to grow our presence in key US markets like Portland,” said Toby McClamroch, Managing Partner of Dentons’ US Region.

Helman focuses his practice on bankruptcy and insolvency matters and works with all types of businesses, including those in the health care and cannabis sectors, to help them restructure and protect their assets. He has served as lead counsel to debtors, creditor committees, trustees, secured parties and others in chapter 11 cases, including having served as independent counsel to a state attorney general in several chapter 11 cases in New England and Delaware.

“I am excited for the opportunity to lead our Portland office and to be able to continue to deepen our relationships with clients here in Maine and across the globe,” Helman said. “We can provide clients in Maine with a deep bench and broad array of services. We also are the only firm in this market that can help Maine-based clients solve legal and business problems throughout the country and across the world.”

Helman is also admitted to practice in Massachusetts and will continue to serve clients out of Dentons’ Boston office as well. He currently is Finance co-chair of the Boston Bar Association’s Bankruptcy Law Section and the immediate past co-chair of the American Bankruptcy Institute’s Health Care Committee.

About Dentons