The Tennessee Williams Museum, located at 513 Truman Avenue, joins the island of Key West in celebrating its 200th Anniversary. The museum has expanded two of its historical exhibits that provide detailed material about two major gifts given by Tennessee Williams to the City of Key West.

The expanded exhibits showcase information about Williams’ writing, filming, and premiering “The Rose Tattoo” in Key West during the 1950s. Also, in 1981 Williams gifted the use of his name to the Tennessee Williams Fine Arts Center, now called the Tennessee Williams Theatre. These are two of the many cultural and philanthropic contributions made by the playwright during his thirty-four-year residency that helped place Key West on the cultural and literary map.

Both of the museum’s exhibits have been repositioned and enhanced to provide new information about these gifts through the use of original photos by Don Pinder, playbills signed by the playwright, artifacts and stimulating details about the development and dedication of the Tennessee Williams Theatre.

​

The Museum is open for self-guided tours from Thursday through Sunday from 9:30 a.m. to 4:30. p.m. An information sheet is available for guests that provides more in-depth details about the exhibits. For those seeking additional knowledge about the filming of “The Rose Tattoo” in Key West and the inclusion of local citizens and island locations in the film, or fascinating details about the dedication of the Tennessee Williams Theatre, Dennis Beaver, the Museum curator offers private day-time tours for four or more guests. Prior arrangements must be made by visiting the museum’s website https://www.kwahs.org/museums/tennessee-williams/visit

Each year, the Tennessee Williams Museum, in partnership with the Key West Art & Historical Society, hosts its annual Tennessee Williams Birthday Celebration throughout the month of March. Activities include a series of literary-based programs, contests and fundraisers celebrating the renowned American playwright Tennessee Williams, a 34-year resident of the island.

As a component of Williams’ birthday festival, the museum organized poetry and short story contests. It would like to recognize all the 2022 winners.

First place in the poetry contest was awarded to Paul Milenski of Massachusetts for “I Knew You as Thomas Lanier Williams at Iowa,” while second place went to Joseph Stanton of Hawaii for “Paper Lanterns.” In the short story component of the contest, Annette Holmstrom of Washington state was awarded first place for “Good Night Irene,” while second place went to Mary Lou Condike of Big Pine Key for “The Yellow Poster.” The winners of the contest were awarded certificates and a monetary prize sponsored by Laurie McChesney of Preferred Properties.

To read the prize-winning writing submissions, visit https://www.kwahs.org/museums/tennessee-williams/twfestival. Your museums. Your community. It takes an island.