Darius McCrary’s “family matters” have ironically landed him in the slammer, according to a new report.

The former sitcom star, known for his role as Eddie Winslow on the ’90s hit “Family Matters,” was arrested last month for failing to keep up with his child support payments, TMZ reported Saturday.

McCrary, 47, was reportedly taken into police custody on Nov. 27 on a felony count of failure to pay child support because he owed $52,788.04 as of March 12, 2019.

The actor pled not guilty and he was asked to pay a bond of $13,197.01, per court records the outlet obtained.

The father of three, who has two daughters and one son, reportedly remains in prison and was ordered to be monitored by a GPS device.

We have reached out to his reps for comment but did not immediately hear back.

However, Page Six has also exclusively learned that a month prior to being busted for child support, McCrary was also arrested in Redondo Beach, Calif., on Oct. 25.

A spokesperson for the Redondo Beach Police Department tells us Saturday that the “Moesha” alum was arrested at that time for an out-of-state fugitive warrant.

It’s unclear if the fugitive warrant from two months ago was related to McCrary’s latest arrest, but the watch commander says it was issued by authorities in the state of Michigan.

McCrary was reportedly first arrested for his failure to keep up with child support payments in 2015, and told a judge two years later that he wasn’t making any money.

For more Page Six you love…

Listen to our weekly “We Hear” podcast

Shop our exclusive merch

He claimed at the time that he had only made $500 that year and owed the IRS $90,000.

The “Star” alum also told the judge that he was working on turning things around by taking on a new acting role that paid him $125 a day for seven days of work, TMZ previously reported.

Less than a year later, McCrary was accused of dislocating his then-2-year-old daughter’s arm. He denied the allegation and claimed his ex-wife Tammy Brawner faked the story.