Katy Perry to headline glitzy amfAR event during Cannes

NEW YORK (AP) -- Katy Perry will be lighting up the French Rivera like fireworks next month: The singer will perform at amfAR's annual "Cinema Against AIDS" event, the glitzy A-list fundraiser held annually during the Cannes Film Festival.

The fundraiser, which takes place just outside of Cannes in Antibes, France, will again feature Sharon Stone, amfAR's global campaign chair; the actress had to bow out last year. Other stars set to attend include Kevin Spacey and Heidi Klum.

The May 19 event raises money for AIDS research. More than $30 million was raised last year, according to amfAR.

Obamas, Bidens to

kick off USO comedy show next week

WASHINGTON (AP) -- President Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden are joining their wives next week for a USO comedy show in observance of Military Appreciation Month.

The event marks the fifth anniversary of Joining Forces and the 75th anniversary of the USO, a military service organization. Joining Forces is the nationwide initiative that the first lady and Jill Biden launched in 2011 to support active-duty service members, retirees and their families.

Former "Daily Show" host Jon Stewart is headlining Thursday's event at Andrews Air Force Base for some 1,500 service members and their families.

David Letterman, former host of "The Late Show," is scheduled to appear while Judd Apatow is among the comedians who are expected to perform.

The comedy show is one of several events that Mrs. Obama and Mrs. Biden are participating in for their program's anniversary.

The White House says they will appear together Monday on NBC's "The Voice." Mrs. Obama will also appear Tuesday on "NCIS" on CBS.

Alec Baldwin to host revived 'Match Game' on ABC this summer

NEW YORK (AP) -- It's going to be fun and games for Alec Baldwin as he joins Steve Harvey and Michael Strahan for ABC's summer prime-time game-show block.

ABC announced Thursday that Baldwin will be quizmaster for a revival of "Match Game." First aired a half-century ago, it's a panel game show that features two contestants who compete to match the answers from six celebrities in filling in a missing blank.

"Match Game" will round out a full Sunday night of game shows, starting at 8 p.m. Eastern with Harvey returning as host of "Celebrity Family Feud" and Strahan presiding over "The $100,000 Pyramid."

The trio of hour-long shows will premiere on June 26.

Holocaust Remembrance Day to connect 9

states with plays

NEW YORK (AP) -- Events in nine states will honor Holocaust Remembrance Day with readings of plays that deal with that darkest time in world history.

The second annual Remembrance Readings program will include the reading of "2.5 Minute Ride" by Lisa Kron, "The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui" by Bertolt Brecht and "The Timekeepers" by Dan Clancy, among others.

The states participating either Sunday or Monday include New York, Florida, Illinois, California, Wisconsin, Alabama, Oregon, North Carolina and Massachusetts.

In New York, Emmy Award-winner Ed Asner will team up with actress Jayne Atkinson to read "The Soap Myth" at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center.

"We live in a word where ant-Semitism is growing by leaps and bounds," said Asner, who lost relatives fighting the Nazis. "That's why I'm doing 'The Soap Myth.'"

The annual event, launched by the National Jewish Theater Foundation, draws upon the over 600 plays in their Holocaust Theater Catalog at the University of Miami, the first comprehensive archive of theater materials related to the Holocaust.

This year's remembrance day comes at a time when immigration is a hot-button issue and Europe faces a refugee crisis unseen since World War II.

Asner noted that Germany is "trying to repay for crimes of the past" by taking in Syrian refugees, but America is only offering "a cold shoulder."

Celebrity birthdays

Singer Judy Collins is 77. Actor Stephen Macht is 74. Singer Rita Coolidge is 71. Pop singer Nick Fortuna (The Buckinghams) is 70. Actor-director Douglas Barr is 67. Actor Dann Florek is 65. Singer-songwriter Ray Parker Jr. is 62. Actor Byron Stewart is 60. Hall of Fame jockey Steve Cauthen is 56. Actress Maia Morgenstern is 54. Actor Scott Coffey is 52. Country singer Wayne Hancock is 51. Actor Charlie Schlatter is 50. Country singer Tim McGraw is 49. Rock musician Johnny Colt is 48. Rock musician D'Arcy is 48. Movie director Wes Anderson is 47. Actress Julie Benz is 44. Actor Bailey Chase is 44. Country singer Cory Morrow is 44. Gospel/rhythm-and-blues singer Tina Campbell (Mary Mary) is 42. Actor Darius McCrary is 40. Actor Jamie Dornan is 34. Actress Kerry Bishe is 32.