Family Matters star Darius McCrary has been accused of his baby over a boiling pot of water while saying he wished he'd never had her.

The accusation came to light before a judge ordered him to stay away from his wife Tammy Brawner and their infant daughter Zoey.

Brawner, 30, received a temporary restraining order against McCrary, 40, after she alleged domestic abuse, according to an article by TMZ.

She alleged in court documents that McCrary went ballistic February 10 and threw picture frames and other objects around the house.

Brawner also accused McCrary of striking her in the head with his forearm.

She claimed in court documents that their 16-month-old daughter Zoey was in danger of being struck by objects he threw.

Brawner also alleged that McCrary has abused her and Zoey in the past, citing the boiling water incident.

Brawner, a former Harlem Globetrotters player, accused McCrary of frequently spanking the baby and strapping down her arms during meals, according to court documents.

She also alleged in court papers that McCrary drinks and does drugs and comes home intoxicated and violent.

A Los Angeles judge ordered McCrary to move out of their home and stay 100 yards away from Brawner and Zoey.

McCrary was also banned from visitation until after a court hearing scheduled for next month.

Brawner stated that she plans to file for divorce.

McCrary's attorney Glen T. Jonas later told TMZ that Brawner lied in court documents about the actor abusing her and their daughter.

Jonas said Brawner 'is no victim ... she is a predator motivated by a desperate desire to extort money out of Mr. McCrary while trying to create an advantage in an impending divorce and custody battle.'

The attorney said that McCrary 'is a loving, devoted and dedicated father' while characterizing Brawner's allegations as 'obvious and outlandish lies ...we are all dumber for having read them.'

The response also took a jab at Brawner's career saying 'floundered after being fired by the Globetrotters she apparently will say anything for a bit of media attention and a glimpse of the spotlight.'

McCrary played Edward 'Eddie' Winslow on Family Matters from 1989 to 1998.

He most recently was featured in the new Fox musical drama Star in a recurring role.

McCrary portrayed Otis Leecan who is the abusive foster father of aspiring singer Simone Davis, played by 20-year-old Brittany O'Grady.

His character was stabbed in the December pilot by Simone's sister Star Davis, portrayed by Jude Demorest, and murdered in a January episode.

Fox renewed Star on Wednesday for a second season, according to Deadline.

McCrary was previously married to music video vixen Karrine Steffans, 38, from 2009 to 2011 and to Juliette M. Vann from 2005 to 2006.