On April 2, 2023, the patriarch of our family, Ronald Charles Paul, (Dad, Grandpa, Ron, RCP) passed away surrounded by family and love.

Born on June 10, 1942, Ron was a wonderful father, loving and devoted husband and genuinely good person. He is survived by his wife of almost 60 years, Marti (Ardis) Paul, his three children, Shari Paul, Shelley (Paul) and Terry Oachs and Rob and Lisa Paul, and four grandchildren, Garrett and Logan Oachs and Charlie and Savannah Paul.

Ron always had a song in his heart and on his lips. He shared his love of song with whoever would listen. Unfortunately he also knew disappointment in his life as he was an avid Minnesota Vikings fan. He has passed the torch to his family who is hoping for a Vikings Superbowl so we can share it with RCP.

A celebration of life is planned on June 10th in Chandler AZ.

In lieu of flowers, please consider making a donation to the American Heart Association in the name of Ronald C. Paul.

Ron was deeply loved and will be deeply missed by his entire family.

Published on May 8, 2023

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of RonaldHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of Ronald

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree