Ringwood Secondary College (RSC) is a vibrant learning community that celebrates achievement and recognises the unique learning needs of each individual. Students are encouraged, challenged and inspired to achieve their personal best. The College enrolment is 1600 students supported with diverse differentiated curriculum programs, including VCE, VCAL and VET.

The Year 7 ACE (Achievement, Commitment, Excellence) program for high ability students aims to engage and challenge students to reach their full intellectual, social and emotional potential within an enriched educational setting. Our ‘Bounce’ pastoral care model, based on the tenets of positive psychology, is well established within every year level. This explicit curriculum program teaches the skills for wellbeing.

RSC has extensive musical programs including stage and concert bands, ensembles, choirs, an orchestra, annual musical productions ‘Spamalot’ and the junior musical production ‘Aladdin’. Co curricula activities include over twenty sports, performing arts tours, debating, Tournament of Minds, Youth in Philanthropy, Debutante Ball, study groups, community service, Year 10 Central and Northern Territory tour, Year 9 interGREAT camp and student leadership programs. The House system has been extended into learning areas and further developed within year level ‘House’ activities.

Student agency is nurtured through student leadership with positions available across all year levels. The Student Representative Council, Ambassadors, and Year Level Leaders operate in teams well led by the Year 12 Prefects.

International tours provide many opportunities to experience new cultures. Experiences include, the triennial World Performing Arts Tour, the Nepal trek, the Greece/Italy/France Odyssey tour, and New Caledonia tours. The College embraces international cultures and accepts enrolments from fee-paying and exchange students. RSC has sister schools in England, France, China, Indonesia and Thailand.

RSC is proud of our parent involvement with the College Council and its sub-committees: PCTA, Music Association, Extra PArts and the Heritage and Alumni Group. Our Sporting Hall of Fame, Science Hall of Excellence and the Arts Hall of Achievement are complemented by the Heritage Hall of Fame, in recognising present and past student achievement. Our bollards, quilts, murals, sculptures, virtues pillars and ‘Ringwood Recalls’ reflect our College culture and spirit.

Ringwood Secondary College believes in inclusion, collaborative experiences and encourages students to think creatively, act compassionately and engage enthusiastically, so students achieve their personal best. World class school buildings provide stimulating adaptable learning spaces within a natural environment.

College tours will commence early in 2020. Please contact the College to register your interest.