An evening to recognise and celebrate the many and varied achievements of the Ringwood Secondary College ‘Class of 2024’.

Graduation and award presentations will be conducted in the theatre, followed by cocktail-style canapes served in the foyer.

Bookings Close Friday 27th September at midnight.

Concession & Discounts

All children aged 14 years and under must be accompanied by a responsible adult at all times.

Under 24 months: Free when held by a carer and not occupying a seat.

Companion Card: Accepted. Please either book online by selecting the Accessibility needs button after clicking the Book Tickets button or contact the Box Office .

How To Book

Anytime

Online: Buy Tickets

Mon to Fri 10am - 4pm

Phone: (03) 9262 6555

Box Office:

The Round

379 - 399 Whitehorse Road

Nunawading

Transaction Fee

Online: $3.00 per transaction (not per ticket)

Phone: $4.00 per transaction (not per ticket)

In Person at Box Office: No fee

Ticket Delivery

eTicket: Tickets sent via email. Can be printed or presented on a smartphone.

Collect: Collect from Box Office or at venue 1 hour prior to a performance.

Mail: Tickets sent via mail up to 14 days prior to the event.

Payment Options

Card: Visa, Mastercard and EFTPOS accepted.

Cash: In-person at the Box Office.

Cheque: Accepted up to 7 days prior to the performance. Payable to Whitehorse Tickets

Gift Voucher: Redeemable online, via phone or in-person at Box Office

Seating

Allocations: Seating allocation will be based on, but not limited to, the size of the group, time of booking and final venue configuration so as to be compliant with any restrictions that are in place. This may require allocated seats to be moved to comply with restrictions.

Accessibility: Wheelchair and Companion Cards can now be purchased online. Please select the Accessibility needs button after clicking the Book Tickets button. If there are any concerns please contact the Box Office immediately and they will happily assist you.

Conditions of Purchase

Please read the terms and conditions, prior to purchasing your tickets.