The history of the Assassins spans thousands of years, from the dawn of humanity until the modern era. Though the Assassins in their modern capacity were only founded during the Middle Ages, their predecessors were notably active during the end of the reigns of Xerxes I, Qin Shi Huang, Alexander the Great, and into Ptolemaic Egypt and the Roman Empire. After their rebirth as the Assassins in the 11th century, they operated throughout the rest of history.

Throughout their existence, the Assassins and their precursors were continuously entangled in a conflict with the Order of the Ancients and their reorganized form as the Templars.

History

Ancient world

Prehistory

The first traces of the Assassin ideology can be traced back to the dawn of humanity, which had been created by the Isu as a slave race. Adam and Eve, two human-Isu hybrids who were imune to the effects of the Pieces of Eden, led the humans in a fight for free will and liberty from oppression, for which they would later be considered by some as the first proto-Assassins.[1]

Adam and Eve's Apple of Eden would later be passed on to their son Abel. Abel would in turn be killed by his jealous brother Cain, who took the Apple for himself. Cain would later be regarded as the first follower of the Templar philosophy, and the Mark of Cain became the Templar insignia.[2]

Early history

Prior to the Brotherhood's official founding, several individuals embodied the ideology and shared the goals of the future Assassins. In ancient China, this included five individuals who would later come to be known as the Five Great Assassins in Sima Qian's Record of the Grand Historian. Some of their weapons and armor would later be kept safe in an underground vault by the Chinese Hidden Ones.[3]

Like Adam and Eve, other people descended from the Isu dedicated their lives to protecting the freedom of mankind.[2] This responsibility was passed down these bloodlines through the generations. One notable example was the bloodline of King Leonidas of Sparta, who fought to keep Greece free from the control of the Persian King and Order of the Ancients ally Xerxes I, and his supporters, the Cult of Kosmos, at the Battle of Thermopylae in 480 BCE.[4]

By 465 BCE, a secret group consisting of Darius, Amorges, Pactyas, and others opposed both Xerxes' rule and the Order of the Ancients, the latter of whom would later develop into the Templar Order. In August 465 BCE, they ambushed Xerxes' entourage, resulting in Xerxes' death at Darius' hands;[5] this became the first documented usage of the Hidden Blade.[2]

After Xerxes' death, Darius feared the king's son and successor Artaxerxes would fall under the Ancients' sway as well and planned to kill the young king. He was thwarted by Amorges, who had defected to the Order of the Ancients along with the rest of their group, hoping to use their resources to bring about change.[5]

Darius was later framed for another assassination attempt on Artaxerxes, conducted by the Order,[5] which caused Artaxerxes to turn blind.[4] The Ancients subsequently pursued Darius and his family for the next decades, as well as other descendants of Isu bloodlines that they referred to as "Tainted Ones".[5]

Peloponnesian War

In 451 BCE, the Cult of Kosmos orchestrated a plan to abduct one of King Leonidas of Sparta's grandchildren, Alexios. The Cult forced the Oracle of Delphi to declare a prophecy that Alexios would cause the fall of Sparta. After Alexios' sister Kassandra disrupted the ritual to sacrifice the boy, he was presumed dead and taken by the Cult, intending to use his unique bloodline to unlock the power of the Pieces of Eden. Kassandra was similarly presumed dead after being thrown off the mountain's cliffside by her stepfather Nikolaos, growing up to become a mercenary on Kephallonia.[4]

In 431 BCE, the Cult orchestrated the Peloponnesian War between Sparta and Athens to secretly gain control of Greece. Kassandra was hired by Elpenor, a member of the Cult of Kosmos, who tasked her with killing Nikolaos, but she ended up sparing his life. Through Elpenor, Kassandra learned of the existence of the Cult, their interest in finding her mother Myrrine, and that her brother had become a feared member of the Cult. She subsequently travelled around Greece, allying herself with people such as Herodotos, Sokrates, Hippokrates, Aspasia and Perikles to help find clues to her mother's whereabouts, all the while disrupting the Cult's plans by taking out its members.[4]

After failing to save Perikles from her brother and seeing Athens fall into the control of the Cultist Kleon, Kassandra reunited with her mother and through her, located her biological father Pythagoras inside the remnants of the ancient Isu city of Atlantis, on the island of Thera. Through her parents, she discovered the importance of her lineage and her role in keeping Atlantis safe from those who sought to harness its power for their own gain.[4]

In 426 BCE, Kassandra freed Sparta from Cultist rule by killing one of its kings, Pausanias. Two years later, she formed a resistance with her closest allies to free Athens from the Cult and Kleon's rule, eventually killing the Athenian ruler during the Battle of Amphipolis. Not long after, Myrrine and Kassandra reunited with Alexios on Mount Taygetos,[4] where Kassandra was forced to slay her brother.[6]

After destroying the Cult of Kosmos, Kassandra experienced a vision of future Assassins from the Cult's artifact, the Pyramid, before destroying it and sparing the Cult's former leader Aspasia. She also helped Pythagoras seal Atlantis from the world, and inherited the Staff of Hermes Trismegistus from him, allowing her to live indefinitely until the time came to pass it on.[4]

Around the same time, Darius and his son Natakas sought refuge in Makedonia in their attempts to evade the Order of the Ancients, eventually crossing paths with Kassandra, who attempted to stop the Order's attacks on the villages in the region. Joining forces, they eliminated the Ancient Pactyas and his subordinates, who were pursuing Darius and the Tainted Ones, before going their separate ways. They later reunited in Achaia, where worked together to take down the Ancient Phila, who blocked Makedonian refugees from escaping. After doing so, Kassandra started a relationship with Natakas and settled down in Dyme, Achaia with him, Darius and her newborn son Elpidios.[5]

Eventually, the Ancients' leader Amorges managed to locate Darius and Kassandra in Dyme, laying siege to the village, killing Natakas and abducting Elpidios. Despite Natakas' death causing a rift in their relationship, Kassandra and Darius worked together to take down the remaining Ancients and ultimately confronted and killed Amorges. Fearing that the Order would continue to hunt her, Kassandra told Darius to take Elpidios away from Greece. The two eventually settled in Egypt,[5] where Elpidios' descendant Aya would lay the groundwork for the Brotherhood generations later.[7]

Other activities

Some hundred years later, in the 4th century BCE, an ancient Order that served as a precursor to the Assassin Brotherhood operated against the Order of the Ancients in the Macedonian Empire.[8] In 323 BCE, Iltani, one of these proto-Assassins, halted the advance of Alexander the Great,[9] an ally of the Ancients.[10] She managed to fatally poison the Greek conqueror and attempted to retrieve his Staff of Eden,[2] but failed and Alexander was ultimately entombed with the Staff in Alexandria, the city he had founded in Egypt.[7]

In 227 BCE, one of the Five Great Assassins, Jing Ke, unsuccessfully attempted to assassinate[3] an affiliate of the Order of the Ancients, King Zheng of the Qin state of China, who would later become known as the first Emperor of China, Qin Shi Huang.[9] Seventeen years later, Qin Shi Huang was killed by Wei Yu with a spear named after Jing Ke, an act which caused Wei Yu to be revered by later Assassins.[2]

Around 70 BCE, the ancient protectors of Egypt known as the Medjay, who would later give rise to the Assassin Brotherhood, were hunted by the Order of the Ancients. A former soldier named Bion, employed by the Ancient Raia, managed to kill several Medjay, including Sabu in 56 BCE. Bion was eventually killed by Sabu's son Bayek and his future wife Aya, before Bayek proceeded to track down and eliminate Raia as well.[11]

Formation of the Hidden Ones

In 49 BCE, members of the Order of the Ancients travelled to the Siwa Oasis in Egypt to discover more about an Isu vault hidden beneath the Temple of Amun. In doing so, they kidnapped Bayek and his young son Khemu to push the Medjay for information. The altercation resulted in the death of Khemu, sending Bayek and Aya on a quest for vengeance against the Ancients. After killing his first target Rudjek, Bayek returned to Siwa to kill the priest Medunamun, from whom he obtained an Apple of Eden.[7]

Aya was bound to her duties as protector to Queen Cleopatra, who was engaged in a civil war with her brother Ptolemy XIII, supported by the Ancients. During her absence, Bayek hunted the men and women responsible, forming a network of people opposing the Ancients and supporting Cleopatra. As Bayek took down most of the Order's network, his and Aya's attention shifted to helping Cleopatra secure an alliance with Pompey the Great against Ptolemy to get support from the Roman Republic.[7]

When the Ancients had Pompey murdered, Bayek and Aya enabled Cleopatra to meet with Pompey's rival, general Julius Caesar, in Alexandria, resulting a successful alliance between the two. The couple later aided Cleopatra by unlocking the door to the tomb of Alexander the Great, which the queen sought to use to impress Caesar. Meanwhile, the Order began secretly manipulating Caesar and, by extension, Cleopatra.[7]

The Ancients' influence over Cleopatra allowed them to retrieve Alexander's Staff of Eden from his tomb and to kill Cleopatra's follower Apollodorus the Sicilian, who held the Apple of Eden taken by Bayek. Faced with stronger opposition than before, Bayek and Aya met with their allies who opposed Cleopatra and Caesar, laying the groundworks for a new Brotherhood.[7]

In 47 BCE, after Caesar and Cleopatra betrayed Bayek and Aya under the Ancients' influence, the two returned to Siwa to stop the Order's leader Flavius Metellus, finding only an opened vault. Bayek tracked Flavius down, exacting revenge for his son's death and reacquiring the Apple, which he later hid away.[7]

Meanwhile, Aya recruited the Roman Senators Marcus Junius Brutus and Gaius Cassius Longinus, enemies of Caesar, to their cause, determined to leave for Rome to combat the Ancients there. Before leaving, Bayek and Aya named their new brotherhood the Hidden Ones, laying out the foundation of the Creed and their customs. They each established bureaus in Memphis and Rome, respectively.[7]

In 46 BCE, the priest Menkhtu impersonated Medunamun as the "Ibis Reborn" and allied with the remnants of the Order of the Ancients in Egypt to form the Sect of the Ibis Reborn in an attempt to retake control of the nation. As they entered the Isu complex under the Great Pyramid of Giza, the Hidden Ones killed Menkhtu and his followers, putting an end to their plans.[12]

In Memphis, the Ancient Habibah possessed one half of an Isu dagger once wielded by the Isu Vejovis. She was killed by the Hidden One Khepri, who was secretly a Sage of Vejovis. After recovering the dagger, Khepri was sent to Mesopotamia to establish a bureau and protect the artifact.[13]

Early assassinations

By 44 BCE, Julius Caesar had become the new figurehead of the Order of the Ancients, with Lucius Septimius as his right hand. With Aya as their leader,[7] Brutus and Cassius spearheaded a conspiracy with thirty-eight other Roman Senators who opposed Caesar's imperialist ideals after he was appointed dictator for life.[14]

On 15 March 44 BCE, Aya, Brutus and Cassius went to the Theatre of Pompey where the Roman Senate was to convene. While Brutus and Cassius went to the curia, Aya fought and killed Septimius, before joining her brothers in the Senate. Aya was the first one to strike at Caesar, followed by the Roman Senators, resulting in Caesar's assured death. Shortly after, Aya adopted the new name Amunet.[7]

As they were subsequently pursued by Caesar's ally Marcus Antonius,[15] Brutus and Cassius eventually fled from Rome, and a civil war ensued. The armies of Gaius Cassius Longinus and Marcus Junius Brutus were confronted by the army of Marcus Antonius and Octavian at Philippi, and Cassius was killed in the ensuing battle. Faced with inevitable defeat, Brutus committed suicide; his Brothers attempted to revive him using one of the Shrouds of Eden, but were only briefly successful;[16] nonetheless, some reports spread that Brutus survived.[15]

After Caesar's death, the Hidden Ones continued to be at odds with the Order of the Ancients, now under the leadership of Octavian. In 38 BCE, the Hidden Ones in the Sinai Peninsula faced trouble from one of Caesar's former generals, Gaius Julius Rufio. The conflict saw Bayek reunite with Tahira, the local bureau leader, and Amunet as they attempted to keep the region safe from the Ancients' influence. Tahira was killed,[17] and Bayek assassinated Rufio in retaliation.[18] The Hidden Ones subsequently aimed to spread their influence to Petra and Judea,[19] where the newly inducted Kawab intended to fight the tyrannical rule of King Herod the Great.[20]

The same year, Bayek heard reports from Amunet of a curse that had struck Thebes and the nearby Valley of the Kings. During his investigation, Bayek discovered that an ancient artifact was being used to create illusions of dead pharaohs that attacked the populace. After exploring several projections of the Afterlife brought forth by the artifact, Bayek discovered that it was another Apple of Eden used by the priestess Isidora in retaliation for the murder of her mother Nitokris at the hands of grave robbers. Bayek killed Isidora and handed the Apple to his ally Sutekh, who went to hide the Apple but mysteriously died in the Waset Desert.[21]

In 30 BCE, fourteen years after Aya had decided to spare Cleopatra's life,[7] the Egyptian Pharaoh was caught in a civil war between Octavian and her lover, Marcus Antonius. After Marcus Antonius was defeated and committed suicide, Octavian's forces closed in on Alexandria, throwing Egypt's people into the crossfires of war.[15]

On 12 August, Amunet infiltrated Cleopatra's palace to implore her to end the war, persuading the Pharaoh to take her own life using Amunet's poison;[15] legend would later say Amunet killed her with a poisonous asp.[2] As a final gesture to her former friend, Amunet took her son Caesarion in to be trained as a Hidden One.[15]

Activities in the Roman Empire

In 27 BCE, the Roman Republic had been transformed into the Roman Empire by Octavian. The third Emperor who reigned over this new empire, Caligula, was a tyrant whose reign was supported by the Order of the Ancients. This turned him into a target for the Hidden One Leonius, who fatally stabbed him in 41 CE.[2]

The Hidden Ones also expanded their reach throughout the territories of the Roman Empire and beyond. By the end of the 1st century CE, the Brotherhood had established bureaus as far north as Britannia, and as far east as modern-day India.[22] By the middle of the 3rd century CE, a group of Hidden Ones started operating throughout the territories of the empire as the Liberalis Circulum.[23]

By 259 CE, the Liberalis Circulum had a headquarters in the city of Lugdunum. The Roman Hidden One Lucius tasked the Aleman Accipiter with obtaining a Precursor artifact known as the Ankh. Lucius' son Aquilus travelled to meet Accipiter,[24] but was left unconscious when his assassination of General Gracchus failed.[25] Accipiter rescued him and gave him the Ankh, which Aquilus took to his father.[24]

Lucius was murdered by his friend Caïus Fulvus Vultur, secretly a member of the Order of the Ancients, and the Ankh was stolen.[24] Aquilus exacted revenge on Senator Vultur, but he was arrested by Roman guards on his return to Lugdunum. After Accipiter negotiated a truce with the Prefect of Lugdunum on behalf of the Alemanni, he attempted to rescue Aquilus, who was killed by Roman guards during Accipiter's ambush. Accipiter left the Ankh in the care of Aquilus' wife Valeria.[26]

In 330 CE, during the reign of Constantine the Great, one Hidden One became acquainted with the Emperor.[27]

Collapse of the Roman Empire

By the 5th century CE, the power of the Roman Empire began to wane. In 410, Emperor Honorius withdrew Roman troops from Britannia to aid in the fight against Germanic tribes in Gaul. After Honorius' death in 423, Magister Vitus deemed the opposition they faced in Britannia from local tribes to be too severe and ordered the Brotherhood to evacuate to mainlaind Europe, deeming it preferable to abandon the island than to see the Hidden Ones eradicated. The remaining members were recommended to join the bureau in Cologne.[22]

Brotherhoods in other outlying territories of the Roman Empire faced similar issues, causing them to retreat to other areas in similar fashion to the Hidden Ones in Britannia. Consequently, the Hidden Ones eventually established their strongest presence among the kingdoms and caliphates in the eastern Mediterranean. This would eventually result in a major foothold among the territories of the Abbasid Caliphate.[22]

Middle Ages

An Lushan rebellion

In 751, the army of the Abbasid Caliphate clashed with the army of the Tang dynasty of China, resulting in the Battle of Talas. A group of Hidden Ones centered in the Great Desert led by Éléna hunted the troups of Abbasid Caliph Abul Abbas As-Saffah when they rescued a Tang soldier called Li E. They recruited the man into the Brotherhood, and Éléna would train him in their ways to become a Hidden One. By 754, this group of Hidden Ones had been killed after being attacked by As-Saffah's men at their headquarters. Li E was left the sole survivor and fled back to Tang territory.[3]

Struggle in the Abbasid Caliphate

In 824, the Hidden One Fuladh Al Haami hired a group of mercenaries to steal a case from the Martyrs of Agaunum, a cult allied with the Order of the Ancients. However, one of the mercenaries, Francis, secretly served the Martyrs and sabotaged the group's mission, resulting in most members' deaths. Eventually, the last surviving mercenaries – Azadeh, Dias and Roshan – ambushed the Martyrs while they were meeting with an Order member in Baghdad and killed them with Fuladh's help, securing the case. Fuladh then recruited Roshan into the Hidden Ones.[28]

By the mid-9th century, the Hidden Ones had established a strong presence in the Abbasid Caliphate, operating primarily out of their headquarters at Alamut. Under the leadership of a council headed by Mentor Rayhan, the Alamut Hidden Ones supported the Zanj rebellion led by Ali ibn Muhammad and fought against the Order of the Ancients based in Baghdad.[29]

In 861, Roshan, by now a Master Assassin, recruited the young thief Basim Ibn Ishaq in Anbar and brought him to Alamut for training. Roshan had deduced Basim was secretly the reborn form of an Isu following his theft of a Memory Seal from the Winter Palace, during which he inadvertently killed the Caliph Al-Mutawakkil and activated the artifact. However, Roshan kept this information hidden from the rest of the brotherhood, including Basim himself, fearing the consequences of such a discovery.[29]

After Basim completed his training, he was sent to Baghdad alongside Roshan, Fuladh, and other Hidden Ones to combat the Order's influence in the city. As Basim assassinated various Order members, who were searching for Isu relics in and around Baghdad, he rose in the brotherhood's ranks and eventually became a Master Assassin. However, during a confrontation with the Order's leader Qabiha, Basim was made aware of his nature as a reborn Isu and was informed of a temple underneath Alamut.[29]

Although Roshan assassinated Qabiha and tried to dissuade her apprentice from seeking out the Alamut temple, Basim, having grown distrustful of the Hidden Ones, disobeyed her and returned to Alamut. He arrived in the midst of an attack by Tahirid forces, who had previously been allied with the Hidden Ones but had betrayed them due to a deal made by governor Muhammad ibn Tahir with the Order. After helping the surviving Hidden Ones to repel the attack, Basim entered the Alamut temple and regained the memories of his past life as the Isu Loki, while Roshan elected to leave the Hidden Ones.[29]

In 867, Basim and his apprentice Hytham were sent to the Byzantine capital of Constantinople to foil an assassination plot by Emperor Basil I and the Order of the Ancients against the prince Leo. Allying with the Varangian guard and Eagle Clan leader Thyra, the Hidden Ones saved the prince and killed the leader of the Ancients, Isaac.[30]

Return to the British Isles

By 870, a team of Hidden Ones led by Basim was stationed in Constantinople. From there, Ammon was sent to Bulgar on a mission to recover a Shroud of Eden. Ammon faced opposition from the Order of the Ancients, as well as from a Viking named Sigurd Styrbjornsson, who took Ammon's life before he could finish his mission. Through another Hidden One's report, Basim discovered that the Viking had a mark on his neck and came to realize that Sigurd was a reincarnation of the Isu Tyr,[31] which inspired Basim to seek out the other reborn Isu like himself.[22]

Sometime later, Basim and Hytham met and befriended Sigurd when the Viking came to Constantinople. As the Order of the Ancients retained a powerful presence in northern Europe, Basim and Hytham decided to accompany Sigurd back to Norway in 872 and combat the Order's influence there. Upon arrival in Fornburg, the home of Sigurd's Raven Clan, Basim met Sigurd's adopted sister Eivor Varinsdottir who was, unbeknownst to both Basim and Eivor herself at the time, the reincarnation of Loki's nemesis Odin.[22]

During their time in Norway, Basim and Hytham became involved in the Raven Clan's conflict with Kjotve the Cruel, the leader of the rival Wolf Clan and a secret member of the Order. During a duel between Kjotve and Eivor, Hytham attempted to interfere and assassinate Kjotve, only to be gravely wounded. After Kjotve's death at Eivor's hands, Basim and Hytham agreed to follow Sigurd and Eivor to England, as the Vikings did not wish to live under the rule of the new King of Norway, Harald Fairhair.[22]

In England, the Raven Clan established a settlement named Ravensthorpe, where the Hidden Ones set up a bureau. Hytham, unable to fight in the same capacity following the conflict with Kjotve, headed the bureau, and frequently employed the aid of Eivor to kill the Order's members active in England. Meanwhile, Basim followed his own ambitions, hoping to revive Tyr's memories in Sigurd. Their travels together led them to the discovery of the Saga Stone, an ancient tablet taken from the Isu temple housing Yggdrasil to England by Ragnar Lothbrok. Basim, Sigurd and a reluctant Eivor subsequently formed an alliance with the scholar Fulke to acquire the Saga Stone, only for Fulke to later betray them and have Sigurd imprisoned by King Alfred of Wessex.[22]

Realizing Fulke was a member of the Order, Basim and Eivor worked together to hunt her down and rescue Sigurd. With the help of Eivor's various allies in England, they besieged the castle of Portcestre in Sussex, killing Fulke and freeing Sigurd, who had been tortured and had his right arm cut off during his imprisonment. This inadvertently benefited Basim's goals, as the torture had awakened Tyr's memories inside Sigurd and he started to believe himself a god.[22]

In 877, Sigurd decided to seek out "Valhalla" and convinced Eivor to accompany him back to Norway, where the siblings found the Yggdrasil Chamber and connected themselves to the device. Basim, having deduced Eivor to be Odin's reincarnation, secretly followed them and waited for the siblings to be disconnected from Yggdrasil, whereupon he ambushed them. Seeking revenge on Odin, Basim attempted to kill Eivor, but the Viking ultimately defeated and trapped him in Yggdrasil's simulation with Sigurd's help. This caused Basim to be presumed dead by all his fellow Hidden Ones.[22]

After returning to England, Eivor hunted down the last remaining members of the Order and discovered King Alfred to be their Grand Maegester. Meeting with the king following his defeat in the Battle of Chippenham and subsequent exile, Eivor learned that Alfred had secretly helped her and Hytham to eliminate the Order by sending them information under the pseudonym "Poor-Fellow Soldier of Christ". Alfred had done so because he was against the Order's veneration of the Isu and hoped to reform it as a Christian organization. Believing Alfred no longer posed a threat, Eivor and Hytham decided to spare him and let him carry out his plan to rebuild the Order as the Knights Templar.[22]

Despite Eivor, Hytham and Alfred's actions, several remnants of the Order in England remained and they allied themselves with the Descendants of the Round Table to recover Excalibur, a Sword of Eden possessed by Eivor. At the same time, the Women of the Mist sent Niamh of Argyll to infiltrate the Hidden Ones in Lunden to take the sword back to Avalon. After Niamh stole the artifact, Hytham helped her by burning a replica of the sword at Hwithors. As the Ancients and the Descendants believed that Excalibur had been destroyed, Niamh brought the sword to Avalon while the Hidden Ones and the Women of the Mist established an alliance.[32]

At some point in the late 9th century, Hytham recruited the copyist monk Edward,[33] who had been kidnapped by Eivor during a raid on his village,[34] into the Hidden Ones. Following his brother Ecbert's supposed death, Edward investigated it with the help of the Viking Niels Gunnarsson and the Hidden One Adelaïde. The investigation led them to an Isu temple underneath the Loch Ness lake in Scotland, where they discovered a cult led by the monk Columba, who used the Codex of Eden to convert the population. Flooding the temple and destroying the cult, Edward betrayed and killed Adelaïde after she murdered Ecbert, who had faked his death and infiltrated the cult on King Alfred's orders. Edward then brought the Codex to the king and agreed to join his reformed Order.[33]

In Lunden, the Ancient Stowe was in possession of half of Vejovis' dagger before sending it to Syria. Three Hidden Ones helped Alva, a Viking warrior of the Raven Clan and a Sage of Vejovis, to kill the Ancient. While exploring the ruins of the Lunden bureau, Alva entered an Isu chamber and communicated with a hologram of Vejovis. The Isu addressed a "spectator" saying that they should locate the blade by finding his Sage. He also tasked Alva to destroy the chamber, which she did.[13]

Several years later, Eivor encountered Roshan when the former Hidden One arrived in England in pursuit of the Ancient Makira. Despite having left the brotherhood two decades prior, Roshan continued to hunt down remnants of the Order and had learned about Makira's alliance with Edward, Earl of Westerna. As Makira and Edward were launching raids to steal gold, silver and various documents and were framing the Raven Clan for the attacks, Eivor and Roshan joined forces to stop them. Once Makira and Edward had been dealt with, Roshan recovered a document from the former's body and parted ways with Eivor, travelling to Jerusalem.[35]

By 889, the Hidden Ones had successfully established a new brotherhood in England, with Hytham having several apprentices training under him. Though Hytham attempted to recruit Eivor into the brotherhood, the Viking politely turned him down and left England for good not long after.[36]

Late Viking Age

By the later half of the 10th century, the Hidden Ones had made their way over to Scandinavia, which was then inhabited by the Norsemen. There, they allied themselves with King Eric of Sweden, and the brotherhood's Mentor, Torgny the Lawspeaker, served as the king's personal advisor.[37]

As of 985, the Hidden Ones opposed the Scandinavian prince Styrbjörn the Strong, King Eric's nephew. The brotherhood suspected that Styrbjörn's ally, King Harald Bluetooth, was affiliated with the Templar Order and in possession of one of the prongs of the Trident of Eden. To oppose the Order's expansion to Scandinavia, the Brotherhood's members, namely Thorvald Hjaltason, opposed Styrbjörn's campaigns against King Eric, fighting to remove the Order's agents from their ranks.[37]

Reformation in the Levant

By the late 11th century, the Hidden Ones had become known as the Assassins. Assassin historian Shaun Hastings speculated the name change might have been a mere adoption of the name Hashashin, meaning "hash-smokers", which was used as an insult against members of the Brotherhood.[22]

As of 1090, the Brotherhood in the Abbasid Caliphate was under the control of Hassan-i Sabbāh. In response to the Templars' reformation as a public knightly order, Sabbāh determined that the Assassins too had to become a public organization. Under his leadership, assassinations were much more often carried out in public, encouraging the people to stand up against oppression alongside the Assassins.[9]

In 1162, the Brotherhood was led by Hassan the Younger from Alamut. He sent an individual who would later come to be known as Al Mualim to establish another fortress in Masyaf, which some speculated to be the consequence of an ideological rift between the two Assassins.[38]

By the 1170s, control of the Brotherhood in the Levant had fallen to Al Mualim.[39] He enforced a series of rules for his Assassins, including prohibiting the use of poison, as well as promising new initiates that paradise would await them upon their deaths.[2]

In 1176, Saladin set up camp outside the Levantine Assassins' headquarters of Masyaf, intent on destroying the Brotherhood. Al Mualim sent Umar Ibn-La'Ahad to silently infiltrate Saladin's tent and plant a message, but Umar was discovered and forced to kill a nobleman. Saladin discovered Umar's name from interrogating Ahmad Sofian, and sent his uncle Šihāb ad-Dīn to negotiate peace with the Assassins; however, he called for Umar's execution, to which Al Mualim reluctantly complied.[39]

Conflict during the Third Crusade

Since at least 1189,[40] Al Mualim was aware of an Apple of Eden located somewhere in the Holy Land. Unbeknownst to his subjects, he collaborated with the high-ranking members of the Knights Templar to find the artifact and, secretly, claim the Holy Land for himself. They eventually located it in an ancient vault beneath the ruins of Solomon's Temple.[41]

Before the Knights Templar could claim it, Al Mualim had three of his Assassins, including Altaïr Ibn-La'Ahad, retrieve the artifact. Arriving at the same time as the Templars, Altaïr ignored his master's orders and decided to seize this oppportunity to kill Grand Master Robert de Sablé, but failed. Though Malik Al-Sayf was gravely injured and his brother killed, he returned the artifact to Masyaf.[41]

The Knights Templar followed Altaïr back to Masyaf, where they attempted to lay siege to the fortress, but were routed by Altaïr. For breaking the tenets of the Creed, Altaïr was demoted to a novice and was sent on a quest to restore his rank of Master Assassin by killing nine notable Templar targets on both sides of the crusader conflict in Damascus, Acre and Jerusalem, winning back the trust of his master and fellow Assassins.[41]

After Grand Master de Sablé used his subordinate Maria Thorpe as a decoy to prevent Altaïr's attempt on his life, he wrote to meet Saladin and King Richard I of England at the Battle of Arsuf to rally them against the Assassins. Altaïr faced de Sablé in combat during his meeting with King Richard, as per the king's request, and killed the Grand Master, who in his dying moments revealed Al Mualim's treachery.[41]

Meanwhile, Al Mualim used the artifact to make his Assassins bend to his will. They ultimately faced opposition from a small group of Assassins including Altaïr and Malik. Altaïr confronted his master in the fortress' garden, where he fought off the illusions created by the Apple and ultimately killed the Mentor.[41]

Following an attack on Masyaf by the Templars in 1189, the Assassin and Vejovis' Sage Faisal,[13] who had been rescued by Altaïr during the assault,[40] rode to Damascus, weakening the Templars' forces along the way. Upon arriving in the city, Faisal met a Templar known as "The Hideout" who, believing the Assassin had defected to their cause, gave him part of Vejovis' blade in order to transport it to Beirut. Their meeting was interrupted by the Assassin Rafee, who fought Faisal, believing he had betrayed the Brotherhood. The Sage killed Rafee but explained that his act would ultimately help the Assassins. Faisal then delivered the dagger to Beirut and, from there, to Constantinople.[13]

Reforms and globalization attempts

After the death of Al Mualim, a minor civil war broke out among the Levantine Assassins, stirred by Abbas Sofian. Altaïr eventually managed to become the new Mentor through gaining the support of his fellow Assassins. He initiated a series of reforms, allowing the use of poison and prohibited the taking of the ring finger and the promise of a false paradise.[2] Altaïr then left on a journey to Cyprus, the Templars' new headquarters, supporting the local resistance movement. Due to Altaïr's efforts, the Templars left the island with the artifacts from the Templar Archive in Limassol, though the Assassin managed to kill the new Grand Master Armand Bouchart,[42] gaining the island for the Assassins in the process.[2]

Altaïr and Malik Al-Sayf worked together on inventing new assassination techniques for the Assassins, resulting in the usage of dual Hidden Blades. All the while, Altaïr continued to study the Apple and wrote in his codex, which defined the Creed for generations to come.[2]

Altaïr and his Assassins also started visiting other countries to spread their reformed Assassin philosophy.[39] However, Altaïr was unsuccessful to spread his teachings in Constantinople in 1204, due to the chaos of the Fourth Crusade, and returned to Masyaf.[39]

First Barons' War

In 1215, tensions rose among the aristocracy in England, when King John had fallen under the sway of the Knights Templar. In doing so, the king refused to abide by Magna Carta. This led the Assassin Robert Fitzwalter to lead the local barons in rebellion against the king, with additional support from the Kingdom of France.[43]

However, this created a rift in the Brotherhood, as the Master Assassin William of Cassingham opposed Fitzwalter's support of the barons and alliance with the French. He instead worked to support John's young son Henry. By the end of the conflict, John had passed away and Henry became the new King of England.[43]

Assassination of Genghis Khan

Around 1217, Altaïr Ibn-La'Ahad recognized the threat of the rising Mongol Empire under the leadership of Genghis Khan, and suspected him of wielding a Piece of Eden. Together with his wife and son Darim, he left the Levantine Brotherhood in the care of Malik Al-Sayf and journeyed to Mongolia. They joined forces with the fledgling Mongolian Brotherhood, and made plans to take down the Khan and stop the Mongol horde.[39]

In February 1227, Darim and Qulan Gal pursued Genghis Khan's son Jochi, who was fatally poisoned by Darim.[43] In August 1227, Qulan Gal joined Altaïr in an attack on the Great Khan's camp in China, though Altaïr was wounded in the process and the Mongols were alarmed.[39]

Genghis Khan attempted to flee, but his horse was shot down by Qulan Gal, followed by Darim who killed him with another arrow.[39] The Assassins consequently rescued Gal's apprentice Nergüi, who was left disfigured.[43] With the Mongols left leadership, Altaïr and his family concluded their business in Mongolia and left their Mongols brothers for Masyaf.[39]

Fall of Masyaf

Circa 1216, Abbas Sofian plotted the murder of Altaïr's son Sef, and framed Malik Al-Sayf for the murder. With the Levantine Brotherhood left leaderless, he installed a council with himself as its head. Altaïr and his family returned in 1228, and after meeting with Abbas, Altaïr rescued Malik from imprisonment. During their absence, Abbas' right-hand man Swami killed Malik,[39] spurring Altaïr and Maria to meet with Abbas. The meeting turned violent, resulting in the deaths of Maria and Swami. Altaïr fled with the help of his son Darim,[40] and started living in exile in Alamut,[39] while Abbas became the new Mentor of the Levantine Brotherhood.[40]

For almost twenty years, Altaïr spent his days studying the Apple of Eden, creating new inventions such as the Hidden Gun. In the Isu temple beneath Alamut, he discovered artifacts known as Memory Seals, six of which he took with him.[39] Meanwhile, tensions between the Assassins and Mongols rose when Qulan Gal and Nergüi respectively killed Chagatai Khan and Ögedei Khan in 1241, creating a power vacuum in the Empire.[43] Altaïr returned to Masyaf six years later and quickly gained support from the Assassins. He went on to kill Abbas and retook his title of Mentor, bringing the Brotherhood back to its former glory. He also started construction of a library beneath Masyaf.[39]

In 1256,[39] under the orders of the Templar Mongol Khan, Möngke,[44] Hülegü Khan destroyed the Assassin fortress of Alamut. Knowing the Mongols' arrival at Masyaf was imminent, Altaïr requested the travellers Niccolò and Maffeo Polo to visit their fortress. Altaïr started telling the Polo brothers his life story and trained them in the ways of the Assassins, seeing them as the Order's future.[39]

On 12 August 1257, Hülegü Khan laid siege to Masyaf. The old Mentor handed the Polos his codex and five Memory Seals, and ordered the other Assassins to abandon Masyaf, wanting his Assassins to operate amongst the people. He then locked himself in his library with the Apple of Eden and his final Memory Seal and passed away.[40]

Conflict with the Mongol Empire

After escaping from Masyaf, the Polos were attacked by the Mongols and lost the codex. Nonetheless, they arrived in Constantinople, founded an Assassins Guild, and hid the Memory Seals in the city.[39] They journeyed to the Mongol Empire in 1259 to retrieve the codex, but their efforts were unsuccessful.[40]

That same year, the Mongols started expanding further into China, to the dismay of the Chinese Brotherhood. To halt the Mongol advance, one Assassin served as a general in the Chinese army and helped prevent the capture of Diaoyu Castle, but was killed. Later, on 11 August, his daughter Zhang Zhi, an apprentice, killed Möngke in revenge, against her Mentor Kang's wishes.[44]

Only four years later, Nergüi carried out another high profile assassination when he killed the Templars' Russian ally Alexander Nevsky, who held a notorious alliance with the Mongols. He succeeded in exacting revenge for the Levantine Brotherhood, by killing Hülegü Khan on 8 February 1265.[43]

The Polos returned to Venice in 1269, establishing another Assassins Guild in the city.[9] They took Niccolò's son Marco with them on their next journey to the Mongol Empire two years later. Arriving at the Mongol court in 1275, Marco Polo gained the trust of Genghis Khan's grandson Kublai Khan, and retrieved the codex from the Khan's palace in Shangdu. The Polos brought it back to Venice,[45] where they handed it to their new Brothers. Around 1296, it was under protection of the Assassin and poet Dante Alighieri, who also began training the individual later known as Domenico Auditore.[2]

Rebirth as a secret order

The Assassins decided to make their continued existence unknown to their mortal enemies, by devising a plan to eradicate the Knights Templar. The Mentor of the French Brotherhood, Guillaume de Nogaret, poisoned his political enemy Pope Benedict XI in 1304, and exerted his influence over King Philip IV of France and the new Pope Clement V to turn them against the Knights Templar.[46]

On 13 October 1307, Assassins dressed as the king's mercenaries launched an assault on the Temple in Paris to arrest the Templars and their Grand Master, Jacques de Molay. Master Assassin Thomas de Carneillon also infiltrated the Temple to obtain the Codex Pater Intellectus and a Sword of Eden, though de Molay's advisor hid them in the Temple's crypt. With de Molay and numerous other Templars arrested, de Carneillon led a decade-long hunt for Templar remnants in Europe. In 1314, de Molay was executed, and the Assassins believed their mortal enemies officially disbanded.[46]

In 1321, Dante Alighieri was killed by Templars, causing Marco Polo and Domenico Auditore's father to order Domenico, Alighieri's apprentice, to take Altaïr Ibn-La'Ahad's codex to Spain. Though the Templars hired pirates to attack Domenico and his family in Otranto's harbor, the Assassin hid the codex's pages from the pirates in various boxes. Three years later, the Templars had also killed Marco Polo and Domenico's father. Domenico founded the noble House of Auditore in Florence, and moved into the Villa Auditore in Monteriggioni, which became the new headquarters of the Italian Brotherhood.[2]

In 1340, the Egyptian Assassin Numa Al'Khamsin was tasked by an Assassin elder to retrieve the Scepter of Aset, an artifact given to rebelling Mamluks by another Assassin in 1250, from the Templars.[47] Numa and his apprentice Ali Al-Ghraib recovered it in Karnak, though Numa was imprisoned by the Mamluks upon his refusal to hand it over.[48] Having escaped with the Templar agent Leila, Numa was led into a trap by his apprentice under the pressure of the Templars and subsequently killed by Leila. Nonetheless, Al-Ghraib hid the artifact in a well, but died before he could contact the Assassins.[49]

Near the middle of the 14th century, the Brotherhood in Germany discovered that a group promising protection from the plague known as the Brothers of the Cross was a secret Templar organization pursuing the Ankh. In 1350, both the Brothers of the Cross and the German Assassin Lukas Zurburg mysteriously vanished.[50]

In 1402, the Templars aided the ascension of the Yongle Emperor, which was followed by a purge of the Chinese Assassin Brotherhood. Li Tong and an apprentice escaped with an Apple of Eden, and she later exacted revenge on the emperor in 1424.[50] Another notable assassination was carried out under orders of Ishak Pasha, leader of the Ottoman Assassins, when he led the attack that resulted in the death of the Templar Vlad the Impaler.[40]

Hundred Years' War

After the Assassins caused the disarray of the Templar Order in Paris in 1307, the Assassins kept France free from Templar influence. Their enemies, meanwhile, had strengthened their presence in Britain. Under the Templars' influence, the Hundred Years' War between England and France started in 1337, with the Templars hoping to regain control over France under the English banner.[51]

By the early 15th century, prophecies of a Maiden who would lead France to victory over the English and their French allies, the Burgundians, had begun to spread. Hoping to find truth to the prophecy, the French Mentor, Queen Yolande of Aragon, deployed Assassins throughout the country hoping to stumble upon the real Maiden. In January 1429, the Assassin Jean de Metz, a squire working for Robert de Baudricourt, met Jeanne d'Arc.[51]

Jeanne had a high amount of Precursor DNA, being able to enchant others by merely being in their presence and hearing "Voices" who she believed to be angels – believed by Abstergo to be Consus – delivering God's messages to her and who informed her of her destiny to lead France to victory in the war.[51]

Recognizing her as the prophesied Maiden, Jean de Metz swore loyalty to her and helped her and her companion Gabriel Laxart to gain an audience with his lord, who sent her to Duke Charles of Lorraine. Through the Duke of Lorraine, Jeanne, Gabriel and Jean met the Dauphin of France, Charles. Jean also started training Gabriel Laxart in Assassin skills, recognizing that he also had high Precursor DNA. Jean and Gabriel dug up the Sword of Eden that Jeanne had been informed of by "the Voices", and after Jeanne met with the Mentor, Queen Yolande, the Assassins ensured Jeanne received the aid required to form her own army to help the besieged city of Orléans.[51]

Renaissance

Fight against the Borgia

In 1476, after Rodrigo Borgia became the new Grand Master of the Italian Templars,[45] Giovanni Auditore da Firenze, a leading Italian Assassin, was publicly executed alongside two of his sons, in an attempt to stop his meddling with Templar affairs. Secretly receiving aid from other Assassins, Giovanni's sole remaining son Ezio Auditore exacted revenge on executioner Uberto Alberti and joined his uncle Mario, the Assassin leader, in their headquarters of Monteriggioni.[2]

With the aid of his uncle and several underworld figures, secretly Assassins, Ezio fought back against the Italian Templars and stopped their conspiracies. This included eliminating the participants in the Pazzi conspiracy, who planned to overthrow Lorenzo de' Medici as leader of Florence, and opposing the Barbarigos in Venice, who were successful in killing Doge Giovanni Mocenigo and claim leadership of the city, albeit temporarily.[2]

All the while, Altaïr collected the scattered pages of Altaïr Ibn-La'Ahad's Codex, discovering a prophecy that foretold of a Prophet who would appear when a Piece of Eden was brought to Venice. In 1488, the Italian Templars recovered an Apple of Eden[2] from the Templar Archive, hidden there by Ottoman Templar Cem,[52] and brought it to Venice. Ezio stole the artifact and confronted Grand Master Rodrigo Borgia, eventually routing him alongside the other Assassins. Unbeknownst to Ezio, it was he who was the Prophet.[2]

Unsure of what to do with the Apple of Eden after their ally Leonardo da Vinci was unable to divulge its purpose, the Assassins endeavored to hide it in the Rocca di Ravaldino in Forlì under supervision of their ally Caterina Sforza. Rodrigo Borgia employed the brothers Checco and Ludovico Orsi to obtain the Apple from the Assassins. While they were briefly successful, Ezio reclaimed the artifact before being gravely wounded by Checco and passing out, at which point it was stolen by the monk Girolamo Savonarola.[2]

In the late 1480s, the Templars searched for a part of Vejovis' dagger in Venice. Ezio asked Leonardo da Vinci to draw a map for the Assassin and Vejovis' Sage Giulia to locate the artifact. She infiltrated the Basilica di San Marco and killed a Templar who revealed the existence of a treasure in the hidden vault beneath the Basilica. Entering the vault, Giulia met Vejovis' hologram who tasked her to hide the dagger deeper in the vault.[13]

Spanish Inquisition

By the 1490s, the Spanish Inquisition, led by the Master Templar and Grand Inquisitor Tomás de Torquemada, had begun to capture and execute members of the Assassin Brotherhood.[53]

In 1491, Christopher Columbus and his friend Luis de Santángel, an Assassin, were lured to Venice with the prospect of funding by Cardinal Rodrigo Borgia, who secretly wanted to kill Columbus to stop him from discovering the New World. Santángel employed the aid of fellow Assassin Ezio Auditore to protect him, who later joined them to stop the Inquisition's persecution of the Brotherhood. There, Ezio worked with a branch of Assassins – unaware of Torquemada's Templar affiliations – at eroding Borgia's influence in Spain.[54]

Meanwhile, another Brotherhood of Assassins under the leadership of Benedicto endeavored to stop Torquemada's Templar schemes. They learned of Torquemada's intent to kidnap the son of Emir Muhammad XII of Granada to trade for the Emir's Apple of Eden. A team of Assassins including Benedicto, Maria and Aguilar de Nerha rode to stop the Templars from finding the sultan's son, but were unsuccessful and captured. Sentenced to be executed at the stake, Aguilar and Maria escaped from their shackles after their Mentor Benedicto was executed.[53]

At Granada, Aguilar and Maria interrupted the exchange between the Emir and Torquemada, resulting in the deaths of Maria and Torquemada's right hand Ojeda, and in Aguilar's retrieval of the Apple. Aguilar rode to Palos de la Frontera, where he entrusted Christopher Columbus with keeping the Apple safe.[53]

Sometime afterwards, after eliminating several key members of the Inquisition and ensuring Columbus' voyage was financed, Ezio decided to confront Torquemada. The Grand Inquisitor, feigning ignorance of Templar affairs and declaring loyalty to Rodrigo Borgia, eventually escaped Ezio. The Assassin decided against pursuing Torquemada, believing him to only be a puppet, and returned to Italy.[54]

Control of the Spanish Brotherhood eventually fell to the new Mentor Aguilar de Nerha.[55] Facing continued opposition from Torquemada, the Assassins ultimately killed the Grand Inquisitor on 16 September 1498.[2] Meanwhile, Luis de Santángel, the finance minister of King Ferdinand, had slowly been poisoning Queen Isabella after she had succumbed to the influence of the Borgia family, a task which a group of Italian Assassins completed in 1504.[16]

Liberation of Rome

In 1497 and 1498, the Italian Assassins endeavored to retrieve the Apple of Eden from Girolamo Savonarola, who had used it to become the leader of Florence. After dismantling his influence and turning the people against Savonarola, Ezio retrieved the artifact during the chaos of a riot, at which point the Assassins turned their gaze toward the Borgia once more.[2]

Through Altaïr's Codex pages, the Italian Assassins discovered that Rodrigo Borgia intended to use the Apple and Staff of Eden to open an ancient vault beneath the Vatican. While the other Assassins caused unrest in the city as a distraction, Ezio infiltrated the Sistine Chapel and eventually bested Rodrigo. Ezio, as the Prophet, managed to open the vault using the Staff and Apple of Eden and received a message from the Isu Minerva, intended for his descendant Desmond Miles.[2]

After Ezio's return to Monteriggioni, Rodrigo's son Cesare attacked the town in retaliation for thwarting the Templars' plans, resulting in Mario Auditore's death and the Villa Auditore's destruction. Ezio later joined Niccolò Machiavelli in Rome, where he took the lead in building up the resistance against the Borgia. With their new headquarters on Tiber Island, Ezio began recruiting new members for the Brotherhood and taking down Borgia institutions. Utilizing the city's underworld, Ezio assassinated key Templars Juan Borgia and Octavian de Valois.[14]

In August of 1503, Rodrigo Borgia, who opposed his son disturbing the Templar-led peace in Rome, hid the Apple of Eden from Cesare, resulting in his own son killing him. Ezio retrieved the artifact before Cesare, and used it to remove the last Borgia holdouts in the city. Cesare, the new Grand Master, was arrested on orders of the new Pope Julius II,[14] an Assassin ally. He escaped the next year and fled to Spain, where he joined the army of his brother-in-law John III of Navarre.[56]

In 1506, the Apple of Eden told Ezio to hide it in a vault beneath the Colosseum, where it would be found later be his descendant. In March of 1507, Ezio had tracked Cesare to Viana, where a battle was taking place. Ezio pursued Cesare to Viana Castle, where he eventually threw the Grand Master off the castle walls, permanently ending the Borgias' schemes.[14]

Fight against the Byzantine Templars

After an earthquake struck Constantinople, the heart of the Ottoman Empire, in 1509, a group of Templars uniting under the banner of the Byzantine Empire showed up in the city. They engaged in conflict with the Ottoman soldiers and Ottoman Assassins, hoping to reconquer the Empire under Byzantine Templar rule.[40]

In 1510, Ezio Auditore found letters from his father detailing Altaïr's library underneath Masyaf, and he set off to find it. However, after facing opposition from the Byzantine Templars in the fortress and discovering the keys – the Memory Seals – were hidden in Constantinople, he joined the Ottoman Assassins' fight against the Templars. The Assassin leader Yusuf Tazim regularly employed Ezio's aid in their troubles, and Ezio also made use of his new friendship with the young Ottoman prince Suleiman.[40]

Slowly, Ezio recovered the Masyaf Keys hidden in the city. He recovered the final key from leading Templar Manuel Palaiologos, whom Ezio killed in Derinkuyu in Cappadocia. However, Ottoman Prince Ahmet, the true Grand Master, killed Yusuf Tazim and kidnapped Ezio's paramour Sofia Sartor to exchange for the artifacts, leading to the Italian Assassin pursuing the Grand Master. At the end of their confrontation, they were met by the forces of Ahmet's brother Selim, who swiftly opted to kill his brother to ensure his own claim on the throne.[40]

With the Masyaf Keys in his possession, Ezio opened Altaïr's library beneath Masyaf, where he discovered Altaïr's Apple of Eden. Ultimately, he decided to leave the artifact hidden away, and retired back to Italy,[40] having left the Ottoman Brotherhood in the hands of Dogan[57] and in good relations with future Sultan Suleiman.[40]

Ezio continued leading the Italian Assassins for several years, keeping his fame amongst the Assassins as a legendary Mentor across the world, before retiring[57] sometime after 1515.[58]

Continued operations in Italy

After returning to 1513, Ezio decided to retire from his position as Mentor, settling on Lodovico Ariosto to succeed him.[57] He remained involved in training for some time, and in 1515 Ezio trained apprentices Giovanni Borgia and the Englishman Hiram Stoddard. That year, he assigned them a task to recover an Apple of Eden from the Templar Dei Petrucci based on information from Ezio's friend Michelangelo. However, the apprentices failed in the task and the Templar escaped with the artifact.[58]

After Hiram found out a jealous Giovanni revealed his adultery to his lover Elena, Hiram angrily confronted his fellow apprentice, and a brawl ensued. Consequently, Giovanni became possessed by Consus – whom he became tied to due to exposure to a Shroud of Eden. In the confusion, Elena ran away from Hiram and fell off the roof, traumatizing Hiram. He left the Brotherhood and, a year later, assaulted an Assassin compound in Greece to retrieve the Apple of Eden they failed to retrieve before. He was subdued by Giovanni, who took the artifact elsewhere.[58]

In February 1519, Giovanni Borgia boarded Spanish conquistador Hernán Cortés' voyage to Mexico to locate a Piece of Eden. After several months of travel, Cortés and his entourage where welcomed into the Aztec capitol of Tenochtitlan. When the Spanish massacred the Aztecs on the night of 20 May 1520, Borgia killed an Aztec priest and took his Crystal Skull, later escaping during the Night of Sorrows and traveling back to Europe.[16]

Operations in the New World

As early as 1503, the Assassins had started to spread to the New World.[16] By 1510, they had established a presence in Florida, and welcomed the Puerto Rican refugees Alonso Carlo and Miguel Ramón Carlo de Lugo into their community.[50]

In 1524, Juan Ponce de León, another conquistador, traveled to Florida to discover the Fountain of Youth. The fountain, secretly a Piece of Eden, was under the protection of the Assassins, and Miguel Ramón Carlo was sent to meet Ponce de León. Upon the latter's insistence to find the fountain, the Assassins shot him with poisoned arrows, resulting in his death sometime later.[50]

By 1533, a Spanish Assassin named Gonzalo Pardo had infiltrated the company of Francisco Pizzaro, a Templar-affiliated conquistador who subdued the Inca Empire. On orders of the Brotherhood, Pardo was to save the Incan Emperor Atahualpa from execution to help the Incas, but failed in his task. He stayed in the Empire, wandering Peru as a drunkard, until joining forces with the Incan Quila in 1536 to stop a conspiracy orchestrated by Pizzaro to kill Emperor Manco Inca Yupanqui.[59] Eventually, in 1541, Pizzaro was killed by the Assassin Brotherhood.[2]

Activities in Tudor England

Since the late 15th century, the Assassins noticed the Templar Order attempting to spread its influence over the House of Tudor, the ruling house of England. In 1503, Ezio Auditore da Firenze sent a group of Assassins to England to aid King Henry VII in stopping a Templar plot. On his behalf, the Assassins poisoned the last key figure in the Templar conspiracy, Margaret of York, on 23 November 1503. In response, the Templars infiltrated Henry's Star Chamber, the secret high court. After removing the conspirators, the Assassins were offered a seat on the Star Chamber by King Henry.[16]

During the mid-1550s, the Templars once again held the upper hand in England by exerting a strong influence over the court of Queen Mary I.[2] The Assassins, instead, supported her half-sister Elizabeth.[60] To end the Templars' reign, the Assassins killed Queen Mary on 17 November 1558. She was succeeded by Queen Elizabeth I, who, with the use of an Apple of Eden, guided England into a golden age.[2]

Rebuilding the Chinese Brotherhood

During the reign of the Zhengde Emperor in China, both the Assassins and Templars held presences in the Imperial court. After the death of the Emperor in 1521, the Eight Tigers – a group of Templar eunuchs – seized power in court, installed the Jiajing Emperor as their puppet, and planned to eradicate the Assassins from the Beijing.[61]

Their Mentor Wang Yangming was warned of their plan by the concubine Shao Jun, and after a failed attempt to kill the Tigers, many of the emperor's enemies including the Chinese Assassins were killed in what became known as the Great Rites Controversy in 1524.[61]

Wang Yangming evacuated the Assassins and their allies from the Forbidden City and went into hiding, Zhu Jiuyuan succeeding him as Mentor and training Shao Jun as in the Assassin ways. As the Tigers' hunt for the Assassins continued, Jiuyuan and Shao Jun left China to seek the aid of Ezio Auditore da Firenze.[61] Only Shao Jun arrived at the retired Mentor's villa in Tuscany, where he reluctantly offered her aid and wisdom – as well as the Precursor box, a Piece of Eden.[62] Shao Jun returned to China in 1526, joining forces with Wang Yangming to rebuild their Brotherhood.[61]

With no other Assassins remaining, the Mentor and his former student traveled across the country to take down the Eight Tigers. Though their efforts initially proved successful with the deaths of four of their enemies, the Tigers' leader Zhang Yong and Qiu Ju killed Yangming in Nan'an in 1529 and stole the Precursor box.[61]

Shao Jun continued the fight, ultimately killing Zhang Yong during a Mongol attack on the Great Wall in 1532. Despite having lost the box, Shao Jun rebuilt the Chinese Brotherhood as its new Mentor, and finally ordered the death of the Jiajing Emperor in 1567.[61]

Expansion to Japan

Having suffered a series of defeats at the hands of the Assassins by the early 16th century, Templars in Europe aimed to spread their influence to new lands. By 1549, they had set their sights on Japan and arrived there under the guise of a Jesuit mission. The Assassins soon caught wind of this and established a presence in Japan to combat their rivals. This included the Chinese Assassin Kotetsu, who was granted leave by his Mentor Shao Jun to fight the Templars in his ancestral homeland.[63]

The Assassins found allies in the Japanese ninja, from whom they learned new techniques. They made contact with the warlord Oda Nobunaga, who promised an alliance with the Brotherhood as soon as he accomplished his goal of uniting the fractured country. Not fully trusting Nobunaga, the Assassins made a secret alliance with Nobunaga’s ally Tokugawa Ieyasu, whose vassal Hattori Hanzō had become a Master Assassin.[43]

Aside from battling the local Templars, the Japanese Assassins aided the Tokugawa clan in becoming the eventual rulers of the land. To this end, Hanzō killed the rival warlords Mōri Motonari and Takeda Shingen, who held a Sword of Eden, which subsequently wound up in Oda Nobunaga's ownership. Five years later, the Master Assassin also killed the warlord Uesugi Kenshin, who had been recruited into the Templar Order.[43]

When the Tokugawa and the Assassins discovered that Nobunaga was to be attacked by his vassal Akechi Mitsuhide, Hanzō protected Tokugawa Ieyasu, while the Assassin Yamauchi Taka secretly killed Nobunaga amidst the chaos and retrieved the Sword of Eden. The Chinese Assassin Liu Yan then transported the artifact away from Japan.[43]

In the 1590s, Hanzō pursued and killed Takeda Shingen's former spymaster Mochizuki Chiyome, who had been using her vast network of spies to support the Templar cause. In 1596, Hanzō himself was killed by a rival ninja, Fūma Kotarō. Suspecting that Nobunaga's successor and the new ruler of Japan, Toyotomi Hideyoshi, played a part in his death, Ieyasu tasked Yamauchi Taka with the investigation, which led to his assassination of Hideyoshi in 1598. The land then became divided between Toyotomi's loyalists, and Tokugawa's supporters, which included other Assassins like Mogami Yoshiaki and Yamauchi Kazutoyo. This led to the Battle of Sekigahara, in which Yamauchi Taka killed the general Shima Sakon to help ensure Tokugawa's victory, and consequently, the foundation of the Tokugawa shogunate.[43]

The Assassins continued to support Tokugawa in the years following, when Tokugawa decided to attack the last remnants of the Toyotomi clan during the Siege of Osaka. The Assassin Hattori Masanari, Hanzō’s son, fought on the side of the Tokugawa during the conflict, but was killed in battle.[43]

Age of Imperialism

Salem witch trials

In the early 1690s, word reached the British Assassins of an artifact hidden somewhere in Salem, Massachusetts. The Brotherhood sent Master Assassin Thomas Stoddard, who had become legendary for tracking Precursor artifacts, to America to recover the artifact. Around the same time, reports of young girls with strange illnesses led the Puritan villagers of Salem to accuse one another of witchcraft in early 1692, known as the Salem witch trials. After the Templars Samuel Parris and William Stoughton arrived looking for the artifact, they took a central role in the persecutions of accused witches. In June 1692, Stoddard arrived in Salem and met the local Assassin Jennifer Querry.[64]

The two Assassins infiltrated a warehouse, where they freed a young girl named Dorothy Osborne and a mute boy named David from Templar imprisonment.[64] When Dorothy became possessed by the Precursor Consus, Stoddard discovered that she was the artifact they had been looking for and he brought her to safety at the Salem docks. The Assassins, Dorothy and David were soon recaptured after their escape.[64]

During their interrogation, while the Templars were distracted by Dorothy being possessed by Consus, Querry managed to kill a guard and free Stoddard before being killed by Stoughton. While Stoddard was also shot in the arm by Stoughton, the Templar was betrayed by his remorseful accomplice Parris before he could finish Stoddard off. Dorothy, overcome by guilt for Querry's death, decided to kill herself in a fire. With Dorothy dead, Stoddard abandoned his quest.[64]

Great Recoinage of 1696

In 1696, the Great Recoinage in Great Britain resulted in the rise of money counterfeiters in the country. The Assassin William Lowndes, the Secretary to the Treasury, was tasked by King William III to resolve the issue through the help of the warden of the Royal Mint, Isaac Newton. Lowndes, in turn, employed his fellow Assassin Omar Khaled to help Newton as his new assistant.[65]

After tracing counterfeiters to William Chaloner, Omar and Newton attended a ball held by Lord Benedict Crystal that Chaloner would attend. There, Omar reconnected with childhood friend Rose Galloway. After her jewelry got stolen and she chased the thief, Omar discovered she also possessed Eagle Vision, leading him to recruit her into the Brotherhood. Upon informing Lowndes and having his suspicions about her skills confirmed, Omar started Rose's training. From the jewelry thief, Omar and Newton recovered the addresses of blackmailers.[65]

The first two counterfeiting locations were seized and Omar and Newton left for the last location in Bristol. There, they found Newton's former assistant Nicolas Fatio de Duillier naked in the house, and returned him to Newton's London residence. After Omar and Isaac evaded a Templar attack, they discovered that Chaloner had false evidence planted to become the new Warden of the Royal Mint and have Newton arrested for counterfeiting. Subsequently, after Omar stopped Rose's training and Newton escaped Newgate Jail, he and Omar discovered from his butler Finnegan that he had planted the evidence, before he was killed by Rose from above.[65]

From Rose's father Nigel, they learned of her working for Chaloner and the latter's plot to destroy the counterfeiting evidence in the Tower of London. Omar confronted Rose in the Tower's catacombs, and dismantled the evidence by opening the floodgates, drowning Rose in the process. Meanwhile, Newton confronted Chaloner and discovered he had abducted Nicolas, though Nicolas managed to knock Chaloner out when he was distracted by Newton. Chaloner was arrested on Lowndes' orders, and Newton handed Omar a counterfeited coin with the inscription "Je maintaindrai" ("I will maintain") as a gift before Omar departed.[65]

Search for the Observatory

Since at least the 1670s, the Assassin Brotherhood in the Caribbean was engaged with the Templars in a search for Sages – reincarnations of Aita capable of opening the Observatory, an ancient Isu complex. In 1673, the Mentor Bahlam abducted the Sage Thom Kavanagh to prevent him falling under the influence of the Templar Laureano de Torres y Ayala, and set him on his quest to find the Observatory.[66]

In 1714, Phillip Randall, Mentor of the British Brotherhood, sent Master Assassin Duncan Walpole – who sought to join the Templars – to meet with the new Caribbean Mentor Ah Tabai and train with him. Seeing this task as an insult, Walpole was convined by Henry Spencer to join the Templars[67] and compiled locations of the Assassin bureaus in the Caribbean for Grand Master Torres. Before he could finalize his betrayal, he was killed by the pirate Edward Kenway in 1715.[66]

The Caribbean Assassins later attacked the Templars in Havana to rescue another Sage, Bartholomew Roberts, but were slaughtered by the Templars, including Kenway posing as Walpole. Kenway's fellow pirate, the Assassin Mary Read, attempted to persuade Kenway to join the Brotherhood. Kenway aided the Assassins in fighting off a Royal Navy attack on the Brotherhood's Tulum headquarters, but Ah Tabai banished him for his earlier misdeeds. Nonetheless, Kenway helped the local Assassin bureaus fend off Templar attacks and performed assassination contracts for the Brotherhood, in exchange for payment.[66]

Read continued to try to persuade Kenway of the error of his ways, though it was only until Read's death in Port Royal's prison that Kenway decided to fight for the Assassin cause; by then, Kenway's quartermaster Adéwalé had already joined the Assassins. Under tutelage of Ah Tabai in 1722, Kenway was assigned three targets: the Sage Roberts, Templar Governor Woodes Rogers and Grand Master Torres.[66]

After killing Roberts and grievously wounding Rogers, Kenway assassinated Torres during the latter's siege on the Observatory, placing both the complex and the Crystal Skull it held under the Assassins' protection. Kenway left after offering the Caribbean Assassins his Great Inagua hideout,[66] while the Brotherhood continued its stewardship over the Observatory. At some point in the 18th century, the complex suffered a catastrophic collapse, after which it was deliberately buried by the Assassins.[46]

Fall of the London Assassins

Edward Kenway returned to Bristol in 1723, where he exacted revenge on his former father-in-law, the Templar Emmett Scott and his henchman Wilson. He and his crew were pardoned by Robert Walpole, acting as a neutral party between the Assassins and Templars, and Edward was offered a home at Queen Anne's Square.[68] Edward settled down and became co-leader of the London Brotherhood alongside Miko, and together they strengthened their presence in London.[60]

Both Miko and Edward often travelled across Europe, doing research into Isu sites and the Pieces of Eden.[60] Edward's research led him to the discovery of several Isu temples in Italy and beneath Alamut, and he endeavoured to find the location of the Grand Temple, detailing his findings in a journal.[69] At some point, Edward also found a Shroud of Eden, which he hid away in a secret location in the Tower of London.[60]

In 1724, Edward was informed of a potential Isu site in the lost Khmer city of Angkor, which the Caribbean Assassins had learned about from a document recovered from an East India Company ship. Edward subsequently travelled to Macau to search for additional leads, where he quickly came into conflict with other factions seeking Angkor's treasure, including the Japanese Templar Shimazu Saito, the merchant Madam Lee, the Hualien Trading Company and the Far East Company.[70]

Angkor's treasure was also sought by Chinese Assassins led by the Mentor Xiao Han, who hoped to use it to overthrow the Qing dynasty. As Edward believed Xiao Han's goal went against the Brotherhood's principles, he clashed with the Chinese Mentor several times as the two raced against each other to find Angkor. While Xiao Han allied with Madam Lee to help him find the lost city, Edward recruited the various allies he had made in Macau, including Saito, to form the Zhang Wei Union, a shipping company that soon rose to prominence thanks to a partnership with the Dutch East India Company.[70]

Upon his return to England, Edward abandoned his pursuit of Isu artifacts as he began tutoring his young son Haytham, hoping to one day recruit him into the Brotherhood. However, on 3 December 1735, the London Assassins were dealt a major blow when Edward was killed in his own home by mercenaries hired by his assistant Reginald Birch, secretly the Grand Master of the British Templars.[68]

Following Edward's death, Birch obtained his journal detailing the Assassin's research of Isu sites and indoctrinated Haytham into the Templar Order.[68] Haytham grew up to become one of the Order's most efficient killers and, in 1754, assassinated Miko to steal the Grand Temple's key in his possession,[71] leaving the London Assassins leaderless. Under Birch's leadership, the Templars managed to rout the Assassins from London, and would maintain control of the city for over a century.[60]

Activities in North America

In 1735, Adéwalé was tasked with intercepting a parcel – which contained the Precursor box – from a French Templar admiral in the Caribbean. His ship was lost at sea when he tried to escape through a storm, and Adéwalé washed up near Port-au-Prince. For the next two years, Adéwalé supported the local Maroon rebellion, culminating in his aiding the French Geodesic Mission and killing Governor Pierre, Marquis de Fayet.[72]

By 1732, the Maroon François Mackandal had created his own Brotherhood in Saint-Domingue. Mackandal took a more radical approach to the Creed, aiming to exterminate French colonists from the colony and actively searching for Precursor relics. In 1746, on orders of his Mentor Ah Tabai, Achilles Davenport established the Colonial Brotherhood in the Thirteen Colonies, which rapidly became one of the strongest branches of the Order.[69]

In November 1751, Mackandal acquired the location of a Precursor temple near Port-au-Prince from using the Precursor box alongside the Voynich manuscript. When Vendredi entered the temple to acquire its Piece of Eden, the temple activated its defense mechanism and triggered an earthquake which devastated the city. During the chaos, Master Templar Lawrence Washington stole the artifacts from Mackandal's camp and brought them to the Thirteen Colonies, with Adéwalé in pursuit. Achilles Davenport then tasked Shay Cormac with the recovering the artifacts from the Templars.[69]

After discovering the location of another temple near Lisbon, Portugal, Shay was sent to find it in 1755. However, upon touching its artifact, the temple also triggered an earthquake that destroyed Lisbon. Angered by his Mentor's decisions, Shay stole the manuscript after his return to the Davenport Homestead, and the Assassins attacked him and left him for dead. Unbeknownst to the Assassins, Shay survived and joined the Templar Order.[69]

Alongside George Monro and later Grand Master Haytham Kenway, Shay hunted down his former Brothers. Though Liam O'Brien managed to kill Monro and retrieve the manuscript, Shay's efforts resulted in the deaths of Kesegowaase, Adéwalé and Hope Jensen. In 1760, with the location of a Precursor temple in the Arctic acquired, Achilles tasked the Chevalier de la Vérendrye with distracting the Templars while they sought the temple.[69]

Kenway and Shay arrived at the temple before Achilles and Liam could disrupt the temple's defense system, though in their struggle Liam activated it. While Shay killed Liam and retrieved the manuscript, Haytham spared Achilles to warn off the Assassins of the temples' danger.[69] Following a purge of the Colonial Assassins in 1763, Achilles, crippled by Haytham, was forced to spend the rest of his days in exile in the Davenport Homestead.[71]

American Revolution

In 1769, Ratonhnhaké:ton, a boy from a Kanien'kehá:ka tribe, was told by Juno through usage of a Crystal Ball to join the Assassin Order to protect his tribe. He contacted Achilles Davenport, who, despite his initial reluctance, agreed to train the boy. After several months of training, Achilles and the boy, who he named Connor, travelled to Boston, where they witnessed the Templars, led by Connor's father Haytham Kenway, plotting igntion of the Boston Massacre. Despite his efforts, Connor failed in stopping their scheme.[71]

Connor started pursuing the members of the Colonial Rite of Templars and training new apprentices, and in his devours, supported the revolutionaries' desire for independence from Britain. He joined the Sons of Liberty in participation in the Boston Tea Party and the Battles of Lexington and Concord.[71]

Connor met George Washington at his inauguration as Commander-in-Chief of the new Continental Army, and fought alongside the Continentals at the Battle of Bunker Hill to assassinate officer John Pitcairn. He also prevented the Templars' attempts to kill George Washington and replace him with Charles Lee, Haytham Kenway's right-hand man.[71]

When pursuing Benjamin Church, Connor formed an alliance with his father, as Church had betrayed both the Continental Army and the Templars. They chased Church to Martinique, and after killing him, temporarily continued their alliance. When Haytham exposed Washington's plans to attack Connor's tribe, the Assassin cut off ties with both his father and Washington. Despite this, he fought alongside the Marquis de Lafayette in the Battle of Monmouth on the revolutionaries' behalf, and later exposed Benedict Arnold's betrayal as a final favor to Washington.[71]

In 1781, Connor targeted his arch-enemy Charles Lee, gained the support of Admiral de Grasse's aid in an attack on the Templars' Fort George headquarters in New York by aiding the French Navy in the Battle of the Chesapeake. However, Haytham Kenway had forced Lee to flee, and Connor was forced to kill his father.

Around the same time, Achilles passed away, and Connor became the new steward of the Davenport Homestead. In 1782, he chased Charles Lee from Boston to Monmouth, where he finally killed his adversary. The next year, the British Army surrendered at the Siege of Yorktown, and the United States were officially founded soon after.[71]

Sometime later, Washington met Connor in the woods, where he showed him the Apple of Eden he found in Yorktown. After the two experienced a vision of an alternate reality where Washington was corrupted by the Apple and had named himself King of the United States, Washington handed the artifact to Connor, who dumped it into the ocean on his behalf.[71]

French Revolution

Due to France's financial costs during the Seven Years' War and inspired by the American Revolution, unrest started among the citizens of France in the late 1780s. The French Mentor Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau, began to mediate between King Louis XVI and the revolutionaries, hoping to bring the conflict to a peaceful end while maintaining his truce with Templar Grand Master François de la Serre.[46]

In 1789, de la Serre was killed in a coup led by the exiled Templar François-Thomas Germain, who intended to reform the Templar Order. While the reformed Templars under Germain started fueling the French Revolution to undo the established positions of power, Master Assassin Pierre Bellec recruited Arno Dorian – son of the Assassin Charles Dorian and adopted son of de la Serre – into the Brotherhood to find de la Serre's murderers at the behest of the French Assassin Council.[46]

After eliminating de la Serre's murderers, Arno rescued François-Thomas Germain, the smith of a Templar pin gifted to him by the Marquis de Sade. Germain directed Arno towards Chrétien Lafrenière, who was loyal to de la Serre, and the Assassin consequently killed him. At a Templar meeting in the Jacobin Club, Arno discovered that the Templars were orchestrating the Revolution and planned King Louis XVI's execution.[46]

Arno subsequently formed an alliance with his adopted sister, Élise de la Serre, from whom the Assassins discovered that Germain was the new Grand Master. Soon after, Bellec killed Mirabeau, angered over the truce with the Templars and fanatically believing the Assassins needed to be destroyed to be built back up, similar to Masyaf, Monteriggioni and the American colonies.[46]

Though he was in turn killed by Arno, the Council lost two of its members. They sent Arno to recover Mirabeau's correspondence with the King from the Tuileries Palace on 10 August 1792, and while there, Arno formed an alliance with Napoleon Bonaparte, who was looking for an ancient key.[46]

The Council forbid Arno from pursuing Germain, instead tasking other members with the investigation. When Arno directly disobeyed their orders by tracking him to the King's execution, the Council exiled him from the Brotherhood. Arno nonetheless pursued Germain and Maximilien de Robespierre, instigator of the Reign of Terror, and killed the Grand Master in the crypt beneath the Temple on 28 July 1794.[46]

Still exiled from the Brotherhood, Arno stopped Napoleon's attempt to recover an Apple of Eden from the Saint-Denis Temple, and gave the artifact to an Assassin for delivery to Al Mualim in Cairo.[73] Arno was later reinstated into the Brotherhood and became a Master Assassin.[46]

While Napoleon later retrieved the artifact from Egypt,[73] the Assassins prevented an attempt on his life on 24 December 1800.[46] Council member Sophie Trenet later played an important role in the events leading to the foundation of the French Second Republic.[45]

Haitian Revolution

As early as 1776, Eseosa, son of Babatunde Josèphe and grandson of Adéwalé, worked to rebuild the Assassin Brotherhood in Saint-Domingue after its decline since the death of François Mackandal. To this end, he recruited the Maroons Dutty Boukman, Toussaint Louverture, Georges Biassou, Jean-François Papillon and Jeannot Bullet into the Brotherhood's ranks, and started making preparations to help other slaves in the colony.[45]

In 1791, during a ceremony inspired by Mackandal, Boukman prophesized that Papillon, Biassou and Bullet would be leaders of a rebellion to free the slaves of Saint-Domingue. Violence erupted, which soon escalated in a colony-wide rebellion. Boukman was captured in battle in November 1791.[45] Though the Assassin Elsie was adamant on rescuing Boukman from execution and procuring his book, Fabien had been given orders to let the execution proceed to bolser their cause.[74] The same month, Eseosa executed Bullet for breaking the tenets of the Creed.[45]

Despite these setbacks, slavery was abolished by Maximilien Robespierre in 1794, and Louverture became the de facto leader of Saint-Domingue. In 1801, they faced opposition from the Templars, who unsuccessfully tried to install Jean-Louis Villatte as governor before the Assassins ousted him. However, by then both Biassou and Papillon had lost faith in the rebellion and joined the Spanish.[45]

By then, the French government had fallen under Napoleon Bonaparte's leadership, and sent Charles Leclerc to secure Louverture's surrender. By May 1802, Louverture surrendered and was imprisoned in France. His general Jean-Jacques Dessalines continued the fight, triumphing over the French, and declared himself Emperor of the new republic of Haiti, subsequently slaughtering thousands of white colonists. Eseosa travelled to the Davenport Homestead to train with Connor, in preparation for assassinating Dessalines.[45]

Hunt for the Koh-i-Noor

By the early 1800s, word reached the Assassin Brotherhood that Sultan Selim III of the Ottoman Empire had come into the possession of the Koh-i-Noor diamond, a powerful Piece of Eden. As the Templars and Napoleon were also seeking the artifact, the Assassin Ahkbar was tasked to infiltrate Selim's social circle and he became the Sultan's right hand.[75]

In 1805, Ahkbar caught wind of the Black Cross Solomon Bolden and Napoleon's agent Jan van der Graff seeking passage into the Sultan's palace. He led them into an ambush, resulting in Bolden's death and van der Graff's capture. In July 1808, after the Sultan refused the Assassins' offer to buy the diamond, Ahkbar resolved to fatally poison the Sultan.[75]

He took the Koh-i-Noor for himself, abandoning his principles to the Order. He was killed by van der Graff, who escaped his imprisonment. A group of Assassins then confronted van der Graff, who pretended to hand over the artifact, but they were given an empty box.[75]

Struggle in Lower Canada

By the 1830s, members of the Canadian Brotherhood of Assassins were engaged in a struggle with the Château Clique, a group of wealthy Templar families that effectively ruled Lower Canada. The journalist Ludger Duvernay, a member of the Brotherhood, posted a series of articles criticizing the Château Clique in 1832, hoping to expose their connection to the Templar. Duvernay was subsequently censored and imprisoned, and the people were rallied against Duvernay.[50]

Duvernay was rescued by the Brotherhood, who then used an Apple of Eden to turn the people against the Château Clique. In 1834, Duvernay created his own secret society, the Saint-Jean Baptiste Society, with the intention of spiritually unifyig Quebec and gaining indepedence from the rest of Canada.[50]

Conflicts in the Sikh Empire

In 1839, Hamid, Mentor of the Indian Brotherhood, tasked Arbaaz Mir with finding a map from the Voynich manuscript detailing the Koh-i-Noor, which had fallen into the hands of Maharaja Ranjit Singh of the Sikh Empire and was sought by the British Templars. To keep the artifact out of the Templars' hands, Hamid sent Arbaaz to obtain the diamond and protect the Maharaja from their enemies.[76]

Together with the slave boy Raza Soora, Arbaaz infiltrated a feast at Singh's summer palace. With Raza's help, Arbaaz obtained the artifact from Isu ruins beneath the palace. However, the Templar General Francis Cotton had the palace guards arrest the Assassin, allowing him and William Hay Macnaghten to poison the Maharaja.[76]

After Arbaaz escaped and engaged in battle with Cotton and the palace guards, Arbaaz's ally, Princess Pyara Kaur, interrupted the battle by using the Koh-i-Noor's powers, changing her shape into that of a Precursor. While giving a warning to unite against a common enemy, Cotton shot at the Precursor, who released a burst of energy that killed Cotton and the Imperial guards.[76]

Until 1841, the Koh-i-Noor remained in Hamid's protection, when he was abducted by Master Templar William Sleeman and his right hand Alexander Burnes, who took the diamond. Arbaaz pursued the Templars after rescuing Hamid, tracing them to the Amritsar Temple where he witnessed Sleeman use the Koh-i-Noor in conjunction with a Precursor box to obtain the location of the Herat Temple. Chasing the Templars to Herat in Afghanistan, Arbaaz discovered the temple's pedestal was broken, and was instead taken captive. Eventually defeating Burnes in a duel, Arbaaz traveled back to India.[8]

After his return to Amritsar, the Assassin was forced to rescue his lover Pyara Kaur, who was being held captive by Sleeman in the summer palace. Having made his way through the palace, Arbaaz confronted Sleeman. During the confrontation, Pyara, who was held at gunpoint, stabbed Sleeman, allowing Arbaaz to steal the Koh-i-Noor before they fled. He then met with fellow Assassin Ethan Frye and gave him the Koh-i-Noor, telling him to hide it somewhere.[8]

Early modern era

California Gold Rush

As the government of the United States expanded its territory across North America, the Assassins ensured their continued presence in the newly formed American states. As such, the Assassins operated in the new states in the west of North America, such as California.[64]

In 1852, at the height of the California Gold Rush, the Brotherhood dispatched an Assassin on a mission to retrieve stolen gold from John Sutter, one of the pioneers during the Gold Rush. The Assassin attacked Sutter's carriage while in transit in the Great Basin Desert, and took the gold from Sutter to bring it back to the Maidu people, through whose labor Sutter had acquired the gold.[64]

American Civil War

In 1861, civil war broke out in the United States. The American Brotherhood supported the Union States under President Abraham Lincoln against the Templar-backed Confederate States. In order to help win the war, in 1863, the Mentor in Washington tasked Varius – the lone Assassin operating in New York City – with stealing a Dagger of Eden from the Aztec Club and deliver it to General Ulysses S. Grant, whom the Mentor perceived as the Union's best hope for winning the war.[23]

After retrieving the object, Varius became entangled in a fight with the Templar agent "Cudgel" Cormac and lost the artifact. Together with a new apprentice, Eliza, whose father was killed during the Templar-planned draft riots, Varius recovered the artifact as Cormac was about to deliver it to his Grand Master William M. Tweed. Eliza later participated in the Civil War and successfully brought the Dagger to General Grant.[23]

The Assassins continued to remain active during the war. After the assassination of President Lincoln at the hands of the Templar affiliate John Wilkes Booth, the Brotherhood killed Booth on 26 April 1865.[2]

Liberation of London

Since the fall of the London Assassins in the mid-18th century, the Templars held control over the capital of the British Empire and the Assassins mostly operated from outside London. In early 1868, the Assassin twins Jacob and Evie Frye assassinated two Templar targets, Rupert Ferris and David Brewster, in Croydon, with the latter assassination resulting in the destruction of an Apple of Eden. Against the will of their superior George Westhouse, the Frye twins left for London to retake the city from Templar rule.[60]

Whilst there, the twins met the local Assassin agent Henry Green and built up a network of allies including Frederick Abberline, Charles Dickens, Charles Darwin, and Karl Marx. While Jacob took over the local Clinkers gang and renamed them the Rooks to aid them in their battle against the Templars and their Blighters gang, Evie instead opted to focus her efforts on finding the Piece of Eden the Templars were seeking.[60]

Over the course of a few months, Jacob single-handedly killed most of Grand Master Crawford Starrick's closest agents, including John Elliotson, Pearl Attaway, Philip Twopenny, James Brudenell, and Maxwell Roth. Meanwhile Evie worked on undoing the chaos some of these assassinations did to London's political and social situation and traced leads on the Shroud of Eden.[60]

With his influence dwindling, Starrick discovered the artifact to be hidden beneath Buckingham Palace and planned to eliminate all heads of state and church at Queen Victoria's garden party at the palace. While the Frye twins killed Starrick's agents at the party, Starrick recovered the artifact from the crypt and a battle ensued between the Grand Master and the Frye twins. The Assassins ultimately overcame their enemy, but decided to leave the artifact in the crypt.[60]

By 1888, one of Jacob's apprentices, Jack, had become insane and took over control of the Rooks to service his own twisted version of the Creed. After several of Jacob's female initiates dressed as prostitutes failed to kill Jack, Jacob requested his siser to return from India, where she was living with Henry Green. Jacob was eventually abducted by Jack, who had become known as Jack the Ripper.[77]

Evie eventually managed to cripple Jack's new hold over London, with the help of Detective Inspector Abberline. She traced Jack's hideout to Lambeth Asylum, where he was previously incarcerated, and ultimately killed the rogue Assassin and freed her brother.[77]

Opposing Imperial Russia

Since at least the reign of Tsar Alexander II, the Russian Assassins – operating in public as the Narodnaya Volya (People's Will) – had been battling the Templars' influence over the Russian Empire. In 1881, the Assassins were successful in killing the Tsar, a puppet of the Templars. This resulted in the ascension of his son, Alexander III, who became a willing ally of the Templars and was gifted a Staff of Eden.[78]

A failed attempt on his life resulted in the execution of several Assassins including Aleksandr Ulyanov in March 1887. The next year, their Mentor responded by tasking Nikolai Orelov with assassinating the Tsar while the latter was travelling by train; the attempt failed, with the conflict resulting in the Borki train disaster. The Tsar eventually died in 1894 from kidney failure developed from injuries inflicted by Orelov.[78]

In 1908, the Assassins discovered that Grigori Rasputin had stolen the Imperial Scepter – a Staff of Eden – from the new Tsar, Nicholas II.[78] They employed the overseas aid of Nikola Tesla, an inventor discredited by the Templar Thomas Edison,[2] and stormed the facility in Tunguska that housed the Staff. Tesla released a burst of energy to the facility from his Wardenclyffe Tower, resulting in the destruction of the Staff in a huge explosion. Orelov was the sole survivor, and Rasputin later managed to retrieve a splinter of the artifact from the site.[78]

World War I

On 28 June 1914, following the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand, the First World War broke out between the Allied Powers and Central Powers.[45] Assassins from all across Europe were pulled in every direction to ensure the Brotherhood was present in every theatre of war and seat of power. As such, many members of the British Brotherhood enlisted in the army.[60]

Open conflict soon started in the Western Front; on Christmas Eve of that year, British and German troops started a truce, during which a British Assassin medic killed the German Templar general Erich Albert.[16]

The war would last several years, and by 1916, the Brotherhood had found an ally in Winston Churchill, former First Lord of the Admiralty. He worked closely with the Assassin Lydia Frye – the granddaughter of Jacob Frye who had chosen to stay and protect London – to take down a German Templar spy network in London, culminating in the assassination of the network's Master Spy, a Sage.[60]

The war continued until 1918,[45] by which point a series of revolutions had started in several countries, including Russia,[78] and Ireland, in the latter of which at least one Assassin participated.[46]

Russian Revolution

In 1917, after the First World War brought Russia to near collapse, the Russian Revolution broke out. The Assassins supported the people's desire for a new government and pressured the Tsar into abdicating.[9] The leader of the revolutionary Bolsheviks, Vladimir Lenin, then asked his old friend Nikolai Orelov to kill Nicholas II. Unwilling to comply, Orelov infiltrated his residence only to determine if the Tsar's new Scepter was the Staff of Eden. The Assassin spared Nicholas' life, and the latter told him about Rasputin's mysterious shard; Orelov then retrieved the artifact from Rasputin's corpse, and planned to leave Russia with his family to start a new life.[78]

The Bolsheviks effectively seized control of Russia after the October Revolution. In reward for their support, Lenin and the Russian Academy of Sciences awarded the Assassins with several of the Academy's facilities. One such facility in Protvino was turned into an Assassin science city, inhabited by a community of Assassins and scientists including Sergei.[45]

In July 1918, Orelov took up one final task from the Brotherhood: to retrieve a Piece of Eden, the Precursor box, from the Imperial family in Yekaterinburg. After Orelov infiltrated the Ipatiev House, the Templars murdered most of the Imperial family to obtain the artifact, with only the Tsar's youngest daughter Anastasia surviving. When she met Orelov, the box she held came in contact with Nikolai's splinter of the Staff, transferring the consciousness of Shao Jun to Anastasia. The Assassin eventually brought her and the box safely to his Brothers in Moscow.[79]

The Assassins instead imprisoned Anastasia in the Kremlin to experiment on her, causing Nikolai to betray the Brotherhood and rescue her. After giving her identification papers belonging to "Anna Anderson",[79] Orelov himself left Russia with his family.[78]

After Lenin's death in 1924, the Russian Assassins faced opposition from the new Soviet government led by Joseph Stalin, a Templar puppet. Yuri Petrovich Figatner, a Templar in the Politburo, started a "counter-revolutionary" commission to hunt down the Assassins and turned the Russian Academy of Sciences into a Stalinist organization, forcing their Mentor to go in hiding.[45]

Roaring Twenties

By 1919, the American Brotherhood had infiltrated the Bureau of Investigation. Around this time, the Russian Brotherhood reached out to their American counterpart hoping to locate the deserter Nikolai Orelov to obtain the knowledge he possessed of a vision during the Tunguska explosion. The American Brotherhood used its position to have Orelov's wife and daughter detained back to Russia during the Palmer Raids, but Orelov and his son managed to elude capture.[80]

By 1926, the American Brotherhood located Orelov, and Russian Assassin Sergei tried to take him back to Russia. After Sergei was killed by Orelov, American Assassins working at the Bureau of Investigation under J. Edgar Hoover tried again in 1928. Orelov and his young son Innokenti managed to kill the team of Assassins, though the encounter proved fatal for Orelov.[80]

Through the 1920s, the Brotherhood retained its strong presence in the United States. During this time, one Assassin became affiliated with Ernest Hemingway, Francis Scott Fitzgerald and Gertrude Stein, who became some of the most famous American writers.[27]

Spanish Civil War

As civil war broke out in Spain between the leftist Republicans and rightist Nationalists in 1936, several Spanish Assassins joined the war on the Republican side. Ignacio Cardona supported Buenaventura Durruti, even after his death in November 1936. On 26 April 1937, a team of Assassins was present at the bombing of the town of Guernica.[81]

In May 1937, the team was joined in Barcelona by the Templar Rufus Grosvenor, secretly serving the will of the Precursor Juno, claiming to be Norbert Clarke, sent by the British Brotherhood as aid. As internal fighting broke out between the anarchists and communists, the members of the team were unable to reach consensus on who to support. Grosvenor handed Cardona the Koh-i-Noor diamond to force them to stop, and the latter unwittingly used its powers on his fellow Assassins until finally dropping it to prevent further harm to himself and the others.[81]

Albert Bolden, the former Black Cross from whom Grosvenor had stolen the Koh-i-Noor, had been watching the ordeal and attacked Grosvenor. He was forced to flee after being attacked by the other Assassins, but took the unconscious Cardona with him. Eventually pursuading Cardona to team up against Grosvenor, they confronted Grosvenor and the other Assassins, who had been persuaded to Juno's cause.[81]

The confrontation eventually came to a head in a run-down church, where the former Assassins overpowered Cardona and Bolden. Grosvenor gave Cardona another opportunity to unlock the Koh-i-Noor's power. The Assassin used the artifact to create bulls from the artifact's energy, which destroyed the church, and also created an illusion of the artifact's destruction. After Bolden rescued Cardona from the rubble, he swore to remain a protector a site, where the Koh-i-Noor remained buried, and the pair continued fighting in the civil war.[81]

World War II

International tensions that arose in the aftermath of World War I ultimately resulted in World War II, orchestrated by the Templars to bring about a new world in the war's wake.[2] Many Assassins across the world participated in the conflict, including a group that operated from a cabin in the Swiss Alps to train, supply and lead local Maquis cells against German troops.[45]

After the start of the war, a team of Assassins led by Boris Pash infiltrated the German nuclear weapons project, headed by the Templar Obbergruppenführer Gero Kramer. After their attempt failed, Pash employed docking manager Eddie Gorm to infiltrate Kramer's inner circle in 1940. Gorm abducted Werner Heisenberg, the lead scientist on the nuclear project, at a meeting in September 1942. From him, Gorm learned that the project was a cover-up for Kramer's real project, Die Glocke.[82]

After receiving formal training to become a member of the Assassin Brotherhood, Gorm infiltrated the hydroelectric water plant of Vemork on 27 February 1943 to stop Kramer's project. During a fight with the Templar, Gorm was overpowered and placed inside Die Glocke, a precursor to the Animus built by Nikola Tesla. Kramer intended to search for other Pieces of Eden by having Gorm relive his ancestors' memories in the device.[82] However, due to Tesla's sabotage, the machine exploded. Gorm was rescued by Julia Dusk in the midst of the British army's infiltration of Vemork, and gained information on Project Riese from their longtime ally Tesla.[83]

The Assassins then diverted their attention to the Project Riese base underneath Książ Castle in Poland, where Abstergo Industries had built a base for the German Templars to build superweapons from Precursor knowledge. Gorm and Dusk infiltrated 