Disclosure: This site may receive compensation from some link clicks and purchases.

The Pontiac Astre is a rebadged version of the Chevrolet Vega, which had a dubious history in the 1970s. Because its sales numbers were much smaller and it only ran for three years in the U.S., the Astre is the lesser-known of the two cars today. The 1977 model featured the Pontiac “Iron Duke” I-4, which escaped the issues of the Chevy aluminum-block engine. This Astre is a one-owner car with just 56,000 miles and one of only a couple of thousand built in ‘77. Located in Hampton, Tennessee, the little machine is available here on craigslist for $7,500. Thanks, Pat L., for finding another seldom-seen car!

Chevrolet rolled out the Vega in late 1970 for the 1971 model year. Throughout seven model runs it would sell more than two million copies. The shift to fuel-efficient cars after the 1973 OPEC oil embargo helped keep that car afloat because – by then – it had gained a reputation for rusting prematurely and aluminum engine woes, such as overheating and oil guzzling. Presumably, those issues were resolved when Pontiac got their version of the car called the Astre. It was sold in Canada in 1973-74 and then in the U.S. for 1975-77. When the Vega folded its tent in ’77, so did the Astre, selling just over 147,000 cars in America in three years.

The biggest improvement made to the car came in 1977 when the Vega engine was replaced by Pontiac’s new 151 cubic inch inline-4. Both the cylinder block and cylinder head were cast-iron. Standard in the Pontiac Astre and Sunbird, these were the first GM vehicles to utilize the engine that saw widespread use into the 1990s. I had a 1980 Sunbird with that engine, and it was the best thing about the car. It was both durable and economical. The seller’s Astre would have benefitted from that change, being produced in Astre’s last model year.

Only 32,768 Astres were produced in 1977, including 2,327 of the notchback coupes, the least popular of the body styles because it had a closed trunk rather than a hatchback. The seller’s car is was of these notchbacks and was purchased new by the seller’s husband’s father. We assume he’s passed on, but that’s not mentioned in the listing. The car has only averaged 1,300 miles since it was new and looks to be in particularly good condition. It has a three-way red color scheme, top/body/interior. The paint may be original, while the vinyl top has been replaced.

The interior looks good for being 44 years old and the driver and his/her passengers will ride in comfort with factory air conditioning that we’re told still works! The dash pad is cracked, but that’s common. The only new part referenced is the radiator and the only thing that appears to need attention is the rubber seal where the trunk lid closes. Online price guides treat the Vega/Astre as used cars and are priced as such at $2-4,000. This car seems much nicer than that and nice cars command more money, but the seller’s asking price may be a stretch.