Disclosure: This site may receive compensation from some link clicks and purchases.

Pontiac’s 1976 brochure states: “Our goal for the 1976 Astre was to come up with a little car you can feel at home in.” This example checks that box for me, for a whole host of reasons. I found this 1976 Pontiac Astre here on Craigslist in Anoka, Minnesota for an asking price of $8,988.

If you can’t tell, the Astre was Pontiac’s take on Chevrolet’s Vega. My grandfather was a Pontiac loyalist. so I tend to favor their offerings over any of their GM siblings’. Except for the Cosworth, my preference for Pontiac applies to the mid-70s subcompacts, even though I never see them — at shows, for sale, or on forums. That’s why I had difficulty believing nearly 150k were built over a 3-model-year run. They were offered in notchback, hatchback, and wagon form. This is one of the 18,143 examples of the 1976 notchback built.

I’m a fan of bold colors on simple cars and this one doesn’t disappoint. It appears to be Carousel Red, one of a few bright color options for the 1976 Astre. The seller’s claim of the body being in “excellent condition, straight and solid” looks to be spot on. Hopefully one of our informed readers can weigh in on the wheels — I recall these being offered on the Sunbird, but not the Astre. There is a matching spare in the trunk. so maybe my middle-aged memory is slipping.

The “standard interior” furthers that bold look with the factory plaid inserts. While there were options for “custom buckets” and “luxury buckets.” the vinyl/plaid works well on this orangeish-red notchback. The split-console look features a floor-mounted shifter below the dash and parking brake and cubby between the seats. Those seats and carpet look to be in very good condition and the dash seems to have held up fairly well over the past 48 years.

A 140 cubic-inch 4-cylinder sends power to the rear wheels via a floor-shifted Turbo-Hydramatic 3-speed automatic transmission. The odometer shows 45,603 miles which the seller believes to be actual. This Astre is equipped with factory air conditioning, but it is not currently blowing cold. The seller tells us the “wipers work, radio works…headlamps work” and the “tires are like new.”

I think the “at-home feeling” for me is captured in this Astre’s simplicity and excellent, original condition. Does this one meet Pontiac’s goal of making you feel at home? Or is it just another little car?