The University of Arkansas at Monticello chapter of Pi Sigma Alpha, the national collegiate honor society for political science majors, recently inducted two new members, according to Carol Strong, associate professor of political science and the chapter’s faculty adviser.

The new members are Emily Mendiola of Hamburg, a junior political science and modern languages double major; and Cassidy Mansur of Crossett, a junior political science and psychology double major.

Requirements for membership in Pi Sigma Alpha include a grade point average of 3.3 or higher, completion of at least 15 credit hours in political science, and junior or senior status.

Also included at the ceremony was the installation of new officers for the 2016 academic year. The officers are President Jimmy Tyler Harrison of Star City, a senior political science and history double major; Vice President Sarah Phillips of Star City, a senior political science and criminal justice double major; Treasurer Emily Mendiola; and Secretary Tasha Evans of Almont, Michigan, a senior political science major with a minor in criminal justice.

Harrison is a member of Alpha Chi honor society, competed three consecutive years at the Arkansas Communication and Theatre Arts Association (ACTAA) Student Congress held each fall in Little Rock and has presented original research at the 2014 Arkansas Political Science Association (ArkPSA) statewide conference, the 2015 Southern Political Science Association (SPSA) regional conference and the 2015 Louisiana Political Science Association (LPSA) regional conference.

Phillips is also a member of Alpha Chi, a UAM Student Ambassador and the president of Alpha Phi Sigma (APS), the criminal justice honor society. She has competed two years in a row at the ACTAA Student Congress, represented UAM at the 2014 Model United Nations competition and has presented papers, including original research, at the 2014 ArkPSA conference, the 2015 SPSA regional conference and the 2015 LPSA regional conference.

Mendiola is a member of the UAM Debate team, Pi Kappa Delta forensics honor society, Delta Zeta Epsilon and the Foreign Language, Spanish and Japanese clubs.

Evans represented UAM at the 2013 Model United Nations competition and is a former member and student coach of the Cotton Blossoms volleyball team.

For more information, contact Pi Sigma Alpha advisers Strong at 870-460-1687 or John Davis at 870-460-1189.