Jerry Bryson Roberts left this world for his heavenly home on December 11, 2014 at the age of 81 following a brief illness. Jerry was born November 30, 1933 in Jones County, Texas to Irene Balch Roberts and Cecil M Roberts. He attended public schools in Anson and Abilene, Texas, graduating from Abilene High School in 1951. He earned a Bachelor of Science degree in Geology from Hardin-Simmons University in 1955.Jerry married Edwina Connally on April 5, 1955 at First Baptist Church in Abilene. They were blessed with 59 years of marriage and were best friends. He was employed by Humble Oil & Refining Co. (now ExxonMobil) in New Orleans and Lafayette, Louisiana, and in Houston, Texas, and by Connally Oil Co. in Abilene, before settling in Midland in 1966. Jerry has proudly served as a Stock Broker, Financial Advisor, and Wealth Management Advisor with RBC Wealth Management in Midland since 1966. He received numerous awards for excellence in his field, including being named a Senior Vice President, and served on the Broker Advisory Committee. He always served his clients with the best advice and research available and was known for his integrity, loyalty and concern for their well-being. Jerry counted his partners and office support as family and his clients as friends.He was a member of First Baptist Church in Midland since March 1968. Jerry and Edwina quietly supported missions and personal needs of others who needed help. He especially took great pleasure in hunting and fishing with family and friends, spending time with his family whom he loved so dearly, and traveling the world with his wife, Edwina.Jerry was preceded in death by his parents, sisters Dorothy Nell Roberts and Mary Belle Roberts, brother Henry Michael Roberts, and nephew John Roberts. He is survived by his wife, Edwina Roberts of Midland, and three sons: Dr. Matthew Bryson Roberts and wife Nancy of Crockett, Texas, David Edward Roberts and wife Karin of Savannah, Georgia, and Dr. Sidney Creed Roberts and wife Catherine of Lufkin, Texas. Matt’s family includes son Dr. Matthew Bryson Roberts II and wife Joanie of Richardson and their children Luke Bryson and Benjamin Gregory, and son Joseph Daniel Roberts of Houston. David’s family includes daughters Leslie Irene Roberts of St. Petersburg, Florida and Christine Lynn Roberts of Athens, Georgia. Sid’s family includes daughters Elizabeth Carol Roberts of New York, New York, Hannah Grace Roberts of Rochester, New York, and Phoebe Blanche Roberts of Waco, Texas. Survivors also include Jerry’s brother Cecil Wayne Roberts and wife, Jackie of Montgomery, Texas along with their two daughters and families, and Jerry’s sister-in-law Suzanne Roberts of Dallas, Texas.You may visit with the family at Nalley-Pickle & Welch Funeral Home on Sunday, December 14 from 3 to 5 PM. There will be a graveside service at Resthaven Memorial Park on Monday, December 15 at 9:00 AM, followed by a celebration of Jerry’s life in the Chapel of First Baptist Church, Midland at 10:00 AM, with reception following in Chapel’s Welcome Center. Honorary pallbearers are Kevin Blonkvist, John Brinker, Jack Burns, Ted Fergeson, Tevis Herd, and Clint Hurt.In lieu of flowers, memorial contribution may be made to Hospice of Midland, PO Box 2621, Midland, Texas 79702, or to High Sky Children’s Ranch, 8701 WCR 60, Midland, Texas 79706.Arrangements are under the direction of Nalley-Pickle & Welch Funeral Home & Crematory of Midland. Online condolences may be made at www.npwelch.com ,