Gerald Lee Roberts, Jr. aka Jerry Roberts, passed away on November 26, 2014, at the age of 84. Raised in the Green Mountain State of Vermont, Jerry was an avid skier and outdoorsman. He served as an Army Lieutenant in the Korean War. Upon his return he transferred from Vermont College to New York University where he studied Fashion Merchandising. Jerry worked for various companies, including Blue Bell, Esprit de Corp and The Emporium. He was sought after as a guest speaker for his greatly respected knowledge of marketing. Ultimately he formed his own company, Cowboy Trappings of the American West based in Fort Worth, Texas.

Jerry had a deep love for bass fishing, ice hockey, downhill skiing and the Green Bay Packers. He shared this with his children and many friends. He was a season ticket holder for the Minnesota North Stars, was a graceful and accomplished skier, and raised 4 diehard fans of his favorite pro football team.

Jerry transformed an old dairy barn on twenty acres in Hammond, Wisconsin into the Circle R Ranch where he pursued his love of horses and horsemanship. He made many friends all over the world who shared his deep and abiding love for all things that celebrated horses and the American Cowboy. After his children had grown, Jerry’s love of horses and all animals transformed him from hobby rancher to cowboy. He became an avid student of “natural horsemanship” from Ray Hunt and competed successfully in cutting horse competitions.

He is survived by his four children, Douglas, Pamela, Christopher and Ruth. His grandchildren Amalia, Andy, Matthew, Riley, Zachary, Crystal, Colton, Winter, Rachel, Jacob and two great grandchildren, Sophia and Camille. He is also survived by his sister Marilyn Morey and her daughter Sharon Martin; his younger brother Earl Roberts, numerous nieces and nephews and many friends. Preceding Jerry in death were his father, Gerald L. Roberts, Sr., his mother Elsie Davis Roberts, his stepmother Ruth Sallies Roberts, two brothers Maurice and Richard, and two grandchildren, Christopher and Ashley.

Private family services are being planned.