Matthías Vilhjálmsson is an Icelandic international footballer who plays as a striker for the Úrvalsdeild club Víkingur. He can as well play as a midfielder. He also played for the Icelandic national football team from 2009 to 2016.

Matthías Vilhjálmsson was born on January 30, 1987, in Ísafjörður, Westfjords, Iceland. His birth geographical coordinates are 66° 4’ 29” North latitude and 23° 8’ 6” West longitude. Matthías Vilhjálmsson is currently 37 years old.

Astrologically, Matthías Vilhjálmsson falls under the Sun sign of Aquarius, with Cancer as his Ascendant, Aquarius as his Moon sign, and Cancer as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Aquarius Moon Aquarius Mercury Aquarius Venus Sagittarius Mars Aries Jupiter Pisces Saturn Sagittarius Uranus Sagittarius Neptune Capricorn Pluto Scorpio Ceres Sagittarius Chiron Gemini Eros Aries Hygiea Gemini Juno Capricorn Pallas Scorpio Vesta Aries Ascendant Cancer Black Moon Lilith Cancer Midheaven Capricorn North Node Aries South Node Libra Part of Fortune Cancer Vertex Libra

Sunin Aquarius10° 3’ 42”

The Aquarius Sun Sign in the Natal Chart makes you intellectual and clever. You are more intense than most people and can be fierce and […] Read more »

Moonin Aquarius22° 54’ 53”

The Moon in Aquarius in the Natal Chart makes you a humanitarian with instincts related to fairness and equality. You are intuitively attracted to group […] Read more »

Mercuryin Aquarius22° 16’ 48”

Is Mercury in Aquarius good or bad? Mercury in Aquarius is an intense placement that enhances your intuition and intellect. The Aquarius Mercury placement brings […] Read more »

Venusin Sagittarius23° 47’ 60”

Sagittarius Venus in the Natal Chart makes you intense and open in love. You are social and go to extremes to show someone special you […] Read more »

Marsin Aries15° 21’ 31”

Aries Mars is a powerful placement, as Mars is this sign’s planetary ruler. You are charming and can be energetic and optimistic. You are passionate […] Read more »

Jupiterin Pisces22° 58’ 60”

Pisces Jupiter in the Natal Chart indicates a generational trend related to your philosophical nature and ideals. The Jupiter house placement speaks to your personality […] Read more »

Saturnin Sagittarius18° 21’ 56”

Sagittarius Saturn in the Natal Chart brings stability and security through your visionary nature. You are part of a progressive generation. You find ways to […] Read more »

Uranusin Sagittarius25° 11’ 55”

Uranus in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart is a generational placement, describing a broad cohort of people born within three years of each other. You […] Read more »

Neptunein Capricorn6° 45’ 16”

Capricorn Neptune in the Natal Chart indicates a desire for security and emotional validation. You are part of a group that desires emotional connection and […] Read more »

Plutoin Scorpio9° 55’ 54”

Scorpio Pluto in the Natal Chart indicates a generation with an intense desire for truth and wisdom. You delve deep to uncover hidden truths and […] Read more »

Ceresin Sagittarius16° 24’ 55”

Ceres in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart brings an abundance of hope and faith. Your generation is committed to fulfilling your ideals. You are energizing […] Read more »

Chironin Gemini16° 7’ 17”

Chiron in Gemini in the Natal Chart indicates a generation committed to helping others understand their past wounds. You find healing and release when you […] Read more »

Erosin Aries0° 16’ 5”

Eros in Aries in the Natal Chart makes you passionate and strong. You are excitable and have a spicey and adventurous sex life. You are […] Read more »

Hygieain Gemini19° 5’ 33”

Hygiea in Gemini in the Natal Chart gives you a broad perspective. You understand the importance of mental and physical health. You advocate for hygiene […] Read more »

Junoin Capricorn22° 56’ 60”

Juno in Capricorn in the Natal Chart makes you a supportive partner. You prioritize your family and work diligently to provide for your loved ones. […] Read more »

Pallasin Scorpio22° 50’ 41”

Pallas in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you passionate about rebirth and transformation. You have a gift for encouraging others to create power and […] Read more »

Vestain Aries17° 48’ 16”

Vesta in Aries in the Natal Chart makes you zealous and caring. You are passionate and can be energetic. You are determined, and nothing stands […] Read more »

Ascendantin Cancer3° 6’ 51”

Cancer Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you emotional and expressive. You can’t hide your feelings and are transparent about your vulnerable nature. You have […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Cancer7° 36’ 36”

Cancer Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you dramatic and caring. You are sensitive and hurt easily. When offended, you lash out and […] Read more »

Midheavenin Capricorn14° 47’ 25”

The Capricorn Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you stoic and observant. You are patient and down to earth. You have a practical and determined […] Read more »

North Nodein Aries14° 55’ 58”

Aries North Node in the Natal Chart indicates you are passionate about your purpose and break habits by developing confidence in yourself. You are driven […] Read more »

South Nodein Libra14° 55’ 58”

Libra South Node in the Natal Chart makes you affectionate and loving. You are attuned to other people’s needs and can learn to open up […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Cancer15° 58’ 1”

Cancer Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart indicates you are creative and comforting. You are nurturing and can be loving and sensitive. You are […] Read more »

Vertexin Libra14° 38’ 49”

Libra Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you intelligent and friendly. You are charming and can easily manifest love and romance. You can be peaceful […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Eleventh House Moon Twelfth House Mercury Twelfth House Venus Sixth House Mars Twelfth House Jupiter Twelfth House Saturn Sixth House Uranus Sixth House Neptune Eighth House Pluto Sixth House Ceres Sixth House Chiron Twelfth House Eros Twelfth House Hygiea Twelfth House Juno Tenth House Pallas Sixth House Vesta Twelfth House Black Moon Lilith Second House North Node Twelfth House South Node Sixth House Part of Fortune Fourth House Vertex Sixth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 17 major aspects, alongside 15 minor aspects, as well as 19 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Sun Square Pluto Moon Conjunct Mercury Moon Sextile Venus Venus Square Jupiter Venus Conjunct Uranus Moon Sextile Uranus Mercury Sextile Venus Jupiter Square Uranus Mercury Sextile Uranus Mars Trine Saturn Neptune Sextile Pluto Mercury Sextile Saturn Sun Sextile Mars Moon Sextile Saturn Venus Conjunct Saturn Jupiter Square Saturn Saturn Conjunct Uranus

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Matthías Vilhjálmsson’s life journey.

Sun Square Plutoorb: 0°

The Sun square Pluto in a Natal Chart makes you fearful of change and loss. Until you accept core fears and weaknesses, you may overcompensate […] Read more »

Moon Conjunct Mercuryorb: 1°

The Moon and Mercury conjunct in the Natal Chart blend your intellectual and emotional nature. You are emotionally attached to your beliefs and convictions. You […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Venusorb: 1°

When the Moon is sextile Venus in a Natal Chart, this typically means that a person is a kind and loving person. They tend to […] Read more »

Venus Conjunct Uranusorb: 1°

Venus conjunct Uranus in a Natal Chart makes you erratic in love. You are enamored with people from a distance but have difficulty sustaining intimate […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Uranusorb: 2°

When the Moon is sextile Uranus in a Natal Chart, this typically means that a person is free-spirited, unique, and a bit rebellious. Someone with […] Read more »

Mercury Sextile Venusorb: 2°

Mercury sextile Venus in a Natal Chart typically indicates a person is friendly, personable, and social. They are likely affectionate and have no problem communicating […] Read more »

Mercury Sextile Uranusorb: 3°

Mercury sextile Uranus in a chart typically indicates that someone is knowledgeable and innovative. This sextile is connected to technology, so someone with this aspect […] Read more »

Mercury Sextile Saturnorb: 4°

What does Mercury sextile Saturn mean? When Mercury and Saturn are connected in this way, a person will likely have a more serious, organized, and […] Read more »

Sun Sextile Marsorb: 5°

The Sun sextile Mars in a Natal Chart blends passion and focus. You are adventurous and bold. Your ego and ambitions are aligned. You enjoy […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Saturnorb: 5°

When the Moon is sextile Saturn in a Natal Chart, this typically indicates that a person is responsible and more on the serious side. They […] Read more »

Venus Conjunct Saturnorb: 5°

Venus conjunct Saturn in a Natal Chart makes you sincere and authentic. You fall in love slowly and can be cautious in relationships. You have […] Read more »

Saturn Conjunct Uranusorb: 7°

Saturn conjunct Uranus in a chart can make a person seem highly energetic. They will have a side of them that is practical and grounded […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Moon Square Pallas Mars Conjunct North Node Mars Opposite South Node Jupiter Sextile Juno Jupiter Trine Pallas Mercury Square Pallas Mars Trine Ceres Mars Sextile Chiron Mars Square Midheaven Mars Square Part of Fortune Mars Opposite Vertex Saturn Opposite Hygiea Saturn Trine Vesta Neptune Opposite Black Moon Lilith Saturn Conjunct Ceres

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Matthías Vilhjálmsson’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Mars Conjunct North Nodeorb: 0°

Mars conjunct the North Node in a chart connects present action with future potential. This aspect can be incredibly ambitious, driven, and motivated. People with […] Read more »

Mars Opposite South Nodeorb: 0°

Mars opposite the South Node in a chart puts Mars’ determination and passion at odds with the South Node’s karmic lessons, comfort zone, and what […] Read more »

Saturn Conjunct Ceresorb: 2°

Saturn conjunct Ceres in a chart can create a strong need to nurture and care for others, but expressing that care in a way others […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Ceres Opposite Chiron Ceres Quincunx Part of Fortune Juno Sextile Pallas Midheaven Square North Node Midheaven Square South Node Midheaven Square Vertex North Node Opposite Vertex South Node Conjunct Vertex Ceres Trine Vesta Ceres Trine North Node Ceres Sextile South Node Chiron Sextile North Node Chiron Trine South Node Chiron Trine Vertex Hygiea Sextile Vesta Midheaven Opposite Part of Fortune North Node Square Part of Fortune South Node Square Part of Fortune Part of Fortune Square Vertex

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Matthías Vilhjálmsson’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Midheaven Square North Nodeorb: 0°

The Midheaven square of the North Node in the Natal Chart makes you passionate and insecure about your career. You seek success and recognition related […] Read more »

Midheaven Square South Nodeorb: 0°

The Midheaven square of the South Node creates challenges related to your career path. You struggle to find your focus and may feel insecure about […] Read more »

Midheaven Square Vertexorb: 0°

The Midheaven square of the Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you struggle to find your way professionally. You may embark on several career ventures […] Read more »

North Node Square Part of Fortuneorb: 1°

The North Node square of the Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you eager to succeed. You seek fame and independence, which can […] Read more »

South Node Square Part of Fortuneorb: 1°

The South Node square of the Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you struggle with challenges from your past. You don’t easily make […] Read more »

Part of Fortune Square Vertexorb: 1°

The Part of Fortune square of the Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you anxious about your destiny. You are reluctant to challenge yourself and […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.