The 1930s was a decade of geo-political and economic upheaval. The world was dealing with the consequences of the Great Depression, the aftermath of WWI and the rise of fascism in Europe.

Against the backdrop of this era, movie audiences longed for any form of escapist fare. And comedies, whether slapstick, screwball, or romantic - fit the bill and garnered wide appeal. With any genre of film in the '30s, there was a bold delineation between "pre-code" - the films made before the enforcement of the (Hays Code) in mid-1934 - and those films made after.

There was no shortage of unbridled sexual innuendo and suggestive behavior with pre-code comedies. Mae West epitomizes this sentiment with She Done Him Wrong (1933) and I'm No Angel (1933). Her now classic suggestive double-entendres: "When I'm good, I'm very good, but when I'm bad, I'm better," and "Well, it's not the men in your life that counts, it's the life in your men," drew the ire of the soon to be enforced Motion Picture Production Code. But other stars in the pre-code era were also pushing the boundaries of what was acceptable; Jean Harlow for example in Platinum Blonde (1931) and Blonde Bombshell (1933).

Throughout the 30's there was a coming of age for the sophisticated comedy. These were generally romantic romps in the vein of The Awful Truth (1937), Easy Living (1937), Forsaking all Others (1935), My Man Godfrey (1936) and It's a Wonderful World (1939). These comedies featured snappy dialogue and teasing one-liners. These were fun vehicles for some of the biggest stars of the era: Katharine Hepburn, Cary Grant, Barbara Stanwyck, Claudette Colbert, Jean Arthur, Clark Gable and Ginger Rogers.

Although centered around a murder mystery, The Thin Man series featuring Myrna Loy and William Powell epitomizes the best of the '30's sophisticated comedy (featured in our Suspense genre).

Finally, comedy in the 1930's were defined by the antics of The Marx Brothers, W.C. Fields. Laurel & Hardy, and The Three Stooges. These stars were at their zenith in the '30s and kept audiences laughing through the 1940's.