Since I started my blog with July 1916, I missed some of Kingsley’s writing about the movies. In the middle of each month, I’m going to catch up on her earlier articles.

One hundred and ten years ago this month, Grace Kingsley, who had been a full-time entertainment writer at the L.A. Times since 1910, was appointed the film editor for the paper. Because the movie beat was tiny when she started, she also continued to write about legitimate theater and vaudeville. On August 20, she started a daily column of short newsy items about people in the theater and film business; her first mentioned that vaudevillian Trixie Friganza would be adding films to her stage act and comedian Max Figman had gone to see himself on the screen at Talley’s Broadway.

In 1914, few movie reviews were being published in newspapers and most movie trade papers hadn’t been founded yet. One that was available, Moving Picture World, gave detailed plot summaries but didn’t offer opinions about if the film as was any good. So the reviews that Kingsley started to write are an useful record of what someone thought of them. She went to her first premier on August 20th and wrote:

An audience deluxe of smart society folk viewed the premiere of Hobart Bosworth’s six-reel production of Jack London’s Martin Eden in the auditorium of the L.A. Athletic Club last evening. Thinly disguised in spots, in others (it must be admitted) highly idealized, the piece is the story of Jack London’s own life. Viewed in this light the play is of absorbing interest, and it is hard to tell how one would view it, seen from a less interesting standpoint.

Her review was mixed. She said it started off well enough, following the hero’s early days of poverty, travels abroad, meeting his sweetheart Ruth, and getting published. But after Ruth betrayed him, he took himself off to the South Seas. That’s when the movie took a turn:

Overcome by his remembrance of his struggles for the girl he loves, and her final discarding of him, he seeks a dramatic death by drowning. This seems the only really incongruous note in the play. A young man, full of good health and fortune, bound for a land he loves, will hardly seek death, even if some girl has sent him to the right-about, and it is rather absurd to see the healthy, wholesome young man swing himself into the sea quite as if he were dropping himself for a swim.

Martin Eden had a good run, starting at Tally’s Broadway on August 24th and moving to Talley’s Alhambra for a second week. It’s been partially preserved at the Library of Congress.

The war in Europe, which had been declared only a month earlier on July 28th, was already showing up in the theaters. Clune’s Auditorium was playing Sealed Orders, which Kingsley called “a great film drama which includes in its tale wonderful details about the big war. It shows spies in action and battle scenes, besides which all the human emotions are given play in the great strife.” Clune’s Broadway was getting war news through two services: Selig and Pathe, even while “little war stuff is getting out of Europe, but many skilled and clever men are exerting their energy in smuggling news films to the United States.” Vaudeville theaters also ran newsreels: the Pantages promised “new war pictures every day.”

She also mentioned that a lot of film equipment was made in Germany, and the war would cut off supplies, flippantly saying “a film famine would be awful, wouldn’t it?” Nobody knew how terrible things were going to be.

One hundred years ago this month, Grace Kingsley returned from her annual vacation to news about a movie that looked like a big box-office hit.

When The Covered Wagon showed at Grauman’s Million Dollar Theater, it broke all records and it seemed that it would hold them for some time to come. However, the way in which crowds thronged the theater last week to see Rudolph Valentino in Monsieur Beaucaire it seems this picture will even overtop the success of the former picture.

Beaucaire was Rudolph Valentino’s return to the screen after a two-year long absence caused by a legal fight with his studio, Famous Players-Lasky. He wanted better quality scripts and productions, and he refused to act in films until he got them. To keep his name before the public, he’d gone on an exhibition dance tour, which you can read about on Donna Hill’s Falcon Lair site.

His break didn’t hurt his acting skills; Kingsley said that he’d become a “polished, finished actor, which enhances the charm of his fascinating love scenes.”

He certainly got what he wanted with his new contract. Beaucaire was a lavish production based on a short novel by the popular and respected author, Booth Tarkington. Set in the court of Louis XVth, Valentino played a charming duke. The king orders him to marry Princess Henriette (Bebe Daniels) but he doesn’t want to so he runs away to England disguised as a barber, M. Beaucaire. There he becomes infatuated with Lady Mary Carlisle (Doris Kenyon), woos her disguised as a noble and fights hired bullies. Then Lady Mary is told he’s a barber so she dumps him, he gets pardoned by the king, returns to France and reconciles with Henriette.

It had its world premiere in Los Angeles on Monday, August 11th and Kingsley’s boss Edwin Schallert attended. He was quite impressed, writing:

This is indeed a picture of quality, and one that enriches beyond measure the pictorial art of the screen. It is the finest and most enchanting achievement that the East has yet offered before the eyes of the West, and it is an auspicious production to signalize the return of Rudolph Valentino.

For the most part he admired Valentino’s performance, though he thought the star wasn’t quite French enough and objected because “too much effort was made to impress the members of the audience with Valentino’s physique, especially in the scenes of wrestling and where he stands forth garbed only in a pair of silken trunks” (I bet the fans didn’t mind). However, he liked the actor’s sense of humor when he was in disguise as a barber and was relieved that didn’t have to charm women. Schallert also thought that the sword fighting was “of the very best.” Furthermore, the photography, production design and direction were all outstanding and he said, “There is nothing but the highest praise for everything else that enhances the glamor of the screen as it has rarely been enhanced before” particularly the direction.

He concluded, “Beaucaire is exceptional in the majority of respects, and can justifiably be chronicled among the very best features of the year.”

Other critics agreed with him. C.S. Sewell wrote a typical trade review for Moving Picture World:

Certainly no picture of greater beauty, artistry, magnificence or pictorial appeal has ever reached the silver screen…the story is fascinating, finely directed, acted by an unusually fine cast, and holds the interest throughout, and coupled with Valentino’s tremendous popularity and the fact that he has a role that suits him well and will appeal strongly to his admirers, it looks as if Monsieur Beaucaire is going to establish a lot of new box-office records.

Many critics did still admired it when they wrote their top ten best film lists for the year. The Film Daily Yearbook had a round-up of their lists, and it came in at number 3, just under The Thief of Bagdad and The Sea Hawk. It appeared on 36 lists of trade press reviewers and newspaper critics, including Edwin Schallert’s.

However, the critics’ admiration didn’t translate into the outrageously big ticket sales and long theatrical runs that people had predicted. It did very well in its first weeks in the big cities; Helen Klumph reported in the L.A. Times that it was still doing big business in New York in its third week at the Strand Theater, when other houses were only half-full during the heat of August. It stayed in Los Angeles for a little over four weeks and its final day was September 9th. So it was in the theater longer than most of movies the day, but not an immensely long, multi-month run like The Covered Wagon or The Thief of Bagdad. The expectations for it were just too high.

However, it did not fare so well in the smaller markets. Film Daily ran an article in November on its box office disappointment: “It’s not a trade secret. Beaucaire is not holding up in the “the sticks”…What I mean to say is that the picture has been a flop for real money or real satisfaction after the first runs.” He accused the film of not being “real entertainment.”

Nevertheless, Valentino’s career was fine and he went on to make more successful movies– The Son of the Sheik and The Eagle were still in his future.

“Idol of Screen in New Role,” Los Angeles Times, August 11, 1924.

Helen Klumph, “Rudolph Minuets Along,” Los Angeles Times, August 31, 1924.

“The Lesson of Monsieur Beaucaire,” Film Daily, November 22, 1924, p. 4.

Edwin Schallert, “Beaucaire is Art Gorgeous,” Los Angeles Times, August 12, 1924.

C.S. Sewall, “Monsieur Beaucaire,” Moving Picture World, August 25, 1924, p. 650.

“The Ten Best Pictures of 1924,” Film Daily Yearbook, 1925, pp. 623-629.

One hundred years ago this week, Grace Kingsley reported on another instance of the oddest trend I’ve found in her columns: there was yet another movie star’s fake brother at large:

The Thomas H. Ince Studios of Culver City have received a telegram from the Atlanta Journal of Atlanta GA, reading “Man here claiming to be Albert Ray, brother of Charles. Is he brother?”

Thomas H. Ince wired back, “Charles Ray has no brother. Therefore the man referred to in your wire must be an imposter. Mr. Ray has had this brought to his attention several times recently. No doubt the man is using this supposed relationship in different parts of the country. Appreciate your calling it to my attention.

That’s a lot of extra words for a telegram! Claiming to have a famous relative sounds like an odd way to convince people to hire you or give you money, but this wasn’t the only time it happened: earlier I wrote about Rudolph Valentino’s and Buster Keaton’s fake brothers. It seems that even a less famous actor like Ray was afflicted with one. So far, I haven’t found any fake sisters.

Charles Ray had played naïve country boys who moved to the big city in a several films for Thomas Ince. Lea Stans wrote a terrific biographical article about him at Silent-ology.

He’d tried to break away from that with an independent production, The Courtship of Miles Standish (1923), but that was a financial flop and by 1924 he’d returned to the Ince studio. He really didn’t have a brother, just a sister named Birdie.* What’s a bit confusing about the story is that he did have a cousin named Albert Ray who had been an actor, but he moved into directing in 1921.

The man who was impersonating Ray’s brother was actually named Grady Henry Terry. He was born on June 13, 1897 in Spiro, Oklahoma. In 1900 he was living on a farm in Hunt, Texas with his grandparents, William and Mary Hodges, his older sister Mattie, and some aunts and uncles. When he registered for the first world war draft in 1918, he was living in Fort Worth, Texas. His form mentioned a distinctive physical characteristic: he had no right arm. It kept him from being drafted.

He moved around a lot, marrying Gertrude Worthington in Chicago on November 4, 1922.

His next appearance in the papers or public records was in Kingsley’s story, and it was the first report I’ve found of his Ray impersonation. It looks like Ince’s telegram might have stopped Terry in Atlanta, but he just moved on to the next town. In 1925 he was in Los Angeles and in August Variety reported: “Police have been requested to take into custody Albert N. Ray, who posed as a brother of Charles Ray, film star, and obtained various sums of money from Hollywood residents.” When he was caught, he changed his story, claiming to be Ray’s cousin Al, but they saw through that quickly. He’d gotten around $1000. It sounds like he was good at being a con man—for a while.

The papers never said if he went to jail, but by when it was time to register for the 1926 elections he said he was a salesman and living near downtown Los Angeles. He hadn’t reformed but he changed his scam a little bit, getting paid to perform prologs in movie theaters. That same year Film Daily reported: “The National Better Business Bureau yesterday warned exhibitors that an individual using the name of Albert Ray, who has claimed to be a brother of Charles Ray and sought the confidence of a number of exhibitors on this account, is not related to the latter, according to investigations conducted by affiliated Western Better Business Bureaus.”

Terry got arrested in L.A. again in August 1927, and Charles Ray was ready to do his part for justice. The L.A. Times reported that he and his father went to the Beverly Hills jail with a file full of evidence about his crimes that they’d collected. The paper said Terry “had toured the United States for three years, posing as his brother, appearing on prologs shown in conjunction with Ray’s pictures, and, in more ways than one, embarrassing him, Ray charged.” They also mentioned that Ray finally got to meet his tormentor: “When Ray appeared at the station, the accused man pleaded with him to drop the charges, declaring he was ‘cured’ of his desire to pose as the actor’s brother.”

Neither Ray nor the police believed that. There was a second complainant, according to Moving Picture World,who “asserted Terry had taken $14 from her ostensibly for magazines as the brother of the star. The magazines, she claimed, never arrived.” Terry went before a judge and the City Attorney presented signed statements from Charles Ray and his father, C.T. Ray. Terry immediately admitted that he’d impersonated his brother, but he meant it as a “joke.” He got sentenced on two charges of obtaining money under false pretenses to 120 days in the Beverly Hills jail.

He was out of jail by January 1928 when two men held him up as he was driving, but he convinced them to return the money because he had only one arm. Terry was awfully good at talking his way out of bad situations.

Nevertheless, jail didn’t reform him and he went on to commit worse crimes (Charles Ray didn’t have as nearly much trouble as his other victims). Terry was a bigamist, and it finally caught up with him in New York City in April 1929. Variety reported:

Grady Terry, 30, who during the past five years has posed on various occasions as a brother of Charles Ray, the film star, and as an English baronet, was committed to the Observation Ward at Bellevue Hospital for 10 days by Judge George L. Donnellan of General Sessions. He has pleaded guilty to the latest charge against him, that of unlawfully marrying three women. He faces five years in Sing Sing when he comes up for sentence May 13, unless he is adjudged insane by the hospital authorities. Meanwhile he is under a three-year sentence in the penitentiary, imposed two weeks ago by the justices of Special Sessions for petit larceny.

On the present indictment Terry admits he married Dorothy Taft, 17, February 20 in New York, although he was already married to Gertrude Worthington of 315 West 97th Street, whom he wedded in 1922 in Chicago. Further investigation proved that he was married to Edith Damsky, 16, October 20 last by Supreme Court Justice Sherman. Except in his marriage to the Worthington girl, Terry went through the other ceremonies under assumed names.

During his career Grady has caused considerable worry to Charlie Ray, the actor, and the latter’s relatives. About a year ago the defendant was sentenced to 120 days in jail in Beverly Hills, California, for using Ray’s name in gypping local merchants. His police record since 1923 show that he has been in trouble in practically every large city from coast to coast.

During these escapades he posed as Ray, and as the latter’s brother. In his speedy love affairs, he represented himself as a motion picture magnate, a reporter, ‘Sir Albert Ray,’ ‘Philip McHue,’ ‘Captain Albert Ray Brown,’ who is credited with having shot down Baron von Richtofen, the German ace during the war, and ‘Captain Lloyd Brown.’ To further impress the girls he made love to, Terry would flash a bundle of fake decorations. In his pedigree Terry described himself as a ‘theatrical man.’

Yikes. The New York Marriage Index backs up their report: Edith Damsky married a Ray Brown in 1928 and Dorothy Taft married a Philip A. McHue in 1929, both in Manhattan.

Somehow he wriggled out of the worst of the punishment for these charges, and was back in Los Angeles in time for the 1930 census in early April. He told the census taker that he was a divorced car salesman. It seems like that was true, and he continued to stay out of trouble (or at least out of the newspapers). Maybe the threat of Sing Sing Prison finally turned him around. After that he only shows up in vital records. In 1940 he was a salesman living alone in San Gabriel, California and when he registered for the second world war draft, he was unemployed and married to Mary Clevenger McGuire, a secretary for a real estate title research company. They lived in El Monte. In 1950 he was back to selling cars. He and his wife divorced in the mid-1950’s. He died on February 18, 1969 in El Monte.

This month, Kingsley also reported about the fierce competition for a role in an upcoming movie:

If you are to believe Gladys Hulette, every girl in town under 40 is hoping to play Peter Pan. Miss Hulette, who is a pretty young actress, who might be expected to fulfil the role acceptably, conceived the bright idea of having some pictures taken in the costume, the other day. So she went to the Western Costume Company and asked for a Peter Pan dress. She said she wanted it for two or three days.

“Oh, but you can’t have it for more than twenty minutes!” the costume people told her. “You see at least half a dozen people rent that suit every day!”

And when Miss Hulette donned the suit, she found it nearly worn out, what with taking in and letting out of the seams. She had something like the same experience at the library and bookstores, where not a copy of Peter Pan could she find for love or money.

I had no idea that so many actresses wanted that role (so the later ballyhooed search for Scarlett O’Hara wasn’t the first). Kingsley said that Hollywood expected to hear author James M. Barrie’s decision about who would play Peter soon, and most people were guessing it would be May McAvoy or Viola Dana. By the end of the month, Kingsley had heard from ‘inside sources’ that it would be Bessie Love.

They were all wrong. Eventually Barrie chose newcomer Betty Bronson, who’d only been in a few movies as an extra before.

*Ray’s actual sister Birdie seems to have had a nice, ordinary life. She married Glen Jones, a tile-setter, in 1906 and they lived in Los Angeles. They had a son named Ralph. They divorced in the 20’s, and by 1940 she’d moved back in with her father and brother and had became a saleslady.

“Bandits Sympathetic,” San Pedro News Pilot, January 3, 1928.

“Charles Ray’s ‘Brother’ Held,” Los Angeles Times, August 6, 1927.

“Jail Term for Man Posing as Ray’s Brother,” Los Angeles Times, August 9, 1927.

“News From the Dailies,” Variety, August 26, 1925, p. 12.

“Posing as Charles Ray’s Brother,” Moving Picture World, August 20, 1927, p. 515.

“Terry, Marrying Fakir, Looks Set for Term,” Variety, May 1, 1929, p. 52.

“Two Held on Charges of Posing as Kin to Actors,” Santa Ana Register, August 6, 1927.

“Warning to Exhibitors,” Film Daily, May 18, 1926, p. 4.

One hundred years ago this month, Grace Kingsley heard about another hardy soul filming in Alaska, joining the parade that included Norman Dawn in 1922 and Lewis Moomaw in 1923 (who knew it was such a trend?):

Alfred Jacquemin, the intrepid cameraman, who rescued the balloonists on Hudson Bay shores in 1920, and who is now in Alaska, has cabled his manager here that he has secured moving pictures of the Major Martin trail, and is now on his way to the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes.

Jacquemin certainly had an attentive manager, who thought to tell Grace Kingsley about his client’s adventures. More details about the trip appeared in the Seward Daily Gateway. He was part of a group of sportsmen led by big game hunter Edward D. Jones, who in 1920 had headed up another expedition to Alaska sponsored by the Southwest Museum of Los Angeles to collect specimens. As of May 10th they were leaving for Unga, Sand Point and other far westward destinations on a steamer called Princess Pat. Most of them were there to kill animals, but Jacquemin and his assistant Gus Peterson were working for the Balmac Educational Film Service,* and they planned to shoot a five reel feature including all of the boat trip, the scenery, and the big game animals of the Kenal Peninsula and Aleutians. Unfortunately, I couldn’t find any evidence that the movie was completed, and the footage seems to be lost.

This trip was a short bit of Jacquemin’s long and varied career as a cameraman. Alfred Leon Jacquemin was born in Cardiff, Wales on May 25, 1886 to French parents, Auguste and Jeanne Landry Jacquemin. They moved back to France, and he married Lucienne Barbier on April 28, 1908. In his later interviews he said he worked for Gaumont in Paris for nine years. He served France in World War 1; most articles said he shot films for the government, but one said he served with the artillery (he could very well have done both).

He and his second wife Agnes moved to Canada in 1919. In January 1920 he was a cameraman for the Metropolitan Motion Picture Company in Detroit, Michigan, but by December he was working for the Aero Film Service of Toronto. That’s how he became part of the team that went looking for the balloonists mentioned in Kingsley’s story. Accounts of that story differed, but the Seward Daily Gateway had the most complete version of his part in it:

Mr. Jacquemin is a cameraman of national importance, having composed part of the party who went to the rescue of the ill-fated army balloonists who sailed from Rockaway, and fell in the Canadian woods in Ontario. Mr. Jacquemin travelled about 80 miles by dog sled to get pictures of the rescued balloonists and was one of the first services to be released following the tragic event.

It turns out they were right about his national importance, but it was to be Canadian importance. Before that happened, in June 1921 when Canada held their census he and his wife were living in Toronto, but he was unemployed. It looks like he decided to try his luck in the United States again in early 1923, and in 1925 he was hired by the Christie Company. He stayed there for two years, shooting short comedies like Dummy Love with Bobby Vernon and Sailor Beware with Vera Steadman, as well as the feature The Nervous Wreak. He even filed a Declaration of Intent to become a naturalized United State citizen on April 8, 1925, but he didn’t go through with it.

In 1927 he was hired by the Associated Screen News of Canada and he and Agnes moved to Montreal. ASN was the largest private production company in Canada from 1921 to 1958; they made most of the newsreels and commissioned industrial films produced in the country. Working with director Gordon Sparling, Jacquemin shot many Canadian Cameos, which was a series of 10 minute long theatrically-released films about everyday Canadian life and people, as well as its history. He helped to preserve a record of what Canada was like, which was certainly of national importance! Highlights of his career included Rhapsody in Two Languages (1934), a portrait of 24 hours in Montreal in the style of Berlin: Symphony of a Great City (1927) and Royal Banners Over Ottawa (1939) the only color film of the King George and Queen Mary’s last trip to Canada. He also shot plenty of more quotidian subjects, like The Miracle of the Locomotive (1928) about how a train is built and Front of Steel (1940), about the value of steel workers in wartime.

Royal Banners Over Ottawa (1939)

As of the 1931 census he and Agnes were living in Montreal, but on June 16, 1934 he married Eva Brabant Paradis. I can’t find anything that says what happened: Canada really needs to digitize more of their newspapers and vital records!

In recognition of his importance, in 1944 he was invited to join the American Society of Cinematographers (Canada didn’t get their own society until 1957). Their article about him still mentioned his 1924 trip to Alaska. They also told about his work on The Thousand Days, a review of the first three years of World War 2.

The last credit I can find for him is for Royal Welcome (1951), which was about then-Princess Elizabeth and Prince Philip’s first visit to Canada. Jacquemin was the only cameraman allowed to travel on board the royal yacht Britannia on that trip.

After 1951, I could find nothing more about him. When Eva Jacquemin died in 1968 after a long illness, she was his widow.

Nonfiction cameramen should be remembered, too! Happily, the Canadian Educational, Sponsored, and Industrial Film Project is contributing to that: his longest, but still incomplete, filmography is available on their site.

* The Balmac Educational Film Company aspired to make educational films for schools and churches, and by 1923 had complete four shorts, including The Land of Everlasting Snow and From Forest to Mill. Their production manager was Capt. M. McKenzie, and it was headquartered in San Anselmo, CA. After this, they completely disappeared.

“Capt. M. McKenzie,” Camera, August 25, 1923.

“Christie Cameramen’s Colorful Careers,” Paramount Around the World, April 2, 1927, p.18.

J. Earl Clausen, “Missing Aeronauts Over Fifty Miles Out from Mattice,” Philadelphia Inquirer, January 11, 1921.

“Princess Pat Party Sails for Westward Some Time Tonight,” Seward Daily Gateway, May 10, 1924.

“To Bring Wild Life in Natural Setting Here,” Los Angeles Times, August 1, 1920.

“To Shoot Approaching American Aeronauts,” Border Cities Star, January 10, 1921.

“Winter Sports Filmed.” Montreal Gazette, March 14, 1932.

“World’s Largest Bear,” Los Angeles Times, August 24, 1924.

One hundred years ago this month, Grace Kingsley interviewed a star of two-reel comedies, “bright-eyed little sprite” Dorothy Devore. She had just finished up a five-year long contract with Christie Comedies, and she was trying something new: live theater. However, she wasn’t deserting comedy: she was starring in a farce with music called The Morning After by C.A. Newton. She told Kingsley that making comedy shorts had turned her into something of a menace:

See the author and director over there talking seriously about the play? I’m just dying to go and pour a bucket of water over them to start things going. That’s what they do in a comedy.

Why, we screen comediennes aren’t safe to be left at large! I can’t even see a man cranking a car in the street without wanting to push him over on his face, and when a painter at our house was climbing a ladder this morning I could just see him dangling and kicking if I pulled the ladder out from under him.

Nobody else has mentioned this side effect of comedy stardom. She also talked about the difference between the kinds of acting: she found that rehearsing for the stage was much slower than making movies, and there was too much standing still and delivering your lines. She said:

On the screen you are glancing at ten places and jumping a wall to get your message across. If only they’d let me do a couple of flip-flops in the middle of my lines I’d be happy.

It seems like you can take the woman out of slapstick but you can’t take the slapstick out of the woman. Anna Inez Williams* was born on June 26, 1899 in Fort Worth, Texas, joining three brothers and a sister. Their father Thomas Williams was a blacksmith and mother Lussie Percifield Williams looked after their home. Her parents got divorced in the early 1900’s and Lussie went to work in an overall factory.

In 1920 Devore told film writer Hazel Shelley about her early years and how she broke into the entertainment industry. When she was 11, her mother decided to leave Texas and take her to Los Angeles for her health (the older kids had already left home). Devore sang at school and in her church choir, discovering she had a big voice in a tiny body. She “caught career fever” and after school every afternoon she sang and danced in amateur shows. To hide from her mother, she needed a fake name, so she picked Dorothy from Robert W. Chambers horror books and Devore from Snappy Stories magazine. She didn’t tell her mother until she got a job singing and dancing at a popular Los Angeles café, Levy’s. She said this led to being hired by the Orpheum vaudeville circuit, which planned to bill her as “The Miniature Pocket-Edition Sophie Tucker.” Instead of touring, she was hired by comedy team Eddie Lyons and Lee Moran in 1918 and broke into the movies.**

She usually played one of the team’s wife or girlfriend. Her film debut was in The House Cleaning Horrors (1918), in which she was Eddie Lyons’ wife. They hire Lee Moran to paper their walls, and messiness ensues.

She made twelve shorts with them. Moving Picture Weekly described the final one, Marry My Wife. She played Edith, who was engaged to Eddie, but she refuses to marry him because married couple Lee and Lucy are quarreling, which makes marriage look like a bad idea. Then there are misunderstandings and jealousy, but both partners end up with their original significant others.

Later that year she was hired by the Christie Company. During her five-year contract there she usually played a daring young woman who gets herself into and out of trouble. Grace Kingsley liked them; in January 1924 she said that Navy Blues was an “an oasis in the great laughless Sahara of ‘super specials’” and a “bright little laugh-pager.” The plot involved Devore disguising herself as a sailor to accompany her groom on his ship and Kingsley called her “that sprite-like vivaciously illustrative and wholly clever little elf of a comedienne.”

In April 1924 Kingsley had reported that Devore had finished her contract with Christie and she planned to freelance, because she wanted to “have a chance at something besides the black-and-blue drama.” She said she hoped to be a real actress. Back in January, Kingsley had predicted this would happen and said, “but in the meantime she remains to charm and soothe the eye and delight the senses… May she never be wasted in the tear-teasers!”

However, instead of going right to another movie company, she decided to try something new: the legitimate stage. Kingsley’s interview with her ran just before The Morning After opened at the Mason Theater. L.A. Times entertainment writer Kenneth Taylor reviewed the play and he thought she was the best thing about it, adding:

we may soon be able to count this young comedienne as one of our foremost stage personalities…It is Miss Devore who saves the show when the action lags, or the situations become too obvious.

He really didn’t like the rest of it, and thought the story of interwoven mistaken identities was the type found in the “cheaper burlesque houses.” He recounted the plot:

The heroine’s girlfriend, a widow, agrees to marry her dead husband’s brother, whom she has never seen. Her father-in-law arrives with the young man as the heroine arrives with a fast boy friend, the aftermath of a party the night before. To avoid creating an unfavorable impression, the fast boy friend is introduced as the heroine’s husband about the same time the heroine is meeting, falling in love, and marrying the young man intended for the widow.

It doesn’t sound like a lost gem! Taylor concluded that three or four re-writings and some actual directing were needed. He wasn’t the only one to pan it; Variety agreed that it had “a most conventional skein for a plot and is deluged with motion picture ‘hoke,’ gags and situations, besides being devoid of any human appeal.” Their reviewer thought that Devore tried hard to put it over, but thought she’d be “seen to better advantage if placed within a comedy talking and singing vaudeville turn.” Nevertheless, he found her voice pleasant and her singing soothing.

Even though it seems she wasn’t the problem with the play, Devore decided to return to the movies. She made one film, The Tomboy, for the Mission Film Corporation, then she got her wish to be a dramatic actress, signing a contract to star in features for Warner Bros.

However, that didn’t work out the way she had hoped it would. She was already complaining about the roles she got there in 1925 when she was interviewed by Doris Denbo for Picture-Play Magazine. She said: “Here I am seriously playing just the sort of ingénue roles that I used to burlesque. I have no sympathy with such characters.”

So it wasn’t too much of a surprise that in 1927 she returned to making comedy shorts for Educational Films. In a 1928 article about her Alma Talley of Picture Play Magazine wrote “she has the common sense to realize that she’s better off being herself in two-reel comedies, even with a few stray custard pies, than being the heroine of feature pictures.” Talley quoted Devore: “No one wants to see me cry, and I don’t blame them. I don’t care about seeing myself cry.” She also mentioned that her fan mail had dropped off when she tried serious roles.

At Educational, Devore had her own production company, Dorothy Devore Comedies. She stayed there until 1929. She starred in one more feature, Take the Heir (1930) with the small company Screen Story Syndicate, then stopped making films except for a short appearance in Miracle on Main Street (1939). It might not have been only the coming of sound that ended her career. In August 1928 she had brought a suit against the Kreliberg Pictures Corporation of New York for breach of contract, after they reneged on an agreement to pay her $1750 to play Kitty in The Little Girl God Forgot. She won the suit, but it could have frightened off other employers.

She kept busy after her film career. On December 18, 1925 she had married Albert Wylie Mather, the managing director of Consolidated Amusements which ran several movie theaters in Honolulu, Hawaii. He worked in Hollywood for awhile—the 1928 interview mentioned that Mather was the new general manager of James Cruze’s film unit, and he was on a leave of absence from his work in Hawaii. After she quit films they moved back there. She divorced him on grounds of cruelty in August 1933. At first they kept their disagreements out of the paper, but in 1935 he sued her to get the divorce settlement back, demanding the return of $100,000 worth of cash, stocks, and real estate. During their court testimony they both accused each other of having affairs. She won, but six months later she had to ask the court enjoin him from continuing to attempt to get the property back.

She didn’t marry again. In the 1940’s she owned a dress shop in Hollywood, and only turned up in the Times when she got arrested for drunk driving after a minor accident in 1946. She paid a $50 fine after pleading guilty. In 1966 she moved into the Motion Picture Home in Woodland Hills after two strokes, and in 1973 she told an interviewer “I am very contented, very happy here.” She spent most of her time sewing. She died on September 10, 1976.

If you’d like to see one of her shorts, Niles Film Museum has made Kidding Katie available online.

*This is a picky detail, of interest only to other researchers. Despite what some other sources say, I think Devore’s birth name was Anna, not Alma. Not only was it what she told Shelley in 1920 for Motion Picture Classic, but in her first appearance in the 1900 census records she’s called Annie Inez Williams, and on a boat passenger list from Hawaii in 1922 she called herself Anna. In 1946 she told the court that her legal name was Anna. Finally, when Anthony Slide spoke to her in 1971, she told him her name had been Anna.

I can understand how earlier researchers might have been confused, because in January 1900 another little girl named Alma Inez Williams was born in Texas to David and Georgia Williams. She lived her life in Texas. Unfortunately, this is a problem in all kinds of history writing, not just film history: a “fact” gets repeated, and nobody double-checks.

**In later interviews, she said she had done a vaudeville tour, but her earliest interview was probably more truthful. Before she was hired by Lyons and Moran, the only mention in the entertainment press of a Dorothy Devore was a wrestler.

“Actress Battles Former Husband’s Suit,” Los Angeles Times, February 19, 1935.

“’Bubbly’ Jag Costs Actress $25 Per Pint,” Los Angeles Times, December 27, 1946.

Doris Denbo, “The Versatile Dorothy Devore,” Picture-Play Magazine, August 1925, p. 83.

“Devore Suit Goes Over for Trial,” Los Angeles Times, August 14, 1928.

“Dorothy Devore Booked as Drunk,” Los Angeles Times, December 26, 1946.

“Dorothy Devore in Plea to Have Ex-Mate Cited,” Los Angeles Times, July 30, 1935.

Jimmy Fidler, “In Hollywood,” Los Angeles Times, January 25, 1942.

“Film Queen Unaware of Nuptial Day,” Los Angeles Times, December 19, 1925.

Grace Kingsley, “Flashes: Comedy Whirls Along,” Los Angeles Times, January 28, 1924.

Grace Kingsley, “Flashes: Will Free Lance,” Los Angeles Times, April 17, 1924.

“Marry My Wife,” Moving Picture Weekly, January 25, 1919, p. 43.

“Miss Devore Wins Battle,” Los Angeles Times, February 28, 1935.

“Morning After Tame,” Variety, May 21, 1924, p. 14.

“One Man’s Dream Became Home for Actors,” Hartford Current, August 18, 1973.

Hazel Shelley, “The Diminutive Dorothy Devore,” Motion Picture Classic, December 1920, pp. 34-5, 71.

Anthony Slide, Silent Players, Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky, 2002.

“Suit to get Salary Won by Actress,” Los Angeles Times, August 16, 1928.

Alma Talley, “A Twinkling, Twinkling Little Star,” Picture Player Magazine, February 1928, pp.23-24, 112.

Kenneth Taylor, “Dorothy Devore in Stage Debut,” Los Angeles Times, May 20, 1924.

One hundred years ago this month, Grace Kingsley reported on a movie that lots of people were looking forward to:

“Charlie Chaplin is a busy man these days. The High Sierras, Mt. Summit* to be exact, is the scene of his labors. Here the comedian is reproducing in comic version the famous Alaskan gold rush of other days. Even Chilkoot Pass has been reproduced. And the rugged camp of the pioneers is there, cluttering the base of the precipitous cliffs. A pathway, cut through the snow 2300 feet long, rising up to the top of Mt. Summit, passes up a narrow defile through the rocks, and was only made possible by snowdrifts banked against the mountain side.

The camp was erected and the pass cut through in less than one week. Special agents of the Southern Pacific Railroad mobilized an army of 1000 men and by special trains to the pass, also a special train of dining cars was brought from Oakland for the feeding of these modern sourdoughs.

Chaplin himself, in the role of director-general, was here, there, and everywhere, giving instructions, leading the men, and on occasions, mixing with the mob in scenes, spurring them on. It was one of the most successfully handled mobs ever assembled before a movie camera, according to reports, and many spectacular scenes were filmed.

It seems that thrills are to mingle with the comedy and scenes of terrific realism, depicting the hardships endured by the pioneer gold seekers who surmounted the mountains which blocked their pathway in that mad rush for gold.

Kingsley also mentioned that that Chaplin was to play a sourdough and the film would be competed in the fall. Filmgoers had already been waiting for quite a while; his most recent feature film was The Kid in 1921, but he had starred in three shorts since then, most recently The Pilgrim in 1923. He had also directed the drama A Woman of Paris (1923) in which he made a brief appearance. Still, for an audience that had been accustomed to seeing him in as many as 13 shorts a year, this was a long time.

They would have to wait even longer, partly due to Chaplin’s perfectionism but also due to what his biographer David Robinson called the distraction of domestic tribulations: he had an affair with his 16-year-old leading lady, Lita Grey, and she got pregnant, so he married her and replaced her in the film with Georgia Hale. They winded up not using most of the footage they shot on location and instead made the majority of the film on sets in his Hollywood studio.

A year later, in April 1925, Kingsley was able to report on the movie’s progress. She ran into Chaplin at the Montmartre night club in Hollywood and he said he was just finishing up his new film, which he was going to call either The Gold Rush or The Lucky Strike. He told her:

Well of course I can’t name my stories at once, because usually we don’t really get the story jelled until the last two months. That’s what happened with this one. Some people think if we name it Lucky Strike the fans might get it mixed with the cigarettes. So we don’t know. Anyhow, I’m a bit superstitious about using the word ‘lucky.’

We really think we have every sort of appeal in our picture. I think it will have historic value, for one thing, the Chilikoot Pass stuff is thrilling. We really underwent a lot of hardships making those scenes, for we were in fear of an avalanche every minute.

Even Chaplin felt the need to emphasize the realism of his movies as other filmmakers did, which now seems extraordinary. Kingsley also mentioned another touch of authenticity: he looked shaggy because he’d been cutting his own hair, as his character would have needed to do.

Chaplin really was almost finished. He did decide to call it The Gold Rush, and it had its world premier two months later at Grauman’s Egyptian in Hollywood on June 26th. As usual, Kingsley didn’t get to review the film; her boss did. Now it’s called a masterpiece, but at the time Edwin Schallert wasn’t entirely sold on it. He wrote, “to say that the picture has the concentrated charm of one of his two-reelers would perhaps be rash.” He thought the narrative was rambling and the comedy and pathos weren’t woven together, making it episodic: “there are moments that are delicious, but there are others that are inclined to be a trifle forced.” However, the audience at the premier “evidenced an immensely enthusiastic appreciation for the film.”

Kingsley did get to go to Samuel Goldwyn’s premier party for the movie, and she reported on it in her new series, Stella the Star-Gazer, named for her fictional companion to Hollywood parties. ‘Stella’ had the time of her life; she said that she never wanted to go to another party again because “I’m sure there will never be another picture so good as The Gold Rush—and this party is just too glorious.” She reported that Mary Pickford wore an especially becoming evening gown and Douglas Fairbanks was so happy that the audience loved the film that he was “shaking hands delightedly with everybody.” As co-owners of the studio that was releasing it, United Artists, they must have been relieved that it looked like a hit.

The Gold Rush was a huge success. It played at the Egyptian Theater until November 1st, and only left because Sid Grauman had a previous commitment to open King Vidor’s The Big Parade there—the box office was still strong. So while it took much longer than the average film to make, it made more money. It has lasted much longer too–it still gets screened, and it was added to the Library of Congresses National Film Registry in 1992.

This month Kingsley saw a movie that was much less of a durable masterpiece, but it featured an early supporting role for an actress who is still famous. She said, “Poisoned Paradise isn’t very much poisoned; it is just a mild little dose of bromide.” Set in Monte Carlo (and she’d already had enough of that place), its theme was “the only way to beat the game is not to play it.”

Even thought it was “commonplace claptrap all belonging to the serial age in picturedom,” she found a bright spot: “the sweet ingenue who goes to live in the house of the artist, yet without sin” was played by “Clara Bow, that marvelous child, is a joy every moment. She is much more than the ingenue; she is human, and her vivid little face holds you every second.” Even though this was only her ninth film, she already stood out from the other actors, even in a small part.

Other reviewers singled out her performance in Poisoned Paradise. Film Daily mentioned that she was the “most interesting cast member,” and Henriette Slone in Exhibitors’ Trade Review wrote:

Nothing but the highest praise can be accorded Clara Bow, who is not only extremely comely and winsome but remarkably convincing. Her performance both when she is at the heights of exaltation, and when she is cast into the depths of despair, is nothing short of inspired. There is every reason to suppose that she will become a great favorite in a short time.

Slone was right. Clara Bow had won the Fame and Fortune Contest sponsored by Motion Picture Magazine in 1922 and she had appeared in small roles in films made in New York since then. Two years later she came to Hollywood, and in 1926 she became a star with her leading role in The Plastic Age. People still admire her work in It(1927) and Wings (1927). You can learn more about her at this profile from the Guardian.

* The name of the mountain, Mt. Summit, was corrected in later publicity to Mt. Lincoln. Now the area is known as the Sugar Bowl. It’s near Truckee, California, close to the Nevada border.

Grace Kingsley, “At the Gold Rush Party,” Los Angeles Times, July 22, 1925.

Grace Kingsley, “Flashes: Chaplin Finishing,” Los Angeles Times, April 23, 1925.

“The New Star,” Motion Picture Magazine, January 1922, p.55.

“One More Week for Gold Rush,” Los Angeles Times, October 23, 1925.

“Poisoned Paradise,” Film Daily, March 2, 1924, p. 9.

Edwin Schallert, “Epic Comedy on the Screen,” Los Angeles Times, June 27, 1925.

Henriette Slone, “Thrills Aplenty in Monte Carlo Story,” Exhibitors’ Trade Review, March 15, 1924, p. 27.

One hundred years ago this month. Grace Kingsley had noticed a dreadful trend: fewer theaters in Los Angeles had been showing comedy shorts before feature films, replacing them with higher-brow offerings. However, exhibitors had recently started to bring them back to their bills. Therefore, the companies headed by Mack Sennett, Hal Roach and Jack White were all busier than ever, and the Christie organization even had plans to increase their output; they had “gradually been enlarging our organization to take care of this increased production” according to Charles H. Christie, general manager.

She was able to tell her readers that “those who have been worrying for fear there will be a dearth of short comedies this year from the Christie organization may now go about their business reassured,” and they could look forward to plenty of two-reelers starring Neal Burns, Bobby Vernon, Jimmy Adams, Dorothy Devore, Priscilla Bonner and Walter Hiers. She was only half-joking–a comedy fan like herself would have been very happy to hear this news. I wrote about the Christie Company earlier.

I was surprised to read that leaving comedies off of bills had even been a trend. Who doesn’t like them? So I did unscientific survey of the newspaper ads and ‘coming attractions’ articles in the Times for the first three months of 1924 and found out that she was right (I should have never doubted her!). At first glance it looked like the chief villain was none other than Sid Grauman. However, in July 1923 Grauman had announced plans to sell his three downtown theaters (the Rialto, the Million Dollar, and the Metropolitan) to Paramount Studios. He planned to remain in charge of them for six months. So this ghastly decision was the new management’s fault.

In the first week of January, none of the three movie palaces that Paramount controlled had comedy shorts on their bills. Instead they had two live acts: the Rialto featured a set with baritone George Dewey Washington along with Big Brother and the Metropolitan had the Three Little Maids dance act to accompany Woman to Woman. Meanwhile, at the Million Dollar, Norma Talmadge’s Ashes of Vengeance was such a strong draw (and long movie—120 minutes) that nothing else of the program was mentioned. The two theaters Grauman did still manage had live prologues: at the Egyptian “A Night in Pharaoh’s Palace” (100 artists on the stage!) playing with The Ten Commandments, and at the Criterion “The Bells of Notre Dame” appeared with The Hunchback of Notre Dame.

These five theaters weren’t the only ones contributing to this distressing trend; the competition at Lowe’s State Theater was running a ballet before Flaming Youth. Additionally, just like the Million Dollar, some of the smaller (under 1000 seat) theaters like the Alhambra, Talley’s Broadway, and Miller’s only listed the features they were running and didn’t mention if there was anything else on the bill.

However, three of the theaters in town did feature comedy shorts: Hal Roach’s Dippity-Do-Dad played with Flaming Passion at the California, Harry Langdon’s Picking Peaches appeared with The Virginian at the Mission and Stan Laurel in The Soilers could be found with Defying Destiny at Clune’s Broadway. However, that wasn’t nearly enough: a hard-working journalist like Kingsley needed her laughs!

The drought continued in the first week of February, with funny two-reelers starring Lloyd Hamilton, Will Rogers, and Bull Montana livening up the bills at only three theaters again. Four of the other big theaters had prologues and the fifth, the Metropolitan, featured “juvenile soloist” Anna Chang. The smaller theaters still only mentioned the features they were playing.

By the first week of March, Kingsley noticed that the situation had improved. She wrote, “not all the solemn trash of the melodramas, not all the high-brow music, can take the place of the laugh lurers, according to local exhibitors who are slowly coming back to the placing of comedies on their bills.” It wasn’t “exhibitors,” it was just the one–the new management at Grauman’s former theaters had come to their senses. They added two-reel comedies back onto their bills, along with live shows. At his Metropolitan, they ran Mack Sennett’s The Hollywood Kid along with a prologue called “Carnival Night in Venice” before the William S. Hart film Singer Jim McKee. At the Rialto they had another Sennett, One Spooky Night, with a musical program before Under the Red Robe. Meanwhile, at the Million Dollar, Clyde Cook in The Broncho Express played alongside a prologue called “The Wolves of Montmartre,” to go with Gloria Swanson’s Paris-set The Humming Bird.

However, Grauman himself didn’t mess with the successful bills at the two theaters he still managed—the comedy-free programs with The Ten Commandments (in its fifteenth week!) and Scarmouche (sixth week) stayed the same.

The Lowe’s State theater also brought back comedy, presenting a Mermaid Comedy along with a Fanchon and Marco prologue called “Society” before Colleen Moore’s Painted People. Meanwhile, the California continued not to run prologues and played an Our Gang short called Back Stage along with Douglas Maclean in The Yankee Consul. The Broadway, the Mission, and the smaller theaters still only mentioned their feature films.

It’s remarkable just how much entertainment the audience got in a night at the movies then. Short comedies stayed on most movie bills until the rise of double features in the 1930’s; Educational Films, Vitagraph and Hal Roach stopped making them in 1938 but Columbia and RKO continued producing them until the 1950’s.

Grace Kingsley really needed some funny two-reelers to help her get through the dire dramas she was sitting through this month. When she reviewed Lilies of the Field (a divorce melodrama) she wrote:

I’m beginning to think that we Americans are supreme comedy makers and rotten drama producers, at least on the screen. Our drama is timid, self-conscious, superficial. It seems to be always about the same old stuff, with neither depth nor sincerity, but with writers and directors trying to blind audiences with a wealth of detail, a complication of extraneous issues.

Being a film critic could really be a drag. Later in the month, Kingsley found another way to get through a turkey when she went to see Women Who Give: listening to Winifred Westover Hart snark about it. In her review Kingsley summed up the plot: “as soon as you see that fishing village, you know there are going to be a drowned only-son-of-a-widow, a wronged girl, and a terrific storm at sea,” then reported on what Hart exclaimed during the movie, like “Why did they let these cod play so big a part? They haven’t any experience! Let the poor fish stay in the ocean and do their stuff!” The actress also suggested taking Mother’s Seasick Pills, to deal with the mal-de-mer caused by so many tippy storm scenes in the ocean.

They made their own fun. I was happy to learn that after her dreadful marriage to William S. Hart, Winifred Westover Hart’s life wasn’t endless misery. She still got to go to the movies and complain about the bad bits.

Many thanks to Paul R. Spitzzeri at the Homestead Blog, who wrote about the Grauman Theater Magazine. I had no idea that Grauman had divested himself of his downtown theaters, and I would have made an embarassing mistake if I hadn’t read his post!

“Grauman Gives Options on Theaters to Paramount,” Los Angeles Times, July 14, 1923.

One hundred years ago this month, Grace Kingsley announced another technical innovation in a film that was in production:

It looks as though natural color photography were coming into its own at last, at any rate so far as the Lasky Studio is concerned. Following the success and the loud acclaim of the color scenes in Cecil B. De Mille’s production of The Ten Commandments, the beauty of which seems to open a new world of loveliness to the cinema, and which scenes were made according to a new color process, the Lasky people announced yesterday the production of a whole new feature to be made in colors.

For the first time the brilliant colorings of the desert will be filmed, for the picture is to be the visualization of Zane Grey’s Wanderer of the Wasteland, and is to be made in Death Valley, with Irvin Willat directing.

In late February Kingsley mentioned that the Wanderer company came back to Los Angeles after five weeks of camping out in the desert. It didn’t take terribly long for the movie to be ready for a critic’s preview in New York City on May 26th. It was a big success. Herbert K. Cruikshank in Exhibitors’ Herald wrote:

In the history of motion-picture production Wanderer of the Wasteland stands alone. Another great forward stride has been made toward perfection. One of the most critical, difficult and hard-boiled audiences ever was assembled at midnight to view this film. As the first few feet were projected, there was an audible intake of breath, then a spontaneous burst of applause that continued at brief intervals throughout the showing and culminated in a demonstration of enthusiasm at the final fade-out.

Why? The Wanderer would have been a fine picture if it had been projected in the usual black, white and gray, but when desert mountain and stream are portrayed in all the splendid grandeur of their natural colors the resulting beaty is actually overwhelming. That’s the answer. The picture is ‘Technicolored’…This masterpiece is a magnificent work of sheer artistry.

Robert E. Welsh in Moving Picture World was similarly effusive, both about the color process and the film overall:

We have for once an example of a story big enough and human enough to rise above the color, and at the same time, a story that gave the color every opportunity to be seen at its best….Able direction has given us the atmosphere of the overpowering desert, the sufferings of its victims, in an admirable manner natural color completes the task with convincing realism. A midnight audience at the Rialto last week spent an hour and a half in successive “oh’s” and “ah’s”!

He concluded that every foot of the photography was “a gem of pictorial beauty.”

Photoplay magazine was less impressed by the story, calling it “more or less indifferent.” However, “the Technicolor process catches the remarkable natural colorings of the arid American desert in a way that is, at times, breath taking in its beauty.” So while what we can see of it now suffers in comparison to three-strip Technicolor, to people in 1924 it looked terrific.

Wanderer opened in Los Angeles on June 14th at the 3,600-seat Grauman’s Metropolitan and only played for one week. It had another one-week run at the 878-seat Alhambra in July. The L.A. Times didn’t review it. However, on the day of its premier, the paper ran Grace Kingsley’s interview with director Irvin Willat about the problems color brought to filmmaking. He said:

Locations had to be picked for their color values. There could not be too many brilliant reds, nor too many brilliant greens. The soft tones of the desert itself were admirably fitted to the Technicolor process, but in smaller things great care had to be exercised. In one scene a red apple was needed. In black and white photography any apple would have sufficed, but for our picture the company had to send all the way to Yuma for a bright red apple.

There’s so much material about the history of Technicolor online that I don’t need to repeat it here. A good place to start is on the well-illustrated Wide Screen Museum site.

Fred E. Basten, Glorious Technicolor:The Movies’ Magic Rainbow. South Brunswick: Barnes, 1980, pp. 29–36.

Herbert K. Cruikshank, “Box Office Reviews,” Exhibitors’ Herald, May 31, 1924, p. 19.

Richard W. Haines, Technicolor Movies, Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 1993.

Grace Kingsley, “Color Brings Difficulties,” Los Angeles Times, June 15, 1924.

Grace Kingsley, “Flashes,” Los Angeles Times, February 27, 1924.

Grace Kingsley, “Flashes,” Los Angeles Times, July 30, 1924.

“Technicolor Building Here,” Los Angeles Times, June 22, 1924.

“Wanderer of the Wasteland,” Photoplay, August 1924, p. 49.

“Wanderer of the Wasteland Takes N.Y. by Storm,” Moving Picture World, July 19, 1924, p. 204.

Robert E. Welsh, “Wanderer of the Wasteland,” Moving Picture World, May 31, 1924, p. 492.

One hundred years ago this month, Grace Kingsley heard about the travails of being an actress:

“Say,” declared Louise Fazenda to me the other day, as we sat on the edge of the set where they were making The Galloping Fish, out at the Ince studios, “every time I get a call nowadays, I expect to support a horse or double for a trained ant-eater!”

So much Hollywood glamour! They went on to have a nice gossipy chat about her co-stars, and Fazenda spilled the tea on one from Fish in particular:

But Ethel the alligator! There’s the animal I had no use for…If there is anything calculated to make a person jumpy, it is having a large, husky alligator, whose dinner time is due any minute, fix you with his cold, calculating eye—an eye that may light up at any minute with enthusiasm for your contours. Nobody wants to be referred to as ‘the alligator’s tenderloin!’

That sounds utterly reasonable. She mentioned that Ethel got loose for a few days, and the cast and crew had to avoid visiting the river. Making comedies in the early days of the movies required so much grit. A few days later, Kingsley reported that even at the studio, Fazenda got to display her fortitude: one day she dropped a bottle on her foot, puncturing her instep, but after first aid “the comedienne, who laughed it off, resumed her work within half an hour or so.” Kingsley had great sympathy for comedians; she remarked. “As for the comedies, they are extra hazardous. When one is a perfect scream, you can bet somebody broke a leg.”

During her interview, Fazenda had much nicer things to say about one of her other animal co-stars, when she talked about Freddie, called Bubbles in the film:

“He’s a dear seal,” explained Louise, “nipped me once or twice, but didn’t mean a thing by it…Bubbles didn’t think so much of the desert. He seemed to say ‘What’s the idea?’ I like a place where I can flip a mean flapper!”

She had a point: seals don’t belong in Yuma, Arizona, with an average temperature in the eighties and nineties when they were shooting in October and November. Other outlets reported on what Fazenda had to do to get along with him. Camera said that while she dotes on Freddie, “the bond of sympathy has been strengthened since Louise never omits keeping herself well smeared with fish.” They said it was inspirational to him. An L.A. Times article contradicted that, saying that she supplied him with his favorite fish, which makes more sense. Nevertheless, making comedies was hard, unenviable work!

Before the fish solution, it seems that they hadn’t been getting along so well. In November, Kingsley had reported that Fazenda a different attitude towards the bites she’d gotten: “He is too fresh for anything. He has nipped me a couple of times and I have told him distinctly that if he doesn’t look out—well, I need a new fur coat this winter, and seals aren’t such hard animals to train!”

Biting animals weren’t the only difficulty on this shoot; even though Fazenda said it cheerfully, she mentioned other troubles:

There were plenty of bathrooms, and this was a comfort as, when it wasn’t rainy, it was hot and dusty, and on returning home at night we had fairly to blast the soil off ourselves. My hands and face cracked till I looked like the alligator.

Even with all the discomfort, she concluded, “but after all, who would miss a location trip? It is certainly something to talk about in the long winter evenings.” She was a good sport.

Fazenda wrote more details about the shoot in a letter to Myrtle Gebhart from the Yuma location published in Picture Play Magazine, beginning with “Myrtle, you never saw so much dirt in your life.” She wrote about how they coped with another problem: boredom. One of her human co-stars, Truly Shattuck, had the foresight to bring along a lot of hankies that need to be hem-stitched, so they had something to do while waiting—it kept them good-humored. Oh, and she almost drowned in the flood scene. Yikes!

She told Gebhart about how Freddie’s trainer tried “to sort of compensate him for the dreadful experiences he is undergoing on this location trip” sent to Santa Barbara for another seal to keep him company. She wrote:

“We all have hopes that love will stir his bachelor heart. When I last saw him he was flapping around in front of her juggling a ball on his nose—which may be one way of winning a wife.”

The end results of all this hardship and hard work were pretty good, but alas for Miss Fazenda, like many other past and future animal stars, Freddie stole the show. The Galloping Fish opened in Manhattan in mid-April 1924 and Helen Klumph, the L.A. Times’ New York correspondent, said “the seal who plays the title role has the naivete of an ingenue star combined with sleek, debonair charm of a Lew Cody. And his emotional facility!” She enjoyed the whole movie and said, “the delicious humor of The Galloping Fish is more than anyone has a right to expect.”

Exhibitors’ Herald also admired his performance too, saying “Freddie the seal was a real surprise as a motion picture actor and the way he ambled in and out of cabs, ran up and down stairs and followed Chaplin about was a revelation.” Beatrice Barrett in Moving Picture World agreed that he was the best comedian in the picture and said “it is refreshing and diverting because you don’t have any idea what is going to happen next, and it is all good clean fun.”

When it opened in at the Rialto Los Angeles on June 4th the Times’ Kenneth Taylor felt it was a bit overhyped, saying “you may possibly be a trifle disappointed in The Galloping Fish, but if you are it will purely be a case of too much anticipation… it merely ranks high among the humorous pictures of the year, and is entertaining generally.” He agreed with the earlier reports about the scene-stealer:

“The fame of Freddie, the fish, has preceded him, you see. And while the cast included a quartet of well-known funsters the picture would be as nothing without the fish. There’s a laugh in every finny move he makes.”

It had a very good run in Los Angeles, playing for nearly five weeks, which was a record for the Rialto. The Galloping Fish doesn’t seem to be available on DVD or streaming, but it’s been preserved at archives in Warsaw and Milan.

Naturally, Freddie was a big part of the publicity for the film. At the time he was eight years old and a vaudeville veteran. He made personal appearances at every performance at the Rialto, and the Times reported: “Meeting his film fans ‘face to face’ has added greatly to the popularity of this new star, for Freddie is never temperamental and always does just the right thing to win friends.”

Freddie was in a few more movies, including a two-reeler directed by Henry Lehrman called Sweet Papa(1924) and Dizzy Daisy (1925), a short that re-teamed him with Fazenda.

Having a few movies with a scene-stealing seal didn’t harm Fazenda’s job prospects. The Galloping Fish came out at roughly the mid-point of her long and varied career. She started out in comedy shorts at Sennett then she made some feature-length dramas like The Gold Diggers (1923) and Westerns like The Old Fool (1923). Fish was a return to comedy for her, and she continued to appear in all sorts of films for nearly two more decades. Having made excellent investments and marrying producer Hal B. Wallis (Adventures of Robin Hood 1938, Casablanca,1942), she retired in 1939 to raise their son and do charitable work. If her letter to Gebhart is any indication, I’m sorry that she didn’t write an autobiography—she was a lively writer! If you’d like to know more, Lea Stans has an article about her at Silent-ology.

Beatrice Barrett, “The Galloping Fish,” Moving Picture World, March 22, 1924, p. 304.

Louise Fazenda and Myrtle Gebhart, “A Letter from Location,” Picture-Play Magazine, April 1924, pp.65, 109.

“Galloping Fish Heading Fun Bill,” Los Angeles Times, June 23, 1924.

Grace Kingsley, “Flashes,” Los Angeles Times, November 7, 1923.

Helen Klumph, “Where are Imitators?” Los Angeles Times, April 20, 1924.

“Louise Has Birthday,” Los Angeles Times, June 17, 1924.

“Louise Infatuated with Bubbles,” Camera, January 12, 1924, p.13.

“Poor Fish Fell Hard for Louise,” Los Angeles Times, June 8, 1924.

“Reviews,” Exhibitors’ Herald, March 29, 1924, p. 53.

Kenneth Taylor, “Bizarre, Hectic and Grotesque Animal Actors to Foremost Rank,” Los Angeles Times, January 20, 1924.

Kenneth Taylor, “Galloping Fish Finny and Funny,” Los Angeles Times, June 5, 1924.