John Cusack takes on Brian Wilson in 'Love & Mercy'

John Cusack plays Brian Wilson in "Love & Mercy."

So does Paul Dano.

The actors play the Beach Boys star at different points in his life — Dano during his creative peak and Cusack when the rock legend was under the sway of therapist Eugene Landy. It's a tricky role for Cusack, 48. He's an idiosyncratic actor, but he's playing someone who has been famous for most of his — Cusack's — life.

He talked about that recently, why he wanted the part and why Wilson is such an inspiration for artists.

Question: You and Paul Dano both play Brian Wilson, but did you approach it as just a single role for you?

Answer: We both thought it would be two different songs about Brian that would harmonize. But we didn't want to preplan it. We didn't want to have matching notes about what we were going to do. That was kind of the conceit of the whole thing.

Q: Wilson seems pretty open about his problems.

A: Someone like him or (Bob) Dylan or someone who's been so famous for so long … they must just be tired to talk about it. But he did want to talk about it to me, I think because he wanted the story to reflect and capture the mood of his experience of reality. It wasn't like, here's just another interview. He did want us to get it right.

Q: You aren't necessarily the first person you'd think of to play him.

A: If you actually see Brian in the '80s or '90s, there is sort of a physical resemblance, but we weren't thinking about that. When he was a teenager, I couldn't play that role anyway because I'm in my 40s, but Melinda (Wilson's wife, played by Elizabeth Banks) actually sent a picture of the two of us, me at 45 and him at 45, and we actually look pretty similar, in a strange way. I just thought it would be a great honor. If I'm going to act at this point, if I'm not doing it for money to pay for my own films or art projects or things that I'm doing, if I'm going to do it, I want to do something that's substantial.

Q: Is it hard to play someone so many people know of?

A: You have to sort of fuse it with your own experience. That's sort of the craft, is blurring the lines between things that you can relate to that Brian has gone through, right? You try to blur the lines, and sort of dream the movie, and dream the character, so that you're dreaming the character or the character's dreaming you a little bit. I certainly wasn't interested in doing an impression or an impersonation. But I think the idea that you have two actors doing it makes that clear, that there cannot be one definitive portrait of him. We're just capturing his essence. We're already admitting there can be multiple portraits.

Q: It's a pretty complicated role.

A: It's a complex part, because you're playing a genius, and you're playing a genius who's being abused and who has mental-health issues and is being drugged to keep his independence from coming up. So yeah, he was a prisoner in a lot of ways. So you have a lot of layers, a bunch of masks on that area of his life, certainly.

Q: Has Wilson seen it?

A: Oh, yeah.

Q: Were you with him?

A: In Toronto (at the Toronto International Film Festival), we were with him. When he saw it for the first time, I knew he and Melinda were watching it, and that's when I was the most nervous. The cut wasn't done, but it was 70, 80 percent done. They weighed in, and I spoke to him right after I saw it. I was quite relieved. It was emotional. But I think they felt like they felt the love story came through.

Q: When a scene is going well, can you tell it's clicking?

A: Yeah, there's a sense. But it's such a fragile process. I think the thing that makes Brian a sort of North Star to creative spirits is, creativity is a very fragile thing. You can really make it happen, but if there isn't a container to hold it, and if people come in and start messing with it, don't let it be, it's a very fragile process.