John Cusack Movies ~

There are several actors that I love, but my favorite, hands down, is John Cusack. There is rarely a movie that he does that I do not at least like, but many of them I feel to be among my favorites.

Top 10 Movies Starring John Cusack

High Fidelity – Rob Gordon works at a record store {with Jack Black} and this movie follows his account of his Top 5 Breakups. I especially love quest for the perfect mix tape and his obsessiveness of finding great music it’s perfect owner. Ha.

Serendipity – Jonathan Trager meets a very interesting girl {Kate Beckinsale} one day by accident. After spending the day together, she decides that if they are meant to be together they will be, but only through fate. She then chooses not to directly give him her number but instead leaves him searching and wondering about her for years. Love him. I would have killed her, lol.

2012 – Jackson Curtis is a writer/chauffeur who must save his family from global catastrophe when the Mayan prediction of the end of the world proves to be valid. The special effects in this movie are awesome and I just love a good “end of the world” movie. Highlight: Woody Harrelson as a crazed Doomsday prophet.

Con Air – Vince Larkin is one of the few believers in Nicolas Cage’s character when dangerous cons take over a plane and plan their escape.

Hot Tub Time Machine – This movie follows four friends who gets slapped back in time to a snow lodge for a Poison concert when they get in the wrong hot tub with the wrong energy drink. The hilarious Craig Robinson from The Office also stars in this hilarious {and highly inappropriate for kids} movie. If you are not into this sort of thing but you love 80s hair band music, I bet you will STILL love this movie! IMDB users give this movie 6.5/10 stars. They are whack.

Identity – 10 strangers who are all stranded at a motel together get murdered one by one. Who will be next? And who is doing it? If you like scary and suspense type movies, I bet you will love this! Oh, and John Cusack plays a very interesting character in this movie.

Say Anything – John Cusack pledging his undying affection with a boombox. Need I say more?

Runaway Jury – Based on a John Grisham novel, this movie involves high stakes jury tampering. It’s been a while since I saw this one, too, but both the movie and the book were excellent.

1408 – It’s been a while since I have seen this one. From what I remember, John Cusack’s character checks into a creepy hotel to debunk ghost/paranormal activity only to find that sometimes scary things are real.

Sixteen Candles – Though John Cusack isn’t the star of this movie, he does make a memorable appearance which helps to catapult his long-lasting career. Oh, and the movie rocks.

Honorable Mention

Stand By Me – Stephen King. John Cusack. Yes, please.

These are the best movies with John Cusack that I have seen. I am very much looking forward to seeing The Raven, and I feel that it will be one of my favorites, as well.

What Is Your Favorite John Cusack Movie?