Nina is a seasoned startup exec and has a strong history of building and scaling early-stage companies. She is currently the founder and CEO of Blu Trumpet LLC, a mobile advertising company incubated at IAC. Prior to this, Nina was the COO of BumpTop where she helped shape the company and execute its sale to Google, Inc. Nina’s start-up experience also includes: Avogadro (acquired by OpenWave), OnDevice (acquired by KeyNote Systems), Cordant Systems, and Gamook. Nina began her career at Microsoft as a Program Manager in the Windows CE group, where she started to build her expertise in the mobile space. In addition to her experiences at tech companies, Nina was a VP at Merrill Lynch in their technology investment banking group for 3 years where she worked on a number of tech IPOs and M&A transactions. Nina holds a B.A.Sc in Electrical Engineering from the University of Waterloo and an MBA from Harvard Business School.

Ronald John Garan, Jr. (born October 30, 1961) is a NASA astronaut. After graduating from State University of New York College at Oneonta in 1982, he joined the Air Force, becoming a Second Lieutenant in 1984. He became an F-16 pilot, and flew combat missions in Desert Shield and Desert Storm. Before becoming an astronaut he was the Operations Officer of the 40th Flight Test Squadron (FTS). He first flew in space as a Mission Specialist on the STS-124 mission to the International Space Station (ISS). He returned to ISS on 4 April 2011 for a six-month stay as a member of Expedition 27.

David Hochman is a consultant in technology-based economic development, serving a broad range of clients in the government and non-profit sectors nationwide. In the New York area, he serves as founding executive director of the Business Incubator Association of New York State, Inc. As a national consultant, he is a long-time affiliate of the Technology Partnership Practice at Battelle Memorial Institute, where he has played key roles in landmark studies such as Battelle’s biannual survey of state-level programs for the Biotechnology Industry Organization and a study for the Association of University Research Parks. Learn more about him at www.tbed.org.