Head of the Institute:

Doc. PhDr. Vratislav Janák, CSc.

Contact:

Petra Kuklová

Masarykova třída 37

746 01 Opava

Czech Republic

Phone: +420 553 684 472,

E-mail: petra.kuklova(at)fpf.slu.cz

Web: https://www.slu.cz/fpf/cz/ustavarcheologie

The Institute of Archaeology, founded in 2009, is the youngest institute of FPS. Institute of Archaeology used to be one of the Departments of Institute of Historical Sciences and was founded in 1995 as the third archaeological university institute in Czech Republic. Its foundation in Opava, in Silesia, was important for the archaeology of the whole region of Silesia. The Oder region and Polish and Czech Silesia played an important role both in prehistory and the Middle Ages, and the study of archaeology right in the heart of the region was necessary.

The institute provides undergraduate study programmes, such as Archaeology, Medieval Archaeology, Archaeology combined with another discipline (both bachelor and master) and one post-graduate doctoral programme Archaeology. Compulsory practical training on archaeological sites in the Czech Republic or Poland is an integral part of the study. Since the 2007/2008 academic year groups of students have participated in excavations in Aquileia, Italy, and cooperated with Università degli Studi di Trieste. The most significant training was held within the framework of the international Shiant Islands Project in 2007.

The position and the scientific aim of the institute predetermine the mutual cooperation especially with universities and scientific institutions in Poland and Slovakia, but also with universities in Germany or Austria. The institute has cooperated with universities in Krakow and Wroclaw for many years. Besides the international cooperation, the institute cooperates with Silesian Municipal Museum, with other museums in the region as well as with the Institute of Archaeology of Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic.

The scientific research is focused on archaeology of Silesia, and the institute participates in many important projects. It organises international scientific conferences, has its own library and publishes Acta Archaeologica Opaviensia.