Film Commission Fundamentals (FCF) is an online course providing valuable information and training to individuals involved with film commissions in any capacity. Paid participants will be tested and, if successful, will be deemed graduates of the course. Only FCF graduates can register for Film Commission Professional or any AFCI University course. This course is now available in English and Spanish.

Who Should Take It?

This course is an introduction and orientation to film commission work and is required of anyone who plans to take advanced AFCI courses. It should be taken by every staff member employed in a film commission. Government officials, local film liaisons, and others associated with on-location filming are encouraged to take our community course, Film Liaison. Film Commission Fundamentals and Film Commission Professional must be completed by at least one employee of each AFCI Member Commission seeking Full Membership with AFCI.

What will you learn?

Film Commission Fundamentals will give the participant an overview of all aspects of film commission work. Topics of study include film commission operations, marketing your jurisdiction, an overview of economic development, film incentives programs, scouting, location photography, plus working with production and clients and within the local jurisdiction. Graduates of the course will gain an understanding of the skills required of every film commission staff member, and the way in which film commissions can successfully interact with the production community and their jurisdictions.

What’s Involved?

You can register for this course on the AFCI website at any time. The online course is self-directed: you may work on it at your own pace and on your own time.

Each chapter of the course is followed by a short quiz which you must pass before you can proceed to the next chapter. When you have completed the course, you will be awarded a certificate of completion for the course and will be eligible to take Film Commission Professional if you would like additional training or your office is seeking Full Membership with the AFCI.

Film Commission Professional is an online course building on the information presented in Film Commission Fundamentals course. It provides more in-depth information on several of the most important elements involved in film commission work. Similar to the Film Commission Fundamentals course, the Film Commission Professional class is self-directed; it is broken into multiple chapters. Each chapter has a quiz that must be passed in order to successfully complete the course.

Who should take it?

This course must be taken by a member of a commission seeking full membership in the AFCI. The course is also designed for those interested in acquiring more knowledge about film commission work, particularly those who aspire to a career as a film commission staff member. Finally, anyone who wishes to enroll in the AFCI Certified Film Commissioner Program must first complete Film Commission Professional unless he/she can demonstrate successful completion of Film Commission Fundamentals prior to 2007.

What will you learn?

Course participants will explore important topics in greater depth including the business aspects of film production, effective marketing techniques, economic development impact and reporting, and the importance of alliances and partnerships such as working with crew, guilds, unions, and economic development officials.

The AFCI Film Liaison course has been developed to assist film commissions in training contacts in their region to support film productions. Film commissioners can’t be at all places at once, nor can they have intimate knowledge of every location in their jurisdiction. We believe communities that have a designated, trained film liaison working in concert with their film commission will meet with a higher level of success.

After taking this course, film liaisons will have a basic understanding of:

the roles of film commissions and liaisons

the fundamental needs of on-location film production

working with the film industry

location scouting

economic opportunities for local labor, businesses and services

This course is designed to be licensed by a member film commission to distribute to contacts in their jurisdiction. It may be purchased at the individual rate of $150. Members can purchase 10 or more licenses at $100 each and 50 or more licenses for $50 each