We're Working to Improve Conditions for Filmmaking

To create a stable and friendly film environment that's competitive with other countries, we've put together manuals and recommendations in cooperation with various institutions and experts.

For example, together with the Audiovisual Producers' Association and the European Institute for Health and Safety in the Film Industry, we created a document entitled The Czech Republic in the Context of the Situation in Ukraine.

During the Covid-19 pandemic, we produced self-regulatory recommendations that enabled filmmakers to return to the set quickly. Compared with other European countries, it was the shortest pause in filmmaking and our rules inspired film commissions all over the world.

We're a member of the European Film Commissions Network (EUFCN) and the Association of Film Commissioners International (AFCI).

Czech Film Fund

The Czech Film Fund provides full support to domestic filmmaking and administers and provides production incentives.

It was established on 1 January 2013 on the basis of Act No. 496/2012 Coll. on Audiovisual Works and Support for Cinematography and on Amendments to Certain Acts (the Audiovisual Act) and replaced the original State Fund of the Czech Republic for the Support and Development of Czech Cinematography, which had been operating since 1992.

Primary Activities

The Czech Film Fund administers audiovisual fees, broadcasting advertising fees, and administrative fees under the Audiovisual Act.

keeps records in the field of audiovisual industry

provides support for cinematography

exercises the property rights of authors and performers attributable to the State under other legislation

exercises the rights of the producer of audiovisual works which have been transferred to its predecessor under another legal provision and the rights of the producer of sound and visual recordings which are due to it under another legal provision

assigns co-production status under the Convention or any other international film co-production treaty

provides production incentives

carries out activities provided for by other legislation

Production Incentives Program

The Czech Republic has been offering incentives for film and television production since June 2010. The aim of their introduction was to return the Czech film industry and cinematography to competitiveness in the European and international arena. The program was designed by the Ministry of Culture and is administered by the Czech Film Fund.

The incentives apply to both Czech and foreign audiovisual works shot in the Czech Republic and take the form of a refund of up to 20% of eligible costs spent on audiovisual production. The refund is paid directly to applicants by the State through the Czech Film Fund after the completion of the production in the Czech Republic.

This program guarantees that no aid amounting to 20% of eligible costs will be paid before the investor (i.e. the producer) has invested its own funds in Czech services and goods in the Czech Republic and subsequently audited the funds spent.

The incentives apply not only to films intended for distribution in cinemas but also to certain types of television production.

Partners