The Society of Jesus, also known as the Jesuits, was founded in Rome, Italy, in 1540 by St. Ignatius Loyola. Learn more about the international Society of Jesus at the Jesuit Curia, our headquarters in Rome.

There are roughly 18,000 Jesuits serving on six continents and in 112 nations.

There are more than 500 Jesuits serving in the USA Midwest Province of the Society of Jesus.

Originally part of the Missouri Province, the Chicago Province was founded in 1928. In 1956, the Chicago Province was divided, forming the Chicago and Detroit Provinces. The Chicago and Detroit Provinces were united in January 2011. They joined the Wisconsin Province to form the USA Midwest Province in 2017. More information about provinces can be found at the Jesuit Conference website

Father Karl Kiser, SJ, is the second provincial of the USA Midwest Province. More information about Fr. Kiser can be found on Our Leadership page.

The Society of Jesus is well known for its schools. Midwest Jesuits operate six universities, the first Jesuit community college, and more than 20 elementary schools, middle schools, and high schools. Learn more about these schools on our Educational Ministries page.

Saint Ignatius of Loyola wrote the Spiritual Exercises after experiencing a profound conversion in Manresa, Spain. Ignatian spirituality today links Jesuits across the world and also enriches the lives of millions of non-Jesuits. We are pleased to share IgnatianSpirituality.org, via Loyola Press, which is a ministry of our province. Copies of the Spiritual Exercises and materials supporting them can be purchased via Loyola Press or at any major online book retailer.

For a partial listing of Jesuit saints and blesseds, please click here.

Father John Hardon, SJ, was a Jesuit of the former Detroit Province (1914–2000), and is the only Midwest Jesuit currently under consideration for canonization. A noted author, promoter of the faith and catechist, his cause is being promoted by the Fr. John A. Hardon, SJ, Archive and Guild