Byron Anthony Hare

26 Year Old Angel

This slideshow requires JavaScript.

I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me. Phil 4:13

Byron is the son of Trey and Traci Pratt born on April 8, and was a wonderful big brother to his sister, Megan Sisco. Byron had unknowingly been harboring this disease since birth. Juvenile Huntington’s disease, or JHD, is an inherited disease that causes the progressive degeneration of nerve cells in the brain. Huntington’s disease has a broad impact on a person’s functional abilities and results in dementia, limited movement, cognitive and psychiatric disorders and is ultimately fatal.

Byron’s symptoms began at the age of 5 (now 18 yrs old) with some minor ‘ticks’ such as blinking, sniffing and clearing of his throat. But other than those little ‘ticks’, Byron was a perfectly normal, happy child. He had complete mobility, played football, soccer and rode his horse daily. Though the symptoms began on a very small scale, at about 13 years of age Byrons movement seem to be noticeably slower and more rigid. And, as time went on, he began to lose focus on the smallest of tasks and having bouts of depression. Byron had ALWAYS been a very well behaved child. He never caused any trouble, but he began to have these fits of emotion, not rage or anger, just outbursts of tears and frustration. Amidst all of this, he also seemed to be losing his ability to problem solve. Byron had difficulty with balance, decreased mobility (rigid/mechanical in movement), speaking and having some dementia. The symptoms will progress and he was ultimately be unable to perform simple every day tasks, including his ability to talk, walk and care for himself.

There is currently no cure and no medications that will successfully slow the disease down. Average life expectancy for JHD is 10 – 15 years from onset of symptoms. We were organizing some benefit efforts to assist in Byron’s medical bills and care. We were holding two separate fundraising efforts. Firstly, we had an online Stallion Breeding Auction. This auction has some of the top barrel racing sires in the industry!

About Byron