Byron Anthony News

Full Cast Announced For World Premiere of New Mischief Comedy GOOD LUCK, STUDIO

Mercury Theatre and Wiltshire Creative have announced the full cast for the world première production of Mischief's Good Luck, Studio. Henry Lewis directs Adam Byron (Anthony), Bryony Corrigan (Saoirse), Eboni Dixon (Pam), Jemma Geanaus (Elizabeth), Harry Kershaw (Sean), Chris Leask (Toby), Greg Tannahill (Kevin), Gareth Tempest (David Cooper-Brown), Sophia Lorenti (Michaela) and Tom Walker (Andy).

Illana Stein to Direct the World Premiere of COMPLICITY at the New Ohio Theatre

Illana Stein will direct the World Premiere of Complicity by playwright Diane Davis (HB Studios Residency Fellow; Actors Studio Playwrights and Directors Unit), presented by Eden Theater Company (Byron Anthony and Joyce Romano, Producers) at the New Ohio Theatre (154 Christopher Street Ste 1E New York, NY), September 28-October 16.

Cast Announced For Eden Theater Company's THE KITCHEN PLAYS

Eden Theater Company announces the featured actors and directors for their presentation of The Kitchen Plays, three new one-act plays set in the kitchen, written by emerging NYC playwrights and created specifically for Zoom.

BWW Review: Eden Theater Company's THE ROOM PLAYS Zooms In On Teleconferenced Relationships

'I guess I knew that you could miss the things you love; I didn't know you could miss the things you hate,' ponders a New York apartment-dweller who sees little reason to get out of bed as she lives in isolation in this era of COVID-19.

Eden Theater Company To Present THE ROOM PLAYS, A Site-Specific New Play Series On Zoom

Eden Theater Company will present The Room Plays, a series of new 10-minute plays by emerging playwrights, created for and presented on Zoom.

Eden Theater Company Presents FLIPSIDE At The Flea Theatre

Eden Theater Company presents Sunday, July 14th the one-night production of FlipSide created by Cassandra Paras and directed by Drew Bierut. The piece reinvents speeches from both theater and film and stripping away all the rules, each actor reimagines the text to create a narrative that completely transforms into something deeper in the imagination. What is created is a narrative connecting each speech in a pinwheel, while also juxtaposing each narrative against another.

PICT's 'SONS OF ULSTER' Coincides with 2014 Centennial of WWI; Runs Now thru 9/20

PICT Classic Theatre's Observe the Sons of Ulster Marching Towards the Somme, by Frank McGuinness, opens just about 100 years after the historical WWI events that are authentically portrayed in the performance. Running today, September 4, through September 20 at the Stephen Foster Memorial, the play, appropriate for ages 12+, leaves audiences with a better emotional understanding of events that changed the course of millions of lives and a sense of the surprising ways that WWI continues to shape the world today.

PICT's 'SONS OF ULSTER' to Coincide with 2014 Centennial of WWI; Runs 9/4-20

PICT Classic Theatre's Observe the Sons of Ulster Marching Towards the Somme, by Frank McGuinness, opens just about 100 years after the historical WWI events that are authentically portrayed in the performance. Running September 4-20 at the Stephen Foster Memorial, the play, appropriate for ages 12+, leaves audiences with a better emotional understanding of events that changed the course of millions of lives and a sense of the surprising ways that WWI continues to shape the world today.

AmoralFEST to Feature Seven New Play Readings, 3/8 - 3/17

As part of the company's 8th season, downtown theatre company The Amoralists will present full-length readings of 7 new plays at 'AmoralFEST 2014: Revengeance.' AmoralFEST is an annually curated series of public readings of full-length plays, portions of which The Amoralists have, over the course of the last season, read in AmoraLAB, the company's monthly(ish) experiment that hands their actors over to promising playwrights and their provocative new plays.

Photo Flash: First Look at The Amoralists' THE BAD AND THE BETTER World Premiere

The Amoralists present the World Premiere of The Bad and the Better, written by Derek Ahonen, directed by Obie Award winner Daniel Aukin and featuring The Amoralists acting ensemble. The acclaimed downtown theater company moves uptown for a 6-week Off-Broadway run from June 14 - July 21, 2012 at The Peter Jay Sharp Theater, located at 416 West 42 Street between 9 and 10 Avenues in New York City. Previews begin June 14 for a June 19 opening. See photos of the cast below!

The Amoralists Announce World Premiere of THE BAD AND THE BETTER Directed by Daniel Aukin for 6/14 - 7/21

The Amoralists have announced the World Premiere of The Bad and the Better, written by Derek Ahonen, directed by Obie Award winner Daniel Aukin and featuring The Amoralists acting ensemble. The acclaimed downtown theater company moves uptown for a 6-week Off-Broadway run from June 14 - July 21, 2012 at The Peter Jay Sharp Theater, located at 416 West 42 Street between 9 and 10 Avenues in New York City. Previews begin June 14 for a June 19 opening.

The Amoralists’ THE BAD AND THE BETTER Tickets On Sale Now

Tickets are now on sale for The Amoralists' World Premiere of The Bad and the Better, written by Derek Ahonen, directed by Obie Award winner Daniel Aukin and featuring The Amoralists acting ensemble. Priced at $49.95, tickets can be purchased online at https://www.TicketCentral.com or by calling 212-279-4200.

The Amoralists to Present THE BAD AND THE BETTER for 6-Week Run at the Peter Jay Sharp Theater

The Amoralists will present the World Premiere of The Bad and the Better, written by Derek Ahonen, directed by Obie Award winner Daniel Aukin and featuring The Amoralists acting ensemble. The acclaimed downtown theater company moves uptown for a 6-week Off-Broadway run from June 14 - July 21, 2012 at The Peter Jay Sharp Theater, located at 416 West 42 Street between 9 and 10 Avenues in New York City. Previews begin June 14 for a June 19 opening.