Sebastian Junger is the author of five books including the widely acclaimed The Perfect Storm. Junger and Tim Hetherington directed the film Retrepo won the Grand Jury Prize at Sundance and was nominated for an Academy Award. Korengal another film, allows Junger to take a more in-depth look into the men deployed in the rough mountains of Korengal Valley. Junger has often been the New York Times bestseller list. In addition to his nonfiction books, Junger is contributing editor for Vanity Fair. His other books include Fire, A Death in Belmont, and War. Not only is Junger a bestseller, he has also won a National Magazine Award and an SAIS Novartis Prize for journalism.

Tribe is a book being considered for the Friends of the Library Board’s Books Sandwiched In series for fall 2017. Junger begins with an “Author’s Note” about how he came to write Tribe. The book developed from an article Junger had written for Vanity Fair: “How PTSD Became a Problem Far Beyond the Battlefield.” Many passages from the article are also included in Tribe. Instead of footnotes which I do find distracting at times, Junger included a “Source Notes” at the end of Tribe.

Tribe begins with a story from Junger’s 1986 hitchhiking journey across the northwestern US. On that journey, he was well-prepared with a tent, food, a camp stove, sleeping bag, and cookpots. Just outside Gillette, Wyoming, Junger saw a scruffy, dirty man walking toward him. Thinking the man had come to job him, Junger was wary and on his guard. The man wanted to know where Junger was going and then asked how much food Junger had. Still thinking the man wants food or money or whatever Junger had with him, Junger replies cautiously, “Oh, I just got a little cheese.”

The man was dismayed and explained that he lived in a broken-down car and had gone into Gillette to see if he could get work for the day, but there had been none that day. Then he opened his lunch bucket and handed Junger a bologna sandwich, an apple, and a bag of potato chips, saying, “I won’t be needing this. I saw you from town and just wanted to make sure you were okay.”

That story illustrates the man’s generosity, but Junger contends the difference is that the man had “taken responsibility for me. He’d spotted me from town and walked half a mile out a highway to make sure I was okay.” In that introduction, Junger ends with this provocative idea: “Modern society has perfected the art of making people not feel necessary. It’s time for that to end.” Tribe was published in June 2016 during the presidential campaign….

Junge points out Benjamin Franklin’s observations about English settlers bolting into Indian society, but that Indians rarely moved into the white society. Even people captured by Indians and later rescued would often succeed in escaping or continually try to escape to go back to the Indian society. Junger likens this pull toward the tribal society to veterans who return from combat only to find they miss the companionship and connections within the platoon life. Junger contends that the loss of that intimacy could clarify the high rates of PTSD among military veterans.

To illustrate that premise, Junger delves into societies that maintain that tribal unity, a connection that has been all but lost in today’s world. Tribe goes on to explore what it means to belong. In examining the subject, Junger points out the struggles and the irony. How can veterans feel better about war than about peace? The answer lies in the fact that together we find strength. In Tribe, Junger goes on to explain how we can achieve that connection “even in today’s divided world.”

Junger concludes that “humans are so strongly wired to help one another—and enjoy such enormous social benefits from doing so—that people regularly risk their lives for complete strangers.” He goes on to explain that men and women approach these risks differently. Men often act spontaneously and impulsively in a dangerous situation while women are “more likely than men to display something called moral courage.”

At the end of Tribe, Junger relates the story of Martin H. Bauman, who died at 85. Bauman’s job-placement company had been very successful until a downturn in the 1990s. Bauman called his employees together and asked them to take a ten percent reduction in salary so that they could all keep their jobs. The employees unanimously agreed. What the employees did not know until the bookkeeper told them was that Bauman gave up his own salary altogether until the company returned to more stable ground. Junger notes that “Bauman voluntarily served his country, served his employees, and served other handicapped people by establishing a scholarship fund in his name. He clearly understood that belonging to society require sacrifice, and that sacrifice gives back way more than it costs.”

The New York Times concludes that “Junger has raised one of the most provocative ideas of this campaign season–and accidentally written one of its most intriguing political books.” The Guardian continues praise for Tribe: “An electrifying tapestry of history, anthropology, psychology and memoir that punctures the stereotype of the veteran as a war-damaged victim in need of salvation. Rather than asking how we can save our returning servicemen and women, Junger challenges us to take a hard look in the mirror and ask whether we can save ourselves.”