Sebastian Junger has made a name for himself writing books and magazine articles about people who risk their lives for a cause, or simply to make a living. His 1997 book The Perfect Storm, which was the basis for Wolfgang Petersen’s 2000 movie, chronicled a voyage by a group of commercial fishermen who had a fatal encounter with a freak superstorm.

He also wrote about murdered Afghan warlord Ahmed Shah Massoud’s battles against the Taliban before the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, led to the end of their reign over Afghanistan. Junger’s writings have described whaling in the Caribbean, fighting forest fires in Idaho and what it was like to have confessed Boston Strangler Albert DeSalvo living in the neighborhood where he grew up in Massachusetts.

When he worked on his 2010 book War, about a year-long deployment for a platoon of American soldiers in the Korengal valley of Afghanistan, he teamed with the British combat photographer and videographer Tim Hetherington to make the Oscar-nominated documentary Restrepo. The film took the top documentary award at Sundance Film Festival, despite the fact that neither man had made a film.

The 40-year-old Hetherington didn’t get to bask in the acclaim for Restrepo for long. On April 20, 2011, shrapnel from a mortar round killed him and fellow photographer Chris Hondros while they were covering the battle of Misrata, Libya, during the Arab Spring. Hetherington was hit in the femoral artery and bled to death before he made it to the hospital.

Junger has started a nonprofit organization called Reporters Instructed in Saving Colleagues (RISCTraining. org), which trains journalists covering war zones in how to deal with combat injuries. “If the journalists around Tim had known what to do, he might have lived,” said Junger at the True/False Film Festival in Columbia, Mo., in March 2012. He had come to the festival to present his second documentary, Which Way Is the Front Line From Here? The Life and Time of Tim Hetherington. It airs on HBO at 8 p.m.Thursday.

When asked why he chose to document the life of his friend and collaborator in a film instead of a book, Junger said, “Words can’t communicate what a picture contains very well. He worked in the visual media. I thought it would be very hard to communicate the miracle of his work with words, so I didn’t try.” Using some of Junger’s research, biographer Alan Huffman has written a worthy account, Here I Am: The Story of Tim Hetherington, War Photographer.

Junger and Huffman describe Hetherington’s approach to combat journalism as unique. He didn’t simply photograph carnage. During the making of Restrepo, he shot several stills of the soldiers sleeping after the fighting had died down. These images are part of his book of photos, Infidel (Chris Boot, $35); Junger wrote the introduction.

When he covered the revolution in Liberia in 2003, Hetherington captured an image of a rebel soldier saying goodbye to his girlfriend before fighting for control of the capital city, Monrovia.

“He also thought in nonobvious ways,” Junger said. “He was covering a combat story and the thing he’s not interested in is combat. I learned to think of things in slightly different ways, slightly off topic. He was a very fair-minded, inquiring person. He respected just about everybody. He didn’t make distinctions between people. He was interested in everyone’s experiences.”

Throughout Which Way Is the Front Line From Here?, Junger demonstrates how close Hetherington got to his subjects, which enabled him to learn things about them his peers missed. The old journalism school adage that a correspondent should simply be a neutral observer didn’t apply to Hetherington.

“That’s a silly rule. It’s just different kinds of journalism. The whole emotional world is a perfectly appropriate topic for journalistic input, so the idea that you might have some emotional connection to the people you’re writing about - I mean, we’re not robots. You spend some time with your subject, you’re probably going to have some emotional connection to them. There’s nothing wrong with that,” Junger said.

That said, during the making of the film, Junger found that he had to include his recollections of his collaborator and friend. While the film includes testimony from Hetherington’s parents, subjects, co-workers and his girlfriend, it would not have been complete without Junger’s memories of the 15 months they spent shooting Restrepo.

Even after completing the documentary, Junger winces at the thought of his face coming on screen.

“I have a natural avoidance of being the subject of my own work because I’m a journalist,” Junger said. “And also, I knew it was going to be emotional.Men are well-known for not wanting to be emotional.”

Nonetheless, including his pain may have helped him talk with others who missed the photographer. Junger also spoke with family and friends of the crew members who died during the 1990 voyage depicted in The Perfect Storm.

“You just learn how to be sensitive to people’s feelings and appeal to their sense of wanting to communicate something helpful to others. I don’t think it’s manipulative, but I think it is a certain way of approaching someone and saying your experience is valuable. I know it’s painful to talk about, but there’s a great good that will come from it, please talk with me. I think there’s a way to do that that’s respectful and not exploitative, though it’s difficult for everybody involved,” Junger said.

Because he has covered genocide in Kosovo and written for outlets such as Men’s Journal, Junger has developed a reputation for covering adventurous or deadly beats.While promoting her book on Hawaii, Unfamiliar Fishes (Riverhead, $16), Sarah Vowell recounted that standing on a cliff at a historical site during her research was her “Sebastian Junger moment.”

When told of the comparison, Junger replied, “Frankly, I think there are journalists who are way more courageous and risk-taking than I. They can find a lesser-known person who’s done more outrageous things than I have. It’d be a more fitting moment. It’s very flattering. I think they’re just a little bit deceived about what they’re referring to.”