Višegrad Gate

Višegradska kapija (transl. Visegrad Gate) was the main entry point to town and is one of the three city gate-towers in the Vratnik Old Town with the other two being Sirokac Tower and Ploca Tower. It was built between 1727 and 1739, in limestone and a special Bosnian stone "hreša" with roof shingles. Traffic went east via the main road towards Visegrad (thus the name) and continued further to the east towards Istanbul.[1]

Ploča Gate and Tower

Kapija Ploča (transl. Ploca Tower) is one of the three gate-towers in the Vratnik Old Town. The Alija Izetbegović Museum was opened on 19 October 2007 and is located in the Vratnik Kapija towers Ploča and Širokac. The museum is a commemoration to the influence and body of work of Alija Izetbegović, the first president of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Visitors are able to walk from one tower to the next along the inside (atop) of fort walls.[3]

White Citadel

Main article: Bijela Tabija

Bijela Tabija (transl. White Citadel) is a cannon bastion/fortress which also served to accommodate soldiers, and it is a part of the Old Town "Vratnik". It is assumed to have been built at the site of a small medieval town "Hodidjed" (central fortress of the Vrhbosna Parish). The fortress overlooks Sarajevo with the panoramic views of the eastern entrance to Sarajevo, the Miljacka River canyon and the city itself. The White Fortress was renovated and expanded several times. The present-day structure dates back to the Austro-Hungarian period. It served as a dungeon, barrack, munitions storage, a treasury, as well as the protection against the raid of Prince Eugene of Savoy in 1697, and defense fortress in battle against occupation by the Austro-Hungarian ruler in 1878. An esteemed local architect, Zlatko Ugljen has developed a conceptual reconstruction project. According to his idea where the site would be used as a theatre/music stage in the summer season.[1] Some reports date the fortress to be built as far back as 1550.[4]

Yellow Fort

Main article: Žuta Tabija

Žuta Tabija (transl. Yellow Bastion; or Yellow Fort) is a cannon fort at Jekovac. It was built close to the Jajce Barracks and the Jekovac water reservoir. It served as one of the defense points against the Austro-Hungarian troops in 1878. The fortress was damaged and rebuilt several times. The most recent renovation took place in 1998.[5][1]

Strošićki Bastion

Strošićka Tabija (transl. Strošićki Bastion) is located on the northwestern part of the Vratnik fort. Essentially the shape is trapezium, with the surface of 367m². Two parallel sides are 25 meters long and 14m, and the other two 18m and 21 meters. Strošićka bastion was built on steep terrain, and the preserved height of the walls on the northeastern side is 3m, and on the north 8m.[6]