Reviewed By FakhizaaA - Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

It was so peaceful to be here, amongst the dead. I saw the cemetery from Bascarsija but only had the opportunity to explore it when I went to the Yellow Bastion. It was so near to the Old Town and I just walk all the way down from Yellow Bastion to the cemetery and walk straight down to Bascarsija. This cemetery consist of 3 types of graves; the graves from Ottoman Empire, graves of the locals around Sarajevo and most famously, graves of people (local and fighters) who defended Sarajevo during its most blackest siege during the modern day Europe in 1992 until 1996. If you have time, walk slowly between the gravestones and try to imagine thousands of life gone to the war leaving behind their loves one and the dreams they had together. It is bittersweet feelings knowing their loves one survived to live in today’s Sarajevo yet knowing these brave defenders of Sarajevo were no longer here to taste freedom. Amongst thousand of them here, there is one prominent grave of Sarajevo’s father; Alija Izetbegovic. He was a staunch fighter during the war and refused to run away leaving his people to their fate. He was here in Sarajevo and there on the hills and mountains fighting as best as he could with his people. I forgot to bring flowers to his grave but on second thoughts, I think it is fair that I forgot because not only Alija, but all of these brave fighters here deserve flowers. So if you are in Sarajevo, do make times to visit this place. You can bring flowers too ????

Reviewed By GeysirGal - Surrey, United Kingdom

This has to be one of my favourite spots within the city, not because I am religious, as I am not, but simply because of its beautiy and serenity. I am going to say that you can feel God in this place or any of that, as if you are looking for that it can be found anywhere, but there is something special about this building. Sited in a small square within the pedetsrianised heart of the shopping district it serves as a reminder that there is more to life than endless consumerism and provides us with an opportunity to stop for a while and just be.