854 relations: A Matter of Minutes, Abies veitchii, Abstraction, Accreditation, Activities prohibited on Shabbat, Admiral Joe Fowler Riverboat, Aerial work platform, Agriculture in Communist Czechoslovakia, Ahuachapán, Akosombo, Al-Barakat, Al-Muhaidib, Albany High School (New York), Alfred McAlpine, All-terrain vehicle, Altmühl, Aluminum building wiring, Amazon (company), American Bridge Company, American Institute of Constructors, Amurca, Anantapur district, Andrew Mellon, Andrew Onderdonk, Angle grinder, Apollo Automobil, Arab diaspora, Arakoon, New South Wales, Arcelor, ArchiLab, Architect, Architectural conservation, Architectural glass, Architectural technologist, Architecture for Humanity, Architecture of Africa, Architecture of India, Arizona State Route 101, Asante Kotoko S.C., Ascot, Berkshire, Astana, Atakule, Atlantia (company), Atlantic Community High School, Atollo, Atomic Age, Autonomous building, Aylesbury College, Čakovec, Bachelor of Architecture, ... Expand index (804 more) » « Shrink index

A Matter of Minutes

"A Matter of Minutes" is the third segment of the fifteenth episode from the first season (1985–86) of the television series The Twilight Zone.

See Construction and A Matter of Minutes

Abies veitchii

Veitch's fir (Abies veitchii; シラビソ or シラベ shirabiso or shirabe), also known as Veitch's silver-fir, is a fir native to Japan on the islands of Honshū and Shikoku.

See Construction and Abies veitchii

Abstraction

Abstraction in its main sense is a conceptual process where general rules and concepts are derived from the usage and classification of specific examples, literal ("real" or "concrete") signifiers, first principles, or other methods.

See Construction and Abstraction

Accreditation

Accreditation is the process in which certification of competency, authority, or credibility is presented.

See Construction and Accreditation

Activities prohibited on Shabbat

Halakha (Jewish law), especially the Talmud tractate Shabbat, identifies thirty-nine categories of activity prohibited on Shabbat (ל״ט אבות מלאכות, lamed tet avot melakhot), and clarifies many questions surrounding the application of the biblical prohibitions.

See Construction and Activities prohibited on Shabbat

Admiral Joe Fowler Riverboat

The Admiral Joe Fowler was a riverboat named after Park Construction Administrator Joe Fowler, a former US Navy rear admiral who was in charge of the construction of both Disneyland and Walt Disney World.

See Construction and Admiral Joe Fowler Riverboat

Aerial work platform

An aerial work platform (AWP), also known as an aerial device, elevating work platform (EWP), bucket truck or mobile elevating work platform (MEWP) is a mechanical device used to provide temporary access for people or equipment to inaccessible areas, usually at height.

See Construction and Aerial work platform

Agriculture in Communist Czechoslovakia

Czechoslovakia was a socialist country from 1948 till the Velvet Revolution of 1989.

See Construction and Agriculture in Communist Czechoslovakia

Ahuachapán

Ahuachapán is a city and municipality and the capital of the Ahuachapán Department in western El Salvador.

See Construction and Ahuachapán

Akosombo

Akosombo is a small town in the south of the Asuogyaman District, Eastern Region, Ghana.

See Construction and Akosombo

Al-Barakat

Al-Barakat, or Al-Barakaat (البركات), which means "Blessings" in Arabic, is a group of companies established in 1986 in Somalia.

See Construction and Al-Barakat

Al-Muhaidib

The Al Muhaidib Group (Arabic:مجموعة المهيدب) is an international private group of companies based in Saudi Arabia that was founded in 1946 by Abdul Kadir bin Abdul Muhsin Al-Muhaidib.

See Construction and Al-Muhaidib

Albany High School (New York)

Albany High School (AHS) in Albany, New York, United States, is a public high school with an enrollment of about 2,600 students for the 2017-18 school year.

See Construction and Albany High School (New York)

Alfred McAlpine

Alfred McAlpine plc was a British construction firm headquartered in Hooton, Cheshire.

See Construction and Alfred McAlpine

All-terrain vehicle

An all-terrain vehicle (ATV), also known as a quad, quad bike, three-wheeler, four-wheeler or quadricycle as defined by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) is a vehicle that travels on low-pressure tires, with a seat that is straddled by the operator, along with handlebars for steering control.

See Construction and All-terrain vehicle

Altmühl

The Altmühl is a river in Bavaria, Germany.

See Construction and Altmühl

Aluminum building wiring

Aluminum building wiring is a type of electrical wiring for residential construction or houses that uses aluminum electrical conductors.

See Construction and Aluminum building wiring

Amazon (company)

Amazon.com, Inc., doing business as Amazon, is an American electronic commerce and cloud computing company based in Seattle, Washington that was founded by Jeff Bezos on July 5, 1994.

See Construction and Amazon (company)

American Bridge Company

The American Bridge Company is a civil engineering firm that specializes in building and renovating bridges and other large civil engineering projects.

See Construction and American Bridge Company

American Institute of Constructors

The American Institute of Constructors (AIC), is a not-for-profit 501(c)(6) non-governmental professional association founded in 1971 for the advancement of professionalism and ethics in the Construction industry.

See Construction and American Institute of Constructors

Amurca

Amurca is the bitter-tasting, dark-colored, watery sediment that settles out of unfiltered olive oil over time.

See Construction and Amurca

Anantapur district

Anantapur district (officially:Anantapuramu district) is a district in the Rayalaseema region of Andhra Pradesh, India.

See Construction and Anantapur district

Andrew Mellon

Andrew William Mellon (March 24, 1855 – August 26, 1937), sometimes A.W., was an American banker, businessman, industrialist, philanthropist, art collector, and politician.

See Construction and Andrew Mellon

Andrew Onderdonk

Andrew Onderdonk (30 August 1848 &ndash; 21 June 1905) was an American construction contractor who worked on several major projects in the West, including the San Francisco seawall in California and the Canadian Pacific Railway in British Columbia.

See Construction and Andrew Onderdonk

Angle grinder

An angle grinder, also known as a side grinder or disc grinder, is a handheld power tool used for grinding (abrasive cutting) and polishing.

See Construction and Angle grinder

Apollo Automobil

Apollo Automobil GmbH (Previously known as Gumpert Sportwagenmanufaktur GmbH) is a German sports car manufacturer headquartered in Denkendorf.

See Construction and Apollo Automobil

Arab diaspora

Arab diaspora refers to descendants of the Arab immigrants who, voluntarily or as refugees, emigrated from their native lands to non-Arab countries, primarily in South America, Europe, North America, and parts of South Asia, Southeast Asia, the Caribbean, and West Africa.

See Construction and Arab diaspora

Arakoon, New South Wales

Arakoon is an eastern suburb of the town of South West Rocks in Kempsey Shire, New South Wales, Australia.

See Construction and Arakoon, New South Wales

Arcelor

Arcelor S.A. was the world's largest steel producer in terms of turnover and the second largest in terms of steel output, with a turnover of €30.2 billion and shipments of 45 million metric tons of steel in 2004.

See Construction and Arcelor

ArchiLab

ArchiLab is an annual architectural exposition and conference held in Orléans in France.

See Construction and ArchiLab

Architect

An architect is a person who plans, designs, and reviews the construction of buildings.

See Construction and Architect

Architectural conservation

Architectural conservation describes the process through which the material, historical, and design integrity of any built heritage are prolonged through carefully planned interventions.

See Construction and Architectural conservation

Architectural glass

Architectural glass is glass that is used as a building material.

See Construction and Architectural glass

Architectural technologist

The Architectural Technologist, also known as a Building Technologist, provides technical building design services and solutions and is trained in architectural technology, building technical design and construction.

See Construction and Architectural technologist

Architecture for Humanity

Architecture for Humanity was a US-based charitable organization that sought architectural solutions to humanitarian crises and brought professional design services to clients (often communities in need).

See Construction and Architecture for Humanity

Architecture of Africa

The architecture of Africa, like other aspects of the culture of Africa, is exceptionally diverse.

See Construction and Architecture of Africa

Architecture of India

The architecture of India is rooted in its history, culture and religion.

See Construction and Architecture of India

Arizona State Route 101

Arizona State Route 101, or Loop 101, (spoken as one-oh-one) is a semi-beltway encompassing much of the Phoenix Metropolitan Area in the United States.

See Construction and Arizona State Route 101

Asante Kotoko S.C.

Asante Kotoko Sporting Club, also known as Asante Kotoko or Ashanti Kotoko, is a professional football club from Kumasi, Ashanti.

See Construction and Asante Kotoko S.C.

Ascot, Berkshire

Ascot is a small town in East Berkshire, England, south of Windsor, east of Bracknell and west of London.

See Construction and Ascot, Berkshire

Astana

Astana (Астана, Astana) is the capital city of Kazakhstan.

See Construction and Astana

Atakule

Atakule is a 125 m (410 feet) high communications and observation tower located in the Çankaya district of central Ankara, Turkey, and is one of the primary landmarks of the city.

See Construction and Atakule

Atlantia (company)

Atlantia S.p.A. (formerly Autostrade S.p.A.) is an Italian holding company whose primary asset is Autostrade per l'Italia, the largest concessionaire on the Italian autostrade network.

See Construction and Atlantia (company)

Atlantic Community High School

Atlantic Community High School (also known as Atlantic and ATL and formerly called Seacrest High School) is a public high school located in Delray Beach, Florida.

See Construction and Atlantic Community High School

Atollo

ATOLLO is a construction toy invented by Scottish architect Donald Macdonald consisting of hinge and socket pieces.

See Construction and Atollo

Atomic Age

The Atomic Age, also known as the Atomic Era, is the period of history following the detonation of the first nuclear ("atomic") bomb, Trinity, on July 16, 1945, during World War II.

See Construction and Atomic Age

Autonomous building

An autonomous building is a building designed to be operated independently from infrastructural support services such as the electric power grid, gas grid, municipal water systems, sewage treatment systems, storm drains, communication services, and in some cases, public roads.

See Construction and Autonomous building

Aylesbury College

Aylesbury College is a general further education college in Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, England.

See Construction and Aylesbury College

Čakovec

Čakovec (Csáktornya; Aquama; Tschakathurn) is a city in northern Croatia, located around north of Zagreb, the Croatian capital.

See Construction and Čakovec

Bachelor of Architecture

The Bachelor of Architecture (B.Arch.) is a bachelor's degree designed to satisfy the academic requirement of practicing architecture.

See Construction and Bachelor of Architecture

Barny Boatman

Barny M. P. Boatman (born 1956 in St Pancras, London), is an English professional poker player and the oldest member of the poker-playing foursome known as The Hendon Mob.

See Construction and Barny Boatman

Barton Creek

Barton Creek is a tributary that feeds the Colorado River as it flows through the Texas Hill Country.

See Construction and Barton Creek

Baseline

A baseline is a line that is a base for measurement or for construction.

See Construction and Baseline

Bălți

Bălți (Belz, Bielce, Бельцы,, Бєльці,, בעלץ) is a city in Moldova.

See Construction and Bălți

Bechtel

Bechtel Corporation (Bechtel Group, Inc.) is an engineering, procurement, construction, and project management company.

See Construction and Bechtel

Belle Vue (Doncaster)

Belle Vue was the home of English professional football club Doncaster Rovers from 1922 to 2007.

See Construction and Belle Vue (Doncaster)

Benghazi

Benghazi (بنغازي) is the second-most populous city in Libya and the largest in Cyrenaica.

See Construction and Benghazi

Bentley Systems

Bentley Systems, Incorporated, is an American-based software development company that develops, manufactures, licenses, sells and supports computer software and services for the design, construction, and operation of infrastructure.

See Construction and Bentley Systems

Berm

A berm is a level space, shelf, or raised barrier (usually made of compacted soil) separating two areas.

See Construction and Berm

Bethlehem Steel

The Bethlehem Steel Corporation (commonly called Bethlehem Steel) was a steel and shipbuilding company that began operations in 1904 and was America's second-largest steel producer and largest shipbuilder.

See Construction and Bethlehem Steel

Bilbao

Bilbao (Bilbo) is a city in northern Spain, the largest city in the province of Biscay and in the Basque Country as a whole.

See Construction and Bilbao

Bin Laden family

The bin Laden family (بن لادن, bin Lādin), also spelled bin Ladin, is a wealthy family intimately connected with the innermost circles of the Saudi royal family.

See Construction and Bin Laden family

Binder (material)

A binder or binding agent is any material or substance that holds or draws other materials together to form a cohesive whole mechanically, chemically, by adhesion or cohesion.

See Construction and Binder (material)

Bitterroot National Forest

Bitterroot National Forest comprises 1.587 million acres (6,423 km²) in west-central Montana and eastern Idaho, of the United States.

See Construction and Bitterroot National Forest

Blue-collar worker

In the United States and (at least some) other English-speaking countries, a blue-collar worker is a working class person who performs manual labor.

See Construction and Blue-collar worker

Boğaziçi University

Boğaziçi University (also known as Bosphorus University, Boğaziçi Üniversitesi, "Boğaziçi" literally meaning Bosphorus in Turkish) is a major research university located on the European side of the Bosphorus strait in Istanbul, Turkey.

See Construction and Boğaziçi University

Boeing CH-47 Chinook

The Boeing CH-47 Chinook is an American twin-engine, tandem-rotor, heavy-lift helicopter developed by American rotorcraft company Vertol and manufactured by Boeing Vertol (later known as Boeing Rotorcraft Systems).

See Construction and Boeing CH-47 Chinook

Bolgatanga Municipal District

The Bolgatanga Municipal District is one of the nine (9) districts in the Upper East Region of north Ghana.

See Construction and Bolgatanga Municipal District

Bollinger County, Missouri

Bollinger County is a county located in the southeastern part of the U.S. state of Missouri.

See Construction and Bollinger County, Missouri

Bolted joint

Bolted joints are one of the most common elements in construction and machine design.

See Construction and Bolted joint

Bomb

A bomb is an explosive weapon that uses the exothermic reaction of an explosive material to provide an extremely sudden and violent release of energy.

See Construction and Bomb

Boral

Boral Limited is a multinational company manufacturing and supplying building and construction materials.

See Construction and Boral

Borassus

Borassus (Palmyra palm) is a genus of five species of fan palms, native to tropical regions of Africa, Asia and New Guinea.

See Construction and Borassus

Boron group

The boron group are the chemical elements in group 13 of the periodic table, comprising boron (B), aluminium (Al), gallium (Ga), indium (In), thallium (Tl), and perhaps also the chemically uncharacterized nihonium (Nh).

See Construction and Boron group

Borrow pit

In construction and civil engineering, a borrow pit, also known as a sand box, is an area where material (usually soil, gravel or sand) has been dug for use at another location.

See Construction and Borrow pit

Boswil

Boswil is a municipality in the district of Muri in the canton of Aargau in Switzerland.

See Construction and Boswil

Breaker (hydraulic)

A breaker is a powerful percussion hammer fitted to an excavator for demolishing concrete structures or rocks.

See Construction and Breaker (hydraulic)

Brick nog

Brick nog, (nogging or nogged, beam filling) is a construction technique in which bricks are used to fill the vacancies in a wooden frame.

See Construction and Brick nog

Bricklayer

A bricklayer, which is related to but different from a mason, is a craftsman who lays bricks to construct brickwork.

See Construction and Bricklayer

Brickwork

Brickwork is masonry produced by a bricklayer, using bricks and mortar.

See Construction and Brickwork

Brighouse

Brighouse is a town within the Metropolitan Borough of Calderdale, in West Yorkshire, England.

See Construction and Brighouse

Britons in Hong Kong

Britons never made up more than a small portion of the population in Hong Kong, despite Hong Kong having been under British rule for more than 150 years.

See Construction and Britons in Hong Kong

Brock Lesnar

Brock Edward Lesnar (born July 12, 1977) is an American-Canadian professional wrestler and former mixed martial artist and football player.

See Construction and Brock Lesnar

Browns Ferry Nuclear Power Plant

The Browns Ferry Nuclear Plant is located on the Tennessee River near Decatur and Athens, Alabama, on the north side (right bank) of Wheeler Lake.

See Construction and Browns Ferry Nuclear Power Plant

Bruay-sur-l'Escaut

Bruay-sur-l'Escaut is a commune in the Nord department in northern France.

See Construction and Bruay-sur-l'Escaut

Buckworth

Buckworth is a village and civil parish in Cambridgeshire, England.

See Construction and Buckworth

Build

Build may refer to.

See Construction and Build

Build to order (HDB)

Build To Order (abbrev: BTO; Chinese: 预购组屋制度) is a Housing and Development Board (HDB) flat allocation system that offers flexibility in timing and location for owners buying a New HDB flats in Singapore.

See Construction and Build to order (HDB)

Building

A building, or edifice, is a structure with a roof and walls standing more or less permanently in one place, such as a house or factory.

See Construction and Building

Building and Wood Workers' International

The Building and Wood Workers' International (BWI) is the global union federation of democratic and free trade unions in the building, building materials, wood, forestry and allied industries.

See Construction and Building and Wood Workers' International

Building code

A building code (also building control or building regulations) is a set of rules that specify the standards for constructed objects such as buildings and nonbuilding structures.

See Construction and Building code

Building material

Building material is any material which is used for construction purposes.

See Construction and Building material

Building Sites Bite

Building Sites Bite is a public information film produced for British schools to warn children about the danger of playing on building sites.

See Construction and Building Sites Bite

Bulldozer

A bulldozer is a crawler (continuous tracked tractor) equipped with a substantial metal plate (known as a blade) used to push large quantities of soil, sand, rubble, or other such material during construction or conversion work and typically equipped at the rear with a claw-like device (known as a ripper) to loosen densely compacted materials.

See Construction and Bulldozer

Bunbury, Western Australia

Bunbury is a coastal city in Western Australia, approximately south of the state capital, Perth.

See Construction and Bunbury, Western Australia

Bunkyō

is a special ward located in Tokyo, Japan.

See Construction and Bunkyō

Burial

Burial or interment is the ritual act of placing a dead person or animal, sometimes with objects, into the ground.

See Construction and Burial

Business software

Business software or a business application is any software or set of computer programs used by business users to perform various business functions.

See Construction and Business software

Campo Grande

Campo Grande (Great Field) is the capital and largest city of the Brazilian state of Mato Grosso do Sul in the Center-West region of the country.

See Construction and Campo Grande

Campus by the Sea

Campus by the Sea (CBS) is a Christian camp operated by InterVarsity Christian Fellowship and is located at Gallagher's Cove on Santa Catalina Island, California, USA.

See Construction and Campus by the Sea

Capital cost

Capital costs are fixed, one-time expenses incurred on the purchase of land, buildings, construction, and equipment used in the production of goods or in the rendering of services.

See Construction and Capital cost

Capitol (board game)

Capitol is a German-style building game set in the ancient Roman Empire, designed by Aaron Weissblum and Alan R. Moon.

See Construction and Capitol (board game)

Carabiner

A carabiner or karabiner is a specialized type of shackle, a metal loop with a spring-loaded gate used to quickly and reversibly connect components, most notably in safety-critical systems.

See Construction and Carabiner

Carhartt

Carhartt, Inc., is a U.S.-based apparel company founded in 1889.

See Construction and Carhartt

Carillion

Carillion plc was a British multinational facilities management and construction services company headquartered in Wolverhampton in the United Kingdom, prior to its liquidation, which began in January 2018.

See Construction and Carillion

Carlos Ahumada

Carlos Agustín Ahumada Kurtz (born 1964) is an entrepreneur of dual Argentine-Mexican nationality.

See Construction and Carlos Ahumada

Carpentry

Carpentry is a skilled trade in which the primary work performed is the cutting, shaping and installation of building materials during the construction of buildings, ships, timber bridges, concrete formwork, etc.

See Construction and Carpentry

CarVup

CarVup is a platform game published by Core Design in 1990.

See Construction and CarVup

Casino Nova Scotia

Casino Nova Scotia is located in Nova Scotia, Canada, and has locations in Halifax and Sydney.

See Construction and Casino Nova Scotia

Castalla

Castalla (Valencian and Spanish) is a town located in the comarca of L'Alcoià, in the province of Alicante, Spain.

See Construction and Castalla

Castile and León

Castile and León (Castilla y León; Leonese: Castiella y Llión; Castela e León) is an autonomous community in north-western Spain.

See Construction and Castile and León

Catherine Guy-Quint

Catherine Guy-Quint (born 1 September 1949 in Poitiers, Vienne) is a French politician and Member of the European Parliament for central France.

See Construction and Catherine Guy-Quint

Catral

Catral is a town in the Valencian Community, Spain.

See Construction and Catral

Cúcuta

Cúcuta, officially San José de Cúcuta, is a Colombian city, capital of Norte de Santander department.

See Construction and Cúcuta

Cenotaph

A cenotaph is an empty tomb or a monument erected in honour of a person or group of people whose remains are elsewhere.

See Construction and Cenotaph

Central Banat District

The Central Banat District (Средњобанатски округ, Srednjobanatski okrug) is one of seven administrative districts of the autonomous province of Vojvodina, Serbia.

See Construction and Central Banat District

Central Bucks High School West

Central Bucks High School West is a public high school serving students in tenth through twelfth grades, the oldest of the three high schools in the Central Bucks School District.

See Construction and Central Bucks High School West

Central Massachusetts Railroad

The Central Massachusetts Railroad was a railroad in Massachusetts.

See Construction and Central Massachusetts Railroad

Central Organisation of the Workers of Sweden

Central Organisation of the Workers of Sweden (in Swedish: Sveriges Arbetares Centralorganisation, SAC - Syndikalisterna) is a syndicalist trade union federation in Sweden.

See Construction and Central Organisation of the Workers of Sweden

Centre Region (Cameroon)

The Centre Region (Région du Centre) occupies 69,000 km² of the central plains of the Republic of Cameroon.

See Construction and Centre Region (Cameroon)

Certification mark

A certification mark (or conformity mark) on a commercial product indicates the existence of an accepted product standard or regulation and a claim that the manufacturer has verified compliance with those standards or regulations.

See Construction and Certification mark

Cesana Pariol

Cesana Pariol was the venue for bobsled, luge and skeleton during the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin, Italy.

See Construction and Cesana Pariol

Chapecó

Chapecó is a major city in the western area of the state of Santa Catarina, Brazil, located 630 km west of Florianópolis, the state capital.

See Construction and Chapecó

Charles Steen

Charles Augustus Steen (December 1, 1919 &ndash; January 1, 2006), was a geologist who made and lost a fortune after discovering a rich uranium deposit in Utah during the uranium boom of the early 1950s.

See Construction and Charles Steen

Chemical toilet

A chemical toilet collects human excreta in a holding tank and uses chemicals to minimize odors.

See Construction and Chemical toilet

Chicago Spire

The Chicago Spire was a super tall skyscraper project at 400 N. Lake Shore Drive in Chicago, Illinois that failed financially after beginning construction.

See Construction and Chicago Spire

Chilliwack

Chilliwack is the seventh largest city in British Columbia, Canada.

See Construction and Chilliwack

Chiltern Hills

The Chiltern Hills form a chalk escarpment in South East England.

See Construction and Chiltern Hills

Chisel

A chisel is a tool with a characteristically shaped cutting edge (such that wood chisels have lent part of their name to a particular grind) of blade on its end, for carving or cutting a hard material such as wood, stone, or metal by hand, struck with a mallet, or mechanical power.

See Construction and Chisel

Chittoor district

Chittoor district, is a district in Rayalaseema region of the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh.

See Construction and Chittoor district

Chris Kanyon

Christopher Morgan Klucsarits (January 4, 1970 – April 2, 2010) was an American professional wrestler.

See Construction and Chris Kanyon

Christelijk Nationaal Vakverbond

The Christelijk Nationaal Vakverbond (English: National Federation of Christian Trade Unions in the Netherlands; CNV) is a federation of trade unions of the Netherlands.

See Construction and Christelijk Nationaal Vakverbond

Chung Ju-yung

Chung Ju-yung or Jung Joo-young (November 25, 1915 – March 21, 2001) was a South Korean entrepreneur, businessman and the founder of Hyundai Groups of South Korea.

See Construction and Chung Ju-yung

Ciba Specialty Chemicals

Ciba was a chemical company based in and near Basel, Switzerland.

See Construction and Ciba Specialty Chemicals

Cinerama Dome

Pacific Theatres's Cinerama Dome is a movie theater located at 6360 Sunset Boulevard in Hollywood, California.

See Construction and Cinerama Dome

Circuit restoration

In telecommunication, circuit restoration is the process by which a communications circuit is established between two users after disruption or loss of the original circuit.

See Construction and Circuit restoration

City of Clarence

Clarence City Council (or City of Clarence) is a local government body in Tasmania, and one of the five municipalities that constitutes the Greater Hobart Area.

See Construction and City of Clarence

CityCenter

CityCenter (also known as CityCenter Las Vegas) is a mixed-use, urban complex on located on the Las Vegas Strip in Paradise, Nevada.

See Construction and CityCenter

Clamp (tool)

A clamp is a fastening device used to hold or secure objects tightly together to prevent movement or separation through the application of inward pressure.

See Construction and Clamp (tool)

Clearview, Ontario

Clearview is an incorporated township in Simcoe County in Central Ontario, Canada, west of Barrie and south of Collingwood and Wasaga Beach in Simcoe County.

See Construction and Clearview, Ontario

Clerk of works

The Clerk of Works (or Clerk of the Works), often abbreviated CoW, is employed by an architect or a client on a construction site.

See Construction and Clerk of works

Clevis fastener

A clevis fastener is a three-piece fastener system consisting of a clevis, clevis pin, and tang.

See Construction and Clevis fastener

ClimateHouse

The ClimateHouse energy efficiency certification promotes the adoption of building construction methods that meet energy saving and environment protection criteria.

See Construction and ClimateHouse

Clinker brick

Clinker bricks are partially-vitrified bricks used in the construction of buildings.

See Construction and Clinker brick

Clugston Group

The Clugston Group is a privately owned business involved in construction and civil engineering, property development and distribution.

See Construction and Clugston Group

Co-Cathedral of Saint Theresa of the Child Jesus (Honolulu, Hawaii)

The Co-Cathedral of Saint Theresa of the Child Jesus is a cathedral of the Roman Catholic Church and its Diocese of Honolulu.

See Construction and Co-Cathedral of Saint Theresa of the Child Jesus (Honolulu, Hawaii)

Cobalt blue

Cobalt blue is a blue pigment made by sintering cobalt(II) oxide with alumina at 1200 °C.

See Construction and Cobalt blue

Colombia

Colombia, officially the Republic of Colombia, is a sovereign state largely situated in the northwest of South America, with territories in Central America.

See Construction and Colombia

Combat engineer

A combat engineer (also called field engineer, pioneer or sapper in many armies) is a soldier who performs a variety of construction and demolition tasks under combat conditions.

See Construction and Combat engineer

Committee of 100 (Delaware)

The Committee of 100 is a Wilmington, Delaware based lobbying group that deals with issues relating to economic development, local finance, and land use policy in the state of Delaware, particularly the northern part of New Castle County.

See Construction and Committee of 100 (Delaware)

Community

A community is a small or large social unit (a group of living things) that has something in common, such as norms, religion, values, or identity.

See Construction and Community

Commuting

Commuting is periodically recurring travel between one's place of residence and place of work, or study, and in doing so exceed the boundary of their residential community.

See Construction and Commuting

Compactor

A compactor is a machine or mechanism used to reduce the size of material such as waste material or bio mass through compaction.

See Construction and Compactor

Comparison of Canadian and American economies

The economies of Canada and the United States are similar because they are both developed countries and are each other's largest trading partners.

See Construction and Comparison of Canadian and American economies

Composite material

A composite material (also called a composition material or shortened to composite, which is the common name) is a material made from two or more constituent materials with significantly different physical or chemical properties that, when combined, produce a material with characteristics different from the individual components.

See Construction and Composite material

Computer-aided architectural design

Computer-aided architectural design (CAAD) software programs are the repository of accurate and comprehensive records of buildings and are used by architects and architectural companies.

See Construction and Computer-aided architectural design

Concrete

Concrete, usually Portland cement concrete, is a composite material composed of fine and coarse aggregate bonded together with a fluid cement (cement paste) that hardens over time—most frequently a lime-based cement binder, such as Portland cement, but sometimes with other hydraulic cements, such as a calcium aluminate cement.

See Construction and Concrete

Concrete masonry unit

A concrete masonry unit (CMU) is a standard size rectangular block used in building construction.

See Construction and Concrete masonry unit

Concrete recycling

When structures made of concrete are demolished or renovated, concrete recycling is an increasingly common method of utilizing the rubble.

See Construction and Concrete recycling

Condensation

Condensation is the change of the physical state of matter from gas phase into liquid phase, and is the reverse of vapourisation.

See Construction and Condensation

Conestoga-Rovers & Associates

Conestoga-Rovers & Associates (CRA) is a group of companies that provides engineering, environmental consulting, construction, and information technology (IT) services.

See Construction and Conestoga-Rovers & Associates

Connecticut Route 11

Route 11 is a state highway in east-central Connecticut, serving traffic between the Hartford and New London areas (which also use Route 2).

See Construction and Connecticut Route 11

Construct

Construct, Constructs or constructs may refer to.

See Construction and Construct

Construction (disambiguation)

Construction is the process of producing buildings and other infrastructure.

See Construction and Construction (disambiguation)

Construction delay

Construction delays in residential and light construction are often the result of miscommunication between contractors, subcontractors, and property owners.

See Construction and Construction delay

Construction engineering

Construction Engineering is a professional discipline that deals with the designing, planning, construction, and management of infrastructures such as roads, tunnels, bridges, airports, railroads, facilities, buildings, dams, utilities and other projects.

See Construction and Construction engineering

Construction foreman

A construction foreman is the worker or tradesman who is in charge of a construction crew.

See Construction and Construction foreman

Construction industry of Japan

In Japan, the mainstay of infrastructure development is the construction industry, which employed 9.4 percent of the labor force in 1990 and contributed some 8.5 percent of GDP.

See Construction and Construction industry of Japan

Construction management

Construction Project Management (CM) is a professional service that uses specialized, project management techniques to oversee the planning, design, and construction of a project, from its beginning to its end.

See Construction and Construction management

Construction set

A construction set is a set of standardized pieces that allow for the construction of a variety of different models.

See Construction and Construction set

Construction site safety

Construction work is a hazardous land-based job.

See Construction and Construction site safety

Construction worker

A construction worker is a tradesperson, laborer, or professional employed in the physical construction of the built environment and its infrastructure.

See Construction and Construction worker

Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act

The Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (CWHSSA) is a United States federal law that covers hours and safety standards in construction contracts.

See Construction and Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act

Cordwood construction

Cordwood construction (also called "cordwood masonry", "stackwall construction", "stovewood construction" or "stackwood construction") is a term used for a natural building method in which "cordwood" or short pieces of debarked tree are laid up crosswise with masonry or cob mixtures to build a wall.

See Construction and Cordwood construction

Corn construction

Corn construction refers to the use of corn (maize) in construction.

See Construction and Corn construction

Cornerstone

The cornerstone (or foundation stone or setting stone) is the first stone set in the construction of a masonry foundation, important since all other stones will be set in reference to this stone, thus determining the position of the entire structure.

See Construction and Cornerstone

Cost estimation models

Cost estimation models are mathematical algorithms or parametric equations used to estimate the costs of a product or project.

See Construction and Cost estimation models

Costa Maya

Costa Maya is a small tourist region in the municipality of Othón P. Blanco in the state of Quintana Roo, Mexico, the only state bounded by the Caribbean Sea to its east.

See Construction and Costa Maya

Costain Group

Costain Group plc is a British technology based construction and engineering company headquartered in Maidenhead.

See Construction and Costain Group

Cowboy hat

The cowboy hat is a high-crowned, wide-brimmed hat best known as the defining piece of attire for the North American cowboy.

See Construction and Cowboy hat

Craiova

No description.

See Construction and Craiova

Crane (machine)

A crane is a type of machine, generally equipped with a hoist rope, wire ropes or chains, and sheaves, that can be used both to lift and lower materials and to move them horizontally.

See Construction and Crane (machine)

Crash bar

Crash bar (also known as a panic exit device, panic bar, or push bar)American National Standards Institute, ANSI/BHMA A156.3-2001, American National Standard for Exit Devices is a type of door opening mechanism which allows users to open a door by pushing a bar.

See Construction and Crash bar

Culebra, Puerto Rico

Isla Culebra (Snake Island) is an island-municipality of Puerto Rico and geographically part of the Virgin Islands.

See Construction and Culebra, Puerto Rico

Culture of ancient Rome

The culture of ancient Rome existed throughout almost 1200-year history of the civilization of Ancient Rome.

See Construction and Culture of ancient Rome

Culture of Nicaragua

Music and religious icons in Iberian culture and Amerindian sounds and flavors.

See Construction and Culture of Nicaragua

Cummins B Series engine

The Cummins B Series is a family of American straight-four and straight-6 diesel piston engines that are manufactured by Cummins.

See Construction and Cummins B Series engine

Daelim

Daelim Industrial was established in 1939, and its E&C (Engineering & Construction) and Petrochemical Groups are the main lead of the Daelim Business Conglomerate (Chaebol).

See Construction and Daelim

Damage Control (comics)

Damage Control is a fictional construction company appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.

See Construction and Damage Control (comics)

Danny Trejo

Danny Trejo (born May 16, 1944) is a Mexican-American actor who has appeared in numerous Hollywood films, often as villains and antiheroes.

See Construction and Danny Trejo

Dave Gahan

Dave Gahan (born David Callcott; 9 May 1962) is an English singer-songwriter, best known as the baritone lead singer of the electronic band Depeche Mode since their debut in 1980.

See Construction and Dave Gahan

David Bellhouse

David Bellhouse (1764–1840) was an English builder who did much to shape Victorian-era Manchester, both physically and socially.

See Construction and David Bellhouse

Day labor

Day labor (or day labour in Commonwealth spelling) is work done where the worker is hired and paid one day at a time, with no promise that more work will be available in the future.

See Construction and Day labor

Deconstruction (building)

In the context of physical construction, deconstruction is the selective dismantlement of building components, specifically for re-use, repurposing, recycling, and waste management.

See Construction and Deconstruction (building)

Deficiency

A deficiency is generally a lack of something.

See Construction and Deficiency

Den Dover

Densmore Ronald "Den" Dover (born 4 April 1938 in Stockton Heath, Cheshire) is a British politician.

See Construction and Den Dover

Denmark

Denmark (Danmark), officially the Kingdom of Denmark,Kongeriget Danmark,.

See Construction and Denmark

Department of Building Construction Management Technology, Purdue University

The Department of Building Construction Management Technology is a department at Purdue University which specializes in the study of building construction management (BCM).

See Construction and Department of Building Construction Management Technology, Purdue University

Design

Design is the creation of a plan or convention for the construction of an object, system or measurable human interaction (as in architectural blueprints, engineering drawings, business processes, circuit diagrams, and sewing patterns).

See Construction and Design

Design engineer

A design engineer is a person who may be involved in any of various engineering disciplines including civil, mechanical, electrical, chemical, textiles, aerospace, nuclear, manufacturing, systems, and structural /building/architectural.

See Construction and Design engineer

Design–bid–build

Design–bid–build (or design/bid/build, and abbreviated D–B–B or D/B/B accordingly), also known as Design–tender (or "design/tender") traditional method or hardbid, is a project delivery method in which the agency or owner contracts with separate entities for the design and construction of a project.

See Construction and Design–bid–build

DHL Supply Chain

DHL Supply Chain is a division of Deutsche Post DHL and is affiliated with DHL Express.

See Construction and DHL Supply Chain

Dianella, Western Australia

Dianella is a suburb of Perth, Western Australia.

See Construction and Dianella, Western Australia

Dirty Sanchez (TV series)

Dirty Sanchez is a British stunt and prank TV series featuring a group of three Welshmen and one Englishman harming themselves, and each other, through dangerous stunts.

See Construction and Dirty Sanchez (TV series)

Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000

The Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000, Public Law 106-390, also called DMA2K, is U.S. federal legislation passed in 2000 that amended provisions of the United States Code related to disaster relief.

See Construction and Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000

Don Cherry

Donald Stewart Cherry (born February 5, 1934) is a Canadian ice hockey commentator.

See Construction and Don Cherry

Doosan Heavy Industries & Construction

Doosan Heavy Industries & Construction Co., Ltd., a subsidiary of Doosan Group, is a heavy industrial company headquartered in Changwon, South Korea.

See Construction and Doosan Heavy Industries & Construction

Double indemnity

Double indemnity is a clause or provision in a life insurance or accident policy whereby the company agrees to pay the stated multiple (i.e., double, triple, etc.) of the face amount in the contract in cases of death caused by accidental means.

See Construction and Double indemnity

Doucet-Boudreau v Nova Scotia (Minister of Education)

Doucet-Boudreau v Nova Scotia (Minister of Education) 3 S.C.R. 3, 2003 SCC 62, was a decision of the Supreme Court of Canada which followed the Nova Scotia Supreme Court's finding that a delay in building French language schools in Nova Scotia violated the claimants' minority language educational rights under section 23 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms.

See Construction and Doucet-Boudreau v Nova Scotia (Minister of Education)

Dow Chemical Company

The Dow Chemical Company, commonly referred to as Dow, is an American multinational chemical corporation headquartered in Midland, Michigan, United States, and the predecessor of the merged company DowDuPont.

See Construction and Dow Chemical Company

Downcycling

Downcycling, or cascading, is the recycling of waste where the recycled material is of lower quality and functionality than the original material.

See Construction and Downcycling

Drainage

Drainage is the natural or artificial removal of a surface's water and sub-surface water from an area.

See Construction and Drainage

Drax power station

Drax power station is a large coal-fired power station in North Yorkshire, England, capable of co-firing biomass and petcoke, and its name comes from the nearby village of Drax.

See Construction and Drax power station

Dropped ceiling

A dropped ceiling is a secondary ceiling, hung below the main (structural) ceiling.

See Construction and Dropped ceiling

Dry-bulb temperature

The dry-bulb temperature (DBT) is the temperature of air measured by a thermometer freely exposed to the air, but shielded from radiation and moisture.

See Construction and Dry-bulb temperature

Drywall

Drywall (also known as plasterboard, wallboard, gypsum panel, sheet rock, or gypsum board) is a panel made of calcium sulfate dihydrate (gypsum), with or without additives, typically extruded between thick sheets of facer and backer paper, utilized in the construction of interior walls and ceilings.

See Construction and Drywall

Duala people

The Duala (or Douala) are an ethnic group of Cameroon.

See Construction and Duala people

Dublin Institute of Technology

Dublin Institute of Technology (commonly referred to as DIT) (Institiúid Teicneolaíochta Bhaile Atha Cliath) is one of the largest higher education institutions in Ireland.

See Construction and Dublin Institute of Technology

Duchy of Brunswick

The Duchy of Brunswick (Herzogtum Braunschweig) was a historical German state.

See Construction and Duchy of Brunswick

Dump truck

A dump truck (known in the UK as a dumper/tipper truck) is a truck used for transporting loose material (such as sand, gravel, or demolition waste) for construction.

See Construction and Dump truck

Dunfermline

Dunfermline (Dunfaurlin, Dùn Phàrlain) is a town and former Royal Burgh, and parish, in Fife, Scotland, on high ground from the northern shore of the Firth of Forth.

See Construction and Dunfermline

Dust abatement

Dust abatement refers to the process of inhibiting the creation of excess soil dust, a pollutant that contributes to excess levels of particulate matter.

See Construction and Dust abatement

Dwang

In construction, a noggingFleming, Eric.

See Construction and Dwang

Dynamite

Dynamite is an explosive made of nitroglycerin, sorbents (such as powdered shells or clay) and stabilizers.

See Construction and Dynamite

EarthCraft House

EarthCraft House is one of five programs within the EarthCraft suite of regional green building standards.

See Construction and EarthCraft House

Earthquake engineering

Earthquake engineering is an interdisciplinary branch of engineering that designs and analyzes structures, such as buildings and bridges, with earthquakes in mind.

See Construction and Earthquake engineering

East Godavari district

East Godavari district or Toorpu Godavari jilla is a district in Coastal Andhra region of Andhra Pradesh, India.

See Construction and East Godavari district

Eastern Region (Ghana)

The Eastern Region is located in south Ghana and is one of ten administrative regions.

See Construction and Eastern Region (Ghana)

Economy of Aruba

The economy of Aruba is an open system, with tourism currently providing the largest percentage of the country's income.

See Construction and Economy of Aruba

Economy of Burundi

Burundi is a landlocked, resource-poor country with an underdeveloped manufacturing sector. The mainstay of the Burundian economy is agriculture, accounting for 32.9% of GDP in 2008. Agriculture supports more than 70% of the labour force, the majority of whom are subsistence farmers. Although Burundi is potentially self-sufficient in food production, the ongoing civil war, overpopulation, and soil erosion have contributed to the contraction of the subsistence economy by 25% in recent years. Large numbers of internally displaced persons have been unable to produce their own food and are largely dependent on international humanitarian assistance. Burundi is a net food importer, with food accounting for 17% of imports in 1997.

See Construction and Economy of Burundi

Economy of Chile

Chile is ranked as a high-income economy by the World Bank, and is considered as South America's most stable and prosperous nation, leading Latin American nations in competitiveness, income per capita, globalization, economic freedom, and low perception of corruption.

See Construction and Economy of Chile

Economy of Denmark

With 5,778,570 inhabitants (1 October 2017), Denmark has the 39th largest national economy in the world measured by nominal gross domestic product (GDP) and 60th largest in the world measured by purchasing power parity (PPP).

See Construction and Economy of Denmark

Economy of Djibouti

The economy of Djibouti is derived in large part from its strategic location on the Red Sea.

See Construction and Economy of Djibouti

Economy of Egypt

The economy of Egypt was a highly centralized planned economy focused on import substitution under President Gamal Abdel Nasser.

See Construction and Economy of Egypt

Economy of Ethiopia

The economy of Ethiopia is a mixed and transition economy with a large public sector. The Ethiopian government is in the process of privatizing many of the state-owned businesses and moving toward a market economy. However, the banking, telecommunication and transportation sectors of the economy are dominated by government-owned companies. Ethiopia has one of the fastest-growing economies in the world and is Africa’s second most populous country. Many properties owned by the government during the previous regime have now been privatized and are in the process of privatization. However, certain sectors such as telecommunications, financial and insurance services, air and land transportation services, and retail, are considered as strategic sectors and are expected to remain under state control for the foreseeable future. Almost 50% of Ethiopia's population is under the age of 18, and even though education enrollment at primary and tertiary level has increased significantly, job creation has not caught up with the increased output from educational institutes. The country must create hundreds of thousands of jobs every year just to keep up with population growth. The Ethiopian constitution defines the right to own land as belonging only to "the state and the people", but citizens may only lease land (up to 99 years), and are unable to mortgage, sell, or own it. Various groups and political parties have sought for full privatization of land, while other opposition parties are against privatization and favor communal ownership. The current government has embarked on a program of economic reform, including privatization of state enterprises and rationalization of government regulation. While the process is still ongoing, the reforms have begun to attract much-needed foreign investment.

See Construction and Economy of Ethiopia

Economy of Georgia (country)

The economy of Georgia is an emerging free market.

See Construction and Economy of Georgia (country)

Economy of Guadeloupe

The economy of Guadeloupe depends on agriculture, tourism, light industry, and services.

See Construction and Economy of Guadeloupe

Economy of Iran

The economy of Iran is a mixed and transition economy with a large public sector.

See Construction and Economy of Iran

Economy of Isan

The economy of Isan, Thailand's largest region, composed of 20 provinces in the northeast, is dominated by agriculture, although agricultural output is low and decreasing in importance while the trade and service sectors are growing.

See Construction and Economy of Isan

Economy of Jamaica

Jamaica has natural resources, primarily bauxite, and an ideal climate conducive to agriculture and also tourism.

See Construction and Economy of Jamaica

Economy of Japan

The economy of Japan is a highly developed and market-oriented economy.

See Construction and Economy of Japan

Economy of Jersey

The economy of Jersey is largely driven by international financial services and legal services, which accounted for 40.5% of total GVA in 2010.

See Construction and Economy of Jersey

Economy of Laos

The economy of the Lao People's Democratic Republic is rapidly growing, as a result of decentralized government control and encouragement of private enterprise since 1986.

See Construction and Economy of Laos

Economy of Malaysia

The economy of Malaysia is the 4th largest in Southeast Asia, and is the 38th largest economy in the world.

See Construction and Economy of Malaysia

Economy of Mongolia

Economic activity in Mongolia has traditionally been based on agriculture and livestock.

See Construction and Economy of Mongolia

Economy of Morocco

The economy of Morocco is considered a relatively liberal economy governed by the law of supply and demand.

See Construction and Economy of Morocco

Economy of Nicaragua

Nicaragua's economy is focused primarily on the agricultural sector.

See Construction and Economy of Nicaragua

Economy of Nigeria

Nigeria is a middle-income, mixed economy and emerging market, with expanding manufacturing, financial, service, communications, technology and entertainment sectors.

See Construction and Economy of Nigeria

Economy of Panama

The economy of Panama is a fully dollarized economy with a history of low inflation.

See Construction and Economy of Panama

Economy of Saudi Arabia

The economy of Saudi Arabia is dependent on oil and has strong government control over major economic activities.

See Construction and Economy of Saudi Arabia

Economy of São Tomé and Príncipe

The economy of São Tomé and Príncipe, while traditionally dependent on cocoa, is experiencing considerable changes due to investment in the development of its oil industry in the oil-rich waters of the Gulf of Guinea.

See Construction and Economy of São Tomé and Príncipe

Economy of Somalia

Somalia is classified by the United Nations as a least developed country.

See Construction and Economy of Somalia

Economy of Sri Lanka

With an economy worth $93.45 billion $298.310 billion PPP and a per capita GDP of about $4,310, $13,480 PPP as of 2018 Sri Lanka has mostly had strong growth rates in recent years.

See Construction and Economy of Sri Lanka

Economy of the Isle of Man

The Isle of Man, one of the Crown dependencies, is a low-tax economy and offshore financial centre.

See Construction and Economy of the Isle of Man

Economy of the Netherlands

According to the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, the Netherlands was the 18th largest economy of the world in 2012, while the country has only about 17 million inhabitants. (see: List of countries by GDP (nominal)). GDP per capita is roughly $48,860 which makes it one of richest nations in the world (see: List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita). Between 1996 and 2000 annual economic growth (GDP) averaged over 4%, well above the European average. Growth slowed considerably in 2001–05 as part of the global economic slowdown. 2006 and 2007 however showed economic growth of 3.4% and 3.9%. The Dutch economy was hit considerably by the ongoing global financial crisis and the ensuing European debt crisis. The Netherlands has discovered huge natural gas resources since 1959. The sale of natural gas generated enormous revenues for the Netherlands for decades, adding hundreds of billions of euros to the government's budget. However, the unforeseen consequences of the country's huge energy wealth impacted the competitiveness of other sectors of the economy, leading to the theory of Dutch disease. The Netherlands have a prosperous and open economy, which depends heavily on foreign trade. The economy is noted for stable industrial relations, fairly low unemployment and inflation, a very big sizable current account surplus (compared to the size of the country even more than Germany) and an important role as a European transportation hub, with Rotterdam as by far the biggest port in Europe and Amsterdam with one of the biggest airports in Europe. Industrial activity is predominantly in food processing, chemicals, petroleum refining, hightech, financial services, creative sector and electrical machinery. A highly mechanised agricultural sector employs no more than 2% of the labour force but provides large surpluses for the food-processing industry and for exports. The Netherlands, along with 11 of its EU partners, began circulating the euro currency on 1 January 2002. The stern financial policy has been abandoned in 2009 because of the current credit crises. The relatively large banking sector was partly nationalised and bailed out through government interventions. The unemployment rate dropped to 5.0% in the summer of 2011, but increased with a sharp rate since then to 7.3% in May 2013, 6.8% in 2015 but dropped again to 3.9% in March 2018. The state budget deficit is about 2.2% in 2015 well below the norm of 3.0% in the EU. In 2016 the state budget showed a surplus of 0.4% and this is expected to grow to a surplus of over 1.0% in 2017. Historically, the Dutch introduced and invented the stock market by the merchandise trading through Dutch East India Company. The Netherlands is a founding member of the European Union, the OECD and the World Trade Organization.

See Construction and Economy of the Netherlands

Economy of the United Arab Emirates

The economy of the United Arab Emirates is the second largest in the Arab world (after Saudi Arabia), with a gross domestic product (GDP) of $403.2 billion (AED 1.46 trillion) in 2014.

See Construction and Economy of the United Arab Emirates

Economy of Turkey

The economy of Turkey is defined as an emerging market economy by the IMF.

See Construction and Economy of Turkey

Economy of Venezuela

The economy of Venezuela is largely based on the petroleum sector and manufacturing.

See Construction and Economy of Venezuela

Economy of Vietnam

The socialist-oriented market economy of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam is the 47th-largest economy in the world measured by nominal gross domestic product (GDP) and 35th-largest in the world measured by purchasing power parity (PPP).

See Construction and Economy of Vietnam

Edge city

"Edge city" is an American term for a concentration of business, shopping, and entertainment outside a traditional downtown (or central business district) in what had previously been a residential or rural area.

See Construction and Edge city

Edo Five Routes

The, sometimes translated as "Five Highways", were the five centrally administered routes, or kaidō, that connected the capital of Japan at Edo (now Tokyo) with the outer provinces during the Edo period (1603–1868).

See Construction and Edo Five Routes

Education in Portugal

Education in Portugal is free and compulsory until the age of 18, when students complete the 12th grade.

See Construction and Education in Portugal

Edward L. Thrasher

Edward Lee Thrasher (1892–1971), who went by Edward L. Thrasher, was a builder, contractor and decorator who served on the Los Angeles, California, City Council between 1931 and 1942.

See Construction and Edward L. Thrasher

Effects of global warming

The effects of global warming are the environmental and social changes caused (directly or indirectly) by human emissions of greenhouse gases.

See Construction and Effects of global warming

Einhard

Einhard (also Eginhard or Einhart; Einhardus; 775 – March 14, 840 AD) was a Frankish scholar and courtier.

See Construction and Einhard

Electrical cable

An electrical cable is an assembly of one or more wires running side by side or bundled, which is used to carry electric current.

See Construction and Electrical cable

Electrical equipment in hazardous areas

In electrical engineering, hazardous locations (sometimes abbreviated to HazLoc, pronounced Haz·Lōk) are defined as places where fire or explosion hazards may exist due to flammable gases, flammable liquid–produced vapors, combustible liquid–produced vapors, combustible dusts, or ignitable fibers/flyings present in the air in quantities sufficient to produce explosive or ignitable mixtures.

See Construction and Electrical equipment in hazardous areas

Elkem

Elkem is a company that produces solar grade silicon, silicon, alloys for the foundry industry, carbon and microsilica.

See Construction and Elkem

Energy crisis

An energy crisis is any significant bottleneck in the supply of energy resources to an economy.

See Construction and Energy crisis

Energy industry

The energy industry is the totality of all of the industries involved in the production and sale of energy, including fuel extraction, manufacturing, refining and distribution.

See Construction and Energy industry

Engel Stadium

Engel Stadium is a stadium in Chattanooga, Tennessee.

See Construction and Engel Stadium

Engineer's spirit level

An engineer's spirit level (or machinist's level) is generally used to level machines, although they may also be used to level large workpieces on machines such as planers.

See Construction and Engineer's spirit level

Engineering

Engineering is the creative application of science, mathematical methods, and empirical evidence to the innovation, design, construction, operation and maintenance of structures, machines, materials, devices, systems, processes, and organizations.

See Construction and Engineering

Environmental consulting

Environmental consulting is often a form of compliance consulting, in which the consultant ensures that the client maintains an appropriate measure of compliance with environmental regulations.

See Construction and Environmental consulting

Environmental issues in Kyrgyzstan

The major environmental issues in Kyrgyzstan are summarized in the 2007 Concept of Ecological Security of Kyrgyz Republic and discussed in other environmental and environmental policy documents such as National Environmental Action Plan (1995), Country Development Strategy for 2009–2011, Strategy on Biological Diversity (2002), 2nd Environmental Performance Review of Kyrgyzstan (2008), etc.

See Construction and Environmental issues in Kyrgyzstan

Erosion control

Erosion control is the practice of preventing or controlling wind or water erosion in agriculture, land development, coastal areas, river banks and construction.

See Construction and Erosion control

Eucalyptus globulus

Eucalyptus globulus, the Tasmanian bluegum, southern blue-gum or blue gum, is an evergreen tree, one of the most widely cultivated trees native to Australia.

See Construction and Eucalyptus globulus

Excavator

Excavators (hydraulic) are heavy construction equipment consisting of a boom, dipper (or stick), bucket and cab on a rotating platform known as the "house".

See Construction and Excavator

Exhaust system

An exhaust system is usually piping used to guide reaction exhaust gases away from a controlled combustion inside an engine or stove.

See Construction and Exhaust system

Explosive material

An explosive material, also called an explosive, is a reactive substance that contains a great amount of potential energy that can produce an explosion if released suddenly, usually accompanied by the production of light, heat, sound, and pressure.

See Construction and Explosive material

Expressways of Japan

The expressways (高速道路 kōsoku-dōro, lit. high-speed road) of Japan make up a large network of controlled-access toll expressways.

See Construction and Expressways of Japan

Falsework

Falsework consists of temporary structures used in construction to support spanning or arched structures in order to hold the component in place until its construction is sufficiently advanced to support itself.

See Construction and Falsework

Fangshan District

Fangshan District is situated in the southwest of Beijing, away from downtown Beijing.

See Construction and Fangshan District

FIDIC

The International Federation of Consulting Engineers (commonly known as FIDIC, acronym for its French name Fédération Internationale Des Ingénieurs-Conseils) is an international standards organization for the consulting engineering & construction best known for the FIDIC family of contract templates.

See Construction and FIDIC

Fill trestle

A fill trestle or filling trestle is a temporary construction trestle that is built to provide a scaffolding for the placement of fill or an earthen dam.

See Construction and Fill trestle

Finnish Americans

Finnish Americans (Finnish: Amerikansuomalaiset) comprise Americans with ancestral roots from Finland or Finnish people who emigrated to and reside in the United States.

See Construction and Finnish Americans

Fire door

A fire door is a door with a fire-resistance rating (sometimes referred to as a fire protection rating for closures) used as part of a passive fire protection system to reduce the spread of fire and smoke between separate compartments of a structure and to enable safe egress from a building or structure or ship.

See Construction and Fire door

Fire protection

Fire protection is the study and practice of mitigating the unwanted effects of potentially destructive fires.

See Construction and Fire protection

Fire safety

Fire safety is the set of practices intended to reduce the destruction caused by fire.

See Construction and Fire safety

Fireproofing

Fireproofing is rendering something (structures, materials, etc.) resistant to fire, or incombustible; or material for use in making anything fire-proof.

See Construction and Fireproofing

FK Rad

Fudbalski klub Rad, commonly known as Rad, is a professional Serbian football club based in Belgrade.

See Construction and FK Rad

Flexicore

Hollow-core is a type of precast, prestressed concrete floor slab.

See Construction and Flexicore

Floating raft system

Floating raft is type of land-based foundation that protects against settlement and liquefaction of soft soil from seismic activity.

See Construction and Floating raft system

Floodwood, Minnesota

Floodwood is a city in Saint Louis County, Minnesota, United States.

See Construction and Floodwood, Minnesota

Florida State College at Jacksonville

Florida State College at Jacksonville (FSCJ) is a state college in Jacksonville, Florida.

See Construction and Florida State College at Jacksonville

Foo Wan Kien

Datuk Dr.

See Construction and Foo Wan Kien

A footbridge (also called a pedestrian bridge, pedestrian overpass, or pedestrian overcrossing) is a bridge designed for pedestrians and in some cases cyclists, animal traffic, and horse riders, instead of vehicular traffic.

See Construction and Footbridge

Forbes Global 2000

The Forbes Global 2000 is an annual ranking of the top 2,000 public companies in the world by Forbes magazine.

See Construction and Forbes Global 2000

Forbes list of Indian billionaires

The Forbes list of Indian billionaires is based on an annual assessment of wealth and assets compiled and published by Forbes magazine in March 2016.

See Construction and Forbes list of Indian billionaires

Foreign hostages in Iraq

Members of the Iraqi insurgency began taking foreign hostages in Iraq beginning in April 2004.

See Construction and Foreign hostages in Iraq

Forensic accounting

Forensic accounting, forensic accountancy or financial forensics is the specialty practice area of accounting that describes engagements that result from actual or anticipated disputes or litigation.

See Construction and Forensic accounting

Fortification

A fortification is a military construction or building designed for the defense of territories in warfare; and is also used to solidify rule in a region during peacetime.

See Construction and Fortification

Framing (construction)

Framing, in construction, is the fitting together of pieces to give a structure support and shape.

See Construction and Framing (construction)

Fred. Olsen & Co.

Fred.

See Construction and Fred. Olsen & Co.

Fresno scraper

Fresno Scraper (Patent Application). The front drawbar is pulled by two horses, and pulls the scraper proper behind it, while the operator walks behind controlling the depth of scrape with the handle Fresno scrapers in use building the Miocene Ditch near Nome, Alaska The Fresno Scraper is a machine pulled by horses used for constructing canals and ditches in sandy soil.

See Construction and Fresno scraper

Fritz Fiedler

Fritz Fiedler (born Potsdam 9 January 1899: died Schliersee 8 July 1972), was an automotive engineer.

See Construction and Fritz Fiedler

Furring

In construction, furring (furring strips) are thin strips of wood or other material to level or raise surfaces of another material to prevent dampness, to make space for insulation, or to level and resurface ceilings or walls.

See Construction and Furring

Gabi Burgstaller

Gabi Burgstaller (born 23 May 1963) is an Austrian politician, and the former governess (Landeshauptfrau) of the State of Salzburg.

See Construction and Gabi Burgstaller

Galen Center

The Galen Center is a multipurpose indoor arena and athletic facility owned and operated by the University of Southern California.

See Construction and Galen Center

Gammon Construction

Gammon Construction Limited is a leading construction and engineering contractor headquartered in Victoria, Hong Kong.

See Construction and Gammon Construction

GE Commercial Finance

GE Commercial Finance was a unit of GE Capital, (one of five major operating divisions of General Electric).

See Construction and GE Commercial Finance

Gender role

A gender role, also known as a sex role, is a social role encompassing a range of behaviors and attitudes that are generally considered acceptable, appropriate, or desirable for people based on their actual or perceived sex or sexuality.

See Construction and Gender role

Gene Snyder

Marion Eugene Snyder (January 26, 1928 &ndash; February 16, 2007) was an American politician elected as a Republican to the United States House of Representatives from two different districts in his native Kentucky.

See Construction and Gene Snyder

General contractor

A general contractor (main contractor, prime contractor) is responsible for the day-to-day oversight of a construction site, management of vendors and trades, and the communication of information to all involved parties throughout the course of a building project.

See Construction and General contractor

Genovese crime family

The Genovese crime family (pronounced) is one of the "Five Families" that dominate organized crime activities in New York City and New Jersey as part of the Mafia (or Cosa Nostra). Often nicknamed the "Ivy League" and "Rolls Royce" of organized crime, the Genovese crime family are rivaled in size only by the Gambino crime family, and are unmatched in terms of power. They have generally maintained a varying degree of influence over many of the smaller mob families outside New York, including ties with the Philadelphia, Patriarca, and Buffalo crime families. The current "family" was founded by Charles "Lucky" Luciano, and was known as the "Luciano crime family" from 1931 to 1957, when it was renamed after boss Vito Genovese. Originally in control of the waterfront on the West Side of Manhattan and the Fulton Fish Market, the family was run for years by "the Oddfather", Vincent "the Chin" Gigante, who feigned insanity by shuffling unshaven through New York's Greenwich Village wearing a tattered bath robe and muttering to himself incoherently to avoid prosecution. The Genovese family is the oldest and the largest of the "Five Families". Finding new ways to make money in the 21st century, the family took advantage of lax due diligence by banks during the housing bubble with a wave of mortgage frauds. Prosecutors say loan shark victims obtained home equity loans to pay off debts to their mob bankers. The family found ways to use new technology to improve on illegal gambling, with customers placing bets through offshore sites via the Internet. Although the leadership of the Genovese family seemed to have been in limbo after the death of Gigante in 2005, they appear to be the most organized family and remain powerful. - the wiretap network - wmob.com Unique in today's Mafia, the family has benefited greatly from members following the code of Omertà. While many mobsters from across the country have testified against their crime families since the 1980s, the Genovese family has only had 8 members turn state's evidence in its history.

See Construction and Genovese crime family

Geodetic control network

A geodetic control network (also geodetic network, reference network, control point network, or control network) is a network, often of triangles, which are measured exactly by techniques of terrestrial surveying or by satellite geodesy.

See Construction and Geodetic control network

Geotechnical engineering

Geotechnical engineering is the branch of civil engineering concerned with the engineering behavior of earth materials.

See Construction and Geotechnical engineering

Geotextile

Geotextiles are permeable fabrics which, when used in association with soil, have the ability to separate, filter, reinforce, protect, or drain.

See Construction and Geotextile

German reunification

The German reunification (Deutsche Wiedervereinigung) was the process in 1990 in which the German Democratic Republic (GDR, colloquially East Germany; German: Deutsche Demokratische Republik/DDR) became part of the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG, colloquially West Germany; German: Bundesrepublik Deutschland/BRD) to form the reunited nation of Germany, and when Berlin reunited into a single city, as provided by its then Grundgesetz (constitution) Article 23.

See Construction and German reunification

Girder

A girder is a support beam used in construction.

See Construction and Girder

Gladstone, Oregon

Gladstone is a city located in Clackamas County, Oregon, United States.

See Construction and Gladstone, Oregon

Glan-Münchweiler

Glan-Münchweiler is an Ortsgemeinde – a municipality belonging to a Verbandsgemeinde, a kind of collective municipality – in the Kusel district in Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany.

See Construction and Glan-Münchweiler

Glazier

A glazier is a skilled tradesman responsible for cutting, installing, and removing glass (and materials used as substitutes for glass, such as some plastics).

See Construction and Glazier

Glenrothes

Glenrothes (Gleann Rathais) is a town situated in the heart of Fife, in east-central Scotland.

See Construction and Glenrothes

Glossary of firefighting

Firefighting jargon includes a diverse lexicon of both common and idiosyncratic terms.

See Construction and Glossary of firefighting

Goto-gumi

The was a Japanese yakuza organization founded by Tadamasa Goto.

See Construction and Goto-gumi

Government procurement in the United States

Government procurement in the United States is the process by which the Federal Government of the United States acquires goods, services (notably construction), and interests in real property.

See Construction and Government procurement in the United States

Grant Thornton LLP

Grant Thornton LLP is the American member firm of Grant Thornton International, the sixth largest accounting network in the world by combined fee income.

See Construction and Grant Thornton LLP

Grinding machine

A grinding machine, often shortened to grinder, is any of various power tools or machine tools used for grinding, which is a type of machining using an abrasive wheel as the cutting tool.

See Construction and Grinding machine

Groundbreaking

Groundbreaking, also known as cutting, sod-cutting, turning the first sod or a sod-turning ceremony, is a traditional ceremony in many cultures that celebrates the first day of construction for a building or other project.

See Construction and Groundbreaking

Grupo Garza Ponce

Grupo Garza Ponce is a Mexican construction company based in Monterrey, Nuevo León.

See Construction and Grupo Garza Ponce

Guana Batz

The Guana Batz are an English psychobilly band that was formed in 1982 in Feltham, West London. It was one of the first psychobilly bands and is considered influential to its scene. The band is most well known for its frequent appearances at the Klub Foot, an early psychobilly club.

See Construction and Guana Batz

Guelma Province

Guelma Province (ولاية قالمة) is a province (wilaya) in eastern Algeria.

See Construction and Guelma Province

Gumpert Apollo

The Gumpert Apollo is a sports car produced by German automotive manufacturer Gumpert Sportwagenmanufaktur GmbH in Altenburg.

See Construction and Gumpert Apollo

Gunnerside

Gunnerside is a village in the Richmondshire district of North Yorkshire, England.

See Construction and Gunnerside

Guntur district

Guntur district is an administrative district in the Coastal Andhra region of the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh.

See Construction and Guntur district

Haliburton County

Haliburton is a county of Ontario, Canada, known as a tourist and cottage area in Central Ontario for its scenery and for its resident artists.

See Construction and Haliburton County

Haltija

A haltija (haltia) is a spirit, gnome, or elf-like creature in Finnish mythology that guards, helps, or protects something or somebody.

See Construction and Haltija

Hard hat

A hard hat is a type of helmet predominantly used in workplace environments such as industrial or construction sites to protect the head from injury due to falling objects, impact with other objects, debris, rain, and electric shock.

See Construction and Hard hat

Hardboard

Hardboard, also called high-density fiberboard (HDF), is a type of fiberboard, which is an engineered wood product.

See Construction and Hardboard

Hardwood

Hardwood is wood from dicot trees.

See Construction and Hardwood

Hays plc

Hays plc is a leading British company providing recruitment and human resources services across 33 countries globally.

See Construction and Hays plc

Hazama Ando

, is one of the 10 biggest construction companies in Japan.

See Construction and Hazama Ando

Head gardener

The head gardener (also known as a curator) or as a Master Gardener is an individual who manages the staff of a large garden, landscape or park, such as a residential garden, botanical garden, theme park, public park, museum or roadside embankments and islands.

See Construction and Head gardener

Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974

The Health and Safety at Work etc.

See Construction and Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974

Health and Safety Executive

The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) is the body responsible for the encouragement, regulation and enforcement of workplace health, safety and welfare, and for research into occupational risks in Great Britain.

See Construction and Health and Safety Executive

Health and social welfare in Communist Czechoslovakia

In the 1980s, Czechoslovakia had a comprehensive and universal system of social security under which everyone was entitled to free medical care and medicine, in theory at least.

See Construction and Health and social welfare in Communist Czechoslovakia

Heat capacity

Heat capacity or thermal capacity is a measurable physical quantity equal to the ratio of the heat added to (or removed from) an object to the resulting temperature change.

See Construction and Heat capacity

Heavy equipment

Heavy equipment refers to heavy-duty vehicles, specially designed for executing construction tasks, most frequently ones involving earthwork operations.

See Construction and Heavy equipment

Heavy industry

Heavy industry is industry that involves one or more characteristics such as large and heavy products; large and heavy equipment and facilities (such as heavy equipment, large machine tools, and huge buildings); or complex or numerous processes.

See Construction and Heavy industry

Helmet

A helmet is a form of protective gear worn to protect the head from injuries.

See Construction and Helmet

HEPCO

Heavy Equipment Production Company (HEPCO) is an Iranian company producing road construction equipment in Iran and the Middle East.

See Construction and HEPCO

Hexagon AB

Hexagon AB is a global technology group headquartered in Sweden.

See Construction and Hexagon AB

Higher education in the United States

Higher education in the United States is an optional final stage of formal learning following secondary education.

See Construction and Higher education in the United States

Himba people

The Himba (singular: OmuHimba, plural: OvaHimba) are indigenous peoples with an estimated population of about 50,000 people living in northern Namibia, in the Kunene Region (formerly Kaokoland) and on the other side of the Kunene River in Angola.

See Construction and Himba people

History of BBC television idents

The history of BBC television idents begins in the early 1950s, when the BBC first displayed a logo between programmes to identify its service.

See Construction and History of BBC television idents

History of geometry

Geometry (from the γεωμετρία; geo- "earth", -metron "measurement") arose as the field of knowledge dealing with spatial relationships.

See Construction and History of geometry

History of Seattle

This is the main article of a series that covers the history of Seattle, Washington, a city in the Pacific Northwest region of the United States of America.

See Construction and History of Seattle

History of the MRT (Singapore)

The history of the Mass Rapid Transit system of Singapore commenced with its planning in the 1960s, which finally led to its opening in 1987 with the launch of the 6 km section of the North South Line from Yio Chu Kang to Toa Payoh.

See Construction and History of the MRT (Singapore)

HM Prison Aylesbury

HM Prison Aylesbury (full title Her Majesty's Young Offender Institution (HMYOI) Aylesbury) is a Young Offender Institution situated in Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, England.

See Construction and HM Prison Aylesbury

Hochtief

Hochtief Aktiengesellschaft is a German construction company based in Essen, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany.

See Construction and Hochtief

Hong Kong Airlines

Hong Kong Airlines Ltd is an airline based in Hong Kong, with its headquarters in the Tung Chung district and its main hub at Hong Kong International Airport.

See Construction and Hong Kong Airlines

Hotel design

Hotel design involves the planning, drafting, design and development of hotels.

See Construction and Hotel design

Houchens Industries

Houchens Industries, is an American employee-owned company, in business since 1918 when it began as a small grocery operated by founder Ervin Houchens in rural Barren County, Kentucky.

See Construction and Houchens Industries

House

A house is a building that functions as a home.

See Construction and House

Housing in Pakistan

This article deals with housing in Pakistan and, more specifically, the trend of low-cost housing.

See Construction and Housing in Pakistan

Housing starts

Housing starts is an economic indicator that reflects the number of privately owned new houses (technically housing units) on which construction has been started in a given period.

See Construction and Housing starts

Hovnanian Enterprises

Hovnanian Enterprises, Inc. is a United States real estate company which is involved in every aspect of marketing homes, including design, construction and sales.

See Construction and Hovnanian Enterprises

Hurricane preparedness

Cyclone mitigation encompasses the actions and planning taken before a tropical cyclone strikes to mitigate damage and injury from the storm.

See Construction and Hurricane preparedness

HVAC

Heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) is the technology of indoor and vehicular environmental comfort.

See Construction and HVAC

Hy-Vee

Hy-Vee is an employee-owned chain of more than 245 supermarkets located throughout the Midwestern United States in Iowa, Illinois, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, South Dakota, and Wisconsin.

See Construction and Hy-Vee

Hyundai

Hyundai Group is a multinational (conglomerate) headquartered in Seoul, South Korea.

See Construction and Hyundai

I-beam

An -beam, also known as H-beam (for universal column, UC), w-beam (for "wide flange"), universal beam (UB), rolled steel joist (RSJ), or double-T (especially in Polish, Bulgarian, Spanish, Italian and German), is a beam with an or H-shaped cross-section.

See Construction and I-beam

Ialoveni District

Ialoveni is a district (raion) in the central part of Moldova, with the administrative center at Ialoveni.

See Construction and Ialoveni District

IBEX 35

The IBEX 35 (contraction of Índice Bursátil Español, literally Spanish Exchange Index) is the benchmark stock market index of the Bolsa de Madrid, Spain's principal stock exchange.

See Construction and IBEX 35

Ibi, Spain

Ibi (Valencian and Spanish) is a town located in the comarca of Alcoià, in the province of Alicante, Spain.

See Construction and Ibi, Spain

IEK

I.E.K. or IEK (Greek: Ινστιτούτο Επαγγελματικής Κατάρτισης) is a public or private Institute of Vocational Training in Greece.

See Construction and IEK

Impervious surface

Impervious surfaces are mainly artificial structures—such as pavements (roads, sidewalks, driveways and parking lots, as well as industrial areas such as airports, ports and logistics and distribution centres, all of which use considerable paved areas) that are covered by impenetrable materials such as asphalt, concrete, brick, stone—and rooftops.

See Construction and Impervious surface

Index of construction articles

This page is a list of construction topics.

See Construction and Index of construction articles

Index of real estate articles

This aims to be a complete list of the articles on real estate.

See Construction and Index of real estate articles

Industrial archaeology

Industrial archaeology (IA) is the systematic study of material evidence associated with the industrial past.

See Construction and Industrial archaeology

Industrial mineral

Industrial resources (minerals) are geological materials which are mined for their commercial value, which are not fuel (fuel minerals or mineral fuels) and are not sources of metals (metallic minerals) but are used in the industries based on their physical and/or chemical properties.

See Construction and Industrial mineral

Industry Foundation Classes

The Industry Foundation Classes (IFC) data model is intended to describe building and construction industry data.

See Construction and Industry Foundation Classes

Inflatable

An inflatable is an object that can be inflated with a gas, usually with air, but hydrogen, helium and nitrogen are also used.

See Construction and Inflatable

Ingalls Building

The Ingalls Building, built in 1903 in Cincinnati, Ohio, is the world's first reinforced concrete skyscraper.

See Construction and Ingalls Building

Inland waterways of the United States

The inland waterways of the United States include more than of navigable waters.

See Construction and Inland waterways of the United States

International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

The International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) is an international arbitration institution established in 1966 for legal dispute resolution and conciliation between international investors.

See Construction and International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

International Classification for Standards

International Classification for Standards (ICS) is an international classification system for technical standards.

See Construction and International Classification for Standards

International Federation of Building and Wood Workers

The International Federation of Building and Wood Workers (IFBWW) was a global union federation of trade unions in the building, building materials, wood, forestry and allied industries.

See Construction and International Federation of Building and Wood Workers

International University of Japan

The is a private university located in Minamiuonuma city in Niigata Prefecture, Japan.

See Construction and International University of Japan

Interserve

Interserve plc is a multinational support services and construction company based in the UK, with a revenue of £3.25 billion in 2017 and a workforce of more than 80,000 people worldwide.

See Construction and Interserve

Interstate 295 (North Carolina)

North Carolina Highway 295 (NC 295), also known as the Fayetteville Outer Loop, is a partially completed Interstate-grade planned bypass around the western side of Fayetteville, North Carolina.

See Construction and Interstate 295 (North Carolina)

Intumescent

An intumescent is a substance that swells as a result of heat exposure, thus increasing in volume and decreasing in density.

See Construction and Intumescent

Isan

Isan (Isan/อีสาน,; also written as Isaan, Isarn, Issarn, Issan, Esan, or Esarn; from Pali ऐशान aiśāna or Sanskrit ऐशान aiśāna "northeast") consists of 20 provinces in the northeastern region of Thailand.

See Construction and Isan

ISO 10303

ISO 10303 is an ISO standard for the computer-interpretable representation and exchange of product manufacturing information.

See Construction and ISO 10303

ISO 12006

ISO 12006 "Building construction - Organization of information about construction works" is an international standard dealing with structuring of information for construction.

See Construction and ISO 12006

ISO 15686

ISO 15686 is the in development ISO standard dealing with service life planning.

See Construction and ISO 15686

J. D. Hayworth

John David Hayworth Jr. (born July 12, 1958) is an American television host and former politician.

See Construction and J. D. Hayworth

Jacobs Engineering Group

Jacobs Engineering Group Inc. is an international technical professional services firm.

See Construction and Jacobs Engineering Group

Jamaica

Jamaica is an island country situated in the Caribbean Sea.

See Construction and Jamaica

James F. Brennan

James F. Brennan (born April 17, 1952) is an American politician.

See Construction and James F. Brennan

James Finch

James Finch (born 1950, Lynn Haven, Florida) is an American businessman.

See Construction and James Finch

James Gerard Kennedy Sr.

James Gerard Kennedy Sr. (February 7, 1907 &ndash; December 24, 1997) aka James G. Kennedy, was the founder, president, and chairman of James G. Kennedy & Company, Inc.

See Construction and James Gerard Kennedy Sr.

Japan–Oceania relations

Before World War II, the Imperial Japanese Navy began construction of various airfields, fortifications, ports, and other military projects in the islands controlled under the South Pacific Mandate.

See Construction and Japan–Oceania relations

Jørgen Kosmo

Jørgen Hårek Kosmo (December 5, 1947 – July 24, 2017) was a Norwegian politician.

See Construction and Jørgen Kosmo

Job Corps

Job Corps is a program administered by the United States Department of Labor that offers free-of-charge education and vocational training to young men and women ages 16 to 24.

See Construction and Job Corps

John Deere

John Deere is the brand name of Deere & Company, an American corporation that manufactures agricultural, construction, and forestry machinery, diesel engines, drivetrains (axles, transmissions, gearboxes) used in heavy equipment, and lawn care equipment.

See Construction and John Deere

John Ferraro

John Ferraro (May 24, 1924 – April 17, 2001) was the longest-serving Los Angeles City Council member in the history of the city—thirty-five years, from 1966 until his death in 2001—and the president of the council for fourteen of them.

See Construction and John Ferraro

John Mowlem

John Mowlem (12 October 1788 – 8 March 1868) was an English stonemason, builder and founder of the quarrying and construction company "Mowlem, Burt and Freeman".

See Construction and John Mowlem

John Soane

Sir John Soane (né Soan; 10 September 1753 – 20 January 1837) was an English architect who specialised in the Neo-Classical style.

See Construction and John Soane

John Spencer (politician)

John Spencer (born November 17, 1946) is the former Mayor of Yonkers, New York (1996–2003).

See Construction and John Spencer (politician)

Johnny Sheffield

Johnny Sheffield (April 11, 1931 – October 15, 2010) was an American child actor.

See Construction and Johnny Sheffield

Joiner

A joiner is an artisan who builds things by joining pieces of wood, particularly lighter and more ornamental work than that done by a carpenter, including furniture and the "fittings" of a house, ship, etc.

See Construction and Joiner

José Azcona del Hoyo

José Simón Azcona del Hoyo (26 January 1927 – 24 October 2005) was President of Honduras from 27 January 1986 to 27 January 1990 for the Liberal Party of Honduras (PLH).

See Construction and José Azcona del Hoyo

José González-Lander

Jose Gonzalez-Lander (November 13, 1933 &ndash; January 18, 2000) was a Caracas, Venezuela born engineer credited for leading the planning, design and construction of the Caracas Metro during an uninterrupted period of more than thirty years, from 1966 to 1997.

See Construction and José González-Lander

K College

K College, also known as South & West Kent College, was an English college of Further Education and Higher Education with facilities across Kent, formed in April 2010, by the merger of South Kent College with West Kent College.

See Construction and K College

Kalevala

The Kalevala (Finnish Kalevala) is a 19th-century work of epic poetry compiled by Elias Lönnrot from Karelian and Finnish oral folklore and mythology.

See Construction and Kalevala

Kamppi

Kamppi is a neighbourhood in the centre of Helsinki, the capital of Finland.

See Construction and Kamppi

Kamppi Center

Kamppi Centre (Kampin keskus, Kampens centrum) is a complex in the Kamppi district in the centre of Helsinki, designed by various architects, the main designer, however, being Juhani Pallasmaa.

See Construction and Kamppi Center

Kaunas

Kaunas (also see other names) is the second-largest city in Lithuania and the historical centre of Lithuanian economic, academic, and cultural life.

See Construction and Kaunas

Kawasaki Heavy Industries

is a Japanese public multinational corporation primarily known as a manufacturer of motorcycles, heavy equipment, aerospace and defense equipment, rolling stock and ships.

See Construction and Kawasaki Heavy Industries

KBR (company)

KBR, Inc. (formerly Kellogg Brown & Root) is an American engineering, procurement, and construction company, formerly a subsidiary of Halliburton.

See Construction and KBR (company)

Keen Engineering

Keen Engineering Co.

See Construction and Keen Engineering

Kenneth A. Gibson

Kenneth Allen Gibson (born May 15, 1932) is an American Democratic Party politician, who was elected in 1970 as the 34th Mayor of Newark, New Jersey, the largest city in the state.

See Construction and Kenneth A. Gibson

Kesko

Kesko Corporation (Finnish: Kesko Oyj) is a Finnish retailing conglomerate with its head office in Katajanokka, Helsinki.

See Construction and Kesko

Kevin Greening

Kevin Greening (30 December 1962 – 29 December 2007) was a British radio presenter, who co-hosted The Radio 1 Breakfast Show on BBC Radio 1 with Zoë Ball from 1997 to 1998.

See Construction and Kevin Greening

Keyhole saw

A keyhole saw (also called a pad saw, alligator saw, jab saw or drywall saw) is a long, narrow saw used for cutting small, often awkward features in various building materials.

See Construction and Keyhole saw

Kiewit Corporation

Kiewit Corporation is an employee-owned Fortune 500 contractor based in Omaha, Nebraska.

See Construction and Kiewit Corporation

King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology

King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST; مدينة الملك عبدالعزيز للعلوم والتقنية) in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia is an organization established in 1977 as the Saudi Arabian National Center for Science & Technology (SANCST); in 1985, it was renamed King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology.

See Construction and King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology

Kingdom Hall

A Kingdom Hall is a place of worship used by Jehovah's Witnesses.

See Construction and Kingdom Hall

Kirloskar Group

The Kirloskar Group is an Indian conglomerate headquartered in Pune, Maharashtra, India.

See Construction and Kirloskar Group

Kirrawee, New South Wales

Kirrawee is a suburb in southern Sydney, in the state of New South Wales, Australia.

See Construction and Kirrawee, New South Wales

Kit-of-parts

Kit-of-parts Theory refers to the study and application of object-oriented building techniques, where building components are pre-designed / pre-engineered / pre-fabricated for inclusion in joint-based (linear element), panel-based (planar element), module-based (solid element), and deployable (time element) construction systems.

See Construction and Kit-of-parts

Klaus Kleinfeld

Klaus-Christian Kleinfeld (born 6 November 1957) was chairman and chief executive officer (CEO) of Arconic.

See Construction and Klaus Kleinfeld

KlingStubbins

KlingStubbins was an architectural, engineering, interior, and planning firm headquartered in Philadelphia, with offices in Cambridge, Massachusetts; Raleigh, North Carolina; San Francisco; Washington, D.C.; and Beijing.

See Construction and KlingStubbins

Koç Holding

Koç Holding A.Ş. (pronounced: Coach with a short syllable) is the largest industrial conglomerate in Turkey, and that country's only entry on the Fortune Global 500 list.

See Construction and Koç Holding

Komatsu Limited

or Komatsu (コマツ) is a Japanese multinational corporation that manufactures construction, mining, forestry, and military equipment, as well as industrial equipment like press machines, lasers and thermoelectric generators.

See Construction and Komatsu Limited

Kongō Gumi

is a Japanese construction company which was the world's oldest continuously ongoing independent company, operating for over 1,400 years until it was absorbed as a subsidiary of Takamatsu in 2006.

See Construction and Kongō Gumi

Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization

The Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization (KEDO) was an organization founded on March 15, 1995, by the United States, South Korea, and Japan to implement the 1994 U.S.-North Korea Agreed Framework that froze North Korea's indigenous nuclear power plant development centered at the Yongbyon Nuclear Scientific Research Center, that was suspected of being a step in a nuclear weapons program.

See Construction and Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization

Krško

Krško is a town in eastern Slovenia.

See Construction and Krško

Krishna district

Krishna district is an administrative district in the Coastal Andhra region of the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh.

See Construction and Krishna district

Kryvyi Rih

Kryvyi Rih (krɪˈwɪj riɦ|lit.

See Construction and Kryvyi Rih

Kværner

Kværner was a Norwegian engineering and construction services company that existed between 1853 and 2005.

See Construction and Kværner

L'Aquila

L'Aquila (meaning "The Eagle") is a city and comune in Southern Italy, both the capital city of the Abruzzo region and of the 