Humayun's Tomb- the tomb is one of Delhi's UNESCO World Heritage Sites, with the tomb of Humayun,the second Mughal emperor, at its heart. The best view can be accessed from the South Gate.

Upon the death of his grandfather, he became a pawn in the political game to seize the Mughal throne.He was declared the Mughal Emperor by Asaf Khan as a stopgap arrangement to counter the claims of the queen Nur Jahan, who wanted Shahryar to succeed.

Nawab" usually refers to males and literally means Viceroy; the female equivalent is"Begum" or"Nawab Begum". The primaryduty of a Nawab was to uphold the sovereignty of the Mughal emperor along with the administration of a certain province.

After the Battle of Buxar in 1764,the Company acquired the civil rights of administration in Bengal from the Mughal Emperor Shah Alam II; it marked the beginning of its formal rule, which was to engulf eventually most of India and extinguish the Moghul rule and dynasty itself in less than a century.

According to the Agra Mission archives, she was buried with her husband in the church they established in 1562,although their remains were never found. Mughal Emperor Shah Jahan had the church demolished in 1636. The Native chapel was rebuilt over the site and in the compound of St Peter's Roman Catholic Cathedral.

The first Grand Mufti of India,Shah Fazle Rasool Badayuni was appointed by the final Mughal Emperor, Bahadur Shah Zafar. Badayuni was a famous Hanafi scholar[11] who had deep knowledge of Islamic jurisprudence. His Urdu statements on Islamic subjects were published as Tariqi Fatwa, which later became famous.

The Siege of Purandhar occurred in the summer of 1665 andwas initiated by the Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb, after the Maratha leader, Chhatrapati Shivaji, sacked the Mughal imperial port city of Surat. Shivaji continued to raid Aurangabad and attacked Mughal ships in the Indian Ocean. In response, Aurangzeb sent one of his most experienced commander Mirza Raja Jai Singh.

The Battle of Torna was fought on between the Mughal Empire andthe Maratha Empire. Mughal Emperor, Aurangzeb ordered to besiege the fortress of Torna where Mughal Generals, Muhammad Amin Khan and Tarbiyat Khan stormed into Torna and defeated the Marathas. In recognition of the difficult defense the Mughals had to overcome to capture this fort, Aurangzeb renamed it as Futulgaib.

Islamic flags containing thecalligraphy of the Quran were commonly used by the Mughal Emperor Akbar, it was the Mughal Emperor Shah Jahan, who is known to have inlaid the Crescent and Star symbol upon his personal shield, his son Aurangzeb is also known to have used similar shields and flags containing an upward Crescent and Star symbol. Various Nawabs, such as the Nawab of the Carnatic, also used the Crescent and Star symbols.[1].

Jahanara Begum Sahib(Urdu: شاهزادی جہاں آرا بیگم صاحب‎) (April 2, 1614- September 16, 1681) was Shahzadi(Imperial Princess) of the Mughal Empire as the eldest surviving daughter of Emperor Shah Jahan and Empress Mumtaz Mahal.[1]She was also the older sister of her father's successor and the sixth Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb. After Empress Mumtaz Mahal died from complications of giving birth to her fourteenth child, Jahanara became Padshah Begum of the Mughal Empire.

This style of painting derives from the great portraits of the Mughal emperors, where they are pictured standing sideways at the centre of the composition with a landscape in the background.

This Mughal-era painting shows a figure depicted in a European style,demonstrating the cultural flexibility of the Mughal court, and the willingness of Mughal emperors and artists to experiment with and embrace new styles of painting.

After the Changez khan's massacre in Iran(Destruction under the Mongol Empire), his family members migrated from Mashhad(Iran) to Sabzwar and then to India via Gardēz(Afghanistan) during the reign of Sultan Shams-ud-din Iltutmish(1211- 1235). In India, this family was acclaimed later on as Gardēzī Sadaat andreceived many honorific titles from Mughal emperors.

Through most of history,the subcontinent has had a dominant government, such as the Emperor Ashoka, the Mughal Empire, the British Raj, and today's India.

Mughal-e-Azam(The Emperor of the Mughals) is a 1960 Indian film that follows the love affair between Mughal Prince Salim(who went on to become Emperor Jahangir) and Anarkali, a court dancer.