Sheldon Reynolds, the talented guitarist who was a key member of the funk and soul bands The Commodores and Earth, Wind & Fire, has died at age 63.

Reynolds' death was announced on social media Tuesday by Philip Bailey, his former bandmate in Earth, Wind & Fire.

'This news of Sheldon Reynolds transition is very sad for all of us who knew and worked with him. Sheldon vocally had Reese down,' he wrote, referring to founder and vocalist Maurice White. 'Sheldon was an excellent addition to the band, a great writer and producer, and a kind, loving person. He will be missed. Our condolences to his family.'

Reynolds made a name for himself as a technically skilled guitarist with the band Sun, before joining later incarnations of classic funk bands.

His cause of death has not yet been announced.

His guitar talents were what first drew him attention, and he was already a virtuoso before he was even a teenager.

After graduating from the University of Cincinnati, Reynolds went into music performance full time.

One of his early gigs was as a touring guitarist for the R&B singer Millie Jackson, before joining the funk and soul group Sun.

After The Commodores' co-founder and co-lead singer Lionel Richie departed the group at the height of its success in 1982 to start his lucrative solo career and lead guitarist Thomas McClary left, Reynolds brought his guitar talents to the funk and pop band.

Although Reynolds also performed as a vocalist, original co-lead Walter Orange — who sang lead on hits like Brick House — took over most of the vocal duties after Richie's departure.

He only played with The Commodores from 1983 to 1987, when he joined another iconic funk and pop band, Earth, Wind & Fire.

The group had been on hiatus since 1984, but Maurice White reformed it in '87 with new members, including Reynolds on lead guitar and vocal duties.

He had previously played guitar on White's 1985 self-titled solo album, which made him an obvious fit for the group when it was revived.

He continued to record and perform with the band until 2002.

Reynolds' stint with the group earned him a Grammy nomination in 1994 for Best R&B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals for Sunday Morning, the second single from Earth, Wind & Fire's 1993 album Millennium.

As a member of the group, Reynolds was honored with induction to the NAACP Image Award Hall of Fame.

He also held record co-lead singer Philip Bailey's 1989 solo album Family Affair, and he would subsequently contribute to Smokey Robinson's 1990 album Love, Smokey.