Burt Reynolds will certainly be missed.

In one of Reynolds’ last movies, actors Eric Peterson and Polly Shannon along with director/writer Stephen Wallis address the joys of working with the late respected actor in the drama Defining Moments.

The indie film comprises an ensemble cast that involves multiple characters in multiple storylines about small decisions that factor into their lives.

Here’s the official synopsis:

A poignant story of eight very different people who are at a crossroads in life and must make decisions that will forever change who they are. Jack must decide to spend the rest of his life with his girlfriend Terri. Marina must reconnect with her aging father. Laurel must embrace her new pregnancy and come to terms with her father’s early Alzheimer’s. Lis is learning to live with MS. And Dave must learn why life is worth it.

The cast includes Burt Reynolds (Boogie Nights), Sienna Guillory (Resident Evil: Afterlife, Love Actually), Graham Greene (The Green Mile, The Twilight Saga), Shawn Roberts (xXx: Return of Xander Gage, Resident Evil: The Final Chapter), and Tammy Blanchard (A Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood Into the Woods), with Eric Peterson and Polly Shannon). Stephen Wallis directed and wrote the screenplay.

ALSO CHECK OUT: Nora Arnezeder Talks About the Preparation For Her Starring Role In The Colony [Exclusive Interview]

LRM Online’s Gig Patta spoke with actors Eric Peterson and Polly Shannon with director Stephen Wallis. We talked about the ensemble cast, the storyline, and working with the great Burt Reynolds.

Eric Peterson appeared on theatrical stages across Canada, Broadway, London’s West End, Edinburgh Festival, and the Melbourne International Theatre Festival. He appeared in film and television, including Street Legal, This Is Wonderland, and Corner Gas.

Polly Shannon made her television debut with the popular children’s series Are You Afraid of the Dark?. She appeared in over 50 films and television series over the years. Her accolades included a Canadian Comedy Award nomination for her performance in the movie Men With Brooms, and Gemini Award nominations for her performance in television movies The Girl Next Door and The Sheldon Kennedy Story.

Stephen Wallis wrote and directed Burt Reynolds’ final film with Defining Moments. Recently, he completed The Martini Shot with Matthew Modine and John Cleese, which is his seventh film as a director and the tenth as a writer and producer. The next feature Cut the Painter is written with John Cleese to begin shooting in August of 2021.

Defining Moments is playing in select theaters and is available on all digital platforms today.

Watch the exclusive interview with Eric Peterson, Polly Shannon, and Stephen Wallis below. Let us know what you think.