Beppin-san

Date: From 8.00 a.m., Mondays – Fridays, 3 October 2016

Station: NHK

Scriptwriter: Watanabe Chiho (Gonin no Junko, Tatakau! Shoten Girl, First Class)

Cast: Yoshine Kyoko, Namase Katsuhisa, Kanno Miho, Renbutsu Misako, Kora Kengo, Nagura Jun, Tanimura Mitsuki, Momota Kanako, Tsuchimura Kaho, Ichimura Masachika, Nakamura Tamao, Honda Hirotaro, Yamamura Momiji, Mikura Mana, Nagayama Kento, Hiraoka Yuta, Tanaka Yoji, Ishino Yoko, Soganoya Bundo, Miyata Keiko, Horiuchi Masami, Matsushita Yuya, Taki Yukari, Nakajima Hiroki, Maeda Beverly, Ibu Masato

Synopsis: Bando Sumire (Yoshine Kyoko) was born to the wealthy Bando family (Namase Katsuhisa, Kanno Miho, Renbutsu Misako, Nakamura Tamao) as the second of two sisters. She loves embroidery and sewing. Once she gets started, she will be so focused that she loses sight of her surroundings. Because she frequently looks like she is gazing vacantly to a casual onlooker as images fill her mind, the people around her worry about what she is thinking. But Sumire is unconcerned. When she decides on something, she will stand firm and follow through no matter what happens. She marries during the Pacific War and gets pregnant, but her husband Norio (Nagayama Kento) soon goes to war. Sumire gives birth to their daughter while he is absent. To make matters worse, an air raid is launched on Kobe just before the end of the war and she loses both the house she grew up in and wealth. As Sumire waits for Norio to come back from the front, she begins to make children’s clothing with her dressmaking skills. Gathering her classmates from her girl’s school days, Sumire rents a shoe shop’s show window and the specialty clothing shop that she started turns into a big hit that is beyond anyone’s imagination.

Website: www.nhk.or.jp/beppinsan

Preview: Beppin-san Introduction

Cain and Abel

Date: From 9.00 p.m., Mondays, 17 October 2016

Station: Fuji TV

Scriptwriters: Aso Kumiko (Hayako-sensei Kekkon Surutte Hontou desu ka, Zannenna Otto, Kazoku no Urajijou), Kanazawa Tatsuya (Lucky Seven, Kareinaru Spy)

Genre: Romance

Cast: Yamada Ryosuke, Kiritani Kenta, Kurashina Kana, Kinoshita Houka, Hino Yojin, Yamazaki Hirona, Nishimura Motoki, Tozuka Junki, Takashima Masanobu, Otsuka Nene, Minami Kaho, Hira Mikijiro

Synopsis: Takada Yu (Yamada Ryosuke) is an employee of Takada Real Estate Co, an estate development firm. His father Takayuki (Takashima Masanobu) is the company president and a perfectionist who has favoured his high-achieving elder son Ryuichi (Kiritani Kenta) and been indifferent to Yu since young. So Yu craves for his father’s love and wants his recognition somehow. Then one day, Yu encounters Yahagi Azusa (Kurashina Kana) who also works for Takada Real Estate Co. Although it was the worst possible meeting, he gradually starts to have romantic feelings for her through work and an unexpected development. But ironically enough, Azusa turns out to be Ryuichi’s girlfriend … … Yu begins to realise what he truly treasures and matures as a person as he struggles with this complicated romance and with his older brother and father.

Website: www.fujitv.co.jp/CainandAbel

Preview: Cain and Abel CM

Keishichou Nasi Goreng-ka

Date: From 12.15 a.m., Tuesdays, 18 October 2016

Station: TV Asahi

Scriptwriter: Tokuo Koji (Konkatsu Deka, DoS Keiji, Lost Days)

Original Work: Keishichou Nasi Goreng-ka by Akimoto Yasushi

Genre: Detective comedy

Cast: Shimazaki Haruka, Furuta Arata, Katsumura Masanobu, Namioka Kazuki, Neko Tsubaki, Koshimura Koichi, Nakayama Masei

Synopsis: 25-year-old Kazahaya Kyoko (Shimazaki Haruka) is appointed to head an investigative division of the Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department, called the Nasi Goreng Division. She is an unconventional division head who believes that an entire investigation can be done in a room and completely rejects the “Showa” concept of legwork. Although Kyoko practically never leaves her room for an investigation, she is able to solve many difficult cases with her remarkable insight and deductive powers. Then things begin with the appearance of the middle-aged Ishinabe Kanta (Furuta Arata) who has finally fulfilled his long-cherished dream to become a detective with his assignment to the Nasi Goreng Division. Ishinabe is full of enthusiasm but even though he appeals to Kyoko about his strength for legwork, she cuts him off and dismisses hot-blooded idiots as unnecessary.

Website: www.tv-asahi.co.jp/nashigorenka

Preview: Keishichou Nasi Goreng-ka CM

Sannin Kyoudai Season 2

Date: From 12.20 a.m., Tuesdays, 18 October 2016

Station: Nagoya TV

Scriptwriter: Kikuhara Tomoki (Nagoya Yuki Saishuu Ressha)

Genre: Comedy

Cast: Rokkaku Seiji, Konno Hiroki, Namioka Kazuki, Hashimoto Manami, Horiuchi Keiko, Ono Nonoka, Masui Mio, Suzuki Fuku, Micro, Kanbe Hiroshi

Synopsis: The three unpopular, poor, spineless Mano brothers – Kinichi (Rokkaku Seiji), Ginji (Konno Hiroki) and Dosan (Namioka Kazuki), who have been running a coffee shop which was the inheritance from their father, are on a trip. However, they get stranded on a beach and all three of them suffer memory loss. They are rescued by a lady (Hashimoto Manami) who had been walking on the beach. Ginji is the first to regain his memory and makes up a story about his relationship with his brothers.

Website: www.nagoyatv.com/3ninkyodai2

Medical Team ~ Lady Da Vinci no Shindan

Date: From 9.00 p.m., Tuesdays, 11 October 2016

Station: Fuji TV

Scriptwriter: Tanaka Shinichi (Seishun Tantei Haruya, Kaiki Renai Sakusen, Team Batista Series)

Genre: Medical mystery

Cast: Yoshida Yo, Aibu Saki, Yoshioka Riho, Shiratori Kumiko, Takizawa Saori, Shonozaki Ken, Kobayashi Katsuya, Ikeoka Ryosuke, Igarashi Kento, Fueki Yuko, Totsugi Shigeyuki, Takahashi Katsunori, Ito Ran, Asaka Kodai (guest star)

Synopsis: Tachibana Shiho (Yoshida Yo) used to be a neurosurgeon who worked for Nishi Tokyo General Hospital. She made the decision to quit being a doctor after a hallucination she had during surgery. However, her former teacher Kitabatake Masayuki (Takahashi Katsunori), who is now the hospital director of Toko University Hospital, has had a high regard for her skills as a doctor. She is persuaded to join the hospital’s analysis and diagnostic department as a diagnostician. The department is made up of outstanding, strong, individualistic female characters (Aibu Saki, Yoshioka Riho, Shiratori Kumiko, Takizawa Saori, Fueki Yuko, Ito Ran) who use knowledge and skills in their areas of specialisation to determine the causes of all sorts of illnesses that doctors cannot figure out and save patients though they sometimes get out of control.

Website: www.ktv.jp/ladydavinci

Preview: Medical Team ~ Lady Da Vinci no Shindan Teaser

Nigeru wa Haji da ga Yaku ni Tatsu

Date: From 10.00 p.m., Tuesdays, 11 October 2016

Station: TBS

Scriptwriter: Nogi Akiko (Juhan Shuttai, Okitegami Kyoko no Bibouroku, Soratobu Kouhoushitsu)

Original Work: Nigeru wa Haji da ga Yaku ni Tatsu by Umino Tsunami

Genre: Love comedy

Cast: Aragaki Yui, Hoshino Gen, Otani Ryohei, Fujii Takashi, Mano Erina, Narita Ryo, Yamaga Kotoko, Takahashi Yo, Hayama Shono, Furuhata Seika, Hosoda Yoshihiko, Takayama Yuko, Furutachi Kanji, Moro Morooka, Takahashi Hitomi, Ukaji Takashi, Tomita Yasuko, Furuta Arata, Ishida Yuriko

Synopsis: 25-year-old Moriyama Mikuri (Aragaki Yui) graduated but had no job offers. She became a temporary employee but was even laid off. So while she is taking a break right now, Mikuri feels unwanted and displaced. She starts work as a housekeeper for 35-year-old Tsuzaki Hiramasa (Hoshino Gen) by chance. Tsuzaki, who has never had a girlfriend and romance in his 35 years, is proud that he is a “professional bachelor”. But he determines the effectiveness of Mikuri’s sudden proposal to marry for work and they have a contract marriage. How will married life with Mikuri change Tsuzaki who usually hardly shows emotion and does not even realise that he is in love?

Website: www.tbs.co.jp/NIGEHAJI_tbs

Preview: Nigeru wa Haji da ga Yaku ni Tatsu CM

Princess Maison

Date: From 11.15 p.m., Tuesdays, 25 October 2016

Station: NHK BS Premium

Scriptwriters: Takahashi Izumi (Fujiko, Yume o Ataeru, Onna wa Sore o Yurusanai), Matsui Kana

Original Work: Princess Maison by Ikebe Aoi

Cast: Morikawa Aoi, Takahashi Issei, Hizuki Hana, Shison Jun, Maihane Mimi, Watanabe Makiko, Kino Hana, Watanabe Misako

Synopsis: 26-year-old Numagoe Sachi (Morikawa Aoi) works for a Japanese-style bar and earns an annual income of 2.5 million yen. She lives with the goal of buying an apartment. Her routine is to spend her off-days going around to an apartment showroom in town in search of a “lucky property”. Sachi scrutinises the showroom with a dispassionate seriousness that is nothing like someone just browsing around, and asks questions that puts professionals to shame. Why does Sachi intend to buy an apartment alone? In truth, she suddenly lost her house in the past.

Website: www.nhk.or.jp/pyd/princessmaison

Fukuyado Honpo ~ Kyoto Love Story

Date: From 19 October 2016 (updated on Wednesdays)

Network: Amazon Prime

Scriptwriter: Nagata Yuko (Garasu no Ashi, Resident, Renai NEET)

Original Work: Fukuyado Honpo by Yuchi Yayomi

Genre: Romance

Cast: Hayami Akari, Sasaki Nozomi, Ichihara Hayato, Maeda Oshiro, Yamashita Kenjiro, Miyano Hina, Kojima Fujiko, Onoe Ukon, Nakamura Yasuhi, Osamura Koki, Okura Yuma, Tanaka Min, Asano Yuko

Synopsis: Fukuyoshi Hina (Sasaki Nozomi), Arare (Hayami Akari) and Hana (Miyani Hina) are three sisters whose family run Fukuya, a 450-year-old traditional Japanese confectionery shop in Kyoto. This is the story of their individual romances, love of family and sacrifices for the sake of protecting tradition.

Website: www.amazon.co.jp/Prime-Video

Preview: Fukuyado Honpo CM

Higanjima ~ Love is Over

Date: From 1.28 a.m., Wednesdays, 21 September 2016 (followed by movie)

Station: TBS

Scriptwriters: Sato Midori (Henshin), Ito Hidehiro

Original Work: Higanjima by Matsumoto Koji

Genre: Horror

Cast: Shiraishi Shunya, Suzuki Ryohei, Kurihara Rui, Sakurai Minami, Endo Yuya, Abe Shohei, Sato Megumi, Misaki Ayame, Morioka Ryu, Fujishige Masataka, Uema Rinko, Takano Tomomi, Yanagi Yurina

Synopsis: Higanjima is a remote island in Japan. Bloodthirsty vampires dwell on Higanjima as a result of a virus that infected people. Miyamoto Akira (Shiraishi Shunya) who has come to Higanjima in search of his missing older brother, Atsushi (Suzuki Ryohei), learns of a vaccine that can neutralise the vampires and boldly gets into their midst. However, Atsushi is infected and has become an underling of the master vampire, Miyabi (Kurihara Rui), who rules the island … …

Website: www.mbs.jp/higanjima

Related: Higanjima

Haikei, Minpaku-sama

Date: From 1.28 a.m., Wednesdays, 26 October 2016

Station: TBS

Scriptwriter: Nomura Shinichi

Cast: Kuroki Meisa, Arai Hirofumi, Nakano Yuta, Konno Anna, Suzuki Masayuki, Kan Hanae, Murakami Jun

Synopsis: One day, Yamashita Kanta (Arai Hirofumi) is laid off by his employer, a game company. His wife Saori (Kuroki Meisa), who works for the Labour Standards Supervision Office, gets scary when angry, so he keeps quiet and starts a B&B business which is the trend now. At first, the B&B is faced with successive problems. Then the fact that Kanta was laid off is discovered at the worst possible timing and he has to deal with the possibility of divorce. Will the business perform well?

Website: minpakusama.com

Preview: Haikei, Minpaku-sama CM

Saki

Date: From 1.28 a.m., Wednesdays, 7 December 2016 (followed by movie)

Station: TBS

Scriptwriter: Mori Hayashi (Night Hero Naoto, Nocon Kid, Shomuni 2013)

Original Work: Saki by Kobayashi Ritsu

Genre: School

Cast: Hamabe Minami, Furuhata Seika, Yamada Anna, Asakawa Nana, Hirota Aika, Natsuna, Sano Hinako, Takeda Rena, Yoshizaki Aya, Hoshina Mizuki, Higuchi Yuzu, Kamura Mami, Yamachi Mari, Nagasawa Marina, Onishi Aguri, Ano, Okamoto Natsumi, Kikuchi Mai, Kaneko Rie, Koshino Ena, Shibata Kyoka, Nagao Mariya, Tamaki Yuki

Synopsis: Miyanaga Saki (Hamabe Minami), a first-year student at Kiyosumi High School, lacks enthusiasm for mahjong and plays it so that it will end with neither a win nor a loss. One day, she is influenced by Haramura Nodoka’s (Asakawa Nana) genius mahjong tactics and decides to join the mahjong club. Nodoka is the titleholder of the national junior high school mahjong tournament. Together with Nodoka and the other club members, Saki contends for the title against formidable opponents.

Website: www.saki-project.jp

Preview: Saki Teaser

Aibou Season 15

Date: From 9.00 p.m., Wednesdays, 12 October 2016 (for two seasons)

Network: TV Asahi

Scriptwriters: Koshimizu Yasuhiro (Aibou Series), Mano Katsunari (Aibou Seasons 13 – 15, Keiji 7-nin Series, ST Akai to Shiro no Sousa File), Sakurai Tomoya

Genre: Detective

Cast: Mizutani Yutaka, Sorimachi Takashi, Suzuki Anju, Kawahara Kazuhisa, Yamanaka Takashi, Yamanishi Atsushi, Asari Yosuke, Jinbo Satoshi, Katagiri Ryuji, Ono Ryo, Enoki Takaaki, Osugi Ren, Nakama Yukie, Ishizaka Koji

Synopsis: After being dismissed by the Ministry of Justice, Kaburagi Wataru (Sorimachi Takashi) is officially assigned to the Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department. It is believed that he will be appointed to a more senior position than Sugishita Ukyo (Mizutani Yutaka) after completing training at the police academy. However, Kaburagi is sent not to the Special Missions Unit, but to the Public Relations Division headed by Yashiro Miyako (Nakama Yukie).

Website: www.tv-asahi.co.jp/aibou

Related: Aibou Season 14

Preview: Aibou Season 15 CM

Jimi ni Sugoi! Kouetsu Girl Kouno Etsuko

Date: From 10.00 p.m., Wednesdays, 5 October 2016

Station: NTV

Scriptwriter: Nakatani Mayumi (Dear Sister, Sono Hi no Maeni, Last Cinderella)

Original Work: Kouetsu Girl Series by Miyagi Ayako

Genre: Work comedy

Cast: Ishihara Satomi, Suda Masaki, Honda Tsubasa, Wada Masato, Eguchi Noriko, Taguchi Hiromasa, Adachi Rika, Ise Kayo, Soda Marie, Matsukawa Naruki, Sugino Yosuke, Mister Chin, Nagae Hidekazu, Aso Kaori, Takahashi Osamu, Kaga Takeshi (guest star), Yoshimoto Miyoko, Aoki Munetaka, Kishitani Goro, Tomosaka Rie (guest star), Ando Masanobu (guest star)

Synopsis: Kouno Etsuko (Ishihara Satomi) joins a publishing company with her sights set on becoming a fashion editor. But she is assigned to the very unglamorous proofreading department which examines and fixes errors in manuscripts. Dressed in flashy clothes, Etsuko goes beyond her proofreading work to see the writers in person and also get into actual locations to verify facts. She tries to do each job to perfection for a transfer to the fashion magazine editorial department. Despite her worries about the gap between her ideal job and reality, Etsuko dedicates herself to the work of proofreading in her own unique way and gradually starts to realise its allure.

Website: www.ntv.co.jp/jimisugo

Preview: Jimi ni Sugoi! Teaser

Loveho no Ueno-san ~ Love Concierge Season 1

Date: From 1 December 2016 (updated on Thursdays)

Network: Fuji On Demand (available on Fuji TV from 18 January 2017)

Scriptwriters: Kanda Yu (Good Morning Call, Sono Otoko Ishiki Takai-kei), Kozuru Noriko

Original Work: Love Hotel no Ueno-san by Ueno

Genre: Comedy

Cast: Hongo Kanata, Matsui Airi, Masaki Reiya, Osawa Hikaru, Imoaraizaka-Kakarichou, Sotaro, Asaoka Megumi

Synopsis: Ueno (Hongo Kanata) works at Gotanda Kingdom, a love hotel in Gotanda, Tokyo. It is an environment where it is easy for human nature to be laid bare and he usually hides himself and is discrete for customers’ sake. However, Ueno objectively sees the true feelings of men and women who have difficulty understanding each other and appeals to them by offering sound advice. He rather sadistically teaches them tricks to be popular regardless of gender through the experiences he has analysed.

Website: www.fujitv.co.jp/uenosan

Cook Keibu no Bansankai

Date: From 12.10 a.m., Thursdays, 20 October 2016

Station: TBS

Scriptwriter: Funabashi Susumu

Genre: Gourmet mystery comedy

Cast: Emoto Tasuku, Kojima Ruriko, Nishime Shun, Enari Kazuki, Fuji Mariko, Ishibashi Renji (guest star), Ogi Hiroaki (guest star), Ono Mayumi (guest star), Tsukamoto Takashi (guest star)

Synopsis: Kokku Hoshimitsu (Emoto Tasuku) of the First Investigative Division is a professional “cook inspector” who solves cases. His investigation policy is “food doesn’t lie”. He has no tolerance for murderers who eat their favourite food without a care after getting away with crime. In order to understand the victims, he will recreate what they ate and focus on reaching a deduction. His partner is the rookie Nanase Azumi (Kojima Ruriko) who fulfilled her long-cherished dream to be a detective after developing a love of detective dramas. However, she finds herself stressed to the max because of his unrestricted investigations and also sandwiched between Kokku and the high-handed detective Nekota Norio (Enari Kazuki).

Website: www.tbs.co.jp/cook_keibu

Preview: Cook Keibu no Bansankai CM

Good Morning Call

Date: From 1.55 a.m., Thursdays, 13 October 2016

Station: Fuji TV

Scriptwriters: Kanome Keiko (Haburashi, Aru Hi Ahiru Bus, Carolling), Suzuki Yuna (Itsuka Hi no Ataru Basho de), Obayashi Rieko (Koekoi, Kari Kare, Kuro no Onna Kyoushi)

Original Work: Good Morning Call by Takasuka Yue

Genre: Love comedy

Cast: Fukuhara Haruka, Shiraishi Shunya, Sakura Dori, Arai Moe, Kentaro, Nagashima Shugo, Nagasawa Koya, Tanaka Hinako, Hasegawa Tomohau, Fujita Tomoko, Mori Erika

Synopsis: High school student Yoshikawa Nao (Fukuhara Haruka) has convinced her parents to let her live by herself. On the day she moves into her new apartment, she discovers that it has also been rented to the handsome Uehara Hisashi (Shiraishi Shunya), who is the most popular guy om her school, due to a mistake on the part of the real estate agency. Nao and Hisashi end up living together and start off on the wrong footing, but gradually become attracted to each other.

Website: www.goodmorning-call.com

Preview: Good Morning Call CM

Kasouken no Onna Season 16

Date: From 8.00 p.m., Thursdays, 20 October 2016

Station: TV Asahi

Scriptwriters: Todayama Masashi (Specialist Series, Shingari, Aibou Seasons 8 – 12), Sakurai Takeharu (Kami no Shita o Motsu Otoko, Yamegoku, Tokyo Scarlet)

Genre: Investigative

Cast: Sawaguchi Yasuko, Naito Takashi, Wakamura Mayumi, Kazama Toru, Kaneda Akio, Saito Satoru, Osada Seiya, Yamamoto Hikaru, Nishida Ken, Ishii Kazuaki

Synopsis: –

Website: www.tv-asahi.co.jp/kasouken16

Doctor X ~ Gekai Daimon Michiko Season 4

Date: From 9.00 p.m., Thursdays, 13 October 2016

Station: TV Asahi

Scriptwriters: Nakazono Miho (Totto Terebi, Doctor X Series, Hanako to Ann), Hayashi Makoto (Yisan Sousa Bengoshi, Doctor Chousahan, Strawberry Night), Terada Toshio (Doctor X Seasons 2 – 3, Mayonaka no Panya-san, Kumo no Kaidan)

Genre: Medical

Cast: Yonekura Ryoko, Namase Katsuhisa, Uchida Yuki, Katsumura Masanobu, Takito Kenichi, Kusakari Tamiyo, Tanaka Michiko, Yoshida Kotaro, Kishibe Ittoku, Nishida Toshiyuki, Izumi Pinko, Takeda Shinji (guest star)

Synopsis: Surgeon Daimon Michiko (Yonekura Ryoko) is sent to Totei University Hospital this time. Although it reigns as the top university hospital in the country, the hospital’s reputation has suffered greatly from various cover-ups, medical malpractice and fighting factions. Furthermore, the person who has snatched the seat of the new hospital director with the plan of reestablishing the hospital’s brand and gaining great power, is none other than the strategist, Hiruma Shigekatsu (Nishida Toshiyuki), who has a longstanding grudge against Michiko. At Totei University Hospital, the medical departments have weakened as the administrative department increases control. Only doctors who have powerful brands are kept to run the hospital, which has transformed into a mere business organisation. What will Michiko stand up against in a power game rife in the healthcare setting?

Website: www.tv-asahi.co.jp/doctor-x

Related: Doctor X ~ Gekai Daimon Michiko Season 3

Preview: Doctor X Season 4 Teaser

Chef ~ Mitsuboshi no Kyushoku

Date: From 10.00 p.m., Thursdays, 13 October 2016

Station: Fuji TV

Scriptwriter: Hamada Shuya (Naomi to Kanako, Haretsu, Last Hope)

Genre: Food

Cast: Amami Yuki, Koizumi Kotaro, Kawaguchi Haruna, Endo Kenichi, Toyohara Kosuke, Arakawa Yoshiyoshi, Tomochika, Ikeda Narushi, Ichikawa Shinpei, Ito Shuko, Harukaze Hitomi, Horiguchi Hikaru

Synopsis: Hoshino Mitsuko (Amami Yuki) is the talented three-star chef of famous French restaurant, La Cuisine de La reine, in Ginza, Tokyo. She has drawn attention not just from Japan but also the world for the new recipes she continuously conceives with her delicate palate and unrivalled creativity. Gourmands around the world visit the restaurant for her cuisine and there is a three-year wait for reservations. Mitsuko has absolute confidence that there is no one in this world who will not finish her food. But one day, trouble occurs between Mitsuko and the restaurant owner Shinoda Shogo (Koizumi Kotaro) and she is fired. She has difficulty finding a new restaurant due to Shinoda’s interference and her over-inflated pride, and ends up creating school lunches for a popular variety programme by the hotshot producer Yaguchi Saki (Tomochika). It was believed to be something easy for Mitsuko, but she meets many obstacles and keeps failing. Moreover, this is aired on TV and made known to the world. Even so, Mitsuko does not give up and starts to create school lunches in order to hear children say her food is delicious and also regain her lost stars.

Website: www.fujitv.co.jp/Chef

Preview: Chef ~ Mitsuboshi no Kyushoku Teaser

Kuroi 10-nin no Onna

Date: From 11.59 p.m., Thursdays, 29 September 2016

Station: NTV

Scriptwriter: Bakarhythm (Sutekina Sentaxi)

Original Work: Kuroi 10-nin no Onna by Wada Natto

Genre: Suspense

Cast: Funakoshi Eiichiro, Mizuno Miki, Narumi Riko, Triendl Reina, Sato Hitomi, Sano Hinako, Megumi, Hirayama Aya, Shirahane Yuri, Chisun, Wakamura Mayumi (guest star)

Synopsis: Kaze Matsukichi (Funakoshi Eiichiro) is a TV producer with a beautiful wife Futaba. However, he also nine mistresses (Mizuno Miki, Narumi Riko, Triendl Reina, Sato Hitomi). His wife and mistresses have an inkling about each other’s existence, but they just cannot leave him even though they are fully aware that he is a philanderer. One day, they plot to murder him.

Website: www.ytv.co.jp/kuro10

Daishou

Date: From 18 November 2016 (updated on Fridays)

Network: Hulu

Scriptwriters: Inagaki Kiyotoka, Moriguchi Yusuke(Keishichou Sousa Ichi Kachou), Honda Takao (Keishichou Sousa Ichi Kachou, Higanbana, Hondana Shokudo)

Original Work: Daishou by Ioka Shun

Genre: Legal suspense

Cast: Oguri Shun, Takahashi Tsutomu, Takanashi Rin, Fuchikami Yasushi, Yanagi Erisa, Yanagi Shuntaro, Kataoka Reiko, Hirata Mitsuru, Ishibashi Ryo, Horibe Keisuke

Synopsis: Okuyama Keisuke (Oguri Shun) is a successful lawyer with a dark past. He suffers from severe obsessive-compulsive disorder as a result of abuse and betrayal when he was a young boy. One day, Keisuke is asked to defend his distant relative and psychopath “friend”, Ando Tatsuya (Takahashi Tsutomu), who is a suspect in a murder case. Tatsuya had robbed him of his own parents and happiness one after another. After that, he was repeatedly mistreated by Tatsuya’s family who adopted him. Keisuke takes a risky gamble to bury Tatsuya from society. His reunion with Tatsuya is the start of a battle with a new nightmare.

Website: drama-daisho.com

Preview: Daishou CM

Death Note ~ New Generation

Date: From 16 September 2016 (updated on Fridays) (followed by movie)

Network: Hulu

Scriptwriter: Mano Katsunari (Keiji 7-nin Series, ST Aka to Shiro no Sousa File)

Genre: Detective, sci-fi thriller

Cast: Higashide Masahiro, Ikematsu Sosuke, Suda Masaki, Kawaei Rina, Nakamura Shido, Nakamura Tomoya (guest star), Aijima Kazuyuki (guest star)

Synopsis: Three stories about the investigator Mishima (Higashide Masahiro), called the Death Note geek, who encounters a case where a former criminal died of stroke and he closes in on the truth; L’s successor, the famous international sleuth Ryuzaki (Ikematsu Sosuke) who has solved numerous difficult cases, decides to assist in a Death Note case that he has continuously refused despite repeated requests; and cyber terrorist Shien (Suda Masaki), who became a follower of “Killer” after he was set free from the trauma of being the only one who survived the brutal murder of his family, attempts to use the Death Note for the first time.

Website: www.hulu.jp/death-note-new-generation

Preview: Death Note ~ New Generation CM

Shinya Shokudo ~ Tokyo Stories

Date: From 21 October 2016 (updated on Fridays) (followed by movie)

Station: Netflix

Scriptwriter: –

Original Work: Shinya Shokudo by Abe Yaro

Genre: Food

Cast: Kobayashi Kaoru, Fuwa Mansaku, Ayata Toshiki, Ando Tamae, Yamanaka Takashi, Tanimura Mitsuki, Shinohara Yukiko, Sudo Risa, Kobayashi Asako, Yoshimoto Nahoko, Hirata Kaoru, Uno Shohei, Kaneko Kiyobumi, Nakayama Yuichiro, Yoshimi Yukihiro, Takahashi Shuhei, Nakazawa Seiroku, Nozaki Yoshimi, Matsushige Yutaka, Mitsuishi Ken, Tabe Mikako, Yo Kimiko, Odagiri Joe, Kataoka Reiko, Kondo Koen, Sato Bsaku, Arai Hirofumi, Ito Mamiko, Yamoto Yuma, Okada Yoshinori, Toyohara Kosuke, Go A Sung, Morishita Yoshiyuki, Miyashita Junko, Inui Akito, Ogata Tamaki, Kazama Toru, Shiga Kotaro, Hirata Mitsuru

Synopsis: There is a small eatery ‘Meshiya’ in a back alley of a busy street which is run just by its owner (Kobayashi Kaoru). Called the “midnight eatery”, its opening hours are from midnight to 7 am in the morning. The only items on the menu of are miso soup with pork and vegetables set, beer, sake and shochu. All sorts of customers visit the eatery which is based on the owner’s policy of “making whatever can be done”. The encounters between the owner, food and customers are humorous and at times heartrending.

Website: www.meshiya.tv

Preview: Shinya Shokudo ~ Tokyo Stories CM

Ishikawa Goemon

Date: From 8.00 p.m., Fridays, 14 October 2016

Station: TV Tokyo

Scriptwriters: Kibayashi Shin, Watanabe Yusuke (Mirai Nikki, ST Aka to Shiro Sousa File), Morishita Tadashi (Saikyou no Futari, Keiji 110 kg Season 2, Kakushou), Ohara Hisasumi (Ooka Echizen Season 3), Yamamoto Mutsumi (Kounodori, Yae no Sakura, Tsukamoto Bokuden)

Genre: Period

Cast: Ichikawa Ebizo, Higa Manami, Maruyama Tomomi, Takatsuki Sara, Yamada Jundai, Maeno Tomoya, Tanaka Misato, Enoki Takaaki, Masuoka Toru, Kunimura Jun, AnJu

Synopsis: Toyotomi Hideyoshi (Kunimura Jun) becomes the regent during the Azuchi-Momoyama Period and holds sway while his vassals amass wealth. On the other hand, the common people slide into dire poverty and their discontent grows day by day. They are given moral support by the Shiranami Yazaemon troupe. Yazaemon, the head of the troupe, is the alias for the great thief Ishikawa Goemon (Ichikawa Ebizo) to disguise himself from the public. Ishikawa goes against the powerful Hideyoshi, sneaking into the mansions of feudal lords and wealthy merchants who have done wrong, to steal anything of value and distribute the money and items to the needy. Hideyoshi is eager to capture Ishikawa. Furthermore, this is mingled with the ulterior motives of Hideyoshi’s concubine Chacha (Higa Manami), his vassals Maeda Geni (Enoki Takaaki), Ishida Mitsunari (Maruyama Tomomi) and other people around him … …

Website: www.tv-tokyo.co.jp/ishikawa_goemon

Preview: Ishikawa Goemon CM

Kozure Shinbei Season 2

Date: From 8.00 p.m., Fridays, 11 November 2016

Station: NHK BS Premium

Scriptwriter: Izumi Rei (Shiawase no Jikan)

Original Work: Ninjo Uranagaya by Yamamoto Shugoro

Genre: Period

Cast: Takahashi Katsunori, Hidari Tonpei, Kojima Riria, Miyata Toshiya, Kurotani Tomoka, Sasano Takashi, Nakamura Katsuo

Synopsis: Matsumura Shinbei (Takahashi Katsunori), an alcohol-loving and skilled wandering samurai, struggles to bring up his adopted baby Tsurunosuke as he runs about solving problems within the city.

Website: www.nhk.or.jp/jidaigeki/kozure2

Related: Kozure Shinbei

Unmei ni, Nita Koi

Date: From 10.00 p.m., Fridays, 23 September 2016

Station: NHK

Scriptwriter: Kitagawa Eriko (Irodori Himura, Sunao ni Narenakute, Orange Days)

Genre: Romance

Cast: Harada Tomoyo, Saito Takumi, Yamaguchi Sayaka, Ohgo Suzuka, Koichi Mantaro, Shibuya Kento, Nishiyama Jun, Kubota Sayu, Kawai Aoba, Okamoto Nobuto, Kusabue Mitsuko, Okuda Eiji

Synopsis: During their childhood, a little girl and a boy made a pledge to meet again. Now at the age of 45, the girl, Kasumi, is now a divorced mother (Harada Tomoyo) of a son of high school age. She works as hard as she can at a laundry delivery shop for the wealthy, in order to make a living. Then one day, Kasumi encounters a young male designer, Yuri (Saito Takumi), who has attracted international attention. He is somehow far too familiar with her and pokes his nose into her affairs. Kasumi is initially wary, but she soon learns that he has a pure heart and starts to get drawn to him. These two people with different backgrounds fall in love. Why did Yuri appear before her? Could he be the boy from that time?

Website: www.nhk.or.jp/drama10/unmei

Preview: Unmei ni, Nita Koi CM

Suna no Tou ~ Shirisugita Rinjin

Date: From 10.00 p.m., Fridays, 14 October 2016

Station: TBS

Scriptwriter: Ikeda Natsuko (Algernon ni Hanataba o, Alice no Toge, Kuro no Onna Kyoushi)

Genre: Suspense

Cast: Kanno Miho, Iwata Takanori, Yokoyama Megumi, Horiuchi Keiko, Horan Chiaki, Uesugi Shuhei, Otozuki Kei, Kimura Yuichi, Sano Hayato, Kawazu Asuka, Inagaki Kurumi, Mitsuishi Ken, Karasuma Setsuko, Tsuda Kanji, Tanaka Naoki, Matsushima Nanako

Synopsis: Takano Aki (Kanno Miho) is a happy, ordinary housewife whose family (Tanaka Naoki, Sano Hayato, Kawazu Asuka) has moved to their dream apartment. Just as they are starting their new life, they encounter an ominous, terrifying neighbour Sasaki Yumiko (Matsushima Nanako). This neighbour manipulates the dark emotions of pride, vanity and jealousy of the housewives living in the apartment building, drives Aki into isolation within the building with unexpected methods and eventually causes the break up of her family.

Website: www.tbs.co.jp/sunanotou

Preview: Suna no Tou Teaser

Copyface ~ Kesareta Watashi

Date: From 10.00 p.m., Fridays, 18 November 2016

Station: NHK

Scriptwriter: Shinozaki Eriko (Hippocrates’ Oath, Mare, Chi no Wadachi)

Original Work: Mirror Image by Sandra Brown

Genre: Love suspense

Cast: Kuriyama Chiaki, Sato Ryuta, Ashina Sei, Tamaoki Reo, Nishihara Aki, Nakagawa Ena, Tajima Reiko, Tsurumi Shingo, Terada Minori

Synopsis: Hirosawa Nodoka (Kuriyama Chiaki), a freelance journalist for a weekly magazine, gets close to Fuyuko, the wife of Asakura Shuji (Sato Ryuta), the young director of a cosmetic surgery clinic, in an attempt at undercover investigation to expose the clinic’s misdeeds. However, the flight that she had boarded in pursuit of Fuyuko crashes in an accident. Misidentified as Fuyuko, Nodoka is saved and given her face through plastic surgery. She lives with the belief that she is his wife as a result of memory loss triggered by the shock of the accident. By the time she regains her memory, she has already fallen in love with the man who is another woman’s husband. Can she live like this for the sake of love or will she expose the misdeeds and return to her former life?

Website: www.nhk.or.jp/drama10/copyface

Kaseifu no Mitazono Season 1

Date: From 11.15 p.m., Fridays, 21 October 2016

Station: TV Asahi

Scriptwriter: Yatsu Hiroyuki (Keiji 7-nin Series, Ryusei Wagon, Roosevelt Game)

Genre: Home

Cast: Matsuoka Masahiro, Shimizu Fumika, Shibamoto Yuki, Hotta Akane, Hirata Atsuko, Yo Kimiko

Synopsis: Mitazono Kaoru (Matsuoka Masahiro) is a superb housekeeper who belongs to a housekeeping agency. Although he is a male in an industry dominated by females, he handles housework such as cleaning, laundry, cooking and babysitting perfectly. However, it is not just the dirt in the house that Mitazono cleans. He completely cleans off “deep-rooted dirt” in the households that he is assigned to each time. These are the households that society calls the “successful” where the people are proud, condescending and insufferable. Mitazono learns the family secrets and slowly lays traps to expose all of the secrets and reveal the family for who they really are. Then he gives the last push that breaks up relationships. However, this becomes the catalyst for the family to start again and solve the problems they have.

Website: www.tv-asahi.co.jp/mitazono

Preview: Kaseifu no Mitazono CM

Yuusha Yoshihiko to Michigakareshi 7-nin

Date: From 12.12 a.m., Saturdays, 8 October 2016

Station: TV Tokyo

Scriptwriter: Fukuda Yuichi (Nietzsche-sensei, Aoi Honoo, Yuusha Yoshihiko Series)

Genre: Fantasy comedy

Cast: Yamada Takayuki, Muro Tsuyoshi, Kinami Haruka, Takuma Shin, Sato Jiro

Synopsis: Several hundred years after Yoshihiko (Yamada Takayuki) defeated the dark spirit Deathtark in a fierce battle and saved the world, the world is once again plunged in darkness. Resurrected by the power of Buddha (Sato Jiro), Yoshihiko and his party (Muro Tsuyoshi, Kinami Haruka, Takuma Shin) set off on a journey around the world. Will they be able to save the world again?

Website: www.tv-tokyo.co.jp/yoshihiko3

Related: Yuusha Yoshihiko to Akuryou no Kagi

Preview: Yuusha Yoshihiko to Michigakareshi 7-nin CM

Kichijoji Dake ga Sumitai Machi desu ka?

Date: From 12.52 a.m., Saturdays, 15 October 2016

Station: TV Tokyo

Scriptwriter: Yamada Akane (Team Batista Season 2, Jikou Keiji Series)

Original Work: Kichijoji dake ga Sumitai Machi desu ka? by Maki Hirochi

Cast: Oshima Miyuki, Ando Natsu

Synopsis: Kichijoji is a popular town that has been voted as the place that people want to live in in the whole of Tokyo many times. There is an old real estate agency called Shigeta that is managed by the Sumita twins, Tomiko (Oshima Miyuki) and Miyako (Ando Natsu). People who fantasise of living in Kichijoji visit the agency. However, the rent is high and the place is small as well as far from the train station. Why is Kichijoji the only one that is such a great town? Customers are bewildered that the twins keep suggesting towns other than Kichijoji. But as they are shown around, they unwittingly find themselves drawn to these these locations and decide to find a town of their own that they want to go back to and move there.

Website: www.tv-tokyo.co.jp/kichijoji

Jikkyosareru Otoko

Date: From 12.55 a.m., Saturdays, 15 October 2016

Station: Fuji TV

Scriptwriters: Okada Michitaka (Nobunaga Concerto, Biblia Koshodo no Jiken Techou), Kyuma Ayumu (Ramen Daisuki Koizumi-san Series)

Genre: Mystery

Cast: Kaname Jun, Fujii Mina, Yui Ryoko, Nomura Hironobu, Ikkan, Sakamaki Mitsuhiro, Hashimoto Manami

Synopsis: Umao (Kaname Jun) is a man targeted as the one who will be the most depressed in the Tokyo Race Course on the internet programme “The Most Depressed Person in Fuchu TV” that is broadcast irregularly. He cries loudly in disbelief. Despite the running commentary that his betting ticket will surely be a miss and he is probably crying over the large amount of money he is losing, the winning ticket is gripped in Umao’s hand. The programme suddenly takes interest. It makes Umao its target and follows him discreetly. Then he tries to commit suicide several times on camera all of a sudden? What is Umao’s true identity? A mysterious female (Fujii Mina) appears before him … …

Website: www.fujitv.co.jp/b_hp/jikkyosareruotoko

Chuushingura no Koi ~ 48-ninme no Chuushin*UPDATED*

Date: From 6.10 p.m., Saturdays, 24 September 2016 (for two seasons)

Station: NHK

Scriptwriter: Yoshida Noriko (Manmakoto, Henshin, Asunaro Sansan Nana Byoushi)

Original Work: 48-ninme no Chuushin by Morota Reiko

Genre: Period

Cast: Takei Emi, Fukushi Seiji, Nakao Akiyoshi, Imai Tsubasa, Sato Ryuta, Tanaka Rena, Ishimaru Kanji, Mita Yoshiko, Daito Shunsuke, Minagawa Sarutoki, Niiro Shinya, Hizuki Hana, Tsuji Kazunaga, Sasano Takashi, Hirata Mitsuru, Hirayama Hiroyuki, Shimizu Misa, Kawahara Ayako, Nono Sumika, Naito Risa, Takito Kenichi

Synopsis: Kiyo (Takei Emi) is a lady-in-waiting who serves the Asano family’s Edo mansion in the Genroku Period. She has fallen in love with Isogai Jurozaiemon (Fukushi Seiji), a samurai of the Ako domain. Kiyo sets her mind to overcome the difference in social status and live for love. But at that moment, bloodshed occurs when Asano Naganori (Imai Tsubasa), the young lord of the Ako domain, attacks the master of ceremonies, Kira Yoshinaka, inside Edo Castle. This incident sets Kiyo’s destiny in motion as the 48th “loyal vassal” unable to participate in the raid with Jurozaemon and the rest of the 47 lordless Ako samurai. After they pull off the raid on Kira’s residence, Kiyo’s second life begins. She gets close to a family positioned to accede to the shogunate and eventually enters the inner palace of Edo Castle with the aim of restoring the Asano family.

Website: www.nhk.or.jp/jidaigeki/chu-koi

Natsume Soseki no Tsuma

Date: From 9.00 p.m., Saturdays, 24 September 2016

Station: NHK

Scriptwriter: Ikehata Shunsaku (Kamogawa Shokudo, Ashio Kara Kita Onna, Saka no Ue no Kumo Series)

Original Work: Soseki no Omoide by Natsume Kyoko and Matsuoka Yuzuru

Genre: Biographical

Cast: Hasegawa Hiroki, Ono Machiko, Tachi Hiroshi, Kuroshima Yuina, Mitsushima Shinnosuke, Takenaka Naoto

Synopsis: Nakane Kyoko (Ono Machiko) grew up in a wealthy family and was raised by her strict father Shigekazu (Tachi Hiroshi) who did not see learning as a necessity. At 19, Kyoko was introduced to Natsume Soseki (Hasegawa Hiroki) as a prospective marriage partner. The two of them were drawn to each other and got married. Soseki took up a post in Kumamoto as a high school teacher and this was the beginning of their new married life. Although Soseki was an extraordinary intellectual, he did not know the warmth of family because he was given up for adoption as a child. In an attempt to understand her husband, Kyoko tried to read what he read, interacted with his friends and joined difficult conversations. But she was not exactly successful. Then she miscarried their first child and her attempted suicide because of loneliness caused a commotion. How would husband and wife overcome this crisis?

Website: www.nhk.or.jp/dodra/souseki

The Last Cop

Date: From 9.00 p.m., Saturdays, 8 October 2016

Station: NTV

Scriptwriter: Sato Tomoharu (Jikoku Sensei Nube)

Original Work: Der letzte Bulle

Genre: Detective

Cast: Karasawa Toshiaki, Kubota Masataka, Sasaki Nozomi, Matsuo Satoru, Kurokawa Tomoka, Tayama Ryosei, Magy, Miyakawa Ichirota, Sano Shiro, Wakui Emi, Sakurai Hinako, Fujiki Naohito, Takeuchi Ryoma, Kohinata Fumiyo, Sakurai Hinako, Takeda Reina, Ito Sairi, Yoshida Kotaro (guest star), Katase Nana (guest star)

Synopsis: In June 2015, Kyogoku (Karasawa Toshiaki) suddenly woke up after being in a coma for 30 years due to an accident during an investigation. It has been a year since he and the young detective, Mochizuki Ryota (Kubota Masataka) of Yokohama Chuo Police Precinct, drove the violent criminal called Kagura as well as the organisation Kyogoku was pursuing 30 years ago to destruction and closed this chapter from the past. Kyogoku and Ryota are still living together in the same place. Although Ryota and Yui (Sasaki Nozomi) have been dating for close to a year, Kyogoku stubbornly refuses to approve their relationship. In this one year, Kyogoku and Ryota have led the police in solving numerous heinous crimes. Ryota has also undergone an unbelievable transformation from a year ago. The investigation methods of the two of them occasionally create trouble. But because their arrest rate and contributions are the highest in the Kanagawa area right now, their maverick, overbearing behaviour is tolerated. They are the “stadium jumper and skinny macho” pair of the Yokohama Chuo district.

Website: www.ntv.co.jp/lastcop

Related: The Last Cop 2015

Futagashira Season 2

Date: From 10.00 p.m., Saturdays, 17 September 2016

Station: WOWOW

Scriptwriter: Nakashima Kazuki (Futagashira Season 1)

Original Work: Futagashira by Ono Natsume

Genre: Period

Cast: Matsuyama Kenichi, Saotome Taichi, Narimiya Hiroki, Nanao, Taguchi Hiromasa, Ashina Sei, Shibukawa Kiyohiko, Yoshikura Aoi, Yamada Jundai, Kitamura Yukiya, Hashimoto Jun, Yajima Kenichi, Shingawa Toru, Omori Nao

Synopsis: The cheerful, big-hearted Benzo (Matsuyama Kenichi) and cool, sharp Soji (Saotome Taichi) are two thieves with the motto “steal all dirty money without threats or murder” and carry out their “work” with brilliance. In the day, Soji does food catering while Benzo gambles in the post town of Shinagawa. They have established a gang of thieves called Ichishi and set their sights on reaching the top of Edo. One day, Benzo hits it off with Kurazo (Omori Nao) who is on a winning streak at the gambling den and when they head down to Yoshiwara, they encounter Soji who has been pursuing young girls. The courtesan Okon (Nanao) appears before them and ask Benzo and Soji to steal 11 prostitutes … …

Website: www.wowow.co.jp/dramaw/futagashira2

Related: Futagashira Season 1

Cold Case Season 1 ~ Shinjitsu no Tobira

Date: From 10.00 p.m., Saturdays, 22 October 2016

Station: WOWOW

Scriptwriters: Zeze Takahisa (64 (movie), Zainin no Uso), Yoshida Yasuhiro (Umoreru, Tabidachi no Shimauta), Hourai Ryuta (Pink to Gray, The Quiz Show), Hayashi Koji (Iryu Series, Rikon Bengoshi, Hagetaka)

Genre: Investigative

Original Work: Cold Case by Warner Bros

Cast: Yoshida Yo, Nagayama Kento, Takito Kenichi, Mitsuishi Ken, Miura Tomokazu, Yoshizawa Ryo (guest star), Naka Riisa (guest star), Ono Ito (guest star), Santamaria Yusuke (guest star), Murakami Nijiro (guest star), Kadowaki Mugi (guest star), Nakadai Tatsuya, (guest star), Enami Kyoko (guest star), Taguchi Tomorow (guest star), Fukikoshi Mitsuru (guest star), Matobu Sei (guest star), Miura Masaki (guest star), Kishii Yukino (guest star), Ruby Moreno (guest star), Komoto Masahiro (guest star), Shibukawa Kiyohiko (guest star), Tsutsui Michitaka (guest star), Nomaguchi Toru (guest star), Mizuhashi Kenji (guest star), Nakamura Tomoya (guest star), Fukuda Mayuko (guest star), Takahashi Mitsuomi (guest star), Imai Yuki (guest star), Kentaro (guest star), Horibe Keisuke (guest star), Fukushi Seiji (guest star), Sakai Miki (guest star), Megumi (guest star), Yamaguchi Karin (guest star), Kiuchi Midori (guest star), Tanaka Kotaro (guest star), Katsube Nobuyuki (guest star), Nakamura Yuri (guest star), Nahana (guest star), Tokunaga Eri (guest star), Sudo Risa (guest star), Nikaido Satoshi (guest star), Mashima Hidekazu (guest star), Okina Megumi (guest star), Yamaguchi Makiya (guest star), Mabuchi Erika (guest star), Asuka Mayumi (guest star), Fujii Mina (guest star), Ota Midori Laurence (guest star), Shinohara Yukiko (guest star)

Synopsis: Inspector Ishikawa Yuri (Yoshida Yo) leads the team (Nagayama Kento, Takito Kenichi, Mitsuishi Ken) from the Kanagawa Prefectural Police’s First Investigative Division to crack unsolved cases.

Website: www.wowow.co.jp/dramaw/coldcase

Preview: Cold Case Digest

Sniffer ~ Kyuukaku Sousakan

Date: From 10.00 p.m., Saturdays, 22 October 2016

Station: NHK

Scriptwriters: Hayashi Koji (Otousan to Yobasete, I’m Home, Iryu ~ Team Medical Dragon Series), Yamaoka Junpei (Juken no Cinderella, Tsuri Baka Nisshi, Sakura), Mano Katsunari (Keiji 7-nin Series, ST Aka to Shiro no Sousa File, Team)

Original Work: The Sniffer by Film.UA

Genre: Investigative

Cast: Abe Hiroshi, Kagawa Teruyuki, Igawa Haruka, Itaya Yuka, Nomaguchi Toru, Yoshiyuki Kazuko, Mizutani Kaho, Gekidan Hitori (guest star), Yasuda Ken (guest star)

Synopsis: “My nose is never wrong”. Hanaoka Shinichiro’s (Abe Hiroshi) other name is “The Sniffer”. He is a consultant who only solves particular important criminal cases. Once Hanaoka gets a whiff, he can uncover all the riddles with his extraordinarily keen sense of smell. He solves difficult, bizarre cases with the compassionate detective Komukai Tatsuro (Kagawa Teruyuki).

Website: www.nhk.or.jp/dodra/sniffer

Toge Shoushimin Kuranaga Haruyuki no Gyakushu

Date: From 11.40 p.m., Saturdays, 8 October 2016

Station: Fuji TV

Scriptwriters: Mikuni Tsuzuko, Obayashi Rieko (Koekoi, Kari Kare, Kuro no Onna Kyoushi), Ogawa Masue (Kyoto Ninjo Sousa File)

Original Work: Toge by Yamamoto Koshi

Genre: Work

Cast: Tanabe Seiichi, Nishida Naomi, Kinomi Nana, Nishimura Masahiko, Kaga Takeshi

Synopsis: Kuranaga Haruyuki (Tanabe Seiichi) works for the citizen consultation centre at the municipal office of Wani no Kuni. In the three years since his transfer, he has been leading a stressful life and battling stomach pains every day. His diligent, polite, methodical, cowardly and quiet personality gets him sandwiched between his subordinates, vain yet timid boss and the citizens who come with impossible demands and complaints. Kuranaga’s only outlet is griping to the tropical arowana fishes that he keeps as he drinks low-malt beer. He eventually erupts one day due to an emergency situation. This awakens his sense of justice and he starts to fight problems in the workplace and his family that leads to a feel-good conclusion.

Website: www.tokai-tv.com/toge

Preview: Toge CM

Retake ~ Toki o Kakeru Omoi

Date: From 11.40 p.m., Saturdays, 3 December 2016

Station: Fuji TV

Scriptwriters: Hashimoto Hiroyuki (Soumato Kabushikigaisha, Hunter, Lost Time Life), Akiyama Ryuhei (Ishitachi no Renai Jijou, Nagareboshi), Peyoung Maki (Kichijoji Dake ga Sumitai Machi desu ka?), Osada Ikue, Honda Takao (Daishou, Keishichou Sousa Ichi Kachou, Hondana Shokudo)

Genre: Sci-fi

Cast: Tsutsui Michitaka, Narumi Riko, Kinoshita Houka, Ono Nonoka, Atsushi, Asano Atsuko

Synopsis: Aratani Shinji (Tsutsui Michitaka) has lost everything – his career, family and friends – as a result of the quirks of fate. As the head of the Census Management Section at the Ministry of Justice, he carries out a top secret mission direct from the Parliamentary Secretary for Justice to isolate time travellers, who have come from the future, at a dedicated residential area and put them under probation.

Website: www.tokai-tv.com/retake

Preview: Retake CM

Sennyuu Keiji Idol Deka Dance

Date: From 12.20 a.m., Sundays, 9 October 2016

Station: TV Tokyo

Scriptwriters: Okura (Urero Series, Hana no Zubora Meshi), Tsuchiya Ryoichi (Urero Series), Oi Yoichi

Genre: Investigative comedy

Cast: Nakamura Aoi, Daito Shunsuke, Yokohama Ryusei, Morinaga Yuki, Tachibana Yuta, Kondo Yoshimasa, Nomaguchi Toru, Aoyama Misato, Fukuchi Momoko, Kataoka Tsurutaro, Watanabe Ikkei (guest star), Megumi (guest star), Otoo Takuma (guest star), Kajihara Zen (guest star), Aizawa Rina (guest star), Kotoge Eiji (guest star, Magy (guest star), Suzuki Taku (guest star), Asagaya sisters (guest star), Yamazaki Shigenori (guest star), Tono Nagiko (guest star), Yamakawa Erika (guest star), Omizu Yosuke (guest star), Tomioka Koichiro (guest star), Furutachi Kanji (guest star), Motomura Kentaro (guest star), Sakai Wakana (guest star), LiLiCo (guest star), Masu Takeshi (guest star), Abe Yuji (guest star), Inaba Yu (guest star), Machida Mari (guest star), Noguchi Kaoru (guest star), Hasegawa Tomoharu (guest star)

Synopsis: Rookie detective Tatsuya Sumire (Nakamura Aoi) dreamed of being like the hot-blooded detectives who appear in detective dramas. However, the first order he gets from his superior is to infiltrate a programme as an idol in order to solve cases occurring in the entertainment industry. And so, the idol group ‘Deka Dance’ (Daito Shunsuke, Yokohama Ryusei, Morinaga Yuki, Tachibana Yuta) is formed impromptu. Tatsuya is initially bewildered by the special world of the entertainment industry but somehow gets popular each time he solves a case. And then he gradually becomes aware of himself as an idol.

Website: www.tv-tokyo.co.jp/dekadance

Preview: Sennyuu Keiji Idol Deka Dance CM

IQ246 ~ Kareinaru Jikenbo

Date: From 9.00 p.m., Sundays, 16 October 2016

Station: TBS

Scriptwriters: Izumisawa Yoko (Omukae Death, Lunch no Akko-chan, Kazokugari), Kurimoto Shizuka, Hara Suzuko

Genre: Mystery

Cast: Oda Yuji, Tsuchiya Tao, Dean Fujioka, Miyao Shuntaro, Matobu Sei, Yano Masato, Saisai Eisuke, Terajima Susumu, Nakatani Miki, Ishiguro Ken (guest star), Inagaki Goro (guest star)

Synopsis: Homonji Sharaku (Oda Yuji) is the descendant of an esteemed, scholarly aristocratic family in Kita Kamakura where the line of eldest sons have had high IQ of 246 passed down from generation to generation. The present 89th head of the Homonji family, Homonji pursues nothing but knowledge. He is fond of saying, “I’ve nothing to do. I’ve nothing to do. Where’s a case that’s worth my while to solve?” One day, Wato Soko (Tsuchiya Tao), a detective of the Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department, is suddenly assigned to the First Investigative Division. However, she is given the mission to guard Homonji rather than investigate brutal crimes. It seems that everyone who was assigned resigned within a month … …

Website: www.tbs.co.jp/IQ246

Preview: IQ246 ~ Kareinaru Jikenbo Introduction

Career ~ Okite Yaburi no Keisatsushochou

Date: From 9.00 p.m., Sundays, 9 October 2016

Station: Fuji TV

Scriptwriters: Koyama Shota (Fukigenna Kajitsu, 5-ji Kara 9-ji Made, Ishitachi no Renai Jijou), Seki Erika (Doctor Car, Senryokugai Sousakan, Shichou wa Mukudono)

Genre: Investigative comedy

Cast: Tamaki Hiroshi, Takashima Masahiro, Takimoto Miori, Shirasu Jin, Hankai Kazuaki, Chibana Kurara, Hirayama Yusuke, Katsuya, Komai Ren, Matsumoto Gaku, Tanaka Minako, Yanagisawa Shingo, Kondo Masaomi

Synopsis: Elite police officer Toyama Kinshiro (Tamaki Hiroshi) has come to be the new chief of a police precinct. He is an eccentric but compassionate man who saves citizens who have no voice, regardless of the type and size of the cases. He believes the police should be close to the citizens and make the streets crime-free. When there is a case that interests him, he must personally go to the crime scene to see everything for himself. No one will realise that he is the police chief because of his clothes. Toyama does not see things from the viewpoint of his investigators, but picks out clues to solve the case from seemingly irrelevant, unexpected things. However, his investigations which do not fit in with the conventional wisdom of crime scenes, are not welcomed by his investigators and their antagonism only gets deeper … …

Website: www.fujitv.co.jp/career

Hippocrates’ Oath

Date: From 10.00 p.m., Sundays, 2 October 2016

Station: WOWOW

Scriptwriter: Shinozaki Eriko (Chi no Wadachi, Kami no Tsuki, Link)

Original Work: Hippocrates’ Oath by Nakayama Shichiri

Genre: Forensic mystery

Cast: Kitagawa Keiko, Shibata Kyohei, Onoe Matsuya, Hamada Mari, Sato Megumi, Aijima Kazuyuki, Kaneda Akio, Furuya Ikkou

Synopsis: On the advice of Professor Tsukuba (Furuya Ikkou), a physician she respects, houseman Tsugano Makoto (Kitagawa Keiko) takes training at forensic medicine classes. She gingerly steps into a classroom with a strange atmosphere. The eccentric but outstanding forensic professor Kosaki Tojiro (Shibata Kyohei) gives her a polite brush-off and leaves the place. Makoto trains under Kosaki in a story that throws the ethical conflict surrounding autopsies and human relationships into sharp relief.

Website: www.wowow.co.jp/dramaw/hipo

Preview: Hippocrates’ Oath CM

Yama Onna Nikki Season 1 ~ Onnatachi ni Itadaki o Mezashite

Date: From 10.00 p.m., Sundays, 6 November 2016

Station: NHK BS Premium

Scriptwriter: Yoshikawa Jiro

Original Work: Yama Onna Nikki by Minato Kanae

Cast: Kudo Yuki, Mabuchi Erika, Uehara Takako, Minamino Yoko, Nukumizu Yoichi, Iida Kisuke, Natsuna, Katase Rino, Hagiwara Masato

Synopsis: Tachibana Yuzuki (Kudo Yuki) is a rookie mountain climbing guide around the age of 40. One day, she leads her first solo tour alone. The group consists of Yumi (Uehara Takako) and Ritsuko (Mabuchi Erika) who both work at a department store, and Mitsuko (Minamino Yoko), a staff of a nursing home. They are headed for two of Japan’s 100 famous mountains, Mt Myoko and Mt Hiuchi, in Niigata Prefecture. Yuzuki has to face these mountain climbing beginners who are there for their own reasons and experiences unanticipated trouble from her first day as she is made sport of by Kijima (Kikawada Masaya), a senior guide.

Website: www.nhk.or.jp/pd/yamaonna

Suisho no Kodou ~ Satsujin Bunseki-han Season 2

Date: From 10.00 p.m., Sundays, 13 November 2016

Network: WOWOW

Scriptwriter: Yaitsu Hiroyuki (Keiji 7-nin Series, Shitamachi Rocket (TBS), Ryusei Wagon)

Original Work: Suisho no Kodou Keishichou Satsujin Bunseki-han by Asami Kazushi

Genre: Detective

Cast: Kimura Fumino, Aoki Munetaka, Watanabe Ikkei, Kitami Toshiyuki, Fujimoto Takahiro, Koyanagi Yu, Furukawa Yuki, Kanno Misuzu, Katsumura Masanobu, Nakamura Toru

Synopsis: Detective Kisaragi Toko (Kimura Fumino) of the Eleventh Section of Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department’s First Investigative Division was instrumental in solving the case of Tremi, the serial murderer who shocked Japan. Although one year has passed, the trauma she suffered at that time still strickens her. One day, a bizarre murder occurs in a room that has turned a deep red. Toko and Assistant Inspector Takano Hideaki (Aoki Munetaka) proceed with the investigation based on clues left behind at the crime scene, but realise that they are being followed by a male stranger. The instant they attempt to arrest him, an explosion occurs at a nearby building. The police have to face an unprecedented crisis. Is this a coincide? And will Toko be able to overcome her greatest crisis as a detective?

Website: www.wowow.co.jp/dramaw/suisho

Related: Ishi no Mayu ~ Satsujin Bunseki-han Season 1

Preview: Suisho no Kodou Teaser

Rental Kyuseishu

Date: From 10.30 p.m., Sundays, 9 October 2016

Station: NTV

Scriptwriter: Watanabe Yusuke (ST ~ Aka to Shiro no Sousa File, Honey Trap, Mirai Nikki)

Cast: Sawamura Ikki, Fujii Ryusei, Shida Mirai, Fukuhara Haruka, Nakamura Anne, Koide Keisuke, Katsuji Ryo, Inaba Yu, Inamori Izumi, Kajihara Zen, Osugi Ren, Mori Kanna (guest star), Komoto Masahiro (guest star), Satoi Kenta (guest star), Sakurai Atsuko (guest star)

Synopsis: “If you want help, but have no one to consult … At such times, make a phone call first!” Akenabe Yugo’s (Sawamura Ikki) occupation is a “rental saviour”. He is a “saviour” who shows up to handle any kind of impossible demand for a limited time only. This is a peculiar, innovative rental service which has appeared as a result of a movement in the rental industry. But Akenabe is certainly not a fellow to be worshiped as a saviour. He is just a very good-natured middle-aged man who is forced to be one as a way to make supplementary income through this commission-based, for-profit, confidential service because he has a huge debt and a wife Shino (Inamori Izumi) and child. So too Aoi Denjiro (Fujii Ryusei) who is a “rental saviour” together with Akenabe. He just is a big show-off who loves attention.

Website: www.ntv.co.jp/renkyu

© jdramas.wordpress.com.