Lacey Chabert, born on September 30th, 1982, is an American actress who has made a name for herself in the entertainment industry. She began her acting career at a young age, appearing in various television shows and movies. Lacey gained a lot of popularity through her role as Claudia Salinger in “Party of Five,” which ran from 1994 to 2000. She also appeared in the hit movie “Mean Girls” as Gretchen Weiners in 2004.

Let’s talk about the legacy of Lacey Chabert Hallmark movies!

How Many Hallmark Movies has Lacey Chabert Appeared In?

In recent years, Lacey has become known as the “Queen of Hallmark” due to her numerous roles in Hallmark Channel movies. Her charming and endearing on-screen presence has won her a dedicated fan base. Some of her most popular Hallmark movies include the two “The Wedding Veil” trilogies, “Winter in Vail,” and “The Christmas Waltz.”

As of the writing of this post, Lacey Chabert has appeared in 32 Hallmark movies, with two additional movies airing during the 2023 Countdown to Christmas Season.

What Was Lacey Chabert’s First Hallmark Movie?

“Elevator Girl” was Lacey’s first movie which aired on February 13, 2010. It’s a modern day Cinderella-romance where a young successful lawyer (played by Ryan Merriman) panics when he finds that he has fallen for a working-class girl (Chabert).

Lacey’s first Christmas movie for the Hallmark Channel was “Matchmaker Santa” which premiered in 2012. This movie was about a young baker who discovers the magic of Christmas and love.

What Are Some of the Most Popular Hallmark Movies Featuring Lacey Chabert?

“The Wedding Veil” trilogies starring Lacey Chabert, Autumn Reeser and Alison Sweeney are very popular. In fact, both sets of movies scored big numbers for the network. Some say fans should expect a third installment since the first two trilogies did so well.

“Haul out the Holly” from Hallmark’s 2022 Countdown to Christmas was a fan favorite. This movie co-stars Wes Brown and an excellent ensemble cast of characters.

In addition, Lacey dazzled in “Christmas Waltz” alongside Will Kemp.

Does Lacey Chabert Have a Favorite Hallmark Movie She’s Been Part Of?

Lacey famously refuses to pick a favorite Hallmark movie or favorite Hallmark co-star!

Are There any Upcoming Hallmark Movies with Lacey Chabert in the Cast?

Lacey will star in not one, but two Hallmark original, new movies during the 2023 Countdown to Christmas season!

“Haul out the Holly 2: Lit Up” is a sequel to last year’s hit “Haul out the Holly.” The Queen of Christmas will star alongside Wes Brown, Melissa Peterman, and Stephen Tobolowsky.

It’s always exciting to see beloved actors reunite on screen, and that’s exactly what fans of “Party of Five” can look forward to in the upcoming Hallmark movie “A Merry Scottish Christmas.” Lacey Chabert and Scott Wolf, who played siblings on the hit ’90s drama, will once again share the screen as brother and sister.

What is Lacey Chabert’s Most Recent Hallmark Movie?

Earlier in 2023, Lacey was the lead in two original Hallmark movies, as well as appeared in two others.

“The Dancing Detective: A Deadly Tango” – When a high-profile CEO is murdered on the eve of his company’s corporate event in Malta – a high stakes ballroom competition between senior executives – Detective Bailey is sent undercover as one of the contestants.

The Wedding Veil Expectations – Avery and Peter try to keep the romance alive while renovating an old house and juggling work, but everything takes on a new perspective when Avery has a surprise for Peter.

They Wedding Veil Inspiration – Emma’s life plan is thrown off course when Paolo must return to Italy to take care of his father and she discovers a new passion for making art accessible to all.

The Wedding Veil Journey – Tracy and Nick agree to set aside work to make time for a long overdue honeymoon to Greece. When they are stranded on a secluded island, they confront their life choices.

Who are Some of Lacey Chabert’s Co-Stars in Her Hallmark films?

Lacey Chabert has co-starred with Brennan Elliot nine times!

She has also starred along Kevin McGarry, Wes Brown, Will Kemp, Tyler Hynes and Brendan Penny, just to name a few!

Has Lacey Chabert Ever Directed or Produced Any Hallmark Movies?

Lacey has 19 producing credits, including all six Wedding Veil movies and fan favorite movie “Sweet Carolina.”

Related: Listen to Girls Gone Hallmark review of “Sweet Carolina”

Where Can I Watch Lacey Chabert’s Hallmark Movies if I Missed Them When They Originally Aired?

There are several places to watch Hallmark movies!

Check the Hallmark schedule as they are regularly re-airing movies all year long!

Subscribe to FrndlyTV for on demand programming and an unlimited DVR. You can even scroll back 72 hours in the schedule to record shows you might have missed

Subscribe to Peacock for Hallmark channel live and on demand

Related: Read all about The King of Hallmark, Tyler Hynes

More Hallmark Talk? Join Our Girls Gone Hallmark Facebook Group

Join our Girls Gone Hallmark Facebook Group! Tons of great people – just like you – who love Hallmark movies. We’re talking new movies, favorite movies, actors, Hallmark gossip, and so much more. Free to join, so click the link below or search “Girls Gone Hallmark” in Facebook Groups.

Don’t miss out on: Girls Gone Hallmark – A Group for Hallmark Movie Fans

Catch all of our Hallmark Movie Reviews

We’re Your New Hallmark Besties

Hi! We’re Girls Gone Hallmark! Megan is a longtime fan of Hallmark’s Countdown to Christmas while Wendy only just started watching Hallmark movies in 2020. Don’t miss out on our twice weekly Hallmark movie review podcast: Tuesday Fan Favorite Hallmark movie reviews and Thursday New Hallmark movie reviews.

Exclusively on the Girls Gone Hallmark podcast. Subscribe today!

’