Xena was a she-hunky leather queen in a breastplate who battled bad guys with sword, shiv, crossbow, frying pan or the ultimate weapon, a murderous missile called the chakram. She and her sidekick, Gabrielle, were part of one of television's more intriguing gal-pal duos, with many viewers celebrating what they saw as lesbian affection.

Famed as fearsome warriors, some went into battle with chakram circular throwing weapons and talwar curved swords as well as rifles.

Likewise, from the Maoist Centre, Barsha Man Pun was given responsibility of Ministry of Energy and Water Resources and Irrigation, Giriraj Mani Pokharel of the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Shakti Basnet of Ministry of Forest and Environment, Chakram Pani Khanal of Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives and Bina Magar of Ministry of Drinking Water.

For instance, many people (this writer among them) would recall that their elders used to read Chakram and Chitralekha, magazines imported form Indian Gujarat.

ChAkram also announced that PCRWR would provide free of cost water testing facility to the flood-hit people for next six months.

The actor's stylish look in the movie's posters was much talked about and some even compared it to his look in the 1996 super hit film "Dharma Chakram." Despite creating much hype, the film has failed to live up to the expectations due to a storyline that lacks substance.

"A hero," he said, "is someone who has given his or her life to something bigger than oneself." Jack Bauer suffers the deaths of friends and loved ones to counter terrorism and keep his nation free; Xena: Warrior Princess wields a mean chakram to fight for the greater good.

Her funeral prayer will be offered at Shami road, Cavalry Ground, Lahore at 10:00 am and she will be laid to rest in her native village Chakram Divali near Faisalabad.

The lengthy and heavily illustrated fifth chapter (33) of the manuscript is devoted to cakra (here called chakram) or astrological charts drawn to determine the effect of the heavens on a particular ritually important object or a specific action about to be undertaken.

In contrast to Kevin Sorbo's Hercules, she also carries a signature weapon (the chakram).

1990s: Warrior princess Xena develops her own unique chakram style.