PRIVACY POLICY

WAYF (“www.wayfclothing.com” or “we” or “us”) has created this privacy policy (this “Privacy Policy”) in order to demonstrate its commitment to user, visitor and customer privacy with regard to the WAYF web site at www.wayfclothing.com (the “Website”). Privacy on the Website is of great importance to us. Because we gather important information from our users, visitors and customers (collectively “Customers” or “you” or “your”, we have established this Privacy Policy as a means to communicate our information gathering and dissemination practices. By accessing this Website, you acknowledge and agree to this Privacy Policy and also agree to the Terms of Use of the Website located at: http://www.wayfclothing.com

We require Customers who register to use the services offered on our Website (collectively, the “Service”) to give us contact information, which may include but is not limited to the Customer ’s name, company name, address, phone number, email address, cookies, IP logs, billing information, billing name and address, credit card number, and other information (collectively “Personal Information”). Besides the Personal Information, we may also collect other information regarding your use of the Website. From time to time, we may also collect or ask for additional Personal Information, which will also be expressly included herein as Personal Information. You can opt out of providing this additional information by not entering it when asked or not using the Website, although not providing it may hinder your ability to use the Website. You can update or remove your Personal Information at any time by logging into the Website and editing your Personal Information within your profile but you should be aware that archival or back–up copies of said information will not cease to exist and WAYF shall not be liable for any problems in this editing process. You can view your updated profile to confirm that your edits have been made to the extent available on the Website. We use the information that we collect to provide and maintain the Website as we deem appropriate in our sole discretion. We may also use the information to contact you to further discuss interest in our company, the services that we provide, and to send information regarding our company or partners, such as promotions and events. You may be invited to receive an email newsletter or other correspondence by providing an email address. Your email address and any Personal Information will not be distributed or shared with third parties unless it is to transact such business as you have contracted us to do, to comply with any legal processes and/or law enforcement requests, or in order to conduct any business as we, in our sole subjective discretion, deem reasonable. We may also email (or send via other methods) information regarding updates to the Website or WAYF , and may send a customer newsletter, or other correspondence. You will have an opportunity to unsubscribe to any emails or mailings by clicking on an “unsubscribe” hyperlink contained in promotional emails we send you, or by e–mailing us at our Customer Service Department (info@wayfclothing.com). Even if you are removed from any such list, if you order online, we will send you an email confirming your order and may need to contact you by phone, email, or regular mail if we have questions about your order. Any opt–out by you is not deemed valid until processed by Love Charles H, LLC. It is your obligation to verify that you have been opted–out. WAYF shall not be liable for problems with the opt– out procedures. Except as we explicitly state at the time we request information, or as provided for herein or in the WAYF Terms of Use Agreement, we do not disclose to third parties the information provided. All financial and billing information that we collect through the Website is used solely to check the qualifications of prospective customers and to bill for the Service. This billing information is not used by WAYF for marketing or promotional purposes, except as provided for herein. We may use a third– party intermediary to manage the credit card processing and we may share any appropriate information with them. You may be using the Website to host data (including but not limited to pictures, email correspondence with other users and other content) and information (“Data”). We will not review, share, distribute, print, or reference any such Data except as provided herein and in the WAYF Terms of Use, as may be required by law, or in order to conduct any business that we, in our sole subjective discretion, deem reasonable. Individual records may at times be viewed or accessed for the purpose of resolving a problem, support issue, suspected violation of any of the terms of this Website, as may be required by law, or as deemed necessary by WAYF. Of course, you are responsible for maintaining the confidentiality and security of your user registration and password. WAYF may also collect certain information from visitors to, and users of, the Website, such as Internet addresses. This information is logged to help diagnose technical problems, and to administer our Website in order to constantly improve the quality of the Service. We may also track and analyze non–identifying and aggregate usage and volume statistical information from you and provide such information to third parties. WAYF does not wish to collect any Personal Information (or any information at all) from any persons under 14 years old. If you are under 14 years old, you may not use the Website.

Correcting and Updating Your Information If you need to update or change your registration information, you may do so by editing the user record to the extent allowed on the Website. To update your User Profile, log in to wayfclothing.com website and then add or update your information.

Cookies When you view our Websites, we may store some information on your computer ’s hard drive. This information will be in the form of a “Cookie.” Cookies enable us to establish the shopping cart session and allow you to purchase products on–line at our site. Most web browsers automatically accept Cookies, but you can change your browser to prevent that. Without accepting a Cookie, you can browse through our site, but you will be unable to establish a shopping cart session and make a purchase on–line.

Security The security of your personal information is important to us. When you enter sensitive information, such as credit card number on our registration form, we encrypt the transmission of that information using secure socket layer technology (SSL). Credit card details are stored encrypted using AES–256 encryption. As a level 1 PCI–DSS compliant service provider we follow all PCI–DSS requirements and implement additional generally accepted industry standards to protect the personal information submitted to us, both during transmission and once we receive it. No method of transmission over the Internet, or method of electronic storage, is 100% secure, however. Therefore, while we strive to use commercially acceptable means to protect your personal information, we cannot guarantee its absolute security. If you have any questions about security on our Web site, you can send email us at support@wayfclothing.com.

Additional Information This Policy is part of the Terms of Use of the Website and any use of the Website is governed by those Terms of Use. Questions regarding this Policy or the practices of the Website should be directed to WAYF ’s Administrator by emailing such questions to support@wayfclothing.com.

Updates to our Privacy Policy If we make any material changes to this Privacy Policy, we will post a notice on this Website notifying users of the changes. In some cases, we also may send an email notifying users of the changes. You should check this Website periodically to see if any recent changes to this Privacy Policy have occurred. If you have any questions regarding this Privacy Policy, you should contact our Customer Service Department.