Manufacture Description:

Siemens Acuson S3000

Designed By You. Designed For You.

Designed to address today’s challenges in ultrasound imaging

Healthcare professionals today are facing challenges on many levels: demanding caseloads, an expanding diversity of patients, and increasing severity of chronic diseases. At the same time, clinicians are tasked to deliver the highest quality of care at the lowest possible costs.

Experts agree that a conventional one-size-fits-all approach to patient care falls short of addressing these challenges. What healthcare providers need today are advanced technologies and applications that intelligently respond to both patient- and user-specific needs. Tailoring diagnosis and therapies to each patient’s individual profile helps to improve clinical, financial and operational outcomes.

The ACUSON S Family of ultrasound systems were built to address today’s most difficult cases in ultrasound. They provide technologies and applications that offer personalized ultrasound solutions by delivering new levels of imaging performance, diagnostic confidence, and workflow efficiency.

Worldwide 1.9 billion adults are overweight* and 600 million are obese*.

Ultrasound professionals are faced with a patient population that is increasingly harder to scan. Imaging at greater depths is needed to provide higher levels of diagnostic confidence.

*World Health Organization (WHO), 2014

Globally, liver cirrhosis has increased by 20 percent in the last 10 years.**

Millions of people are at risk of developing liver disease from obesity, alcohol abuse, and Hepatitis, however, patients usually show no symptoms until the very late stages. Using ultrasounds as a non-invasive test for liver disease can help assess liver tissue stiffness within minutes.

**World Health Organization (WHO), 2010

Liver biopsies are costly and carry potential complications.

up to $2,700

Non-invasive technologies, such as shear wave elastography, produce instant results and potentially reduce healthcare costs by avoiding possible complications from infections caused by interventional procedures.***

***Franciscus, Alan, 2014. Hepatitis C Support Project,

hcvadvocate.org/hepatitis/factsheets_pdf/biopsy.pdf

See more, know more, do more – Powered by HELX

With patient-centric technology and applications at the core of its DNA, the ACUSON S Family systems offer the most advanced imaging performance ever.

They offer one of the widest portfolios of advanced applications in the industry that enables clinicians to personalize their diagnostic approach to each patient’s specific needs.

Unique knowledge-based workflow solutions streamline processes and improve exam consistency and quality of care. Clinical and operational outcomes are further enhanced with intelligent service solutions that optimize system usability and performance.

See more – HELX image formation

Improve your diagnostic confidence with beautiful images featuring exquisite detail and contrast resolution.

Know more – HELX advanced applications

Expand your clinical information with advanced imaging technologies that improve patient outcomes.

Do more – HELX knowledge-based workflow

Protect your investment with upgradeable, easy-to-use ultrasound systems that address all your needs.

Designed to see more

The unique SieStream HD architecture of the ACUSON S Family ultrasound machines works to provide new levels of diagnostic information. Complex processing algorithms double pixel density to produce unparalleled signal fidelity. From transducer to display, advanced HD technologies have been carefully optimized. The result: beautiful, uniform images down to the pixel level that deliver excellent images – including at depth – to advance your diagnostic confidence.

HD Transducer Technology

The unique, fine-pitched high-element density (HD) technology of ACUSON S Family HELX Evolution transducers delivers excellent image clarity and penetration. This improves exam workflow and imaging performance.

HD transducers feature innovative ergonomic palmar or ridged grips to promote fine motion control, supporting delicate hand movements and reducing operator fatigue.

High-density (HD) element transducers

enable beam steering at greater angles to improve detail and contrast resolution

achieve greater border definition

improve image quality and color sensitivity

Designed to know more

The powerful ultrasound engine that drives the ACUSON S Family ultrasound systems is the backbone for advanced clinical applications and technologies. They provide healthcare professionals with clinical information not available on conventional ultrasound systems.

HELX advanced applications allow users to personalize the diagnostic pathway to a patients’ individual condition. This unique patient-centric approach to diagnosis leverages the comprehensive advanced applications toolbox offered by the ACUSON S Family ultrasound systems – from quantification and characterization of tissue to interventional procedures.

Patient outcome and care are further enhanced with reproducible and quantifiable results.

Tissue characterization using shear wave elastography imaging can improve diagnostic results while reducing costs.

The ACUSON S2000 Automated Breast Volume Scanner (ABVS) helps to identify lesions efficiently. Its automated operation provides consistent, reproducible, operator-independent results with high-resolution full-field views of the entire breast.

eSie Touch elasticity imaging delivers additional clinical information to improve diagnostic confidence. Stiff fibroadenoma displayed in red using the 9L4 transducer.

Large stiff spiculated breast mass depicted with Virtual Touch IQ shear-wave elastography. Placing ROIs within the image helps to gain quantitative tissue stiffness assessment within the lesion.*

Liver tissue stiffness assessment using Virtual Touch quantification shear wave elastography. Based on Acoustic Radiation Force Impulse (ARFI) imaging, this unique application may potentially reduce biopsies for liver patients.*

eSie Touch™ elasticity imaging of biopsy-proven breast fibroadenoma provides real-time qualitative assessment of relative tissue stiffness to aid diagnosis.

eSieFusion imaging of a shoulder AC joint integrated into an MRI dataset using the 9L4 transducer.**

Improved near-field and detail resolution in tumor vascular analysis for this liver metastasis using Cadence contrast harmonic imaging with the 6C1 HD transducer.

*Not available on the ACUSON S1000 system.

**Available on the ACUSON S3000 system

Designed to know more

Your reputation as a healthcare provider and your financial success rely on best-in-class staff expertise, exceptional system performance and security as well as seamless clinical workflows.

Designed to adapt to the highest standards of care, the ACUSON S Family HELX Evolution provides a new solution to increase patient outcomes, improve standardization through eSieScan protocols and increase process efficiency with simplified workflow solutions.

Compliance to the latest technical advancements lets you rest assured that the equipment you invest in today will be up-to-date and ready to integrate the most advanced technologies for years to come, allowing you to manage costs without compromising the quality of care.

eSieLink Remote Assistance Technology

A new service tool for your ultrasound systems, eSieLink™ remote assistance technology supports your workflow staff with fast answers to technical and clinical questions. Secure remote desktop sharing allows them to communicate in real-time with technical experts from Siemens Healthineers to resolve issues right away and to receive additional training support. eSieLink helps to improve system uptime and promotes seamless clinical workflows.

m a c a d a m i a n

The overall usability of ultrasound systems determines how well advanced technologies and diagnostic tools perform to expand the clinical capabilities of healthcare professionals. The ACUSON S3000, HELX Evolution was evaluated by an independent user experience design and development company in terms of user performance and user satisfaction. With a system usability score (SUS) of 83, the ACUSON S3000 scored higher compared to conventional ultrasound systems that participated in the test.*

System Usability Score (SUS)

83 ACUSON S3000 Score *

68 Conventional System Score *

83 System Usability Score (SUS) score* compared to a conventional system score of 68*

95% Task completion rate*

* Macadamian Usability Test Study using the ACUSON S3000, HELX Evolution with Touch Control. Study result data on file. More information also available at info@macadamian.com.

Designed for upgradeability

The ACUSON S Family HELX Evolution is built on innovation and the drive for excellence, smarter imaging and premium performance.

The platform architecture of the systems has been designed for comprehensive upgradeability and maximum flexibility offering a solution tailored to a wide variety of clinical environments and the needs of heterogeneous patient populations.

The SieStream HD flexible software and hardware architecture is powered by Microsoft® Windows® 7. This supports upgradeability and access to interchangeable transducers and applications to provide comprehensive investment protection.

ACUSON S3000 Expert Intervention

Industry-leading image analysis tools and intuitive workflow combine to deliver exceptional performance in a broad range of specialties, including Interventional Radiology.

Designed for system and data security

To ensure highest security of your patient data and other sensitive information, the ACUSON S Family of ultrasound systems uses the latest McAfee® Embedded Security solution for the protection against advanced persistent threats (APT), viruses, malware and other executing software.

An additional layer of security is provided by the eSieCrypt Data Encryption option, which provides an encrypted hard drive to protect your data from security breaches.

Industry-leading application control and change control technology ensures that only trusted applications are allowed to be used on the systems.

The optional syngo® Security Package manages system access and ensures safe communication inside and outside of your network.

Transducers to suit your needs

4C1

Curved array

Abdomen, Renal, Gynecology, OB, Fetal Echo, Pelvis

6C1 HD*

Curved array

Abdomen, Renal, Gynecology, OB, Fetal Echo, Pelvis

6C2

Curved array

Abdomen, Renal, Gynecology, OB, Vascular, Fetal Echo, Pediatrics, Pelvis

8C3 HD*

Curved array

Gynecology, OB, Fetal Echo, Pediatrics

7CF1

Curved array (volume)

Abdomen, Renal, Gynecology, OB, Fetal Echo, Pelvis

9EVF4

Curved array (volume, endovaginal)

Gynecology, OB, Fetal Echo, Neonatal Head

EV8C4

Curved array (endovaginal)

Gynecology, OB

MC9-4

Curved array (endovaginal)

Gynecology, OB, Prostate, Neonatal Head

9L4

Linear array

Cardiovascular, Thyroid, Breast, Gynecology, OB, Vascular, Fetal Echo, Musculoskeletal, Pediatrics, Pediatric Hip, Pelvis, Penile, Testis, Digital

12L4

Linear array

Cardiovascular, Thyroid, Breast, Gynecology, OB, Vascular, Fetal Echo, Musculoskeletal, Pediatrics, Pediatric Hip, Pelvis, Penile, Testis, Digital

14L5

Linear array

Cardiovascular, Thyroid, Breast, Vascular, Musculoskeletal, Penile, Testis, Digital

14L5 SP

Linear array (hockey stick)

Cardiovascular, Thyroid, Breast, Musculoskeletal, Penile, Testis, Digital, Intraoperative Vascular, Intraoperative Abdominal

18L6 HD

Linear array

Cardiovascular, Thyroid, Breast, Vascular, Musculoskeletal, Penile, Testis, Digital

4V1

Phased array (vector)

Abdomen, Renal, Gynecology, OB, Fetal Echo, Pelvis

4V1c

Phased array (vector)

Abdomen, Renal, Adult Echo, Pediatric Echo, Transcranial Doppler

4P1

Phased array

Abdomen, Renal, Gynecology, OB, Adult Echo, Fetal Echo, Pediatric Echo, Pelvis, Transcranial Doppler

8V3

Phased array (vector)

Fetal Echo, Pediatrics, Pediatric Echo, Neonatal Echo, Neonatal Head

10V4

Phased array (vector)

Renal, Pediatrics, Pediatric Echo, Pelvis, Neonatal Echo, Neonatal Head

V5M

Phased array (TEE)

TEE

V7M

Phased array (TEE)

TEE

*Not available on the ACUSON S1000 system.

Why Siemens Healthineers?

At Siemens Healthineers, we enable healthcare providers to achieve better outcomes at lower costs by expanding precision medicine, transforming care delivery, improving patient experience, and digitalizing healthcare.

Healthcare providers around the world have long relied upon our engineering excellence – leading-edge, high-quality medical technologies across a broad portfolio. Our technologies touch an estimated 5 million patients* globally every day. At the same time, they help hospital departments to continuously improve their clinical, operational, and financial outcomes.

We now consolidate this unprecedented volume of data and insights and turn them into pioneering enterprise and digital health services. With those, we maximize opportunities and share risks of your entire health system.

Partnerships are built on people. With Siemens Healthineers there is no team more committed and more connected than we are to realize your success together.