Siemens Medical Engineering Group (Erlangen, Germany) on Sept. 27 surprised the medical imaging community with word that it signed an agreement to acquire ultrasound company Acuson Corp. (Mountain View, Calif.) for approximately $700 million.

Acuson’s Aspen is at the mid-range of its product line, which would enhance Siemens’ offerings.

According to the pact, Siemens will make a cash tender offer for all outstanding shares of Acuson for $23 per share. That amount was more than 1.5 times the value of Acuson stock, which closed at $14.69 per share the day before the deal was announced.

“We believe that the merger of our two companies creates the largest and the best ultrasound company in the world,” said Samuel Maslak, chairman and CEO of Acuson. “Customers will benefit from more R&D, better distribution and service, and better connectivity solutions.”

Acuson has posted sluggish financial results this year, but still holds a strong reputation for its ultrasound product line.

Acuson blamed price erosion in the domestic cardiology market and the stronger dollar abroad for the adverse effects in its mid-year financial report. For the six-month period, revenues dipped to $231.4 million, compared with $238.9 million in the first half of 1999. Net income declined to $3.3 million, down from $10.3 million in the year-ago period.

Acuson began the year by completing its acquisition of Ecton Inc. (Plymouth Meeting, Pa.), which brought a low-end, portable, all-digital phased array echocardiography platform to Acuson. In March, Acuson President Daniel R. Dugan resigned as president and COO.

Siemens would receive a good share of the ultrasound market with the acquisition of Acuson and enhance its reputation in the business, much the same way GE Medical Systems (GEMS of Waukesha, Wis.) did when it acquired Diasonics Vingmed Ultrasound Ltd. (Haifa, Israel) in 1998 and Royal Philips Electronics (Amsterdam) purchased ATL Ultrasound Inc. (Bothell, Wash.) that same year.

According to Klein Biomedical Consultants (New York), Acuson held the No. 2 market share spot in ultrasound in 1998. Agilent Technologies Inc.’s Healthcare Solutions Group (Andover, Mass.) held the top spot.

Siemens and Acuson officials said the combination creates minimal geographic overlap, because the majority of Acuson’s business is focused on the U.S. market, while much of Siemens’ business is outside the United States.

“Our market shares are very complementary,” said Maslak. “About 65 percent of the worldwide ultrasound market is outside the U.S. and 70 percent of Acuson’s revenues come from the U.S. Meanwhile, 60 percent of Siemens’ revenues come from outside the U.S.”

Siemens’ premium ultrasound

line includes the all-digital Sonoline Elegra.

Siemens plans to keep R&D operations at both Acuson’s Mountain View site and the R&D operations of Siemens Medical Systems Inc., Ultrasound Group (Issaquah, Wash.).

“The intent is to continue both product lines and integrate them in the future,” said John D. Pavlidis, president of Siemens’ ultrasound division. “The Siemens products don’t include cardiology applications, which is a great strength of the Acuson products. Siemens has the Sonoline product, a strong product that addresses a mid-price range, which is an area that Acuson has never been able to address, and, finally, Siemens has good high-end technology.”

The new corporate structure has not been determined, but Maslak said Acuson’s management would continue to be closely involved in the business. Reaction to the proposed acquisition was one of surprise, but not totally unexpected.

“It wasn’t a surprise that it could happen, but it was a surprise that it did happen when it happened,” said Ernie Andberg, an analyst with R.J. Steichen & Co. (Minneapolis), who tracks Acuson. Andberg said previous ultrasound consolidation moves made Acuson’s acquisition more likely, as it struggled to compete with larger companies.

Andberg added that the companies’ ultrasound product lines can remain separate for only so long before it makes sense to consolidate and use the best-of-breed. He speculated that Acuson products would be used at the top end with Siemens’ Sonoline in the middle tier. Acuson — through its January acquisition of Ecton — provides a platform that would fit well into the product mix.

Siemens placed a strong emphasis on IT and networking advantages it will have with new PACS products from Acuson combined with its acquisition of Shared Medical Systems (Malvern, Pa.) earlier this year.

Siemens was expected to complete its tender offer for Acuson stock by late October or early November. Maslak owns approximately 1.5 million shares of Acuson stock, while board member Karl H. Johannsmeier owns more than 5 million shares, giving the two men more than 30 percent ownership in the company. Acuson is 39 percent insider-owned, while 53 percent of the company is held by institutional investors.

Following the consummation of the tender offer, Siemens will acquire the remaining shares of Acuson at $23 per share through a merger of a wholly owned Siemens acquisition subsidiary into Acuson.

ADAC Laboratories Inc. (Milpitas, Calif.) hung on to its Health Care Information Systems (HCIS of Houston) business unit as long as it could, but the time has come for ADAC to sell the unprofitable HCIS.

On Oct. 10, ADAC agreed to sell HCIS’ Cardiology Systems Group (CSG) to Camtronics Medical Systems (Hartland, Wis.) for an undisclosed amount. Exactly two weeks later, ADAC agreed to sell the rest of HCIS to Cerner Corp. (Kansas City, Mo.) for $6 million in cash.

The Camtronics’ agreement could close as soon as December.

CSG is a small component of ADAC’s HCIS unit, accounting for less than 10 percent of HCIS’ revenues in FY99, ending Oct. 3. HCIS’ poor financial performance and a sluggish market for large-scale information systems are the main reasons why ADAC has put all of HCIS on the block.

“I believe the right partner may provide a tighter, more dedicated focus on the healthcare IT market that ADAC is not able to provide,” said ADAC Chairman and CEO R. Andrew Eckert. “This is a very positive step, as the cardiology business was not sufficiently related to our core focus on nuclear medicine. PET imaging and radiation therapy products merit further investment over the course of the next few quarters.”

CSG would appear to be a much more compatible fit for Camtronics, which has specialized in cardiology information management technology. In 1994, the company made its leap into cardiac information systems with its Archium digital cardiac system for cath lab image management.

Camtronics President Gene Bergholz estimated that between Archium and derivative products, the company has more than 250 systems installed in the United States.

“Our goal, even back in 1994, was to integrate cath imaging and all the information relevant to a cardiac patient’s treatment,” Bergholz said. “That would include echo imaging, nuclear medicine, cardiovascular MR, and non-imaging information, such as hemodynamic data, and procedure and patient report related information.”

Camtronics plans to integrate ADAC’s CorCAAT system — an advanced hemodynamic and database management system for catheterization labs — into its Vericis integrated cardiac repository. Vericis is an open-architecture information and image management system for cardiology.

Bergholz said Camtronics has no plans to move CSG or its employees from its base of operations in Orlando, Fla., “at least for the foreseeable future.”

ADAC warned investors to expect lower-than-anticipated revenues and earnings in the company’s fourth fiscal quarter, ending Oct. 1.

ADAC cited two reasons for its shortfall: the “ongoing poor performance” of HCIS and lower-than-planned shipments of its C-PET scanners.

ADAC anticipates the sale of CSG will result in a fourth-quarter charge of approximately $2 million. The company added that the potential sale of the rest of HCIS — which leaves radiology information systems (RIS) products — would result in an additional charge to its books.

Cerner officials declined to comment on the proposed acquisition, pending completion of the transaction. ADAC and Cerner expect to complete its transaction later this month.

One HCIS product that would join Cerner’s lineup is the QuadRIS.

Cerner designs, develops, markets, installs and supports information systems for healthcare providers.

Hologic Inc. (Bedford, Mass.) in September closed on its $55 million acquisition of Trex Medical Corp. (Danbury, Conn.), while GE Medical Systems (GEMS of Waukesha, Wis.) closed on its acquisition of Micro Medical Systems Inc. (Sioux Falls, S.D.).

In addition, Tyco International (Pembroke, Bermuda) received shareholder approval to acquire Mallinckrodt Inc. (St. Louis), and Jomed N.V. (Beringen, Switzerland) completed its merger of EndoSonics Corp. (Rancho Cordova, Calif.), a maker of intravascular ultrasound products.

Parent company Thermo Electron Corp. (Waltham, Mass.) placed Trex on the block in February. On Aug. 15, Hologic came out of the blue to announce a proposal to acquire Trex.

The acquisition includes all of Trex’s businesses and product lines, with the exception of the Trophy Radiologie (Vincennes Cedex, France) dental imaging subsidiary. Trex has 550 employees and facilities in Danbury and Littleton, Mass.

The Trex purchase gives Hologic new product offerings in the following areas: general radiography, mammography, nondestructive testing, mobile X-ray, cath lab equipment, breast biopsy, R/F and electrophysiology.

Hologic entered the digital radiography market last year with its purchase of Direct Radiography Corp. (Newark, Del.) from Sterling Diagnostic Imaging Inc. (Greenville, S.C.). Prior to that, Hologic focused solely on bone densitometry.

While Hologic hasn’t revealed which product lines will stay and which, if any, will go, the company did give an idea of its focus going forward.

“This acquisition solidifies our position as the leading X-ray manufacturer for women’s health,” said S. David Ellenbogen, Hologic’s chairman and CEO. “Our goal is to position the company to generate sales in excess of $200 million in calendar 2001 from bone densitometry, mammography, C-arm imaging and digital radiography.”

Tyco-Mallinckrodt

Mallinckrodt shareholders have approved the company’s $4.2 billion purchase by Tyco, originally announced in late June. Tyco is offering Mallinckrodt shareholders $47.50 in Tyco stock for each share of Mallinckrodt held.

The transaction remains subject to approvals from the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. The European Commission approved the acquisition saying the only overlap in the companies’ activities occurs in the field of medical devices, but their “overall market share does not raise any competition concerns.” Tyco also signed a deal to acquire InnerDyne Inc. (Sunnyvale, Calif.), a maker of minimally invasive surgical access products.

GE Medical-Micro Medical

GEMS’ purchase of Micro Medical was announced in August. The acquisition will come under the newly created GE Medical Systems Information Technologies (GEMSIT), which brings together six previously separate IT businesses acquired by GEMS.

“Our goal is to continue to grow our company’s cardiology business by providing technology — driven productivity solutions and clinical workflow services for cardiology departments,” said Greg Lucier, president and CEO of the new business unit. “The acquisition of Micro Medical supports the technology piece of the equation by joining together more than 150 people with proven cardiovascular information systems expertise.”

GEMSIT has been working with Micro Medical since 1998, when the companies jointly developed the Catalyst cardiovascular information system. Catalyst unites patient data, images, waveforms and descriptive text on a single screen to optimize clinicians’ review and reporting processes.

Jomed-Endosonics

In the Jomed-EndoSonics deal, Jomed purchased 16.5 million shares of EndoSonics common stock at $11 per share, making EndoSonics a wholly owned subsidiary of Jomed. As a result, any outstanding shares of EndoSonics stock not accepted for payment in Jomed’s tender offer would be converted into the right to receive $11 per share in cash.

It has been a very interesting ride for Patrick Kelly, and now he is calling it quits.

The colorful co-founder, chairman and CEO of medical products supplier PSS World Medical (PSS of Jacksonville, Fla.) in October announced he was stepping down to pursue other interests.

In 1983, Kelly co-founded medical products distributor Physician Sales and Service (Jacksonville) and grew the business through an aggressive acquisition plan and unique management style to a $1.8 billion company. In 1996, PSS acquired Diagnostic Imaging Inc. (DI of Jacksonville), which itself was created in 1996 through the merger of four local X-ray equipment and consumables distributors.

Since then, DI has used the backing of PSS to acquire other local and regional imaging products suppliers in its efforts to build an extensive distribution network.

Kelly’s unique management style focuses on hiring and promoting youthful employees with an intensive sales background that creates a trickle-down enthusiasm among all employees. His philosophy has been such a topic of interest that he wrote a book in 1998 titled Faster Company: Building the World’s Nuttiest, Turn-on-a-dime, Home-grown, Billion-dollar Business.

Things unraveled last year with slumping financial statements becoming a growing concern for Kelly and PSS. Early this year, the company began looking for an acquisition partner and in June signed a deal to be acquired by Fisher Scientific International (Hampton, N.H.), a supplier of laboratory and scientific supplies. The stock-for-stock transaction was valued at $840 million.

However, the Fisher deal collapsed in September when Fisher’s declining stock price changed the value of the deal for PSS shareholders. With the failed merger and more poor financials expected in the upcoming second quarter, Kelly decided to retire as chairman and CEO and pursue other interests.

For the six-month period ending Sept. 30, PSS posted sales of $915.1 million, compared with $888 million in the same period of FY2000. Net income decreased to $13.9 million, down from $31.4 million in the year-ago period.

PSS did not provide any information as to Kelly’s future plans. As of Dec. 13, 1999, he owned approximately 500,000 shares of PSS.

Former Executive Vice President David A. Smith will fill in as CEO.

The company also named Clark A. Johnson, former chairman and CEO of retail chain Pier 1 Imports Inc. (Fort Worth, Texas), as the chairman of the board.

Two former executives at the former healthcare information systems firm HBO and Co. (HBOC of Atlanta) were indicted in October in one of the nation’s largest-ever securities fraud cases.

A 17-count indictment blames former HBOC co-presidents Albert J. Bergonzi and Jay P. Gilbertson for accounting discrepancies at the company, alleging securities fraud, conspiracy, mail and wire fraud.

HBOC was acquired by healthcare supply giant McKesson Corp. (San Francisco) in January 1999, creating the even bigger McKesson HBOC. In April 1999, the newly formed business revealed serious accounting discrepancies from HBOC that ignited a shareholder panic, causing the company to lose more than $9 billion in value in one day.

The indictment asserts that the pair inflated quarterly sales to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), backdated contracts, falsely reported operating and expense outlays, and provided false records to independent auditors. According to Associated Press reports, the indictment alleges Gilberston illegally made $7 million by trading stocks he helped inflate, and earned more money through bonuses. Bergonzi allegedly earned $4 million in the same manner.

The indictment also says the duo concealed the accounting irregularities from McKesson during merger talks.

A third executive, former HBOC vice president Dominick DeRosa, was named in a related civil suit filed by the SEC and settled it, agreeing to repay the $361,000 he made illegally, as well as a $50,000 fine. Gilberston and DeRosa left HBOC before the merger with McKesson, but Bergonzi remained until he was fired in June 1999.

In the April 1999 stock plunge, the New York Common Retirement Fund lost $250 million and later filed a private, class action suit. That suit is in pretrial phases in San Jose, Calif. federal court.

Gilbertson and Bergonzi face up to 10 years for each of the criminal counts and a fine of up to $1 million.

“This case is a poster child for the devastating effects of financial fraud by corporate management,” said U.S. Attorney Robert Mueller at a press conference announcing the indictments. “McKesson HBOC shareholders lost $9 billion in a single day as a result of the defendants’ actions and the reputation of a century-old San Francisco company, McKesson, was severely shaken.”

In other legal news, McKesson HBOC filed a lawsuit against W3Health Corp. (Wilmington, Mass.) and 12 former McKesson HBOC employees, alleging that they took trade secrets from the iMcKesson business and used the information to develop competing software. The complaint alleges that W3Health courted each of the defendants individually to leave the company.

The digital radiography market has another player with a new technology and a new price goal.

Edge Medical Devices (Hackensack, N.J.) is developing what it says is a new DR technology and is preparing to release a product early next year.

Edge was created three years ago in Raanana, Israel, to commercialize a new flat-panel technology developed by Israeli engineers. This year, as the company got closer to a final product, it opened a U.S.-based sales office. Its R&D and manufacturing are based in Raanana.

Robert Sohval, president of U.S. operations, explained that Edge has developed a new type of flat-panel detector called a SMART detector. SMART is an acronym for Scanned Matrix Array Readout Technology, which means the detectors do not use an active matrix array. Sohval said this configuration will allow Edge to make 17-inch by 17-inch detectors more reliable and market the technology at a lower cost than units currently available.

Sohval explained that the technology uses a direct conversion process with amorphous selenium and the sensor has a pattern of finely spaced parallel conductive tracks. After X-ray exposure, a proprietary scanhead scans across the tracks and in two seconds reads out and resets the detector. The readout electronics are on the edge of the detector and not on the surface of the detector, limiting the problems due to radiation exposure.

While Sohval could not provide an exact price, he said he expects the product to be competitive with what computed radiography systems cost.

Edge expects to offer both a digital bucky system, as well as a retrofit option that will work with virtually all existing bucky arms. The detector is designed to be thinner than existing products and fit neatly into existing bucky arms.

Beta testing could begin late this year and a submission to the FDA is anticipated in the first quarter of 2001.

Dicom Imaging Systems (Bellingham, Wash.) and Eastman Kodak Co. (Rochester, N.Y.) have signed a joint marketing agreement for Kodak to distribute Dicom’s software. A separate agreement allows Dicom to purchase and resell Kodak’s Dental Digital products in the United States.

Power Quality Engineering Inc. (Phoenix) has reached an agreement with Premier Inc.’s Clinical Technology Services division (CTS of San Diego) for the exclusive marketing of PQE’s product to Premier’s 2,000 member hospitals. PQE’s custom-tuned power filters are designed to increase uptime and improve equipment reliability in radiology and cancer therapy equipment.

ART Advanced Research Technologies Inc. (Saint-Laurent, Quebec, Canada) has renewed its scientific collaboration agreement with GE Medical Systems (GEMS of Waukesa, Wis.) for a second six-month period. Under the agreement, GEMS assists ART in the development of its SoftScan optical breast imaging system, which is is expected to begin Phase 3 trials in the United States in early 2001.

Cedara Software Corp. (Mississagua, Ontario, Canada) has released Cedara Software for the Heart. The product line targets healthcare system integrators and OEM developers and is designed to provide imaging support for applications in cardiology. The Cedara Web-enabled suite of cardiology components offers simultaneous display of images from numerous imaging modalities, including angiography, ultrasound, nuclear medicine, X-ray, MRI, and CT. Cedara Software for the Heart cardiology component suite serves several stages of the workflow process, including multiconnectivity access to multimodality display, diagnosis, decision-making, and therapy.

Images-On-Call Teleradiology Systems (IOC of Dallas) and Vidar Systems Corp. (Herndon, Va.) have announced the inclusion of Vidar’s Sierra and Diagnostic Pro film digitizers in IOC’s image capture/

transmit station for films in its FilmDigitizer models FD5W-S and FD5W-DP.

Marconi Medical Systems (Highland Heights, Ohio) has expanded its PACS capabilities by offering voice recognition from Talk Technology Inc. (Bensalem, Pa.). Marconi said the integration of voice recognition will run seamlessly on its diagnostic workstations and the technology will allow the radiologist to dictate, edit, and sign ICD-9 code reports and distribute them in real-time or in batch mode. When integrated with Marconi’s Web-based results distribution, radiologists can provide electronic reports to referring physicians. Talk Technology’s TalkStation application includes Web browser functionality and Internet access.

Siemens Oncology Care Systems Group (Concord, Calif.) signed a three-year contract to supply group purchasing organization Premier Inc. (Charlotte, N.C.) with oncology equipment and in-service support. Among the products is the Primatom system, which combines a CT scanner with a medical linear accelerator. Siemens also is collaborating with Premier Innovation Institute to develop a solution for improving radiation therapy treatments.

Fuji Medical Systems USA Inc. (Stamford, Conn.) has scored a deal to supply CR systems to group purchasing organization AmeriNet Inc. (St. Louis). The contract is effective Oct. 1 through January 31, 2001. The agreement allows all AmeriNet members to buy one Fuji CR system at a discounted price and a second stand-alone CR unit at a greater discount.

An MRI technician from GE Medical Systems (GEMS of Waukesha, Wis.) was killed by a nitrogen gas leak while installing an MRI at a New York hospital in September. According to a report in the New York Daily News, Paul Ambrose, 25, arrived from a British GEMS office and was installing an MRI at Weill Medical College on the campus of New York-Presbyterian Hospital when the odorless gas seeped into the enclosed trailer where he was working. When other members of the installation team realized Ambrose was missing, the gas had become too prevalent in the trailer to attempt to rescue Ambrose. Six other people were injured by the leak.

3D imaging software provider Vital Images Inc. (Minneapolis) received approval to list its common stock on the Nasdaq SmallCap market. Trading will take place under the symbol VTAL.

OSI Systems Inc.’s (Hawthorne, Calif.) Osteometer MediTech subsidiary has received FDA clearance to market its UltraSure DTU-one ultrasound scanner. Company officials said the clearance represents the first pre-market approval for an ultrasound system for the assessment of osteoporotic fracture risk. The UltraSure DTU-one is a new generation of ultrasound scanner, which measures broadband ultrasound attenuation and provides high-resolution images to identify the precise location a scan takes place on a patient’s heel bone.

Marconi Medical Systems Inc. (Highland Heights, Ohio) has struck a deal with Broadlane.com to be the exclusive provider of multislice CT scanners for the BuyPower GPO, which serves hospitals owned by Tenet Healthcare Corp. (Santa Barbara, Calif.). The one-year deal began Sept. 1 and evolved from an existing relationship between Marconi and Tenet.

GE Medical Systems (GEMS of Waukesha, Wis.) established a cardiology-specific sales and marketing team to sell its products directly to the cardiology market. GE Medical Systems Cardiology will provide cardiology products, including cardiac X-ray, MRI, CT, nuclear medicine, ultrasound, ECG, holter monitoring, EP systems, defibrillators, stress testing and integrated cardiovascular information systems. D. Brent Shafer, formerly general manager of X-ray sales and marketing, has been named general manager of the new organization.

Marconi Medical Systems (Highland Heights, Ohio) signed a multiyear distribution agreement with the Japanese operations of Shimadzu Corp. (Kyoto, Japan) for Shimadzu to sell Marconi’s multislice CT scanners exclusively in Japan. The companies also agreed to extend their current agreement for the distribution of Marconi’s nuclear medicine products in Japan. According to Marconi, the companies have an 11-year history in nuclear medicine resulting in Shimadzu gaining 25 percent market share in the Japanese market.

Theragenics Corp. (Buford, Ga.) has signed a five-year deal for Nycomed Amersham plc (Buckinghamshire, U.K.) to distribute the TheraSeed oncology seed in the United States, Canada, and Puerto Rico. The five-year agreement is consistent with Theragenics’ plans to place TheraSeed into a variety of non-exclusive domestic and international distribution channels.

Boston Scientific Corp. (Natick, Mass.) received clearance from the FDA to market its Atlantis SR intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) catheter. According to the company, the Atlantis SR is the only commercially available 40 MHz IVUS catheter compatible with 6 French guiding catheters. The 40 MHz transducer offers the highest frequencies available, allowing for high-resolution images that are easier to interpret. The product incorporates Monorail catheter technology in its design. The Atlantis SR is used to decide the size of stents and assess how much to expand the stents during procedures.

Fonar Corp. (Melville, N.Y.) will sell and distribute the virtual colonoscopy product from Viatronix Inc. (Stony Brook, N.Y.). The product uses a CT scanner to simulate a colonoscopy exam non-invasively. The two companies may explore using MRI images to produce virtual exams.

Mobile P.E.T. Systems Inc. (San Diego) has been approved for trading on the OTC Bulletin board under the symbol MBPT.OB.

A.L.I. Technologies Inc. (Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada) has signed a deal with Vidar Systems Corp. (Herndon, Va.) to offer Vidar’s DiagnoticPro film digitizer with its ALI UltraPACS product.