Siemens Heathineers has introduced the Acuson Maple, an ultrasound system designed for rapid diagnosis and assessment across various clinical settings. It incorporates AI-powered features to enhance clinical performance for users of all skill levels.

Utilizing Acuson technology from Siemens Healthineers’ existing portfolio, the Acuson Maple serves as a versatile ultrasound system suitable for a wide range of applications. It is lightweight, portable, and operates on battery power, making it suitable for emerging markets, small hospitals, outpatient centers, private practices, and urgent care facilities.

“Siemens Healthineers proudly expands its Acuson portfolio with the Acuson Maple, which leverages a common hardware and software platform as well as AI-powered applications that automate workflow and analysis to bolster exam efficiency,” says Daniel Frisch, head of radiology and image guidance at Siemens Healthineers Ultrasound. “This affordable, configurable, and versatile system offers a broad range of diagnostic imaging capabilities, with a high level of image quality for every patient.”

Designed for versatility, the Acuson Maple supports 15 transducers and has 25 advanced features that enhance usability and streamline workflow. An integrated battery enables up to 75 minutes of unplugged system scanning. This capability is invaluable in emerging markets with power supply challenges and in clinical settings that require movement between exam rooms for rapid patient assessment.

The system’s suite of AI-powered tools allows clinicians to improve efficiency by increasing consistency in repetitive tasks. For obstetrics and gynecology (OB/GYN) imaging, the Auto OB feature leverages machine learning to automatically calculate the fetus’s age and weight, reducing overall measurement time by up to 24%. For cardiac imaging, the eSie Measure feature uses machine learning to automatically perform cardiac measurements during a routine echocardiography exam. eSie Measure reduces keystrokes by up to 44% and shortens routine echo exam time by up to five minutes, according to the company.

The ultrasound system is cleared by the U.S. FDA, CE marked in Europe, and is available globally.