Siemens Acuson Juniper

A highly versatile system with plenty application options.

Learn more

Siemens Acuson Juniper

The Siemens Acuson Juniper is mostly recognized for its versatile nature. This machine can easily be used across several departments.

For example, it is great in radiology, interventional radiology, and urology. But, it also comes handy in cardiovascular, orthopedic, and OB/GYN examinations.

If you wish to, you also have the option for shared service on this machine.

Another highly valued benefit of the Acuson Juniper, is that it is very budget-friendly. This is partly due to how robust the system is and how easy this makes long term maintenance.

What is the Siemens Acuson Juniper price then?

The Juniper is a mid-range system. This is why the Acuson Juniper price typically lies between 10-20.000 Euros.

With the Juniper, you further get a nice and compact footprint, which is lightweight and easy to move around in your clinic. Also, the intuitive interface ensures that you can work fast and efficiently every day.

It is a perfect fit for a smaller clinic with a lower daily patient throughput.

Siemens Acuson Sequoia

The Sequoia is mainly used for radiology, but it performs well in general imaging too.

Learn more

Siemens Acuson Sequoia

The Siemens Acuson Sequoia is, similarly to the Juniper, a versatile system.

Mainly the Sequoia is used in radiology because of its highly detailed imaging. Any radiologist would appreciate having this premium machine in their clinic or hospital.

This is because of its many advanced applications.

For example:

Shear Wave for liver analysis

Ultrasound Derived Fat Fraction (UDFF)

Fusion Imaging

and CEUS Imaging.

With technology such as the Fusion Imaging, you are able to combine CT/MRI images with ultrasound images for better diagnostic precision.

Further, when using the Sequioa, you can expect excellent Color Doppler which provides amazingly clear images. Also, this system clearly shows blood vessels and borders around all organs.

For this system, you can further use DAX and 7L2 probes for deeper penetration. This makes it easier to examine many types of patients. You can even do transcranial exams using a cardio probe – you will be amazed at the image clarity.

The Acuson Sequoia is also useful for general imaging.

As for the Acuson Sequoia price, you should expect it to range between 30-45.000 Euros. The Sequoia is a high-tier machine and thus the price range is higher, even on the used market. Of course buying used is still the more affordable option.

Siemens Acuson Redwood

The Redwood is the preferred system for cardiology exams.

Learn more

Siemens Acuson Redwood

While the Juniper and Sequoia are primarily used for radiology, the Siemens Acuson Redwood is preferred for cardiology. It is beneficial for heart health assessments and monitoring.

But at the same time, many like to use the Acuson Redwood for radiology and general imaging as well.

You can also easily use this system for Shared Service.

For cardio, the Syngo VVI, Stress Echo, and LVO (Left Ventricular Opacification) features will take your work to the next level. Also, when you use this machine for shared service cardiology, you can use the 2D TEE probe.