School Overview

Definition of Terms | 2023 School Data

Brooks School

Boarding School Avg.

School Focus

College Preparatory

College Preparatory

Grades Offered

9-12

9-12

School Type

Co-ed

Co-ed

ADD/ADHD Support

Yes

Religious Affiliation

Non-denominational

Year Founded

1926

1906

Campus Size

251 acres

128 acres

Student Body

Academics and Faculty

Tuition Cost

Acceptance Rate

Application Deadline

Jan. 15

Jan. 15

Accepts Standardized Application

No

Acceptance Rate

25%

60%

Director of Admissions

Bini Egertson

AP / Advanced Courses

# of AP / Advanced Courses Offered

17

18

Courses

Biology, Calculus (AB), Calculus (BC), Chemistry, Chinese, Computer Science, English Literature, French, Latin, Microeconomics, Music Theory, Physics, Spanish, Spanish Literature, Statistics, Studio Art, U.S. History

Sports

Extracurriculars

College Matriculation

School Notes

Newly opened-our brand new $28 million Center for the Arts. Featuring an abundance of practice spaces, community meeting areas, and state of the art technology, it is a perfect space for the arts in the middle of the campus.

Brooks has three unique programs we encourage you to learn more about: Students on the Forefront of Science, Winter Term, and our Exchange Program.

The goal of Winter Term is to put into practice the concept of "depth over breadth," something that supports the school`s mission of providing the most meaningful educational experiences Brooks students will have. The single-course structure of Winter Term allows students and faculty to work together even more closely than they do in regular classes.

The Students on the Forefront of Science Program is an initiative developed by the Science Department at Brooks School. The goal of the program is to provide rising sixth-formers (between junior and senior year) with innovative experiences that will expose them to research, technology, and advanced studies in the sciences.

Our Exhange Program, founded in 1986, promotes the global education of students from Brooks and its partner schools in Botswana, Hungary, Morocco, Scotland, Spain and Peru. By living abroad as residents in other school communities, our students are challenged to extend themselves to another place, another culture, another people and, most importantly, to be affected by them, to be changed by them.

Something exciting is always going on here, so please make an appointment to come visit us in person or virtually.

Brooks School accreditations: NEASAC, TABS

Frequently Asked Questions

How much does Brooks School cost?

Brooks School's tuition is approximately $66,900 for boarding students and $55,000 for day students.

What is the acceptance rate of Brooks School?

The acceptance rate of Brooks School is 25%, which is lower than the boarding school average of 60%. Brooks School's acceptance rate is ranked as one of the top boarding schools with low acceptance rates.

What sports does Brooks School offer?

Brooks School offers 17 interscholastic sports: Baseball, Basketball, Crew, Cross Country, Dance, Field Hockey, Football, Golf, Ice Hockey, Lacrosse, Sailing, Soccer, Softball, Squash, Tennis, Volleyball and Wrestling.

Does Brooks School offer a summer program?

Yes, Brooks School offers a summer program. Visit their summer school page for more information.

What is Brooks School's ranking?

Brooks School ranks among the top 20 boarding schools for Low acceptance rates.

When is the application deadline for Brooks School?

The application deadline for Brooks School is Jan. 15.

I am a:

Parent

Student

Email:

Name of parent:

Student first name:

Student last name:

Student date of birth:

Student is:

Male

Female

Currently in grade:

Seeking entry for grade:

Target start date:

Please briefly describe academic, athletic, and extracurricular interests of the student:

Home address:

City:

Country:

State:

Zip: (enter "N/A" if not applicable)

Phone:

Allow other boarding schools to send me information. Share your information with nearby schools on our site and let them send you brochures.

Save this data and create your user profile. Create your own user account so you don't have to re-type your user data each time you request information. You'll also be able to track your information requests, get reminded of application dates, and more!

Username:

Password: