We are thrilled that you are interested in learning more about Brooks School. The best way to get to know us is to visit our North Andover campus, situated on beautiful Lake Cochichewick.

There are many qualities that set Brooks apart: happy and engaged kids, caring adults attuned to the needs of students, and an approach rooted in the belief that we can always be better.

"I chose Brooks for the rigorous academics, wonderful afternoon activities and especially the connected community. People are genuinely happy to see each other and teachers want to help their students, in every way possible."

Katharine Gutkoski '22As you analyze schools and consider the metrics used to separate schools, I think you will find that Brooks stands up well. In every area of school life – from the rigorous academic program to creativity in the arts and teamwork in athletics – Brooks students find themselves challenged and inspired by a dedicated faculty.

Our mission statement is: “At Brooks School, we seek to provide the most meaningful educational experience our students will have in their lives.” Head of School John Packard says it best: “Our mission is inspirational, aspirational, and enduring.” There is no greater evidence of this than the fact that every member of our school community knows the mission of the school. At Brooks, our mission is alive.

"My dreams are coming true at Brooks... I love everything about this school!"

Janelle Umana-Limon' 20

We hope to have the opportunity to meet you soon and wish you the best as you search for the most meaningful educational experience of your life.

If you would like to get in touch with us, please email admission@brooksschool.org.

Bini Egertson

Director of Admission

Brooks School is a coeducational boarding and day school, grades 9 through 12, located in North Andover, Massachusetts. The school admits students of any race, color, gender, religion, sexual orientation, and national and ethnic origin to all the rights, privileges, programs, and activities generally accorded or made available to students at the school. The school does not discriminate on the basis of disability, race, gender, religion, sexual orientation, color, or national and ethnic origin in the administration of its educational and admission policies, scholarship and loan programs, and athletics and other school-administered programs and activities.