The co-educational boarding and day school​ is on a list compiled by GoBankingRates.com. Find out where Brooks ranks and how much it costs.

NORTH ANDOVER, MA —North Andover's Brooks School is among the 15 most expensive high schools in the country, according to the personal finance website GoBankingRates.com.

Earlier this month, the website ranked the most expensive schools based on annual tuition. Brooks School, a co-educational boarding and day high school located next to Lake Cochichewick, finished 15th on the list.

According to GoBankingRates.com, the annual tuition for a student at Brooks is $57,805. Of course, that's only for day students. The Brooks School website lists the annual boarding tuition at $69,575.

In its article, GoBankingRates.com described why Brooks — budgeted enrollment 370 — might be so expensive.

"The school fosters small classes, close relationships with teachers, and a tight-knit community," GoBankingRates.com wrote. "For the academically inclined, there are 17 advanced placement courses, and opportunities to study abroad in Africa, Europe and China."

Brooks, which was founded in 1926, has an average class size of 11, and a faculty-to-student ratio of 1 to 6, according to the school's website.

According to the Brooks website, the school has enrolled students from 31 states and 23 countries in recent years. Though not all are paying full price.

The website states that 36 percent of students do receive aid, with an average award of $47,000.

Other schools from the region to feature on the GoBankingRates.com list were: Rivers School in Weston (No. 14, $57,950), St. Paul's School in Concord, New Hampshire (No.5, $62,000) and Kent School in Kent, Connecticut (No. 2, $69,950).

The list features eight schools located in New York City.

The No. 1 school on the list of most expensive high schools in the country is The Lawrenceville School in Lawrenceville, New Jersey, where the annual tuition is $73,220.

Get more local news delivered straight to your inbox. Sign up for free Patch newsletters and alerts.