IKR but it was just an example of a deliberate choice for the definition of a parameter based on the technology of the time. Logically the fundamental value should be derived from the radius even if practically it is "easier" to measure diameter. When you do that of course you have to assume constant radius and equidistance from the focus...

In the same vein you might have thought someone would argue if you're going to go all metric, we need to get rid of the ancient Babylonian time base. If you did think that, you'd be right!

Count your fingers for the hours of the day, toes at night. Not so sure about a 10 day week though!

Clickspring would have a fit if they had to remake the Antikythera mechanism.

Also all the western countries and many others are trying to use a Greek alphabet....whatever next?

Men on the moon?

If you don't like Pi you can use Tau, equal to 2*Pi. Yes it tidies the circumference equation a bit but it uglies up the area equation, introducing a factor of a half. I'd say for every equation you can come up with containing 2*Pi, where tau would fit neatly, I could (Although I won't) find two more which use a single Pi, or 4*Pi, or Pi/n, or Pi^n, where using tau would make either no difference or an even bigger mess. Plus, it's easy to measure a diameter, usually not so easy to directly measure radius, so Pi is actually more useful for finding a circumference anyway.

Pi D^2/4 is far better the Pi r^2 for calculating the area of a circle Nobody, in their right mind, would try to accurately measure the radius instead of the diameter, when doing anything engineering.

Pi D^2/4 is far better the Pi r^2 for calculating the area of a circle Nobody, in their right mind, would try to accurately measure the radius instead of the diameter, when doing anything engineering.

It was a philosophical point made in relation to the choice of “human“ size measuring scales. I suggested imperial units have their place since they are still useful in giving a sense of perspective, in understanding the physicality of nature as it relates to a person.

Conceptually, Pi is not the fundamental constant from which geometry is created in nature. An orbit for example has a focus and a radius, it is from that geometry a diameter may be created. Therefore when trying to appreciate nature from a human perspective, which involves complex maths and odd equations, Pi is a derivative constant and not a fundamental property of nature.

How that affects our measurement of this phenomena is irrelevant.

It was a philosophical point made in relation to the choice of “human“ size measuring scales. I suggested imperial units have their place since they are still useful in giving a sense of perspective, in understanding the physicality of nature as it relates to a person.

Conceptually, Pi is not the fundamental constant from which geometry is created in nature. An orbit for example has a focus and a radius, it is from that geometry a diameter may be created. Therefore when trying to appreciate nature from a human perspective, which involves complex maths and odd equations, Pi is a derivative constant and not a fundamental property of nature.

How that affects our measurement of this phenomena is irrelevant.

Bah humbug to ‘conceptually’. The value of Pi was detetmined long before orbits were invented! I’m for practicality. Most of us measur someting to find the value of something else. Measuring the diameter of a pip is sooo much easier than trying to measure its radius - unless, of course , you first measure the diameter and then calculate the radius from that.

I think everyone should start using base twelve instead of base ten, it's so much more practical. Hours, months, inches, eggs and degrees are all much more neatly expressed in dozenal than decimal, you can divide by 2, 3, 4 and 6 as easily as dividing by 2 and 5 in decimal, clearly thirds and quarters are so much better than rubbish old fifths.

I am not immune to irony but you make a fair point. The multiple systems of measurement are a mess and should be replaced with "better".

We can then have a sensible discussion about what makes a unit "better" and what might make it human friendly. Like I said, I use mm as much as I possibly can unless I am speaking to someone where the metric system fails to convey either the meaning of an observation or has a numerical value that is tricky to hold in your head or inappropriate for the accuracy required (or a really large number of impossibly small units).

Now normally I'd be looking at a slice of steak to decide if it's the "right" size. Since I am not that metric friendly I have "no idea" what an 8 ounce (226g) steak would be in grams "on the spot". But if the butcher asks I'll probably say slice off an inch thick please (25mm just doesn't "sound" right) or he might say 8oz or 6oz (12oz is American sizing). Easy decision, small numbers. Six vs. eight (or 12 I suppose ).

In grams that is a chore. I'll round it off so I'm not being picky but would you really ask for a 225g steak? Would you know (on the spot) that a 6oz steak would be 170g? Would you easily be able to "tell" the difference between 225g and 170g which is near as dammit 8oz vs. 6oz? Do you metric kids do that? Do you ask for half a kilogram or a quarter? Quarter pounder has a ring to it but does "quarter kilo" even exist as an option Note, here we are again using fractions in an attempt to get rid of them...

I am genuinely asking because I appreciate being an older person means I am bringing all my imperial baggage along with me. I've just never heard anyone use a precision metric scale in the vernacular when you just want a sensible size thing or vaguely describe something being miles off...