With production on The Mandalorian & Grogu set to begin in a few weeks, casting is apparently ramping up, and the first major piece of news has emerged.

According to reporter Jeff Sneider, via his newsletter, three-time Oscar-nominated actress Sigourney Weaver is in talks to join Jon Favreau’s Star Wars theatrical debut. Weaver thus becomes the first name to be attached to it besides Pedro Pascal as the titular bounty hunter — not even fellow Disney Plus co-stars Katee Sackhoff or Emily Swallow have been confirmed yet. Sadly, we will have to move on without Carl Weathers returning as Greef Karga following the actor’s passing earlier this year.

The Hollywood Reporter backed up the story a few minutes later. Details on Weaver’s character, as well as the plot, are being kept under wraps for now, but if there’s already this level of behind-the-scenes movement on the film, it won’t be late before the major trades start digging up other details on the film. For now, we know that Jon Favreau is directing and co-writing the script with Dave Filoni.

The schedule as of a few months ago was to film this summer in California, but both Sneider and THR are saying “later this year” now, which could either mean nothing or suggest a possible change in the planning. The shoot is supposed to go on for 4-5 months. If Weaver’s name is already popping up we might be in for a sizable role for her. Guest stars like Christopher Lloyd or Temuera Morrison weren’t revealed until late into filming for the last couple of seasons of the series.

As Sneider put it in the newsletter and social media, perhaps the biggest headline here is that there is finally some casting news on a new Star Wars movie, as it’s been six years since names like Keri Russell or Richard E. Grant joined a galaxy far, far away.

But here’s another nugget that was hidden inside the text, that may or may not be relevant down the line. According to the reporter, Lucasfilm hasn’t decided yet if the next movie after The Mandalorian & Grogu, which is set to open May 22, 2026, will be Sharmeen Obaid-Chinoy’s New Jedi Order or James Mangold’s Dawn of the Jedi.

From where things stand at the moment, Mangold has barely started work on his film as he’s still waiting to finish A Complete Unknown, while Obaid-Chinoy could have seen at least a couple of drafts of the script of her new movie already. Then again, this movie was also going to be the first new Star Wars movie and then Lucasfilm pulled The Mandalorian & Grogu out of nowhere.

The next Star Wars project out is The Acolyte, hitting Disney Plus on June 4. The Mandalorian & Grogu will hit theaters on May 22, 2026.