Blazing Saddles but French?

A real hoot to watch, with jokes landing consistently throughout the entire runtime, and the cast of La Grande Bouffe all showing their aptitude for comedy. The running gags all work excellently, especially Nixon as president, Custer's loud boot stamping, and the ridiculous romance between Custer and Marie-Helene. Michel Piccoli also gives the performance of a lifetime and it was truly an experience to behold it.

Unfortunately...the satire doesn't completely land because even though I get what Ferreri is going for (Manifest Destiny as a metaphor for French colonialism and gentrification) using a real life genocide from a different country's history as your political metaphor is already pretty eyebrow raising, but by characterizing the Native Americans…

Marco Ferreri directs a two hour comedy, repurposing the operations of General Custer into a modern age. Marcello Mastroianni stars as Custer.

Before watching Don't touch the white woman I'd heard that in it's day it struggled at the box office.

It's in French yes, but was it just too Italian for them?

I can't call this one of Ferreri's more disturbing efforts, but it is him at his maniacal and wacky best, it's absolutely one of his out and out wilder or imaginative films.

I love the newspaper stuffing joke, the schlubby guy with the crisp bag who represents a send up of American college intellectuals and the CIA. Or the Wild bunch style bloodbath later on, the photographs…

When the counter-culture got a hold of the mythology attached to the US calvary commander General George Armstrong Custer the more reverential film portrayals by Errol Flynn (They Died with Their Boots On) and Ronald Reagan (Santa Fe Trail) became a distant memory. Custer became the subject of some straight faced revisionism (Robert Siodmak’s flawed wannabe epic Custer of the West) and revisionism with farcical accents (Arthur Penn’s excellent picaresque Little Big Man). Iconoclast, provocateur and general wild man Marco Ferreri in this Franco-Italo comic hodgepodge of an absurdist “Western“ also gives Custer a go. With Marcello Mastroianni (Custer), Michel Piccoli (Buffalo Bill), Philippe Noiret and Ugo Tognazzi in the cast, Ferreri reunites with his bros from the prior year's…

"We'll just do a re-enactment. Everything is possible for the press." --director Marco Ferreri, playing a photographer

While Alex Cox allowed anachronisms to slowly creep into Walker -- starting with the Zippo lighter that shows up 37 minutes in -- Ferreri puts them front and center right at the top of Don't Touch the White Woman, never allowing the viewer to forget for a moment that these are actors (chiefly, the four leads from La Grande Bouffe, plus Catherine Deneuve for flavor) playing dress-up, dramatizing the lead-up to Custer's Last Stand in the middle of -- and often on the streets of -- modern-day Paris. With its references to Watergate (mentioned once), Nixon (brought up multiple times, plus his photograph…