Tracey Grady, BSN, RN

Lead RN Care Coordinator, Arizona Care Network

The best way to maintain your health is by scheduling annual wellness visits with your doctor. Certain tests and screenings are recommended for men at specific ages and are crucial to staying healthy and identifying signs of illness early on. Check out the guidelines below to ensure you are current on the recommended health exams for your age group.

Please remember these guidelines are not meant to replace advice from your doctor. Your doctor may recommend certain screenings at a different age based on your individual genetics and health history, as they know your overall health the best.

20’s

Annual physical exam

Blood pressure

Height / weight measurements

Annual vision & dental exam

STI testing/ HIV screening every 2 years

If you are sexually active, have multiple partners, or are getting into a new relationship, it is a good idea to get tested.

Testicular cancer screening every year

Testicular cancer is most common in males age 15 to 35, so it’s important to start getting tested early.

Full body skin exam every 2 years

Skin changes can occur rapidly, so an exam ensures any form of cancer is caught early.

Cholesterol testing every 5 years

High cholesterol increases your risk of heart attack and stroke, two of the leading causes of death in the United States.

Annual Flu vaccine

HPV vaccine (if not already received)

Protect yourself against warts and cancers that can be caused by this STD.

Tdap booster at least every 10 years

Tetanus enters the body through cuts or wounds. Diphtheria and pertussis spread from person to person. Prevent all three with this vaccine.

MMR

Protects against measles, mumps, and rubella.

Should get 2 doses if there are no previously documented doses.

Varicella

Protects against chicken pox. For people who have not previously had chicken pox or the vaccine.

Depression screening

Helps you recognize, talk about, and seek treatment for depression if needed.

30’s

All screenings from your 20’s PLUS:

Blood test for diabetes, thyroid disease, liver problems, and anemia

Annual cardiovascular evaluation

Includes blood pressure, cholesterol, and family history screening.

40’s

All screenings from your 20’s and 30’s PLUS:

Annual prostate screening exam

Diabetes screening

Screening for lipid disorders (Coronary Heart Disease) every 5 years

50’s

All screenings from your 20’s, 30’s, and 40’s PLUS:

Annual Low-dose CT Lung Scan

Necessary if you are or have been a smoker.

Blood test for thyroid every 5 years

Annual screening for colon cancer with fecal occult blood test

Checks stool for hidden blood.

Colonoscopy every 10 years

Annual screening for lipid disorders (Coronary Heart Disease)

Shingles vaccine (2 doses)

60’s and Older

All previous screenings listed PLUS:

Annual screening for Osteoporosis

Tests your bone mineral density to identify low bone mass.

Annual hearing exam

Continue colorectal screening based upon previous studies and results

Annual screening for Dementia and Alzheimer’s

One-time screening for Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm

Ultrasound to detect any enlargement of the Aorta, the main blood vessel that delivers blood to the body.

Staying current on health exams should be a top priority to keep your body healthy. Need a better way to keep track of your progress? Download and print off our men’s health checklist to identify which screenings you have already received and which ones you still need to talk to your doctor about.