Formed in Stockbridge 10 years ago when lead singer Eva Spence was just 14 years old, Rolo Tomassi have spent the last decade becoming critical darlings thanks to their intense mathcore blend of metal, shoegaze and jazz, even as commercial success has continued to elude them. The last few years have seen them weather a few storms, with Eva and brother James now the only original members, but if anything it seems these obstacles have only made them stronger – fourth album Grievances is nothing short of monumental.

Certainly they’ve always known how to make a visceral impact. Within a split second of pressing play we are greeted with a furious barrage of blast-beat drumming and technical guitar, wrapped around Eva Spence’s unholy shriek, and noise fans will not be disappointed by the Dillinger Escape Plan-esque Funereal or the anthemic post-hardcore of Stage Knives.

But Rolo Tomassi have never just been about volume, and never has that been clearer than here. Take Raumdeuter, a dazzlingly complex mix of ideas, a collision course of post-rock and electronica, with Spence shifting effortlessly from guttural screams to angelic soprano and back again. The jazzy, piano-rich textures of Opalescent and the thoughtful, twinkling Crystal Cascades eschew death growls entirely in favour of clean harmonies from brother and sister Spence. There’s even a string interlude in the form of Chandelier Shiver. Such musical airs could risk coming across as pretentious. In Rolo Tomassi’s hands they sound hugely accomplished.

While Grievances represents a small step towards more widespread accessibility for the notoriously inaccessible band (the melodic mid-section of The Embers even possesses something approaching a recognisable riff!) they are never likely to be a band that sells millions of records. But by God they deserve to. Grievances is not just Rolo Tomassi’s best album, ironing out the inconsistencies that plagued their (otherwise superb) earlier albums. It’s one of the best metal albums from anyone in years. Every track sees the band try something new. Every track sees them nail it.

Epic seven-minute long closer All That Has Gone Before is, fittingly, the perfect summation of all that has preceded it. It’s a spine-chilling clash of sounds – classical piano, unearthly screams, clean vocals, chugging guitar, rapid-fire drums, all swirling around each other and melding into a crushing, beautiful wall of sound. ‘There is no glory in the air,’ Eva Spence laments mournfully, and maybe she’s right. But if there’s any justice, Grievances will be the album that sees Rolo Tomassi take their place in the pantheon as one of the best British bands around.