Berlin-Pankow station

Berlin-Pankow is a station on the Berlin–Szczecin railway, situated in Berlin's Pankow district. It is served by the S-Bahn lines S2, S8 and S9 and is the northern terminus of the U-Bahn line U2. But the next extension could terminate at Ossietzkyplatz.

Vinetastraße (Berlin U-Bahn)

Vinetastraße is a Berlin U-Bahn station in the Pankow district, located on the U2. Like the eponymous street, it is named after the legendary town of Vineta on the Baltic Sea. The station opened in 1930 and for decades was the northern terminus of the U2, until the line was extended to the Pankow S-Bahn station in 2000.

Eberswalder Straße (Berlin U-Bahn)

Eberswalder Straße is a Berlin U-Bahn station located on the U2. The station is a raised iron structure on stone columns, designed by architect Alfred Grenander. It opened 1913, named Danziger Strasse. It was closed during the last months of World War II when Berlin was bombed heavily. The post-war division of Berlin put it in the Russian sector. In 1950 it was renamed Dimitroffstrasse, in honour of Bulgarian communist leader Georgi Dimitrov.

Berlin Schönhauser Allee station

Berlin Schönhauser Allee is a railway station in the Prenzlauer Berg district of Berlin. It is located on the Berlin U-Bahn line U2 and also on the Ringbahn. Build in 1913 by A. Grenander opened as "Bahnhof Nordring". As the station was well accepted the roof was elongated in 1925 and a new entrance build. In 1936 the station was named "Schönhauser Allee". On one day about 500 trains and more than 26000 people cross this station.

Weißensee Cemetery

The Weißensee Cemetery is a Jewish cemetery located in the neighborhood of Weißensee in Berlin, Germany. It is the second largest Jewish cemetery in Europe. The cemetery covers approximately 42 ha and contains approximately 115,000 graves. It was dedicated in 1880.

Schönhausen Palace

Schönhausen Palace is a Baroque palace at Niederschönhausen, in Berlin's borough of Pankow. It is surrounded by gardens through which the Panke river runs. The palace belongs to the Prussian Palaces and Gardens Foundation Berlin-Brandenburg and reopened to the public in 2009 after extensive restoration.

Ernst-Thälmann-Park

Ernst-Thälmann-Park is a park in the centre of the Prenzlauer Berg district in Berlin. It was laid out in 1986 at the site of a former coal gas plant and named after the former Communist party leader Ernst Thälmann (1886-1944). The former plant built in 1874 was closed in 1981, the last gasometer was demolished in 1984.

Kopenhagener Straße

The Kopenhagener Straße in Berlin's Prenzlauer Berg district runs parallel to the Ringbahn tracks between busy Schönhauser Allee in the East all the way to the Mauerpark in the West, where the Berlin Wall separated the Soviet from the French sector. The street was named on 30 April 1899 after the Danish capital Copenhagen.

Majakowskiring

The Majakowskiring is an ellipse-shaped street in the Pankow district of Berlin, Germany, in the Niederschönhausen locality. It was famous as the residence of many senior figures in the government of the German Democratic Republic. The Majakowskiring neighbourhood (Ortslage) is situated between Grabbeallee to the west and northwest, Ossietzkystraße and Schlosspark to the east, Schloss Schönhausen to the northeast, and the Panke river to the south.

Ausland

Ausland is a venue in Berlin for music and performance and related public and non-public events. Ausland is a workspace for local, national and international artists and projects. Ausland holds on the average three shows a week. Ausland is run by a group of up to twelve people. Each "Ausländer" (member of Ausland; German for "foreigner") has a high degree of autonomy in deciding how to use the space, which includes hosting any event he or she wishes.

Rykestrasse Synagogue

Rykestrasse Synagogue, Germany's largest synagogue, is located in the Prenzlauer Berg neighbourhood in the Pankow borough of Berlin. Johann Hoeniger built the synagogue in 1903/1904. It was inaugurated on 4 September 1904, on time for the holidays of and around Rosh haShana. The synagogue stands off the street alignment and is reached by a thoroughfare in the pertaining front building.

Berlin Greifswalder Straße station

S-Bhf. Greifswalder Straße is a railway station in the Prenzlauer Berg district of Berlin. It is served by the S-Bahn lines S41, S42, S8 and S9.

Berlin Prenzlauer Allee station

Prenzlauer Allee is a railway station in the Prenzlauer Berg neighbourhood of Berlin, named after the Prenzlauer Allee road. Situated on the Berlin Ringbahn, it is served by the S-Bahn lines S41, S42, S8 and S9. The station was opened on 1 May 1892 where Prenzlauer Allee crosses the Ringbahn tracks at right angle. Damaged in World War II, it has been rebuilt in its original condition. The station can also be reached via the M2 line of the Berlin tram network.

Berlin-Pankow-Heinersdorf station

Pankow-Heinersdorf is a railway station in the Pankow district of Berlin. It is served by the S-Bahn lines S2 and S8.

Berlin-Blankenburg station

Blankenburg is a railway station in the Pankow district of Berlin. It is served by the S-Bahn lines S2 and S8.

Khadija Mosque

Khadija Mosque is the first mosque in former East Germany located in Heinersdorf, Pankow, Berlin of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community. It was opened on October 16, 2008. The mosque has a 39 feet high minaret and can hold 500 worshippers. The mosque was risen by funds collected by Ahmadiyya-Women and the design was done by the architect Mubashra Ilyas. Another mosque was built in Berlin between 1924 and 1928 by the Lahore Ahmadiyya Movement.

Schmöckpfuhlgraben

The Schmöckpfuhl is a ditch in Heinersdorf in the Pankow district of Berlin. It meanders above ground and partly subterraneously through allotment gardens and settlements and flows finally into the Panke. It is probably fed of wastewater from the allotment gardens.

Bundesautobahn 114

Bundesautobahn 114 is a motorway in the north of the German capital Berlin. It connects the A 10 (Berliner Ring) starting at the Autobahndreieck Pankow over a seven kilometers distance to the main center of Berlin. The motorway was released for traffic between 1973 and 1982.

Radrennbahn Weissensee

Radrennbahn Weissensee is a large cycling track located in the Weissensee district of Berlin. It is north of the park containing the Weisser See. It is also popular for inline skating and skateboarding. During the time Radrennbahn Weissensee was part of East Berlin, it was also used as a concert venue. Acts such as James Brown and ZZ Top played there, in an attempt to satisfy the musical desires of East German youth.

Weißer See (Berlin)

Weißer See (Weisser See) is a lake in the Weissensee district of Berlin, Germany. Its surface area is 8.3011ha (84,000m) and volume 360,606m. With a depth of 10.64m (average depth 4.34m) it is one of the deepest areas of water in Berlin. Its dimensions are approx. 300m East-West by 350m North-South. The lake and its surrounding landscape were shaped by the Weichsel ice age. It is embedded in the ground moraines of Niederbarnimer.

Gethsemane Church

Gethsemane Church is one out of four church buildings of the Lutheran Northern Prenzlauer Berg Congregaton (German: Evangelische Kirchengemeinde Prenzlauer Berg-Nord), a member of the Evangelical Church of Berlin-Brandenburg-Silesian Upper Lusatia, an umbrella organisation comprising Lutheran, Calvinist and united Protestant congregations. Gethsemane Church is the best known church in the locality of Prenzlauer Berg, in Berlin's borough of Pankow.

Prenzlauer Allee

Prenzlauer Allee is a major avenue in the Prenzlauer Berg district of the German capital Berlin and one of the main thoroughfares of the north-eastern Pankow borough. The arterial road connects the centre of former East Berlin at Alexanderplatz via Karl-Liebknecht-Straße with the far north-eastern districts and the orbital motorway Berliner Ring (BAB 10) via the Bundesautobahn 114.

Embassy of Moldova, Berlin

The Embassy of Moldova in Berlin is the diplomatic mission of Moldova to Germany.

Schönhauser Allee

Schönhauser Allee in Berlin is one of the most important streets of the Prenzlauer Berg district. Schönhauser Allee reaches from Rosa-Luxemburg-Platz in the south to Pankow in the north. Many of the boulevards crosstreets have names with Nordic themes as Bornholmer Strasse and Kopenhagener Strasse. Over the boulevard the subwayline U2 pass by on high elevated bridges.

Kulturbrauerei

The Berlin Kulturbrauerei (literally "Culture Brewery") is a 25,000 square metres building complex. Originally built and operated as a brewery, its courtyards and unique architecture have been protected as a monument since 1974 and it is one of the few well-preserved examples of industrial architecture in Berlin dating from the end of the 19th Century.