History of Lane College

Lane College, located in Jackson, Tennessee on approximately 55 acres, is a small, private, co-educational, church-related institution that provides a liberal arts curriculum leading to baccalaureate degrees in the Arts and Sciences. The College admits persons regardless of color, sex, religion or national origin.

The future of Lane is intimately tied to its historic past. The College was founded by individuals who were committed to assuring that newly freed slaves would be able to “read, write, and speak correctly.” The vocational goals of the first students to enroll at the College were in the areas of teaching and preaching. It was the view of the founders that neither group would be able to influence the more learned individuals in society unless they had academic, spiritual, cultural, and economic qualifications that were equal to their counterparts.

Lane College played a significant role in reducing the rate of illiteracy among blacks in the South in fewer than fifty years. The pool of Lane College graduates has expanded to include alumni who have entered a multitude of professional disciplines. The College is confident in its future because of its exceptional progress — due in large measure to the advocacy and commitment of its faculty and staff, alumni and friends — all of whom have supported an ambitious agenda of high academic standards, robust support services, new capital improvements, strong financial management, and strict administrative accountability.

While Lane enjoys the solid advantages accruing from a 133-year tradition of educational progress, the College is more confident in its future than ever before. The faculty and staff, under the leadership of President Logan Hampton, have employed a collaborative approach to establishing a revived culture of student-centered, technology-enhanced teaching and learning. This involves viewing students as clients, life-long learners and future leaders, and viewing faculty as life-long learning facilitators who utilize technology as an integral part of the teaching and learning process.