Lane College provides a liberal arts curriculum leading to baccalaureate degrees in the Arts and Sciences. The College accepts persons regardless of race, color, gender, religion, age, or national origin.

Founded in 1882 by Bishop Isaac Lane, a former slave, Lane College is proud to be one of the nation’s oldest Historically Black Colleges, and the first four-year institution established by the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church. Consistent with its tradition of providing educational opportunities for those who may not otherwise have the opportunity to attend college, Lane College is committed to preparing students, through its liberal arts curriculum, to assume meaningful positions in their chosen occupations or professions and/or to pursue graduate studies. Consistent with its history and tradition, the College has a particular interest in preparing professional educators.

Lane College guides students through programs of intellectual experiences that enable them to identify and develop their Power of Potential ® to meet the demands of decision-making situations through thoughtful, rational, and creative thinking. Students are exhorted to continuously pursue their potential by becoming lifelong learners.

Lane College develops the “whole student.” The College fosters academic excellence. The College is also concerned about the student’s spiritual, social, and ethical development. The College believes that spiritual growth is an important part of the development of the individual. Spiritual life at the College is viewed as a quality-filled experience rather than a specific and narrow range of separate activities. Spiritual programs of learning, worshipping, and service have the purpose of illuminating life and making life more meaningful.

Students are encouraged and assisted in developing inner strengths and resources needed to follow through and complete tasks, fulfill responsibilities, and live by a workable system of values. The College seeks to help all students achieve self-discipline.

Lane College offers a balanced liberal education and seeks to continue adding to the variety of its curricular offerings in order to become even more innovative in organization and methodology and continue to develop the mature, educated individuals needed in an ever-changing society.

Lane College is grounded in the belief that improvement is a life-long endeavor. Furthermore, it believes democratic participation in American society in an intellectual manner is designed to improve society and its members’ opportunities. In a world of continuous change, the College offers programs that develop the attitudes and understandings necessary for leadership and effective participation in a democratic society. The College helps its students become open-minded and tolerant while developing sensitivity for, and commitment to, ways of improving the human condition.