A lot can change in 10 years! Believe it or not, it's been a decade since the Disney Channel original movie "Camp Rock" premiered on television. In celebration of the milestone anniversary on June 20, 2018, Wonderwall.com is checking in on the cast today. Keep reading to find out what the "Camp Rock" actors and actresses are up to now…

RELATED: "America's Got Talent" winners: Where are they now?

Demi Lovato starred as Mitchie Torres, an aspiring young singer from a working-class background, in "Camp Rock."

RELATED: Katy Perry's biggest career moments

Demi Lovato is now an international superstar with seven Top 20 entries on the Billboard Hot 100. After getting her big break in "Camp Rock," the onetime "Barney & Friends" child actress starred on the hit Disney show "Sonny with a Chance" and made "Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam." The singer was eager to drop her Disney image after a few years and left the network in 2011. She went on to release five super-successful albums: "Here We Go Again," "Unbroken," "Demi," "Confident" and "Tell Me You Love Me." The singer has also faced personal struggles and battled depression, bulimia and addictions to cocaine and alcohol. Demi, who went to rehab and resided in a sober-living home while she was serving as a judge on "The X Factor," celebrated five years of sobriety in March 2017. She dated "Camp Rock" co-star Joe Jonas after falling for him on the set and later moved on with actor Wilder Valderrama, whom she dated from 2010 to 2016. After briefly romancing MMA fighters Luke Rockhold and Guilherme "Bomba" Vasconcelos in recent years, she's currently enjoying the single life.

RELATED: Stars who are knights or dames

Alyson Stoner starred as Caitlyn Gellar, Mitchie's supportive friend, in "Camp Rock."

Alyson Stoner is not the same pop-locking, dancing Disney girl she use to be. The actress starred in the "Step Up" film series and voiced Isabella Garcia-Shapiro on "Phineas & Ferb" after wrapping "Camp Rock." Alyson decided to pursue music in 2010 and released debut EP "Beat the System" in 2011. Most recently, she voiced the character of Florina on the DreamWorks series "Voltron: Legendary Defender." Alyson came out in March 2018, writing in a Teen Vogue article that she's "attracted to men, women and people who identify in other ways… It is the soul that captivates me. It is the love we can build and the goodness we can contribute to the world by supporting each other's best journeys," she explained.

Joe Jonas starred as Shane Gray, the spoiled lead singer of the popular music trio Connect 3, in "Camp Rock."

Joe Jonas has gone from shaggy-haired Disney boybander to a accomplished solo performer. The musician starred in a number of Disney projects after "Camp Rock" wrapped including "Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam," "Jonas Brothers: Living the Dream" and the series "Jonas." He also achieved worldwide success as a member of the Jonas Brothers with real-life siblings Nick Jonas and Kevin Jonas. The group sold more than 17 million albums worldwide before disbanding in 2013. Joe has since released one successful solo album, "Fastlife." In 2015, he formed the funk-pop band DNCE. Their debut single, "Cake by the Ocean," peaked at No. 9 on the Billboard Hot 100. Fans can now catch Joe on the Australian version of "The Voice" as a coach. As for his personal life? After splitting with Demi Lovato in 2010, Joe went on to date actress Ashley Greene and artist Blanda Eggenschwiler. In 2017, he got engaged to "Game of Thrones" actress Sophie Turner after a year of dating.

Meaghan Martin starred as Tess Tyler, the unkind popular girl at camp whose mom was famous, in "Camp Rock."

Meaghan Martin continued to act following her appearance in "Camp Rock" and also got a formal education. The actress starred on the ABC Family sitcom "10 Things I Hate About You" as Bianca, reprised her role as Tess Tyler in "Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam" and starred in "Mean Girls 2." After appearing in "Geography Club" and "The Good Mother," Meaghan stepped away from the screen to study classical acting at the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art. She graduated in 2016 and is set to star in the film "Journey" in 2018. But a degree isn't the only thing Meaghan picked up in London: She also found a husband there! She married British actor Oli Higginson in September 2016.

Nick Jonas (left) starred as Nate Gray, a Connect 3 bandmate, in "Camp Rock."

Since "Camp Rock" wrapped in 2008, Nick Jonas has become a certified superstar. Nick achieved international stardom as a member of the Jonas Brothers, who sold millions of albums and appeared in "Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam," "Jonas Brothers: Living the Dream" and the series "Jonas" before splitting up in 2013. Nick, who also did some actin — notably on "Hawaii Five-0" and "Kingdom" — then pursued a solo career, releasing "Nick Jonas" in 2014 and "Last Year Was Complicated" in 2016. The youngest Jonas brother has also become a sex symbol and a ladies' man since his Disney days. Nick famously dated Miley Cyrus, Selena Gomez, Olivia Culpo, Kate Hudson and Lily Collins, among others, and in May 2018 went public with "Quantico" star Priyanka Chopra.

Jasmine Richards played Margaret "Peggy" Dupree, one of Tess's friends who eventually stands up to her and wins the Final Jam.

Ontario native Jasmine Richards appeared in a handful of Canadian TV and film productions including "The Listener," "King" and "Bomb Girls" in the years after "Camp Rock" and "Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam." She seemingly has left acting behind and until 2015 ran the style, beauty and lifestyle blog A Dash of Something Pretty. She's active on social media where fans can check out her latest posts as she plans her September 2018 wedding to her fiance, Michael.

Kevin Jonas (left) starred as Jason Gray, a Connect 3 bandmate, in "Camp Rock."

Kevin Jonas is now married father of two and a successful businessman. He first achieved fame as a member of the Jonas Brothers — just like his real-life brothers Nick Jonas and Joe Jonas — and starred in "Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam," "Jonas Brothers: Living the Dream" and the Disney Channel's "Jonas." After selling 17 million albums worldwide and touring the globe, Kevin decided to go a different route after the band broke up in 2013. He starred on his own reality show, "Married to Jonas," and competed on "Celebrity Apprentice" before founding the real-estate development and construction company JonasWerner. The former teen star is now co-CEO of The Blu Market company, which deals with communications and plans for social media influencers. Kevin married former hairdresser Danielle Deleasa in 2009. The couple welcomed daughters Alena Rose in 2014 and Valentina Angelina in 2016.

Roshon Fegan played Sander Loya, a breakdancer and rapper who's tight with fellow camper Barron, in "Camp Rock."

Roshon Fegan has had a very successful career since appearing in "Camp Rock" and "Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam." He starred as Rocky's big brother, Ty Blue, on Disney's "Shake It Up!" opposite Zendaya and Bella Thorne from 2010 to 2013 and has done episodic work on shows including "A.N.T. Farm," "Parenthood," "Crazy Ex-Girlfriend" and "Insecure." In 2012, he competed on "Dancing With the Stars" and since 2017, Roshon — who's also a recording artist — has starred on OWN's "Greenleaf." He started dating fellow freestyle dancer Courtney Nicole Kelly — better known as Dytto — in 2017.

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle played Eliza "Ella" Pador, one of Tess's backup singers who's also Mitchie's friend, in "Camp Rock."

After appearing in "Camp Rock" and "Camp Rock 2," Anna Maria Perez de Tagle — who had a recurring role on "Hannah Montana" until 2011 and appeared on an episode of the Disney Channel series "Jonas" in 2010 — toured with Demi Lovato and the Jonas Brothers in 2010. She began a Broadway run in the revival of "Godspell" in 2011. She's currently a beauty vlogger with her own YouTube channel, Anna's Beauty Secrets, which features makeup and hairstyling tutorials.

Jordan Francis played Barron James, a rapper and breakdancer who's friends with Caitlyn and Sander, in "Camp Rock."

After "Camp Rock," Toronto-bred Jordan Francis reprised his role in "Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam" in 2010. The same year, he starred on the TV series "Connor Undercover" and was a featured performer on the Jonas Brothers' world tour. In 2012 and 2013, he hosted his own show, "Cross Country Fun Hunt," on Canada's CBC network. Since then, Jordan — who played Simba in "The Lion King" on Broadway in his youth — has focused on his career as singer-songwriter (he released a mixtape, "The Wait Is Over" in 2014), dancer and award-winning choreographer.

Maria Canals-Barrera is still a successful working actress today. The Miami native, who's best known as Theresa Russo on "Wizards of Waverly Place," has also appeared in projects including "Larry Crowne," "Justice League," "Cristela," "Vixen" and "Justice League Unlimited" over the years. Most recently, she lent her voice to the Nickelodeon series "Knight Squad." Maria has been married to "Generation Kill" actor David Barrera since 1999. The couple share two daughters.