This story is available exclusively to Business Insider subscribers. Become an Insider and start reading now. Have an account? .

"Camp Rock" was released on Disney Channel in June 2008, starring Demi Lovato and Joe Jonas.

Since the film came out, the two actors have gone on to pursue other roles and release more music.

Lovato is a two-time Grammy nominee and Jonas is part of the popular band called the Jonas Brothers, which made a career comeback in 2019 following a six-year hiatus.

Visit Insider's homepage for more stories.

Sign up to get the inside scoop on today’s biggest stories in markets, tech, and business — delivered daily. Read preview

Thanks for signing up!

Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go.

Email address

By clicking “Sign Up”, you accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy. You can opt-out at any time by visiting our Preferences page or by clicking "unsubscribe" at the bottom of the email.

Advertisement

"Camp Rock" was released on Disney Channel in June 2008 and remains one of the network's most-watched original movies of all time.

The musical film, which took place at a fictional summer camp, starred Demi Lovato as Mitchie Torres, a role that earned the actress her big break in Hollywood. It also starred Joe Jonas as Shane Gray, a pop star and her love interest.

This story is available exclusively to Business Insider subscribers. Become an Insider and start reading now. Have an account? .

To date, "Camp Rock" is the third most-watched DCOM, following "High School Musical 2" and "Wizards of Waverly Place: The Movie." The success of "Camp Rock" also led to a 2010 sequel titled "Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam."

Here's what the stars of "Camp Rock" have been up to since the movie's release.

Advertisement

Demi Lovato starred as Mitchie Torres, a shy singer-songwriter.

She lied about her mom's job so that she could fit in with the kids at Camp Rock and be popular.

Advertisement

Lovato continues to act and sing, and paid homage to her Disney Channel roots in her 2020 music video for "I Love Me."

After "Camp Rock," Lovato continued to star on shows and films for Disney Channel.

She starred on the short-lived sitcom "Sonny With a Chance" as the titular character and reunited with "Barney & Friends" costar Selena Gomez (then known for her role on "Wizards of Waverly Place") for the 2009 DCOM "Princess Protection Program." She also returned as Mitchie for the "Camp Rock" sequel.

A few months after "Camp Rock" premiered on Disney Channel, Lovato released her debut studio album titled "Don't Forget." She went on to release five more albums: "Here We Go Again" (2009), "Unbroken" (2011), "Demi" (2013), "Confident" (2015), and "Tell Me You Love Me" (2017).

She has also been nominated for two Grammys: best pop vocal album for "Confident" and best pop duo/performance for "Fall in Line" with Christina Aguilera.

Lovato was also close friends with the Jonas Brothers during her Disney Channel years and beyond. She briefly dated Joe Jonas and developed a strong friendship with Nick Jonas, even going on a joint tour with him in 2016. In a 2020 cover story for Harper's Bazaar, Lovato said that she was no longer friends with them.

She also spoke about her personal struggles with addictions in two documentaries: "Demi Lovato: Stay Strong" (2012) and "Demi Lovato: Simply Complicated" (2017).

The singer entered treatment to deal with her addition in 2010 and celebrated six years of sobriety in March 2018. Three months later, the singer released the track "Sober" and revealed that she relapsed.

In late July 2018, Lovato was hospitalized in Los Angeles after suffering an apparent drug overdose. She made a career comeback in 2020.

Lovato performed an emotional song named "Anyone," which was recorded four days prior to her overdose, during the 62nd Grammys. She also sang the national anthem at the Super Bowl.

She dropped a track called "I Love Me" in 2020 and the accompanying music video was filled with references to various points in her career. The singer also teamed up with Sam Smith for a song called "I'm Ready."

Though music appears to be her primary focus, she has acted in a few movies and shows. She voiced a character in the animated movie "Smurfs: The Lost Village," guest-starred on "Glee," and appeared on NBC's "Will & Grace" revival.

Lovato started dating actor Max Ehrich in 2020. They also appeared in Ariana Grande and Justin Bieber's music video for "Stuck With U." The pair revealed their engagement in July 2020.

She was previously in a relationship with "That '70s Show" star Wilmer Valderrama, but they split in 2016 after several years together.

Advertisement

Joe Jonas played a self-centered pop star named Shane Gray.

He was forced to be an instructor at Camp Rock as a way to fix his bad-boy reputation and generate good press. Shane later explained to Mitchie that he changed his music style to please the record label's desire for "cookie-cutter pop" that would sell.

Advertisement

These days, Jonas is known for being a member of the Jonas Brothers.

Siblings Joe, Nick, and Kevin Jonas were already established stars when they appeared in the first "Camp Rock" movie, having previously released two studio albums: "It's About Time" (2006) and "Jonas Brothers" (2007).

Months after "Camp Rock" was released, the Jonas Brothers dropped their third album titled "A Little Bit Longer." The following year, they released "Lines, Vines and Trying Times."

The band also starred on a Disney Channel sitcom called "Jonas," which lasted for two seasons. Joe went on to explore music as a solo artist and released an R&B-inspired album titled "Fastlife" in 2011.

His solo career was short-lived and he found greater success after forming the band DNCE with friends Jack Lawless, Cole Whittle, and JinJoo Lee. Jonas created the group after the Jonas Brothers announced their shocking breakup in 2013.

DNCE released their debut, self-titled album in 2016, which contained hits like "Cake by the Ocean" and "Body Moves." The group also cameoed in Fox's "Grease: Live" as Johnny Casino and The Gamblers.

In addition, Jonas guest-starred on "Hot in Cleveland" and appeared as a coach on season seven of "The Voice Australia."

The Jonas Brothers returned with a catchy song called "Sucker" in early 2019, following a six-year hiatus. They went on to release their fifth album, "Happiness Begins," go on tour, and release two documentaries.

Jonas started dating "Game of Thrones" star Sophie Turner in 2016. They got engaged the following year. The couple got married during two ceremonies that took place in 2019: one in Las Vegas and the other in France.

In February 2020, multiple publications reported that Turner and Jonas were expecting their first child together. They welcomed their child in July 2020. TMZ reported that Turner gave birth to a daughter named Willa.

Advertisement

Nick Jonas played Nate, a member of the fictional group called Connect 3.

He was the level-headed band member who had a larger role in the "Camp Rock" sequel.

Advertisement

Most recently, Nick Jonas appeared as a coach on season 18 of NBC's "The Voice."

Jonas has kept busy with plenty of roles and music over the years. After "Camp Rock," he formed a side band called "Nick Jonas & The Administration." They released one album, titled "Who I Am," in 2010.

He released a self-titled solo album in 2014, which included a duet with Lovato and the hit track "Jealous," inspired by now ex-girlfriend Olivia Culpo. Two years later, after their split, he released another album called "Last Year Was Complicated."

In 2012, Jonas starred as J. Pierrepont Finch on Broadway's "How to Success in Business Without Really Trying." The role was also portrayed by Daniel Radcliffe and Darren Criss during separate runs.

In addition, Jonas earned a Golden Globe nomination for his track "Home," which was featured in the 2017 animated movie "Ferdinand."

Jonas guest-starred on shows like "Last Man Standing," "Smash," and "Hawaii Five-0." He also starred on Fox's "Scream Queens" and DirecTV's "Kingdom."

He starred in the 2017 Dwayne Johnson-led movie "Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle" and returned for the 2019 sequel. Jonas also portrayed Bruno Gaido in the 2019 war movie "Midway." Next, he'll star in the movie "Chaos Walking" with Tom Holland and Daisy Ridley.

Jonas started messaging actress Priyanka Chopra in 2016 and they met in real life the following year. They started dating in 2018 and revealed their engagement in August 2018. The couple got married in December of that year at Umaid Bhawan Palace in Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India during two lavish ceremonies.

Advertisement

Kevin Jonas starred as Jason, the third member of Connect 3.

He asked Shane to make him a birdhouse at Camp Rock.

Advertisement

Kevin Jonas has been married for nearly 11 years and has two daughters with wife Danielle Jonas.

The couple met in 2007 and got married two years later. Their children, Alena Rose Jonas and Valentina Angelina Jonas, were born in 2014 and 2016, respectively. Kevin and Danielle also starred on a reality TV series for E! titled "Married to Jonas," which lasted for two seasons.

Outside of music with the Jonas Brothers, he appeared on "Celebrity Apprentice," became the co-CEO of The Blu Market (a marketing company), and had a construction business called JonasWerner.

Advertisement

Maria Canals-Barrera starred as Connie Torres, Mitchie's mom.

She had her own catering business.

Advertisement

Canals-Barrera has guest-starred on shows like "Fuller House."

She appeared on season four of the "Full House" spin-off series and guest-starred on shows like "The Big Bang Theory" and "Last Man Standing."

Canals-Barrera is also probably known for her role as Theresa Russo on Disney Channel's "Wizards of Waverly Place," which lasted for four seasons.

The actress also returned for the "Camp Rock" sequel and starred as Daniela on the short-lived show "Cristela."

Advertisement

Meaghan Martin portrayed Tess, a controlling and bossy Camp Rock attendee.

She was the daughter of a Grammy-winning singer and acted as the Queen B at the camp.

Advertisement

Meaghan Martin has appeared on shows like MTV's "Awkward."

Martin reprised her role as Tess for the "Camp Rock" sequel. The actress also starred as Bianca Stratford on Freeform's TV show "10 Things I Hate About You," based on the hit movie of the same name.

You may have also seen her in the 2011 TV movie "Mean Girls 2" and on episodes of Freeform's sitcom "Melissa & Joey."

Martin married actor Oli Higginson in England in September 2016.

Advertisement

Alyson Stoner played Caitlyn Geller, an aspiring music producer.

She became friends with Mitchie on the first day of camp.

Advertisement

Stoner continues to sing, dance, and act.

Stoner was already a well-known star before "Camp Rock," having starred in Missy Elliot's videos for tracks like "Work It" and playing Sarah Baker in the "Cheaper by the Dozen" movies. She made her TV debut as one of the hosts on Disney Channel's "Mike's Super Short Show" and had a recurring role on "The Suite Life of Zack & Cody."

After "Camp Rock," Stoner returned for "Step Up 3D" in 2010 (she also starred in the franchise's 2006 film). She voiced Isabella Garcia-Shapiro on Disney's animated series "Phineas and Ferb," too.

In addition, Stoner is a singer-songwriter and has released covers as well as original music over the years.

In a 2018 essay for Teen Vogue, Stoner spoke about her sexuality, saying that she's "attracted to men, women, and people who identify in other ways. I can love people of every gender identity and expression. It is the soul that captivates me."

In 2019, she appeared at the 2019 MTV VMAs to recreate her iconic dance moves from Missy Elliott's "Work It" music video and later revealed that she didn't rehearse the routine.

Advertisement

Jasmine Richards starred as Peggy, one of the girls in Tess' inner circle.

Peggy won Final Jam after quitting as a backup singer for Tess' act and singing a solo track called "Here I Am" with a guitar.

Advertisement

Richards is now the owner of a beauty brand called Wildwood Lashes, based in Ontario, Canada.

In a post shared on the brand's Instagram account in April 2020, Richards, who no longer acts, said that she's "been a lash artist for over 5 years now and have loved every minute of it."

The "Camp Rock" alum also said that she was employed as a senior artist at Toronto's Lust for Lashes.

Richards has been married to Mike Caci since September 2018 and they're expecting their first child, a baby boy.

Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Daniel Fathers portrayed Brown Cesario, Camp Rock's director.

He was a musician and the uncle of Shane.

Fathers starred alongside Rupert Grint on season two of the show "Snatch."

The actor has also guest-starred on shows like "Reign," "Dark Matter," and "Orphan Black."

Read next

Movie Celebrities Joe Jonas

More...

Advertisement