Synopsys (NASDAQ: SNPS; Mountain View, CA) signed a definitive agreement to acquire QTronic (Stuttgart, Germany), a provider of simulation software, test tools, and services for automotive systems development. Synopsys says the acquisition will broaden its product portfolio of automotive solutions serving the needs of automotive Tier 1 and OEM companies and add a team of highly experienced engineers to accelerate technology development and customer deployment.

The transaction is subject to customary closing conditions, including certain foreign regulatory filings, and is expected to close in Synopsys’ fourth quarter of fiscal year 2019. The terms of the deal, which is not material to Synopsys financials, are not being disclosed.

The rapid growth of vehicle software, combined with the complex interaction of hardware, software, and physical components, creates an enormous challenge for automobile manufacturers and their suppliers developing future powertrain, electric vehicle, advanced driver assistance and autonomous driving systems. To address these challenges, automotive companies are deploying virtual development and test environments enabling software development to start earlier and accelerate continuous integration and test for over the air updates. QTronic simulation and test tools will accelerate Synopsys delivery of a comprehensive automotive virtual prototyping solution for system and software development throughout the automotive electronic supply chain.

"From semiconductors to OEMs, automotive companies are looking to accelerate the development, verification and test of increasingly complex and software rich automotive electronic systems," said Manoj Gandhi, general manager of the Synopsys Verification Group. "With the acquisition of QTronic, we are strengthening our position as the leader in virtual prototyping solutions and will continue to deliver powerful virtual development and test solutions that enable automotive companies to develop vehicle software earlier, faster, and better."

Synopsys calls itself the Silicon to Software [trademarked] partner for innovative companies developing the electronic products and software applications we rely on every day. As the world's 15th largest software company, Synopsys has a long history in electronic design automation (EDA) and semiconductor IP and says it is also growing its leadership in software security and quality solutions.