Synopsys, Inc. Template:Nasdaq is one of the three largest competitors in the electronic design automation industry, founded in 1986 and headquartered in Mountain View, California.

Synopsys' most well-known (and first) product is Design Compiler. Synopsys offers a wide range of other products used in the design of an Application-specific integrated circuit. Products include place and route, static timing analysis, and Verilog and VHDL simulators. The simulators include a powerful debugging environment which assists in the design of the logic for chips and computer systems.

Contents

1.1 Acquisitions, mergers, spinoffs

1.2 Finance

History

The company was founded in 1986 as Optimal Solutions by Dr. Aart J. de Geus and a team of engineers from General Electric's Microelectronics Center in Research Triangle Park, North Carolina. Since then it went through a series of acquisitions, the most significant being that of Avanti Corporation, which was the #4 company in the EDA industry at that time.

Acquisitions, mergers, spinoffs

1997: acquired EPIC Design Technology Inc., USA

1997: acquired Viewlogic Systems, Inc., USA

June 6, 2002: merger with Avanti Corporation, USA

February 23, 2004: acquired Accelerant Networks, USA

February 26, 2004: acquired technology assets of Analog Design Automation, Inc., USA

October 2004: acquired assets of Monterey Design Systems, Inc., USA (Note: a development division in Armenia)

October 18, 2004: acquired Cascade Semiconductor Solutions Inc., USA

Nivember 2, 2004: acquired Integrated Systems Engineering AG (ISE), Switzerland, a TCAD company.

November 2, 2004: acquired assets of LEDA Design, Inc., USA, a developer of mixed-signal intellectual property. (Note: a development division in Armenia)

December 1, 2004: agreement to acquire Nassda Corp., USA, an intergated circuit simulator company and settle the litigation between the two companies

Finance

Fiscal year 2004

Revenue: 1.09B

Employees:4,447

Fiscal year 2003

Revenue: 1.18B

Employees:4,408

Management Team

Dr. Aart J. de Geus, Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer

Dr. Chi-Foon Chan, President and Chief Operating Officer

Vicki Andrews, Senior Vice President, Worldwide Sales

Dr. Raul Camposano, Senior Vice President, Chief Technology Officer, and General Manager, Silicon Engineering Group

John Chilton, Senior Vice President and General Manager, Solutions Group

Jan Collinson, Senior Vice President, Human Resources and Facilities

Dr. Antun Domic, Senior Vice President and General Manager, Implementation Group

Manoj Gandhi, Senior Vice President and General Manager, Verification Group

Jay Greenberg, Senior Vice President, Marketing

Deirdre Hanford, Senior Vice President, Worldwide Application Services

Rex S. Jackson, Senior Vice President, General Counsel, Corporate Secretary and Acting Chief Financial Officer

Notable persons

Aart J. de Geus, founder

Alberto Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, co-founder.

External links