Synopsys

Synopsys inc. is a leading American EDA solutions provider with focuses across multiple industries including automotive, aerospace, financial services, memory, mobile/5G technology, Internet of Things (IoT) and more.

Synopsys EDA tools are used worldwide and partnered with popular foundries including Intel, ARM, Samsung and TSMC. Founded by Aart J de Geus and David Gregory in 1986 in Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, their software caters to a holistic approach for design, layout, verification, modeling and simulation.

Based in California USA

www.synopsys.com

Cadence

Cadence Design Systems Inc is an American multinational electronic automation (EDA) company founded in 1988 that provides platforms for custom IC technology, digital implementation and signoff technologies, verification technologies, IPs and more.

Cadence is a pivotal leader in electronic design helping its customers deliver the most extraordinary products from chips to systems for the most dynamic market. For seven years in a row, Fortune magazine has named Cadence one of the 100 Best Companies to Work For.

Based in California USA

www.cadence.com

Siemens EDA (previously Mentor Graphics)

Initially founded in 1981, Mentor Graphics was a US-based EDA solutions provider that was acquired by Siemens in 2017 and later rebranded to Siemens EDA.

Primarily geared towards providing electronics design automation solutions for the automated vehicle technology industry, Siemens EDA provides tooling for IC design, verification, packaging and manufacturing. With the prospect of SystemVerilog-driven 2.5/3D IC integration, design and verification.

Based in California USA

eda.sw.siemens.com

ANSYS Inc.

Ansys Inc. offers various simulation softwares for different industries including motorsports, aviation, and computing. They have a suite of EDA tools designed to speed completion times of even the most complex

finFET integrated circuits (IC) and 3D/2.5D multi-die systems. Their products include RedHawk-SC and Totem-SC for power integrity (EM/IR) analysis and modeling; and electrothermal analysis of 2.5D/3D multi-die systems.

The company was founded in 1970 by John Swanson after he left Westinghouse Astronuclear Lab, where he came back as a consultant.

Based in Pennsylvania USA

ansys.com

Keysight Technologies

Keysight Technologies is known for their EDA tool PathWave Advanced Design System which they claim is the industry’s most trusted Power Electronics (PE) Electronic Design Automation (EDA) software tools.

PathWave ADS offers engineers end-to-end design and testing tools which includes a power electronics library containing essential information for high-level power electronics design.

Keysight Technologies traces its roots to Hewlett-Packard (HP) who created an off-shot company – Agilent Technologies which specialized in developing scientific and medical testing instruments. In 2014, Agilent created an off-shoot of their testing and measurement division which became Keysight Technologies.

Based in California USA

www.keysight.com

Agnisys Inc.

Agnisys Inc. is the proprietor of tools such as IDesignSpec, IDS NextGen, and SoC Enterprise. Their solutions are known to help design architects and engineers ease their workflow by providing tools that can easily be integrated to basic programs such as MS Word, MS Excel, and LibreOffice. Most of their EDA tools are designed for creating and verifying Intellectual Properties (IP) and System-on-Chip (SOC) projects.

The company was founded in 2007 and currently operates in Boston, Massachusetts. Agnisys also has Research & Development centers in India and the United States.

Based in Massachusetts USA

www.agnisys.com

Aldec Inc.

Aldec Inc. provides EDA solutions for military, aerospace, automotive, and other industries. The company’s flagship tool being their FPGA Design Solution which is a comprehensive all-in-one platform that improves the development process. Their product line also includes FPGA Simulation (Active-HDL), Functional Verification (Riviera-Pro), and Emulating and Prototyping (HES-DVM). Their solutions ensure that clients can achieve DO-254 compliance in their projects.

Aldec was founded in 1984 and is currently based in Nevada, USA. They currently have 50+ global partners, and a global sales distribution network in over 43 countries.

Based in Nevada USA

www.aldec.com

Lauterbach GmbH

Lauterbach GmbH specializes in debugging complex systems including boot loader, hypervisor and several concurrent operating systems. Aside from this, they also have logic analyzers that can handle the debugging of multicore chips. The company is most known for their TRACE32 – a modular system used to trace and debug hardwares and softwares using JTAG.

The company has been providing both complete, modular, and upgradeable microprocessor development tools since 1979. They are headquartered in Germany, but also have offices in the United Kingdom, Italy, France, United States, Japan, and China.

Based in Upper Bavaria Germany

www.lauterbach.com

Zuken Ltd

Zuken is a Japanese company founded in 1976. They pioneered in the development of CAD systems used for electronics manufacturing. Currently, they provide various design solutions for companies creating electrical and electronic products. They are known for CR-8000 – a suite of tools that covers the entire PCB engineering lifecycle. This design solution includes both 2D and 3D multi-board design, system circuit engineering, and chip, package, and PCB co-design.

One of the company’s thrusts towards the future is integrating digital engineering as their entry into the Model-Based Systems Engineering (MBSE) industry.

Based in Yokohama Japan

www.zuken.com

JEDAT

Founded in 1980 and headquartered in Tokyo, Japan – JEDAT has a suite of EDA solutions to help companies design pioneering technologies used across a variety of products and industries.

JEDAT’s suite of tools support LSI design, PCB and package design, flat panel display design, and fine pattern design. JEDAT is known for SX-Meister, popular amongst engineers throughout Asia and the world.

Based in Minato, Chuo-ku, Tokyo Japan

www.jedat.co.jp