Pollyanna McIntosh is best known for her role as Jadis/Anne on AMC’s The Walking Dead–one of the most popular shows on television, boasting nine seasons. In addition to her acting work, Pollyanna is also a writer/director who will soon be premiering her debut feature film, Darlin’. She is a strong supporter of the Joshua Nolan Foundation, a mental health charity providing free counseling for those who need it. Wondering what this TV star does early in her day? Keep scrolling to find out.

On a non-shoot day

7 A.M. These days, the first thing I see when I wake up is Sammy Davis Jr. He’s my Terrier-mix puppy rescued by Dogs Without Borders who has recently become family. He’s got a great attitude toward life and is an affectionate joy to wake up to. Once I’m up, he goes from super chill lazy in bed like he’s got all day to “When the hell are we going outside!!?” so I usually only manage to get sunscreen on before we’re out the door. Institut Esthederm Photo Reverse is a very high-factor sun protector which also protects from and reverses hyperpigmentation. I highly recommend it if you’re sun sensitive.

7:15 A.M. We go for a wander in the neighborhood and I’ll pick up a coffee or a smoothie on the way. Sammy will pick up anything he can find so I keep an eye on him. He’s a brilliant walking buddy who helps me discover new corners of my hood.

8 A.M. We come home so I can feed Sammy and freshen up before a hike or park visit. I’ll take a shower and wash my face with Avalon Organics Vitamin C face wash. I like that it’s ecological, refreshing with an orange scent and good for skin in sunny places which both LA and Atlanta are. I’m based half and half in these two cities depending on whether we’re shooting The Walking Dead or not.

8:30 A.M. Sammy and I are off up a hill, to a park or a dog park. He’s like a goodwill ambassador and always wants to say hi to people and dogs so I get to have lovely interactions with folks everywhere I go because of it.

10:30 A.M. I’ll make breakfast listening to NPR. If I’m not shooting but working I’ll begin at my desk to catch up on emails or writing; study a script or work on an audition. If I’m not ready to focus I’ll exercise and listen to a podcast like The Adam Buxton Podcast, On Being with Krista Tippett, Fresh Air with Terri Gross, Radiolab or You Made it Weird with Pete Holmes. Stand up or comedy specials are also great to play. A recent favorite is Hannah Gadsby’s Nanette. Prepare to cry as well as laugh, it’s a special and brilliant piece. Dylan Moran is also a firm favorite. He’s absurd and cutting and oh so human.

If it’s not a work day, I’ll fanny about on the phone catching up with friends and family in the UK; go kickboxing in the park with one of the two great and funny trainers I’ve been working with or take Sammy down to the pool with a book. I’m currently reading Grayson Perry’s fascinating The Descent of Man. I’ll have a good swim while Sammy shepherds the area, plays ball or snoozes under a lounger. I’ll then get ready for lunch with a friend or whatever I feel like. When I’m shooting I’m often up very early and spend the day super focused so on days off I like to let my mood lead me rather than plan ahead. Like letting a kid choose.