Kamal Haasan completed the screenplay within 7 days for this film. Undoubtedly considered as one of the great films of its decade, Thevar Magan had few scenes which can never be recreated again on the celluloid. The on-screen relationship between Periya Thevar played by Sivaji Ganesan and his son Sakthivel played by Kamal Haasan is remarkable. Full credits should be given to behind the screen geniuses of Director Bharathan, PC Sreeram and Ilayaraja. This movie was so well written by Kamal Haasan that each and every shot carried a strong meaning.

Let us now look at the scene that had brilliance written all over it.

This scene had such an impact on this movie. It starts with Sakthivel(Kamal Haasan) entering into the house while the rain symbolizing the gloomy atmosphere in the house. As he moved close to his father Periya Thevar(Sivaji Ganesan), we can see lightning falling over the place which symbolized the argument that is going to take place between father and son maybe, for the first time.

The next shot shows how Sakthivel always hid behind a pillar like a 5 year old while talking to his father, showing the fear and respect that he carries for him even at this age. During the whole conversation, Sakthivel denied to make an eye contact with his father while conversing. Sivaji Ganesan showed his acting prowess with his dialogue delivery and facial expressions. Especially, when he explains to his son about his responsibility and duty, the pride for his caste and village can be seen all over his eyes.

At the same time when Sakthivel disagrees and pleads to leave him alone, Periya Thevar’s pride turns immediately into rage. Till that moment, there was no background music provided by Ilayaraja. Once the tension reached its pinnacle, the bgm was heard. The scene continues with Periya Thevar calling the accountant half heartedly to book return tickets for his son.

In the next shot, when Periya Thevar requests his son to stay for 10 more days with him. We can see him emoting through his eyes and trying to convey the love that he carries for his son throughout. The whole scene was lifted up by the 'potri paadadi penne' flute version. It got etched in the hearts of the viewers.

In the end part, when Sakthivel almost tumbles, Periya Thevar stood up in fear to make sure his son is fine. The tumbling part was a sign indicating Sakthivel that his father needs him whereas Periya Thevar’s reaction showed the caring and support that he had always provided him since childhood.

More than a caste oriented movie, this movie depicts an undying father-son relationship. We can see the love being poured for each other in tandem.

Films are more than just entertainment. It has a soul and Thevar Magan is the perfect example for this.