Er det nok at gøre dannelse bæredygtig?

posted in: Jeppe på dansk |

De udfordringer, den globale systemkrise har bragt med sig, berører alle dele af vores liv og fællesskaber. Derfor skal vi forholde os til dem på alle niveauer: politisk, økonomisk, socialt, teknologisk, eksistentielt og spirituelt. Det har selvsagt store konsekvenser for den måde, vi tænker og udøver dannelse på både i og uden for højskolen. Fremkomsten af den globale systemkrise er i sig selv et tegn på, at den dannelsestænkning og -praksis, der har præget industrialiserede samfund, er mangelfuld. Klimaforandringerne er ikke bare en række socio-tekniske problemer, vi skal løse, de er en konsekvens af den måde, vi som moderne mennesker har tænkt om verden og været i verden på. Det er selve vores verdensbillede og måde at være på, der er i spil.

Fremtidens dannelse er væredygtig

posted in: Jeppe på dansk |

Dette essay er udgivet i antologien Væredygtighed – Indersiden af bæredygtighed som er lavet af Center for Væredygtighed og udgivet på forlaget Dafolo. Den globale opvarmning er ikke bare et problem, vi kan eller skal “løse”; det er en virkelighed, … Continued

Livets læring – Fra Grundtvig til Gaia

posted in: Jeppe på dansk |

Dette essay er en del af forordet til min undervisningsvejledning til faget Kloden Kalder, som jeg underviser på Ry Højskole. Det har også været bragt i Skriftet 2020 og Højskolebladet, hvor man kan lytte til essayet. En dannelse, der gør … Continued

En samtale om bæredygtig dannelse

posted in: Jeppe på dansk |

Jeg har de sidste år haft en samtale med mine højskolekollegaer Theis Scherfig, som underviser på Uldum Højskole, og Kåre Birk, som underviser på den Skandinaviske Designhøjskole, omkring hvad bæredygtig dannelse betyder i teori og praksis. Tilbage i efteråret 2019 … Continued

Fortællingen om livet

posted in: Jeppe på dansk |

I højskolen synger vi ofte om livet som en manifestation af lyset. Grundtvig spørger os i sangen vi lige har sunget: “Er lys ej livets øje?” For Grundtvig er livet en kraft der står i kontrast til mørket og “som … Continued

Kære Kristian Leth,

posted in: Jeppe på dansk |

Lad mig starte med at sige at jeg har været stor fan af dit virke. Derfor er det også mærkeligt at skrive dette brev til dig. Hvis jeg i min vildeste fantasi skulle forestille mig at skrive et brev til … Continued

Opmærksomhedens pris

posted in: Jeppe på dansk |

Denne tekst er skrevet til Skriftet 2018 som er udgivet af Ry Højskoles Elevforening De der beskæftiger sig med markedsføring, sociale medier eller andre dele af opmærksomhedsøkonomien ved, at dét at du læser disse ord lige nu har enorm værdi. … Continued

Pædagogik og bæredygtighed i forandringernes tidsalder

posted in: Jeppe på dansk |

Erkendelsen af, at den etablerede samfundsmodel er slået ind på en forkert kurs og på væsentlige områder er blevet direkte farlig, indebærer, at det ikke længere kan være et oplagt mål for forældre og foresatte (eller for lærere) at socialisere … Continued

Læring som en rejse i et ukendt land

posted in: Jeppe på dansk |

Der findes i hjertet af de fleste formelle undervisningssammenhænge en fundamental ulighed, en asymmetri imellem lærer og elev. Grundlaget for denne asymmetri er ikke at den ene ved noget og den anden ikke gør, men at der er et krav … Continued

Når svarene er sluppet op

posted in: Jeppe på dansk |

Da jeg sidst så Marie, sagde jeg, at det var min fornemmelse, at der er flere og flere, der har det som hende. Flere og flere der hungrer efter en substantiel samtale om den indre og ydre naturs sammenbrud. Hun … Continued

Fremtiden er aflyst

posted in: Jeppe på dansk |

”Fremtiden er aflyst” var et foredrag jeg holdt på Ry Højskole, 04.10.17. Denne tekst er genskabt ud fra en optagelse fra aftenen og har derfor et mundtligt præg – dele af oplægget var skrevet på forhånd imens noget af det … Continued

Hearing a silent spring

posted in: Interviews & conversations, Re-membering |

Back in 2013 I had a chance to speak with sound recordist and soundscape ecologist Bernie Krause about his work and outlook on the Earth’s changing soundscapes – a conversation we called Repairing the silent spring. The notion of a … Continued

On giving up hope

Our predicament is simple: the reality of certain slow and complex dangers* points to the fundamental unsustainability of the world as we know it, and we’re failing to produce meaningful action because our way of life and the society we … Continued

An improbable pattern

One of the many starting points for this blog was my three month stay in Greenland in 2008 where I felt like I was rain in a paper cup: “The beat of the sea on the shore always calms my … Continued

Når sproget ikke længere rækker

posted in: Jeppe på dansk |

Jordens mangfoldighed er faldet drastisk under industrialiseringen, og det er en udvikling som forventes at accelerere i det 21. århundrede. Iagttagere kalder det for den sjette masseudryddelse, men har vi empatien, sproget og evnerne til forstå konsekvenserne? Jeg var uden … Continued

Lige meget hvem du er

posted in: Featured, Jeppe på dansk |

Jeg var ret spændt på, hvordan det ville være at flytte tilbage til Danmark. Det var otte år siden, jeg sidst havde gjort forsøget, og dengang endte det med, at jeg nærmest flygtede tilbage til England efter en mørk og … Continued

Waves

posted in: Re-membering, Reflections |

There’s a still point when a wave has tumbled from its peak, embraced the shoreline and rolled back into itself. A moment when there is no movement and no anticipation of the next wave, a kind of zero point that … Continued

Navigating uncertainty at LungA School

Back in January Jonatan Spejlborg got in touch and invited me to co-design a week-long course for LungA, a school which he co-founded in Seyðisfjörður, Iceland, a couple of years ago. LungA School is based on the model of the … Continued

What it was I did there

After four years of research and writing I’m happy to be able to share my thesis – a theoretical and practical exploration of the meaning of sustainability and the possibilities for envisioning and embodying a different kind of cultural narrative … Continued

Finding a new place to speak from

Over the last two weeks I’ve had the chance to speak about some of my research at two different conferences, the RGS conference on co-production in London and Degrowth 2014 in Leipzig. I’ve always found conferences a bit daunting but … Continued

Postcard from the road

It has been a while since I’ve had the time or presence of mind to post anything on PatternWhichConnects, mostly because of the busyness of changing places and finishing up my thesis. It seems like most other things in my … Continued

Blog tour: living with writing

posted in: Re-membering, Reflections |

The blog tour is a kind of online relay where different bloggers write about their work and writing process. By invitation from last week’s blogger and artist, Emily Wilkinson, I’ve been thinking about how to put my different processes of … Continued

Ragnarok and the fate of the Danish soul

[A society] has to have constellating images to pull together all these tendencies to separation, to pull them together into some intention. – Joseph Campbell I am sat at the optician’s, waiting for my new glasses to be cut, glaring … Continued

Horizons of Significance – Aligning with coherence

posted in: Community, Re-membering |

Regulars to this blog will be aware of the work and writing of Tony Dias who has been a conversation partner and fellow explorer of many of the ideas that have appeared on Remembering throughout the last years (if you … Continued

Figuring out life in parcels

It’s been about three years since I began PatternWhichConnects. Exactly how it started I can’t really remember any more. It was probably more of an inkling than a definite idea. At least that’s how I’ve come to think of it: … Continued

The voices of the wild places

I close my eyes and really listen. Some of the sounds I can readily identify, the drone of chicadas, birdsong, monkey howls and flies zooming past the microphone. Then there is another layer of, to me, unidentifiable forest sounds where … Continued

Expanding the possible – Uncivilisation 2013 and beyond

This is a culture that wasn’t afraid of ages, but made a waking dream of eternity and dwelt in it. – Jay Griffiths In the middle of the night I hear singing outside of the tent. It is a slow, … Continued

Draget – A photo-essay

Draget, the small strip of coastline on Thy where my family’s summerhouse is tucked away between conifers, is a moraine landscape that was formed by the glacier which covered most of Denmark when it retreated at the end of the … Continued

Medicine stories, liberation and shifting allegiance – A conversation with Charlotte Du Cann

I first met Charlotte Du Cann at a Transition meeting in Norwich years before I bumped into her again at the Uncivilisation festival in 2011. And living in the same end of the country we have been meeting with the … Continued

Subverting the war of stories – A conversation with Vinay Gupta

Vinay Gupta is one of those hard-to-pin-down, hyper-productive people that seems to be everywhere once you start looking. The Hexayurt, a low-cost shelter made from plywood, is perhaps one of his best known projects – having found use in places … Continued

Towards a new time culture

After a few months of editing and learning how to put together a publication, Morten and I are happy to be able to share a translation of his work on time, art and society: “Towards a New Time Culture – … Continued

Unprogramming the apocalypse – A conversation with Steve Wheeler

Steve Wheeler is one of the people I’ve met who has been thinking about collapse for the longest and probably the deepest – I highly recommend his blog Steelweaver which contains some real gems of insight for anyone thinking about … Continued

Caught out of the corner of the eye – A conversation with Dougie Strang

Taking time out from busy organising at the last Uncivilisation festival, Dougie Strang shared some of his reflections on the Dark Mountain Project with me over a cup of coffee and breakfast. We delved into the role of art and … Continued

Looking backwards to see what happens next – A conversation with Alex Fradera

Having thought about improvisation as a central theme in my research, I was excited to find myself in conversation with Alex Fradera at last year’s Uncivilisation festival. Alex is an improvisational performer and psychologist who uses play and creativity as … Continued

Transforming stories. Sharon Blackie on the culture of nature

I first encountered writer and storyteller Sharon Blackie at the Uncivilisation festival back in 2011. She was telling about her experience of moving to the Hebrides, becoming a crofter and connecting with her new home. I’ve since found a trove … Continued

Serendipity, Edges and Dissolving Language-Armour – A Conversation with Cat Lupton

Last year around this time, I found myself responding to an invitation by Cat Lupton to contribute a piece to her new blog The Place Between Stories. That was the beginning of a longer conversation that has unwound itself into … Continued

Beyond isolation – A conversation with Tony Dias (Part III)

This is the third and final instalment of a longer dialogue with Tony Dias in which we develop some of the themes that emerged in the first and second parts. TD: One of the things I have been realising … Continued

Suspending choice – A conversation with Tony Dias (Part II)

This is the second of a three-part conversation with writer & thinker-maker, Tony Dias, where we delve further into some of the issues that opened up in the first conversation. We share this conversation here in the spirit of gift … Continued

The Common Room

After the disappointment of getting ill and missing what sounds like two fantastic days of conversations and workshops at Redrawing the Maps last week, I was excited that Social Spaces and 00:/ were taking their Common Room prototype to Norwich … Continued

Finding community – A conversation with Tony Dias (Part I)

Last February I approached Tony Dias for an interview about his involvement in and thoughts about the Dark Mountain Project. This turned into a series of dialogues about his work and my own, a process of mutual sense-making. In this … Continued

Two weeks in October

posted in: Re-membering, Travels |

Vad som än händer så kommer vi aldrig vända om. Kultiration

Breaking the double-bind

I’d come to think of Gregory Bateson as an academic version of Alan Watts, pointing to the limits of the Western modernist worldview and probing unexplored territory between the disciplinary silos of the Academy. When I went to see An … Continued

The otherness of time – A conversation with Jay Griffiths

I bumped into Jay Griffiths at the Dark Mountain festival and had an improvised chat about wild time, progress and narrative. A cross-post from the blog on time-culture.net: The otherness of time – A conversation with Jay griffiths. This is part … Continued

New clothes for PatternWhichConnects

posted in: PatternWhichConnects, Re-membering |

The site has been dressed up to be more reader friendly, more easy to navigate, and generally just a little better looking. The main thing is that I’ve switched from Iweb’s blog module to WordPress which is a massive improvement. … Continued

The reality of collapse – reflections on Uncivilisation 2012

About this time last year, I was sitting in the same place I am sitting now, mulling over similar thoughts, trying to convey sentiments that arose from the exact same place. A year ago, I put it thus: “Sitting in … Continued

Building a new time culture – launching time-culture.net

My old friend Morten Svenstrup and I am launching the website time-culture.net as a place for dialogue about how we experience time and how this affects our lives individually and collectively. Over the next couple of months we are trying … Continued

Soul-making, wildness and the psychology of collapse – A conversation with Steve Thorp

When I came across Steve Thorp’s blog Psycho-Bubble last winter I found a style of writing that was both sincere and explorative, the kind of words that take you along with them and suggest new directions without telling you where … Continued

David Graeber and the rewriting of monetary history

This review of David Graeber’s ‘Debt’ appeared in Volume 16 of the International Journal for Community Currency Research. It was difficult to really communicate the depth and breadth of this book in the space available but hopefully it will whet … Continued

Why you should get Dark Mountain Issue 3 now

The third issue of the Dark Mountain Project’s yearly publication is in the making. It is crowd-funded by people who pre-order a copy of this beautifully bound hardback (image above is a detail from the cover of issue 2 by Rima … Continued

Musicality

When the going gets rough and all statements seem worthless it is time to sit still, ruffle some feathers and leave the world to its own. I’ve been spending some days listening to the black bird outside my window, go … Continued

Getting to month one hundred – A conversation with Paul Kingsnorth

“This is like a movement of people who have seen the promises broken. You come through the other side of the development process and suddenly you’re facing being poorer than your parents. Environmental degradation, overcrowding, decline. It is just what … Continued

Stories about violence

I recently partook in a conversation about violence. Really, it was about appropriate responses to ecocide but it quickly focussed on the much narrower topic of whether violence is a legitimate response to the destruction of the community of life. … Continued

Uncivilisation, settlerism, metaphorising and jazz – A conversation with Andrew Taggart

In early February I called up the American philosopher Andrew Taggart in New York for the first of a series of interviews with people involved in or affiliated with the Dark Mountain Project. Having just started my fieldwork I didn’t … Continued

Self-abandonment and devotion

I continue to be excited, uplifted, exhilarated, even, by Rainer Maria Rilke’s Book of Hours – a collection of poetry that remains central to the journey of soul-making despite being written more then a hundred years ago. These poems speak … Continued

When the game is rigged and the ref is corrupt

Perhaps what we should fear most in this age of Collapse is the strain on our hearts that the weight of living in the Machine puts on us. Times are tough and toughness seems to call for protection, the building … Continued

Convergence and fragmentation

Once we start recognising recurring features in the world and begin seeing patterns that converge, we tend to merge disparate part of our reckoning to build larger concepts that explain. This is undoubtedly deeply rooted in our psychology and probably … Continued

Changes to the site

I’ve finally found the time to bring PatternWhichConnects up to scratch, or at least a little closer to what I originally had intended. When I looked back on the first year of running this site it was with part joy … Continued

Melancholia

posted in: Re-membering, Reflections |

It’s the hour of passing through the needle’s eye: “I am here” becoming “I was there”. Like smoke time dissipates into memory. We built good memories. Did you see me? I wonder. Laughter and giggles resounded from the tree tops … Continued

Icicles, darkness, moonlight and rainbows

posted in: Re-membering, Reflections |

It was a strange time to be writing. All my circles had converged on each other and patterns I had never dreamed of became apparent. A new line was being drawn and although I could not yet see it clearly … Continued

Out into your heart as onto a vast plain

posted in: Re-membering, Reflections |

Happy New Year. May the coming year bring you strength and joyous times wherever you are. The year gone felt like a bumper car ride with one hand tied on the back. Fun, scary, and a little painful. Rilke’s image … Continued

The coming storm

It’s one of those days. Words seem like enemy soldiers lined up on the surrounding hill tops, menacing silhouettes against a darkening sky, a firing squad waiting to pull the trigger at the slightest tremble. I tremble. This week has … Continued

Hungry City

Carolyn Steel is an architect who got interested in what would happen if she described cities through food. The work and the insights that came out of asking this question throws light on the processes underlying the growth of cities … Continued

Beyond the parameters of the game – A conversation with Dougald Hine

Having had a thoroughly enjoyable weekend at the Dark Mountain Festival 2011 in Hampshire, I started thinking seriously about researching the Dark Mountain Project as part of my PhD. I spent much of the festival chatting to people about the … Continued

No-brainer, that’s a left brainer, right?

I started reading Iain McGilchrist’s book ‘The Master and the Emissary’ a while back. I started other books before I finished reading it but I still dip into it occasionally because it is simply a startling and fascinating account of … Continued

Toronno

posted in: Re-membering, Travels |

I went to Toronto. It is great! And I say that having arrived with a large degree of scepticism towards… well, towards cities (North American cities in particular) and what could be called the biggest-bang-for-the-buck-attitude (or perhaps it’s a deeper … Continued

Sirmilik and other places

I had the good fortune to come across the imagineNATIVE film and media arts festival in Toronto this week, and having found a short film I saw at the festival online I thought I’d point in that direction. This work … Continued

Circles

posted in: Re-membering, Reflections |

Here I am. On the verge. Looking back at the landscape of the last weeks, months, what before seemed like a chaotic sprawling of feelings and thoughts are making shapes and strands of my life are coming together in the … Continued

A week in October

Trains, tired transformations, talkings and translucent trees. You find so many holes in time when you move faster than your two legs can transport you.

Where next for PatternWhichConnects?

posted in: Re-membering, Reflections |

I have been running this site for a year now. Closing a circle is always a good opportunity to reflect on what’s happened and where one is going. So here I offer a few reflections on my last year online … Continued

The Dark Mountain Project & Uncivilisation

Words and images can change minds, hearts, even the course of history. Their makers shape the stories people carry through their lives, unearth old ones and breathe them back to life, add new twists, point to unexpected endings. It is … Continued

Heart-Mind stories

What is the Heart-Mind Computer? I offer you my initial thoughts and visions for the Heart-Mind Computer. Not as a way of explaining what it is, or what I think it ought to/could/would be if it was enacted or received … Continued

The Heart-Mind Computer takes off

This is the programme subject to a minor change. Lucinda Abel won’t be able to do her online narrative, so instead I am setting up a ‘melodrome’ – an interactive kit where you can trigger music/word pads to create your … Continued

Invitation to co-create the Heart-Mind Computer

Artists, inventors and visionaries are cordially invited to co-create the Heart-Mind Computer, an interactive art exhibition at the Sainsbury Centre, Norwich. For one evening only, the Living Area – the open space displaying the Centre’s permanent exhibition – will be … Continued

Feminism and the dualism disease

I’d like to know if someone out there has done a qualitative comparison of attitudes to ‘feminism’ across different nationalities. It might well have been done, I have never studied gender beyond my general interest in politics but here is … Continued

Words are like bridges

Ever since I started reading Wittgenstein as an undergraduate I have been fascinated by the power of words to invoke and create meanings and, ultimately, reality. One of the few quotes that has stayed with me over the years is … Continued

Ashes and Snow – in the eyes of the beholder

posted in: Art, Re-membering |

“What matters, is not what is written on the page, what matters, is what is written in the heart, So burn the letters, and lay their ashes on the snow, at the river’s edge when spring comes and the snow … Continued

Shifting consciousness – reflecting on the meaning of Gaia

posted in: Philosophy, Re-membering |

So what happens after all this reading and thinking about Gaia? If we take seriously the insight that the Earth works as a grand organic whole and that we form an inseparable part of Gaia, what happens next? Is the … Continued

One Grand Organic Whole

posted in: Philosophy, Re-membering |

I wanted to write a sort of introductory piece to Gaia. This turned out to become a rather lengthy and slightly muddled account of cybernetics, Gaian evolution and gradient reduction theory. Then I picked up Gaia in Turmoil by Eileen … Continued

The future is ours to decide

posted in: Art, Re-membering |

You might well be aware of Jason deCaires Taylor’s world of underwater sculpture coral conservation projects. I wasn’t until now and this completely threw me. The images speak for themselves and deCaires Taylor’s website says it better than i could … Continued

Do it loud – surviving and thriving in the Great Transition

In case you haven’t noticed, we’re in the middle of a Great Transition. This is the time of [insert pet doomsday subject here. If you’re not feeling very imaginative try: the sixth mass extinction, global warming or global food/energy crisis]. … Continued