Essays edited by Ander Monson and Craig Reinbold

March 14, 2017 • 6 x 9 • 275 Pages • 978-1-56689-457-9

The best of Essay Daily—each a writer in conversation with and about an essay, whatever its variety, contemporary and classic.

How We Speak to One Another is some of the most engaging evidence we’ve got that the essay is going strong. Here, essayists talk back to each other, to the work they love and the work that disquiets them, and to the very basic building blocks of what we understand “essay” to be. What’s compiled in these pages testifies to the endless flexibility, generosity, curiosity, and audacity of essays. Even more than that, it provides the kind of pleasure any great essay collection does—upsetting our ideas and challenging the way we organize our sense of the world.

About the Author

Ander Monson is the author, most recently, of Letter to a Future Lover: Marginalia, Errata, Secrets, Inscriptions, and Other Ephemera Found in Libraries (Graywolf Press). He is also the author of Vanishing Point, a finalist for the National Book Critics Circle Award, and Neck Deep and Other Predicaments. He edits DIAGRAM and the New Michigan Press. Monson lives in Tucson and teaches in the MFA program at the University of Arizona.

Craig Reinbold’s writing has appeared in many journals and magazines including the Gettysburg Review, Iowa Review, New England Review, Guernica, Gulf Coast, and Brevity. He was the managing editor of Essay Daily from 2013 – 2016.

Contributors include:

Ander Monson • Marcia Aldrich • Kristen Radtke • Robin Hemley • Robert Atwan • Matt Dube • Aisha Sabatini Sloan • T. Clutch Fleischmann • Rigoberto González • Kati Standefer • Julie Lauterbach-Colby • César Diaz • Emily Deprang • Lucas Mann • Danica Novgorodoff • Bonnie J. Rough • Peter Grandbois • Albert Goldbarth • Alison Hawthorne Deming • Steven Church • Bethany Maile • David Legault • Joni Tevis • John D’Agata • Meehan Crist • Thomas Mira Y Lopez • Danielle Deulen • John T. Price • Maya L. Kapoor • Chelsea Biondolillo • Megan Kimble • Brian Doyle • Nicole Walkder • Paul Lisicky • Brian Oliu • Pam Houston • Dave Mondy • Phillip Lopate • Amy Benson • Patrick Madden • Elena Passarello • Erin Zwiener • Patricia Vigderman • Ryan Van Meter

Thanks to a 2013 ADA Access Improvement Grant administered by VSA Minnesota for the Metropolitan Regional Arts Council, this title is also formatted for screen readers which make text accessible to the blind and visually impaired. To purchase this title for use with a screen reader please call (612) 338-0125 or email us at info@coffeehousepress.org.

Reviews