Dr. Nicolas Prevost earned his Bachelor’s in Biochemistry from the University of Nantes, France and continued his studies at the University of Grenoble, where he obtained his Master’s in Cell and Molecular Biology. He attended the University of Pennsylvania and the University of Paris to complete his doctorate studies in Pharmacology.

Following his studies, Dr. Prevost was a Post-doctorate Fellow at the University of California San Diego as well as an Assistant Professor at Kyoto University for four years. He is currently appointed as an Associate Professor of the Faculty of Bioenvironmental Science at Kyoto University of Advanced Science, where he teaches classes for students to improve their presentation skills, scientific writing skills and reading skills in English. He also instructs seminars to introduce various fields of biomedical research to students.

Hobbies of Dr. Prevost’s include rugby, hiking, snorkeling, guitar and reading.

Whether you are healthy or not depends on how well your immune system works. To most people, the immune system is what protects you from infectious agents (Bacteria, viruses, fungi, archaea, parasites). But your immune system does so much more:

It cleans up the billions of cells that die in your body every day

It destroys cancer cells

It maintains beneficial exchanges with your microbiota, may it be on your skin, in your airways, digestive tract…

It keeps you from bleeding to death when you cut yourself or undergo surgery.

And much, much more.

Dr. Prevost’s research focuses primarily on the early-response element of the immune system in the blood: blood platelets, fibrillar proteins, coagulation factors and complement enzymes. These immune responses are known as immunothrombosis or, in the context of pathology, thromboinflammation.

He studies the involvement of immunothombosis and thromboinflammation in the various human diseases: thrombotic microangiopathies, cancer, fibrosis, COVID-19 or adverse reactions to certain medications.