My friend Stephen Dunham passed away unexpectedly two weeks ago. His memorial service is tonight, and I am devastated that for several reasons I am prevented from being there.

Stephen and I first met when we worked on a sitcom many years ago. He was one of the funniest people I’ve ever known and was a giving and caring friend. We had an insane amount of fun both on and off stage. We’d hang out in my dressing room and clown around, do bits, sneak drinks, watch the rehearsal feed from “Passions” on my little TV (the soap opera shot on our lot), and watch and goof on the original Hawaii Five-0. Out of an episode of that show came a nickname we’d call each other: “Paniolo.”

Life found us drifting away from each other– no falling out, no hard feelings, just a thing that happens sometimes– but we’d remember each other’s birthdays. Emails, texts, that sort of thing. “Happy Birthday, Paniolo! Love, Paniolo.”

We reconnected a couple years ago, on an episode of another sitcom, and it was like no time had passed at all. He came to see my variety show at Largo and had a great idea for a sketch we could do. We performed together a couple times and it was like old times. Actually, it was better.

We went out for dinner with our wives and had a great time and promised to do it again. Then life did what life does, and we had a hard time connecting again. I should say, I had a hard time connecting with him. Stephen was good about reaching out, trying to make some time for dinner, lunch, a beer; I was perpetually over-scheduled, always saying “not now but soon, check back with me in a couple, we’ll make it happen.”

It turns out that there might not always be enough time. It turns out there’s never enough time. It turns out that it’s cruel how little time there actually is.

How is it that I will never see my friend Stephen again? How is it that a young, healthy man is just… done? How is it that his wife doesn’t get to grow old with him? How are we not supposed to be angry?

Two of my favorite moments that have ever happened in the ten years I’d done my variety show were the sketches I performed with Stephen. I am one of many people who will sorely miss him.

Rest in peace, Paniolo.