Bogdanovic, Nenad, ed., Jürgen O. Olbrich, Ko De Jonge, Chuck Stake, Bern Porter, Private World, Arrigo Lora-Totino, Miroljub Todorovic, Janet Janet, Vittore Baroni, et al.

Odzaci, Yugoslavia: Total Contemporary Art Review, 1985–1987. First editions of 133 examples. Six side-stapled softcover 8vos of the same size, five of which are in brown kraft wrappers with title labels affixed to front covers, and one in white wrappers with a spray-painted title. Pages Xeroxed on paper in various colors with a myriad of tipped in items in each issue, including artwork, postcards, rubber stamps, stickers, documents, and postage stamps. Varying page counts between each issue, and each one housed inside original mailing envelope with postage markings.

Issues nos. 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 of the assembling magazine Total Contemporary Art Review, edited and published by Serbian artist Nenad Bogdanovic focusing on mail and stamp art. Each issue with varying contributors, all of whom crossed the boundaries of art, mail art, and stamp art connecting Bogdanovic in Eastern Europe with artists from around the world at a time when Serbia was still part of former Yugoslavia. Seventeen issues in total were issued between 1984–1987.

Issue no. 6 issued 1985, with approximately thirty contributors, including Umberto Basso, Private World, Jürgen O. Olbrich, Pat Fish, Kim Il Jung, Ko De Jonge, Chuck Stake, Bern Porter, Ona Nuk, and Arrigo Lora-Totino among others.

Issue no. 9 issued 1986, with approximately twenty-four contributors, including Franz-Josef Weber, Jacques Massa, Private World, Arrigo Lora-Totino, Serse Luigetti, Bernhard Skopnik, Jürgen O. Olbrich, Graf Haufen, Hilda Paz, and Harry Fox among others.

Issue no. 10 issued 1986, with approximately twenty-nine contributors, including Chuck Stake, Jürgen O. Olbrich, H. R. Fricker, Bernhard Skopnik, Vittori Venuti, Achim Schnyder, Jacques Mass, Franz Joseph Weber, Arrigo Lora-Totino, Miroljub Todorovic, Janet Janet, Kim Il Jung, Private World, and Sarah Jackson among others.

Issue no. 11 issued 1986, with approximately eighteen contributors, including Van Eechaute Danny, Mimi Holmes, Jean-Paul Morelle, Private World, Aloys Ohlmann, Bernhard Skopnik, Vittore Baroni, Bob Kirkman, Achim Schnyder, Petra Lee and Hok Wai Lee, Teresinka Pereira, and Jürgen O. Olbrich among others.

Issue no. 12 issued 1986, with approximately nineteen contributors, including Géza Perneczky, Van Eechaute Danny, Craig Hill, Josean M. L., Private World, Achim Schnyder, Gaetano Colonna, Axel Kretschmer, M. L. Hochkofler, Lon Spiegelman, and Erich Schröder among others.

Issue no. 13 issued 1987, with approximately twenty-six contributors, including Mario Marzidovsek, Craig W. Summers, Rea Nikonova, Private World, Petra Grund, Teresinka Pereira, Bruno Capatti, Miroljub Todorovic, Shigeru Nakayama, Bernhard Skopnik, Riggero Maggi, and Lon Speigelman among others.

These six issues housed inside their original mailing envelopes addressed to Private World in San Francisco.

Ref. Perneczky, Géza, ed.: ‘A HÁLÓ: Alternatív muvészeti áramlatok a folyóirat-kiadványaik tükrében, 1968–1988.’ [Budapest], Héttorony Könyvk, [1991], pp. 53.

Books very good with trace amounts of age toning to pages, handling creases, bumps to corners, and light wear along spines on account of the side-stapling. Mailing envelopes good only with postage markings, handling creases, and bumps to corners, including wear along margins which has resulted in a few of the seams splitting. Item #902