Nenad Bogdanovic

Nenad Bogdanovic's profile at Sherdog

Association: N/A

Pro Debut Date: 2015-11-29

Pro Record: 0-1-0

Win Finish %:

Quality Perf. %:

Last Ranked: N/A

Highest Ranked: N/A

Last Loss Date:

Complete Professional MMA Fight History

Fighter rankings represent most recent generated quarterly rating prior to the fight

Opponent Outcome L Ognjen Ledjanac TKO (Punches)

Round 1 SBC 7 - Serbian Battle Championship

Sunday, November 29th 2015

Opponent Event Outcome L Ognjen Ledjanac SBC 7 - Serbian Battle Championship

Sunday, November 29th 2015 TKO (Punches)

Round 1

A fighter's rank (US) state is assigned based on the state that the fighter most frequently fought in professionally, within the past three years. If there is a tie, the most recent state is used. The Win-Loss-Draw record for the fighter in the "Big Leagues". The Big Leagues refer to the top organizations based on a statistical analysis we performed. Some organizations were counted as one, due to mergers, etc. A quality performance is a fight in which the fighter fought an acceptable opponent, and substantiated their current rating (at the time) based on the outcome. At it's most basic level, one can equate "combat age" to "dog years" in that it will mirror the basic human lifecycle. With this computation, we expect fighters to hit their respective "peak" in the years that your typical adult "peaks" in life, somewhere between 25 and 40. We will expect most fighters to start their descent at some point in their 40s and be far removed from their peak by 60. This is an experimental metric that attempts to reflect a fighter's recent opposition quality. The metric goes back 1,080 days, and looks at all the fighter's opponents' W-L-D records within a window of 540 days before, and 540 days after their respective bout(s) with the fighter. All of the records are added up and the cumulative win percentage is presented by this metric in a "strength of schedule" format. These ranking sets have been generated by a recent version of the software, using recent data and will not match previously published issues of the rankings, especially since a majority of these generated sets are for dates much earlier than the site’s inception.