Turkey's largest newspaper, fiercely critical of the government last week before it was seized by state administrators, has returned to news-stands, publishing flattering stories on President Tayyip Erdogan.

The last edition before police raided the offices of Zaman about midnight on Friday boldly declared Turkey's "Constitution suspended".

But on Sunday, with state-controlled editors at the helm, the front page news was dominated by Mr Erdogan's visit to a bridge being built across Istanbul's Bosphorus Strait.

Sedat​ Mulayim​ from RMIT University's School of Urban and Social Studies said the crackdown on liberal freedoms in Turkey had grown more severe.

"I remember when I lived under the military rule – in 1980 I was there – I think it is more serious now," Mr Mulayim said.

Zaman, and its English-language counterpart publication, Today's Zaman, are linked with US-based cleric Fethullah Gulen.

Mr Gulen was previously closely allied to Mr Erdogan, but the president has since accused Mr Gulen of terrorism and fomenting a coup after stories alleging corruption.

"The government says [the takeover of Zaman] is an independent investigation. No one really believes that," said Mr Mulayim.

"They are using the prosecutor and the court system for their own purposes."

Zaman also has a presence in Australia, with its Turkish-language online site on Monday reporting Australian media reaction to the takeover of the publication in Turkey.

Police used tear gas against crowds of protesters outside the newspaper offices in Istanbul over the weekend.

That story was not reported in the new state-run edition.

"In less than 48 hours, the new admin turned seized Zaman into a propaganda piece of the regime in Turkey," said Sevgi Akarcesme, the editor-in chief of Today's Zaman, on Twitter.

The European Union warned the crackdown on press freedom "jeopardises progress made by Turkey in other areas", although many in Turkey have relinquished long-frustrated hopes of joining the economic union.

Critics have also accused the EU of soft-peddling on Mr Erdogan's authoritarian drift, worried about co-operation over the large number of Syrian refugees in Turkey and travelling through the country.