National Film Award is one of the prestigious awards given by the Hon’ble President of India. This award is presented annually in Delhi.

The event is organized by the Directorate of Film Festivals under the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. It is one of the several awards presented for feature films and awarded with Rajat Kamal and a cash prize.

National Film Award for Best Actor in Malayalam

1. P.J. Antony: P.J. Antony was the first Malayalam actor to win a National Award for Best Actor in 1974. He started his carrier in stage plays.

Film: Nirmalyam. M. T. Vasudevan Nair directed the film.

2. Bharat Gopi: Bharat Gopi was the second Keralite to receive the National Film Award in 1977.

Film: Kodiettam.

3. Balan K Nair: Balan K Nair got the National Award in 1980.

Film: Oppol. The story is written by the famous legendary writer M.T. Vasudevan Nair.

4. Premji: He won this prestigious award in 1988.

Film: Piravi.

5. Mammootty: Mammootty has won three National Film Awards. Films: Mathilukal and Oru Vadakan Veera Gadha in 1990.

Ponthan mada and Vidheyan in 1994.

Dr.Baba Saheb Ambedkar in 1999.

6. Mohan Lal: Mohan Lal won the National Award for Best Actor twice.

Films: Bharatham in 1991.

Vanaprastham in 1999.

7. Bala Chandra Menon: In 1997 Bala Chandra Menon got the National Award.

Film: Samantharangal.

8. Suresh Gopi: Suresh Gopi won the Best Actor Award in 1997.

Film: Kaliyattom.

9. Murali: Murali got his National Award in 2001.

Film: Neythukaran.

10. Salim Kumar: Salim Kumar started his carrier as a comedy artist and turned into a spectacular actor.

Film:Adaminte Makan Abu in 2010.

11. Suraj Venjaranmoodu: Suraj Venjaramoodu got National Award for Best Actor in 2013.

Film: Perariyathavar.

Best Supporting Actor Award

Nedumudivenu-Film: His Highness Abdullah.

Thilakan-Film:Rithubhedam.

Biju Menon-Film:Ayappanum Kosiyum.

Fahad Fazil-Thondimuthalum Druksakshiyum.

Special Jury Award

1.Mohan Lal-Film:Janatha Garage, Munthirivallikal Thalirkkumpol, Pulimurukan.

2. Kalabhavan Mani-Film: Vasanthiyum Lakshmiyum Pinne Njanum.

Special Mention Award

1.Nedumudi Venu-Film:Margam.

2.Thilakan-Film:Ekantham, Usthad Hotel.

3. Mohanlal-Film: Kireedam

4. Lal-Film:Ozhimuri.

5.Jayasurya-Film:Su Su Sudhi Vatmeekam.

6. Joju George-Film: Joseph.

About Author