Day 1 | Morning

Pha Taem National Park

Recommended Length of Stay: 0.5-1.0 Days

Location: 9GX5+J8R, Huai Phai, Khong Chiam District, Ubon Ratchathani 34220, Thailand

PhaTaemNationalPark is located in Konjan, Thailand, which is famous for its huge mushroom-shaped rocks and precious petroglyphs, in addition, people can enjoy the fascinating natural scenery here.

Reviews from Real Guests:

น้ำอิง: Pha Taem is another tourist destination in the Isan region of Thailand that we must have once given to. The distinctiveness here is that it is combined with a rich nature. Including beautiful spots that happen naturally such as Pha Chan, Sร้อย Sawan Waterfall, Sao Chaling, miracle cave, Phu Na Tam. With historical traces There are color paintings more than 3,000 years old and the location of this place is also close to the Mekong River. You can see a beautiful view of the river and the Lao border as well. Can be called very complete.

Ward_0861: Loved this forest garden Almost no people, only the sound of wind and rain and the sound of the Mekong River. You can see the Mekong River view on both sides of Thailand and Laos and listen to the movements of the internal noise.

Day 1 | Afternoon

When time permits after visiting Pha Taem National Park, don’t forget pay a visit to Sao Cha Lhiang.

Sao Cha Lhiang

Location: CG32+QR7, Huai Phai, Khong Chiam District, Ubon Ratchathani 34220, Thailand

Reviews from Real Guests:

Mississippi: To get to the top two pillars, you need to use a 4-wheeled car or a pickup truck as the way up is rocky. If you want to rent a pickup truck, you can contact the Na Pho District Tourist Service Center.

Fionjosephine: The porch pillars are beautiful natural sculptures. There is a walkway up to the viewpoint of the broken stone courtyard above to watch the sun. Walking up not far, not very difficult, very beautiful.

Day 1 | Evening

Looking for a bed nearby after finishing your journey at Sao Cha Lhiang? Khong Chiam Orchid Riverside Resort is one of your top choices.

Khong Chiam Orchid Riverside Resort

Offering a sun terrace and views of the river, Khong Chiam Orchid Riverside Resort is set in Khong Chiam in the Ubon Ratchathani Province Region, 39 km from Pakse. Guests can enjoy the on-site restaurant. Free private parking is available on site. The rooms come with a flat-screen TV. A terrace or balcony are featured in certain rooms. The rooms are equipped with a private bathroom. Extras include bathrobes, slippers and free toiletries. Khong Chiam Orchid Riverside Resort features free WiFi throughout the property. Bike hire and car hire are available at this resort and the area is popular for cycling. The area is popular for fishing and canoeing. Ubon Ratchathani Airport is 70 km from the property.