Former Hey Girl member Tina Chou (also known as Da Ya) has come forward amid the #MeToo Movement in Taiwan, accusing a “Mr. Chen,” later identified as actor-and-host Blackie Chen, of sexual harassment.

Tina started off as a participant in Blackie’s Teenage Club, a show aimed to produce new and young female celebrities. She would later become a permanent co-host of the show and make her girl group debut with Hey Girl, a group produced by the show and consisted of the show’s participants.

On June 27, Tina shared via Facebook that she had a harrowing encounter with Blackie, the host of Blackie’s Teenage Club, at a hotel back in 2012.

“To be honest, just like many others, I hope everyone pays more attention to the kindergarten drugging and child abuse incidents. But if I don’t share this now, perhaps I would be forever caged in that night, 11 years ago… In the early hours of July 18th, 2012. I remember the date clearly because I was scared to death that day…”

— Tina Chou

According to Tina’s initial post, she was in a vehicle with her “boss” and four other members after a shoot in Hong Kong when an inappropriate comment was made.

“I was with a female makeup artist, a male hairstylist, my male manager, Mr. Chen who was my boss at the time, and his male manager. The six of us took a red-eye flight to Hong Kong to film a show called 18/22. As soon as we arrived, we did interviews non-stop. We finally got to rest at the hotel after sunset.

Just as I kept yawning, Mr. Chen asked me from the front passenger seat, ‘You’re that tired? Have you not loosen up in a long time?’ He even winked.

I didn’t think much of it at the time and thought he was referring to getting a massage. I said I was tired and my shoulders were tight, so I should get it loosen up. The atmosphere during the car ride was casual and fun, but I came to realize he meant something else when he said ‘loosen up.’ But he’s a jokester, and the manager heard the conversation as well, so I didn’t think much of it.”

— Tina Chou

Tina claimed that the behavior continued well after the car ride—into the hotel elevator and, ultimately, her room, too.

“After the car arrived at the hotel, Mr. Chen, his manager, and I got our luggage and took the elevator up to our rooms for rest. (My manager and hairstylist went to have a meeting with the show’s staff, in order to discuss the details of the filming. The makeup artist waited for our mutual friend in the lobby, as we had plans to exchange face masks and have a meet up.)

The elevator was small, crowded, and suffocating. Basically, you could hear other people breathing. Then, Mr. Chen asked me with a whispering voice, ‘What’s your room number?’ I was puzzled and hesitated, and then made a face! (I was wondering, why would you want to know my room number?!)

He got impatient and asked again, ‘Quick! Didn’t you say you want to loosen up?!’ So I thought on my feet and gave him my manager’s room number with a straight face, ‘1XXX.’

He said, ‘Bullcrap! That’s your manager’s room number! Quick! Which room are you in?’ I didn’t know he would see through it, so I got nervous and didn’t know what to do… We got to my floor and the elevator door opened. Mr. Chen kept staring and wasn’t going to let me get away with it. So I thought, fine! If you really want to know, then I’ll tell you. Your manager is here too, so you wouldn’t dare to do anything! So I said, ‘1XXX.’ I escaped from that uncomfortable space with my luggage after telling him.”

— Tina Chou

The post continued to recall the forced interaction that Tina had to have. While Tina kept refusing, she ended up having to open her hotel room door to “Mr. Chen,” which she regretted to be “the worst mistake” she made.

“After getting to my room, I got in touch with the makeup artist and best friend, and told them I’m taking a shower first and asked them to come in about 20 minutes. Then, I got ready for the shower.

Ding dong, the door bell rang! (I only had my underwear on at the time.) I put on the hotel’s bathrobe and complained, ‘Didn’t I tell you girls I have to shower…?’ Then, I was stunned. The person on the other side of the peephole was Mr. Chen! I yelled from the other side of the door, ‘What are you doing?!’

‘Open the door first. Quick!’ He said in a low voice. I told him clearly that I was tired and was going to take a shower, and he should go back to his room and rest! ‘Open the door first. I just want to tell you something quick.’ He continued with his low voice…

So I thought maybe he really had something important to say? Since it would be quick, I cracked the door open a little to listen, since he was my boss. Opening the door was the worst mistake I made!!!”

— Tina Chou

Tina claimed that she felt vulnerable and at risk. Against her will, she was molested.

“He swiftly pushed the door wide open, came in, closed the door, and sat on my bed! To keep a distance from him, I sat on the chair by the desk and tightened my bathrobe. Then, he continued his joke about ‘loosening up…’ I told him with a smile, ‘That’s just a joke, what do you want! You’re so silly! I’m tired and need to take a shower. Get back to your room, we have to wake up early tomorrow for filming…’

He didn’t care, reached out to the chair (it had wheels), and rolled it towards him. I immediately got out of it. I was looking at my cellphone which was on the bedside table, and really wanted to reach out to someone for help! But I only had a bathrobe on and was afraid it could get pulled off. I was too scared that his stupid joke would become a reality, I didn’t grab my phone…

Besides, no matter what, I had to film with him for the entire day the next day, ride in the same car, take the same flight… I told myself, I can’t turn against him now. I was blacklisted by him for a while during Blackie’s Teenage Club, so I knew he had ways to make me lose all my jobs. I needed to come up with a way to get out of the situation unharmed.

I pushed myself to smile and told him the makeup artist and my best friend were coming to meet up with me, and it would not look good for him to be in my room, so he should leave. But he didn’t move, as if his butt was glued to my bed. I ran out of ideas and decided to open the door, thinking that even if he didn’t leave, at least I would be safe.

But I didn’t think that this move would give him an opportunity…”

— Tina Chou

Throughout the post, Tina referred to Blackie as “Mr. Chen.” The public, however, realized it’s Blackie when Tina mentioned the name of Mr. Chen’s wife to be “Fan Fan,” also known as singer Christine Fan. Christine Fan and Blackie Chen have been married since 2011, with twin sons.

“He hugged me from behind. I immediately protected my chest and struggled, but I was no match for his strength!

He asked, ‘What do you think? Muscular, right?’ I coldly said that I liked skinny guys, not muscular ones, and told him, ‘Don’t be like this!’ He replied, ‘You haven’t even tried. Maybe you’d come to like it after trying!’

I couldn’t even react, as I went from struggling to getting pushed onto the bed!

I finally got a chance to push him away and tight my bathrobe which was about to fall off. I told him since he was done messing around, he should get back to his room. I was tired.

Then he said, ‘Okay! Then let’s get to it quickly!’ I didn’t think he would respond like that… I seriously told him that I treated him like an older brother, so I’m not going to take his jokes to heart. I told him, ‘You’re married. I went to your wedding. This is wrong and weird!’

He told me, ‘There’s no other way. Your sister Fan Fan doesn’t like this kind of stuff!’

I couldn’t believe my ears… He was known to be a loving husband, and they were like couple goals on screen. I witnessed their “till death do us part” love, but he actually said something like this! I really wanted to throw up. Besides, what does Fan Fan not liking this kind of stuff have anything to do with me? Why did he tell me?! Even if you have needs, you shouldn’t be doing this to other women!”

— Tina Chou

Tina recalled Blackie being persistent in pursuing her, even though she tried to convince him to leave her alone. According to her account of the night, Blackie left her room after she turned him down multiple times.

“For my own safety, I still had to find an excuse to reject him. So I told him we were in the same company. ‘Even if you have needs, you shouldn’t be treating me like this because I’m an artist at your company,’ I told him.

He actually responded with, ‘But you’re so hot!’

I was stunned by his responses and didn’t know what to do… Thank God, some noises came from outside at this time. But they were not from my friends, some people just walked by. But I took the chance and said they might be arriving soon! Go back and rest, I beg you…

He insisted, ‘Fine! Since you’re tired, I’ll let it go. Kiss me on the lips and I’ll leave!’

Who was this person standing in front of me? Did I know him? Why was he saying such weird things? I was just trying to come up with ways to get him to leave, or get my friends to come. I seriously told him once again, ‘I really see you as my older brother. Don’t you have a biological sister? Would you ask your sister to kiss you on the lips?’

He said, ‘I have never asked, but I could try next time!’

No matter how much I tried, he had a way to bring the topic back to what he wanted to talk about… Finally, as I kept buying time and telling him my friends would arrive soon, he decided it was not worth it and gave up.”

— Tina Chou

Tina claimed that, based on her personal experience, she “understood why girls are afraid to speak out against perpetrators of sexual harassments and sexual assaults.”

“In order to keep a distance from him, I only looked at him as he left, and then ran up and locked the door afterward. As I was still in shock, the door bell rang again! It’s still him! I was really too afraid to open the door this time, and asked him what he wanted from the other side of the door.

He said, ‘Give me some cleansing oil, I’m afraid of running into someone who knows me when I take the elevator.’

This person actually had something so detailed in mind, coming up with the ‘I went to her room just to borrow some cleansing oil’ excuse just in case someone saw him… And suddenly, I understood why girls are afraid to speak out against perpetrators of sexual harassments and sexual assaults. They’re so shrewd. The way he hid behind a façade, I wonder how much about him was actually true?

I immediately told the makeup artist and my best friend when they finally came, and helplessly asked them what I should do. Before I even finished, the phone rang and it was Mr. Chen…

He asked, ‘Little sis, are you asleep? I was just thinking if you couldn’t fall asleep, you could come up to my room. My room is more spacious, and we could even watch DVDs!’

My best friends heard what he said and were stunned. They didn’t really believe it at first, but they heard Mr. Chen’s invite. Before leaving, they reminded me to lock my door, and lock it from the inside too!”

— Tina Chou

Tina concluded her detailed account with a grateful sentiment for others who started the #MeToo movement and“giving [her] courage.” She called out Blackie for “using his public image of a loving husband and charitable person” and hoped that—after revealing her past with him—that she’d no longer be afraid of him.

“The next day went as planned, we flew back to Taipei after filming. Mr. Chen acted as if nothing happened the night before.

I really wanted to reveal this incident for a long time, but I never had the courage to… After the incident, I kept hearing about similar things involving Mr. Chen. The girls didn’t want to reveal it, and didn’t even want to recall it. They didn’t want to be associated with this person.

He’s been using his public image of a loving husband and charitable person to advance his career. Who’s going to believe me? Should I just leave it be?

When I met up with my friends a few years back, I saw him and his wife having a meal at the same restaurant. I really wanted to hide, and even wished that I had the ability to become invisible, but he saw me… He came over to say hi, with his wife in tow. I was so uncomfortable to the point of wanting to throw up. But, just like when the incident happened, I forced myself to smile. I discovered that I not only hate him, but I also fear him a lot.

I’m thankful to the people who spoke out during this #MeToo movement, giving me courage. I admire you all for being fearless. I’m only able to live because everyone is treating sexual harassments seriously. I’m scared because I’ve been blacklisted by him before. If I don’t speak out now, the night from 11 years ago would continue to be a nightmare forever.

I hope women know how to protect herself on the job. Whether it be your boss, manager, or co-worker, inappropriate jokes need to stop before they’re taken too far. Have the courage to revolt against those who are shameless but authoritative. Don’t be like me who stayed silent for over 10 years just for the job.

If I was brave enough to reveal his wrongdoings back then, perhaps I would not be called a traitor when I left his company, and I would not shiver every time I heard or saw his name.

I hope that, after today, I only feel hate, but not fear, when I think of this person.”

— Tina Chou

Following Tina’s post, Blackie Chen responded through a legal representative and claimed that all accusations being made against him are false.

“This legal statement has been issued with our client Mr. Blackie Chen’s appointment. Regarding Miss Tina Chou’s Facebook post dated June 27, 2023, the content is completely false. Our client is pursuing legal actions through our law firm, and solemnly states the following:

Our client is absolutely supportive of the Metoo movement, and encourages victims to speak out and protect their rights. Calling on all men and women to protect themselves and distance themselves from unfair sexual treatment is valuable and positive. However, taking this opportunity to maliciously smear one’s name with false accusations is not strictly not permitted.

Regarding the trip to Hong Kong for filming in July 2012, our client was always with a group of people and absolutely never had time alone with Miss Tina Chou as she alleged. Miss Tina Chou’s allegations are groundless and completely false.

Our client has nothing to hide and is willing to face it head on if he performed any improper actions. But false accusations that consume the public and media resources are not appropriate. Our client has entrusted our law firm in pursuing legal actions in accordance with the law.”

— Legal statement

After Blackie issued his legal statement, Tina responded with a short post on Facebook.

“Everything I’ve said is the truth.

I have a clear conscience.

The public will be the judge.”

— Tina Chou

More than a handful of celebrities have been accused during this wave of the #MeToo movement in Taiwan. You can read more about some of the cases below.

5 Celebrities Accused Of Sexual Assault And Harassment During Taiwan’s #MeToo Movement