Our 6th graders journeyed back to a time of Renaissance, Reformation, and Shakespeare, and brought to life historical men and women of the past. They put on a “Gallery of the Greats,” enjoyed a themed “BreakFEAST” and were entertained by 7th graders performing a “Shakespearean Rock Opera.” The day’s festivities ended with jousting led by 7th grade Bible teacher Mr. Dresback and Middle School principal Mr. Rafacz. Huzzah to all our 6th grade scholars and 7th grade thespians! ‘Twas a job well done.

In 1998, members of a young Catalina Foothills Church opened the doors of a classical, Christian school called Cornerstone Christian Academy with 27 students. Three years later, Pusch Ridge Christian Academy was formed, taking over the former Palo Verde Christian School for grades 7-12. Eventually, the two schools merged boards and began to share a name and become one K-12 district. Our South Campus was added in August 2022 and today over 950 students attend the three campuses.

All the while, we have continued to be a ministry of Catalina Foothills Church. Says current Lead Pastor, John Stone, “CFC is so thankful for God's faithfulness through PRCA and the work the Lord does in educating and equipping students to serve Christ in all areas of life. We are grateful for the faculty and staff's commitment to Christ and his kingdom. It has been amazing to see the Lord's hand on Pusch Ridge Christian Academy.”

Thank you, CFC, for 25 years of support!

About 700 years before Christ’s birth, the prophet Isaiah wrote about the coming of the Messiah, Jesus Christ. In Isaiah 9:6, he penned, “For to us a child is born, to us a son is given, and the government will be on his shoulders. And he will be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace.”

Jesus became flesh and was born to a human mother. He was sent into the world to become our high priest when he died on the cross for our sins, and then rose from the dead to emerge as our Savior so that those who believe in Him will inherit eternal life. During this Christmas season, let us remember and reflect on why Christ came to earth. Merry Christmas to all!