The Settlers: Rise of an Empire - The Eastern Realm is a strategy game developed by Blue Byte and Funatics Software. It was originally released in 2008. It was published by Ubisoft Entertainment. The game is rated as "Skip" on RAWG. The Settlers: Rise of an Empire - The Eastern Realm is available on PC.

The Settlers: Rise of an Empire - History Edition is a strategy game developed by Blue Byte. It was originally released in 2019. It was published by Ubisoft Entertainment. The game is rated as "Skip" on RAWG. You can play The Settlers: Rise of an Empire - History Edition on PC. The game is sold via Steam. Benedikt Grindel produced the game. Michael Pummel scored the game.

Anno Online is a strategy-simulation game developed by Blue Byte. It came out on 01-07-2015. It was published by Ubisoft Entertainment. The game is rated as "Skip" on RAWG. Anno Online is available on PC and macOS. You can purchase the game on Steam.

The Settlers: Rise Of An Empire Gold Edition is a strategy game developed by Blue Byte. It was originally released in 2009. Ubisoft Entertainment published the game. On review aggregator Metacritic, The Settlers: Rise Of An Empire Gold Edition has a score of 66. Most rawgers rated the game as "Recommended". You can play The Settlers: Rise Of An Empire Gold Edition on PC. The game is sold via Steam.

The Settlers 7: History Edition is a strategy game developed by Blue Byte. It came out on 22-01-2019. Ubisoft Entertainment published the game. The game is rated as "Meh" on RAWG. The Settlers 7: History Edition is available on PC. The game is sold via Steam.

The Settlers 2: 10th Anniversary is a strategy game developed by Blue Byte. It was originally released in 2006. Ubisoft Entertainment published the game. The game is rated as "Recommended" on RAWG. The Settlers 2: 10th Anniversary is available on PC. You can purchase the game on GOG.

The Settlers: Heritage of Kings - Nebula Realm is a strategy game developed by Ubisoft Montreal and Blue Byte. It was originally released in 2005. It was published by Ubisoft Entertainment. Most rawgers rated the game as "Recommended". You can play The Settlers: Heritage of Kings - Nebula Realm on PC.

Dawn of Discovery: Venice is a strategy game developed by Related Designs. It came out on 25-02-2010. Ubisoft Entertainment published the game. The game is rated as "Skip" on RAWG. Dawn of Discovery: Venice is available on PC.

Anno 1800 - The Passage is a strategy-simulation game developed by Ubisoft Mainz. It came out on 10-12-2019. It was published by Ubisoft Entertainment. The game is rated as "Exceptional" on RAWG. You can play Anno 1800 - The Passage on PC. The game is sold via Steam and Epic Games Store.

Dawn of Discovery is a strategy game developed by Related Designs. It was originally released in 2009. Ubisoft Entertainment published the game. Most rawgers rated the game as "Recommended". You can play Dawn of Discovery on PC, Nintendo DS and Wii. You can purchase the game on Nintendo eShop.

Anno 1503 A.D. is a strategy-simulation game developed by Max Design GesMBH. It came out on 22-03-2003. It was published by Ubisoft Entertainment. The game is rated as "Recommended" on RAWG. You can play Anno 1503 A.D. on PC. You can purchase the game on GOG.