SACRAMENTO — Grayson Allen has drawn comparisons to Dan Majerle since he joined the Phoenix Suns this season for making 3s, athleticism and competitiveness.

Add an award to the list.

Allen received the Dan Majerle Hustle Award, named after the Suns legend who helped Phoenix reach the 1993 NBA Finals. Majerle presented Allen with the honor at center court before Tuesday’s final regular-season home game, which the Suns lost to the Los Angeles Clippers, 105-92, at Footprint Center.

“I didn’t know what was happening before the game, I was kind of surprised,” Allen said before Wednesday’s 124-108 win over the Clippers at Crypto.com Arena in Los Angeles. “It’s a really cool honor. I really appreciate it. I don’t know how it was selected or picked, but I feel very honored.”,

The award is given to the player who most personifies “the same hustle, grit and determination” Majerle displayed as a player. In the past, the selection was based on the votes of Suns fans, players, and Majerle, with each group “carrying equal weight” in the final selection.

“I briefly looked at the list of the names of guys who have won the award,” Allen added. “Great list to be a part of.”

Former Suns wing Mikal Bridges won the award three out of four seasons (2019, 2021, 2022) before Josh Okogie received the honor last season. Jevon Carter was the award recipient in 2020.

“It’s big-time,” Suns two-way player Ish Wainright said about Allen. “For him to come in and do what he’s been doing and showing how good of a player and good of a person he is, he deserves it. He doesn’t complain. He come in, get the job done and go home to a beautiful family, feed the dog and enjoy life.”

Allen admits having not watched a bunch of Majerle’s games, saying, “It’s a little before my time,” with a smile, but said he sees the similarities between him and the Suns “Ring of Honor” member.

“For people to say that about me, Dan was such a great player,” Allen said. “That’s awesome for me to hear.”

Allen is having a career year in averaging 13.4 points and shooting a league-best 45.6% from 3 this season. The Suns (47-33) acquired him from Milwaukee in a three-team deal before training camp as Damian Lillard went to the Bucks and Deandre Ayton landed in Portland.

The 6-4 guard has started all but one of the 73 games he’s played this season as Frank Vogel gave Royce O’Neale the start Wednesday.

“It’s a little different,” Allen said after the game. “Once you get out there, it’s the same thing.”

O’Neale posted 15 points, hitting 3-of-9 from 3, seven rebounds, five assists to just one turnover, three steals and a block in 34 minutes.

“Just bringing the size, versatility on the defensive end,” Suns All-Star Devin Booker said about O’Neale, who was making his eighth start in 28 games for Phoenix.

O’Neale is averaging 8.4 points and shooting 37.8% from 3 with the Suns since coming over from Brooklyn in a three-team deal right before the trade deadline.

“Spacing the floor out. Those dribble-keep actions, and DHOs (dribble handoffs). Teams try to put a lesser defender on him. He’s quick and he gets right to it.”

Suns coach Frank Vogel said starting O’Neale was matchup-driven and a test to see how it’d look in a playoff situation. Vogel looks to put Allen back in the starting lineup Friday at Sacramento (45-34).

“It’s just something we’ve been talking about,” Vogel said after Wednesday’s game. “If we get into a playoff matchup where we have a bigger opponent, then we feel like his size in the starting lineup is something that would make sense. We didn’t want to go to that with Grayson coming off the bench for the first time having never done it. We used this one game to let Grayson just feel the rhythm of coming off the bench, if it’s needed in the playoffs.”

Allen scored just six points on 2-of-5 shooting (all 3s) in 24 minutes.

He had gone 0-for-15 on 3s over the course of three games starting with the fourth quarter of Sunday’s loss to New Orleans, continuing Tuesday against the Clippers and ending Wednesday at Los Angeles.

Allen ended the skid with a made 3 in the second quarter Wednesday and later hit a huge one to put Phoenix up four, 110-106, with 6:02 left in the game, forcing Clippers coach Ty Lue to call timeout.

“Hit my two toughest 3s, both of them off the dribble,” said Allen, who grabbed four rebounds, committed four fouls, but had the game’s highest plus-minus at plus-18. “I was missing the wide-open catch-and-shoots.”

Have opinions about the current state of the Suns? Reach Suns Insider Duane Rankin at dmrankin@gannett.com or contact him at 480-787-1240. Follow him on X, formerly Twitter, at @DuaneRankin.