Roman Siscia was one of the most important ancient towns in the province of Pannonia. It was a vibrant commercial centre trading in wheat, wool and other goods, but the economic context of its development is still not as researched as it should be. Understanding of economic activities is connected with research of suburban and rural areas, but unfortunately the ager of colonia Siscia is fragmentarily and insufficiently researched and only a limited research of city’s suburban zones can provide some answers to questions about economic activities of ancient Siscia. By methods of interdisciplinary research and consolidation of all relevant data this paper present a thesis on economic activities associated with animal husbandry and textile processing activities in ancient Siscia through a re-evaluation of the Mrcinište site and a determination of the economic purpose of this large residential-economic complex in the suburban area of Siscia.

Even though industrial activity is traditionally considered to be something restricted to areas outside the settlements in the Roman period more and more data refer to the contrary nowadays: several workshops-even those with stinking, combustible and noisy activities-have been located inside civil settlements, sometimes even close to the centres. This raises several questions about urban structure, town planning or even the interests of the workshops' owners and merchants in the settlements' public life. This paper will focus on the archaeological imprints of industry and commerce in military and civil settlements along the Pannonian Limes, taking into consideration both the old and new archaeological data.

KEY WORDS Sirmium, Bassianae, Glac, Imperial Weaving Houses (gynaecea), Notitia Dignitatum, Sheep Grazing, Roman Pannonia, Wool Production ABSTRACT As part of the Joint Australian – Serbian archaeological project at Glac near ancient Sirmium, an archaeological survey is being undertaken of a Study Area of a 700 km² slice of the catchment of the Sava River. Two of the objectives of the survey are to understand the environmental conditions and the nature of the rural economy in the Study Area during the Roman period. As part of this survey an examination has been undertaken of existing literary, epigraphical and archaeological evidence relating to the area in the Roman period. Consideration has been given to the Notitia Dignitatum ("The List of Offices") that lists two imperial weaving houses (gynaecea) at Sirmium (modern Sremska Mitrovica) and Bassianae (adjoining the modern village of Donji Petrovci). The location of two imperial weaving houses in such close proximity to each other is unprecedented, subject to a peculiarity at Salona and Split, and has not previously been noted. The potential implications of the existence of two imperial weaving houses in such close proximity are considered together with potential implications on the likely rural economy and the environmental conditions of the area in the late Roman period.