Credits

Beach Boys, Mamas & Papas, Tommy TuTone, Bob Dylan, Chuck Berry, Jan & Dean, The Cowsills, Action Skulls, The Heaters, Dwight Twilley, Harry Chapin, The Bangles, Mickey Dolenz , Hoodoo Gurus, The Smithereens, Foster The People, Maroon 5, Herman’s Hermits, The Dream Syndicate

Bio

John Cowsill began playing drums and singing at the age of 7, joining his siblings to form the hit 1960’s band The Cowsills. In the early 1980s, Cowsill performed and recorded with Jan and Dean and is heard playing percussion and singing back-up vocals on Tommy Tutone’s hit, "867-5309/Jenny."

During this time he also toured as the drummer of Dwight Twilley’s band. Cowsill began playing with the touring Beach Boys on keyboards and vocals in 2000. He moved to the drums in 2008, and was featured as lead vocalist on such songs as "Wild Honey,” "California Dreamin’,” “Darlin’,” and "Sail On Sailor."

In 2011, Cowsill was chosen to play with Brian Wilson’s band-- along with Al Jardine and Mike Love--on The Beach Boys’ sold-out 50th Anniversary Reunion Tour. Cowsill appears on that band's subsequent studio album, That's Why God Made the Radio (2012).

He also performed on Mike Love's solo albums Unleash the Love (2017) and Reason for the Season (2018). In 2017, Cowsill, Vicki Peterson, and musician/actor Bill Mumy formed the band Action Skulls, releasing two albums: “Angels Hear” (2017) and “A Different World” (2020). Their third album “From A Running Horse” will be released in the near future. Cowsill toured all over the world with The Beach Boys for over 22 years.

Videos

Television Appearances​

Good Morning America (x7)

The Today Show (x6)

The Tonight Show w/ Jimmy Fallon

The Ed Sullivan Show (x3)

Fox & Friends (x5)

Johnny Carson (x3)

Dick Cavett Show

The Grammys

Johnny Cash Show (x2)

Joey Bishop Show

Virginia Graham Show

National Christmas Tree Lighting Ceremony

Later... w/ Jools Holland

​American Bandstand

Get In Touch Below - All Fields Required

* Indicates required field

Name *

First

Last

Email *

Comment *