Maps of Hwali

Maphill is a collection of map images. This view of Hwali at an angle of 60° is one of these images. Click on the Detailed button under the map for a more comprehensive map.

See Hwali from a different perspective.

Each map type has its advantages. No map style is the best. The best is that Maphill lets you look at each place from many different angles.

Sure, this political 3D map is nice. But there is good chance you will like other map styles even more. Select another style in the above table. See Hwali and Matabeleland South from a different view.

What to do when you like this map?

If you like this Hwali, Gwanda, Matabeleland South, Zimbabwe map, please don't keep it to yourself. Give your friends a chance to see how the world converted to images looks like.

Share this 3D map.

Use the buttons for Facebook, Twitter or Google+ to share a link to this political map of Hwali. Maphill is the largest map gallery on the web. The number of maps is, however, not the only reason to visit Maphill.

Get 3D map of Hwali for free.

You can embed, print or download the map just like any other image. All Hwali and Matabeleland South maps are available in a common image format. Free images are available under Free map link located above the map.

Is there anything more than this map?

Sure, there is. It has been said that Maphill maps are worth a thousand words. No doubt about that. But you can experience much more when you visit Hwali.

Be inspired.

Matabeleland South has a lot to offer. Each place is different. Each place is worth a visit. It will never be possible to capture all the beauty in the map.

Hwali hotel deals.

If any of Maphill's maps inspire you to come to Hwali, we would like to offer you access to wide selection of nearby hotels at low prices and with great customer service.

Thanks to our partnership with Booking.com you can take advantage of up to 50% discounts for hotels in many locations in the area of Matabeleland South. Book hotels online and save money.

Hwali hotels

See the full list of hotels in or close to Hwali, the list of destinations in Gwanda, browse destinations in Matabeleland South, Zimbabwe, Africa or choose from the below listed cities.

Hwali hotels »

Hotels in Gwanda »

Hotels in Matabeleland South »

Hotels in Zimbabwe »

Hotels in Africa »

Hotels in popular destinations in Gwanda

Gwanda hotels »

Sablevale hotels »

West Nicholson hotels »

Antenior hotels »

Mbizo hotels »

Hwali hotels »

Mashaba hotels »

Glass Block hotels »

Colleen Bawn hotels »

Learn more about the map styles

Each map type offers different information and each map style is designed for a different purpose. Read about the styles and map projection used in the above map (Political 3D Map of Hwali).

Political map

Political map shows how people have divided up the world into countries and administrative regions such as states, counties, provinces, municipalities and postal zones. Different colors represent different countries and regions, whereas different shades of one color represent their internal divisions.

The choice of color is not related to the characteristics of Hwali, colors are assigned to countries and regions randomly. The capital is marked with a black star inside a white circle. Squares and circles of various size indicate other major cities.

Plate Carree map projection

A map projection is a way how to transform points on a Earth to points on a map. This 3D map uses Plate Carree projection, a simple variant of the equidistant cylindrical projection originated in the ancient times. The parallels and meridians are equally spaced, they together form equally sized squares over the entire world map.

Using simple grid, where each cell has the same size and shape, brings in significant benefits. For comparison, the detailed maps of Hwali use Mercator projection instead. The Mercator projection preserves the shapes and angles of small areas better, but on the other hand, it significantly distorts the size of areas.

Technology

We unlock the value hidden in the geographic data. Thanks to automating the complex process of turning data into map graphics, we are able to create maps in higher quality, faster and cheaper than was possible before.

Forever free

We created Maphill to make the web a more beautiful place. Without you having to pay for it. Maphill maps are and will always be available for free.

Real Earth data

Do you think the maps are too beautiful not to be painted? No, this is not art. All 3D maps of Hwali are created based on real Earth data. This is how the world looks like.

Easy to use

This map is available in a common image format. You can copy, print or embed the map very easily. Just like any other image.

Different perspectives

The value of Maphill lies in the possibility to look at the same area from several perspectives. Maphill presents the map of Hwali in a wide variety of map types and styles.

Vector quality

We build each 3D map individually with regard to the characteristics of the map area and the chosen graphic style. Maps are assembled and kept in a high resolution vector format throughout the entire process of their creation.

Experience of discovering

Maphill maps will never be as detailed as Google maps or as precise as designed by professional cartographers. Our goal is different. We want to redefine the experience of discovering the world through the maps.

Fast anywhere

Maps are served from a large number of servers spread all over the world. Globally distributed map delivery network ensures low latency and fast loading times, no matter where on Earth you happen to be.

Spread the beauty

Embed the above political 3D map of Hwali into your website. Enrich your blog with quality map graphics. Make the web a more beautiful place.