Coordinates: City College Brighton & Hove (CCB) is a large general further education college in Brighton and Hove. Its main campus is at Pelham Street, Brighton. It was formerly known as Brighton College of Technology and before that Brighton Technical College.

The college is a popular choice for visual arts progression from nearby colleges e.g. A-level art and photography courses, and provides academic grounding in workmanships such as woodwork, carpentry, engineering, plumbing and electronics. The technical progressions the college provides give opportunities for post-GCSE students wishing to pursue a specific profession rather than studying multiple A-levels. The college also supports adult learning for over 21s, including those without existing traditional qualifications but the necessary experience and intentions.

The college has embraced new media technologies with the introduction of video games related qualifications. Courses syllabuses are regularly updated with new technologies to keep tuition up to date and the most desirable by employers.

Contents

1 Courses

2 Students

3 Awards

4 Alumni

5 External links

6 References

Courses

The college offers vocational courses, academic and vocational A-levels, BTEC National and First Diplomas and NVQs. The College offers progression to its own Higher Education courses in conjunction with the University of Brighton.[1]

Students

Two thousand full time students, and 1300 part time, attend the college every year. The students come from varying kinds of social and ethnic backgrounds, including many international students.

There is no accommodation for City College students.

Awards

City College's carpentry department has been awarded a City & Guilds Medal for Excellence eleven times since 1996. The college has also achieved the ‘Action for Business Colleges’ (AfBC) accreditation, an award which marks the college’s responsiveness to the needs of the local business community.

In addition the college has also been awarded a 'Centre of Vocational Excellence' (CoVE) status in Digital Design, Instrumentation, Automation and Control Engineering, Heritage Engineering, Business, Management and Finance, Hospitality and Tourism.[2]

Alumni

Famous alumni of the college include: [3]

Julie Christie, actress

Chris Collins, Blue Peter gardener

Graham Kerr, chef

Deborah Meaden, business woman

Steve Ovett, Olympic Gold Medalist

Dame Flora Robson

Ben McKellar, chef and owner of The Gingerman and Ginger Pig

City College website.