A genuine community spirit was the force behind the successful public launch of The Greater Brighton Metropolitan College and the 'Have you MET your future?' campaign this week. Great new branding, thought-provoking research and a truly impressive group of high-profile alumni all helped attract media attention for The MET, but I was struck by the extent to which students and apprentices old and new went out of their way to offer support and get involved.

http://www.brightonandhoveindependent.co.uk/news/education/video-high-flyers-back-college-campaign-1-7902430

As separate colleges, City College Brighton and Hove and Northbrook College have an extensive 150-year history and heritage - and more high-achieving supporters than I would normally assume could be incorporated into a PR launch strategy for a college merger! But that's what happened this week for Sussex's new 'super college' - now the second biggest provider of technical education and apprenticeships in the region.

Busy people took time out of their schedules to support in person and online - even Dragon's Den's Deborah Meaden re-tweeted The Brighton Argus' coverage saying how 'chuffed' she was to have received a MET Honorary Graduate Award from her old college while she was busy filming in another part of the country.

http://www.heart.co.uk/sussex/news/local/new-super-college-for-sussex/

This willingness to get behind the MET and what it stands for is testament to what I saw as I accompanied the campaign's photographer and film maker around Brighton before the campaign launch - people are passionate about flying the flag for vocational education and training. They are eager to share how the qualifications they opted for at 16 have helped them achieve career success. Without A-Levels and often without a degree.

As a professional, it has been a pleasure working on this campaign. As a parent of a 15-year-old it has got me thinking. Over a third of UK university applicants haven't studied for the traditional A-levels, degree-level apprenticeships are now available and a BTEC professional qualification is equivalent to a phD. It's time to start thinking - and talking -about post-16 education options in a different way.