It has merged with Northbrook College and education will now be offered across five sites in Brighton, Worthing and Shoreham.

There will be 1,200 staff and 14,000 students.

The focus will be on providing quality vocational education.

Chief executive officer Nick Juba, who has been at the helm for 18 months, says the new college has an exciting future.

He said: “This move is all about the students and making the new college sustainable for the long term.

“Our focus is on providing students with the knowledge and skills they need to go on to outstanding careers.

“There will be a renewed emphasis and focus on providing the right curriculum for local people and also meeting the needs of employers.”

City College has suffered tough times in recent years.

It faced major financial problems and there were staff redundancies but Mr Juba insists the future is now looking bright.

He said: “Construction is a key growth area and we have invested £9 million into our Wilson Avenue campus to meet this need.

“There is a natural growth in the number of young people aged 16 to 18 and we must be ready to meet that demand. I am confident we are.

“We will see a change in attitude and approach. We have an obligation to these young people to understand the options that are available to them.

“Further education has seen drastic cuts in recent years.

“The funding has been unfair but too many people have moaned for far too long.

“I want to make sure our young people have local access to local education.

“Partnership is key and I realise how important it is that we do this properly.

“We are here to transform people’s lives and I want us to be doing that.

“It will take time but I am confident about the provision that is on offer.

“We are ambitious and I say to everybody – come and have a look at what we are doing and what we can do for young people.

“We have some great resources and excellent facilities.”

Mr Juba said staff were feeling positive after a period of cutbacks caused by the old City College making a loss.

He said: “I do feel that staff are largely positive.

“Of course there is always a degree of anxiety at a time of change but there is better opportunity now for career progression among our staff.

“I have been very clear about what we want to achieve here at The Met and this has been communicated to all staff.”

APPRENTICESHIPS A GREAT ROUTE TO CAREER SUCCESS

THE Met says there is significant public support for apprenticeships and vocational qualifications as valuable routes to career success in today’s job market.

The new college has been undertaking research into what young people really want.

Of all adults aged 19 and over in Sussex surveyed for the report, 42 per cent agreed vocational qualifications were as valuable as A-levels.

And more than half of the 14 to 18-year-olds questioned in the region believe vocational qualifications are as valuable a route to career success as having an academic university education.

The METfutures research report is being released as part of a new Have you MET your future? campaign.

Almost one in two top professionals, such as chief executive officers, believed vocational qualifications provided a higher level of relevant skills to many careers.

One in three believes vocational qualifications are as valuable as A-levels in today’s job market and moe than a third said they would even consider doing an apprenticeship themselves.

Teens and adults under 35 also appear to favour vocational paths into work.

They seem less aware than older age groups of labour market skills shortages and the potential for vocational education to help fill them.

Just 25 per cent of 14 to 16-year-olds and 19 per cent of 17 to 18-year-olds agreed the UK will have a skills shortage in the future and vocational qualifications will help to fill this skills gap compared with 47 per cent of adults over 55.

The research also found a lack of awareness around the new apprenticeship levy with one in two of 14 to 18-year-olds not aware of its planned introduction.

METfutures report data reveals that jobs in construction and catering will be among the top ten growth occupations in Sussex and the UK over the next five years.

In Sussex, floorers and wall tilers are among the occupations predicted to see the highest percentage growth between now and 2022.

Employers in construction and catering are facing significant problems, however, when it comes to filling job vacancies due to skill shortages.

Mr Juba said: “For the first time in many years a much-needed emphasis is being placed on professional and technical education – whether through apprenticeships or college-based study.

“The demands of our labour market are changing and therefore so too are the skills and qualifications employers are looking for.

“As our college embarks on a new era of opportunity, it feels like the right time to address some of the myths and lack of understanding that often exist around apprenticeships, technical education and the career and higher education options they lead to through our METfutures campaign.”

Julie Nerney is chairwoman of the Greater Brighton Metropolitan College board of governors.

She said: “The Government is in the process of negotiating a deal to leave the European Union and it remains unclear what impact this might have on the supply of labour to many of our industries including construction, health and tourism.

“In this time of change we need to think carefully about the knowledge, skills and understanding that the people of our region need to succeed and to thrive.

“While A-levels and university provide a great option for some students, more than 60 per cent of our young people choose an alternative route.”

TROUBLES ARE ALL IN PAST

IT’S been a troubled few years for City College but chief executive Nick Juba says that is all in the past.

In February 2015 Lynn Thackway, the principal and chief executive office stood down.

The news followed an Argus report saying the college was in a cash crisis over payments to its suppliers.

The board of governors said it “regrets to announce that Lynn Thackway has left her role as principal and CEO of the college due to a family illness”.

In a statement issued to staff, Mrs Thackway said: “It is with great regret that I have to inform you that I have made the difficult decision to step down from my role as principal of City College, which has a very special place in my heart.”

Last June we reported that students’ learning opportunities were at risk at the college which was failing to provide adequate resources for its more academic learners.

The college was told it required improvement to meet national standards for the quality of student learning opportunities, by the Quality Assurance Agency for High Education.

The college was found to meet expectations in the three other areas – the academic standards of its awards, quality of information about learning opportunities and enhancement of student learning opportunities.

Mr Juba said the financial problems have all gone and there is a very bright future.

He revealed that three years ago the college had lost £1.9 million.

Two years ago it lost £1 million but last year it made £200,000.

Guests were at the Wilson Avenue campus on Tuesday morning for the official launch of The Met.

The college has produced a host of former students who have gone on to greater things.

These include Deborah Meaden, UK entrepreneur and Dragon’s Den investor, celebrity fashion designer Gresham Blake, who has stores in Brighton and London, and Oscar winner Paul Norris.