Swing Patrol hit the television screens back in 2014 when business legend Deborah Meaden decided to invest £65,000 into the the business.

Three years later and Swing Patrol Brighton is launching on September 4 in three locations in Brighton and Hove.

Ms Meaden said: “I’m delighted to see the launch of Swing Patrol Brighton.

“Having spent my college years there, I can see exactly why Swing Patrol will be embraced and enjoyed in this vibrant and energetic city.

“Scott’s enthusiasm for dance is infectious and his approachable teaching style is evident during his lessons.

“I have marvelled at the sense of community across the wider Lindy Hop scene and witnessed at first hand the vibrancy and joy that this dance brings to people throughout the world

“When he first appeared on the BBC’s Dragons’ Den and presented his ideas, I was immediately impressed by his drive and enthusiasm.

“ I was one of three Dragons keen to invest in his business venture so I was genuinely excited when he chose me to be part of the Swing Patrol journey.”

Dance teacher Scott Cupit, the school’s founder, is hoping hundreds of new dancers will join in when he sets up Swing Patrol Brighton.

The team of Swing Patrol teachers, including Mr Cupit and award-winning dance partner Faraday Loughlin, want residents to experience swing dancing for the first time.

The weekly drop-in classes take place at Revolution Bar on Mondays at 7pm, Hove Station Studios on Thursdays at 7pm, and The King and Queen on Sundays at 1.30pm.

Mr Cupit said: “I still get a huge thrill from introducing the dance to new people with absolutely no experience.

“That’s why I’m so excited to be teaching and sharing my love of vintage dancing in Brighton from September.

“One of the best things about today’s swing dancing scene is the sense of community and the assortment of people who are attracted to the music and the dance I fell in love with more than 20 years ago.

“In particular, the Lindy Hop dance, with all its variety and charm, comes with an absorbing history.

“The dance offers so much challenge and diversity and is accessible to everyone, regardless of age, gender or experience.

“It’s easy to see why there’s currently so much interest in swing dancing.

“The vintage fashion appeals to many.

“The music appeals to all ages, from more upbeat electro-swing mixes, traditional big band tunes from the likes of Duke Ellington, Cab Calloway, Benny Goodman and the enchanting vocals of Nina Simone, Ella Fitzgerald and Billie Holiday.

“We can’t wait to start teaching in Brighton.”

Local dance teacher Ms Loughlin has already taught swing dance lessons for beginners with Jumpin’ at the Seaside, in Brighton.

From September, she will be teaching all ability levels with Swing Patrol.

She said: “Lindy Hop is for everyone, whether you’re looking to keep fit, meet new people, enjoy listening to swing or jazz music, or simply want to have fun.

“I’m looking forward to new dancers joining us in Brighton and sharing the joy of various forms of swing dancing – and showing everyone what a welcoming and inclusive community Lindy Hop can be.”

For more information go to https://www.visitbrighton.com/things-to-do/swing-patrol-brighton-p1459371