Author K. W. Jeter should be given credit for daring to pen a sequel to the motion picture Blade Runner. I don't envy him because he's going to get a lot of heat from fans of this science fiction classic.

Why will Blade Runner aficionados want to "retire" Jeter's book? Largely because Blade Runner 2: The Edge of Human reads like a treatment for a "typical" Hollywood sequel - short on new ideas, heavy on brainless action. Quiet moments like those that made the original film a classic are not only few but irrelevant. Instead, whenever there's a lull, Jeter piles on the action: explosions, gunfire, characters getting busted up real bad.

Set two years after the movie's sequence of events, The Edge of Human follows former blade runner Rick Deckard on his hunt for the mysterious sixth replicant on the streets of LA. (As Blade Runner fans will remember, only five androids were accounted for in the movie.)

Jeter does make one worthy addition to the Blade Runner world - the concept of "templant" humans whose DNA is cloned to make replicants. It's initially intriguing as a logical extension to the movie's premise focusing on replicant technology. Yet, as The Edge of Human unfolds, the templant concept begins to play like a plot contrivance devised to resurrect a significant character who died in the movie. (There's that Hollywood sequel feel again.)

Most irritating is how Jeter keeps missing the entire point of Blade Runner. What made the movie so vital was its exploration of what it means to live in a dehumanized, technological world. The closest The Edge of Human gets to philosophical depth is when characters engage in long, drawn-out discussions about what it means to be human. All you'll want to know is when the next chase sequence starts.

Blade Runner 2: The Edge of Human, by K. W. Jeter: US$21.95 hardcover. Bantam Spectra: +1 (212) 782 9425.

STREET CRED

Engaging GageCream of Beats

Punk Me Up

I Want My M(edia)TV!

Modems with a Future

Good Bugs

Faux Finishes

Blade Runner Run-On

Global Chatter

Things That Go Fractional

Hive Mentality

Just Your Luck

A Sub with Meat

Begotten Not Forgotten

Baked in Cyberspace

README On the bookshelves of the digerati

What, Me Collect Mad?

On the Air All Night

Zen and the Art of Multimedia

Legal Online Eagle

Legal Online Eagle

How One Bad CrowdStrike Update Crashed the World’s Computers

A defective CrowdStrike update sent computers around the globe into a reboot death spiral, taking down air travel, hospitals, banks, and more with it. Here’s how that’s possible.

Priscila, Queen of the Rideshare Mafia

She came to the US with a dream. Using platforms like Uber, Instacart, and DoorDash, she built a business empire up from nothing. There was just one problem.

Donald Trump and Silicon Valley's Billionaire Elegy

Venture capitalists Ben Horowitz and Marc Andreessen claim the tech industry, California, and the country are doomed if we don’t embrace the former president.

The 49 Best Shows on Netflix Right Now

Bridgerton, Scavengers Reign, and Sweet Tooth are just a few of the shows you need to watch on Netflix this month.

The 19 Best Movies on Amazon Prime Right Now

The Idea of You, Road House, and American Fiction are just a few of the movies you should be watching on Amazon Prime Video this week.

The 29 Best Shows on Apple TV+ Right Now

Constellation, Presumed Innocent, and a Steve Martin documentary are among the best shows on Apple TV+ this month.

The 35 Best Shows on Amazon Prime Right Now

The Boys, My Lady Jane, and Fallout are just a few of the shows you should be watching on Amazon Prime Video this week.

Don’t Fall for CrowdStrike Outage Scams

Swindlers are spinning up bogus websites in an attempt to dupe people with “CrowdStrike support” scams following the security firm's catastrophic software update.