Diána Igaly is one of the greatest figures of Hungarian sports shooting. She won a gold medal at the Junior European Championships, her first international appearance in women's skeet in 1983. She then went on to achieve great results: along with many podium finishes, she celebrated two individual and team world titles, while winning six gold medals at the European Championships.

Women's skeet debuted at the Olympics in Sydney at the turn of the millennium, and Igaly immediately won a bronze medal. She crowned her career at Athens 2004 where she was able to stand on top of the podium.

How she won the Olympic gold in 2004

In an interview with MTI in 2015 to mark her 50th birthday, Igaly broke down her professional career into three stages. She revealed that in 1997, when the first stage ended with her father's, the former great competitor's death, she also thought about retiring. However, it was her father's words that convinced her to continue.

"My father died knowing that participating at the Olympics was available to me. He didn't tell me, but my mother that I would be there. When my mother told me all this after his death, that's when I decided to keep going, and even though I was successful then, I won a world championship and a quota the following year," Igaly said at the time, adding that she had been able to win major competitions every year until the Olympic success in Athens, and that was at the top.

Despite struggling with shooting range problems for years, she was able to qualify for the 2008 Beijing Olympics and finished 13th there, and attempted to qualify for the London Olympics, but failed to do so.

We reported on Tuesday that she had been hospitalized for a disease caused by the coronavirus. Her death news was confirmed to Nemzeti Sport by György Nagy, president of the Hungarian Shooting Federation.

"Diána will always remind me of the wonderful memories she gave sports-loving Hungarian people at the 2004 Athens Olympics and the 2000 Sydney Olympics. I am in the fortunate position of seeing both of her great successes on the spot which are unforgettable experiences. Skeet was her labor of love – she was devoted to it both as the Federation's vice president and as the representative of her own club. The outstanding figure of Hungarian sports shooting, who was able to fight for her goals with blocking everything else out, was a great warrior, I am terribly sorry that she lost this last fight. My sincere condolences to the family," György Nagy told Nemzeti Sport.

Diána Igaly had been on the podium 32 times in world competitions. She was sports shooter of the year five times and received a lifetime achievement award from the Hungarian Shooting Federation in 2019.

Translated by Vanda Orosz