Hungary, Germany Win Gold in Shooting Competition

Hungary's Diana Igaly has won the Olympic gold medal in women's skeet shooting competition.

Igaly won Thursday's final with a score of 97, four points better than Wei Ning of China and Zemfira Meftakhetdinova of Azerbaijan.

Wei claimed the silver medal by beating the Azerbaijani in a shoot-off.

Meftakhetdinova still won the bronze, her country's second medal of the Athens Olympics.

Earlier Thursday, German shooter Manfred Kurzer won the gold in the 10-meter running target event, amassing 682.4 points.

The silver medal went to Russia's Alexander Blinov with 678 points, while his teammate Dimitri Lykin earned the bronze with 677.1.

China Takes 2 Badminton Golds

China has added to its Olympic medal tally with a pair of golds Thursday in badminton.

Zhang Jun and Gao Ling won the mixed doubles title by defeating the British team of Nathan Robertson and Gail Emms in a close three-game final.

Denmark's team of Jens Eriksen and Mette Schjoldager took the bronze by beating another Danish team in the third-place match.

Earlier, China's Zhang Ning won the women's singles title in three games, beating Mia Audina.

By winning the silver, Audina gave her adopted home country of the Netherlands its first-ever medal in badminton. Audina won silver for Indonesia at the 1996 games.

The women's singles bronze went to China's Zhou Mi.

Belarus, Japan Take Gold Medals in Judo Competition

Japan and Belarus have claimed gold medals in Olympic judo action Thursday.

Belarussian Ihar Makarau won the gold in the men's 100-kilogram competition, defeating South Korea's Jang Sung-Ho, who took the silver.

The bronze medals went to Michael Jurack of Germany and Ariel Zeevi of Israel.

In the women's 78-kilogram competition, Japan's Noriko Anno earned the gold medal by beating Liu Xia of China.

Liu settled for the silver, while Italy's Lucia Morico and Cuba's Yurisel Laborde won the bronze.

Chinese Weightlifter Sets 3 Records in Winning Gold

China's Liu Chunhong has set three world weightlifting records in winning the women's 69-kilogram competition at the Olympics.

Liu broke her own records for total weight lifted, and for the two types of lifts that make up the competition -- the snatch, and the clean and jerk.

Liu lifted 122.5 kilograms in the snatch and 152.5 kilograms in the clean and jerk for a winning total of 275.

Eszter Krutzler of Hungary won the silver medal, and Zarema Kasaeva of Russia took the bronze.

US Men's Basketball Team Scores Comeback Win Over Australia

The struggling U.S. men's basketball team endured another scare Thursday, trailing Australia for most of the game before coming back to post an 89-79 win.

Australia took an early double-digit lead and still led by two at the end of three quarters. But the U.S. men took control of the game with a 14-3 run.

Tim Duncan led the U.S. scoring with 18 points

The U.S. squad continues to have problems with its shooting, a big factor in its loss to Puerto Rico on Sunday. Thursday, the players hit only 3 of 17 shots from behind the three-point line.

The Americans improved to 2-1 in Olympic preliminary action. The top four teams in each qualifying group go on to the quarterfinals.

In other preliminary round action Thursday, Spain defeated Italy 71-63, while New Zealand beat Serbia-Montenegro 90-87.

Grosjean, Henin-Hardenne, Pierce Advance to Olympic Tennis Quarterfinals

The men's and women's tennis players at the Athens Olympics take the court Thursday, to decide who reaches the semifinals.

After a number of upsets in the men's draw, third seed Carlos Moya of Spain is the favorite. He faces number 10 Nicolas Massu of Chile Thursday.

The next highest seed still in action is number eight Sebastien Grosjean of France, who meets 16th seed Fernando Gonzalez of Chile.

The other matches feature unseeded players. Tomas Berdych of the Czech Republic goes up against American Taylor Dent, while Russian Mikhail Youzhny faces American Mardy Fish.

On the women's side, the top three seeds still have chances to win medals.

Number one Justine Henin-Hardenne of Belgium faces unseeded Mary Pierce of France. Second seed Amelie Mauresmo of France takes on number five Svetlana Kuznetsova of Russia. Third seed Anastasia Myskina of Russia meets number 11 Francesca Schiavone of Italy. And eighth seed Ai Sugiyama of Japan will go up against unseeded Alicia Molik of Australia.

Wednesday was a rough day for American men and women on the tennis courts as second seed Andy Roddick was upset in the round of 32, as were all three American women, including star Venus Williams.

Spain Reaches Olympic Men's Basketball Quarterfinals

Spain's basketball team has clinched a berth in the Olympic men's quarterfinals with a 71-63 victory over Italy.

Spain pulled away in the closing minutes Thursday behind the play of big men Pau Gasol and Jorge Garbajosa.

New Zealand rallied from an 11-point deficit in the final five minutes to beat Serbia and Montenegro 90-87 in another men's contest.

South Korea Advances to Olympic Men's Doubles Badminton Finals

A South Korean team has assured itself at least an Olympic silver medal in men's doubles badminton.

Third-seeded Kim Dong-Moon and Ha Tae-Kwon defeated Indonesia's eight-seeded duo of Eng Hian and Flandy Limpele Thursday, to advance to the finals.

An unseeded South Korean team faces a fifth-seeded squad from the Netherlands in the other semifinal match Thursday.

China, South Korea to Face Off in Olympic Women's Doubles Table Tennis Semifinals

China will face South Korea for the Olympic gold medal in women's doubles table tennis after both posted semifinal victories Thursday.

The second-seeded Chinese duo of Wang Nan and Zhang Yining downed the top seeds, also from China, 11-7, 13-11, 9-11, 6-11, 13-11.

The third-seeded South Korean team of Lee Eun-sil and Seok Eun-mi eased by their ninth-seeded teammates, 11-6, 12-10, 11-7, 11-2.

South Korean Sets Olympic Archery Record

South Korean archer Park Kyung-mo has set an Olympic record on his way to the quarterfinals on the men's individual event.

Park hit the bulls eye 13 times Thursday, while setting the 18-arrow record of 173 points -- one more point than countryman Jang Yong Ho scored in Sydney four years ago.

Three Americans Win Gold In Mens And Womens Swimming

Swimming star Michael Phelps won his fourth gold medal of the games, and sixth overall, by setting an Olympic record (one minute 57.14 seconds) in the men's 200-meter individual medley race. Phelps led the race from start to finish to beat fellow American Ryan Lochte and George Bovell of Trinidad and Tobago.

American Amanda Beard captured her first individual Olympic gold medal today when she beat Australian Leisel Jones and Anne Poleska of Germany in the women's 200-meter breaststroke final.

The 22-year old, three-time Olympian, finished in two minutes, 23.37 seconds, nearly one second slower than the world record time (2:22.44) she set last month at the Olympic Trials.

And in the men's 200-meter backstroke final, world record holder American Aaron Piersol finished first by more than two seconds, beating Austrian Markus Rogan and Romanian Razvan Florea. At the end of the race officials initially disqualified Piersol for an illegal turn, but the ruling was overturned following a U.S. appeal.

Two Top Remaining Men's Seeds Ousted from Tennis

The upsets continued at the Olympic tennis tournament Thursday, as the two top remaining men's seeds were knocked out of the event.

Third-seeded Spaniard Carlos Moya lost his quarterfinal match 6-2, 7-5, to number-10 Nicolas Massu of Chile, while his countryman, 16th-seeded Fernando Gonzalez, knocked off number-eight Frenchman Sebastien Grosjean in three sets (6-2, 2-6, 6-4).

The win leaves Massu as the top men's player remaining in the draw, and guarantees that Chile will win its first Olympic tennis medal. Third-seeded Russian Anastasia Myskina was the first woman to reach the semifinals, topping number-11 Francesca Schiavone of Italy, 6-1, 6-2. Second-seeded Amelie Mauresmo eliminated number-five Svetlana Kuznetsova of Russia in three sets (7-6, 4-6, 6-2), while unseeded Alicia Molik of Australia shocked number-eight Ai Sugiyama of Japan, 6-3, 6-4.

Turkish Weightlifter Wins Gold Medal at Olympics

Turkish weightlifter Taner Sagir has won the gold medal in the 77-kilogram competition at the Summer Olympics in Greece.

Sagir lifted 172.5 kilograms in the snatch Thursday, and 202.5 kilograms in the clean and jerk for a first-place total of 375 kilograms.

Sergey Filimonov of Kazakhstan won the silver at 372.5 kilograms, and Russia's Oleg Perepetchenov took the bronze at 365.

Earlier, China's Liu Chunhong set three world weightlifting records in winning the women's 69-kilogram competition.

Eszter Krutzler of Hungary won the silver medal, and Russia's Zarema Kasaeva took the bronze.

In other news, the International Weightlifting Federation said two more weightlifters were banned from competition Thursday after testing positive for drugs, bringing the total number to seven.