Lucian Freud, a British painter of German origin, was born on December 8, 1922 in Berlin, within a Jewish family. He died on July 20, 2011 in London at the age of 88. His father, Ernst Ludwig Freud, is the youngest son of Sigmund Freud, the father of psychoanalysis. Her mother, Lucie Freud, is the daughter of a cereal merchant. In 1934, Lucian Freud's parents decided to move to England as voluntary emigrants to escape the rise of Nazism. 'East Anglian School of Painting and Drawing where he studied there until 1942 under the direction of Cedric Morris. He begins to sell some paintings to his parents' friends. The exit of his schooling, he embarked on illustration and painting. His style is then highly influenced by surrealism. He envelops his paintings in an atypical, intriguing and personal atmosphere. Man, animals, plants. This is the living world that Freud represents. During a trip to Paris he met Picasso and Giacometti, with whom he wore solid links. In the 1960s, Lucian Freud sits his popularity by means of a categorical, brutal and incisive style. He produces many portraits, including those of his friends Frank Auerbach, Francis Bacon, Kossoff or Andrews. The painter works the structure of his table by means of the thickness of the materials. He voluntarily increases the characters, using an impressive quantity of pigments. The gray, brown, and white tones give its paintings a cold, almost morbid charm. In 2001, he caused a scandal with a portrait of Queen Elizabeth II. On the occasion of his golden jubilee, he is responsible for painting the queen, and uses for this the same clear tones which he is fond of. The features of the royal figure are thick and caricatured, accentuating its stoic and las. The artist also works with great nudes, and animal representations. The figures, once again, are exaggerated and caricatured, making his style highly recognizable. In 1987-1988, Lucian Freud organized his first large traveling exhibition. He travels in Europe and the United States, ranging from Paris to Washington, London to Berlin. In 2002 he exhibited at the London School and the Britain Tate. A retrospective of his work was organized in Venice in 2005. In the 2000s, proud of his international success, he exhibited in the largest museums in Europe, notably in Paris at the Georges-Pompidou Center.