947 Area Code

Get a 947 Area Code Phone Number to Serve Troy

Buy multiple local and vanity phone numbers with 947 Area Code numbers for private and business pursuits from anywhere in the world. Customize your business communication with 947 local phone numbers and relish various benefits.

Localize your business across southeastern Michigan.

Quick Setup - Instant Activation - Effortless Termination Anytime.

Connect multiple devices with 947 area code numbers for better communication.

Exceptional Flexibility & Scalability with 947 Area Code Numbers.

Cutting-edge communication features for employee productivity & customer experience.

Own 947 Area Code Phone Number

City/Town Country TimeZone Bloomfield Hills, MI Oakland Eastern Madison Heights, MI Oakland Eastern South Lyon, MI Oakland Eastern Walled Lake, MI Oakland Eastern Lake Orion, MI Oakland Eastern Royal Oak, MI Oakland Eastern White Lake, MI Oakland Eastern Troy, MI Oakland Eastern Holly, MI Oakland Eastern Hazel Park, MI Oakland Eastern Ferndale, MI Oakland Eastern Berkley, MI Oakland Eastern Davisburg, MI Oakland Eastern Drayton Plains, MI Oakland Eastern Union Lake, MI Oakland Eastern Birmingham, MI Oakland Eastern Clawson, MI Oakland Eastern New Hudson, MI Oakland Eastern Waterford, MI Oakland Eastern Keego Harbor, MI Oakland Eastern Ortonville, MI Oakland Eastern Clarkston, MI Oakland Eastern Pontiac, MI Oakland Eastern Pleasant Ridge, MI Oakland Eastern Rochester, MI Oakland Eastern West Bloomfield, MI Oakland Eastern Franklin, MI Oakland Eastern Novi, MI Oakland Eastern Lathrup Village, MI Oakland Eastern Farmington, MI Oakland Eastern Southfield, MI Oakland Eastern Commerce Township, MI Oakland Eastern Leonard, MI Oakland Eastern Oakland, MI Oakland Eastern Northville, MI Wayne Eastern Huntington Woods, MI Oakland Eastern Milford, MI Oakland Eastern Wixom, MI Oakland Eastern Clawson, MI Oakland Eastern Auburn Hills, MI Oakland Eastern Oak Park, MI Oakland Eastern Lakeville, MI Oakland Eastern Highland, MI Oakland Eastern ​ Show more

947 Area Code History – Where is 947 Area Code Coming From?

The 947 area code is coming from southeastern Michigan. Originally in 1989. area code 248 was introduced to serve the overall Oakland County. However, with the rising population and phone usage, area code 248 was on the verge of running out of phone numbers. So, in 2000, North American Numbering Plan (NANP) assigned area code 947 as an overlay of 248 area code.

Area code 947 covers cities and towns like Troy, Oak Park, Lake Orion, Milford, Ortonville, Southfield, etc.

Why Choose 947 Area Code Number for Business?

From establishing a local business presence in Troy, Michigan and its neighboring areas in northeastern Michigan to relishing the power of enhanced communication features – get everything with 947 Area Code numbers for your business communications.

Establish a local presence across southeastern Michigan

Establish your business presence in Oakland and Wayne County with 947 Area Code business VoIP numbers. Regardless of your business stature and location, become a part of the locals and capitalize on local markets.

Elevate your acceptance rate and boost sales

Win over the Michigan locals, and their trust with 947 Michigan Area Code local and vanity numbers. Simplify your agents' tasks and elevate their conversion rates. Ensure greater local acceptance, boosting your sales and business revenue.

No special equipment is required

Downloading the KrispCall app is all it takes. Use 947 Michigan Area Code phone numbers on your existing digital devices—laptop, PC, tablet, or anything else. Don’t worry about new hardware installations. Get going with whatever you have.

Powerful standard PBX system features

Relish every PBX feature of 947 business VoIP phones with the KrispCall app. Unleash the power of enhanced calling features, like Number Sharing, ACD, Monitoring, Barging, Recording, Phone Trees (IVR), etc., for efficient enterprise communication management.

Access Powerful VoIP Features with your 947 Area Code Business Phone Number

Streamline business communication among your team members and customers by investing in 947 business phone numbers. Regardless of the stature of your business, take advantage of Area Code 947 Michigan phone numbers.

Areas of Application for Area Code 947 Phone Number

Practical ways businesses use 947 Area Code Numbers.

Businesses can incorporate 947 Area Code numbers to localize their business in southeastern Michigan while streamlining communication for enhanced business productivity and unparalleled customer experience.

Businesses can assign 947 area code numbers to their employees as their dedicated second numbers. It helps them track employees’ communication activities and whereabouts while helping employees manage their private communications.

Use Area Code 947 numbers for your business phone systems. Facilitate your Troy customers with a local call to reach you cheaply and vice versa. More importantly, grow your business as a local to impact a greater audience.

Low-cost calling rates with local Area Code 947 phone numbers in Troy, Oak Park, Milford and Southfield. A cloud call or contact center can use these numbers to save a fortune in business communications, especially in the long run.

Create and deploy multiple vanity numbers using the 947 Area Code and track your marketing and sales campaigns. Invest in the ones that perform and revoke the ones that are not. A practical way to market and sell your products and services in Troy, Lake Orion, Milford, and Livonia.

Use 947 Area Code phone numbers anywhere you need to make and receive calls, send and receive text messages, or MMS. From personal use (social media to location tracking) to SMB sectors to large enterprises.

How to get a 947 Area Code Phone Number Online?

Purchasing 947 Area Code Phone Numbers takes only a few minutes with KrispCall. In minutes, you can follow the steps to obtain an area code 947 phone number. All you need is a valid payment detail.

Select the USA from the country list and enter 947 in the advanced filter & search.

Pick a number from the list and purchase the number.

Make payment after you've selected the number.

Submit your documents for verification if required.

Port Your 947 Area Code Number to KrispCall Cloud Telephony

You can also effortlessly port your existing 947 area code numbers to KrispCall. KrispCall provides you with a different number to keep your communication active during your porting process. The number will appear as your existing number for your outbound calls and all your inbound calls will be redirected to it. Go on with your business without altering your business communication.

Nearby Area Codes

Location Area Code Detroit, MI 313 Ann Arbor, MI 734 Lansing, MI 517 Flint, MI 810 Saginaw, MI 989

Frequently Asked Questions

Didn’t find the Answer you were looking for?

Visit our Help Center or Contact Support

947 Area Code is an area code initiated by the NANP (North American Numbering Plan) to serve all of Oakland County, as well as portions of Livonia and Northville in Wayne County. It covers Troy, Oak Park, Lake Orion, Milford, Ortonville, Southfield, etc. It is an overlay to an area code 248 serving the same geographical area.

Country USA State Michigan Major Cities Troy, Oak Park, Lake Orion, and Southfield. Time Zone Eastern Time Zone Telephone Number Format +1 (947) XXX-XXXX Zip Code 48009-48462

The standard time zone of the 947 area code is Eastern Time Zone. It follows Eastern Standard Time (EST) during the non-daylight saving period and Eastern Daylight Time (EDT) during daylight saving time.

Anyone with a 947 area code local phone number can call. It can be a legitimate business call or even a scam call. Always check their online presence and do some background checks (code lookup, caller id, & reverse phone lookup) on the caller using their provided information on the call.

The zip code for 947 area codes has a range of 48009-48462. Bham has the lowest code, 48009, and Ortonville has the highest code, 48462, as Zip codes.

The 947 area code text message is a message that has been sent or received from a telephone number registered with area code 947. These messages come from legit business services or scammers often used to carry out various types of area code 947 phone scams (robocalls, utility scams, IRS Impersonation scams, Tech support scams, Prize and lottery scams) targeting individuals within the geographical area. Avoid clicking on unknown links or sharing sensitive information without verifying the authenticity of the area code 947 text messages.