Biography : Stratovarius

Stratovarius are back! After their last studio album “Infinite³, in 2000, the Finnish gods of metal took a break while Nuclear Blast released the “Intermission³ compilation. Timo Tolkki and Timo Kotipelto both used the time to record solo-albums as well as started writing new songs for another Stratovarius album. "Eagleheart," the first single from “Elements Pt. I³ already prooved that the band is hungry and able to top their former records. "Eagleheart" is in the classical Strato-style, a up-tempo track with great melodies and the typical atmosphere only those Finns are able to create. “Elements Pt. I³ S.O.S.the band from their classical and various side, but still very heavy and powerful. Stratovarius ever had their own sound they kept for years. Straight and catchy melodies, but still able to surprise. You all know what to expect, but in the end they created a metal masterpiece that will rest in our hearts for eternity. “Elements Pt. I³ features many classical hymns and prooves the high level of the band.

In 1984 when Stratovarius were founded, originally called Black Water,they were heavily influenced by Black Sabbath and Ozzy Osbourne. One year later Timo Tolkki joined the band and even took over the vocals for some time. It was at this point the music was started to sound more like it does today, very melodic and classically influenced. Timo Tolkki brought along his influences; Blackmore, Rainbow and Baroque music. The band rehearsed and gigged extensively in Helsinki and made its first demo tape under this line up in 1987. It contained songs "Future Shock", "Fright Night" and "Night Screamer". After two more singles were released, their debut album “Fright Night³ saw the light of day in May 1989. The following records “Twilight Time³, “Dreamspace³ and “Fourth

Dimension³ established the band worldwide and made Stratovarius a trademark for classical influenced melodic metal. All of their records were something special and each track stood as a hymn on its own. At this stage Timo Tolkki decided that his singing days were over and that the band should find a proper singer to take the band's sound even further. At the same time they placed advertisements in local music papers, someone remembered a guy from Lappajärvi, Finland who had approached the band a year and a half earlier. It was then that Timo Kotipelto got a phone call from Timo Tolkki and an audition was arranged. The band jammed some songs and as the new guy opened his mouth for the first time, everybody knew that he was the new singer.

Kotipelto's sound can be heard all over the bands fourth release “Fourth Dimension³. The title of the album says it all and the sound and the songs on this album were something totally different than before but still the musical style remained as true Stratovarius metal. “Fourth Dimension³ was released worldwide in March 1995 and its sales doubled those of “Dreamspace³.

After the success of “Fourth Dimension³, Timo Tolkki and Timo Kotipelto wanted to take the band's music even further and it was at this time that new drummer Jörg Michael and new keyboard player Jens Johansson entered the band. With this line-up “Episode³ was recorded, a dramatic, melodic and symphonic metal album. Also, for the first time, a choir of 40 singers and a string orchestra of 20 players were used. With their follow up, Visions, they entered the Finnish charts where they spent a total of 24 weeks on the Finnish Top 40 and exceeded the gold disc plateau of 20.000 sold copies in Finland.

“Destiny³ continued the successful story of the band, and was followed by a best of album called “Chosen Ones³. After this release Stratovarius decided to sign with their new label, Nuclear Blast, where they released the fantastic track "Hunting High And Low" as their first single from

the excellent Infinite album, released in 2000. Stratovarius became one of the biggest metal acts of our days; just returned with the new single "Eagleheart" and their excellent new album “Element Pt I³.

Listen to it and I'm sure you will love it! Thank god to have Stratovarius! The eagle has landed once again and the whole metal community has a new hymn to celebrate.

In march the band will be on european tour, supported by their labelmates Thunderstone and well known Symphony X; before they will be playing the Wacken Festival and the Bang Your Head.

Source: Label Officiel: http://www.nuclearblast.de