FOSTER CITY, Calif., July 16, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Sling Media Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of EchoStar Corp. (NASDAQ: SATS), today announced the release of the Slingbox® M2 — a new entertainment experience designed to meet the ongoing shift in consumers' television viewing habits. With the Slingbox M2 bundle, today's ultra-connected generation will have uncompromised access to their live and recorded home TV content from anywhere on their personal computers, tablets and smartphones without the previous cost-by-device barrier.

According to the 2014 Ericsson Mobility Report, the average household has at least five connected devices. The Slingbox M2 accommodates this growing household trend by empowering consumers with the ability to download the Slingplayer app to view their home TV content on an unlimited number of devices at no additional cost. By connecting to a cable or satellite box, the Slingbox M2 turns consumers' preferred mobile devices into a convenient entertainment companion—perfect for on-the-go use while traveling domestically or abroad, or to catch up on content between daily errands.

"Consumer media consumption is evolving at a faster rate than ever before. The new Slingbox M2 experience enables people to enjoy the live and recorded TV content they care most about, whether that's seeing who makes the game-winning play or catching a cliffhanger season finale. Now anyone can stay connected to their local news, events and sports, even if they're miles away from their home," says Michael Hawkey, senior vice president and general manager of Sling Media. "Our customers have been asking us to eliminate the cost of downloading the app for every mobile device that they own. The Slingbox M2 bundle addresses this request by providing a no-compromise entertainment experience across a variety of touch points, allowing users to view what they're paying for at home from anywhere in the world—and on their own terms."

To further enhance the customer experience, the Slingbox M2 comes with a complimentary live video setup service available after the purchase of the product to improve ease of installation and use. Additionally, the Slingplayer app includes free upgrades for the lifecycle of all new Slingbox models and later this year, Sling Media will release usability enhancements to the app, including video quality improvements and a gallery viewing mode on iPhone and Android phones, similar to what is available on the iPad. The unlimited free app downloads are supported by seamlessly integrated ad spots, ensuring customers can leverage their Slingbox M2 on compatible media devices in their household while still enjoying an excellent viewing experience.

In addition to enhancing the value of consumers' existing cable or satellite subscriptions, Slingbox M2 users who have Apple TV®, Chromecast®, Fire TV® or Roku®* can use these services to shift content from their mobile devices to a second TV anywhere in the world that has an Internet connection.

Key benefits of the Slingbox M2 include:

Watch and control live TV on a tablet**, smartphone**, PC or Mac

Access to 100% of your cable or satellite channel subscription

Play and schedule all of your DVR recordings

Quick setup and playback via PC/Mac desktop apps, as well as iPhone, iPad and Android phone apps

WiFi connectivity and Ethernet port for simple network setup

High-definition video up to 1080p

Absolutely no monthly fees

The Slingbox M2 suggested retail price (MSRP) is $199.99 and is available immediately for purchase at leading retailers including Best Buy and Amazon Marketplace, as well as at www.slingbox.com. For media inquiries, contact [email protected].

About Sling Media

Sling Media Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of EchoStar Corp., is a leading provider of Multiscreen Smart TV solutions for consumers and television service providers. Sling Media provides the complete award-winning solution of hardware, cloud services and applications that gives consumers the freedom to discover, control and consume their live TV and DVR content anywhere in the world, on their preferred tablet, phone and computing platform. Sling Media's patented TV solutions are available directly to consumers or through service providers that have embedded Slingbox capabilities. For more information, please visit www.slingbox.com.

About EchoStar

EchoStar Corporation (NASDAQ: SATS) is a premier global provider of satellite and video delivery solutions. Headquartered in Englewood, Colo., and conducting business around the globe, EchoStar is a pioneer in secure communications technologies through its EchoStar Satellite Services, EchoStar Technologies Corporation and Hughes Network Systems business segments.

For more information, visit echostar.com. Follow @EchoStar on Twitter.

*Apple TV support requires Slingplayer for iPhone or iPad. Chromecast and Roku support requires Slingplayer for iPhone, iPad, Android Phone, or Android Tablet

**Requires free Slingplayer app, available through Apple App Store, Google Play, Amazon Appstore and Windows Store

Video - http://origin-qps.onstreammedia.com/origin/multivu_archive/PRNA/ENR/237471-EchoStar-Slingbox-M2.mp4

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20141231/166601LOGO

SOURCE Sling Media

Related Links