ENGLEWOOD, Colo., Jan. 8, 2013 /PRNewswire/ -- EchoStar Corp. (NASDAQ: SATS), a leading global satellite services provider and developer of hybrid video delivery technologies, today announced its subsidiary Sling Media has filed a lawsuit against two companies in U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California, alleging infringement of five Sling Media patents.

The civil complaint names Monsoon Multimedia Inc. of San Mateo, CA. and Belkin International Inc. of Los Angeles. Sling Media alleges that products sold by the two California companies infringe proprietary Sling technology used to power the segment-leading Slingbox product family. Using Slingbox, consumers have the ability to watch and control content placeshifted from their living room TVs at any time, to any location, using Internet-connected PCs, Macs, tablets and smartphones.

Specifically, the suit alleges that Monsoon and Belkin infringe U.S. Patent Nos. 7,725,912, "Method for Implementing a Remote Display System with Transcoding;" 7,877,776, "Personal Media Broadcasting System;" 8,051,454, "Personal Media Broadcasting System with Output Buffer;" 8,060,909, "Personal Media Broadcasting System;" and 8,266,657, "Method for Effectively Implementing a Multi-Room Television System."

EchoStar is a pioneer of the "TV Everywhere" trend. Sling Media launched the Slingbox in 2005, and completely refreshed the product family with the new Slingbox 350 and 500 models in 2012. These new Slingbox models deliver full 1080p HD quality live placeshifting of TV shows. Today Sling Media is the leading provider of video placeshifting products and services for consumers and television service providers. To learn more about Slingbox visit the Sling Media booth during the 2013 International CES® (Central Hall, Booth #8143).

About EchoStar Corporation

EchoStar Corp. (NASDAQ: SATS) is a leading global provider of satellite operations and video delivery solutions. EchoStar's wholly-owned subsidiary, Hughes, is the world's leading provider of satellite broadband services, delivering network technologies and managed services for enterprise and government customers in more than 100 countries.

Headquartered in Englewood, Colorado, with additional business units world-wide, EchoStar is a multiple Emmy award-winning company that has pioneered advancements in the set-top box and satellite industries for over 30 years, consistently delivering value for customers, partners and investors through innovation and outstanding quality. Over the last three decades EchoStar's contribution to video technology has been a major influencer in the way consumers view, receive and manage their TV programming.

EchoStar's consumer solutions include HughesNet®, North America's #1 high-speed satellite Internet service, Sling Media's Slingbox® products, and EchoStar's line of advanced digital video set-top box products for the international free satellite and terrestrial viewer markets. For more information, please visit www.EchoStar.com

SOURCE EchoStar Corporation