Sling Media Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of EchoStar Corp. (NASDAQ: SATS), will demonstrate its popular line-up of “TV Anywhere” solutions at the 2015 International Consumer Electronics Show.

The Slingbox® M1 and Slingbox 500 are the best solutions for delivering a customer’s live or recorded pay-TV channels and programs to the most popular mobile devices in HD quality and with no restrictions on content. Offered at a suggested retail price (MSRP) of $149.99, the Slingbox M1 is the most affordable Slingbox that Sling Media has ever produced for core access to all of consumers’ live TV and DVR content; the Slingbox 500, with an MSRP of $299.99, delivers the power of a Slingbox combined with new “Smarter TV” features designed to enhance the TV viewing experience in the living room.

Sling Media also recently announced Slingplayer® app support for Amazon’s popular Fire TV and Fire TV Stick streaming media devices. Similar to the manner that Slingbox products currently support media streamers, Amazon Fire TV and Fire TV stick owners can now download the Slingplayer app and enjoy all of their live TV and DVR content on any large television screen that their Amazon product is connected to.

Avoid C.W.A.P.: Don’t Be Fooled By Big Cable on “TV Anywhere”

Sling Media recently launched a new online media campaign, which is designed to aid consumers in understanding the limitations they face when utilizing the “TV Everywhere” solutions promoted by leading cable companies.

Sling Media has detailed these limitations on their website (www.slingbox.com/BigCable.aspx) in a fact-based manner that leads consumers to the conclusion that only Slingbox solutions offer genuine “TV Anywhere” capability, without restrictions. This online media campaign is augmented by an irreverent website (www.dontgetcwap.com) that allows consumers to upload 6-second video clips of their frustration trying to watch all of their live TV and DVR content outside of their homes without a Slingbox and avoid the dreaded C.W.A.P. (“Can’t Watch Anywhere Pain”) syndrome.

Sling Media will be demonstrating its entire lineup of “TV Anywhere” solutions at Booth 8143 in the Las Vegas Convention Center’s Central Hall throughout CES. Consumers can follow and stay abreast of the sights and daily happenings in the show booth by following Slingbox on Twitter at @Slingbox and #SlingboxCES. Visitors to the Slingbox booth also will be eligible to win a Slingbox M1 during a daily raffle throughout the show.

Both the Slingbox M1 and Slingbox 500 are available at leading U.S. retailers including Best Buy, Amazon, TigerDirect.com, Walmart and select Target locations. Slingbox products can also be purchased directly from Sling Media at www.slingbox.com.

About Sling Media

Sling Media Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of EchoStar Corp., is a leading provider of Multiscreen Smart TV solutions for consumers and television service providers. Sling Media provides the complete award-winning solution of hardware, cloud services and applications that gives consumers the freedom to discover, control and consume their live TV and DVR content anywhere in the world, on their preferred tablet, phone and computing platform. Sling Media’s patented TV solutions are available directly to consumers or through service providers that have embedded Slingbox capabilities. For more information, please visit www.slingbox.com.