Dharamvir Bharati was the lead writer, poet, playwright and social thinker of modern Hindi literature. He was also the editor-in-chief of the once famous weekly magazine ‘Dharmayuga’. Dr. Dharamvir Bharti was awarded the Padma Shri in 1972. The theme of his novel “Gunaho Ka Devta” is considered to be an evergreen creation. The story of “Suraj Ka Satwan Goda (The Seventh Horse of the Suraj)” is considered a unique experiment, Which Shyam Benegal made a film of the same name, ‘Andha Yug’ (Blind Age) is his famous play. It has been staged by Ibrahim Alkazi, Ram Gopal Bajaj, Arvind Gaur, Ratan Thiam, MK Raina, Mohan Maharshi and many other Indian theatre directors. Dharamvir Bharati was the best writer in the world of Hindi literature. Dharamvir Bharati was a social thinker who lived in an extended hand towards society. During his lifetime, Bharati was the editor-in-chief of the famous Hindi magazine “Dharmayuga.”

Biography of Dharamvir Bharati

Early Life and Eucation of Dharamvir Bharati

Bharti was born on Christmas Day in Allahabad city of Uttar Pradesh in 1926. His parents Chiranjee Lal and Chanda Devi had two children named Dharamvir and his sister Veerbala. The family underwent considerable financial hardship after his father died early. Dharamvir continued to get good results in studies despite his personal loss and completed his Master’s degree in Hindi from Allahabad University in 1946. His talent in college was recognised by teachers who won him the ‘Chintamani Ghosh Award’ for scoring top marks in Hindi during his session. Dharambir started working as soon as he completed his college and after a few years he was able to complete the research work, thus getting a Degree in Ph.D.

Dharavir Bharati was the sub-editor for magazines Abhyudaya and Sangam during this period. He completed his Ph.D. in 1954 under Dr. Dhirendra Verma on the topic of “Siddha Sahitya” and was appointed lecturer in Hindi at Allahabad University. The 1950s were the most creative period in Bharati’s life. He wrote many novels, dramas, poems, essays, and critical works during this phase.

Also Read : Biography of Hazari Prasad Dwivedi

Journalism (Mumbai)

In 1960 he was appointed as chief-editor of the popular Hindi weekly magazine Dharmayug by the Times Group and moved to Bombay. He remained the editor of Dharmayug till 1987. During this long phase the magazine became the most popular Hindi weekly of the country and reached new heights in Hindi journalism. As a field reporter, Bharati personally covered the Indo-Pak war that resulted in the liberation of Bangladesh.

Personal life of Dharamvir Bharati

Dr Bharati got married twice. He married Kanta Bharti in 1954 and later divorced. The couple had a daughter named Parmita. After few years Bharati got remarried again this time to Pushpa Bharati. The couple had a son Kinshuk Bharati and a daughter Pragya Bharti.

Career of Dhramvir Bharati

After graduating in Hindi, Dharamvir joined the journals “Abhyudaya” and “Sangam” as deputy editors. After working for more than five years, Dharamvir started working on his thesis paper by choosing to do research work on siddha literature under Dr. Dhirendra Verma. When he earned his Ph.D. degree in 1954, Dharamvir Bharati got the post of Lecturer in Hindi at Allahabad University. While he was educating students in his alma mater, Dharamvir used his free time to write his own poems, novels and plays. Reports claim that it was during this period that Dharamvir Bharati wrote the most part of his huge collection of poems and stories.

In 1960, Dharamvir left Allahabad University and shifted his base to Bombay where he became the editor-in-chief of the popular Hindi magazine “Dharmayuga”. The “Dharmayuga” was India’s best selling Hindi language magazine during that time. This was published by The Times India Group. Dharmavir Bharati’s tenure with “Dharmayuga” took the magazine to a greater height of popularity in Hindi journalism. Dharamvir Bharati served under the magazine from 1960 to 1987 during which he not only did the editing work but also did some of the reporting work of the magazine. The poet and playwright personally covered the 1965 Indo-Pak war for the “Dharmayuga”.

Composition of Dharamvir Bharati

Story collection

Swarg aur Prithvi, Chand aur Tute hue Log, Band Gali Ka Aakhkri Makaan, Saas ki Kalam se, Samasta Kahaniya ek Saath etc.

Poetry

Kanupriya, Thanda Loha, Saat Geet Varsh, Sapna Abhi Bhi and Toota Pahiya are amongst his most popular works of poetry. Toota Pahiya tells a story of how a broken wheel helped Abhimanyu in the Mahabharata war.

Novel

Gunaho Ka Devta, Suraj Ka Satwan Goda, Giyaro Sapno Ka Desh, Parambh va Samapan etc.

Essays

Thele par Himalayas, Pashyanti stories: Ankahi, The river was thirsty, Neel Lake, Human values and literature, Cold iron etc.

Drama

Nadi Pyasi Thi, Andha Yug etc.

Death

Dharamvir Bharti died at the age of 70. He had been suffering from a heart attack for several years, which led to his sudden death on September 4, 1997. Bharati will always be remembered as the best writer ever produced by Hindi literature.

FAQ

1. Which is Dharamvir Bharati’s first novel?

Ans: Gunaho ka Devta is the first novel by Bharati.

2. When did Bharati won Padma Shri Award?

Ans: Dharmavir Bharti, the great writer of modern Hindi literature, won many awards in his literary career. He was awarded the Padma Shri in 1972. Dr. Dharamvir Bharatiji’s novel ‘God of Sins’ is considered to be his evergreen creation.

3. Where and when was Dharamvir Bharati born?

Ans: Dharambir Bharti was born on December 25, 1926 at Allahabad (Uttar Pradesh).

4. What was the name of Bharati’s mother and father?

Ans: The names of mother and father of Dharambir Bharati are Chanda Devi and Chiranjee Lal.

5. When did Dharamvir Bharati died?

Ans: Dharambir Bharti died at the age of 70. He had been suffering from a heart attack for several years, which led to his sudden death on September 4, 1997.