Lil Fizz has been putting in work since B2K disbanded. He's built an impressive net worth thanks to his time as a solo performer and reality star.

By D.M.

Jun. 20 2024, Published 8:40 p.m. ET

In the early 2000s, B2K was one of the biggest music groups around, and Lil Fizz was at the forefront of the boyband. Fizz was the youngest member of the group, which achieved significant success with hits like "Bump, Bump, Bump" and "Uh Huh."

While the group split in 2004, the often come together for live performances. However, they have never fully repaired their friendship.

“At the end of the day, we’re all grown men, and we all live our own separate lives,” Fizz told VIBE Magazine. “It’s not like we’re brothers and best friends and hang out after the tour. Everybody’s home. I haven’t spoken to any of them. They haven’t spoken to me. And you know, that’s just that. It’s business, but we know what it is.”

Despite the drama, Fizz has built and maintained a decent net worth. Here is a look at how much the former boy band member reportedly has in fortune.

Lil Fizz earned a nice fortune while in B2K. What's his net worth?

According to Celebrity Net Worth, Fizz has a $2 million net worth. B2K's success translated into substantial earnings for its members. Lil Fizz, along with his bandmates, enjoyed the perks of stardom, including concert tours, endorsement deals, and record sales.

After B2K's breakup, Fizz pursued a solo music career. He dropped his debut solo album, Payday, in 2007, but it did not achieve significant commercial success. Fizz’s B2K fame has also allowed him to pursue other creative opportunities.

Article continues below advertisement

In a 2014 interview with VladTV, Fizz revealed that he is often booked for performances overseas, adding to his hefty net worth. The former boyband member explained that most of his gigs are in the United Kingdom, but he has also worked on a Korean film, which he filmed alongside B2K member J Boog.

Article continues below advertisement

Lil Fizz

Singer

Net worth: $2 Million

Lil Fizz is a singer and performer who rose to fame as a member of the 2000s R&B group B2K. Following his time with the group, Fizz launched a solo career, which included a stint on VH1's Love & Hip Hop: Hollywood.

Birth name: Dreux Pierre Frédéric

Birthday: November 26, 1985

Birthplace: New Orleans, Louisiana

Education: Bishop Montgomery High School

Kids: 1

Lil Fizz’s dating history has been filled with drama.

Lil Fizz is currently single. However, his dating life has been riddled with messy romances.

The drama began in 2019 when Fizz publicly confirmed his romantic relationship with Apryl Jones, Omarion’s ex-girlfriend and the mother of his two children. This revelation sent shockwaves through their fanbase and sparked a bitter feud that played out on VH1's Love & Hip Hop: Hollywood.

Article continues below advertisement

Omarion surprised many with his composed yet pointed response, stating he was unbothered by the pair’s relationship. Fizz and Apryl’s union fizzled out in 2020, and he later apologized to Omarion for breaking their brotherly bond.

“I don't think it would be right if I didn't take this moment, bro, to publicly apologize to you," Lil Fizz said during a 2021 performance. "I did some f**ked up s**t to my brother, and I'm not proud of it, man."