Following the premiere of "Surviving R. Kelly," many stars took to social media to condemn the artist, including Omarion – except his statement didn't go over too well.

The former B2K member said that in the wake of the Lifetime docu-series, it's time to stop dismissing the type of behavior that R. Kelly is accused of by the women and those like him must be held accountable for heir actions. Omarion then vowed to retire all the songs that R. Kelly wrote from his set list ... after the Millennium Tour.

"While I know our fans would be greatly disappointed if we didn’t perform those songs on #TheMillennoumTour, after the tour I am retiring those songs from my set list," tweeted the "Bump Bump Bump" artist. "I too am raising a future queen."

More: 'Surviving R. Kelly': All the shocking claims from night one of the docu-series

R. Kelly wrote and produced the hit song "Bump Bump Bump" for B2K which peaked at number one on the Billboard charts for a week straight. Kelly also wrote and produced two more songs off the group's Pandemonium! album, "What a Girl Wants," and "Girlfriend."

Fans were excited when the boy band announced a reunion tour back in December, but now social media is not here for Omarion's comments. Many people expressed confusion about the timing – why he wouldn't retire R. Kelly's songs before the tour ends.

"Unbelievable so you gone profit off the mans work what type of stance is that?" one person tweeted in response to Omarion.

More: 'Surviving R. Kelly': The most horrifying claims from night two

"'But first I'm gonna get this bag' is basically what he's saying," wrote someone else alluding to the idea that the artist wants to secure his paycheck before truly condemning Kelly.

Another fan said on the contrary, they would actually be disappointed if B2K decided to perform those songs on tour.

"Nope! Disappointed. I was so excited to see this tour. But absolutely not supporting your 'get money and THEN I’ll give a hell no'," wrote one fan.

Popular celebrity gossip news site, The Shade Room, reposted Omarion's tweets to their Instagram page where angry users flooded the comment section also insinuating that the "Girlfriend" artist wants to earn money off the tour before taking a stance on R. Kelly.

"This is a (expletive) joke! Make money off the songs R Kelly wrote, first, then join the movement?!?! So you sir are also part of the problem. Pick a stance and be courageous enough to stick to it," one person wrote on Instagram.

More: 'Surviving R. Kelly' night three: Everything we learned from the docu-series' finale

Fans were excited when Omarion announced The Millennium Tour back in December featuring B2K, Mario, Pretty Ricky, Lloyd, Bobby V, Ying Yang Twins and Chingy.

USA TODAY reached out to Omarion's representation for comment and have yet to hear back.

See Omarion's tweets below.