Owen Wilson was seen hugging his ex and mother of his firstborn son Jade Duell at LAX Airport on Thursday.

The actor, 54, whose ex Varunie Vongsvirates claimed he refuses to see their four-year-old daughter in 2021, looked in good spirits as he embraced Duell, 39, who he shares son Robert, 12, with.

The Zoolander actor wore a white tee, printed shorts and sneakers as he bade farewell to his ex - who he split from in 2011.

Jade wore all black and a cream coat as she chatted with the actor, who she co-parents their son with.

The pair enjoyed a friendly chat before Owen left the airport in California,

Owen eldest son is named Robert after the actor's father but the actor refers to him by his middle name, Ford.

He also has a nine-year-old son called Finn by fitness trainer Caroline Lindqvist.

Caroline was reportedly in the process of divorcing then-husband, plastic surgeon Ritu Chopra, when news of her pregnancy with Finn became public.

His third child Lyla was born in 2018 and in 2019 Varunie told DailyMail.com that she has begged the actor to get involved in their daughter Lyla's life.

Varunie, 38, told DailyMail.com that her former lover is 'not involved at all' with their little girl and has 'never' even met his youngest child.

'He helps financially but it’s never been about that,' she said at the time.

Questioned about this, she added: 'Lyla needs a father. It’s ironic how [Owen] keeps getting these father roles, he's playing a father in his new movie, and he's never met his own daughter.'

Varunie and Owen casually dated for five years before splitting up. He underwent a paternity test in 2018 which confirmed he was the father.

Varunie gave birth to their little girl on October 9, 2018 without Owen by her side.

He reportedly 'checked the no visitation box in court in June' and doesn't want 'any custody of her,' a source told Us Weekly.

During an appearance on The Ellen DeGeneres Show to promote his 2017 film Cars 3, Owen discussed parenting his first two children.

The proud father talked lovingly about how much little Finn idolizes his older brother.

'It's unbelievable. I mean, anything Ford says is just, like, the funniest thing ever, and I can make and joke and it's, like, crickets. It's like nothing from those guys.'

Owen said that 'I'm already sort of seeing how they're gonna be as teenagers, where they're gonna be sort of be ganging up on me.'

He said: 'We went to Sequoia National Park, and they have the biggest tree in the world. I'm like: "Guys, this is the biggest tree in the world," and Ford's like: "I've seen bigger."

'And I'm like: "Well, no, Ford, actually you haven't seen bigger. This is - this is the General Sherman tree. This is the biggest tree." And he's like: "If you say so."

'And I'm like: "No, it's not if I say so! There's the plaque right here!" And he's like: "I can't read."'

Wilson chat with Esquire this past August about how he likes to be a storyteller for his sons.

'Sometimes telling the stories at night, you do take a little pride that these guys are into this story!' he said. 'One of them even said, "Dad, you should do something with this. This is a really good story!"'

The Wedding Crashers actor continued with details of his story: 'It was about this little pack of boys in a post-apocalyptic world, and there’s a pack of dogs - I play to my audience.

'There was a moment in the story where the girl that the one boy likes, he sees her with another boy, and he thinks they’re holding hands" - he’s speaking slowly now, and in his distinct accent the word hands is hee-yands- but they’re just playing that game, you know that game?

Wilson continued, 'You hold your palms out faceup, and the other person puts their palms on yours, and you have to slap the top hand really fast. And the kid sees that from afar and thinks they’re holding hands, but it’s actually the game. So sometimes, little things like that, you think, That’s a pretty good little element for a story. A good little detail.'