Citation preview

Film Remakes

‘In this groundbreaking study, Constantine Verevis explores an aspect of commercial film production interesting to the scholar and movie enthusiast alike: remaking. Film Remakes can be profitably viewed from a number of perspectives, and this book provides an intriguing and revealing anatomy of the phenomenon. Verevis writes with verve and insight; an important feature of Film Remakes is the series of individual analyses that sparkle with revealing and intelligent comment as they clarify general points about remaking. Though theoretically informed, this book is wonderfully accessible to the general reader.’ R. Barton Palmer, Calhoun Lemon Professor of Literature at Clemson University

Film Remakes Constantine Verevis

Edinburgh University Press

© Constantine Verevis, 2006 Edinburgh University Press Ltd 22 George Square, Edinburgh Typeset in 11/13 Ehrhardt by Servis Filmsetting Ltd, Manchester, and printed and bound in Great Britain by MPG Books Ltd, Bodmin, Cornwall A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library ISBN 0 7486 2186 5 (hardback) ISBN 0 7486 2187 3 (paperback) The right of Constantine Verevis to be identified as author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

Contents

Preface Acknowledgements Introduction: Remaking Film

vii ix 1

Part I Remaking as Industrial Category 1 Commerce

37

2 Authors

58

Part II Remaking as Textual Category 3 Texts 4 Genres

81 105

Part III Remaking as Critical Category 5 Audiences

129

6 Discourse

151

Conclusion: Remaking Everything

173

References Index

179 195

Preface

I see an endless film with sequences signed by various authors in a complex game of quotations, influences, remakes, variations and references. (Bernardo Bertolucci, in Ungari, 1987)

This book seeks to provide a broad and systematic approach to the phenomenon of cinematic remaking. Drawing upon recent theories of genre and intertextuality, Film Remakes describes remaking as both an elastic concept and a complex situation, one enabled and limited by the interrelated roles and practices of industry, critics and audiences. This approach to remaking, outlined in the book’s introduction, is developed across its three parts. The first of these, Remaking as Industrial Category, deals with issues of production, including commerce and authors; the second, Remaking as Textual Category, considers genre, plots and structures; and the third, Remaking as Critical Category, investigates issues of reception, including audiences and institutions. The film remake emerges from this discussion as a particular case of repetition, a function of cinematic and discursive fields that is maintained by historically specific practices, such as copyright law and authorship, canon formation and media literacy, film criticism and re-viewing. That is, while cinematic remaking belongs to the entire history of cinema and can refer to any number of technological, textual and cultural practices, this book contributes to an understanding of how the film remake is maintained as a separate yet connected phenomenon. Film Remakes seeks to address some of the central critical issues around the concept of remaking, striving to deliver a broad theoretical approach to provide both an understanding of the phenomenon of cinematic remaking and of individual film remakes. This book takes an interest primarily in the industrial and institutional conditions of remaking in contemporary Hollywood cinema, and acknowledges that more and different work needs

viii

 

to be undertaken through comparative studies that reach across other historical moments, national cultures and cross-cultural transactions. Additionally, this book seeks to introduce a wide readership to the concept of cinematic remaking and to the various issues – industrial, textual and critical – attending it. Accordingly, it works to provide an overview of existing approaches, to simplify theoretical concerns and to make its arguments through well-known and readily available film examples. Finally, the ideas presented in Film Remakes have been developed in a number of places and with the assistance and support of many people. In particular I would like to thank: Paul Coughlin, Sarah Edwards, John Frow, Matt Holden, Sonya Jeffery, Jane Landman, Julie Palmer, Barton Palmer, Lesley Stern and Deane Williams.

Acknowledgements

Material contributing to this book appeared in earlier versions in the following publications and is reprinted here with the permission of the editors. 1. ‘Through the Past Darkly: Noir Remakes of the 1980s’, in Alain Silver and James Ursini (eds), Film Noir Reader 4. New York: Limelight, 2004, pp. 307–22. 2. ‘Remaking Film’, Film Studies, no. 4 (2004), pp. 87–103. 3. ‘Television Features: A Survey’, Metro, no. 123 (2000), pp. 34–41. 4. ‘Re-Viewing Remakes’, Film Criticism, vol. 21, no. 3 (1997), pp. 1–19.

For Julie, Zoi and Mia And in memory of Emmanuel and Irene Verevis

Introduction: Remaking Film

This book provides a broad introduction to some of the issues and concerns arising from the concept of ﬁlm remaking. Although the cinema has been repeating and replaying its own narratives and genres from its very beginnings, ﬁlm remaking has received little critical attention in the ﬁeld of cinema studies. What is ﬁlm remaking? Which ﬁlms are remakes of other ﬁlms? How does ﬁlm remaking diﬀer from other types of repetition, such as quotation, allusion and adaptation? What is the relationship between remakes and other commercial forms such as sequels, cycles and series? How is ﬁlm remaking diﬀerent from the cinema’s more general ability to repeat and replay the same ﬁlm over and again through reissue and redistribution? And how does remaking diﬀer from the way every ﬁlm is ‘remade’ – dispersed and transformed – in its every new context or re-viewing? These are questions that have seldom been asked, let alone satisfactorily answered, in cinema studies. Recent accounts of cinematic remaking have variously deﬁned ﬁlm remakes as ‘ﬁlms based on an earlier screenplay’,1 as ‘new versions of existing ﬁlms’2 and as ‘ﬁlms that to one degree or another announce to us that they embrace one or more previous movies’.3 Although there may be suﬃcient cultural agreement on the existence and nature of ﬁlm remakes to allow for a clear understanding – especially in the case of those remakes which carry a pre-sold title and repeat readily recognisable narrative units – when considered alongside the broader concept of intertextuality, ﬁlm remaking can refer to ‘the inﬁnite and open-ended possibilities generated by all the discursive practices of a [ﬁlm] culture’.4 As David Wills points out, ‘what distinguishes the remake is not the fact of its being a repetition, [but] rather the fact of its being a precise institutional form of the structure of repetition, . . . the citationality or iterability, that exists in and for every ﬁlm’.5 As in the case of ﬁlm genre, a fundamental problem for ﬁlm remaking has arisen from ‘the ever-present desire for a stable and easily identiﬁable

2

 

[set of] objects of analysis’, and a related attempt to reduce ﬁlm remaking to a ‘corpus of texts’ or set of textual structures.6 Such approaches often succumb to the problems of taxonomism and associated diﬃculties, such as the exclusion of marginal examples and canonisation of favourites. In addition, these textual accounts of remaking risk essentialism, in many instances privileging the ‘original’ over the remake or measuring the success of the remake according to its ability to realise what are taken to be the essential elements of a source text – the property – from which both the original and its remake are derived.7 While there is often suﬃcient semantic and syntactic evidence to suggest that remakes are particular textual structures, ﬁlm remakes (like genres) ‘exist always in excess of a corpus of works’.8 Film remaking depends, too, ‘on the existence of audience activity’, not only prior knowledge of previous texts and intertextual relationships, but an understanding of broader generic structures and categories.9 In addition to this, ﬁlm remaking is both enabled and limited by a series of historically speciﬁc institutional factors, such as copyright law, canon formation and ﬁlm reviewing which are essential to the existence and maintenance – to the discursivisation – of the ﬁlm remake.10 In these ways, ﬁlm remaking is not simply a quality of texts or viewers, but a ‘by-product’ or the secondary result of broader discursive activity.11 This chapter refers to several books and essays dealing directly with ‘ﬁlm remakes’ and (more broadly) the concept of ‘remaking ﬁlm’, from Michael B. Druxman’s early survey of ﬁlm remakes, Make It Again, Sam (1975), through to more recent theorisations of remaking in anthologies such as Andrew Horton and Stuart Y. McDougal’s Play It Again, Sam (1998) and Jennifer Forrest and Leonard R. Koos’s Dead Ringers (2002). A number of key points developed here have been made (diﬀerently) by John Frow and Lesley Stern in their work on intertextuality12 and remaking13 respectively, and also in their reviews of the Horton and McDougal anthology.14 In addition, this account of remaking draws upon Rick Altman’s Film/Genre (1999), developing from that book the idea that, although ﬁlm remakes (like genres) are often ‘located’ in either authors or texts or audiences, they are in fact not located in any single place but depend upon a network of historically variable relationships.15 Accordingly, this chapter falls into three broad (though not unrelated) sections: the ﬁrst, remaking as industrial category, deals with issues of production, including industry (commerce) and authors (intention); the second, remaking as textual category, considers texts (plots and structures) and taxonomies; and the third, remaking as critical category, deals with issues of reception, including audiences (recognition) and institutions (discourse).

:  

3

Remaking as industrial category As in some approaches to ﬁlm genre, remakes can be understood as industrial products, located in ‘the material conditions of commercial ﬁlmmaking, where plots are copied and formulas forever reiterated’.16 For ﬁlm producers, remakes are consistently thought to provide suitable models, and something of a ﬁnancial guarantee, for the development of studio-based projects. In a commercial context, remakes are ‘pre-sold’ to their audience because viewers are assumed to have some prior experience, or at least possess a ‘narrative image’,17 of the original story – an earlier ﬁlm, literary or other property – before engaging in its particular retelling.18 Remakes of cult movies such as King Kong (Merian C. Cooper and Ernest B. Schoedsack, 1933; John Guillermin, 1976; Peter Jackson, 2005), Godzilla (Ishiro Honda, 1954; Roland Emmerich, 1998) and Planet of the Apes (Franklin J. Schaﬀner, 1968; Tim Burton, 2001) are revived through massive production budgets as cultural juggernauts, with strong marketing campaigns and merchandising tie-ins. For instance, in the mid-1970s King Kong was seen as a ‘natural’ for remaking, not only because of the success of the original, its pioneering special eﬀects and cult status, but for the opportunities it provided for promotional tie-ins, from Jim Beam King Kong cocktails to 7–11 store slurpy drinks in special Kong cups.19 In the case of recent cross-cultural remakes, such as Vanilla Sky (Cameron Crowe, 2001; Abre Los Ojos, Alejandro Amenábar, 1997), The Ring (Gore Verbinski, 2002; Ringu, Hideo Nakata, 1998) and Insomnia (Christopher Nolan, 2002; Erik Skjoldbjaerg, 1997), foreign ﬁlms are dispossessed of ‘local detail’ and ‘political content’ to exploit new (English-language) markets.20 In these examples, remaking is not only evidence of Hollywood being an ‘aesthetic copy-cat’, but (worse) of ‘cultural imperialism’ and ‘terroristic marketing practices’ designed to block an original’s competition in the US market.21 A number of commentators22 have observed that the remake, along with the sequel and series, has become typical of the defensive production and marketing strategies of a contemporary, or ‘post-Jaws’, Hollywood. 23 For instance, Jim Hoberman says that: The trickle of remakes that began . . . with Farewell, My Lovely in 1975 became a ﬂood of recycled Jazz Singing Scarfaced King Kong ‘landmarks’, Roman numeral’d replays of old and recent mega-hits, and retired mixedmedia ﬁgures [Flash Gordon, Popeye, Superman, and the like] pressed back into service.24

This ‘great downpour’ of sequels and remakes is perhaps more perceived than real. For instance, reviewing a sample of 3,490 ﬁlms from between

4

 

1940 and 1979 Thomas Simonet concludes that far more ‘recycled script’ ﬁlms appeared before the conglomerate takeovers of contemporary Hollywood in the 1970s, and perceptions that remaking has increased may be governed by comparisons with the 1960s only.25 Nevertheless remaking is often taken as a sign of Hollywood ﬁlm having exhausted its creative potential, leading into ‘conservative plot structures’26 and ‘automatic selfcannibalisation’.27 A recent account of remaking in the popular ﬁlm monthly Empire simply put the motivation for studio remakes down to ‘lack of creativity [and] laziness’.28 Similarly, in previewing the television mini-series remake of On the Beach (Russell Mulcahy, 2000), The Age newspaper critic Simon Hughes found opportunity not only to express his antipathy toward remake practice in general, but to condemn both the mini-series and the earlier, feature ﬁlm version, On the Beach (Stanley Kramer, 1959): In the Dearth of Ideas, hard by the dire Lack of Imagination, dwell those alchemists of the entertainment industry who delight in turning gold into base metal. These are the remakers and their awful talent is to be feared. Not only will they not stop at buggering up a classic like Psycho . . . they will even transform the second rate – like the original On the Beach – into something completely forgettable.29

Film remaking is equally seen as a trend that is encouraged by the commercial orientation of the conglomerate ownership of Hollywood. In this approach, the Hollywood studios seek to duplicate past successes and minimise risk by emphasising the familiar – ‘recreating with slight changes ﬁlms that have proved successful in the past’ – even if this leads to ‘aesthetically inferior ﬁlms’.30 Mark Kermode similarly reports that remakes, such as The Texas Chainsaw Massacre (Marcus Nispel, 2003; Tobe Hopper, 1974), are cynical ‘rebranding exercises’ and evidence of ‘the entertainment industry’s artistic laziness and penchant for pre-sold product’.31 Stern takes this further, pointing to the commercial ‘paradox’ of remaking: Remakes reﬂect the conservative nature of the industry; they are motivated by an economic imperative to repeat proven successes. But in order to maintain economic viability . . . remakes are also compelled to register variation and diﬀerence (from the originals), to incorporate generic developments.32

As instantly recognisable properties, remakes (along with sequels and series) work then to satisfy the requirement that Hollywood deliver reliability (repetition) and novelty (innovation) in the same production package.33 Understood in this way, the remake becomes a particular

:  

5

instance not only of the repetition eﬀects which characterise the narrative structure of Hollywood ﬁlm,34 but also of a more general repetition – of exclusive stars, proprietary characters, patented processes, narrative patterns and generic elements – through which Hollywood develops its pre-sold audience.35 In a high-proﬁle example like Planet of the Apes, the B-movie aesthetic of the original cult ﬁlm (and series) becomes an opportunity to revive the franchise as mega-budget ($110 million) blockbuster, complete with stars, special eﬀects and auteur themes (see Chapter 3). In discussions of industry and commerce the surest arbiter of what counts as a ﬁlm remake is an acknowledgement of copyright, but this limit is complicated by the ﬂexibility of copyright law,36 and what are commonly referred to as ‘unacknowledged remakes’ and ‘non-remakes’. In Make It Again, Sam, Druxman sets out ‘to provide a comprehensive dissertation on the remake practice’ by ‘detailing the ﬁlm life of [thirty-three] literary properties’.37 Druxman begins by electing to limit the category of remake ‘to those theatrical ﬁlms that were based on a common literary source (i.e., story, novel, play, poem, screenplay), but were not a sequel to that material’.38 This ‘seemingly infallible signpost’ is, however, complicated by those ﬁlms that are ‘obviously remakes [but] do not credit their origins’.39 In such cases Druxman adopts a heuristic device – a rule of thumb – which requires that a new ﬁlm ‘borrow more than just an element or two from its predecessor to qualify’.40 This in turn allows Druxman to distinguish between ‘non-ﬁction ﬁlms’ of a single historical incident or biography of a historical ﬁgure (for example, the mutiny on the Bounty or the life of outlaw Jesse James) which diﬀer because they are based around competing versions of the same incident; and those ‘non-ﬁction ﬁlms’ of a like historical incident which are similar even though they are based upon diverse literary sources.41 As might be expected from an approximate rule which arbitrates according to whether a ﬁlm’s borrowings are ‘signiﬁcant’ or only amount to ‘an element or two’, Druxman ultimately admits that ‘there were many marginal situations . . . [in which he] simply used [his] own discretion in deciding whether or not to embrace [a ﬁlm as a remake]’.42 Although Druxman’s recognition of ‘unacknowledged’ remakes introduces a number of methodological diﬃculties, he further grounds his discussion by viewing (pre-1975) Hollywood remaking practice as a function of industry pragmatism driven by three major factors. First, Druxman argues that the decision to remake an existing ﬁlm is primarily a ‘voluntary one’ based on the perceived continuing viability of an original story. However, industry demand for additional material during the studio-dominated era of the 1930s and 1940s, and attempts to

6

 

rationalise the often high costs of source acquisition prompted studios to consider previously ﬁlmed stories as sources for B-pictures, and even for top-of-the-bill productions.43 As Tino Balio points out, the Hollywood majors ‘had story departments with large oﬃces in New York, Hollywood, and Europe that systematically searched the literary marketplace and stage for suitable novels, plays, short stories, and original ideas’.44 Taking as an example story acquisitions at Warner Brothers between 1930 and 1949, Balio notes that ‘the pattern of source acquisition demonstrates two often contradictory goals: [1] the desire to base ﬁlms on pretested material, that is, low-risk material that was already well known and well received by the public and [2] the desire to acquire properties as inexpensively as possible, especially during declining or uncertain economic circumstances’.45 In practice this meant that while Warners often invested in expensive pre-sold properties, such as bestselling novels and Broadway hit plays, ‘it oﬀset the high costs of pretested properties by using original screenplays written in its screenwriting department and by relying heavily on “the cheapest pretested material of all” – earlier Warner pictures’.46 Druxman’s second, related point is that the customary studio practice at the time of purchasing the rights to novels, plays and stories in perpetuity meant that a company was able to produce multiple versions of a particular property without making additional payments to the copyright holder.47 Canonised classics of literature, such as Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, The Count of Monte Cristo and The Three Musketeers not only had pre-sold titles, but because they were in the public domain, had the added advantage of requiring no initial payment for their dramatic rights.48 While the majority of recycled, previously purchased source material (particularly from those ﬁlms that had done fair to poorly at the box-oﬃce) made its way into B-unit production,49 high-proﬁle titles were sometimes remade to take advantage of new technologies and practices. Accordingly, Druxman’s third and ﬁnal point relates to the proﬁt potential of redoing established ﬁlms in order to exploit new stars or screen techniques. For example, following the success of Captain Blood and The Charge of the Light Brigade (Michael Curtiz, 1935 and 1936) Curtiz’s 1938 version of The Adventures of Robin Hood is not only a vehicle for co-stars Errol Flynn and Olivia de Havilland, but also a sound and Technicolor update of the Douglas Fairbanks silent epic, Robin Hood (Allan Dwan, 1922).50 Expanding screen technologies, including ‘the developing technological powers of ﬁlm to create more convincing representations of reality’,51 and the ongoing appeal of casting star performers in established roles continue to be cited as principal motivations for remaking ﬁlms.

:  

7

Druxman’s initial deﬁnition, and the above factors of industry pragmatism, allow him to posit three general categories of Hollywood remake: 1. the disguised remake: a literary property is either updated with minimal change, or retitled and then disguised by new settings and original characters, but in either case the new ﬁlm does not seek to draw attention to its earlier version(s), for example Colorado Territory (Raoul Walsh, 1949) is a disguised Western remake of the crime ﬁlm High Sierra (Raoul Walsh, 1941); and High Society (Charles Walters, 1956) is a musical retelling of The Philadelphia Story (Joseph L. Mankiewicz, 1940); 2. the direct remake: a property may undergo some alterations or even adopt a new title, but the new ﬁlm and its narrative image do not hide the fact that it is based upon an earlier production, for example William Wellman’s 1939 remake of Beau Geste (Herbert Brenon, 1926), or Charles Vidor’s 1957 remake of A Farewell to Arms (Frank Borzage, 1932); 3. the non-remake: a new ﬁlm goes under the same title as a familiar property but there is an entirely new plot, for example Michael Curtiz’s 1940 version of The Sea Hawk (part of the above-mentioned Errol Flynn swashbuckling cycle) is said to bear little relation to First National’s 1924 adaptation of the Rafael Sabatini novel, and the 1961 remake of The Thief of Baghdad (Arthur Lubin and Bruno Vailati) is little like the ‘deﬁnitive’ 1940 version (directed by Ludwig Berger, Michael Powell and Tim Whelan).52 Not surprisingly, Druxman’s three categories do not operate without the kind of overlap and exclusion that often attends taxonomism. For instance, an inspection of elements from the second half of James Cameron’s Titanic (1997) – the band’s decision to play on as the ship sinks; Benjamin Guggenheim’s preference for his dinner jacket over a life jacket; designer Thomas Andrews’s address to a young couple at the ﬁreplace of the ﬁrst-class lounge – suggest it is a ‘direct’ remake of the British-made account of the sinking, A Night to Remember (Roy Ward Baker, 1958). But the narrative drive of the ﬁrst half of the ﬁlm – the establishment of the romance between (ﬁctional) characters Rose DeWitt Bukater (Kate Winslett) and Jack Dawson (Leonardo DiCaprio) – suggests that it is not only a ‘non-remake’ of A Night to Remember, but perhaps a ‘disguised’ remake of both It Happened One Night (Frank Capra, 1934) and An Aﬀair to Remember (Leo McCarey, 1957).53 In addition, any attempt to determine a single precursor text for Titanic (even Druxman’s method for

8

 

distinguishing between types of ‘non-ﬁction’ remakes) is further complicated not just by the ﬁlm’s ‘inter art intertextuality’ (references to paintings, operas and the like),54 but by various other reworkings of the Titanic disaster: ﬁlm versions, such as Saved from the Titanic (Eclair Film Co., 1912), In Nacht und Eis (Kunstﬁlm, 1912), Titanic (Herbert Selpin, 1943) and Titanic (Jean Negulesco, 1953), and also books (Walter Lord’s A Night to Remember), musicals (The Unsinkable Molly Brown), TV movies (S.O.S. Titanic) and historical accounts (Steven Biel’s Down with the Old Canoe: A Cultural History of the Titanic). In addition to this, the commercial quality of Cameron’s Titanic – one of the most expensive and proﬁtable ﬁlms ever made – requires that it also take as intertexts broader elements such as genre (teen romance, action adventure, heritage ﬁlm), cycle (millennium disaster movie), stars (Winslett and DiCaprio) and auteur (Cameron). Although the example of Titanic presents diﬃculties for Druxman’s taxonomy it does, however, support his further claim that, in addition to industry pragmatism, remaking is located in a ﬁlm maker’s desire to repeatedly express (and modify) a particular aesthetic sensibility or world view in light of new developments and interests.55 In the case of Titanic, it is not only Cameron’s ‘devotion to and love for the ship at the bottom of the ocean’,56 but his well-documented ‘preoccupation with precision and historical accuracy’57 which motivates this particular retelling of the story. In the anthology Play It Again, Sam, Stuart McDougal takes up this type of approach, describing Alfred Hitchcock as a director who was continuously revising and remaking his own earlier ﬁlm work.58 This results not only in the repetition of speciﬁc shots, sequences and themes, but in the case of Hitchcock’s 1955 remake of his own earlier ﬁlm, The Man Who Knew Too Much (1934), it provides the ﬁlm maker with an opportunity to rethink ‘the relations between texts, between characters (real and ﬁctional), and between the work of a younger, more exuberant director and a mature craftsman’59 (see Chapter 2). In a similar way, Lloyd Michaels argues that while it is diﬃcult to conceive of a more ‘ “faithful” remake’ of Nosferatu, A Symphony of Horror (F. W. Murnau, 1922) than Werner Herzog’s Nosferatu, the Vampyre (1979), the latter not only pays homage to Murnau’s silent classic but simultaneously ‘resurrects the ghost of Herzog’, remaking in limited ways the director’s signature themes and stylistic traits.60 Harvey Roy Greenberg takes this type of authorial approach to remaking a step further, modifying Druxman’s commercially grounded remake categories to locate the motivation for remakes, ‘well beyond the proﬁt principle’, in complex, highly personal reasons, based on various ‘Oedipal

:  

9

inﬂections’.61 Following Druxman, Greenberg outlines three categories of remaking: 1. the acknowledged, close remake: the original ﬁlm is replicated with little or no change to the narrative, for example Ben-Hur (William Wyler, 1959; Fred Niblo, 1925; Sidney Olcott, 1907); 2. the acknowledged, transformed remake: there are substantial transformations of character, time and setting, but the original ﬁlm is variably acknowledged, ranging from a small screen credit to foregrounding in promotion, for example A Star Is Born (Frank Pierson, 1976; George Cukor, 1954; William A. Wellman, 1937), Heaven Can Wait (Warren Beatty and Buck Henry, 1978; Here Comes Mr Jordan, Alexander Hall, 1941) and Stella (John Erman, 1990; Stella Dallas, King Vidor, 1937; Stella Dallas, Henry King, 1925); 3. the unacknowledged, disguised remake: minor or major alterations (in character, time and setting) are undertaken but the audience is not informed of the original ﬁlm version, for example studio-era remakes such as Warner Brothers’ The Wagons Roll at Night (Ray Enright, 1941) remake of Kid Galahad (Michael Curtiz, 1937).62 Focusing on the example of Steven Spielberg’s Always (1990) – an ‘acknowledged, transformed’ remake of the Second World War fantasy A Guy Named Joe (Victor Fleming, 1943) – Greenberg ﬁnds in ‘the intensely rivalrous spirit inhabiting Spielberg’s “homage” . . . an unconscious Oedipally driven competitiveness [which] constitutes the dark side of Spielberg’s intense admiration for the original [ﬁlm] and its director [and father surrogate, Victor Fleming]’.63 Greenberg’s ‘symptomatic reading’64 of ﬁlm remaking is itself an (acknowledged) elaboration of Harold Bloom’s theory of inﬂuence (and the Freudian analogies that structure it),65 and a like attempt to shift the relationship between a text (remake) and its particular precursor (original) to that between an author and his major predecessor(s).66 In the case of Always, Spielberg, at once worshipful and envious of his predecessor (Fleming, and also Spielberg senior, a Second World War veteran), returns to his preferred Second World War locale (the historical setting for 1941 (1979), Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981), Empire of the Sun (1987), and the later Schindler’s List (1993) and Saving Private Ryan (1998)) and enters into ‘an ambiguous, anxiety ridden struggle with a ﬁlm [A Guy Named Joe] he both wishes to honor and eclipse’.67 Timothy Corrigan argues that auteurs – ‘star-directors’, such as the above examples of Steven Spielberg and James Cameron – are especially important in contemporary Hollywood because they serve as a ‘commercial

10

 

strategy for organising [a type of] audience reception . . . [one which is] bound to distribution and marketing aims that identify and address the potential cult status of an auteur’.68 In the case of contemporary remakes, a pre-existing title is relayed and transformed through the ‘individual vision’ and ‘personal perspective’ of the ﬁlm maker.69 Or, as Catherine Grant puts it, ‘contemporary ﬁlm auteurs . . . make aspects of [earlier] texts their own, overwriting them with their own traceable signatures, perhaps reconﬁguring them by incorporating references to other (rewritten) intertexts’.70 Accordingly, Tim Burton’s Planet of the Apes is not a remake but a ‘re-imagining’ of Schaﬀner’s ﬁlm (and Pierre Boulle’s novel); George A. Romero’s zombie movie Dawn of the Dead (1979) is ‘re-envisioned’ by Zack Snyder (2004); and Solaris, a 1972 ﬁlm by Andrei Tarkovsky (from the novel by Stanislaw Lem) is ‘revisited’ by Steven Soderbergh (2002). In the latter instance, the original material is not only ﬁltered through the perspective of the ﬁlm maker, but the contemporary auteur remakes himself and his earlier remakes: [Soderbergh’s] Solaris is almost if not quite a rerun of Ocean’s Eleven (outof-towner invades hi-tech labyrinth in order to win back wife), The Underneath (out-of-towner pursues former wife for second chance), Traﬃc (strangerin-town searches for lost daughter to reunite family), or The Limey (troubleshooter from another continent arrives in town to avenge lost daughter).71

Remaking as textual category While the above factors contribute to an understanding of ﬁlm remaking, the concept of the remake is never simply reducible to issues of industry and commerce or matters of inﬂuence and authorship. A second, general (and related) approach suggests that remakes are located in texts (or structures) that are produced in accordance with the narrative invention of former ﬁlm models.72 At its most contracted, a textual approach leads to accounts of remaking which attempt to reduce all narrative structures to a single (Oedipal) logic or variant thereof. Michael Eaton, for instance, notes that ‘there are only two possible premises for stories: The Odd Couple and The Fish Out of Water . . . Although Oedipus, if you think about it, is a bit of both’.73 While Eaton’s comment might be tongue-in-cheek, the description readily ﬁts any number of recent remakes. For instance, in Planet of the Apes astronaut Leo Davidson (Mark Wahlberg) ﬁnds himself in a tentative (‘odd-couple’) relationship with chimpanzee Ari (Helena Bonham Carter) on an alien planet dominated by apes. Or in the case of Insomnia, Will Dormer (Al Pacino) is the ‘ﬁsh-out-of-water’ city cop who ﬁnds

:  

11

himself in the twenty-four hour daylight of an Alaskan summer tracking a murderer (Robin Williams) with whom he becomes complicit. More commonly though (and as for ﬁlm genre), the desire to conﬁne ﬁlm remakes to a body of texts or set of textual relationships reveals a tension between ‘sharable terms’ (shareability) and ‘accurate designation’ (accuracy).74 In the case of remaking this is a conﬂict between a desire to provide exhaustive lists of ﬁlm remakes, and one (as in Druxman’s and other taxonomies) to precisely deﬁne the category, or various categories, of the remake. An example of the former approach – of shareability – is Robert Nowlan and Gwendoline Wright Nowlan’s almost one thousand pages long Cinema Sequels and Remakes, 1903–1987, a reference work which alphabetically lists 1,025 ‘primary ﬁlms’ and many more associated remakes and sequels. In a brief (not quite two pages long) introduction, Nowlan and Nowlan make little attempt to deﬁne either remake or sequel, but rather take these as received categories. That is, the principal criterion for selection is that a ﬁlm has been previously designated as a remake or sequel in any two or more of a number of unidentiﬁed but ‘reliable source[s]’ which list remakes and sequels of certain genres of ﬁlms.75 While this type of loose deﬁnition makes for a wide selection of material (shareability), and does not preclude the inferential reconstruction of at least some of the unspeciﬁed principles of selection (through an examination of those ﬁlms that have been included), Nowlan and Nowlan’s intuitive approach underscores the extent to which the remake is conceived more through actual usage and common understanding than through rigorous deﬁnition. In this respect, Nowlan and Nowlan’s account of remaking overlaps with Simonet’s survey of recycled scripts (that is, remakes, sequels and series), in which each ﬁlm is categorised not according to an analysis of its content, but according to its being identiﬁed in the text of a ﬁlm review. 76 If shareability tends toward exhaustive lists of remakes, then accuracy is inclined toward taxonomism. Robert Eberwein, for instance, provides a recent and elaborate taxonomy of remakes, proposing ﬁfteen categories (many with subdivisions) including sound remakes of silent ﬁlms, American remakes of foreign ﬁlms, parodic remakes, pornographic remakes and so on.77 In the more developed ‘Twice-Told Tales’, Thomas M. Leitch makes a number of points about the singularity of the remake both among Hollywood ﬁlms and even among other types of narratives. Leitch argues that: The uniqueness of the ﬁlm remake, a movie based on another movie, or competing with another movie based on the same property, is indicated by the word property. Every ﬁlm adaptation is deﬁned by its legally sanctioned use

12

  of material from an earlier model, whose adaptation rights the producers have customarily purchased.78

Putting aside for the moment the fact that this description immediately excludes those ‘obvious remakes’ (Druxman) which do not acknowledge their previous sources, the point Leitch wants to make is that although adaptation rights (for example, ﬁlm adaptation rights of a novel) are something producers of the original work have a right to sell, it is only remakes that ‘compete directly and without legal or economic compensation with other versions of the same property’79: Remakes diﬀer from . . . adaptations to a new medium because of the triangular relationship they establish among themselves, the original ﬁlm they remake, and the property on which both ﬁlms are based. The nature of this triangle is most clearly indicated by the fact that the producers of a remake typically pay no adaptation fees to the makers of the original ﬁlm, but rather purchase adaptation rights from the authors of the property on which that ﬁlm was based, even though the remake is competing much more directly with the original ﬁlm – especially in these days of video, when the original ﬁlm and the remake are often found side by side on the shelves of rental outlets – than with the story or play or novel on which it is based.80

Taking as an initial proposition the triangular relationship among a remake, its original ﬁlm and the source for both ﬁlms, Leitch suggests that any ‘given remake can seek to deﬁne itself either with primary reference to the ﬁlm it remakes or to the material on which both ﬁlms are based’. And then, depending upon ‘whether it poses as a new version of an older ﬁlm or of a story predating either ﬁlm, it can take as its goal ﬁdelity to the conception of the original story or a revisionary attitude toward that story’.81 Accordingly, Leitch outlines the following quadripartite taxonomy of the remake: 1. Readaptation: the remake ignores or treats as inconsequential earlier cinematic adaptations in order to readapt as faithfully as possible (or at least more faithfully than earlier ﬁlm versions) an original literary property, for example the ﬁlm versions of Shakespeare’s Hamlet (Laurence Olivier, 1948; Tony Richardson, 1969; Franco Zeﬃrelli, 1990) or Macbeth (Orson Welles, 1948; Roman Polanski, 1971). 2. Update: unlike the readaptation which seeks to subordinate itself to the ‘essence’ of a literary classic, the update ‘competes directly’ with its literary source by adopting an overtly revisionary and transformational attitude toward it, for example West Side Story (Robert Wise and

:  

13

Jerome Robbins, 1961), China Girl (Abel Ferrara, 1987) and William Shakespeare’s RomeoJuliet (Baz Luhrmann, 1996) as transformed remakes of earlier, ‘faithful’ ﬁlmed versions of Romeo and Juliet (George Cukor, 1936; Franco Zeﬃrelli, 1968). 3. Homage: like the readaptation which seeks to direct the audience’s attention to its literary source, the homage situates itself as a secondary text in order to pay tribute to a previous ﬁlm version, for example, Brian De Palma’s Obsession (1975) and Body Double (1986) as homages to Alfred Hitchcock’s Vertigo (1958), or Rainer Werner Fassbinder’s Fear Eats the Soul (1974) and Todd Haynes’s Far From Heaven (2002) as tributes to Douglas Sirk’s All That Heaven Allows (1956). 4. True remake: while the homage renounces any claim to be better than its original, the true remake ‘deal[s] with the contradictory claims of all remakes – that they are just like their originals only better – [by combining] a focus on a cinematic original with an accommodating stance which seeks to make the original relevant by updating it’, for example Bob Rafelson’s 1981 remake of The Postman Always Rings Twice (Tay Garnett, 1946) or Lawrence Kasdan’s Body Heat (1981) as a remake of Double Indemnity (Billy Wilder, 1944).82 Leitch concludes that, unlike readaptations, updates and homages, which only acknowledge one earlier text (literary in the ﬁrst two cases and cinematic in the third), ‘true remakes [emphasise] a triangular notion of intertextuality, since their rhetorical strategy depends on ascribing their value to a classic earlier text’ (that is, an original property such as James M. Cain’s novel, The Postman Always Rings Twice), ‘and protecting that value by invoking a second earlier [ﬁlm] text as betraying it’ (Garnett’s version as a watered-down ﬁlm noir, probably due to limitations imposed by the MGM studio and the Production Code of the 1940s).83 While Leitch’s recognition of the signiﬁcance of a literary property, and in particular the relationship of a ﬁlm adaptation and its remake to that property, leads to what at ﬁrst appears to be a more inﬂected taxonomy than that developed by Druxman, further consideration reveals a number of diﬃculties, not only among Leitch’s four categories but in relation to his preliminary suppositions. First, while the ubiquity of the Hollywood remake might understandably lead Leitch to conclude that the remake is a particularly cinematic form, one might question to what extent it diﬀers from the remaking of songs in the popular music industry. That is, how does the triadic relationship between (1) the Pet Shop Boys’ long remake (of their earlier, shorter remake) of ‘Always on My Mind’, (2) the 1972 version of the same song by Elvis Presley, and (3) the original property

14

 

(music and lyrics written by Thompson James Christopher and published by Screen Gems/EMI) diﬀer appreciably from the triangular relationship for the ﬁlm remake as described by Leitch? Or, to take as another example a case which underscores Leitch’s overestimation of the economic competition a remake creates for a former adaptation, the Sid Vicious remake of ‘My Way’ from The Great Rock’n’Roll Swindle (Julien Temple, 1980), and even Gary Oldman’s remake of that performance for Alex Cox’s Sid and Nancy (1986), competes culturally, but not economically, with Frank Sinatra’s earlier adaptation of a property written by Reveaux, Francois and Anka. Director Cameron Crowe draws attention to the aﬃnity between remaking in popular music and ﬁlm, describing Vanilla Sky as a ‘cover version’ of Abre Los Ojos, and Martin Arnold’s extraordinary Alone: Life Wastes Andy Hardy (1998) remakes the Mickey Rooney–Judy Garland Andy Hardy cycle (1937–58) through the methods of music ‘sampling’. These examples, and (many) others from the popular music industry, adequately conform to, and so problematise, Leitch’s initial claim that the ﬁlm remake is unique because of the fact that its producers ‘typically pay no adaptation fees to the makers of the original [version], but rather purchase adaptation rights from the authors [publishers] of the property on which that [version] was based’.84 A second limitation is that while Druxman at least acknowledges the diﬃculty of identifying and categorising those ﬁlms ‘that are obviously remakes [but] do not credit their origins’,85 Leitch remains silent in this respect. For instance, Leitch considers Body Heat a ‘true remake’ of Double Indemnity, but he does not comment upon the fact that the ﬁlm’s credits do not acknowledge the James M. Cain novel as a source. Similarly, Leitch takes Obsession and Body Double to be ‘homages’ to Vertigo but he fails to note that neither of the ﬁlms credits either the Alec Coppel and Samuel Taylor screenplay, or the Pierre Boileau and Thomas Narceiac novel, D’entre les morts, upon which the Hitchcock ﬁlm is based. Examples such as Sergio Leone’s A Fistful of Dollars (Per un pugno di dollari, 1964) remake of Yojimbo (Akira Kurosawa, 1961) – uncredited, but consistently ‘acknowledged’ in critical commentaries – suggest that taxonomies need attend not only to the nature of textual remakings (‘free’ or ‘faithful’), but to contextual (or extratextual) markers, such as credits and reviews, that enable the identiﬁcation of the intertext (see Chapters 3 and 5). While the question of categorising unacknowledged remakes is returned to below, Leitch’s insistence upon the connection between three elements – a remake, an earlier version and a literary property – presents a further diﬃculty in that it marginalises those instances in which a dyadic relationship exists between a remake and a previous ﬁlm that is itself (at least in the

:  

15

The Assassin (John Badham, 1994). Courtesy Warner Bros/ The Kobal Collection.

sense conveyed by Leitch) the original property. Although it might be objected that a published original screenplay constitutes a discrete property, the point to be made here is that the remake of an ‘original ﬁlm property’, such as John Badham’s The Assassin [Point of No Return] (1994), does not ‘compete directly and without legal or economic compensation’ with

16

 

its earlier version, but (generally) pays adaptation fees to the copyright holder of the original ﬁlm upon which it is based (in this example, Luc Besson’s Nikita, 1990).86 Indeed, some producers of (foreign) originals, realising the direct ﬁnancial gains to be made, are actively involved in the production of US remakes.87 For example, following an unsuccessful attempt to repackage a dubbed version of Les Visiteurs (1993) for an English language, multiplex audience, director Jean-Marie Poiré extended the franchise (which included the sequel, Les Couloirs du temps: Les Visiteurs II, 1998) through a 2001 French/American remaking, Just Visiting (directed under the pseudonym Jean-Marie Gaubert).88 The above example of the American remake of Nikita (and also Les Visiteurs) not only demonstrates that a ‘triangular relationship’ fails to adequately accommodate remakes of those ﬁlms based upon original stories and screenplays but highlights the diﬃculty of Leitch’s suggestion that remakes compete with earlier versions, and his belief that successful remakes supersede and so ‘typically threaten the economic viability of their originals’.89 To stay with the example of the French-Italian production of Nikita, it seems doubtful that having successfully played an art-cinema circuit and having been released to home video (variously under the categories of ‘cult’, ‘festival’ and ‘art-house’) the appearance of The Assassin, initially as a ﬁrst-run theatrical release and then as a mainstream video release, would have any appreciable impact (either positive or negative) upon the former’s ‘economic viability’. Admittedly, The Assassin was not promoted as a remake of the Besson ﬁlm, but even a widely publicised remake such as Martin Scorsese’s 1991 version of Cape Fear did not occasion the burial, or even diminish the cult following, of J. Lee Thompson’s earlier (1961) version. On the contrary, the theatrical release of the Scorsese ﬁlm (accompanied by press releases and reviews foregrounding its status as remake) prompted ﬁrst a video release and then a prime-time national television screening of the Thompson version. The reciprocity of the two versions is further exempliﬁed by Sight and Sound magazine’s running together of a lead article by Jim Hoberman on Scorsese and Cape Fear and a second briefer article comparing the two versions (‘novelist . . . Jenny Diski watches a video of the ﬁrst Cape Fear and the Scorsese remake – and compares them’) and giving details of the availability of the (then recently) re-released CIC video of the 1961 version.90 More recently, the two versions of Cape Fear have been released together to DVD in a collector’s three-disc boxed set. This does not, however, mean that reciprocity is always the case. In the international marketplace a local remake may supplant an earlier foreign language and/or culture version. For instance, the producers of the Brazilian Costinha e o King Mong (1977), a parodic

:  

17

remake of King Kong (1933/1976), capitalised on the advertising apparatus and pre-release publicity for Guillermin’s 1976 remake to release a version that ran simultaneously with the American remake in Brazilian theatres. 91 While it is likely that both versions beneﬁted from this arrangement, it seems probable too that King Mong siphoned oﬀ some of its older sibling’s box-oﬃce receipts. The example of Cape Fear suggests that contemporary remakes generally enjoy a (more) symbiotic relationship with their originals, with publicity and reviews often drawing attention to earlier versions. As Steve Neale points out, along with the institutionalised public discourses of press, television and radio, a key role in communicating the narrative image of a new ﬁlm is played by the industry itself, ‘especially in the earliest phases of a ﬁlm’s public circulation, and in particular by those sectors of the industry concerned with publicity and marketing’.92 In the case of remakes, oﬃcial ﬁlm websites will often draw attention to originals, seeing this as an opportunity to instantly invest new versions not only with a narrative image, but with aesthetic (and commercial) value. On these sites, ﬁlm makers often enthuse about the ‘timeless’ attributes and ‘classic’ status of originals before going on to insist upon their own value-added transformations. For instance, F. Gary Gray, the director of the 2003 version of The Italian Job, says ‘I liked a lot of things about the original [The Italian Job, Peter Collinson, 1969]. It had great style and unforgettable performances’. Gray goes on to add: ‘but the ﬁlm that we’ve made is for modern audiences, with updated technology’.93 Following the 2003 theatrical run of The Italian Job, both versions were simultaneously released to DVD, with extras on the remake DVD not only drawing attention to the original, but featuring scenes from it. More than this, the subsequent release of Paramount Home Video’s ‘The Italian Job Gift Set’ DVD edition (which included both 1969 and 2003 versions) suggests that, just as adaptations of literary properties often lead viewers back to source novels for a ﬁrst reading, remakes encourage viewers to seek out original ﬁlm properties94 (see Chapter 5). While the above examples suggest that Leitch might overestimate the extent to which some remakes compete with original ﬁlm versions, his recognition of the impact that innovations in television technology, particularly home video, have had upon shaping the relationship between a remake and its earlier versions should not be underestimated. Leitch states that during the studio-dominated era of the 1930s and 1940s it was at least in part the belief that ﬁlms had a ‘strictly current value’ that enabled studios such as Warners to recycle The Maltese Falcon property three times in ten years (Roy Del Ruth, 1931; Satan Met a Lady, William Dieterle,

18

 

1936; John Huston, 1941), and release many ‘unoﬃcial remakes’ of its own ﬁlms.95 Although the re-release of successful features, particularly during the late 1940s and early 1950s, gave some ﬁlms a limited currency outside their initial year of release,96 the majority of ﬁlms held in studio libraries were not available for re-viewing until the mid-1950s when the major studios decided to sell or lease their ﬁlm libraries to television.97 The release of thousands of pre-1948 features into the television market not only gave the general public the opportunity to see many ﬁlms that had been held in studio archives since their initial year of release, but provided the possibility of seeing diﬀerent versions of the same property, produced years or even decades apart, within weeks or even days of each other. Moreover, and in an instance of what has been described as the ‘virtual mobility’ of contemporary spectatorship,98 the television broadcasting of ﬁlms provided the further possibility of viewing remakes outside of the temporal order of their production. That is, the repeated screening of the same features meant that it was inevitable that the broadcast of a remake would precede the screening of its original. While Leitch does not address the impact of television, his recognition that a remake and its original circulate in the same video marketplace draws attention to the fact that the introduction of an information storage technology such as videotape (and now DVD) radically extends the kind of ﬁlm literacy – the ability to recognise and cross-reference multiple versions of the same property – that was inaugurated by the age of television. The ever-expanding availability of texts and technologies, and the unprecedented awareness of ﬁlm history among new Hollywood ﬁlm makers and contemporary audiences, is closely related to the general concept of intertextuality, an in principle determination which requires that texts be understood not as self-contained structures but as ‘the repetition and transformation of other [absent] textual structures’.99 In Mikhail Iampolski’s discussion of intertextuality and ﬁlm, the ‘semantic fullness’ of a text is precisely ‘the result of its ability to establish a connection with [these other] texts that came before it, and occasionally with those that came later’.100 Refusing to reduce this type of semantic productivity to a simple question of inﬂuence, Iampolski draws instead upon Ferdinand de Saussure’s (and Julia Kristeva’s) account of the anagram to deﬁne the intertextual element – the quotation – as that ‘fragment of the text that violates its linear development [its internal, textual repetitions] and derives the motivation that integrates it into the text from outside the text itself’.101 As this description suggests, the ‘semantic anomaly’ of the quotation disrupts the linear unfolding of the text impelling the reader toward a non-linear (‘tabular’) intertextual reading, but one that may ultimately enrich

:  

19

meaning and salvage the very same narrative linearity that was initially compromised.102 Additionally, Iampolski points out that an ‘embedded quotation’, one that seems to derive its motivation from the logic of the text and so dissolves into the ﬁlm’s mimetic structure (that is, a quotation known to the author but not the reader) is, paradoxically, not a quote, and (conversely) an ‘anomalous moment’ can become a quote through the reader making speciﬁc moves of exegesis, regardless of whether this expresses the author’s intentions.103 Adapted to the case of the ﬁlm remake, this suggests that ‘remaking is not necessarily about intended eﬀects, nor necessarily about precise identiﬁcation of an intertext. It is, or it may be, a more general intertextual relation, although this doesn’t mean that it is unstructured or imprecise in its operations’.104 Robert Stam takes up the concept of intertextuality in ﬁlm drawing upon Gérard Genette’s description of transtextuality as ‘all that which puts one text into a relation, manifest or secret, with other texts’ to describe several types of textual transcendence.105 Among these categories, the term ‘intertextuality’ speciﬁcally describes the ‘literal presence of one text within another’, principally as ‘quotation’ (or ‘the explicit summoning up of a text that is both presented and distanced by quotation marks’), but also through ‘plagiarism and allusion of various kinds’.106 In its most literal and contracted form, remaking as quotation would describe the (acknowledged) insertion of segments from one ﬁlm into another. There are countless instances of direct quotation in feature ﬁlms. Examples include: Nana (Anna Karina) watching images of Maria Falconetti from La Passion de Jeanne d’Arc (Carl Theodor Dreyer, 1928) in Vivre sa vie (Jean-Luc Godard, 1962); Allan (Woody Allen) transﬁxed upon the ending from Casablanca (Michael Curtiz, 1942) in Play it Again, Sam (Herbert Ross, 1972); Donnie (Jake Gyllenhaal) and Gretchen (Jena Malone) ‘sleeping’ through The Evil Dead (Sam Raimi, 1981) in Donnie Darko (Richard Kelly, 2001); and, in one of the most expansive of recent examples, scenes from Shock Corridor (Sam Fuller, 1963), A bout de souﬄe (Jean-Luc Godard, 1959), Queen Christina (Rouben Mamoulian, 1933), Bande à part (Jean-Luc Godard, 1964), Blonde Venus (Josef von Sternberg, 1932) and others interspersed throughout The Dreamers (Bernardo Bertolucci, 2003). The unauthorised but direct use of material in experimental ﬁlms – for example, clips from East of Borneo (George Melford, 1931) in Rose Hobart (Joseph Cornell, 1936); fragments from The Wild One (László Benedek, 1951) in Scorpio Rising (Kenneth Anger, 1964); and soundbites from Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves (Arthur Lubin, 1944) in Flaming Creatures (Jack Smith, 1963) – would constitute a kind of quotation as appropriation.107 By contrast, plagiarism – the direct but unacknowledged use of segments from

20

 

another ﬁlm – is (by deﬁnition) a less obvious but no less prevalent strategy. Plagiarism might include the use of stock footage (establishing shots, action sequences and the like) in genre ﬁlms and B-movies. For instance, Flying Leathernecks (Nicholas Ray, 1951) makes extensive use of US Navy newsreel footage for its battle sequences, and stock footage recurs in the various versions of the Titanic story.108 Finally, while Genette seeks to restrict intertextuality to direct and localised instances of citation, allusion suggests a wide range of practices, and a potential overlap with the forms of imitation, pastiche and parody reserved by Genette for the category of ‘hypertextuality’ where a hypertext ‘transforms, modiﬁes, elaborates, or extends’ an anterior hypotext109 (see Chapter 3). Employed here in a restricted sense, allusion describes ‘a verbal or visual evocation of another ﬁlm’,110 and includes such strategies as the mention of ﬁlms and ﬁlm makers in dialogue, the display of ﬁlm titles on marquees and posters, and the recreation of classic scenes, shots and lines of dialogue from earlier movies. For instance, Omar Calabrese claims that Spielberg’s Raiders of the Lost Ark includes 350 allusions to old Hollywood ﬁlms.111 Or, to give a more recent and speciﬁc example, in the 2030 sequence in The Time Machine (Simon Wells, 2002) Alexander Hartdegen (Guy Pearce) asks Vox, a holographic guide at the New York public library, about time travel and is referred not only to The Time Machine by H. G. Wells but also to the original 1960 ﬁlm directed by George Pal. Genette’s ‘highly suggestive’ category of intertextuality leads Stam to speculate upon sub-categories within the same paradigm.112 Some of these terms can be productively adapted for a discussion of remaking. The ﬁrst sub-category, celebrity intertextuality, deﬁnes those situations in which the presence of a ﬁlm or television star or celebrity evokes an earlier version of a ﬁlm property. This is evident in many contemporary remakes where actors from original ﬁlms lend themselves to cameo appearances. For instance, Robert Mitchum and Gregory Peck – stars of J. Lee Thompson’s version of Cape Fear (1961) – take minor roles in Martin Scorsese’s 1991 remake. In another example, two of the four actors who played the ‘survivors’ in George A. Romero’s Dawn of the Dead (1978) appear in diﬀerent roles in the 2004 remake, and a third actor from the original (Gaylen Ross) has a clothing store in the mall named after her. A second, similar sub-category of intertextuality is referred to as genetic intertextuality. In this case, the appearance of a well-known actor’s child (or other relative) evokes the memory of an earlier ﬁlm version. For example, in Swept Away (Guy Ritchie, 2002) Adriano Giannini takes on the role played by his father, Giancarlo, in Lina Wertmüller’s original Swept Away . . . by an Unusual Destiny in the Blue Sea of August (1974).

:  

21

In a related example, Simon Wells, director of the 2002 remake of The Time Machine, is great-grandson to H. G. Wells, author of the book from which the ﬁlm versions are derived. Stam’s next category, intratextuality, might be employed to describe the way in which a remake refers to the process of remaking – in particular, the status of originals and copies – through strategies of mirroring or mise-en-abyme structures. For example, Laura Grindstaﬀ says that Luc Besson’s Nikita (1990) is an ‘adaptation of the Pygmalion myth in which a woman is subjected to a dramatic makeover’, and as such ‘the Nikita narrative stands as a synecdoche for the relation between original ﬁlm and its copies [The Assassin and Black Cat]’.113 Similar arguments have been made about the way in which science ﬁction remakes like The Fly (Kurt Neumann, 1958; David Cronenberg, 1986) and Invasion of the Body Snatchers (Don Siegel, 1956; Philip Kaufman, 1978) act out the logic of the original and the copy.114 Finally, the category of autocitation would refer to a ﬁlm maker’s self-quotation through the remaking of his/her own earlier ﬁlm. Examples include Alfred Hitchcock’s The Man Who Knew Too Much (1955, 1934), George Sluizer’s The Vanishing (1993, 1971) and Takashi Shimizu’s The Grudge (2004, Ju-On: The Grudge, 2003). Film remaking can be regarded as a speciﬁc (institutionalised) aspect of the broader and more open-ended intertextuality described above. It can range from the limited repetition of a classic shot or scene, for example the many reprises of the Odessa Steps sequence of The Battleship Potemkin (Sergei Eisenstein, 1925) – Bananas (Woody Allen, 1971), Brazil (Terry Gilliam, 1985), The Untouchables (Brian De Palma, 1987), Steps (Zbigniew Rybczynski, 1987) and Naked Gun 331⁄3: The Final Insult (Peter Segal, 1994) – to the ‘quasi-independent’ repetitions of a single story or popular myth,115 for example the successive versions of Dracula or Robin Hood or the Titanic story. More often, though, ﬁlm remakes are understood as (more particular) intertextual structures which are stabilised, or limited, through the naming and (usually) legally sanctioned (or copyrighted) use of a particular literary and/or cinematic source which serves as a retrospectively designated point of origin and semantic ﬁxity. In addition, these intertextual structures (unlike those of genre) are highly particular in their repetition of narrative units, and these repetitions most often (though certainly not always) relate to the content (‘the order of the message’) rather than to the form (or ‘the code’) of the ﬁlm.116 Brian De Palma’s Obsession (1976) provides an example of both, repeating not only the narrative invention of Alfred Hitchcock’s Vertigo (1958), but ‘resurrecting’ some of Hitchcock’s most visible stylistic characteristics, such as doubling eﬀects and the voyeuristic use of point-of-view shots.117

22

 

While these factors yield some degree of consensus, any easy categorisation of the remake is frustrated (as seen above) by a number of factors. First, there is the problem of those ﬁlms which do not credit an ‘original’ text, but which do repeat both general and particular elements of another ﬁlm’s narrative unfolding, for example Body Heat as an uncredited remake of Double Indemnity; The Big Chill (Lawrence Kasdan, 1983) as an unacknowledged remake of The Return of the Secaucus Seven (John Sayles, 1980); and Flying Tigers (David Miller, 1942) and all major combat ﬁlms of the early 1940s as unacknowledged remakes of Only Angels Have Wings (Howard Hawks, 1939).118 Second, there is the diﬃculty of those ﬁlms based on a like source – a literary (or other) work or historical incident – but which diﬀer signiﬁcantly in their treatment of narrative units, for example The Bounty (Roger Donaldson, 1984) as a non-remake of Mutiny on the Bounty (Frank Lloyd, 1935 and Lewis Milestone, 1962); Tony Richardson’s The Charge of the Light Brigade (1968) as a non-remake of Michael Curtiz’s 1936 version; and The King and I (Richard Rich, 1999) as a remake of the Rogers and Hammerstein musical, but not of the ﬁlm versions based on Margaret Landon’s book or Anna Leonowens’s diaries. Moreover, in a contemporary context, remakes increasingly take only the pre-sold title of an original property as a point of departure to create a nonremake, with all new characters, settings and situations. A third complication (discussed further below) arises from the fact that originals are never pure or singular. For instance, Michaels notes that Herzog’s remaking of Nosferatu is complicated by the fact that the negative of the Murnau ‘original’ was destroyed, and that all existing prints are copies (remakes) reproduced from Murnau’s shooting script.119 Furthermore, the intertextual referentiality between either ‘non-remakes’ or ‘unacknowledged remakes’ and their ‘originals’ is to a large extent extratextual,120 being conveyed through institutions such as ﬁlm reviewing, marketing, distribution and exhibition. For example, the BFI/National Film Theatre’s programme describes four ﬁlms from Paul Schrader scripts – Taxi Driver (Martin Scorsese, 1976), Rolling Thunder (John Flynn, 1977), Hardcore (Schrader, 1979) and Patty Hearst (Schrader, 1988) – as ‘updates’, or remakes, of The Searchers (John Ford, 1956).121 And Schrader has since added that his later Mishima: A Life in Four Chapters (1985) is in turn a ‘remake’ of Taxi Driver.122 In a more complicated example, reviewers consistently refer to The Big Chill as a remake of The Return of the Secaucus Seven,123 even though director John Sayles does not admit to the description: ‘I never felt like it [The Big Chill] was a rip-oﬀ. It goes in such a diﬀerent direction. It’s like saying if my movie had an Indian and a horse in it: “Oh, it’s a rip-oﬀ of Shane” ’.124

:  

23

Remaking as critical category The above comments suggest that remakes do not consist simply of bodies of ﬁlms but, like genres, are located too in ‘expectations and audience knowledge’125 and in ‘the institutions that govern and support speciﬁc reading strategies’.126 The concept of intertextuality needs, for instance, to be related to the ever-expanding availability of texts and technologies, the tendency of contemporary Hollywood ﬁlm makers to combine the commercial necessity of generic patterns of repetition with more direct patterns of borrowing (allusion and quotation), and the unprecedented awareness of ﬁlm history both among ﬁlm makers and contemporary audiences.127 As seen in Leitch’s taxonomy, a remake can be categorised according to whether its intertextual referent is literary (the ‘readaptation’, the ‘update’) or cinematic (the ‘homage’, the ‘true remake’). In the latter case, Leitch states that while homages, such as The Thing (John Carpenter, 1982) and Invaders from Mars (Tobe Hooper, 1986), establish direct intertextual relations to their original ﬁlms (The Thing from Another World, Christian Nyby, 1951; Invaders from Mars, William Cameron Menzies, 1953), these quotations or ‘rewards . . . take the form of throwaway jokes whose point is not necessary to the [ﬁlm’s] continuity, and which therefore provide an optional bonus of pleasure to those in the know’.128 This seems consistent with what Umberto Eco describes as the ‘intertextual dialogue’, that is the instance where a quotation is explicit and recognisable to an increasingly sophisticated, ciné-literate audience.129 But what Leitch does not suﬃciently stress here is that his examples of the homage (and of the true remake) – all drawn from the new Hollywood cinema – suggest a historically speciﬁc response to a postmodern circulation and recirculation of images and texts. This does not mean that the classical Hollywood remake never takes an earlier ﬁlm as its intertextual referent, but rather that, as the continuity system develops through the pre-classical period (1908–17), direct intertextual referentiality is mostly displaced by an industrial imperative for standardisation which prioritises the intertextual relation of genres, cycles and stars. Accordingly, as the classical narrative strives to create a coherent, self-contained ﬁctional world according to speciﬁc mechanisms of internal (or intratextual) repetition, direct intertextual referentiality to earlier ﬁlm versions (and other textualised sources) becomes an extratextual referentiality, carried by such apparatuses as advertising and promotional materials (posters, lobby cards, commercial tie-ins, etc.), ﬁlm magazines, review articles and academic ﬁlm criticism (see Chapter 5). What seems to happen with contemporary Hollywood cinema, particularly in the case of remakes, is that while the intratextual mechanisms of

24

 

Cape Fear (Martin Scorsese, 1991). Courtesy Universal/The Kobal Collection.

classical continuity are mostly respected, intertextual referentiality (to genres, cycles and stars) is sometimes complemented by what is perceived – within speciﬁc interpretive communities130 – as the explicit and recognisable intertextual quotation of plot motifs and stylistic features peculiar to earlier ﬁlm versions. To take a general example, and one that

:  

25

underscores the assertion that ‘allusion constitute[s] . . . the very briefest form of “remaking” ’,131 the narrative of Unforgiven (Clint Eastwood, 1992) assumes as its primary intertexts the revisionist Westerns of the 1960s and 1970s and the Eastwood star persona, but (re)viewers additionally see the ﬁlm as a kind of sequel (the Will Munny character as the now aged ‘Man-with-no-name’ from Eastwood’s spaghetti Westerns), and as a homage to the ﬁlms of both Sam Peckinpah and John Ford. For instance, Pat Dowell states that Unforgiven is ‘inescapably Fordian’ in its mood, lifting a ‘signature scene’ – the man silhouetted against the sunset, looking over the grave of his beloved wife – from She Wore a Yellow Ribbon (1949) and Young Mr Lincoln (1939).132 More speciﬁcally, Martin Scorsese’s remake of Cape Fear may be said to work perfectly well as a conventional thriller (a psychopath attacks a ‘normal’ – in this case, dysfunctional – American family), but the new Cape Fear also ‘assumes [in its reworking of the original Bernard Herrmann score, and the casting of original lead players in cameo roles] that the viewer has seen the earlier one, perhaps even as recently as Scorsese himself ’.133 Another example, Jim McBride’s Breathless (1983), displays a ‘neo-noir’ predilection for l’amour fou, but also quotes its Godard original (A bout de souﬄe, 1959) in its smallest detail (a character’s name, a player’s gesture), and more generally embraces Godard’s enthusiasm for American pop-cultural iconography: the title song, ‘Breathless’, by the ‘Killer’, Jerry Lee Lewis; the direct quotation from Joseph H. Lewis’s Gun Crazy (1950); the Roy Lichtenstein-type lifts from Marvel Comics’ The Silver Surfer; the collectable American automobile – the 1957 Ford Thunderbird, the 1959 Cadillac Eldorado (see Chapter 6). While it is possible to ﬁnd instances of ‘direct’ quotation in the classical cinema, the above examples demonstrate that ‘at whatever level of generality the intertext exists (or rather can be posited), every remake simultaneously refers to and remakes the genre to which that intertext belongs, and this genre may itself be the only intertext’.134 The type of intertextual referentiality that characterises contemporary American ﬁlm circulates in a historically speciﬁc context. Accordingly, the identiﬁcation of (and indeed the commercial decision to remake) an earlier ﬁlm is located in particular extratextual, institutional or discursive practices. As in Noël Carroll’s discussion of new Hollywood ‘allusionism’, the question of intertextual referentiality needs to be related to the radical extension of ﬁlm literacy and the enthusiasm for (American) ﬁlm history that took hold in the United States during the 1960s and early 1970s.135 Partly made possible by the release of Hollywood features to television and the wider accessibility of new technologies (for example, 16 mm ﬁlm

26

 

projection), this re-evaluation, or legitimisation, of Hollywood cultural product was underwritten by such additional factors as the importation of the French politique des auteurs, the upsurge of repertory theatre short seasons, the expansion of ﬁlm courses in American universities and the emergence of professional associations such as the American Film Institute. Accordingly, and this is evident from the above examples – Unforgiven, Cape Fear, Breathless – the selection and recognition of ﬁlms, and bodies of ﬁlms, for quotation and reworking (for example, the work of auteurs, Ford and Peckinpah; the cult movie, Cape Fear; the nouvelle vague landmark, A bout de souﬄe) can be located in the institutionally determined practice of ﬁlm canon formation and its contributing projects – the determination to comment upon and conserve a ﬁlm heritage, the discussion and citation of particular ﬁlms in popular and academic ﬁlm criticism, the selective release and re-release of ﬁlms to theatrical and video distribution windows, the proliferation of talk and websites on the Internet and (in circular fashion) the decision of other ﬁlm makers to evoke earlier ﬁlms and recreate cinema history.136 An understanding of the formation and maintenance of the ﬁlm canon in turn goes some way toward explaining why remakes of highly institutionalised ﬁlm noirs – for example, D.O.A. (Rocky Morton and Annabel Jankel, 1988), No Way Out (Roger Donaldson, 1987) and Against All Odds (Taylor Hackford, 1984) – are discussed with reference to their originals (D.O.A. (Rudolph Maté, 1949), The Big Clock (John Farrow, 1948) and Out of the Past (Jacques Tourneur, 1947), respectively), while ﬁlms such as Martin Scorsese’s version of The Age of Innocence (1993) and James Dearden’s remake of A Kiss Before Dying (1991) defer, not to their little known or (now) rarely seen earlier ﬁlm versions – The Age of Innocence (Wesley Ruggles, 1924; Philip Moeller, 1934) and A Kiss Before Dying (Gerd Oswald, 1961) – but to the authority of an established literary canon: The Age of Innocence is based on Edith Wharton’s 1920 Pulitzer Prize winning novel and A Kiss Before Dying is adapted from a best-selling novel by Ira Levin. Indeed, and in accordance with the canonisation of the work of Alfred Hitchcock, the more direct intertextual referent for the remake of A Kiss Before Dying is Hitchcock’s Vertigo – a clip from the ﬁlm appears diegetically on a character’s television screen, and in addition to the ‘ﬁgure’ of the doppelganger there is allusion to Hitchcockian plot structure and motif: ‘liberally alluding to Hitchcock by killing oﬀ his leading actress in the ﬁrst reel, Dearden includes subtler references like the washing out of hair-dye and the cop who just won’t leave’.137 Steven Soderbergh’s remake of Solaris is similarly likened not only to its direct precursor (the Tarkovsky version), but is ‘reminiscent of Hitchcock’s Vertigo’,138 and has

:  

27

‘more than a touch of Vertigo’s l’amour fou as déjà vu’.139 In another example, Kolker suggests that Scorsese’s Cape Fear is not simply a ‘direct remake’ of the 1961 version, but a ‘secret remake’ of three ‘minor’ Hitchcock ﬁlms: Stage Fright (1950), Strangers on a Train (1951) and I Confess (1953): ‘[Cape Fear] adopts the plot of its predecessor while gaining a deeper structure through an allusive tag game with [these] three Hitchcock ﬁlms’.140 The endless chain of connections – both voluntary and involuntary – which characterises ﬁlm remaking is further sketched in Lesley Stern’s The Scorsese Connection. Stern argues, for instance, that Scorsese’s version of Cape Fear, in its reworking of elements of horror and ﬁlm noir, is as much a remake of The Night of the Hunter (Charles Laughton, 1955) as it is of Thompson’s earlier ﬁlm version.141 Additionally, Stern sees Max Cady (Robert DeNiro) from Cape Fear as a ‘reincarnation’ of Taxi Driver’s Travis Bickle (also played by DeNiro) who, in turn, is a kind of ‘resurrected’ Ethan Edwards, the John Wayne character from The Searchers.142 Moreover, Stern states that ‘it is not just characters who are reincarnated: ideas persist, questions that are not answered, anomalies that drive by night through a variety of cinematic landscapes [return].’143 In the case of The Searchers, Stern traces an elaborate exchange, ‘a network of similarities, a kind of cinematic scar tissue [it is the Indian Chief ‘Scar’ whom Ethan pursues] that stretches, extends over the continuity of the celluloid surface’.144 In The Searchers and Taxi Driver, this exchange is not just (to give two examples) an oscillation between the terms of ‘home’ and ‘away’, or the reproduction of a prohibition against contamination and miscegenation, but more broadly the ghostly return of ‘a troubling scenario of irresolution . . . The repetition . . . (aimless yet compulsive) . . . of the obsessive structure of the ﬁlms [of all ﬁlms] themselves’.145 The above examples of A Kiss Before Dying, Cape Fear and The Searchers/Taxi Driver demonstrate that ‘the intertext, the precursor text, is never singular and never a moment of pure origin’.146 This is nowhere more evident than in Breathless, the American remake of A bout de souﬄe. At one level, Breathless is a genre movie, an outlaw romance which draws heavily on the romantic star persona developed by Richard Gere in ﬁlms like American Gigolo (Paul Schrader, 1980) and An Oﬃcer and a Gentleman (Taylor Hackford, 1982). For a contemporary audience, the Breathless update is a ‘suitably jazzy, sexy entertainment’,147 but its identiﬁcation as remake may be the occasion for an interpretive shift, restricting attention to particular scenes and to a comparative analysis of the remake to its original. For instance, Gilbert Adair says that ‘whatever its precise status – homage, pastiche, paraphrase, vulgarisation’ – the McBride ﬁlm is in ‘no

28

 

signiﬁcant sense’ a remake of A bout de souﬄe, but rather ‘a wet, pulpy, squelching kiss lovingly applied to Hollywood’s backside’.148 Reviewers thus appeal to originals not only in order to establish the (greater or lesser) worth of the remake, but also to secure the value of the ﬁlm medium by relating it to deeply established precursors (the canon).149 The identiﬁcation of a source can secure the former version as a kind of ﬁxity (against which the remake is evaluated), but ‘there can never be a simple original uncomplicated by the structure of the remake’.150 Just as Breathless admits to other intertexts – its makers screened Gun Crazy, High Sierra (1941), and Killer’s Kiss (1955) during pre-production151 – A bout de souﬄe draws upon classic ﬁlm noirs – Whirlpool (1949), The Enforcer (1951), The Harder They Fall (1956), Ten Seconds to Hell (1959) – and a host of inter-art intertexts, among them: Paul Klee’s The Timid Brute (1938), Picasso’s The Lovers (1923), Faulkner’s The Wild Palms (1939) and Maurice Sachs’s Abracadabra (1952).152 Understood in relation to a vast body of critical writing on Godard, Breathless is but one moment in an elaborate chain of reworkings: Godard as critic rewrites Hollywood cinema; Andrew Sarris rewrites Godard as critic; Godard remakes Hollywood cinema in A bout de souﬄe; Godard remakes A bout de souﬄe in Pierrot le fou (1965); McBride remakes Godard in David Holzman’s Diary (1967); McBride remakes A bout de souﬄe in Breathless; Quentin Tarantino remakes everyone in Pulp Fiction (1994) (see Chapter 6). Like all critical constructs (genre included), remaking – quotation, allusion, adaptation – is created and sustained through the repeated use of terminology.153 The suggestion that the very limited direct intertextual referentiality between the remake and its original is organised according to an extratextual referentiality, located in historically speciﬁc discursive formations – especially ﬁlm criticism and reviewing, but also copyright law and authorship, canon formation and ﬁlm literacy – has consequences for purely textual descriptions of the remake, particularly those which seek to ground the category in a rigid distinction between an original story and its new discursive incarnation.154 Aside from the questionable move of assuming that the unchanging essence of a ﬁlm’s story can somehow be abstracted from the mutable disposition of its expression,155 demarcation along the lines of story and discourse is evidently frustrated by those remakes which repeat not only the narrative invention of an original property but seek, for instance, to recreate the expressive design of an earlier ﬁlm (for example, Far From Heaven as a recreation of Sirkian mise-en-scène) or to rework the style of an entire oeuvre or genre (for example, Miller’s Crossing (Joel Coen, 1990) as the ‘essential’ Hammett, or Body Heat as the archetypal recreation of the ﬁlm noir). More importantly, while it might

:  

29

appear ‘an elementary and intuitively given fact that a story can be told in diﬀerent ways and remain, in an important sense, the same story’,156 the identiﬁcation of exactly which elements shall count as the fundamental units of narrative in the determination of the similar and the same – that is, in the identiﬁcation of the remake and its original – becomes (especially in the absence of a screen credit acknowledging an original property) a theoretical construct, or a function of the discursive context of the ﬁlm’s production and reception. These ‘contextual forms of intertextuality’,157 which include ﬁlm industry and other public discourses, shift attention from purely textual markers to the identiﬁcation of an interpretive frame. That is, while a general narrative and cinematic competence enables the construction of an intratextually determined hierarchy of story descriptions, which range from the most succinct to the most detailed, the construction of a particular intertextual relation between a remake and its presumed original is an act of interpretation, one which is ‘limited and relative – not to a [viewing] subject but to the interpretive grid (the regime of reading) through which both the subject position and the textual relations are constituted’.158 Finally, and as Frow argues generally in relation to the concept of intertextuality,159 what is important to an account of the remake is not the detailed ‘identiﬁcation of particular . . . intertextual source[s]’, which function as retrospectively designated points of origin, but the determination of ‘a more general discursive structure’ – the genre of re-viewing labelled ‘remake’. To sum up, it seems necessary to stress the need for detailed (historical) investigation and research into the concept of ﬁlm remaking, in both its legal-industrial and critical-interpretive deﬁnitions. As Stern points out, there may be no simple answer to what it is about the term ‘remaking’ that makes it ‘peculiarly cinematic’, but the pursuit of just what deﬁnes ﬁlm remaking and characterises its intersection with other practices of repetition would need to include ‘[an engagement] with the industrial nature of the cinema (questions of what constitutes a “property” and questions of copyright, for instance), [an engagement with] the peculiarity of cinematic genre, with the nature of cinematic quotation, and with how to conceive of cinematic intertextuality as a question of cultural history’.160 Beyond textual approaches to ﬁlm remaking, beyond the identiﬁcation of endlessly proliferating patterns of repetition and diﬀerence, inquiries into the nature of remaking would locate it (as has been argued above) not only in industrial ﬁelds and textual strategies, but in cinematic (and general) discursive ﬁelds, in such historically speciﬁc technologies as copyright law and authorship, canon formation and media literacy, ﬁlm criticism and ﬁlm reviewing.

30

 

Reﬂecting the organisation of this introduction, this book draws out and develops various approaches to ﬁlm remaking across its three broad sections. Part I develops the idea of remaking as an industrial category. Chapter 1 (Commerce) takes up the case of the remaking of television series as feature ﬁlms in order to investigate the commercial strategies behind the rebranding of previously market-tested properties such as The Addams Family and Charlie’s Angels as new cross-media franchises. Chapter 2 (Authors) takes this production-oriented approach further to look at the way in which the ﬁlm remake can be understood as a category of authorship by investigating the case of Psycho and the general remaking of the ﬁlms of Alfred Hitchcock. Part II investigates remaking as a textual category. Chapter 3 (Texts) attends to the question of the transformation of earlier textualised sources by investigating issues of adaptation and drawing these out through extended case studies of the remaking of Yojimbo and Planet of the Apes. Chapter 4 (Genres) continues this approach but attends to the remaking of broader generic structures by investigating the case of the remaking of classic ﬁlm noirs such as The Postman Always Rings Twice and Double Indemnity. Part III casts an even wider net to look at remaking as a critical category. Chapter 5 (Audiences) looks at a wide range of contemporary remakes to consider the contribution that audience knowledge and industry discourses (publicity, exhibition, reviewing) make to an understanding of remakes. Chapter 6 (Discourse) further develops this contextual approach to investigate the role of the ﬁlm canon in a chain of remakings extending from Gun Crazy and A bout de souﬄe to Bonnie and Clyde and Breathless. The book’s conclusion (Remaking Everything) at once extends and revisits some of these issues by attending to the persona and ﬁlms of arch-remaker Quentin Tarantino.

Notes 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.

Mazdon, Encore Hollywood, p. 2. Grindstaﬀ, ‘A Pygmalion Tale Retold’, p. 134. Horton and McDougal, Play It Again, Sam, p. 3. Stam, Film Theory, p. 202. Wills, ‘The French Remark’, p. 148. Altman, Film/Genre, p. 84. Whelehan, ‘Adaptations’, p. 3. Neale, ‘Questions of Genre’, p. 51. Altman, Film/Genre, pp. 83–4. Ibid., p. 85. Ibid., p. 120.

:  

31

12. Frow, Marxism and Literary History, and ‘Intertextuality and Ontology’. 13. Stern, The Scorsese Connection, and ‘Emma in Los Angeles’. 14. See online reviews of Play It Again, Sam by Frow and Stern in Screening the Past and Modernism/Modernity, respectively. 15. Altman, Film/Genre, p. 86. 16. Ibid., p. 84. 17. Ellis, Visible Fictions, p. 30. 18. Altman, Film/Genre, p. 112. 19. Bahrenburg, The Creation of Dino De Laurentiis’ King Kong, pp. 13 and 112–13. 20. Patterson, ‘Second Time Lucky’, p. 6. 21. Vincendeau, ‘Hijacked’, p. 24. 22. See Balio, ‘Introduction to Part II’; Hoberman, ‘Ten Years That Shook the World’, pp. 34–59; and Silverman, ‘Hollywood Cloning’, pp. 24–30. 23. Schatz, ‘The New Hollywood’, pp. 17–25. 24. Hoberman, ‘Facing the Nineties’, pp. 1–2. 25. Simonet, ‘Conglomerates and Content’, p. 161. 26. Harvey, ‘Can’t Stop the Remakes’, pp. 50–3. 27. Miller, ‘Hollywood: The Ad’, pp. 59–62. 28. Murray, ‘Let’s Do It Again’, p. 64. 29. Hughes, ‘Apocalypse now. Please!’, p. 1. 30. Simonet, ‘Conglomerates and Content’, p. 154. 31. Cinefantastique, quoted in Kermode, ‘What a Carve Up!’, p. 14. 32. Stern, ‘Emma in Los Angeles’, p. 226. 33. Simonet, ‘Conglomerates and Content’, p. 155. 34. See Bellour, The Analysis of Film. 35. See Kolker, ‘Algebraic Figures’, p. 36; Neale, ‘Questions of Genre’, p. 56; and Altman, Film/Genre, p. 115. 36. See Friend, ‘Copy Cats’, pp. 51–7. 37. Druxman, Make It Again, Sam, p. 9. 38. Ibid. 39. Ibid. 40. Ibid. 41. Ibid. 42. Ibid. 43. Ibid., p. 13. 44. Balio, Grand Design, p. 99. 45. Robert Gustafson, quoted in ibid. 46. Ibid. See also Schatz, Boom and Bust, pp. 40–1 and 64–5. 47. Druxman, Make It Again, Sam, p. 15. 48. Ibid., pp. 18–20. 49. Balio, Grand Design, p. 100. 50. Druxman, Make It Again, Sam, p. 15. 51. Corrigan, ‘Which Shakespeare to Love?’, p. 163.

32 52. 53. 54. 55. 56. 57. 58. 59. 60. 61. 62. 63. 64. 65. 66. 67. 68. 69. 70. 71. 72. 73. 74. 75. 76. 77. 78. 79. 80. 81. 82. 83. 84. 85. 86.

87. 88. 89.

  Druxman, Make It Again, Sam, pp. 13–15. Lubin, Titanic, pp. 36 and 72. Ibid., p. 120. Druxman, Make It Again, Sam, p. 20. Keller, ‘ “Size Does Matter” ’, p. 133. Wyatt and Vlesmas, ‘The Drama of Recoupment’, p. 35. McDougal, ‘The Director Who Knew Too Much’, p. 52. Ibid., pp. 53 and 67. Michaels, ‘Nosferatu’, p. 245. Greenberg, ‘Raiders of the Lost Text’, p. 165. Ibid., p. 170. Ibid., pp. 166–7. Bordwell, Making Meaning, p. 9. Bloom, The Anxiety of Inﬂuence. See Culler, The Pursuit of Signs, pp. 107–10; and Worton and Still, ‘Introduction’, pp. 27–9. Greenberg, ‘Raiders of the Lost Text’, p. 170. Corrigan, A Cinema Without Walls, p. 103. See also Corrigan, ‘Auteurs and the New Hollywood’. Corrigan, ‘Which Shakespeare to Love?’, p. 168. Grant, ‘Recognising Billy Budd in Beau Travail’, p. 58. Strick, ‘Rev. of Solaris’, pp. 54–5. Altman, Film/Genre, p. 84. Eaton, ‘Condemned to Repeats’, p. 4. Altman, Film/Genre, p. 87. Nowlan and Nowlan, Cinema Sequels and Remakes, pp. xi–xii. Simonet, ‘Conglomerates and Content’, p. 156. Eberwein, ‘Remakes and Cultural Studies’, pp. 28–31. Leitch, ‘Twice-Told Tales’, p. 138. Ibid. Ibid., p. 139. Ibid., p. 142. Ibid., pp. 142–5. Ibid., p. 147. Ibid., p. 139. Druxman, Make It Again, Sam, p. 9. The titles to The Assassin state that it is ‘based on Luc Besson’s “Nikita” ’ (the latter was both written and directed by Besson). While the payment of copyright fees is generally the case, there are exceptions. For instance, Black Cat (Stephen Shin, 1991), a Hong Kong ﬁlm that closely follows the narrative unfolding of Nikita, does not acknowledge Besson’s ﬁlm. Vincendeau, ‘Hijacked’, p. 24. Newman, ‘Rev. of Just Visiting’, p. 47. Leitch, ‘Twice-Told Tales’, p. 139.

:   90. 91. 92. 93. 94. 95. 96. 97. 98. 99. 100. 101. 102. 103. 104. 105. 106. 107. 108. 109. 110. 111. 112. 113. 114. 115. 116. 117. 118. 119. 120. 121. 122. 123. 124. 125. 126. 127. 128. 129. 130. 131. 132.

33

Hoberman, ‘Sacred and Profane’; and Diski, ‘The Shadow Within’. Vieira and Stam, ‘Parody and Marginality’, p. 94. Neale, Genre and Hollywood, p. 39. http://www.italianjobmovie.com/ﬂash/index.html. Corrigan, ‘Which Shakespeare to Love?’, p. 164. Leitch, ‘Twice-Told Tales’, p. 139. See McElwee, ‘Theatrical Re-issues’. Laﬀerty, ‘Feature Films on Prime-Time Television’, pp. 235–56. Friedberg, Window Shopping. Frow, ‘Intertextuality and Ontology’, p. 45. Iampolski, The Memory of Tiresias, p. 8. Ibid., p. 31, emphasis in original. Ibid. Ibid., pp. 32–5. Frow, ‘Rev. of Play It Again, Sam’, emphasis added. Stam, Film Theory, p. 207. Macksey, ‘Foreword’, p. xviii. Wees, Recycled Images, pp. 32–48. Thompson, ‘Songe de Titanic’, p. 66. Stam, Film Theory, p. 209. Ibid., p. 208. Calabrese, Neo-Baroque, pp. 173–9. Stam, Film Theory, p. 337, n. 2. Grindstaﬀ, ‘A Pygmalion Tale Retold’, p. 161. Roth, ‘Twice Two’. Georgakas, ‘Robin Hood’, p. 70. Frow, ‘Intertextuality and Ontology’, p. 45. Rosenbaum, ‘Rev. of Obsession’, p. 217. Ray, A Certain Tendency of the Hollywood Cinema, pp. 119–20. Michaels, ‘Nosferatu’, p. 241. Friedberg, Window Shopping, pp. 175–6. ‘The Searchers: A Family Tree’, pp. 2–6. Schrader commentary on Mishima, Warner Home Video, Region 1 DVD, 2001. For example, Newman, ‘Rev. of The Big Chill’, p. 41. Sayles and Smith, Sayles on Sayles, p. 57. Neale, ‘Questions of Genre’, p. 51; and Genre and Hollywood, p. 31. Altman, Film/Genre, p. 91. Kolker, ‘Algebraic Figures’, p. 36. Leitch, ‘Twice-Told Tales’, p. 141. Eco, ‘Innovation and Repetition’, pp. 161–84. See Fish, Is There a Text in This Class? Biguenet, ‘Double Takes’, p. 131. Dowell, ‘Rev. of Unforgiven’, p. 72.

34 133. 134. 135. 136. 137. 138. 139. 140. 141. 142. 143. 144. 145. 146. 147. 148. 149. 150. 151. 152. 153. 154. 155. 156. 157. 158. 159. 160.

  Hoberman, ‘Sacred and Profane’, p. 11. Frow, ‘Rev. of Play It Again, Sam’. Carroll, ‘The Future of Allusion’, pp. 51–81. Staiger, ‘The Politics of Film Canons’, p. 4. Strick, ‘Rev. of A Kiss Before Dying’, p. 50. Martin, ‘Soderbergh’s Planet Casts Psychic Spell’, p. 5. Taubin, ‘Steven Soderbergh Follows Andrei Tarkovsky into Space for a Walk with Love and Death’, p. 22. Kolker, ‘Algebraic Figures’, p. 40. Stern, The Scorsese Connection, p. 198. Ibid., pp. 49 and 170. Ibid., p. 49. Ibid., p. 58. Ibid., pp. 33–4. Frow, ‘Rev. of Play It Again, Sam’. Variety Movie Guide, p. 121. Adair, ‘Rev. of Breathless’, pp. 241–2. Altman, Film/Genre, p. 127. Wills, ‘The French Remark’, p. 157. Carson, ‘Breathless Diary’, pp. 33–8. Andrew, ‘Breathless: Old as New’, pp. 3–20; and Kline, Screening the Text, pp. 184–221. Altman, Film/Genre, p. 84. Leitch, ‘Twice-Told Tales’, p. 143. See Brunette and Wills, Screen/Play, p. 53; and Gabbard, ‘The Ethnic Oedipus’, p. 96. Culler, ‘Deﬁning Narrative Units’, p. 123. See also Andrew, ‘Adaptation’, p. 34; and Ray, ‘Film and Literature’, pp. 121–2. Klinger, ‘Digressions at the Cinema’, p. 7. Frow, Marxism and Literary History, p. 155. Frow, ‘Intertextuality and Ontology’, p. 46. Stern, ‘Rev. of Play It Again, Sam’.

CHAPTER 1

Commerce

A number of essays in the recent Thomas Elsaesser and Kay Hoﬀmann anthology, Cinema Futures, consider the mutual dependence – both cultural and economic – of the institutions of cinema and television.1 In particular, Elsaesser describes two related strategies of media repetition. The ﬁrst, serialisation, is a textual strategy employed by both television (serials, series, sagas) and cinema (series, sequels, remakes) to deliver and bind a global audience to its product and its own institution. The second, multiplication, is a marketing strategy that connects these institutions, and their audiences, beyond textual and national boundaries via adjacent discursive ﬁelds.2 In other words, Elsaesser describes a globalised entertainment industry (dominated by Sony, News Corp, Time-Warner and the like) in which ﬁlm and television franchises exceed boundaries (textual, national, institutional) to be reiterated – expanded and exploited – across an array of media platforms: from music and print media to theme parks and electronic games.3 This is, for instance, the strategy of the Batman remaking (Tim Burton, 1989) of the television property and feature ﬁlm of the 1960s (Batman, ABC, 1966–68; and Batman, Leslie Martinson, 1966, respectively). Both versions (1960s and 1980s) have their foundation in Bob Kane’s comic books for Detective Comics in the late 1930s, and the Burton remake (earning $250 million domestically and $160 million overseas) revived the franchise, spinning it out through sequels (Batman Returns, 1992; Batman Forever, 1995; Batman and Robin, 1997; Batman Begins, 2005) and a host of media texts (including a new Batman tele-series, 1992–95) and merchandising items.4 As described in the introductory chapter, remakes are often thought of as commercial products that repeat successful formulas in order to minimise risk and secure proﬁts in the marketplace. Some properties, such as King Kong (Peter Jackson, 2005), are selected for (commercial) remaking because they are inherently spectacular and so suited to the developing

38

 

technological powers of (digital) ﬁlm. Other properties are reworked to oﬀer up vehicles for top-line stars, or to open up and exploit new markets, or (as in the example of Batman) to revive and create cross-media franchises. This chapter takes particular interest in the remaking of classic television series – such as The Addams Family, The Fugitive, The Flintstones, Mission: Impossible, Charlie’s Angels and Scooby Doo – as new theatrical features and potential cross-media platforms. On one hand, this cycle of television remakes relates to cultural memory and to the archival function of television, but on the other it seems a function of the conservative production and marketing strategies of a globally dominant (and, what critics see as, artistically challenged) contemporary Hollywood. That is, since the mid-1970s, the North American ﬁlm industry invests – whether because of ‘creative atrophy, conglomerate domination, commercial timidity, or all three at once’5 – in various strategies of recycling. In the case of television remakes, critics despair at ‘the pillaging of television vaults for movie ideas’, a tendency they characterise as ‘a kind of latter-day tomb raiding’.6 In the context of defensive production practices, old television series (along with comic books and computer games7) provide recognisable, and relatively inexpensive, self-promotional devices with which to market and brand new ‘high-concept’ feature ﬁlms and media franchises. For instance, producerstar Tom Cruise’s second instalment in the Mission: Impossible ﬁlm series is described as ‘a franchise in the making, taking over, perhaps, where James Bond Inc. left oﬀ ’.8 Mission: Impossible and other successful properties generate then not only sequels – Addams Family Values, A Very Brady Sequel, U.S. Marshals, The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas, Mission: Impossible 2, Charlie’s Angels: Full Throttle, Scooby Doo 2: Monsters Unleashed – but revived television series, music videos, ﬁlm soundtracks, video games, comic books and other brand-name products. The term ‘television features’ is used in this chapter to refer to an industrial cycle of feature ﬁlms, mostly from the 1990s (and beyond), derived from television series of the late 1950s, 1960s and early 1970s. Variously described as adaptations, updates, homages, remakes, recyclings, recreations, resurrections, sequels and spin-oﬀs, these television features are heavily imbricated – like the tele-series that inspire them – with patterns of repetition. In the 1950s, the major Hollywood studios – restructuring in their shift to independent production and in response to the emergence of commercial television – gradually realised the potential for transferring some of their mass production techniques to television, and began to supply standardised episodic series to the major television networks.9 These tele-series constituted a form of television characterised by the



39

recurrence of a narrative scheme, a ﬁxed situation with a restricted set of regular pivotal characters – the Clampett family in The Beverly Hillbillies (CBS, 1962–71), the castaways on Gilligan’s Island (CBS, 1964–67), the three female detectives in Charlie’s Angels (ABC, 1976–81) – around which a secondary set of characters revolved.10 In the example of The Beverly Hillbillies the tele-series is a sitcom, a domestic comedy which unfolds in the speciﬁc physical world of the Clampett’s mansion, and the ‘situation’ itself is built into this (principally) domestic space and develops there through confusion and complication, eventually toward its resolution.11 More speciﬁcally, it has been noted that The Beverly Hillbillies, the most popular television comedy of the 1960s, and a series which generated 216 half-hour episodes (or approximately ninety hours of television), can be reduced to just ﬁve (repeated) narrative lines. These are: 1. shrewd city folks try to swindle Jed Clampett and family out of their fortune; 2. variously inappropriate – corrupt and/or mercenary – suitors come courting for the hand of Jed’s daughter, Elly May; 3. Jed’s moronic nephew, Jethro, tries his hand at various careers, including international spy and brain surgeon; 4. Jed, a widower, meets a potential bride; and 5. Granny, the family matriarch, battles to protect her backwoods traditions against the forces of post-industrial culture.12 While the above description already suggests strong patterns of textual repetition in the US tele-series, it is necessary to make a distinction between, on the one hand, thirty-minute sitcoms like The Beverly Hillbillies and Gilligan’s Island, and on the other hand, sixty-minute actionadventure series like Maverick (ABC, 1957–62), The Fugitive (ABC, 1963–67) and Mission: Impossible (CBS, 1966–73). This is because, while in the latter instance there is still a restricted set of characters – brothers Bart and Bret Maverick (and sometimes their English cousin, Beau), Dr Richard Kimble and his nemesis Lt Philip Gerard, or the members of the IMF (Impossible Mission Force) team – other elements, such as situations, settings and adversaries (‘special guest stars’), can vary considerably. The more important point, though, is that in the case of the tele-series (especially the variety found in the 1960s), the structure of each episode is always basically the same, and ‘each episode contains a complete story, [while] the series as a whole possesses no story’ (that is, there is no anticipated series conclusion).13 The episodes in the series can thus be produced and ‘programmed inﬁnitely’ (and to some extent broadcast in any order)

40

 

because ‘the [narrated] time of each episode’ (which can vary f