An incredible collection of aerial images shows some of Scotland's best-known landmarks from the sky. Snaps in the National Collection of Aerial Photography lets us see how our country has changed over the decades.

One of the images shows Hampden Park - our national stadium, which Steve Clarke's men have turned into a fortress in recent years - as it looked nearly a century ago. The bird's-eye-view snap was taken in 1927 and highlights the stark differences the stadium and surrounding area have undergone since.

In the historic image, there is just one grandstand, with bowl-shaped terraces circling the pitch. Lesser Hampden is still in place to the west of the ground and another, smaller pitch can be seen on what is now the car park.

The surrounding fields have mostly long since been replaced by housing, though an aerial snap from after the stadium was refurbished in 1999 still shows a lot of greenery in the Mount Florida area.

Among the other standout images are: the Queen Mary being built at John Brown's shipyard in the 1930s; the Wallace Monument in Stirling; and Kinnoull Tower in Perthshire, taken through a gap in the wing of a biplane.

The first aerial photos were taken from huge airships before and during World War I. The giant boats patrolled the waters between Scotland and the continent, having been based at East Fortune Aerodrome in East Lothian.

The region was feared to be a target for Germany to try and attack Britain by sea, with its long beaches seen as a perfect place to land and launch an invasion. The airships photographed the sites to analyse and assess their defensive and strategic effectiveness

The pilots were like the astronauts of their time: brave, exciting risk-takers. One of the most courageous was Douglas Hamilton, a champion boxer and RAF squadron leader.

In 1932, he was asked by John Buchan, an MP and the famous author of The 39 Steps, to lead a mission to take a photo of the top of Mount Everest from above. This was seen as the last big challenge for planes on the world's surface.

In 1933, two planes flew over the Himalayas, piloted by Scotsmen Hamilton and David McIntyre. Their journey was captured in the 1934 documentary, Wings Over Everest. Fast forward twenty years, and their photos were used by Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay to plan their route to the top of the iconic mountain.

Aerial photography also played a big part in planning a new Scotland after the world wars. Even though Scotland was not obliterated during the conflict, it did not come out unscathed.

There were still many other problems, such as overcrowding, poor living conditions, and a lack of infrastructure. Scotland's cities weren't ready for what was happening then, let alone what was going to happen in the future.

So, in 1944, certain RAF squadrons were given the job of making a complete photographic map of all of Scotland. The same planes, pilots and photographers who had helped plan and carry out the bombing of Europe were now helping to rebuild at home.

Over the course of six years and 500 flights, nearly 300,000 photos were snapped and used to plan hydro schemes, bring electricity north of the Highland line, plot new forestry and farmland, and redesign our cities.

In 1945, Glasgow's chief engineer Robert Bruce suggested knocking down almost all of the city centre and starting again. Central Station, the City Chambers, and even the Charles Rennie Mackintosh-designed School of Art were all marked for demolition.

Bruce's idea for "surgical" planning was approved in 1947 but eventually shelved due to costs. Instead a number of new towns were built on fresh, green land. These sites - East Kilbride, Glenrothes, Irvine, Cumbernauld, and Livingston - had been identified by the RAF photos between 1944 and 1950.

Aerial snaps also helped with an important archaeological find after a field in Banchory was photographed in 1976. Dark, evenly-spaced dots were seen in a straight line in one of the images.

Decades later, the site was excavated and 12 circular pits were discovered, filled with traces of burnt flint, nuts and bone, which turned out to be 10,000 years old.

This was evidence of hunter-gatherers maintaining an elaborate landscape monument for some four millennia. One theory is that these pits were a primitive calendar, which hunters used to work out when it was time to chase the migrating deer.