Good Omens: The Official (and Ineffable) Graphic Novel is an upcoming graphic novel using the written work of Terry Pratchett and Neil Gaiman, paired with Colleen Doran's artwork. It is an adaptation of Good Omens: The Nice and Accurate Prophecies of Agnes Nutter, Witch.

Production[]

Development[]

The Terry Pratchett Estate and Neil Gaiman are once again joining forces, this time to bring one of the most well-loved writing collaborations in history to life in graphic novel form. We are working with the inimitable Colleen Doran on Good Omens: The Official (and Ineffable) Graphic Novel. On June 5, 2023, Doran explained through her personal website that she had come onboard the project to adapt the story in this medium.[1]

Good Omens: The Nice and Accurate Prophecies of Agnes Nutter, Witch, by Terry Pratchett and Neil Gaiman began life almost forty years ago as an idea that grew legs (and scales and rapidly wings) and went on to be published in 1990. The story follows the angel Aziraphale and the demon Crowley as they attempt to avoid the impending Apocalypse on the horizon. There's also the small matter of a missing Antichrist…

Good Omens has been reprinted many, many times and translated into over forty languages across the world. It has also been adapted for audio (twice!) and most-recently television, with seasons 1 & 2 now available on Prime Video. But it has never been a graphic novel… until now.

We’re absolutely delighted to be working with Colleen Doran, the multi-award-winning illustrator and long-term collaborator with Neil on projects such as Chivalry, The Sandman, and Snow, Glass, Apples. She has also worked on other hugely prestigious titles including Wonder Woman, Amazing Spiderman, Lucifer, Walt Disney's Beauty and the Beast, and created all the art for Stan Lee's autobiography.

Colleen is not only a world-class artist but she has a unique relationship with, and understanding of, the very special sensibility of Terry and Neil’s work. You only have to look at the many, many sticky notes in her own edition of the book in the project video to see the special place the story has in her heart.

Good Omens is a tale that is special to all involved in this project, and when bringing a new adaptation into the world, we knew we had to retain full creative freedom. So the idea was born to bring this edition to you, the fans, via Kickstarter and Dunmanifestin, the publishing arm of the Terry Pratchett’s Estate. Therefore the book you will eventually hold in your hands comes straight from the hearts of teams Pratchett, Gaiman and Doran.

Not only that but we can also take fans beyond the graphic novel itself, creating items we love and know you will too! We are bringing other artists on board with their own imaginings of the world of Good Omens and and, for the collectors among you, there will be exciting one-offs, rarities, collectibles and even chances to be immortalised forever in this stunning book. The more we raise via Kickstarter, the higher the quality of this edition - we're talking foils, we're talking fancy endpapers, we’re talking ribbons...

And as if that wasn’t enough, we can invite you, fellow Good Omens fan, to join us behind the scenes as we work towards publication in Summer 2024. We'll be able to share exclusives, progress news, competitions and more as we go with our amazing backers via our Kickstarter updates.

The hardback edition of Good Omens: the Official (and Ineffable) Graphic Novel is available in every tier. As we climb up the tiers, the spectrum of Good Omens widens, bringing in new artists, loot packs, treats and progressively rarer gifts.

Each tier is cumulative (bar a few at the higher end - check those carefully for details!), meaning you get everything in the tiers below – and then some! We also have additional copies of the graphic novel and a new Good Omens mug available as an add-on when you pledge.

And for our beloved independent booksellers out there, we also have two tiers specifically for you! (See The Bookshop Tier below, and the newly added Small Bookshop Tier.) So read on and join us.

Welcome to the ineffable world of Good Omens…

For those of you who wish to keep their feet firmly on the ground. Get the Good Omens official graphic novel in beautiful full colour, hard cover format delivered straight to your door. The book will measure 172mm x 267mm (6.8 x 10.5 inches) and run approximately 186 pages. Bursting at the seams with Colleen Doran's vivid artwork, and bringing the book's Crowley and Aziraphale to life with rapturous abandon, stretch goals will unlock additions to the graphic novel's production for all backers.

In addition to the graphic novel itself, get your hands on the exclusive alternative dust cover from Frank Quitely (All-Star Superman, Batman, X-Men, Jupiter's Legacy, The Sandman: Endless Nights) as well as Loot Pack #1 which includes 2 x A4 (8.3 x 11.7 inches) prints of Colleen Doran artwork from the graphic novel, as well as a glossy postcard and bookmark. Stretch goals will unlock more artists and artwork towards this box.

Frank Quitely is a comics hero with decades of experience. He has worked with DC Comics, Marvel and Millarworld on some of comics' best-loved heroes such as Batman and Superman. This tier makes your book a collector's joy: swap the covers to suit your mood, or buy two and have one of each on display!

We’ll call this one Dog. Everything from the previous tiers plus Loot Pack #2, which includes 4 x A4 (8.3 x 11.7 inches) Good Omens prints from Colleen Doran, Crowley and Aziraphale enamel pins, a punchy sticker set, and the brand new Good Omens trading cards. These cards will be playable and collectable and as a special treat for Kickstarter backers we will be sprinkling some rarer cards in with these packages at random so you might just unlock something very special.

Keep a better track of the Antichrist with our brand new largescale map of Tadfield (and the rest of the planet), designed by Julien Labit. Capturing the mysteries and oddities of the picturesque town in all its glory this map will make any wall an instant talking point. Dimensions approximately 594 x 841 mm.

CALLING ALL OUR BELOVED INDEPENDENT BOOKSELLERS! We've got two tiers for you. The Bookseller Tier has batches of 20 copies of the graphic novel at a 50% discount, and our newly added Small Bookshop Tier has batches of 10.

We love bookshops as much as Aziraphale does and want YOU to be part of Good Omens with us. To celebrate the graphic novel's release into the world, we will have point-of-sale material on request nearer to release. If you have any queries, get in touch.

Terms: These are for retailers only. Packs must be delivered to a verified bookshop address. You can buy additional packs as an add-on.

What better way to saunter vaguely downwards than in a snazzy pair of Good Omens socks? This bundle packs a creative punch from head to toe, bringing together 5 additional brand new enamel pin badge designs, and creator-themed notebooks, one for jotting down your inner Pratchett, the other for your inner Gaiman - you decide how to split that creatively. Please get scribbling and send us some of your own creations, we'd love to see them.

The Horsemen tier comes with plenty of thrust and menace: as well as everything from the Demon Tier; you get an A3 Giclee print from the graphic novel, signed by Colleen; plus the new Neil Gaiman and Terry Pratchett collector's enamel pin set; and saving the best for last... the exclusive enamel pin of Beelzebub himself on a Hell card. An absolute must for the demonic collection.

Make a deal with the devil for this mystery tier at £666. It includes the Good Omens graphic novel, and– *demonic gurgling noises*

Limited to: 50. Note: the contents of this tier are not included in the higher levels.

Wannabe angels, demons and witchfinders. Fancy being immortalised in the Good Omens graphic novel universe? Then get yourself painted into the crowd scenes! There will be an accompanying postcard with a full list of who's who, so you'll know who you're galivanting around Tadfield and beyond with.

You can also add the exclusive Metatron enamel pin on a Heaven card to your collection, and a "Keeper of the Official Master" Floppy Disk, casting us back to the 1980s when Good Omens first began.

Limited to: 100. Note: this tier does not include a copy of William the Antichrist (available in the Antichrist tier).

Add to your pile of goodies from previous tiers a limited copy of William the Antichrist - the original short story that evolved into the tale we know and love today - signed by Neil. A true collector's delight as very few remain available to get your Hellhound paws on.

Limited to: 100. Note: this tier does not include a background cameo appearance (available in the Archangel tier).

Dip into Agnes Nutter's prophecies and you will see… more signed books in your future! In addition to all of the above, you can get a signed copy of Good Omens: the Official (and Ineffable) Graphic Novel signed by both Neil and Colleen.

Limited to: 50. Note: This is on top of the base tier which includes the graphic novel, so you will receive two copies in total.

This is it, you’re now almost at the top of the (apple) tree. You can feature prominently within the pages of the graphic novel itself. Maybe you're there while Crowley and Aziraphale feed some ducks; maybe you're there for something a bit more high octane; or maybe you're just stuck on the M25. What you'll be up to will be at the discretion of Colleen, but there are plenty of places in the journey towards the Apocalypse and we can’t wait to see where you will turn up. You will also get a print of your priceless cameo, signed by Colleen.

Limited to: 10.

A special tier for collectors. This tier includes three additional stunning volumes: the Obsidian editions of the graphic novel (artist Colleen Doran), The Illustrated Good Omens (artist Paul Kidby) and William the Antichrist (artist TBA). Each of these books will be something very special and take pride of place in any collection. What's more, you will receive a personalised trading card, featuring your own likeness, as drawn by Colleen Doran, for you and you only.

Limited to: 30.

Just like the Apocalypse, this opportunity can only happen once. We are offering the owner of this tier a foreground, named cameo within the graphic novel and a print of your cameo signed by Colleen and Neil. You will also receive our one remaining copy of the extremely rare 'Celestial' edition of Good Omens, of which only 24 were made, each one limited by its number in the Greek alphabet.

There's a box. It's padlocked. There's a letter telling you how to unbox the mysteries within. It has hidden goodies, secret compartments, a huge and beautiful edition of Good Omens and a couple of surprises - a miracle of craftmanship with the devil in the detail. The book originally sold for £6,666 - this is an opportunity to add this one of a kind to your collection. To top off this bounty you will also receive an individual sketch by Neil Gaiman himself.

Limited to: 1.

Money raised will go towards the costs of bringing this project and its many tendrils to the most vibrant life possible, ranging from creative fees to production and beyond. Our stretch goals therefore bring more of that ineffable joy into the project: we'll (hopefully) be unlocking various finishes on the graphic novel, expansions on the loot packs, and some - if we're lucky - backer exclusives further down the road, but these are to be revealed...

You will be able to unlock artists including Alice Oseman (Heartstopper), Rachael Stott (Fantastic Four, Doctor Who), and David Aja (Hawkeye), and more.

The Good Omens graphic novel Kickstarter has a number of add ons available, and these will grow over the course of the campaign. They are able to be added to any pledge, even early bird pledges, by altering your selection, re-selecting your chosen tier, and adding items. Here is a full rundown of what is available at present:

You can add:[]

Extra copies of the graphic novel

Extra copies for bookshops

Slip case for the graphic novel

Good Omens mug

Good Omens trading card pack. Note that those with Loot Box #2 will be getting a Deluxe Box of Good Omens trading cards, and the opportunity for rarer cards.

A variety of Good Omens enamel pins

Various items of A.Z. Fell merch

A print of Rachael Stott's alternative cover 'Eternal Encounter'

Oversized edition of the graphic novel

Individual copies of the Obsidian edition of three titles: the Good Omens illustrated version, the graphic novel, and William the Antichrist - signed by Neil.

There are two pairs of Aziraphale and Crowley pins available, as well as a mystery pack.

The mystery packs will have three random pins from the wider collection, of which some of the designs can be seen below.

Pins #001-004 will remain separate to the random packs.

We will be unveiling more as time goes on, and you can keep up to date via goodomenshq.com.

Kit yourself out in your favourite bookshop's merch with some A.Z. Fell bookmarks, mugs, socks and tote bags.

Calling all book fans (so, all of you...):

You can get an oversized edition of the book, perfect for the coffee table, as well as individual copies of the Obsidian editions (more information can be found in the Obsidian Tier).

Note that while add ons will be their cheapest via the Kickstarter campaign, they will be made available afterwards for those hoping to get them at a later date.[2]

Note that shipping will be charged separately after the campaign to ensure we can get the best cost for supporters. You can however find estimates below.

The world of Good Omens, and Aziraphale and Crowley, is incredibly special to everyone involved in this project, and we want to say a huge thanks to everyone who continues to share in that ineffable joy. You can keep up to date with Good Omens more broadly via Good Omens HQ.

Risks and Challenges[]

The creative teams involved in this project have decades of experience in publishing, comics, crowdfunding, merchandising and fulfillment between them. We are confident in our own capacity to bring this ineffable story to life in graphic novel form.

Our expenses have been carefully priced for both domestic and international shipping and distribution, as well as the printing costs and production for the various rewards. The surging costs across the industry in terms of production are beyond our control and are a challenge, but these are managed behind the scenes and, should there be any shifts, this would be absorbed by the Terry Pratchett Estate and Neil Gaiman teams, not passed on to fans and readers.

While we cannot plan for every eventuality, and there may be surprises or curveballs that the world may throw at the logistics of a project such as this, we are confident in the collective capacity to deliver all elements to the level and quality that a work like Good Omens deserves.[3]

Trivia[]

On August 23, 2023, Doran revealed that the Kickstarter campaign for the Good Omens graphic novel has already broken some major records. The campaign sailed past its initial £25,000 goal within ten minutes. It proceeded to break the record for the highest-funded first 24 hours of a comic project as well as the most backed and funded comic overall, surpassing Keanu Reeves' BRZRKR, the previous titleholder.[4]

Doran is just responsible for the graphic novel adaptation, and doesn't have to worry about the marketing and design for it. Dunmanifestin, the Pratchett Estate publishing arm, has the manpower and expertise to handle everything.[4]

Doran mentioned how she just loved that the energy and funds are being put back into the work itself to make a better book and give fans a lot of the cool licensed goodies they've been wanting for a long time...They look great. The designer is doing an amazing job![4]

She had actually been working on it for months before it was announced. Thus, the wave of attention that came after didn't affect her process or approach at all. Doran mentioned how everything is set in place. But she realized she could easily get lost in online chatter, so it's important for her to maintain boundaries and put the work first.[4]

Her relationship to the book is that she initially read it when came out, and it's been one of her favorite books for decades.[4]

Doran actually got pretty sick while she was working on the graphic novel, too, but she is toughing it out now.[4]

when she found out that she was getting this project, she actually immediately stopped watching the show to make sure she cleared as much of it from her head as possible and stuck to only what was written on the page.[4]

Instead, she focused on going with her head-canon character designs and performances, and luckily, she thinks that she pretty much nailed it because neither Neil nor anyone at the Pratchett Estate has run screaming to her about what she did with their work.[4]

Her process includes going over and over the novel, pick at things, and find single lines that can change how she think about things. It's really exciting, but it's also a big responsibility because the fans want a book worthy of their time and support. So she intends to give it to them. However, she considers it to be an incredible privilege to get to work on this much-loved book.[4]

Gallery[]

Concept artwork[]

Promotional images[]

BTS images[]

Videos[]