Author: Terry Pratchett & Neil Gaiman

Title: Good Omens: The Nice and Accurate Prophecies of Agnes Nutter, Witch

Year of publication: 1990

Page count: 373

Rating: ★★★★★

Before Neil Gaiman was Neil Gaiman, and when Terry Pratchett was just beginning to be Terry Pratchett, they became fast friends, and wrote a book together, which originated from half a short story Neil had written and didn’t know how to finish, by racing each other to get to the next good bit. The result is an endlessly quotable and infinitely funny story about Armageddon, which was accurately predicted by Agnes Nutter in the seventeenth century, before she exploded at the stake.

“God moves in extremely mysterious, not to say, circuitous ways. God does not play dice with the universe; He plays an ineffable game of His own devising, which might be compared, from the perspective of any of the other players (i.e. everybody), to being involved in an obscure and complex version of poker in a pitch-dark room, with blank cards, for infinite stakes, with a Dealer who won’t tell you the rules, and who smiles all the time.“

Anyway, the end of the world. It’s nigh. Scheduled for next Saturday, in fact. The armies of Heaven and Hell are amassing for the final showdown, the Four Horsemen Bikerpersons of the Apocalypse are riding forth, Atlantis has resurfaced, it’s raining fish—but thanks to a scatterbrained Satanic Nun, the Antichrist was misplaced. And thus, the Adversary, Destroyer of Kings, Angel of the Bottomless Pit, Great Beast that is called Dragon, Prince of This World, Father of Lies, Spawn of Satan, and Lord of Darkness, grows up in an environment free of the influence of either Heaven of Hell. He’s a normal, eleven-year old kid who happens to be destined to bring about the culmination of the Ineffable Plan™.

But Good and Evil’s earthly representatives are not looking forward to the Rapture: Crowley, a demon and former angel who did not so much fall, but saunter vaguely downwards (deep down inside, there’s a spark of goodness in him), and Aziraphale, an angel and part-time rare book dealer (deep down inside, he’s just enough of a bastard to be worth liking), who have both lived on Earth since the beginning and have rather come to like the lifestyle (what’s Existence worth without good music, vintage cars, sushi restaurants, and books?) and also each other, in a way eternal enemies are bound to, eventually.

“It may help to understand human affairs to be clear that most of the great triumphs and tragedies of history are caused, not by people being fundamentally good or fundamentally bad, but by people being fundamentally people.”

I loved this book when I first read it five years ago, but I loved it so much more this time around—it’s hilarious, but there’s so much more to it beneath the humorous surface. It was my introduction to Pratchett, but having read over twenty Discworld novels in the intervening years, I can see the parallels; it’s a hell of a good time, with a myriad of sub-plots spinning away in all directions, but it’s also a profound and philosophical exploration of humanity with a theological tinge: Nature VS. nurture, destiny VS. free will. It packs more jokes and puns than any Discworld novel I’ve read so far though, or rather, the funny bits are less subtle and much more in-your-face; I read most of this while commuting to work, and let’s just say that I caught some very odd looks from fellow bus passengers. It’s the sort of book you read with your face stuck in a perpetual and slightly creepy grin of delight, which makes it a very specific type of reading experience you probably have to be in the mood for; in a way, it’s exhausting, and I don’t mean just for your diaphragm and face muscles, but mentally tiring because of the acrobatics your brain will have to do just to keep up with the fast-paced jokes and plot.

My favorite bits are the ones that feature Crowley and Aziraphale, preferably together; there’s a bit in the middle where they disappear for a while and the book loses a bit of steam. I love the scenes featuring the International Express Delivery Man who is ridiculously devoted to his job responsibilities, while I’m not fond of Shadwell’s character (unless Madame Tracy is involved), and the Riders’ end feels rushed and unsatisfying to me (just a bit too neat and easy), so it’s not a perfect book, but still… quite as close as you can get, and the many strong parts more than make up for the few weak ones. According to the notes at the back, Neil had the most influence on the beginning, Terry on the ending, most of the scenes involving Agnes and the Them originated with Pratchett too, while the Apocalyptic Riders came from Gaiman (although Death is closer to Terry’s Discworld incarnation)—but the writing itself was really an entirely collaborative effort, achieved by them excitedly shouting at each other over the phone. I’ve read a fair amount of their work (lots of Terry, virtually everything by Neil) and am thus quite familiar with their respective narrative voices, yet it’s impossible to pinpoint what came from whose mind and pen; their styles mash better than in any other collaborative work I’ve ever read. This is one of the few books where I just know that I’ll be regularly re-reading it for the rest of my life.

“I don’t see what’s so triffic about creating people as people and then gettin’ upset ’cos they act like people. Anyway, if you stopped tellin’ people it’s all sorted out after they’re dead, they might try sorting it all out while they’re alive.”