In the beginning, it was the desire, the desire to excel. José de Alencar narrates, in How and why I am a novelist(1873), the first steps of his “literary pilgrimage”. At the origin of his vocation as a writer, the dispute for first place in the class and the recognition of the master. Januário Ferreira “had the gift of creating the noblest stimuli in the child's heart” and ensured the correct recitation of anthology authors, poets and sacred speakers. This will earn young Alencar “the honorable position of reader” in your own home. In addition to letters and newspapers, he is entrusted with reading volumes from the small library available during family evenings. The need to repeatedly resort to the same novels contributed to engraving in his mind “the molds of this literary structure”.

So it's academic life, the discovery of Joaquim Manuel de Macedo and the “strange feeling” awakened by the worthy tributes paid to the author ofIn Moreninha. “What royal diadem was worth this halo of enthusiasm surrounding the name of a writer?” The encounter with the “French school” (Balzac, Dumas, Hugo, etc.) will mean the recognition of the novelistic model, now manufactured with superior elegance and beauty. “Poem of real life”, the genre then appears to him at the level of “those sublime creations that Providence only grants to the demigods of Thought”. His narrative sketches remain saved while he runs the magazine with friends Literary Essays. During a stay in the Northeast, he revisits the landscapes of his childhood and researches the chroniclers of the colonial era. Back at Court, he works in the press and debuts as a serialist, winning over the public with Five minutes, The Widow, Luciola, The Guarani, etc.

The training of a writer does not depend on a program. In Alencar, fervor, curiosity and chance converge in a nature provided with critical virtues. From school, with his declamatory training, through prestigious institutions, such as the Faculty of Law and adjacent circles, to notoriety, his path also suggests the process described by Paul Bénichou as “the consecration of the writer”. For this author, literature, in its modern sense, would have made its appearance only in the 19th century. XVIII. Marc Fumaroli adds that only in the century XIX, freeing yourself from eloquence, she will acquire awareness of her autonomy, which presupposes writers aware of a spiritual power recognized by civil society. The romantic era guarantees you concrete spaces - magazines, publishers, in short, the “literary world” - that allow it to “nurture itself and expand upon a cultivated and reverent public.”

The 20th century reformulates, based on the symbolist movement, the ideal of an almost religious supremacy of literature, henceforth removed from “real life” and legitimized by a special relationship with language. The solemnity involved in writer's mission ends up becoming an object of irreverence, like that practiced by Ivan Lessa in “The difficult art of not writing". Modern aesthetic esotericism also has peculiarities that lend themselves to satire (I think of the Chronicles of Bustos Domecq, by Borges and Bioy Casares, a parody of an extravagant avant-garde). Viewed favorably, the complexities of verbal art admit of a more colloquial approach, and occasionally, in non-academic circles, criticism recovers something of its didactic role. This is how we can read this work recently translated in Brazil: Literary mail - or how to become (or not) a writer,of the Polish poet Wisława Szymborska (1923-2012).

Literary Life was the name of the publication in which, from 1953, Szymborska worked as a reviewer and critic. The future Nobel Prize winner also took care of the magazine's correspondence, having to communicate to unsuccessful applicants the rejection of their manuscripts, indicating the reasons. With peculiar sarcasm, she indulges in the demolition of slovenly, long-winded, threatening letters, which were a bad omen for the texts they sent. These, apart from the mistreatment of grammar, bordered on emotionality and disdain for form (“the newcomer’s original sin: faith in the omnipotence of the theme”). Szymborska explains that talent “is not a mass phenomenon”, because, in the end, “it is the genes that decide”. Even a talented writer requires, especially at the beginning, “advice and instructions”, and thus encourages a critical attitude towards their own productions, encouraging reading, writing diaries and letters, the private circulation of verses, the continuous re-elaboration of writings. And ultimately, why not just be a reader?

Unconcerned with fame, we free ourselves to learn, with the contingencies of “literary life”, a certain authorial consciousness, in which comparative judgment plays an important role. Writing as an author is silently collecting triumphs over our own limits. Textual revision would be an extension of this “vocation”: ensuring a correct, clear and relevant text for the reader. Anyone who has experienced the ungrateful reality of proofreading will eventually be able to claim the noble ideal implied in the definition of George steiner protocols for intellectual: someone who holds a pencil in their hand while reading a book. The correction of a word, he says, is “an act of faith”, as “God hides in the details”. The stylistic reconstruction of a spurious text is equivalent to restoring the greatness of a writer. There was, however, a moment when I myself aspired to this greatness.

He was seven years old. One composition mine had caused a sensation among the teachers (it narrated the mishaps of a hero rescued by anthropomorphized plants). One of them was known to the family and my fame as a fiction writer reached my relatives, who demanded new texts. Once school pressure was eliminated, I lacked the talent to invent new plots.. I tried a poem but had difficulties with the rhymes. The dream of literary glory was not sustained, and my career collapsed like the protagonist of composition from a colleague with the same creative block. After filling a preambular paragraph with commonplaces about a butterfly that flew from flower to flower, he concluded witheringly: “One day, she said: I think I will die. And he died”. His perception of the emptiness of existence would make one think of Beckett, but his undeniable avant-garde consisted in the joyfully and courageously asserted desire to not become a writer.