This is a reproduction of a book published before 1923. This book may have occasional imperfections

such as missing or blurred pages, poor pictures, errant marks, etc. that were either part of the original artifact,

or were introduced by the scanning process. We believe this work is culturally important, and despite the imperfections,

have elected to bring it back into print as part of our continuing commitment to the preservation of printed works

worldwide. We appreciate your understanding of the imperfections in the preservation process, and hope you enjoy this valuable book.

++++

The below data was compiled from various identification fields in the bibliographic record of this title. This data is provided as an additional tool in helping to ensure edition

++++

Romance, Volume 1; Romance; Joaquim Manuel De Macedo

2

Joaquim Manuel de Macedo

B.L. Garnier, 1871

Joaquim Manuel de Macedo (June 24, 1820 — April 11, 1882) was a Brazilian novelist, medician, teacher, playwright and journalist, famous for the romance A Moreninha.

He is the patron of the 20th chair of the Brazilian Academy of Letters.

Joaquim Manuel de Macedo was born in the city of Itaboraí, in 1820, to Severino de Macedo Carvalho and Benigna Catarina da Conceição. Graduated in Medicine in 1844, he started to practice it in the inlands of Rio. In the same year, he published his romance A Moreninha. In 1849, he founded the magazine Guanabara, along with Manuel de Araújo Porto-alegre and Gonçalves Dias. In this magazine, many parts of his poem A Nebulosa were published.

Returning to Rio, he abandoned Medicine and became a teacher of History and Geography at the Colégio Pedro II. He was very linked to the Brazilian Royal Family, even becoming a tutor for Princess Isabel's children. He was also a provincial deputy and a general deputy, and a member of the Brazilian Historic and Geographic Institute.

During his last years of life, he suffered mental disturbies. Those disturbies deteriorated his health and made him die in May 11, 1882.

He was married to Maria Catarina de Abreu Sodré, the cousin of Álvares de Azevedo.

From Wikipedia