Barcelona, Spain - Gammick Entertainment and EnjoyUp Games announce Little Red Riding Hood's Zombie BBQ for the american market on the Nintendo DSiWare service.

Little Red Riding Hood's Zombie BBQ has received high praise across the board in Americas including:

IGN:

"Where else are you going to find a sexy Little Red Riding hood murdering her zombified grandmother with a shotgun?"

Daemon Hatfield

Score:8.6/10

Nominations of Little Red Riding Hood's Zombie BBQ in Nintendo DS.

The Top 25 DS Games Under $20

https://ds.ign.com/articles/926/926356p4.html

Cheers

https://ds.ign.com/articles/102/1023745p1.html

Nominated best Shooting Game 2008:

https://bestof.ign.com/2008/ds/8.html

Nintendo Life

"What's great about the Zombie BBQ is that it's not only fun to play, but it is also fun to watch: the title stands strong as one of the best examples of hand-drawn art on the DS"

Matthew Blundon

Score: 8/10

Worthplaying

"Little Red Riding Hood's Zombie BBQ is one of the most bizarre games in recent memory that I've had the chance of playing"

Score: 8.1/10

Game Zone

"Zombie BBQ is one of the most original and fun games I've played on the DS recently, and anyone with a DS and an appreciation for the bizarre would do themselves a disservice if they missed it"

Dylan Platt

Score: 8.4/10

Pricing: 800 Nintendo DSi Points.

See for more details including latest video footage, screenshots and exclusive content:

www.gammickentertainment.com/zombie

www.enjoyup.com

Little Red Riding Hood's Zombie BBQ

OVERVIEW

Fry those zombies up!

Alter saving her grandmother from the claws of the Wolf and its army of the evil everything seemed to have gone back to normal. Nothing further from reality. With the recent and tragic death on combat of the woodman, an invasion of leper zombies endangers once again the peace in the world.

Little Red Riding Hood's Zombie BBQ is a really fun shooter for Nintendo DsiWare, where you have to move forward by shooting down every living (or dying) creature in your path! Use the great arsenal of weapons at your disposal to do away with the savage hoards of zombies. Shoot, blast, massacre, bombard and burn your enemies to the bone with a simple touch of your stylus on the console screen. Can you save fairy tale land or will you let its creatures live an unhappy-ever-after-life?

Features

- 21 action-packed levels wrapped in a seamless fairy tale environment.

- 10 Epic enemy Final Bosses.

- Superb 3D graphics.

- Choose between Little Red Riding Hood or the mythic japanese character Momotaro.

- 3 difficulty levels.

- 3 refreshing game modes.

About EnjoyUp Games

Innovative developer in the gaming industry, EnjoyUp Games born with a team with more than 14 years of experience on the entertainment sector and the idea of revolutionize the concept of video game, a young company with strong principle of contribute with new and fun game forms.

Our philosophy is create new products that give new sensations to the player. We have achieved this with our ambitious and original project Chronos Twins, a game never seen were the action runs on two screens at once with a new concept of time.

With these projects, EnjoyUp achieve his short-term objectives. With a look on the future on new and fascinating challenges, becoming a promising studio on the video game sector.

Experience:

Chronos Twins

Chronos Twins DX

FootballUp