I swear the concept behind this game is synonymous to the concept behind a pizookie...

coz seriously... how can they possibly screw this up?!?!?!?!

it's freakin Little Red Riding hood!!

with D Cups!

and a Ninja!

what's this game about?? I dont kno!!!!!!

check out the official website and get hype!!

http://www.gammickentertainment.com/zombie/

Trailer:

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kGONu64cncQ

8.6 IGN http://ds.ign.com/articles/923/923549p1.html

Gameplay is like those "base assault" levels in Contra - where you could only move left/right and had to blow up the walls.

Which means it's also like Sin and Punishment to an extent.

Also, check out the site. I think Jekki actually wrote all the text for it. They even say you can use your "sexy dodge" to avoid enemies that try to "undermine your energy bar."

And really, how can you not want to help LRRH do that?

bam!!

Barcelona, August 2008 – Gammick Entertainment today announced its partnership with Minneapolis-based Destineer. Led by executives who helped grow Bungie, Red Storm, and Atari into industry leaders, Destineer will publish and distribute several Gammick titles in the U.S. territory.

The publishing and distribution agreement includes the first two titles produced by Gammick for Nintendo DS ™, Animal Boxing and Little Red Riding Hood’s Zombie BBQ. Destineer is setting both titles for a Q4 2008 U.S. release, which will represent the first titles released in the U.S. by the Spanish producer.

Sergio Rincon, Managing Director of Gammick Entertainment commented “I am delighted to be partnering with Destineer, a key player in the U.S. market, in our mission to distribute our licensed products in the States. It is a very special occasion for us, because it represents the first step in our expansionist strategy to achieve worldwide distribution of our titles. I am convinced that our games will captivate the American public.”

“We are thrilled to be working with Gammick Entertainment,” said Peter Anthony Chiodo (“Tony”), Destineer’s Director of Product Development. “Little Red Riding Hood’s Zombie BBQ and Animal Boxing are two of the most exciting, innovative titles we’ve seen in a long time, and Gammick have been amazing partners in helping bring these titles to the U.S. market.”

To find more about Animal Boxing and Zombie BBQ, please visit www.gammickentertainment.com/animal/

www.gammickentertainment.com/zombie/

Ok, I was skeptical until I read Sleeping Beauty's profile, complete with awesome Wham! reference ("Wake me up, and you'll go NO! NO!"). Day 1!

Seriously, from the screenshots I'm expecting something akin to those old Tiger handhelds (the ones where you can essentially move a little blob left and right, and maybe shoot), but with enhanced graphics.

they need to package a tee-shirt that says...

"Got Sexy Dodge?"

Maybe on the back, with a small logo in the front.

Anyways, keeping my eye on this... see about pre-ordering.

I could see this game not being that well distributed... and rare to find in stores.

[quote name='darkslime']

I could see it as being a rare game later in the DS lifespan though.[/QUOTE]

I can imagine the conversations at Gamestops across the country now....

"Do you have the one with the big titted chick doing a sexy dodge? Also she's eating ribs, or so I heard. Undead ribs."