As a small record-pressing plant, we handle each order with meticulous precision.Our team listens to records throughout production and visually inspects every single one. We adapt our services as required and respond promptly and efficiently.

RPM employees are passionate vinyl enthusiasts, DJs, musicians, and producers with diverse tastes in music.We are dedicated to upholding the highest quality standards, delivering warm, natural sound, and promoting sustainable production practices.

OUR STORY

We started as a dubplate studio in 2015, cutting limited runs for independent artists. By 2018 we acquired our first vinyl press and RPM Records was born. Since our founding, we have aspired to produce premium quality records faster and more accessible.This way helping independent artists and labels to showcase their best work on vinyl.

As new generation producers, we approach ecological degradation with earnest concern. Thus, paving the way for sustainable production and longevity of a clean physical format. All while maintaining some of the highest quality standards in the industry.

CLIENTS

RPM Records is a trusted partner for diverse range of artists and labels. Independent musicians, small record labels, big record companies, distributors, and record stores all appreciate our fast and high-quality service. While the majority of our clients are from Scandinavia, we take pride in providing service across three continents: North America, Europe, and Asia.

Our clients value the unparalleled flexibility and customization we offer, as well as our commitment to upholding equal standards for all, regardless of whether you’re a big record label or an independent artist.

QUALITY MANAGEMENT

RPM Records is devoted to the enduring vinyl tradition, modern technology and deep understanding of production methods. We uphold top quality standards on the manufacturing floor and throughout the supply chain. Here is how we do it:

EXCEPTIONAL QUALITY CONTROL. Our records are defect free. We always reject skipping, warped and noisy records. There is no “good enough” for a skipping record, if we can fix it – we will. While packing records by hand, employees inspect every single copy for scratches, warping and artwork damage.

HIGH QUALITY STANDARDS. We maintain top-quality standards for both visual appeal and sound quality. Produced on modern technology, our records are low noise level, perfectly centered, and consistent from copy to copy. Our team values glorious days of vinyl, and the warm, natural, open sound it entailed.

PARTNER NETWORK. We work with a diverse network of professional mastering houses. Over 30 years of experience, and state-of-the-art equipment enable the best possible sound in all genres of music.

CUSTOMER SERVICE. We are committed to immediate customer care. Our staff is friendly, knowledgeable and will help you to make the best product.

WHY DO WE PRESS VINYL?

Our extensive record collections have served as invaluable teachers, shaping our understanding of how vinyl should sound. We believe in the importance of actively listening to music rather than merely skipping through or relegating it to background noise. It is this profound appreciation for the tangible experience of physical music that drives our dedication to preserving its legacy.