Many people would argue that this record is the greatest pop record ever made. Whatever its claim in that respect, it is certainly one of the most interesting pieces of vinyl to emerge from the 1960s.

Ike and Tina Turner had been working together since 1956 and making records together since 1960. Despite this fact, and the credit on the label, Ike Turner did not participate in the recording of 'River Deep- Mountain High'

'River Deep- Mountain High' was co-written and produced by Phil Spector. It was literally, his masterpiece- the pinnacle result, as it were, of his famous 'wall of sound'. Phil Spector needed the powerful female vocal that Tina Turner could provide on this lavishly made monumental recording with its huge orchestral backing.

Unfortunately, the American public rejected it and its total absence from the U.S. chart has been regarded with amazement ever since. However, it had a much better reception in the UK where it reached #3, being held back from the top spot by both the Beatles and the Kinks.

1966 saw the creation of the so-called 'super groups', formed from the most accomplished and experienced members of other groups. The best known examples of the phenomena were Cream and Creation.

Ginger Baker had previously been with Alexis Korner and Clapton with the Yardbirds and John Mayall. Jack Bruce had experience with Graham Bond and Manfred Mann.

Such groups paved the way for the heavier rock sound that was to come in the 1970s.

'I Feel Free' was the most successful of the singles produced by the group. They issued seven 45s during the 1960s, all of which charted in the UK. Despite its ongoing success the group had disbanded by 1970 and marked an end to the release of new singles.

All the members of the group gained further success, but only Clapton managed to retain the 'super' image.

The Electric Prunes were a product of the emerging 'garage' music from the USA. They marked the beginning of the so-called 'psychedelic' era.

'I Had Too Much To Dream' is a renowned classic of the short lived genre. This single and its follow-up 'Get Me To The World On Time' are both highly collectable records.

The Kinks were one of the UK's most consistent male groups, having chart successes on both sides of the Atlantic from 1964 until the early 1970s.

'Sunny Afternoon' was their third UK #1 among the 13 top-ten singles that they accumulated. Dave Davies also managed two top 20 singles as a solo artist, the second of which, 'Suzannah's Still Alive', he wrote himself.

However, there is little doubt that the great success of the group,

The Troggs have been described as being "so far behind, that they were in front". It is certainly true that their sound was truer to the raw 'Rock and Roll' of the late 1950s than the more polished sophistication of the emerging 'super groups'.

'Wild Thing' could easily have been a 'one-off', a throw-back to the pre-'beat boom' era. However, it was the songwriting talent of the improbably named Presley that paved the way to a string of further hits.

'You Don't Have To Say You Love Me' was Dusty Springfield's biggest chart success.

Dusty Springfield remains one of the UK's most successful female solo vocalists. Almost all her 1960s 45s managed to reach the UK chart.

Dusty's singing career began in the late 50s as a member of a British girl group called the Lana Sisters who, despite several close attempts, never managed chart success.

Things changed for Dusty when she joined her brother Tom, and Tim Field in 1960 to become the Springfields. With a 'folkier' sound than her previous work, the group found the chart several times before Dusty went solo in 1963.

Despite being acknowledged as one of the UK's best 'soul' sounding female vocalists, her tremendous 1960s 'pop' success made it difficult for her to break out of that mould. She transferred herself to the United States in the 1970s because she believed her future lay there. However, poor management, lack of self discipline and other problems meant that successes became infrequent. This long bleak period in her career was finally broken when she was invited back to the UK to record with the 'Pet Shop Boys'. Fortunately, she still had her great singing voice and her reputation as a female vocalist was confirmed to a new generation.