Original source : 2. MIESTO NA TURNAJI ENC V ESTÓNSKU.

During the last week in Tallinn, Estonia took place the tournament European Nations Cup Division 3. Our representation, the last winner of the first tournament in Montenegro, was considered the favorite on the paper and aspirant to the procedure. Unfortunately, this goal we failed to meet when we are in the final match failed to win over domestic representation and we ended up in second place.

Rugby Europe cancelled the results of the first tournament, so we don’t get points over the previous first place and we stayed in this case, despite the disapproval of our Union, we have only our eyes to weep.

Slovakia 29 – 17 Belarus

From this meeting we did not know what to expect because the Belarus Rugby Team was for us a big unknown. We knew only the result regarding their performance two years ago from the relegation battle […].

Honestly, the beginning of the match in our favor, […] Belarusians surprised by their aggressiveness play in the offensive phase and a very good defense. Our players instead of respecting the simple gaming system, adjust to the game well prepared physically Belarusians, who tried to attack an individual without the necessary support and thus bumping into a defensive wall opponent.

[…]

[…]

In the words of the Belarusian team manager, about the last period has undergone major progress and the main merit is that the head coach of Russia. Also, the Belarus team also appeared a few players from the Russian Federation who have ancestors with its neighbor and use this rule Rugby World, on the other hand, a few players from the British and Russian competitions had to leave home for financial reasons.

Slovak squad: Michal Mihálik, Ondrej Štefanšich, Peter Kalina, Ondrej Hankowski, Miroslav Procházka, Andrej Rabara, Andrej Náter, Peter Vadina, Sebastián Náse, Martin Mihalik, Théo Fouillade, Jiří Krejčí, Martin Májovský, Patrik Poledna, Daniel Puha, Martin Veselý, Marián Múdrik, Miloš Tažký, Ján Szekely, Patrik Ľoch, Marcel Mana, Radek Fialka, Jan Chupík, Tomáš Černohorský.

The supporting crew: Josef Fišer, Pavel Lištvan, Vladimír Kubala, Eduard Krützner, Michal Mikuláš, Jan Čermák, Terry Purton.

Body SR: Chupík (5), Fialka (5+5), Puha (3+2+3+3+3)

Slovakia 29 – 36 Estonia

In this tactic match, many of our players bravely and incomplete treatment of injuries, which they got from the first match. We also lost our captain Marian Mudrík whom the ankle has been unable so quickly to recover and despite great efforts, we had regrets. The psychological welfare of players was great, butalso it did not help few puzzling things set by the organizer (We sincerely hope that it was not on purpose), such as training on the racetrack, for which we had to get through the Galloping horses, and for which there were no sanitary facilities, not to mention drinking water. Lunch before the final match, we got 45 minutes before kick-off, and so it, of course, had to be rejected. In no case we do not want to make excuses because we lost the game ourselves. […] The biggest star of the current Estonian team can be considered Veebee Luka, offspring Academy Leicester Tigers and Leicester Lions RFC player who plays the English National League 2. […]

[…]

In the second half, each of our players were aware that there is nothing to lose and understood of the importance of this meeting. Further noticeable blow to our team, was injured scrum half that unfortunately collided with teammate and bring back the memory of the 10 stitches on his face. This injury even more stand together team. Players resorted to the absolute bottom of their forces and managed to dramatize the match. In the last minute of the match Estonians dohrávali has only thirteen players for two yellow cards. And in the last seconds of the match they had already been granted only twelve for the third yellow card, when, in our judgment, we should be attributed to criminal fiver for high landfill meter in front of the goal area of the opponent, but the Russian referee has a different opinion. Pressure our team came late, but it certainly is huge respect for each one representative, who can recovered from the different and managed very little to reverse the match in our favor. Fulltime 29:36. We congratulate Estonia and the honor of the vanquished.

Slovak squad: Michal Mihálik, Ondrej Štefanšich, Peter Kalina, Ondřej Hankowski, Miroslav Procházka, Andrej Rabara, Andrej Náter, Peter Vadina, Sebastián Náse, Jiří Krejčí, Martin Mihalik, Théo Fouillade, Martin Májovský, Patrik Poledna, Daniel Puha, Martin Veselý, Miloš Tažký, Ján Szekely, Patrik Ľoch, Marcel Mana, Radek Fialka, Jan Chupík, Tomáš Černohorský.

The supporting crew: Josef Fišer, Pavel Lištvan, Vladimír Kubala, Eduard Krützner, Michal Mikuláš, Jan Čermák, Terry Purton.

Body SR: Mihalik (5), Černohorský (5), Tažký (5), Rabara (5), Veselý (3+2+2+2)

In conclusion, let me thank the whole team for the perfect representation of our country in the European Nations Cup in the year 2015/16.

Last but not least thanks to three Matadors, who has served for decade and beco;e as a model to future generations. After the match announced its end in the national team Andrej coatings, Marcel Mana and Patrik noon. Wow, we were honored! And you’ll be Slovak rugby legends!

I would also like to thank our partners: Respect Slovakia, Arval, Jandl TT Pharma, Firepost, Pizza balls, 4Sport media, without which our way was a very difficult to participate and to develop the rugby in Slovakia.

Vladimír Kubala – manager of SRU