New International Version

rather, he made himself nothing by taking the very nature of a servant, being made in human likeness.New Living Translation

Instead, he gave up his divine privileges; he took the humble position of a slave and was born as a human being. When he appeared in human form,English Standard Version

but emptied himself, by taking the form of a servant, being born in the likeness of men.Berean Standard Bible

but emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in human likeness.Berean Literal Bible

but emptied Himself, having taken the form of a servant, having been made in the likeness of men.King James Bible

But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men:New King James Version

but made Himself of no reputation, taking the form of a bondservant, and coming in the likeness of men.New American Standard Bible

but emptied Himself by taking the form of a bond-servant and being born in the likeness of men.NASB 1995

but emptied Himself, taking the form of a bond-servant, and being made in the likeness of men.NASB 1977

but emptied Himself, taking the form of a bond-servant, and being made in the likeness of men.Legacy Standard Bible

but emptied Himself, by taking the form of a slave, by being made in the likeness of men.Amplified Bible

but emptied Himself [without renouncing or diminishing His deity, but only temporarily giving up the outward expression of divine equality and His rightful dignity] by assuming the form of a bond-servant, and being made in the likeness of men [He became completely human but was without sin, being fully God and fully man].Christian Standard Bible

Instead he emptied himself by assuming the form of a servant, taking on the likeness of humanity. And when he had come as a man,Holman Christian Standard Bible

Instead He emptied Himself by assuming the form of a slave, taking on the likeness of men. And when He had come as a man in His external form, American Standard Version

but emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men;Aramaic Bible in Plain English

But he stripped himself and took the form of a Servant and was in the form of the children of men, and was found in fashion as a man.Contemporary English Version

Instead he gave up everything and became a slave, when he became like one of us. Douay-Rheims Bible

But emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men, and in habit found as a man. English Revised Version

but emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men;GOD'S WORD® Translation

Instead, he emptied himself by taking on the form of a servant, by becoming like other humans, by having a human appearance.Good News Translation

Instead of this, of his own free will he gave up all he had, and took the nature of a servant. He became like a human being and appeared in human likeness. International Standard Version

Instead, poured out in emptiness, a servant's form did he possess, a mortal man becoming. In human form he chose to be,Literal Standard Version

but emptied Himself, having taken the form of a servant, having been made in the likeness of men,Majority Standard Bible

but emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in human likeness.New American Bible

Rather, he emptied himself, taking the form of a slave, coming in human likeness; and found human in appearance, NET Bible

but emptied himself by taking on the form of a slave, by looking like other men, and by sharing in human nature. New Revised Standard Version

but emptied himself, taking the form of a slave, being born in human likeness. And being found in human form,New Heart English Bible

but emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men.Webster's Bible Translation

But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men:Weymouth New Testament

Nay, He stripped Himself of His glory, and took on Him the nature of a bondservant by becoming a man like other men.World English Bible

but emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men. Young's Literal Translation

but did empty himself, the form of a servant having taken, in the likeness of men having been made,Additional Translations ...

Audio Bible

Context

The Attitude of Christ

…6Who, existing in the form of God, did not consider equality with God something to be grasped, 7but emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in human likeness. 8And being found in appearance as a man, He humbled Himself and became obedient to death—even death on a cross.…

Cross References

Isaiah 42:1

"Here is My Servant, whom I uphold, My Chosen One, in whom My soul delights. I will put My Spirit on Him, and He will bring justice to the nations.Matthew 20:28

just as the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give His life as a ransom for many."John 1:14

The Word became flesh and made His dwelling among us. We have seen His glory, the glory of the one and only Son from the Father, full of grace and truth.Romans 8:3

For what the law was powerless to do in that it was weakened by the flesh, God did by sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful man, as an offering for sin. He thus condemned sin in the flesh,2 Corinthians 8:9

For you know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though He was rich, yet for your sakes He became poor, so that you through His poverty might become rich.2 Corinthians 13:4

For He was indeed crucified in weakness, yet He lives by God's power. And though we are weak in Him, yet by God's power we will live with Him to serve you.Galatians 4:4

But when the time had fully come, God sent His Son, born of a woman, born under the law,

Treasury of Scripture

But made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men:

made.

Psalm 22:6 But I am a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and despised of the people.

Isaiah 49:7 Thus saith the LORD, the Redeemer of Israel, and his Holy One, to him whom man despiseth, to him whom the nation abhorreth, to a servant of rulers, Kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship, because of the LORD that is faithful, and the Holy One of Israel, and he shall choose thee.

Isaiah 50:5,6 The Lord GOD hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned away back…

the form.

Isaiah 42:1 Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him: he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles.

Isaiah 49:3,6 And said unto me, Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified…

Isaiah 52:13 Behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted and extolled, and be very high.

in the.

Philippians 2:6 Who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God:

John 1:14 And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth.

Romans 1:3 Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh;

likeness.

Jump to Previous

Bondman's Bondservant Bond-Servant Born Emptied Empty Form Glory Human Likeness Nature Reputation Servant Stripped

Jump to Next

Bondman's Bondservant Bond-Servant Born Emptied Empty Form Glory Human Likeness Nature Reputation Servant Stripped

Philippians 2

1. Paul exhorts them to unity, and to all humbleness of mind, by the example of Christ's humility;

12. to a careful proceeding in the way of salvation, that they be as lights to a wicked world,

16. and comforts to him their apostle, who is now ready to be offered up to God.

19. He hopes to send Timothy to them, and Epaphroditus also.

(7) But made himself . . .--This verse needs more exact translation. It should be, But emptied (or, stripped) Himself of His glory by having taken on Him the form of a slave and having been made (or, born) in likeness of men. The "glory" is the "glory which He had with the Father before the world was" (John 17:5; comp. Philippians 1:14), clearly corresponding to the Shechinah of the Divine Presence. Of this He stripped Himself in the Incarnation, taking on Him the "form (or, nature) of a servant" of God. He resumed it for a moment in the Transfiguration; He was crowned with it anew at the Ascension.

Made in the likeness of man.--This clause, at first sight, seems to weaken the previous clause, for it does not distinctly express our Lord's true humanity. But we note that the phrase is "the likeness of men," i.e., of men in general, men as they actually are. Hence the key to the meaning is to be found in such passages as Romans 8:3, God sent His own Son in "the likeness of sinful flesh;" or Hebrews 2:17; Hebrews 4:15, "It behoved Him to be made like unto His brethren," "in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin." It would have been an infinite humiliation to have assumed humanity, even in unique and visible glory; but our Lord went beyond this, by deigning to seem like other men in all things, one only of the multitude, and that, too, in a station, which confused Him with the commoner types of mankind. The truth of His humanity is expressed in the phrase "form of a servant;" its unique and ideal character is glanced at when it is said to have worn only the "likeness of men." . . .

Verse 7. - But made himself of no reputation; rather, as R.V., but emptied himself; not, he indeed, of the Godhead, which could not be, but of its manifestation, its glory. This he did once for all, as the aorist implies, at the Incarnation. The word "emptied' involves a previous fullness, "a precedent plenitude" (Pearson on the Creed, 2:25). The Divine majesty of which he emptied himself was his own, his own rightful prerogative; and his humiliation was his own voluntary act - he emptied himself. "He used his equality with God as an opportunity, not for self-exaltation, but for self-abasement" (Alford). "Manebat plenus, John 1:14, et tureen perinde se gessit ac si esset" (Bengel). And took upon him the form of a servant; rather, as R.V., taking the form. The two clauses refer to the same act of self-humiliation regarded from its two sides. He emptied himself of his glory, taking at the same time the form (μορφήν as in Ver. 6, the essential attributes) of a servant, literally, of a slave. Observe, he was originally (ὑπάρχων) in the form of God; he took (λαβών) the form of a slave. The Godhead was his by right, the manhood by his own voluntary act: both are equally real; he is perfect God and perfect Man. Isaiah prophesied of Christ (Isaiah 49 and Isaiah 52; comp. Acts 2:33, in the Greek or R.V.) as the Servant of Jehovah; he came to do the Father's will, submitting his own will in all things: "Not as I will, but as thou wilt" (comp. Matthew 20:27, 28; Mark 10:44, 45). And was made in the likeness of men; translate, becoming, or, as R.V., being made (aorist participle). This clause is another description of the one act of the Incarnation he was God, he became man. Form (μορφή) asserts the reality of our Lord's human nature. Likeness (ὁμοίωμα) refers only to external appearance: this word, of course, does not imply that our Lord was not truly man, but, as Chrysostom says ('Hom.,' 8:247), he was more. than man; "We are soul and body, but he is God and soul and body." The likeness of men; because Christ is the Representative of humanity: he took upon him, not a human person, but human nature. He is one person in two natures. As Bishop Lightfoot says, "Christ, as the second Adam, represents, not the individual man, but the human race." Parallel Commentaries ...

Greek

but

ἀλλὰ (alla)

Conjunction

Strong's 235: But, except, however. Neuter plural of allos; properly, other things, i.e. contrariwise.

emptied

ἐκένωσεν (ekenōsen)

Verb - Aorist Indicative Active - 3rd Person Singular

Strong's 2758: (a) I empty, (b) I deprive of content, make unreal. From kenos; to make empty, i.e. to abase, neutralize, falsify.

Himself,

ἑαυτὸν (heauton)

Reflexive Pronoun - Accusative Masculine 3rd Person Singular

Strong's 1438: Himself, herself, itself.

taking

λαβών (labōn)

Verb - Aorist Participle Active - Nominative Masculine Singular

Strong's 2983: (a) I receive, get, (b) I take, lay hold of.

[the] form

μορφὴν (morphēn)

Noun - Accusative Feminine Singular

Strong's 3444: Form, shape, outward appearance. Perhaps from the base of meros; shape; figuratively, nature.

of a servant,

δούλου (doulou)

Noun - Genitive Masculine Singular

Strong's 1401: (a) (as adj.) enslaved, (b) (as noun) a (male) slave. From deo; a slave.

being made

γενόμενος (genomenos)

Verb - Aorist Participle Middle - Nominative Masculine Singular

Strong's 1096: A prolongation and middle voice form of a primary verb; to cause to be, i.e. to become, used with great latitude.

in

ἐν (en)

Preposition

Strong's 1722: In, on, among. A primary preposition denoting position, and instrumentality, i.e. A relation of rest; 'in, ' at, on, by, etc.

human likeness.

ὁμοιώματι (homoiōmati)

Noun - Dative Neuter Singular

Strong's 3667: From homoioo; a form; abstractly, resemblance.

Links

Philippians 2:7 NIV

Philippians 2:7 NLT

Philippians 2:7 ESV

Philippians 2:7 NASB

Philippians 2:7 KJVPhilippians 2:7 BibleApps.com

Philippians 2:7 Biblia Paralela

Philippians 2:7 Chinese Bible

Philippians 2:7 French Bible

Philippians 2:7 Catholic BibleNT Letters: Philippians 2:7 But emptied himself taking the form (Philipp. Phil. Php.)