[Hinds' Precedents, Volume 2] [Chapter 30 - General Election Cases, 1875 To 1880] [From the U.S. Government Publishing Office, www.gpo.gov] GENERAL ELECTION CASES, 1758 To 1880. ------------------------------------------------------------------- 1. Cases in the Forty-Congress. Sections 902-923.\1\ 2. Cases in the Forty-Fifth Congress. Sections 924-935. ------------------------------------------------------------------- 902. The Florida election case of Finley v. Walls, in the Forty- fourth Congress. Election officers fraudulently chosen and acting illegally were held to be intruders and not de facto officers. Fraud having been commited by election officers, no reliance was placed on their returns, and they were rejected. Where returns are rejected, the vote may not be proven aliunde by the opinion of a person who kept a tally sheet. On March 23, 1876,\2\ Mr. Charles P. Thompson, of Massachusetts, from the Committee on Elections, submitted the report of the majority of the committee in the case of Finley v. Walls, of Florida. As returned by the State canvassers, the sitting member had a majority of 371 votes, which the contestant sought to overcome by proving frauds and irregularities. While a large number of allegations were made, the decision was universally conceded in the debate to depend on the disposition of the returns from the Colored Academy precinct, where sitting member received 588 votes and contestant 11. This disparity was not of itself a suspicious circumstance, since under the laws of Florida the voter might cast his vote at any precinct in the county, and the white and colored people quite generally sought different polls. The law of Florida provided: The polls of the election shall be opened at 8 o'clock a.m. on the day of the election. And also-- The county commissioners shall * * * appoint a board of three discreet electors to be inspectors of the election for each place designated for voting within the county. And-- In case of the death, absence, or refusal to act of any or all of the inspectors appointed by the county commissioners, the electors present at the time appointed for opening the election may choose, ----------------------------------------------------------------------- \1\ Also Lee v. Rainey, South Carolina (Vol. I, sec. 641). \2\ First session Forty-Fourth Congress, House Report No. 295; Smith, p. 367; Rowell's Digest, p. 305. Sec. 902 viva voce, from the qualified electors, such a number as, together with the inspector or inspectors present, if any, will constitute a board of three, and the persons so chosen shall be authorized to act as inspectors of that election. The inspectors shall, before opening the election, choose a clerk, who shall be a qualified elector, and said inspectors and clerk, previous to receiving any votes, shall each take and subscribe an oath or affirmation in writing that they will perform the duties of clerk or inspectors of election according to law, and will endeavor to prevent all fraud, deceit, or abuse in conducting the same. Such oath may be taken before any officer authorized to administer oaths or before either of the persons chosen as inspectors, and shall be returned with the poll list and the returns of the election to the clerk of the circuit court. One of the inspectors shall be chosen as chairman of the board. The majority of the committee say in regard to the Colored Academy precinct: At this precinct your committee find that there was a conspiracy to commit a fraud upon the election. That the conspirators were Dr. E. G. Johnson, who was a candidate for State senator in Columbia County and was voted for at this precinct, together with Charles R. King and John W. Tompkins, who acted as inspectors, Charles A. Carroll, who acted as clerk, and one Duval Selph, a supporter of Doctor Johnson. Carroll and Selph were at Doctor Johnson's during the night previous to the election, and King took breakfast with him in the morning. They all, except Selph, left the house of Doctor Johnson in the morning, a little after daylight, and proceeded to the place where the election was to be held, and, in pursuance of the object of the conspiracy, opened the polls at about 7 o'clock in the morning, an hour before the time at which the meeting was notified and an hour before the duly appointed inspectors were called upon to be present and an hour before the election could be held according to law. No one of the duly appointed inspectors, unless it was Aleck, Hamilton, was present or acted at this precinct. Tompkins and King had been requested to be present by Doctor Johnson and act as inspectors, and Charles A. Carroll had been requested by him to act as clerk, and these several persons were either nominated by, or acted at the request of, Doctor Johnson. They were not legally elected, as there was no regular meeting of the electors having power to choose inspectors before Tompkins and King undertook to act as such, and without legally appointed or chosen inspectors no legal clerk could be chosen or appointed, so that the election at this precinct was conducted by persons not legally authorized, with the exception of Hamilton, and by persons who were ready and willing to violate the election laws of the State, and who did violate them. The committee then go on to quote testimony that there was fraud at the precinct, persons voting who had voted at other precincts and others voting who had not conformed to the legal requirements. And the committee insisted that there was fraudulent collusion on the part of the election officers. They say: Your committee are satisfied that the irregularities at this precinct were not the result of ignorance, inadvertence, or carelessness, but were the result of fraud, and that there were no legally appointed inspectors nor a legally appointed clerk at this precinct; that Johnson took the entire charge of the polls through persons who, by his procurement, acted as inspectors and clerk. They can not stand better than mere intruders, having no official character; intruders not for the purpose of aiding in conducting an election fairly, but for the purpose of carrying into execution a previously arranged fraud upon the ballot box. It is clear that the pretended clerk, Charles A. Carroll, arranged with Doctor Johnson to commit a gross fraud at this election, and although he did not do the particular acts it was arranged he should do, still the evidence is clear that Doctor Johnson himself carried out the fraud planned with the clerk, of putting illegal votes into the ballot box with the knowledge of the clerk. In conclusion the majority say: The law is, that where fraud is proved to have been committed by the officers of an election in conducting the election, no reliance can be placed upon any of their acts and their return must be rejected as wholly unreliable. The party claiming under the election must prove the actual vote in some other way. The only evidence as to what the vote was is from John V. Brown (p. 79), one of the challengers, a Conservative, who says: ``Finley got 11 and Walls 588, 1 think. I derived my information from being present and keeping a tally sheet.'' This certainly can not establish the vote, as his testimony at most can only be evidence of the actual number of votes cast, but one of the principal objections Sec. 903 is that illegal votes were cast, and this, too, with the guilty knowledge of the officers of the election. There being proof that such illegal votes were cast and the real number of legal votes not being proved, there is nothing upon which the true vote can be ascertained, and, therefore, the entire poll must be rejected; and your committee so find and determine. The minority dissent from the majority's views as to the facts, deny that fraud is proven, and hold: As these men acted as inspectors and clerk, and as no proof is given to show that they were not, in fact, appointed, and as it is now claimed that their return went into the Columbia County return, counted by the State board, and found at page 23, and as it is now sought to deduct this vote from the State count, these inspectors and clerk must be taken to be officers de facto, and full faith, prima facie, is due to their acts. The committee considered at length other objections of the contestant, and came to conclusions thereon: 903. The case of Finley v. Walls, continued. Persons actually registered but omitted from the copy of the list in use at the polls were held to have cast valid votes, although a required oath was not administered when they voted. Where the nature of illegal votes had not been determined the Committee on Elections deducted a proportionate number from the poll of each candidate. (1) At the Gainesville precinct about 60 persons voted whose names were not on the certified copy of the registration list. The majority say: It is clear by the election laws of Florida that a person, in order to be entitled to vote at any election, must, six days prior thereto, be duly registered as a voter in the clerk's office of the circuit court in the county. If, on offering to vote, his name is not on the certified copy of the registry list at the voting precinct, he may then, if he takes the oath prescribed in section 16 and the additional oath required by section 9, which is ``that his name has been improperly struck off from the list of registered voters,'' be entitled to vote. And the taking of the oath in section 9 is indispensable to the right of the person to vote whose name is not upon the registration list. The officers presiding at the election have no right to receive his vote without this oath. But it also appears by the evidence that, although the names of these 60 voters were not on the certified copy of the registration list furnished for this poll, still a large number of the names were actually on the registration list in the clerk's office of the circuit court. Your committee, in view of this fact, although the inspectors were in fault in allowing the persons to vote whose names were not on the list furnished them by the clerk of the circuit court, still, as their names should have appeared on such list, and they were deprived of the legal right to vote without taking the oath in section 9, by the neglect of the clerk of said court in not providing a correct list of the voters of said precinct, have arrived at the conclusion that, they having voted, their votes should be counted when their names are found to have been on such registry list at the clerk's office. This leaves the poll to be purged of 12 votes. ``In purging the polls of illegal votes, the general rule is that, unless it is shown for which candidate they were cast, they are to be deducted from the whole vote of the election division, and not from the candidates having the highest number.'' ``Of course, in the application of this rule such illegal votes would be deducted proportionately from both candidates, according to the entire vote returned for each.'' (Am. Law of Elec., sec. 298.) Although this is the rule to be applied where it can not be ascertained for whom the illegal votes were cast, and in this case there is nothing to show that it might not have been ascertained for whom the illegal votes were cast, as the names of the unregistered voters could have been ascertained by comparing the poll list and the registry list, and the evidence of the illegal votes taken as to whom they voted for, and the poll purged in this the more regular mode; still, as this has not been done, your committee, unwilling to reject the entire poll, there being not evidence sufficient to prove actual fraud on the part of those having charge of the election, have determined to purge the poll of the 12 illegal votes by subtracting from each of the candidates a proportionate number of the illegal votes, according to the entire vote returned for each. 904 904. The case of Finley v. Walls, continued. An entire poll is not to be rejected except after the fullest attempt to purge it of illegal votes. Where election officers did not follow State law and draw out an excess of ballots, the Elections Committee deducted proportionately. Failure to swear the election officers, combined with other irregularities, was, by a divided committee, held not to require rejection of the poll, actual fraud not being shown. Failure to return the poll book to the county officer, as the law required, was not held in the absence of proof of fraud to vitiate the election. (2) As to sheriff's office precinct the report says: There was at this precinct a grave omission on the part of the officers of election in their failure to purge the poll, as directed by the law of Florida. It appears from the testimony of Albert A. Ellenwood, one of the inspectors (pp. 96, 97), that there were only 298 names on the poll list while there were 309 votes cast and counted. There appearing to be 11 more votes than names on the poll list, it was the duty of the inspectors to replace the ballots in the box and have one of their number publicly draw out and destroy, unopened, so many of such ballots as were equal to such excess. (Sec. 22, above.) This not having been done, it becomes a difficult problem to determine what shall be done with the poll. The statute having prescribed the method of and the person by whom the poll should have been purged, can it be purged in any other manner? Your committee, upon a careful consideration of the question, regarding it as settled that an entire poll is not to be rejected except after the fullest attempt to purge the poll of illegal votes, and, to ascertain the real vote by all reasonable means, have decided to regard this statute of Florida as providing a principle upon which, as well as a mode by which, the poll in such a case should be purged; and, as the method was omitted without fraud, have not regarded its omission an act of such a character as to compel the rejecting of the entire poll, but have decided to apply the principle established by the law, viz: that the excess of votes shall be regarded as thrown proportionately for both candidates, according to the entire vote for each, and that the drawing out in the manner provided by law would draw a proportionate number for each candidate. Your committee have taken from each candidate a proportionate part of said 11 votes. Certain members of the committee who concurred in the majority report generally advocated more severe treatment of this poll, Mr. J. S. C. Blackburn, of Kentucky, insisting that it should be thrown out altogether. (3) At Archer precinct, besides the voting of certain persons whose names were not on the lists and the presence of a few more ballots in the box than there were names on the poll list, the committee found other irregularities: At this poll other and serious informalities are found to exist, such as a failure to swear the inspectors, the concealment of the ballot box from public view during the adjournment for dinner, being about a half hour (Geiger, p. 56), not opening of the poll until about half past 9 o'clock, and the keeping it open after sunset. There was also an improper interference with the election by W. U. Saunders, United States marshal, both in meddling with the ballots and controlling the order of voting, so that several conservatives could not vote at all. These irregularities are grave ones and might, with much reason, be adjudged sufficient to vitiate the poll; still, your committee are unwilling to reject an entire vote where there is not proof of actual fraud and the poll may probably be purged of its illegal votes. They have, therefore, allowed the returns to stand as certified by the inspectors, deducting only the 35 illegal votes proportionately from each candidate, which will leave the vote 260 for Walls and 23 for Finley, instead of 293 for Walls and 25 for Finley. Mr. Blackburn and three other members of the majority of the committee considered the decision too lenient. Sec. 905 (4) As to irregularities in Alachua County, the report says: That said election at precinct No. 3, at Gainesville, within the county of Alachua, and within said Second Congressional district of Florida, was irregularly and illegally conducted, and was null and void, and I hereby notify you that I will ask that all the votes cast at said precinct be rejected on the following grounds, viz: First. Because no poll book or list of the names of the electors voting at said precinct was returned to the judge of the county court or to the clerk of said county, with the certificates of the election at said poll, as the law requires, but a paper list of names was found eight days after said election, unsigned by any of the officers of the election at said precinct; second, because a large number of illegal votes at said election were received and counted at said poll, viz, about 58 votes not registered, and 5 not checked, as the law requires, were received at said poll, and changed the result of the election at said poll, and only 3 appeared to be sworn, and because the oath administered to the unregistered voters who voted at said poll was not such as the law prescribes. To which the contestee answers in substance that it is untrue that said election was irregularly and illegally conducted, or was null and void. He admits that the poll book was not returned to the judge of the county court nor to the clerk of the county with the certificate of the election at said precinct, but alleges that the same was found eight days after said election, and that this irregularity is not such as will affect the rights of the contestee. He also objects to proof of any illegal votes, as it does not appear from the contestant's said specifications for whom said illegal votes were cast. A poll may be purged of illegal votes without it being proved for whom they were cast. (Am. Law of Elec., sec. 298.) The not returning of the poll list, although an irregularity which might, connected with other irregularities, be entitled to very considerable weight, still, in this case, it being shown that the poll list used at this precinct was found and used by the county canvassers in canvassing this precinct, and there being no evidence that it had been tampered with, or was by reason of fraud not returned in the ballot box, the committee have not regarded it as a sufficient reason for rejecting said poll. The majority of the committee concluded, from an application of the principles set forth, that the true result showed a majority of 343 votes for Mr. Finley, the contestant, and reported resolution giving the seat to him. The report was debated at length on April 18 and 19,\1\ the debate being confined almost exclusively to the Colored Academy precinct. On the latter day the resolutions of the minority, confirming the title of sitting Member to the seat, were offered as a substitute, and were disagreed to, yeas 84, nays 135. Then the resolutions of the majority were agreed to without division. The contestant, Mr. Finley, then appeared and took the oath. 905. The Alabama election case of Bromberg v. Haralson, in the Forty-fourth Congress. Illustration of a specification in a notice of contest condemned as too general. Testimony taken after the time allowed by law was rejected. Original testimony, taken on notices stating that witnesses were to be examined in rebuttal, was rejected. On March 23, 1876,\2\ Mr. John T. Harris, of Virginia, from the Committee on Elections, submitted the report of the committee in the case of Bromberg v. Haralson, of Alabama. The contestant alleged fraud and intimidation sufficient to overcome the majority of nearly 2,700, by which sitting Member had been returned. Two preliminary questions were discussed and passed on in relation to the vote of the district, especially of Wilcox County. ----------------------------------------------------------------------- \1\ Journal, pp. 817, 825, 826; Record, pp. 2553, 2593-2603. \2\ First session Forty-fourth Congress, House Report No. 294; Smith, p. 364; Rowell's Digest, p. 303. Sec. 905 (a) The report quotes one of the specifications: Twelfth. That illegal and undue influences were employed by United States and State officials, or by persons representing themselves to be such, adherents of the Republican party, to prevent voters in this district from voting for me (the contestant), or inducing or intimidating voters into voting for you (the contestee), by threats of prosecution and otherwise, by the presence of detachments of United States troops at or near the polls, and by the illegal distribution of provisions donated by act of Congress to sufferers by the overflow of the Tombigbee and Alabama rivers in 1874. And says: The twelfth specification is too vague and uncertain to be good. The statute requires that the contestant, in his notice, ``shall specify particularly the grounds upon which he relies in his contest.'' (Rev. Stat., pp. 17, 18, sec. 105; McCrary, sec. 343; Wright v. Fuller, 1 Bartlett, 152.) It is impossible to conceive of a specification of the grounds of contest broader or more general in its terms. It fixes no place where any act complained of occurred. It embraces the whole district in one sweeping charge. This specification embraces three general grounds of complaint, not one of which possesses that particularity essential to good pleading; but it can subserve no valuable purpose to pursue the question of legal sufficiency of this specification further, because there is another ground upon which the whole evidence of the contestant, relating to the election in this county, must be rejected. (b) As to the notice of contest and validity of certain testimony, the committee say: The sitting Member served his answer to the notice of contest on the contestant on the 23d of December, 1874. The statute gives ninety days next after the service of the answer in which to take the testimony. (See act of February, 1875.) This period is to be divided as follows: The contestant shall take testimony during the first forty days, the returned Member during the succeeding forty days, and the contestant may take testimony in rebuttal only during the remaining ten days of said period. (Rev. Stat., p. 18, sec. 107.) During the first forty days the contestant took no testimony in Wilcox County or elsewhere to sustain any specification in his notice of contest affecting the election in said Wilcox County. His entire evidence was confined to the election held in other counties. During the succeeding forty days the returned Member did not take any testimony in Wilcox County or elsewhere relating to the election held in said county of Wilcox; and yet, on the 15th and 16th days of March, 1875, the contestant caused notices to be served on the attorney of the returned Member that on the 22d of March, 1875, he would take testimony in said county of Wilcox. Both notices specify that the witnesses therein named ``will be examined in rebuttal of the testimony taken'' by the returned Member. Knowing that he had taken no testimony in relation to the election in Wilcox County at all, and hence that there was nothing to rebut, the returned Member did not attend the taking of the testimony of contestant in said county. In violation of the statute, and contrary to the terms of the notices served upon the attorney of the sitting Member, the contestant took a large number of ex parte depositions or affidavits for the purpose of proving the truth of the general charges embraced in the twelfth specification above quoted. The whole of the testimony taken in Wilcox County is directed exclusively to the proof of the contestant's original case, and no portion of it is directed to the rebuttal of the proofs adduced by the returned Member. The rules of law and the principles of common fairness alike require that the whole of contestant's testimony relating to the election in Wilcox County should be entirely rejected, first, because the time within which the contestant could lawfully take testimony to prove his original case had long previously expired; and, second, because the notices explicitly state that the witnesses were to be examined in rebuttal, and under such notices, in the absence of the returned Member, it would be to give sanction to a surprise to allow any other than rebutting testimony to stand. And, in addition thereto, the contestee would have no right or opportunity to introduce evidence in answer to the original evidence thus taken during the ten days prescribed by law for taking of rebutting testimony. Sec. 906 906. The case of Bromberg v. Haralson, continued. Clear and satisfactory proof of fraud or mistake is required to remove the legal presumption in favor of the correctness of the acts of sworn election officers. Isolated cases of violence or intimidation do not justify a rejection of the poll. The mere presence of United States soldiers in the neighborhood of the polls, unaccompanied by disorderly or threatening conduct, does not vitiate the poll. As to the merits of the contest, several considerations were involved: (1) Extensive frauds were alleged in the city of Mobile through the agency of a club organized for the purpose of encouraging fraudulent voting. The committee discuss at length the quality of the evidence required for proof of such a charge: The burden of proof is always upon the contestant or the party attacking the official returns. The presumption is that the officers charged by law with the duty of ascertaining and declaring the result have discharged that duty faithfully. (Am. El. L., secs. 306, 394, subdiv. 10.) The action of a board of supervisors of election, when in due form, is prima facie correct, and it must stand until it is shown by extrinsic evidence to be illegal and unjust. The presumption is always the commission of a fraudulent or illegal act, and in favor of the honesty and correctness of the official acts of a sworn officer. The rule on this subject is thus stated in the New Jersey cases, 1 Bartlett, 25: ``It is not sufficient that there should exist a doubt as to whether the vote is lawful or not; but conviction of its illegality should be reached to the exclusion of all reasonable doubt before the committee are authorized to deduct it from the party for whom it was received at the polls.'' The true rule is believed to be one which, while it may not require the exclusion of all reasonable doubt, does require clear and satisfactory proof of fraud or mistake before the legal presumption in favor of the correctness of the acts of sworn officers shall be nullified. The testimony of a conspirator swearing to his own infamy and implicating others in the same crime is always jealously scrutinized, and unless corroborated in material points by evidence coming from uncontaminated sources, can not generally be received as sufficient to establish a litigated fact. And if in addition to this, such conspirator declines to submit to a full, thorough, and searching cross-examination upon the whole subject-matter testified to by him in his examination in chief, this circumstance casts additional suspicion upon his testimony. And if to this be also added the fact that such conspirator is at the time he so testifies the paid agent of the party producing him in ascertaining and arranging the evidence for his employer, this circumstance is one calculated to cast additional doubt and suspicion upon his testimony. There was a period in the history of both English and American jurisprudence when the paid attorney or counsel of a litigant party would not be heard to testify in behalf of his client. Bearing in mind these salutary rules, there can be found no reliable evidence to sustain the charges of fraud and overcome the legal presumption in favor of the returns. It would seem upon its bare statement incredible that, in the city of Mobile, at an election where the contestant polled 6,497 votes, mostly cast by the intelligent and lately master race, a number nearly 2,000 in excess of the entire vote polled for the sitting Member, such a conspiracy to repeat, if it existed, could have been consummated. It demands large credulity to believe that in the presence of 6,500 white voters, intelligent, alert, jealously watching their rights, 250 colored men, with the aid of a few white leaders, could have polled about 2,000 votes, or in the neighborhood of 1,700 fraudulent votes. There are nine witnesses who were examined to prove that such a fraud was consummated. The witnesses, however, did not testify to any specific acts of illegal voting, and the report concludes: This evidence given by these conspirators is so vague, indefinite, and contradictory that if it came from purer and less suspicious sources it would furnish no safe or reliable basis upon which to act. Sec. 907 To undertake to purge the poll upon such evidence would be impossible. No man can safely say how many illegal votes, if any, were cast. There is no basis furnished by the evidence from which it can be determined whether there was 1 or 1,000 illegal votes cast. Admitting that there is evidence that there were some illegal votes cast, still, no reliable data are furnished to show how many there were. The result in such case would be that the whole poll would have to be thrown out. The rule is thus stated in Howard v. Cooper, 1 Bartlett, 275: ``When the result in any precinct has been shown to be so tainted with fraud that the truth can not be deducible therefrom, then it should never be permitted to form a part of the canvass. The precedents as well as the evident requirements of truth not only sanction but call for the rejection of the entire poll when stamped with the characteristics here shown.'' The application of this rule would end the contestant's case if every other charge of fraud were admitted, and it is therefore safe to say that he will concede that the proper rule is not to reject this poll. (2) As to intimidation: The report says: As to the violence, intimidation, and deception alleged to have been practiced by the Republican voters in Mobile County, the evidence is so meager and unsatisfactory that it can serve no useful purpose to enter into an analysis of it. While there doubtless were isolated cases of violence and intimidation, the election seems in the main to have been orderly, full, and fair. All the witnesses, with perhaps one single exception, testify that they were amply protected in voting as they pleased. This evidence presents a case which the precedents concur in showing can not affect the poll. (McCrary, secs. 416, 424, 586; Harrison v. Davis, 1 Bartlett, 341; Brown v. Loan, ib., 482.) Nor is there anything in the argument that the colored vote polled was so large as to suggest the existence of illegal voting. The census of 1870 shows the population of Mobile County to have been 49,311, divided by races as follows: Whites, 28,195; colored, 21,107. The evidence tends to show that there has been little increase in the population since that time, and that the races maintain about the same relative proportions. The contestant, in 1874, received 6,497 votes, and the sitting Member 4,753. It may be safely inferred that each race voted about equally solid for the candidate of its own color and blood. On this basis the contestant received 1 vote for every 4.34 inhabitants, while the sitting Member received only 1 vote for every 4.44 inhabitants, thus showing a larger vote polled in proportion to the population by the white than by the colored people. Hence it seems clear that the poll of Mobile County ought not to be disturbed. (3) In Monroeville, in Monroe County, both bribery and intimidation by soldiers were alleged. Of the latter charge the report says: There was a small squad of United States soldiers stationed at Monroeville, and on the day of the election they were in the neighborhood of the polls. But the evidence fails to show any disorderly or threatening conduct on their part, and it is apparent that no man of ordinary firmness was or could have been thereby intimidated from voting. The allegation that the presence of this small squad of soldiers intimidated a large number of Democratic voters and kept them from voting the Democratic ticket is not sustained. Indeed, in the year 1872 the contestant received, at the Monroeville precinct, 214 Democratic votes only, while in 1874, at the same precinct, he received 218 votes. 907. The case of Bromberg v. Haralson, continued. The Elections Committee leaned to the view that a promise of general distribution of food to voters was a corrupting influence justifying purging of the poll. Discussion as to validity of English rule that to justify rejection of votes bribery must be practiced by the candidate or agent. It is not safe to assume voting by nonresidents on mere testimony as to migrations of large numbers of persons. (4) The above precinct of Monroeville was attacked on other grounds, however. The report says: It is established by the evidence before the committee that a report was industriously circulated among the colored voters that in order for them to obtain bacon they would have to vote the straight Sec. 907 Republican ticket; that if they received bacon, and afterwards neglected or refused to vote the Republican ticket, they would forfeit their legal rights; that they should come to Monroeville on election day, and that Perrin would give them a big barbecue and meat enough to last them a year. It seems that no effort was made by the Republican leaders to correct these reports and disabuse the minds of the colored voters of their truth. It is testified by Perrin and many others that, in their opinion, the belief in the truth of these reports induced the colored voters to cast for the sitting Member at least 800 votes more than he would otherwise have received. The evidence fails to connect the sitting Member with these reprehensible practices. But it is apparent that these corrupt practices did have an influence to swell the vote of the sitting Member at this precinct. There are but a few voters who are shown to have been directly influenced to vote otherwise than they would have done by these means. It is apparent that more were corrupted than can be distinctly proved to have been influenced. It is probable that the truth has between the extremes. On the one hand it is claimed that at least 800 votes were obtained for the sitting Member by corruption and bribery; on the other hand it is claimed that this estimate is proved by the mere opinions of witnesses, and that the evidence does not point distinctly to more than 10 or 12 voters who are shown to have been thus corrupted. It perhaps would be fair to assume that the whole vote cast at this precinct in excess of the vote of two years before, when no such influence existed, was cast by voters who came there under the influence of the corrupt practices and promises disclosed in the evidence. At the Congressional election held in that precinct in 1872, the total vote polled was 516, and at the Congressional election in 1874 the total vote polled was 848. The excess in 1874 over the vote of 1872 is thus shown to be 332. The practice indulged in by Perrin and others to corrupt the colored voters in this county is of a most shameless and reprehensible character. It strikes at the foundations of republican government, and poisons the very sources whence all legitimate authority flows. No system of government can long endure where public opinion tolerates such conduct. Its general prevalence must lead to anarchy and bloodshed, and loosen the very ligaments binding society together. It strikes a fatal blow at the social compact. It overturns all just distinctions between honesty and corruption in the delegation of authority to the representatives of the people. No language can too strongly express our disapproval of the practices indulged in to corrupt the purity of the ballot box, at Monroeville, in particular. Votes thus obtained, even if cast by legal voters, it would seem ought to be rejected as illegal and void, even though it is not shown that the candidate who received them knew or consented to the corrupt practices whereby they were obtained. Such is the rule of law laid down in the unanimous judgment of a highly respectable court of last resort in one of the States of the Union. In that cue it is said: ``In our form of government, where the administration of public affairs is regulated by the will of the people, or a majority of them, expressed through the ballot box, the free exercise of the elective franchise by the qualified voters is a matter of the highest importance. The safety and perpetuity of our institutions depend upon this. It is therefore particularly important that every voter should be free from any pecuniary influence. For this reason the attempt by bribery to influence an elector in giving his vote or ballot is made an indictable offense. * * * Can a vote thus obtained, in direct violation of the statute, be considered a valid or legal vote? If it can, then the very object of the statute, which is that it should not be so obtained, is defeated. We are of opinion that such votes are illegal, and that the judge was right in directing the jury to disregard them. This conclusion is sustained by the authorities, so far as we have been able to find any.'' (State ex rel. Hopkins v. Olin, 23 Wis., 326.) The Lex Parliamentaria of England seems to require that the bribery which will justify the rejection of a vote shall be practiced by the candidate to be affected, or by his agent. It is not necessary to the decision of this case to determine which rule should be applied in election cases depending before this House, and hence the committee express no judgment upon it. If it should be held that 332 votes cast at this precinct should be thrown out, or that every vote cast for the sitting Member should be rejected, it would not affect the result at which the committee have arrived. Further on the report says: No sufficient evidence has been produced to warrant the rejection of any votes cast in Monroe County except at the Monroeville precinct. Sec. 908 (5) Changes were made that in Dallas County 1,000 votes were cast by persons not residents of the county. The report says: There was a large body of testimony produced before the committee which tended in some degree to raise an inference that a large number of votes had been cast by nonresidents of the county. This testimony is susceptible of being grouped into two general classes: 1. The testimony of a large number of witnesses showing quite a large emigration of colored people from this county since the year 1869. In the opinion of the witnesses the number was from 2,000 to 3,000, of whom it is estimated that from one-half to three-fourths were colored voters. 2. The second class of testimony is that of railroad officers, steamboat men, and other persons engaged directly or indirectly in procuring and sending away colored laborers into Western States, particularly Mississippi and Louisiana. It is quite apparent that it would be unsafe to hold that illegal votes had been cast on deductions drawn from testimony so infirm. The number of persons removing into the county would have to be ascertained; also how many of those who went abroad to seek labor went away temporarily and afterwards returned would have to be determined; and, in addition to this, it would be necessary to determine how many who were minors in 1869 had attained their majority in 1874. With so many elements of uncertainty the committee do not realize the force which the contestant attached to this class of proofs. Therefore the committee held that the charge was not made out. In conclusion the-committee found: In conclusion, and without entering into any recapitulation of the votes rejected by the committee in the several precincts in this district, the committee content themselves with the statement that when all such illegal votes have been rejected, it still lacks much of overcoming the majority of nearly 2,700, which the sitting Member received; and it is believed no beneficial purpose would be subserved by any more minute analysis of the votes which we agree should be rejected. And your committee have unanimously agreed to report to the House the following resolutions: Resolved, That Frederick G. Bromberg was not elected a Member of the Forty-fourth Congress of the United States and is not entitled to a seat in this House. Resolved, That Jere Haralson was elected a Member of the Forty-fourth Congress of the United States and is entitled to a seat in this House. On April 18 \1\ the House agreed to the resolutions without debate or division. 908. The Illinois election case of Le Moyne v. Farwell, in the Forty-fourth Congress. Where rejection of the poll (although undoubtedly merited) would accrue to advantage of the offending party, the House purged by deducting the illegal votes from the latter's poll. On April 10, 1876,\2\ John T. Harris, of Virginia, from the Committee on Elections, submitted the report of the majority of the committee in the Illinois case of Le Moyne v. Farwell. The official returns gave sitting Member a majority of 186. The contestant alleged fraud and irregularities. Three questions arose, the first two being of essential importance. (1) In the first precinct of the Twentieth Ward of Chicago the returns gave sitting Member a majority of 171 votes. It was admitted by the whole committee that these returns were entirely unreliable. The minority say: In reference to this precinct the committee are all agreed that the election was thoroughly corrupt; that an organized effort was made to commit fraud, commencing with a false registration list and ending in the polling of hundreds of illegal votes. Unless these votes can be eliminated and the poll purged, ----------------------------------------------------------------------- \1\ Journal, p. 817; Record, p. 2552. \2\ First session Forty-fourth Congress, House Report No. 385; Smith, p. 406; Rowell's Digest, p. 308. Sec. 908 we must reject the entire returns, as the number of fraudulent votes cast was clearly sufficient to change the majority. We clearly recognize the duty to follow the rule, that the exclusion of an entire poll is the very last resort, and that it must never be done where there is any rational means by, which the illegal votes can be eliminated and we be enabled to arrive at the truth. In this case no such means exists. The evidence clearly shows not only fraud, but that the judges of the election were parties to it, that they were corrupt and dishonest, and so conducted the election that frauds might be and were committed. They would not respect challenges nor allow challengers in the room; they numbered the ballots so that no one can tell who cast them, although under the Illinois law it was their duty to place on the ballot cast by each voter a number corresponding to that opposite his name on the poll list; and when the ballots were produced from the clerk's office, it was found not only that the ballots were not so numbered, but that on a count there was a discrepancy of 48 against Farwell between the returns of the officers and a count of the ballots. These facts destroy the prima facie character of the returns, the judges are impeached, and their returns become as blank paper. The only question which arose, then, was as to the disposition of the poll, whether it should be wholly rejected or purged. While the majority of the committee--seven in all-sustained the whole report, which recommended purging, yet two of this seven indorsed their dissent and favored the entire rejection of the vote. The four minority members also favored the rejection of the vote, so on this branch of the case the report submitted by the majority of the committee actually represented the opinion of a minority. The report makes this argument: Presumption is raised against contestee from the fact of his receiving a large majority in the precinct. It is also proven that one person who was furnishing names to illegal voters was providing them with tickets bearing contestee's name, and that the four men who made out the fraudulent registry, who, with one addition, constituted the judges and clerks of election, all voted for contestee. All the testimony proving illegal voting in this precinct is adduced by contestant. The contestee has called no witness nor made any attempt to show an illegal vote in the precinct, nor does he claim that there was any fraud practiced therein by contestant, but in his answer says that there was no illegal votes given for him in said precinct, and only asks to have the whole vote of the precinct thrown out, after the number of illegal votes proven by contestant to have been given to contestee exceeds his (contestee's) majority in the precinct. Contestee's majority in the precinct is 171. The number of illegal votes proven to have been given him in the precinct is 252, so that a rejection of the whole poll would give to contestee the advantage of the difference between these numbers, or 81 votes. ``No man shall be allowed to take advantage of his own wrong,'' is one of the plainest and best settled of legal principles. The law says, ``A wrongful or fraudulent act shall not be allowed to conduce to the advantage of the party who committed it.'' The old rule is, ``At law fraud destroys rights. If I mix my corn with another's, he takes all.'' If contestee can have the whole vote of this precinct rejected because of the fraud perpetrated by his own supporters and in his own interest, as proven in the record and not denied, then he is rewarded to the extent of 81 votes for the perpetration of said frauds. The proposition appears to be inequitable and illegal, bordering too closely upon absurdity to admit of argument. By the law of elections it is held (American Law of Elections, sec. 304): ``Nothing short of the impossibility of ascertaining for whom the majority of the votes were given ought to vacate an election.'' Again, section 305, page 231: ``It is the first duty of the tribunal trying the contest to purge the poll of the illegal votes, if this can be done.'' This rule is particularly applicable in a case where it is proven that illegal votes were received and counted, rather than in cases where from the proof of irregularities upon the part of the judges it was to be presumed that the count and returns were illegal. The method used in this election was such that had fairness and honesty been observed, the poll of this precinct could have been purged with certainty and without difficulty. Every voter's name was entered upon the poll book as he voted. Opposite his name was written the street and number of his residence, as given by himself; also a poll-book number, and the testimony of the judges shows that the same number as that opposite his name on the Sec. 908 poll book was written on the ballot of every voter before it was put into the box, so that when proof is made that any name on the poll book is fictitious, or not the name of a legal voter, it is only necessary to select the ballot bearing the corresponding number, and thus identify the candidate from whose vote the deduction should be made. In this case the proof shows that after the election was closed, the ballot box was taken off by one of the judges to the house of a candidate on the same ticket with the contestee, and there left for two days before the official returns were made, and that the friends of contestee having charge thereof withheld their returns until the other precincts were heard from; that when said official returns were made the ballots were sealed and returned to the county clerk, and were not again opened until in taking the testimony in this case they were produced and opened in the presence of the parties to this contest or their attorneys and the officers taking the testimony. Then great irregularity appeared in the numbering of the ballots. There were found 183 names on the poll book for which no ballots were found, 198 ballots of duplicate and triplicate numbers. There were only 673 names on the poll book, but there are ballots numbered 674, 675, 675, 676, and 677. It is clear that the ballot box had been tampered with, but it must be remembered that the box was in the custody of the friends and supporters of contestee, which raises the presumption that whatever alterations or changes were made were in his interest and to his advantage. It must be to the disadvantage of contestant to be forced to purge this poll of fraudulent or illegal votes, after the ballots had been thus manipulated by the friends and in the interest of contestee. In such a condition of things, would it be inequitable or unfair to hold that whenever an illegal vote was proven it should be charged to contestee, whether a ballot bearing a corresponding number was found for him or not? In the case of Duffey (4th Brewster, p. 531), the court held, ``Upon notice, etc., that fraudulent votes had been received, the burden of proof falls upon the candidate advantaged by the count, to show that the person so voting was a legal voter or voted for his opponent; otherwise it will be presumed that they were polled and counted for him, and the poll will be purged by striking the whole number of such votes from his count.'' This ruling was no doubt based upon the presumption that the party receiving the majority is responsible for the fraud, and upon which presumption the court felt warranted in throwing the burden of proof on him, and thus purging the poll. But the application of this rule, which might be claimed to be stringent, is not asked or contended for in this case. Here it is only proposed to deduct from the returned vote of the contestee the number of illegal votes, with ballots bearing numbers corresponding to the names of the illegal voters proven to have been received by him in this precinct (there are 84 names in addition to these proven to be of illegal voters, for which there are no ballots, and we disregard them), and it is held that the adoption of this method for the purging of said poll will necessitate the deduction of 252 votes from the returned votes of contestee. The minority views,\1\ after quoting section 442 of McCrary's American Law of Elections, say: Returns which are impeached are good for no purpose whatever; they prove nothing; and to us the result seems inevitable that if it is admitted, as it is by every member of the committee, that the judges of the election were corrupt and the election fraudulent, that then the whole of the return becomes valueless, does not import verity, and can be used for no purpose whatsoever. The rule of the law, falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus, applies and we have no middle course except to admit all or reject all; and we shall not attempt to argue the absurdity of taking ballots from the same source, numbered by the same hands, and which are proved to be numbered wrongfully, and from these numbers and ballots determine who the illegal voters cast their ballots for. The rule is a safe one; no one is injured by it; it deprives no one of a single legal vote; for when returns are excluded, it is always in the power of the candidate who believes he has a majority of the legal votes to call the voters and prove whom they cast their ballots for. In the debate it was urged \2\ that the officers of the election were not the agents of either party, but were officers of the law, and there was no presumption one way or the other on account of their acts. Legal authorities on this point were adduced. ----------------------------------------------------------------------- \1\ By Mr. Thompson, of Massachusetts, Record, p. 2843. \2\ Submitted by Mr. William R. Brown, of Kansas. Sec. 909 909. The case of Le Moyne v. Farwell, continued. Illustration of a vague and uncertain specification in a notice of contest, which was nevertheless considered. Discussion by a divided committee as to the status of paupers at a poorhouse with reference to question of residence. Discussion as to the evidence required to reject votes of alleged paupers received and counted by the election officers. The House declined to be bound by a decision of a State court on an analogous question, but not the identical question of qualification of voters. (2) The majority report thus sets forth a question as to the residence of certain alleged paupers: Norwood Park: At this precinct the contestee received 51 and contestant 94 votes. The contestee, in his answer, charges: ``Third. That a large number of illegal voters, to wit, over one hundred, who temporarily were inmates of the poorhouse in the town of Norwood Park, and who were not legal voters of said town, were allowed to cast their votes for you, which were counted and returned for you.'' This charge is very vague and uncertain, and leaves the reader in ignorance of any other objection to these voters than the simple fact that they are paupers. But as the law of Illinois allows paupers to vote, it is evident that the objection, as disclosed by the testimony and the brief of the contestee, is to the residence of these supposed paupers. The report criticises the evidence presented to prove that these were paupers as negative and not the best evidence when the law of Illinois required a list of persons admitted to the poorhouse to be kept as a public document. The votes of the alleged paupers were received in accordance with all the precautions of the law as to challenges. Therefore the majority report argues: No fraud being proved, or attempted to be proved, in the officers who received the votes, the question recurs, what degree of proof, as to the illegality of these voters, ought to obtain to justify this committee in excluding votes thus received, counted, and duly certified? In the celebrated New Jersey cases (1 Bart., p. 25) the committee say: ``It is not sufficient that there should exist a doubt as to whether the vote is lawful or not, but conviction of its illegality should be reached to the exclusion of all reasonable doubt before the committee are authorized to deduct it from the party for whom it was received at the polls.'' In Rogers's Law and Practice of Election Committees, page 116, it is said: ``So in petitions against candidates on the ground of want of sufficient qualification, although a negative is to be proved, it is the usage of Parliament that the party attacking the qualification is bound to disprove it.'' So run all the authorities, that a vote once legally cast can not be set aside except upon proof so strong as to produce the certain moral conviction that the said vote was illegal. The burden of proof is on the party assailing the vote. See Cessna v. Myers (McCrary, p. 426), wherein Judge Hoar, in behalf of the committee, says, ``The burden of proof, when either party insists that a vote should be deducted from those cast and returned for his competitor, is upon that party to show the person whose vote is in question voted, and that he voted for his competitor, and that he lacked some one of the qualifications to constitute him a voter.'' Admit, for the argument, that the law of Illinois disqualifies paupers from voting in that State, is the testimony in this case sufficient to satisfy the judgment that those ``employees,'' as they were called, were paupers? We think not, though, secondarily, the weight of evidence is that they were a class employed by the superintendent of the poorhouse by order of the board to do work upon the county farm an about the premises, and to receive their clothing and food as a compensation. We know the human heart revolts at being called a pauper, and that there are many, many poor persons in Sec. 909 every county who would gladly work the remainder of their days for their food and clothing rather than be called paupers. To this class, it seems to your committee, these voters belong. Therefore, in the light of the authorities and the evidence, your committee could not strike off these votes, even if the law prohibited paupers from voting. But the law of Illinois does allow paupers to vote, and the contestee attacks, in his evidence and the brief of his very learned and able counsel, the residence of these parties. This brings us to consider the law of residence within the meaning of the constitution of Illinois so as to allow the exercise of the election franchise. No question has been more discussed and to less purpose than the definitions of ``residence'' and ``domicile.'' No two authors precisely agree in their attempt to define them. But all agree upon the universal principle that every man must have a domicile. We can well understand why a strict rule should apply in the definitions of these terms, as has ever been and will be, in regard to domicile where the rights of property, the law of descent and distribution, the law of the duty of the citizen or the subject to his government, are involved. We can as readily see, in regard to suffrage, why the strictness of the rule should not apply in our Government. While the extent to which suffrage may be carried is under the control of the law power of the several States, conferred by their constitutions, yet suffrage in some form is inherent in our Government and forms its very basis. Without the free and legitimate exercise of this right, we can have no republican government; and all laws passed by the States requiring its exercise in particular localities and requiring a residence are not to abridge the sacred right, but to guard and protect it from abuse and violation. The report then goes on to quote Vattel, Story, the American Cyclopedia, Bouvier, and the House cases of Monroe v. Jackson, Covode v. Foster, Taylor v. Reading, and Cessna v. Myers, and concludes: Upon this brief summary of these cases, it is evident that the weight of authority is to the point that paupers at a poorhouse do acquire there a residence within the meaning of the election laws prescribing a residence as a requisite to suffrage. There had been in Illinois decisions of the court (Paine v. The Town of Durham, 29 Ill., 125; Freeport v. Supervisors, 41 Ill., 41) that paupers did not lose their residence in the towns from which they went, nor did they acquire a residence at the poorhouse. The report calls attention to the fact that the law of Illinois allowed the towns to take care of their own poor or to have them cared for at a county poorhouse. It was therefore evident that had the court authorized the contrary doctrine, the town where the county poorhouse was located would become responsible for all the county paupers. The report points out that these decisions have reference to a police matter merely and have ``no reference or bearing upon the constitutional provision in regard to suffrage.'' Therefore the majority of the committee decline to be bound by the decisions of the court. The report quotes the constitution of Illinois: Every person having resided in this State one year, in the county ninety days, and the election district thirty days shall be entitled to vote. A law passed by the legislature also provided as quoted and commented on in the report: ``A permanent abode is necessary to constitute a residence within the meaning of the preceding section.'' Certainly it will not be contended that the legislature had a right to change the constitution, or so to construe it as to enlarge or restrict the right of voting. It can do neither, and their act on the subject of residence is null and void; and we must decide this question as if it had never passed, and look alone to the constitution for our guide. By that constitution we find ``every person having resided,'' etc. This is certainly putting the question of residence in its mildest form, and rebuts the presumption that the constitution means that a man, before he can vote in Illinois, must have a domicile in the sense of the old Sec. 909 and strict construction of that word when applied to contracts, distribution, etc. In the opinion of your committee, ``having resided'' simply means that a man shall, in good faith, have lived in Illinois for twelve months, not as a mere itinerant or visitor, but that he shall have been substantially engaged in business there during that time. Given the construction contended for by contestee, then there is a very large class in that State who do not dwell in poorhouses who would be disfranchised. The law of Illinois is rather singular in this. It requires the relatives of a poor person, if they are able, first to support them, in the following order: First, children shall support their parents; next, parents support their children; next, brothers and sisters; next, grandchildren; next, grandparents. And it is made the duty of the State's attorney for the county to apply to the court for judgment and award of execution such relative for the support of his pauper kinsman; for the statute recognizes all persons as paupers who are not able to support themselves. Will it be contended that these poor persons, living in the family of their relatives, do not acquire a home, a residence there, because they are placed there in obedience to the law? Surely not. If so, we would witness the painful spectacle of disabled soldiers and some of the most intelligent citizens disfranchised because of poverty and because they live in the family of their relatives, away from the town in which they had previously lived. This is as much their poorhouse under the law as the county building is the poorhouse of those who have no relatives within the degree able to support them. If the home of the family in which he lives is not his, then he has none--no home on earth. So with the pauper at the poorhouse. It is his home, his residence; he has none other. It is idle to say his residence is a restrained one. It is not. He can leave when he pleases. He is there for no offense; paying the penalty of no violated law. His only crime is poverty, and he is there to receive the bounty of his county or his town, as the most convenient place. It is a necessity that compels him to go there, but it is not the necessity of duress which deprives him of his volition and his intent. Unlike the lunatic, the infant, and feme covert, he is a free agent, to think and act for himself, except so far as he is restrained by poverty. The humblest citizen in his little hut, living perhaps on one meal a day, is restrained by poverty, yet he is a freeman and a voter. That necessity which compelled them to go to the poorhouse will compel them to remain; and if there be one class above another whose homes, whose residences, are fixed, it is this class of persons. We presume but few go animo revertendi, but they go with the expectation of spending the remainder of their days there. Then admitting these persons to be paupers, which we do not, in the opinion of this committee, their home, their residence, their permanent abiding place is at the poorhouse, and they have a right to vote in the Norwood Park precinct, in which the poorhouse is. The minority views combat the above argument: Norwood Park is a small country precinct, casting outside the poor farm only eighty-four votes. In such a precinct every man knows and is acquainted with his neighbor, and especially is this true of the officers and business men in such a place; and when these come up and testify that they do not know these men, and have never known them there, the evidence seems to us very conclusive. In speaking of this class of testimony Mr. McCray says (American Law of Elections, sec. 356): ``This kind of evidence is admissible for what it is worth, but it is manifest its value must depend upon circumstances. If the district or territory within which the voter resides is large or very populous, and the witness has not an intimate and extensive acquaintance with the inhabitants, the evidence will be of little value, and, standing alone, will avail nothing. But on the other hand, if such district or territory be not large or populous, and if the witness shows his acquaintance with the inhabitants is such that he could scarcely fail to know any person who may have resided therein long enough to become a voter, his evidence may be quite satisfactory, especially if it further appears that soon after the election the alleged nonresident voter could not be found in the district within the limits of which all voters must reside. Proof of this character must at least be regarded sufficient to shift the burden upon the party claiming that the vote of such alleged nonresident be counted and require him to show affirmatively that he is a bona fide resident.'' The evidence in this case of Winship, justice of the peace; Corse, town clerk; Pennoyer, an old resident of ten years; Ball, who had lived in the town since it was organized and had been through it three times within two years in assessing and collecting taxes, and of Stockwell, certainly is sufficient to change the burden of proof and throw upon Mr. Le Moyne the duty of showing such prior residence. But instead of attempting this, Mr. Kimberly, the warden of the poor farm, and Mr. Le Moyne's only witness, directly testifies that he does not know that these men had been residents of Norwood Park, and if cor- Sec. 910 roborative evidence was necessary that they had no residence in the town except at the poor farm, it is found in the fact that John Walsh, deputy warden of the poor farm, signs all the affidavits as witness, showing in itself that the men were not acquainted in the town. Now, if these men had no prior residence at Norwood Park could they have obtained one by being inmates of the poorhouse? To us the answer is plain--that as employees they could; as paupers they could not The minority then examines the authorities, after which they consider the status of the alleged paupers, coming to the following conclusions: We believe every rule of evidence would require us to come to the conclusion that the seventeen men whom Mr. Kimberly will not attempt to prove to be employees were paupers; for certainly their place of residence, their appearance, the manner in which they were brought to the polls, and the manner in which they were voted would raise that presumption, and, in the language of Mr. McCrary, at least shift the burden of proof upon the contestant. Were the others not also paupers? Mr. Kimberly, the warden of the poor farm, testifies that they belonged to a class of employees ``to whom, in lieu of money, I allow payment in the way of extra clothing, board, and accommodation and liberties''--persons who were not on the pay rolls, but employed as ``assistants in the bakery, cooks in the kitchen, men in the washhouse and soup house, men in care of the wards of the almshouse, nurses, teamsters, men in care of the stock, and men on the farm--gardeners.'' They are paid in ``extra board, accommodations, clothing, and are allowed small perquisites, liberty.'' The same witness stated that he could not state where the men came from, but presumes ``most of them were convalescent patients from the hospital, and that they came on physicians' certificates in the city, and that, as a general thing, they came to the institution as paupers;'' that, ``generally, this extra employment was given to the inmates of the institution.'' He also states the regular corps of employees consisted of twenty-one men and twenty-three women. We submit that this evidence of Mr. Kimberly is conclusive that these men were paupers, and came there mostly from the city. The manner in which such institutions are usually conducted is, to have a regular force of persons hired and paid to take charge, and that the assistants are always paupers; that the very object of having such an institution on a farm is to furnish such employment as the inmates may be capable of performing, so that they may, in part, make the institution self- supporting; and we do not understand that the mere fact that paupers labor, that a system of rewards is established to encourage them to labor, that thereby their status is changed. The very evidence of Kimberly calling their pay ``extras'' shows that without this employment they would receive ordinary fare. Notice his language: ``Extra board,'' ``extra clothing,'' ``privileges at first table,'' ``extra diet,' ``in the winter time an extra meal,'' ``extra allowance of clothing,'' ``privilege of selecting their own ward,'' ``small perquisites.'' The evidence is so convincing that we hardly feel that we need go beyond Kimberly's testimony to show that these employees were paupers from the city; but we have, besides, conclusive evidence as to their status. Comparing the lists we have made of persons who called themselves paupers and those whom Kimberly calls employees, we find that the names of Thomas Sage, Hugh Gallagher, Daniel McFarland, I. A. Hipwell, John Campbell, Daniel Boyle, and M. A. Kinsella appear on both lists, showing that these men did not conceive these extras changed their status, and that they were not paupers, supported by the county, as they stated they were. If ever a witness was contradicted, Mr. Kimberly is, by the very facts he testifies to, and by the statements of the very men whom he claims as his employees. The conclusion, to our mind, is irresistible, that these persons were never residents of Norwood Park, and were paupers; and we reject the votes of each and all of the forty-seven voters named on our two lists. 910. The case of Le Moyne v. Farwell, continued. A return made up ``irregu1arly from ballots that had not been properly kept'' was rejected. Affidavits given by nonregistered voters need not be signed; but the jurat must appear or the votes are rejected. (3) The report rejects the returns from the third precinct of the Eighteenth Ward of Chicago ``as wanting in regularity and certainty.'' After the election Sec. 911 had closed the ballot box, ballots, and all papers pertaining to the election were taken to a saloon and left over-night in inadequate custody of one who was not an officer of election or authorized to have care of the ballot box under the law. On the day after the election some of the election officers with others unauthorized took charge of the box and papers, made a count, and drew up a return, which was claimed to be an official return. (4) The report further says as to another precinct: Contestee objects to a number of affidavits furnished by nonregistered voters, because of their not being signed by the affiants, though properly certified to by the officer taking the same. We hold that said affidavits are clearly sufficient. In this precinct contestant objects to seven affidavits furnished by voters for contestee, upon the ground that they do not appear to have been sworn to before any officer. There is no jurat thereto; it is agreed that the same are fatally defective, and 6 votes therefore should be deducted from contestee. As a result of their reasonings the majority report finds contestant elected by a majority of 106 votes, and presents resolutions unseating sitting Member and seating contestant. The report was fully debated in the House for three days, and on May 3 \1\ resolutions declaring sitting Member entitled to the seat offered by the minority as a substitute, were disagreed to, yeas 89, nays 129. Then the resolutions of the majority, seating contestant, were agreed to without division. 911. The Minnesota election case of Cox v. Strait, in the Forty- fourth Congress. The State legislature having included a county within a Congressional district, the House did not examine whether or not it was technically entitled to be so included. County commissioners having established election districts at a special meeting when the law specified a stated meeting, the action was void. The election district having been illegally constituted, the votes cast therein were rejected. On April 12, 1876, \2\ Mr. John Harris, of Virginia, from the Committee on Elections, submitted a report in the case of Cox v. Strait, from the Second district of Minnesota. The election in question was held on November 3, 1874, and the official canvass showed a majority of 221 votes for sitting Member. The contestant sought to prove sufficient fraud and irregularities to overturn this result. The questions examined were: (1) In the vote of the Second district was included that of Kandiyohe County, to which the legislature had in 1870 added what had formerly been Monongalia County. And as the districting act had left to the Third district all counties not specifically enumerated as in the First or Second district, and as Monongalia County was not especially mentioned as in the First or Second district, it was urged by contestant that contestee was not entitled to the majority of 188 votes returned for him from the territory of Monongalia County. The ground of the contestant for ----------------------------------------------------------------------- \1\ Journal, pp. 910-912; Record, pp. 2834, 2885, 2918-2922. \2\ First session Forty-fourth Congress, House Report No. 391; Smith, p. 428; Rowell's Digest, p. 309. Sec. 911 making this claim was that the consolidation of the two counties was unconstitutional and void. The report says: Section 1, article 11, constitution of Minnesota, is as follows: ``The legislature may from time to time establish and organize new counties, but no new county shall contain less than four hundred [square] miles; nor shall any county be reduced below that amount; and all laws changing county lines in counties already organized, or for removing county seats, shall, before taking effect, be submitted to the electors of the county or counties to be affected thereby, at the next general election after the passage thereof, and be adopted by a majority of such electors. Counties now established may be enlarged, but not reduced below four hundred square miles.'' The contestant claims that the clause which prohibits the reducing of the counties then existing below 400 square miles, and the provision that counties then existing may be enlarged, but not reduced below 400 square miles, prohibit the extinguishing of the county of Monongalia by consolidating it with the county of Kandiyohi, and that the act of the legislature of Minnesota consolidating those counties is unconstitutional and void, and that Monongalia is now in fact a county, and not being included by name in either the First or Second district, belongs to the Third district instead of the Second. It appears that the object sought to be accomplished by that section of the constitution is to prevent the reducing of the original counties below 400 square miles, and the formation of new counties with a less amount of territory than 400 square miles, and to prevent the changing of county lines in counties then organized without the consent of the electors of the counties to be affected thereby. The legislature certainly has the right to consolidate counties formed subsequent to the adoption of the constitution. There is no direct prohibition to the consolidating of original counties, and thereby forming a new county. The only direct prohibition is that the county so formed shall not contain less than 400 square miles. The power to form new counties without specifying the territory out of which they may be formed certainly gives the right to form a new county by consolidating counties, whether original or otherwise, unless the prohibition relative to reducing the original counties below 400 square miles shall be held to forbid the extinguishment of a county by consolidating it with another county. This does not seem to be the mischief designed to be remedied. In fact, the consolidating of counties might be a remedy for the evil and in manifest futherance of the object of this constitutional provision, viz, to avoid the existence of small counties. Constitutional restriction upon legislation must be plain and certain. A State legislature has supreme power of legislating except where it is restricted by the constitution, and everything will be presumed in favor of the power of the legislature. The courts will not declare an act unconstitutional unless it is clearly made so by an express provision of the constitution. Your committee are strongly of the opinion that the act consolidating those counties is constitutional, but have not deemed it necessary to decide that question in this case. The real question is, What territory was included in the Second district? The representative districts are formed of contiguous territory. In 1872 the legislature of Minnesota set off a certain amount of territory as the First district, a certain amount of territory for the Second district, and then enacted that all the territory of the State not included within the First and Second districts should compose the Third district. The legislature designated the territory to be comprised in the Second district by in naming the counties to be included in it, and it must be assumed that it included the territory which the legislature itself had determined belonged to said counties. The legislature passed the act of 1870 consolidating Monongalia and Kandiyohi counties, and the same was made effectual by the methods provided in the act. The consolidation of the counties was recognized in the division of the State into senatorial and representative districts in 1871 (chap. 20), and it is plain that the legislature when it designated the county of Kandiyohi as a part of the Second district designated it as it was formed by itself and did include in it the territory which formerly composed the county of Monongalia. Your committee, therefore, find that the majority of 188 votes canvassed for the sitting Member was rightly canvassed, and ought not to be deducted from his majority of 221. (2) As to the illegality of certain voting precincts, the report says: Second. It is provided (p. 220, Stat. L., see. 19) that the board of commissioners shall meet at the county seat of their respective counties, for the purpose of transacting such business as may devolve upon or be brought before them, on the first Tuesday of January and September in each year, and may Sec. 912 hold such extra sessions as they deem necessary for the interest of the county; such extra sessions shall be called by a majority of the board, and the clerk shall give at least ten days' notice thereof to the commissioners, but no regular session shall continue longer than six days, and no extra session longer than three days. Page 233, section 31: The commissioners of such county (any county not divided into towns) shall, at their stated meetings in January and September, upon the petition of not less than 10 legal voters not residing within 10 miles of any established election district, create and establish within said county an election district at such point as will be most convenient for the persons so petitioning; but no place of holding elections shall be located in said election districts within 10 miles of any other place of holding elections previously established, nor shall the commissioners create any election district except at the time of their stated meetings, and then only in compliance with the request of 10 or more legal voters residing not less than 10 miles from any established election district. The election districts of Southeast, Blaen Avon, Michigan, South, Ceresco, East, and Northeast were not established at a stated meeting of the county commissioners, but at a special meeting holden October 5, 1874 (pp. 50, 51, record), and were therefore not legally established. The action of the county commissioners was without authority of law, and null and void, and no legal election could be held at either of said districts; therefore 111 votes must be deducted from the majority reported for the contestee-- that being the majority he received in said districts which was wrongfully canvassed for him. 912. The case of Cox v. Strait, continued. Although election officers left the ballot box unguarded while adjourned for dinner, the returns were not rejected in the absence of evidence of fraud. Although de facto officers presided and returns were transmitted unsealed by an unauthorized person, the House did not reject the return. As to the evidence required to establish a charge of bribery. Irregularities unaccompanied by fraud do not vitiate the return. (3) In the town of West Newton the election judges closed the polls for about an hour while they took dinner, the ballot box being left in the election room, which adjoined that in which the dinner was taken. After quoting the evidence, the report holds: Your committee regard the conduct of the judges of election at this place in leaving the ballot box for the space of an hour unsealed and unguarded as highly reprehensible. It is of the highest importance that the ballot box should be guarded and protected in the most careful manner; that all the provisions of law made for the security of the ballot should be strictly obeyed. There should not be the least opportunity for tampering with the ballots. It is certainly a serious question whether such an irregularity as this ought not to vitiate the election; but your committee under all the circumstances have not felt compelled to reject this entire poll, there being no evidence that the ballot box was actually tampered with, but, on the contrary, there is some negative testimony showing that it was not tampered with. Your committee would, were there any facts tending to show that the ballot box had been tampered with, have decided to reject the returns from this poll. The adjournment for dinner has frequently been decided not to be sufficient to vitiate an election. The law of the State of Minnesota provides that no election returns shall be refused where there has been a substantial compliance with the law. Section 40, election law of Minnesota: ``Sec. 40. No election returns shall be refused by any auditor for the reason that the same are returned or delivered to him in any other than the manner directed herein; nor shall the canvassing board of the county refuse to include any returns in their estimate of votes for any informality in holding any election or making returns thereof, but all returns shall be received and the votes canvassed by such canvassing board and included in the abstracts, provided there is a substantial compliance with the provisions of this chapter.'' The fact ought also to be considered, in determining what should be done with the votes at this Sec. 913 place, that the contestant did not in his notice of contest claim that the ballot box was tampered with, or even left unguarded, but rested his claim to have the vote excluded upon the sole and untenable ground of the adjournment of the judges of election for an hour at noon. (4) As to West Newton precinct certain questions were settled thus: It does not appear from the evidence that the ballot box was not all of the time in sight of some one of the election officers during the adjournment for dinner, and we apply the same rule here as in the case of the town of West Newton. It does not appear that any unnaturalized person voted, and the officers who presided at the election were de facto officers, and there is nothing shown which so impeaches their action as to vitiate the poll on that account. The returns should have been conveyed to the county auditor by one of the judges of the election sealed, but were conveyed by the witness, an unauthorized person, and were unsealed. This is a grave irregularity, but the evidence is that he delivered the returns to the county auditor just as he received them from the town canvassers, and this testimony is not impeached. The committee do not, therefore, reject the returns from this town. (5) As to a charge of bribery: Sixth. The contestant claims that 200 votes given for the contestee should be deducted for bribery. The evidence shows that Ph. Stelzer received a check for $25 in a letter which purported to be from the contestee, and requesting Stelzer to use his influence in the election for the contestee (pp. 38, 39). Also Julius Christianson received $2 from one J. B. Sackett the day before election, and was promised $2 on election day, ``to peddle Republican tickets with H. B. Strait's name on.'' The $2 promised was paid the day after election. A. J. Lamberton testified that ``common report was that J. B. Sackett and William Beckel were distributing a great deal of money for the purpose of buying and influencing votes for H. B. Strait for Member of Congress.'' But he had no personal knowledge of a dollar having been spent for that purpose. Your committee find the evidence wholly insufficient to establish the charge of bribery. (6) As to irregularities not accompanied by charges of fraud: The contestee makes counter charges, alleging irregularities in a large number of voting precincts which gave a majority for the contestant. These voting precincts are in the counties of Carver, Le Sueur, Sibley, and Dakota, but the irregularities, where any are shown to exist, relate to the manner of returning the votes, the swearing of the election officers, and adjournment for dinner, and are not of that nature and character and extent which, unaccompanied with fraud, will vitiate the returns. In conclusion the committee found: The committee do not make any deductions from the votes of the contestant, and only deduct from the contestee the majority of 111 votes which were canvassed for him in those precincts in Lyon County which were not legal voting precincts. The returns as corrected give Horace B. Strait 110 majority, instead of 221. Your committee find that he was elected by that majority, and recommend the passage of the following resolution: Resolved, That Horace B. Strait was duly elected, and is entitled to retain the seat which he now holds from the Second Congressional district of Minnesota. On June 23 \1\ the resolution of the committee was agreed to in the House without debate or division. 913. The Louisiana election case of Spencer v. Morey. The making of essential tally-lists by unsworn volunteers, combined with other irregularities, caused the rejection of return, although no fraud was shown. The record of a trial in a State court as to a title to a State office is not competent evidence in an election case, although relating to the election in question. ----------------------------------------------------------------------- \1\ Journal, p. 1143; Record, p. 4076. Sec. 913 On April 27, 1876,\1\ Mr. John F. House, of Tennessee, from the Committee on Elections, submitted the report of the majority of the committee in the Louisiana case of Spencer v. Morey. It was admitted that the result was not impeached in any parts of the district except in the precincts of Carroll Parish and in the Fifth precinct of Concordia Parish. Outside of this contested territory Mr. Spencer, the contestant, received a majority of 1,396 votes. Therefore the sitting Member's majority depended on the disposition of the questions relating to the disputed territory. The examination of the case is naturally divided into two main branches: (1) As to the fifth precinct of Concordia Parish. The law of the State provided: That immediately upon the close of the polls on the day of election, the commissioners of the election at each poll or voting place shall proceed to count the votes. * * * The votes shall be counted by the commissioners at each voting place immediately after closing the election and without moving the boxes from the place where the votes were received, and the counting must be done in the presence of any bystander or citizen who may be present. Tally lists shall be kept of the count, etc. Sec. 45. Be it further enacted, &c., That any civil officer or other person who shall assume or pretend to act in any capacity as a commissioner or other officer of election to receive or count votes, to receive returns or ballot boxes, or to do any other act toward the holding or conducting of elections, or the making returns thereof, in violation of or contrary to the provisions of this act, shall be deemed guilty of a felony, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment in the penitentiary for a term not to exceed three years nor less than one year, and by a fine not exceeding three hundred dollars nor less than one hundred dollars. Of the conduct of the commissioners of the parish the majority report says: In view of the specific requirements of the law upon the subject, it must be admitted that the conduct of the commissioners in totally disregarding its plain provisions is somewhat extraordinary. The law required them not to remove the ballot box from the place where the election was held until they had counted every vote in it in, the presence of such of the voters as saw fit to be present and witness the counting. This counting they were required to commence immediately on the close of the polls, and their returns were to be made out and delivered to the supervisor of registration within twenty-four hours after the voting ceased. Instead of doing this, after the close of the election, between 6 and 7 o'clock in the evening, they took the ballot box and started with it to Vidalia, the parish site, a distance of some 16 miles from the voting place. Dameron, one of the commissioners, who is sworn by both parties, in his testimony says when the polls were closed the box was locked, and he took the key and gave the box to Robert H. Columbus, another commissioner. They started to Vidalia on horseback, and when they arrived at the store of one Witherspoon, the suggestion was made that Dameron should get into a buggy with one Irvine and take the ballot box in the buggy with him. They then proceeded to Vidalia, one of the commissioners riding in front and the other in rear of the buggy, on horseback. They reached Vidalia between 11 and 12 o'clock that night, and finding the court-house occupied by the officers of election at Vidalia, they went upstairs into the room of the tax collector, opened the box, and commenced counting the votes. They counted until half past 2 o'clock that night, when, being fatigued, they adjourned for the night. When the box was closed, Dameron says he locked it and gave the key to Columbus, and took the box himself with him to the hotel, where he and William C. Yorger, United States supervisor, occupied the same room for the balance of the night. The box was placed under the bed during the night. The next morning, Dameron says, he took the box with him to the table when he went to breakfast. After breakfast they again met in the upstairs room of the court-house, opened the box, and commenced counting, and after counting there a while went down into the court room. They completed their returns on Wednesday night, November 3, between 10 and 11 o'clock, and made their returns to the supervisor of the parish on the next day, 4th November, between 12 m. and 1 o'clock p.m. Dameron further says ----------------------------------------------------------------------- \1\ First session Forty-fourth Congress, House Report No. 442; Smith, p. 437; Rowell's Digest, p. 311. Sec. 913 that during the time they were counting the votes in the tax collector's office there were several spectators present; the tax collector's office was considered a public office; says when he went to his meals, during the counting, he left the box in the court room in charge of his co-commissioner Columbus, and took the key himself, and when Columbus went to his meals he took the key, leaving the box in Dameron's custody. Columbus and Jefferson, the other two commissioners, being colored men, did not take their meals at the same place Dameron did. The minority views call attention to the fact that Dameron, who was most prominent in the action, represented the political party friendly to contestant. The former law had required the election commissioners to go to Vidalia to count the vote, and they appeared to consider the requirement still in force. The minority views continue: No other presumption can arise out of this evidence than that they supposed and believed the law required them to go to Vidalia, the parish seat, and there count the votes, and that this was done by them in order to conform with the law, as they supposed it to be, and not with the intent to commit fraud in connection with the election; especially when we understand that the election laws of Louisiana, in force at the last election prior to this one, and for some time prior thereto, provided that ``at the conclusion of the election, at each poll, the boxes containing the ballots shall be securely locked and sealed, and taken immediately by the commissioners of election to the parish seat, where they shall be counted out by the said commissioners, in the presence of the supervisors of registration and election of the parish.'' It certainly would be a violent presumption to presume anything else than this from the evidence before us. There is not a scintilla of evidence proving fraud of any kind, nor is any attempt made to prove fraud by contestant, nor was it urged in argument that any fraud was committed; but it was urged that the mere fact of removing the box gave an opportunity for fraud. The evidence shows that the box was never out of the hands of the lawful custodians until the votes were counted and the returns made. Until the contestant proves some act showing fraud on the part of the commissioners, or some one of them, or some act from which fraud will, be presumed, the law is that their acts must be taken as having been honestly performed. The legal presumption is against fraud on the part of the officers of election, and that nothing but the most unequivocal proof can destroy the credit of official returns. (See Goggin v. Gilmore, 1 Bart., 70; Little v. Robbins, same; p. 130.) The burden of proof is upon contestant to prove the fraud. We do not deem it necessary to cite authorities to establish this legal proposition. We conclude therefore that, as there is no evidence proving fraud, or any evidence from which fraud can be presumed in connection with this box, the committee will not, in the absence of such proof, conclude that because there was an opportunity for fraud that therefore fraud was committed. Certainly this would be a monstrous violation of the legal presumption in regard to legal acts, viz, that all persons are presumed innocent until proven guilty, that officers are presumed to have performed their duties, and to have performed them honestly, and that the mere opportunity to commit a crime, in the absence of other evidence, will. not be taken as a presumption to establish the fact that a person committed the crime. The evidence regarding this box, taken all together, does not even raise the presumption of fraud. The majority of the committee say on this point, and on a second question raised as to these returns: Whatever may be thought as to whether those portions of the law are mandatory or directory which require the votes to be counted at the place where they axe polled, without removing the ballot box, in the presence of such voters as may see fit to witness the count, and the commissioners to make their return to the supervisor of the parish in twenty-four hours after the close of the polls--all of which provisions were intentionally violated or ignorantly disregarded by the commissioners--we assume that there can be no two opinions on the proposition that that part of the law which requires the commissioners to make a correct count of the votes cast is certainly imperative. Before entering upon their duties, as we have seen, they are required to swear that they will ``carefully and honestly canvass'' the votes. How were the votes at this box counted? How did these commissioners discharge their duty in this respect? Sec. 913 The keeper of the tally list, to all intents and purposes, makes the only record from which the votes can be counted. If his list is correct, the number of votes cast can be correctly ascertained; if his list is erroneous, the returns based on it are necessarily incorrect. The tally keeper is, then, the party who counts the votes. The marks he makes on the paper determine how many votes each candidate has received. It is not pretended, and indeed can not be, that these commissioners had any other mode or means of determining the result of the election than from the tally sheets kept by parties ``picked up``-- to use Dameron's expression--at random in the court-house to tally the vote. Can sworn commissioners, whom the law places around the ballot box as guardians of its purity, and charges with the duty of ``carefully and honestly'' canvassing the votes at an election, delegate to unsworn and irresponsible parties the delicate task which the law imposes upon them alone? The law of Louisiana expressly requires tally sheets to be kept; and when properly kept they are authority upon the state of the vote. Says McCrary, in his Law of Elections, section 291: ``In the case last named it was held that the tally sheet kept by the officers of the election is competent evidence, in an election contest, to show the true state of the vote. It is good until impeached, and affords prima facie evidence of the votes cast for such candidate.'' This gives to the tally sheet kept by officers of the election the same dignity and authority as the returns themselves, and properly so; for the returns are based on the tally sheets, and unless the latter are correct the former can not possibly be so, or import verity. Who were Connell, Joyce, and Nutt, the three parties picked up in the court- house to work upon these tally sheets? All we know of them is their names. They were not officers of the election, and were not sworn to discharge their duties faithfully. By the law of Louisiana it is made a felony for any person not an officer of election to assume to act as such in receiving or counting votes, or doing any other act toward the holding or conducting elections, or making returns thereof; clearly prohibiting all unofficial hands from touching anything connected with holding elections or counting the votes. No legal presumption of correctness attaches to their acts. If the tally sheets kept by them can stand at all, they must stand on extrinsic evidence of their truth, as they can lean on no legal presumption for support. It is no extenuation of such a proceeding as this for witnesses to swear, as Dameron does, that the election was all fair. Of what avail is a fair election with a dishonest or uncertain count of the votes? But, in addition to the absence of any legal presumption to support such a count, Dameron says, in positive disparagement of the manner in which the tally sheets were kept, ``I don't think the tally lists were very regularly kept, as we had no regular tally keepers, and had to pick them up as we could get them. I believe the tally lists were kept as correctly as they could have been kept under the circumstances.'' Not ``very regularly kept,'' but ``I believe'' they were ``as correctly kept as they could have been kept under the circumstances!'' The law required him and his cocommissioners to keep them regularly. They had been sworn to do so, and they were required to know of their own personal knowledge that they were correctly kept, and yet this sworn officer admits they were not very regularly kept, but excuses the irregular manner in which they were kept by saying the commissioners had to pick up such persons as they could get to keep them. Why did they have to pick up anybody to discharge a duty whic