Canada Place is an iconic building located on the picturesque waterfront of Vancouver, Canada. The white sails of the structure have made it an iconic city landmark. The building is home to a variety of restaurants, retail facilities and luxury accommodations. Part of Vancouver Convention Centre is also housed in Canada Place, in addition to Vancouver World Trade Centre and virtual reality ride, Flyover Canada. The building is also the main terminal for cruise ships embarking to Alaska.

Canada Place is home to the East Building of Vancouver Convention Centre, one part of the award-winning exhibition and conference facility. The state-of-the-art West Building, complete with a rooftop garden, is in the adjacent glass fronted structure. Visitors to Canada Place will enjoy the spectacular virtual reality ride, Flyover Canada. Experience the winds and mists of the Niagara Falls, the sights and sounds of the bustling metropolis and cultural landmarks of this fascinating country. The busiest harbour in the country surrounds Canada Place. Intrepid adventurers wishing to explore uncharted territory can embark on a cruise ship to Alaska. Those craving retail therapy can indulge in their favourite pastime, as the main collection of Vancouver’s downtown shops are located nearby. The waterfront zone is also a wonderful place in which to discover some of the city’s ultimate dining venues. Visitors can choose from seafood eateries and popular Irish bars to Japanese sushi restaurants and gelato parlours.

Canada Place can be reached on foot, by bicycle or via the Skytrain line which operates to nearby Waterfront Station. Walking from the city centre takes around 10-15 minutes. If travelling from further afield in the city, taxis and Uber are readily available. Visitors who wish to drive will find directions easy to follow, and parking facilities close by.

The area where Canada Place sits was once frequented by the earliest explorers. The port area has set ships afloat to provide lumber to other continents, accepted immigrants from all over the world and the seen the arrival of the first train into the country. Canada Place opened during Expo ‘86 and has expanded as popularity dictated. Today, it is one of the most popular and visited attractions in Vancouver. The crisp white sails of Canada Place are a recognisable landmark for visitors arriving or leaving the city by ship.