Owing to their star power, depth, and effective coaching, the LA Clippers have established themselves as one of the finest teams in the NBA. Dynamic players with offensive and defensive grit, including Kawhi Leonard and Paul George lead the Clippers team. Alon with these star players, they have a talented supporting cast contributing significantly, both on-court and off-court. Seeing their journey, the Clippers truly have the adaptability and a strategic understanding under the head coach Tyronn Lue. Lue leads them to compete at a high level, constantly challenging their spirits and nudging them to grow.

However, the team’s journey to the top wasn’t a smooth road. An ex-NBA star reveals his ‘wild days’ in a recent podcast episode, talking about the days spent under the leadership of the controversial Donald Sterling.

ADVERTISEMENT

Article continues below this ad

Los Angeles Clippers Practice Days in a Shady Neighborhood

Donald Sterling’s rise to fame was as the owner of the Los Angeles Clippers. His association with the Clippers dates back to 1981 when he paid $12.5 million for the franchise while it was still based in San Diego. Sterling significantly influenced the path of the franchise throughout his 33 years as owner.

However, a 2014 scandal cast a shadow over Sterling’s ownership. His racist comments about his then-mistress were leaked in an audio clip, which landed him in hot water. Players, fans, and the league reacted quickly to the incident, and it pressured Sterling into selling the team. In reaction to the uproar, Shelly Sterling, his estranged wife, helped sell the franchise to Steve Ballmer for a record-breaking $2 billion.

Most recently, Shaun Livingston who used to play in the Clippers under Donald Sterling was asked about his experience with the same. And boy, “it was weird!”

Shaun Livingston Shares His Shocking Experience

Shaun Livingston recently appeared in an episode of ‘SHOWTIME Basketball.’ During his appearance, he talked about the unpleasant experiences he faced while playing for the Clippers.

He said, “It was a step-down. I just didn’t know what to expect, I just expected better. I’m saying it just you know our first practice being at Southwest Community College. I remember one of the guys, they got their car broken into. It was just wild that you know we were going through that. And then you know we finished practice you know we’re on pretty much like one side of the gym. We finished practice we go in the locker room. Here comes the football team in there. You know you kind of like ‘No I am going to take the shower pill dog don’t take it to the crib like huh.’ It’s just was..you know it was rough.”

The absence of adequate shower facilities was one of the major obstacles that the Clippers encountered during these years. Another issue that they faced was security. The lack of a specific practice area forced the team to extreme measures to keep themselves and their belongings safe. It became necessary to leave the back door open in order to deter potential break-ins into their parked cars.

He then retrospects on the things the team could’ve achieved had adequate resources been provided to them back then.

ADVERTISEMENT

Article continues below this ad

However, luckily for him, Mike Dunleavy Sr took over, and they upgraded to Spectrum Health Club!

ADVERTISEMENT

Article continues below this ad

Watch This Story–Worst career-threatening injuries in NBA history

What are your thoughts on this? Let us know in the comments below!