On Friday, 15-year pro and three-time NBA champion Shaun Livingstonannounced his retirement via Instagram.

Livingston was selected No. 4 overall by the Los Angeles Clippers in 2004 out of high school, but during a game against Washington in 2007 he suffered a broken left leg, dislocated left knee cap and multiple ligament tears in his left knee that threatened his career. Livingston missed the entire 2007-08 season before brief stints with Miami then Oklahoma City in his first season back.

Livingston played a combined 18 games for the Thunder in the 2008-09 and 2009-10 seasons. During that time, though, Livingston also spent 11 games regaining his confidence with the D-League Tulsa 66ers.

Livingston was the first call-up from the 66ers to the Thunder, a practice that's been common for the NBA team since.

“It was tough,” Livingston told The Oklahoman in 2015. “My knee was still having some issues. That was the first time I really started playing on the road, back-to-backs, those sort of things. I started to turn the corner a bit, still having good days and bad days, but more good days than bad days. So it was that transitional part of the recovery.

“For them to give me that opportunity, I’m forever grateful. It’s a part of my journey. I’m grateful for the opportunity Sam (Presti) gave me. And I respect Scott Brooks to the fullest, one of the better coaches I played for.”

The Thunder was among the nine teams Livingston played for in his career, but his most success was as an integral piece of the Golden State Warriors of the past five seasons.

Livingston appeared in five NBA Finals with the Warriors in that span, winning three titles and along the way overcoming a 3-1 deficit against the Thunder in the 2016 Western Conference Finals. In that series, Livingston was particularly key in a must-win Game 5 for Golden State in Oakland, acting as the catalyst as the Warriors expanded a four-point lead to 12 to start the fourth quarter.

“’The injury’ gave me a chance to find and prove to myself (and the world) that I wouldn’t be defined by my circumstances,” Livingston said on Instagram. “With my time in the league what I will be most proud of is the fact that my character, values and faith were tested and I persevered.”