LOS ANGELES – Just when the Clippers may have been turning around their season, they were pounded with their biggest blow: Shaun Livingston dislocated his left knee in a shockingly unnatural fall and is out for the season.

The Clippers went on to defeat the Charlotte Bobcats 100-93 Monday night at Staples Center to move into a tie with New Orleans for the eighth and final playoff spot in the Western Conference.

But the loss of Livingston and the ugly scene of his unnatural-looking fall overshadowed the Clippers beating a team that is in its third year of existence.

With 8:18 left in the first quarter, Livingston tried to convert a fast-break layup and missed. When he landed on his left leg, the knee buckled and twisted out of place. The grotesque way the knee turned caused the Clippers’ reserves to stand up and yell for help.

While players and both Clippers coach Mike Dunleavy and Charlotte coach Bernie Bickerstaff walked to Livingston while he was down, Dr. Steven Shimoyama popped Livingston’s knee back into place and wrapped it. The 21-year-old player was taken off the court on a stretcher with not a pained look, but a perturbed look.

Two seasons ago, Livingston missed 52 games of his rookie season because of injuries. He was on the injured list for 39 games because of a dislocated right kneecap.

“That’s a different injury – less serious,” said Shimoyama, an orthopedic surgeon who has been with the Clippers for seven seasons.

Usually, one ligament or more are torn when a knee is dislocated.

Shimoyama said it was possible that no ligaments could have been torn with Livingston and even said it was possible that he could return by the end of the season, or within seven weeks.

But that scenario looks so highly unlikely that it is safe to say Livingston’s season is done. When the point guard had the less serious injury two years ago of a dislocated kneecap, he missed 39 games. Only 26 games are left this season.

Regardless, Shimoyama and the Clippers’ public-relations staff refused to confirm that the injury is season-ending because of the newness of the injury and the inability to conduct a longer examination.

“Prognosis is still uncertain because of the uncertainty of the exact extent of his injuries,” Shimoyama said.

Livingston was taken to Centinela Freeman Regional Medical Center in Inglewood, where an early step in medical care was to receive an injection of dye into his leg to make sure he didn’t tear any arteries.