SELF-SERVICE

Small to medium-sized teams.

Easily manage licenses for your whole team means a simplified billing solution and full access to every feature Concepts’ has to offer.

$10 / mo or $100 / yr per license 2

Start your 30-day free trial

ENTERPRISE

Larger teams and organizations.

Special considerations including manual billing, security audits, special services, and personalized support.

Contact us for pricing

EDUCATION

Get free licenses for your entire school.

If you are a student who’d like to use Concepts at your school, please ask a staff member to apply.

Learn more or sign up here

Who is Concepts Teams for?

Teams of all sizes use Concepts to iterate on design ideas and share work with clients instantaneously. Teams who commonly use Concepts:

Architects

Engineers

Industrial Designers

Landscape Designers

Which devices and platforms does Concepts work on?

Concepts is available on iOS, Windows, Android and ChromeOS and optimized for stylus-based devices like the Apple iPad & iPad Pro, the Microsoft Surface family, Samsung Note + Tab lines, and any Chromebook with a pen.

The file formats are not yet compatible between iOS and other platforms, but we’re working on it.

See System Requirements >

Does Concepts offer any collaboration features?

Live collaboration does not currently exist. You can share files, but only one user can work on a file at a time.

Object and brush packs can be shared live (on iOS currently, and is coming to Windows, Android and ChromeOS soon).

What are Concepts’ data and privacy policies?

Simply put, your data is your own. Drawings live on your devices or cloud services (where available), and we don’t share your info without your consent. Follow these links to review our Terms of Service & Privacy Policy.

What kind of deployment options are available?

You can deploy to users via direct download, BYOD (bring your own device), or managed distribution (e.g MDM) through the various app stores.

© 2024 TopHatch, Inc.

Apple, the Apple logo, and iPad are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the U.S. and other countries. App Store is a service mark of Apple Inc. Google Play and the Google Play logo are trademarks of Google LLC. COPIC is the trademark of Too Corporation. Special thanks to Lasse Pekkala for cover art.