25 years ago, I was hired by TEAM Concepts in my first pharmaceutical position. This position paved the way for my career and led me in the path to where I am today. Along the way I have had the pleasure of many relationships with TEAM Concepts starting as an employee and now as a client. TEAM Concepts has always been knowledgeable, efficient and a pleasure to work with. I will always be grateful to the TEAM for their help and guidance. It is with pleasure that I highly recommend them for any staffing needs.

We have partnered with TEAM Concepts for over 15 years and their support in providing us qualified temps has been tremendous. Everyone is very professional and courteous. When we need temporary staff for our manufacturing side or clerical help, they respond in a timely manner, with more than one option. Their referrals are not “warm bodies” to fill the orders, they are people with great potential and 90% of the time those referrals are added to our payroll once their assigned period ends. Working with the TEAM is an outstanding experience. TEAM Concepts is my agency of choice.

The TEAM Concepts staff were nothing but amazing! From the first day I reached out, they were extremely patient with me and kept in constant contact during the recruiting process. They help with providing you with the tools that you need to jump-start your career in the right direction. I can’t thank you enough for your full support and help to start a new chapter of my professional career. Thank you all at TEAM Concepts!

TEAM Concepts is the most impressive recruitment company that I have ever worked with. They become your business partner and are always looking for ways to help. They are efficient and always proactive, with excellent communication. It is pleasure to work with them.

I worked with TEAM Concepts for over 10 years and they always come through with just-in-time (JIT) staffing solutions. TEAM takes the time to understand your business needs and tailors their staffing solutions. They are with you every step of the way, and their customized approach to customer focus, attention to details, and planning is what has kept me with TEAM Concepts over the years.

Nothing but professionalism from the first day as they really got to know me, understand what kind of position I was in and where I envisioned my self for the future. The ability to find a compatible workplace is what set the difference between other agencies as every opportunity had room to grow and was an environment tailored to my skill set. Not only will they find the opportunities for you, but they will also provide you the support and tools to succeed where you are placed. I will always recommend TEAM Concepts, as my professional career has only become stronger thanks to their help.

I’m thankful for TEAM Concepts as they were able to identify the right fit for the level of professionalism and well-balanced environment I was searching for. I spent a few years in consulting, which I really enjoyed, but was looking for a little more stability. TEAM Concepts’ attention to detail and the evident established relationships with the companies they serve, are key to the success of anyone in the market, looking for the right opportunity and match.

Having moved down to the South Florida area from North Carolina, I was looking for assistance in obtaining employment. TEAM Concepts was recommended by a family member, and they did not disappoint! They really took into consideration what my career plans and interests were when matching me with a placement. They are always very welcoming and supportive. I truly felt as if it was more than just making the placement for the sake of making it, but that they really wanted to ensure I was comfortable and happy with my placement. I have nothing but great things to say about TEAM Concepts!