Biography

J. (John) Michael Luttig (born June 13, 1954), is an American lawyer and jurist who was the General Counsel for the Boeing Corporation and a retired judge of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, 1991-2006.

Luttig was born in Tyler, Texas. He attended Washington and Lee University, graduating in 1976 with a Bachelor of Arts and Omicron Delta Kappa honors. From 1976 to 1981, Luttig worked for the U.S. Supreme Court's Office of the Administrative Assistant to the Chief Justice. He developed a close friendship with then Chief Justice Warren E. Burger, and later, was co-executor of Burger's will. Luttig attended the University of Virginia School of Law while still working for the Supreme Court. He graduated in 1981.

After his law school graduation, Luttig spent a little over a year (March 1981-August 1982) in the Reagan Administration starting with an intermittent appointment as Assistant to the Counsel, Fred Fielding, and leaving as an Assistant Counsel. Luttig's duties included standard legal review of issues affecting the President and his constitutional duties including Civil Aviation Board decisions, executive orders, review of proclamations and assisting with the vetting and successful nomination of Sandra Day O'Connor to the Supreme Court. Luttig was replaced on the White House staff by now Chief Justice John Roberts.

Luttig left the White House to serve as a law clerk to U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia circuit judge Antonin Scalia. Luttig then returned to the Supreme Court, this time as a law clerk to Chief Justice Burger from 1983-1984. He then stayed on as an assistant to Burger, finally leaving the Supreme Court in 1985.

In 1985, Luttig joined the law firm of Davis Polk & Wardell in their Washington, DC office. Luttig returned to government service in the George H.W. Bush Administration in 1989. He held various positions within the Department of Justice including Assistant Attorney General, Office of Legal Counsel. His duties in the Justice Department included assisting Supreme Court nominees David Souter and Clarence Thomas through their nominations and confirmations.

Luttig was nominated by President George H.W. Bush to a newly created seat on the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit. He was confirmed by the Senate on July 26, 1991, but delayed his commission until August 2, 1991 so he could complete some of his duties for Supreme Court nominee, Clarence Thomas. Luttig, at the time of his appointment, was the youngest judge (37) on a federal appeals court.

As a federal appeals judge, Luttig developed a reputation as a fierce conservative, and was often compared to Justice Scalia in his analytical style and criticisms of fellow judges. Luttig was among the leading feeder judges on the U.S. Court of Appeals with more than 40 of his law clerks going on to clerk with conservative justices on the Supreme Court. Luttig's clerks are commonly referred to as "Luttigators."

Luttig was mentioned frequently as being near the top of the short list for potential nominees to the Supreme Court during the George W. Bush administration. Bush choose John Roberts and Samuel Alito to fill the two open seats in 2005

Around the time of his nomination consideration, Luttig became involved in a legal dispute with the Bush Administration regarding the "dirty bomber," Jose Padilla. In September 2005, Luttig wrote the opinion that upheld the government's power to designate Jose Padilla as an "enemy combatant." He could then be contained in a military brig without charge. In December 2005, the Bush Administration, anticipating a Supreme Court overturning of the enemy combatant decision, petitioned the Fourth Circuit for approval to transfer Padilla to civilian custody for a criminal trial. Luttig's panel refused the transfer and Luttig admonished the government for potentially harming its "credibility before the courts." The Supreme Court overturned the appellate court's decision swayed by the government's argument that the Fourth Circuit had encroached on the power of the President.

In May 2006, Luttig resigned his federal judgeship to become general counsel and senior vice president for the Boeing Corporation. Luttig strengthened and reorganized the general counsel's office at Boeing and hired numerous former Supreme Court law clerks for his staff. He resigned from Boeing in May 2019. Luttig's resignation coincided with the terminations of former CEO Dennis Muilenberg and former executive Kevin McAllister that year. This was during the Boeing 737 MAX groundings crisis.

Following his resignation from Boeing, Luttig worked for the Coca Cola company and worked in private law firms. He also remained a strong conservative legal voice in government circles, especially regarding the "stolen election" arguments of President Donald Trump and his allies.

One of Trump's attorneys, John Eastman, a former Luttig law clerk, presented his constitutional argument on the election directly to Vice President Pence on January 5, 2021. He argued that the vice president has the constitutional authority to alter or otherwise change certified electoral votes for the presidential certification in Congress. Pence rejected Eastman's argument, and in a letter released on January 6, 2021 he cited Luttig by name as influencing his decision not to attempt to intervene in the certification process. Luttig has said it was "the highest honor of my life" to be involved in preserving the Constitution.

On June 16, 2022, Luttig testified during a televised hearing conducted by the United States House Select Committee on the January 6 Attack. Before the hearing, Luttig wrote out a statement for the record, saying "it is breathtaking that these arguments even were conceived, let alone entertained by the president of the United States at that perilous moment in history." At the close of the hearing, Luttig said, "Donald Trump and his allies and supporters are a clear and present danger to American democracy. They would attempt to overturn the 2024 election in the same way that they attempted to overturn the 2020 election, but succeed in 2024 where they failed in 2020. I don't speak those words lightly. I would have never spoken those words ever in my life, except that's what the former president and his allies are telling us."

Luttig, along with fellow conservative attorneys and judges, contributed to Lost, Not Stolen: The Conservative Case that Trump Lost and Biden Won the 2020 Presidential Election. This extensive report on the 2020 election and the incorrect claims and statements about the election was made available in 2022 and can be found online.

Luttig is married to Elizabeth Ann Luttig and they have two children, daughter Morgan Luttig and son John Luttig. The Luttig family relocated to the Chicago area after Luttig became the general counsel at Boeing. Elizabeth Luttig, a fellow attorney, was active in local Chicago charities including the Breakthrough Board, the Infant Welfare Society and various functions to benefit Lake Forest High School and the Lake Forest Academy.