Lais Ribeiro has graced countless runways and magazine covers, working with Chanel, Versace, Louis Vuitton, and, most notably, Victoria's Secret over the years. If you don't already recognize her from her many brand campaigns, you might remember her as a Victoria's Secret Angel walking in the brand's Fashion Show, even getting to wear the coveted Fantasy Bra in 2017.

She's not here to gatekeep her secrets to success, and she gave POPSUGAR some tips and tricks on how to unleash your inner supermodel. The first is to practice. "You got to train, you got to take a couple of selfies, see which side is better for you in the mirror, and then find your position," Ribeiro says, adding that models have to work on their posture to get the perfect pose, and they too have unflattering angles. If you have trouble walking in high heels, Ribeiro says, "You have to put all the weight of your body in your tippy-toes, and then you can control what you want to do."

Her passions go beyond the runway and photo shoots; Ribeiro is very connected to nature. In fact, she has an extensive plant collection. "I plant every single tree that you can imagine in my house: bamboo, fruit trees, we brought baobab trees from Africa. It looks beautiful out here, and it just feels nice to be outside," she says. Along with nature, she makes a point to prioritize self-care, whether it's her in-home wellness center complete with an outdoor sauna and cold plunge or just taking some time to herself to rest and recuperate.

Otherwise, she spends time giving back to the community. "I've been doing a lot of projects with my husband, and now I have the platform for that, and just seeing someone else that is so close to you doing it and seeing that is possible — it inspires me a lot," Ribeiro says. She has been involved with organizations like amfAR and Brazil Foundation and is now helping out in Maui, after the wildfires. "I think as a community, we have to help each other," she says. (If you want to donate to Maui's wildfire relief, check out this guide from Hawaii Magazine on how to help.)