NEW BEDFORD -- Joseph Andrews Jr., a star athlete who fought racism, then devoted himself to steering people away from alcohol and drug abuse, died unexpectedly at home Monday of natural causes. He was 68.

Baseball Hall-of-Famer Hank Aaron, an old friend of Mr. Andrews, called him "a giant."

Born in Fall River, Mr. Andrews excelled as a member of the baseball, basketball and football teams at Durfee High School.

"He was, without question, the greatest athlete Durfee ever had," said Bernie Sullivan, a close friend of Mr. Andrews since their Durfee days and now public information officer at the Bristol County Sheriff's Office.

In his final years, the father of five counseled teen-agers, prison inmates and others on the evils of substance abuse. He knew his subject well, having lost his promising baseball career to alcohol.

"I don't think you could even imagine how many people he touched," Mr. Sullivan said. "He had a great heart. Everybody loved him."

Speculating on the possibility that Mr. Andrews died of a heart attack, Mr. Sullivan said, "If that's what gave out -- his heart -- it's because he ran out of what there was to give."

Mr. Andrews' baseball talent landed him a relatively rare, $50,000 bonus for signing with the Milwaukee Braves. In 1953, he headed to the club's farm team in Jacksonville, Fla. There, he met a young man named Hank Aaron, who went on to become baseball's home-run king.

The two men cemented a lifelong friendship in part because Mr. Andrews, who was white, refused to go along with the racial animosity surrounding Mr. Aaron and the handful of black players then entering the majors.

"He was a giant," Mr. Aaron said yesterday on the phone from Atlanta. "He helped me and others get through hard times in Jacksonville."

Today, Mr. Aaron owns a BMW dealership in Atlanta and serves as the Braves' senior vice president and assistant to the president.

The last time he saw Mr. Andrews was in May 1998, when Mr. Aaron spoke to students at Durfee High about making good choices in life.

The men last spoke about three weeks ago on the phone. "I talked with him all the time," Mr. Aaron said.

He recalled that when southern restaurants refused to serve the Braves' black players, Mr. Andrews brought them food and ate with them. Mr. Andrews defused racial attacks, including rock-throwing by fans, and in general, he tried to serve as a protector for black players.

At a time when it was not common for whites "to take a black man's side, he was there for me. And he didn't change a bit in the entire time I knew him," said Mr. Aaron, who said he regretted he will not be able to attend the funeral Friday due to a prior commitment.

Thanks to alcohol, Mr. Andrews' baseball career never went further than Jacksonville.

Mr. Sullivan recalled, "He told me, 'I thought I could do anything. I wasn't afraid of anything. But once the booze got me ... I remember being at first base in the minors and praying nobody would hit the ball at me."

Mr. Andrews' "true courage" was in how he conquered his own alcohol and drug addictions, "then spent a good deal of the rest of his life making sure others weren't caught up in that," Mr. Sullivan said.

County jail prisoners and staff were "devastated" by the news of the death, Mr. Sullivan said. "The inmates listened to him. He knew their language, and they respected him for it. ... I know there were inmates who called Joe when they got out, to seek advice."

Mr. Sullivan pointed out that Mr. Andrews first gained fame as an athlete, lost it, then returned to prominence because he was someone helping others. "He had a real satisfaction in that."

The owner of the former Andrews Lincoln Mercury car dealership here, Mr. Andrews served as a commissioned Bristol County deputy sheriff. An avid golfer, he had lived in New Bedford for the past 20 years. He was a member of Durfee's class of 1949.

"I've learned that through all your life, you can count your true friends on one hand," Mr. Aaron said. "You could count Joe on two hands."

On a visit to New Bedford High School with Mr. Andrews in 1994, Mr. Aaron told students, "I could have been a twisted and angry person -- if I hadn't met someone like Joe."

"He should be remembered as someone who was caring for other human beings," he said yesterday.

"He was a friend," Mr. Aaron said. Then, after a pause, he said it again.