Dr. Eric Thomas was born in Brooklyn, New York and raised in Queens, New York with his family until moving to South Carolina in Middle School. Dr. Eric received a Bachelor’s Degree in Biology from South Carolina State University with a United States Army ROTC Scholarship. Accepting an educational delay with the US Army, he graduated with honors in 1991 from Tufts University School of Dental Medicine, Boston Massachusetts. Dr. Eric served his country as a Captain/Dentist in the US Army Dental Corps stationed in Alabama, Texas, South Carolina, Berlin, and Heidelberg Germany.

Dr. Eric’s private practice, Sunshine Dentistry, is located in Cape May Court House, New Jersey. He is passionate about staying on the cutting edge of dentistry and sleep medicine. Dr. Eric graduated from the prestigious Hornbrook Group for Advanced Cosmetic Dentistry and is a Diplomat of the American Sleep and Breathing Academy. He prides himself on making all of his patients feel comfortable while in his dental chair. He loves people and welcomes the opportunity to have small children to older adults in his practice.

He is an active member of the American Dental Association, National Dental Association, New Jersey Dental Association, and the Atlantic/Cape May County Dental Society. He also is an active member of the American Academy of Dental Sleep Medicine, the International Academy of Sleep and Vivos Life Sleep medicine. Aside from professional affiliations, he is a life member of Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, Inc. Dr. Eric loves to educate local students and participates in local health fairs on dental health. He also has a featured column in the local weekly newspaper.

Dr. Eric and his wife Stephanie are proud to make Cape May County their home. They have two daughters, Alix and Logan, and a son, Zack. In his spare time, he enjoys sports including triathlons and golf, photography, making homemade outdoor brick oven pizza, and spending time with his family.

Winner of the 2023 Middle Township Chamber of Commerce Businessperson of the Year Award