About Us

Miami is, like, awesome, bro! We want all you creators, big-thinkers, and dreamers of our great city to prove it. And we’ll be giving away monthly grants, up to $1000, to help make that happen. The Awesome Foundation isn’t your average foundation. We’re not a charity and we’re not trying to make a profit. Awesome Foundation Miami’s board of trustees are a group of diverse locals ready to open our own wallets to make a positive impact in our community and promote its awesomeness. If you’ve got an idea and you need some support to take your initiative to the next level, you’ve come to the right place.

Applications are reviewed on a monthly basis and grants are up to $1,000. Apply for a grant today! Deadlines are the 15th of every month.

Some rough guidelines:

Joy and surprise: Does it make people smile? Will it make us laugh?

Innovation: Is it a totally new idea?

Staying power: Will it stick around after the money is gone?

Environmental impact: Needless waste is not awesome.

Impact: Does it help people? Does it increase happiness in Miami?

Bigness: Is there potential to reach a lot of people?

Value: Will the Foundation get good bang for its buck?

Local: How will this help the city of Miami?

We don’t typically fund:

Personal use: We think you’re really awesome, but we’re probably not going to just give you $1000 for a car/vacation/rent payment/home repair/pony… unless it’s the crucial component of a bigger project that also benefits others!

Charities and foundations: We’re primarily interested in funding projects or new ventures and not the continuation of an existing organization. If your organization still wants to apply, think of a specific, creative $1000 project that our money could go directly towards!

Vague causes: That is to say, the more specific you are in your application about what you’ll use the money for and why, the more likely we are to fund it! Good luck!

Read More:

The New Tropic | HuffPost | World Economic Forum | Knight Foundation

Donate:

Awesome Foundation Fund @ Miami Foundation.