Editor's note: This article was revised and updated on 9/10/2021.

One of the most interesting philanthropic vehicles that we’ve come across is the Awesome Foundation, a collection of fully autonomous chapters around the world that specialize in microgrants. This foundation originated in Boston and has been on the grantmaking scene for a decade now. One of its local chapters is in Alaska, playing an important role in a place where funders are few and far between.

Here’s what Alaska grantseekers should know about the Awesome Foundation and the best way to secure a grant from its local chapter.

Experimental Ideas Get Funded

Unlike a traditional grantmaker, the Awesome Foundation does not have an established list of priorities, such as education, health, or human services. Instead, this is a funder that looks for new, exciting, and innovative ideas—the types of ideas that would likely not even be considered by a traditional foundation.

In the past, many Awesome grants in Alaska have gone towards the arts, technology, and community development. But what the foundation is really looking for is experimental ideas. Choose something surprising, challenging, and inspiring for your pitch. Past support has gone to pop-up performances in downtown Anchorage, Native art classes, and a campaign to educate the community about pollinators in the environment.

All Grants are $1,000

Regardless of the project, all Awesome Foundation grants are $1,000 each. Therefore, applicants need to explain to the foundation in their applications how $1,000 is really going to make a difference in what they are trying to do.

Other things to highlight include details about what makes your project unique and how it will impact an Alaskan community as well as you as an individual. The foundation’s grants have no strings attached and never have to be repaid. In addition to nonprofits, individuals and groups of other kinds can also apply for $1,000 monthly grants.

Money Comes from Local Trustees

Based upon the general Awesome Foundation model, trustees contribute about $100 each towards a monthly grant. Many chapters have between 10 and 20 trustees. Chapters operate independently of each other and practically none of them are formally registered as organizations. You can see a list of Alaska trustees and learn a bit about their hobbies and interests on the Alaska page.

Currently on a Hiatus

Fortunately for groups located throughout Alaska, the Awesome Foundation typically accepts unsolicited funding requests all year. Proposals are due by the 15th of any month, and trustees make their decisions by the end of the month. But according to the chapter’s website, the Alaska Chapter is taking a hiatus following the September 2021 round of applications. Check the funder’s page for the most up-to-date information following this grant cycle.