SAN JOSE, Calif. and SINGAPORE, May 6, 2014 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Avago Technologies Limited (Nasdaq:AVGO) and LSI Corporation (Nasdaq:LSI), today announced Avago has completed its acquisition of LSI Corporation for $11.15 per share in an all-cash transaction valued at approximately $6.6 billion. The acquisition creates a highly diversified semiconductor market leader with approximately $5 billion in projected annual revenues.

Avago believes the acquisition of LSI positions Avago as a leader in the enterprise storage market. The acquisition also expands Avago's product offerings and brings system-level expertise in its wired infrastructure market. With increased scale and a diversified product portfolio across multiple, attractive end markets, the combined company is strongly positioned to capitalize on the growing opportunities created by the rapid growth in data center IP and mobile data traffic.

In additional to the anticipated strategic benefits of the acquisition, Avago continues to anticipate achieving annual cost savings at a run rate of $200 million by the end of the fiscal year ending November 1, 2015, the first full fiscal year after closing. Avago's management will discuss business outlook and provide guidance for the combined company during its second quarter earnings conference call on Thursday, May 29, 2014. Avago will include LSI Corporation's contribution to financial performance in the company's third quarter earnings announcement.

In connection with the closing of the acquisition, LSI's common stock will cease to be publicly traded on the NASDAQ Stock Market after the close of market today.

About Avago Technologies Limited

Avago Technologies Limited is a leading designer, developer and global supplier of a broad range of analog semiconductor devices with a focus on III-V based products. Our product portfolio is extensive and includes thousands of products in three primary target markets: wireless communications, wired infrastructure and industrial & other.

About LSI Corporation

LSI Corporation designs semiconductors and software that accelerate storage and networking in datacenters, mobile networks and client computing. Our technology is the intelligence critical to enhanced application performance, and is applied in solutions created in collaboration with our partners. More information is available at www.lsi.com.

Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements