MILPITAS, Calif., May 8, 2012 /PRNewswire/ -- LSI Corporation (NYSE: LSI) announced it will demonstrate high-availability direct-attached storage (HA-DAS) solutions for Microsoft速 Corp.'s Windows速 Server platforms at the SCSI Trade Association (STA) Technology Showcase taking place May 9, 2012, at the Hyatt Hotel in Santa Clara, Calif. LSI's HA-DAS solutions are designed to provide small and medium-sized business (SMB) and cloud datacenter customers with continuous application uptime at a fraction of the cost and complexity of existing HA solutions.

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20120222/SF57952LOGO)

High-availability systems are essential to nearly all businesses regardless of size or industry. When systems running business-critical applications such as transaction processing, Web serving or electronic commerce are not accessible, the results can be lost revenue, lost productivity and reduced customer satisfaction.

"A critical goal of Windows Server 2012 is delivering high availability to a volume market, and LSI has been key in this effort," said Thomas Pfenning, general manager, File Server Foundation, Microsoft. "The combination of LSI速 HA-DAS with Windows Server can provide SMBs and cloud datacenter providers with a low-cost and easy-to-manage option for meeting their high-availability requirements."

Traditional HA solutions ensure continuous application availability through server clustering and shared-node storage area network (SAN) connections that build redundancy into a cluster and eliminate single points of failure. LSI is pioneering HA-DAS solutions that lower the cost and complexity of HA solutions by providing fully redundant, shared-node storage and application failover without requiring storage networking hardware. LSI's HA-DAS solutions also reduce latency compared to SAN-based solutions, helping to accelerate storage I/O performance and speed applications.

"LSI HA-DAS solutions are designed to bring SAN-like shared storage and application failover capabilities to DAS environments to provide customers with a low-cost and easy-to-manage and -deploy solution for ensuring business-critical applications remain up and running during server failures," said Bill Wuertz, senior vice president and general manager, RAID Storage Division, LSI. "We're excited to be collaborating closely with Microsoft to bring HA-DAS solutions to the marketplace."

LSI is demonstrating its HA-DAS solutions based on leading MegaRAID速 controller and intelligent HA-DAS technology. The demo utilizes two servers with two internal LSI MegaRAID controllers running HA-DAS firmware connected to twenty-four 2.5-inch SAS drives through an LSI SAS expander. The demo showcases how LSI HA-DAS solutions can bring simpler, lower-cost shared storage and failover capabilities to DAS environments.

More information about LSI HA-DAS solutions is available at www.lsi.com/HA-DAS. Connect with LSI via Facebook, Twitter and YouTube.

About LSI

LSI Corporation (NYSE: LSI) designs semiconductors and software that accelerate storage and networking in datacenters and mobile networks. Our technology is the intelligence critical to enhanced application performance, and is applied in solutions created in collaboration with our partners. More information is available at www.lsi.com.

LSI, the LSI & Design logo and MegaRAID are trademarks or registered trademarks of LSI Corporation.

All other brand or product names may be trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective companies.

SOURCE LSI Corporation