Rygar is a video game created by Tecmo in 1986 and originally released for arcades in Japan as Warrior of Argus (アルゴスの戦士Arugosu no Senshi). It is a sidescrolling platform game where the player assumes the role as the "Legendary Warrior", battling through a hostile landscape. The main feature of gameplay is the use of a weapon called the "Diskarmor", a shield with a long chain attached to it.

A Nintendo Famicom version was released in Japan as Warrior of Argus: Extreme Great Charge (アルゴスの戦士 はちゃめちゃ大進撃 Arugosu no Senshi: Hachamecha Daishingeki) on April 14, 1987, and later that year in the United States for the NES. A European release came in 1990.

While the arcade version is more of a standard side-scrolling action title, the NES's Rygar is an open-ended action-adventure game like Metroid (see Metroidvania), which was also released at the time. At the beginning of the game, Rygar has access to some of the worlds, but as the game progresses, new areas open up as the result of finding items such as the grappling hook, crossbow, and wind pulley, which lets him cross previously impassable obstacles.

The NES version of Rygar was also more of an action role-playing game. It was particularly notable for its permanent power-up mechanic, which at the time blurred the line between the power-ups used in action-adventures and the experience points used in RPGs.

This page uses Creative Commons Licensed content from Wikipedia (view authors).

Continue or Game Over?[]

Person Decision Nick Continue Paul Continue Josh Continue

Quotes[]

"Josh we're all wearing dark blue and you messed it up!" —Nick

"Black's dark blue." —Josh

"I've been on this show before." —Josh

"It's the fucking theme from Superman!" —Nick

"When I die put me on a trampoline." —Paul

"This grapple weapon's gotta be over here. If it's not - uh-oh." —Josh

"Holy shit, we thought Jesus was wearing robes, the whole time it was just his wings." —Nick

"What kind of God can't swim?" —Paul

"Hercules loved anal too much." —Josh

"If God had a face would you kiss it?" —Nick

"Lizard Jesus said evolution's true, so it is." —Josh

"Curriculum Vitae. That's Latin for Cum Victories." —Paul

References[]

When voicing 'God', Josh uses his Reeses the Wize voice from Fantasy Fiction.

Gallery[]