Loading...

Strangers

by Gardner Dozois

Other authors: See the other authors section.

MembersReviewsPopularityAverage ratingMentions1272219,506 (3.15)3

The return of a classic science fiction novel by Hugo and Nebula award-winning author and editor Gardner Dozois Hundreds of years in the future, Earthmen have moved out into the galaxy of inhabited worlds, but only through the gift of advanced technology from alien interstellar traders. Earthmen do not dominate among inhabited worlds, as many races are older and wiser - in fact, space travellers from Earth are second-class citizens or worse on most of the planets they visit. Joseph Farber, an artist, is part of the uncomfortable and decadent Earth colony among the alien Cian on the planet Weinunnach. As with many earthling spacefarers, Farber suffers a decline in spirits when faced with the utter difference of aline cultures, yet he is deeply moved by the rituals of the Cian - and by Liraun, a humanoid Cian, with whom he falls in love. And though love between races is forbidden, he allows himself to be genetically altered so that he and Liraun may marry and interbreed. But the couple soon discovers that the fundamental differences between their races and cultures prevent adequate communication between them. This lack of communication leads to a powerful climax of tragedy and revel… (more)

▾Tags

▾LibraryThing Recommendations

▾Lists

None

▾Will you like it?

Loading...

Sign up for LibraryThing to find out whether you'll like this book.

▾Conversations (About links)

No current Talk conversations about this book.

» See also 3 mentions

▾Member reviews

Showing 2 of 2

Showing 2 of 2

▾Other authors

» Add other authors (1 possible)

Author nameRoleType of authorWork?StatusGardner Dozois—primary authorall editionscalculatedGrimando, ScottCover artistsecondary authorsome editionsconfirmedWeston, SteveCover artistsecondary authorsome editionsconfirmed

▾Series and work relationships

Belongs to Publisher Series

▾Awards and Honors

▾Common Knowledge

You must log in to edit Common Knowledge data.

For more help see the Common Knowledge help page.

Original title Alternative titles Original publication date People/Characters Important places Important events Related movies Epigraph Quotations Disambiguation notice Publisher's editors Blurbers Original language Canonical DDC/MDS Canonical LCC

▾References

References to this work on external resources.

Wikipedia in English (1)

Strangers (Gardner Dozois novel)

▾Book descriptions

The return of a classic science fiction novel by Hugo and Nebula award-winning author and editor Gardner Dozois Hundreds of years in the future, Earthmen have moved out into the galaxy of inhabited worlds, but only through the gift of advanced technology from alien interstellar traders. Earthmen do not dominate among inhabited worlds, as many races are older and wiser - in fact, space travellers from Earth are second-class citizens or worse on most of the planets they visit. Joseph Farber, an artist, is part of the uncomfortable and decadent Earth colony among the alien Cian on the planet Weinunnach. As with many earthling spacefarers, Farber suffers a decline in spirits when faced with the utter difference of aline cultures, yet he is deeply moved by the rituals of the Cian - and by Liraun, a humanoid Cian, with whom he falls in love. And though love between races is forbidden, he allows himself to be genetically altered so that he and Liraun may marry and interbreed. But the couple soon discovers that the fundamental differences between their races and cultures prevent adequate communication between them. This lack of communication leads to a powerful climax of tragedy and revel

▾Library descriptions

No library descriptions found.

▾LibraryThing members' description

Book description

SBN 425-03924-2

Haiku summary

Current Discussions

None

Popular covers

Quick Links

Rating

Average: (3.15)

0.51 11.52 12.5 23 23.5 44 24.55 1

Is this you?

Become a LibraryThing Author.