How old is Robbie Williams and where is he from?

Robbie Williams and his dad - 'Sweet Caroline' live

Robbie Williams was born on February 13, 1974. He celebrated his 49th birthday in 2023.

Robbie Williams and his dad: The fascinating story behind their relationship

He was born in Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire.

His parents, Janet (née Farrell) and Peter Williams (also known as Pete Conway), ran a pub called the Red Lion in Burslem.

Who is Robbie Williams' wife Ayda Field?

Since May 2006, Robbie has been in a relationship with American actress Ayda Field.

Who is Ayda Field?

Three years later, the couple got engaged, and they married at his home in Mulholland Estates in Beverly Hills on August 7, 2010.

The pair appeared alongside each other as judges on The X Factor in 2018.

How many children does Robbie Williams have?

Robbie Williams reunites with his kids after his coronavirus quarantine

Robbie and Ayda's daughter Theodora 'Teddy' Rose was born on September 18, 2012.

Their second child Charlton 'Charlie' Valentine was born on October 27, 2014.

On September 7, 2018, Ayda announced that she and Robbie had welcomed their surprise third child, a daughter named Colette 'Coco' Josephine, via a surrogate mother.

A fourth child was also born via surrogate, Beau, in 2020.

When did Robbie Williams quit Take That?

Take That - Could It Be Magic (Official Video)

Robbie was a member of boyband Take That alongside Gary Barlow, Mark Owen, Howard Donald and Jason Orange, from 1990 until 1995, when he quit the group after falling out of favour with the band.

What tattoos does Robbie Williams have?

He soon launched a solo career. While his first few singles weren't huge successes, his song 'Angels' became a huge success and propelled him to a greater level of fame.

After Take That reunited without him in 2005, he rejoined the band in 2009 for the Progress album and tour a year later. He has performed with the group on and off ever since, but has yet to announce any plans to rejoin full-time.

What are Robbie Williams' biggest songs?

Robbie Williams - Angels (Official Video)

If you live in the US, then there's a chance that you've never even heard of Robbie Williams, as it is the one country he hasn't quite been able to crack.

The 20 best Robbie Williams songs ever

If you want to check out his best-known songs, then you should start with 'Angels', 'Let Me Entertain You', 'She's the One', 'Rock DJ', 'Feel', 'No Regrets', 'Candy', 'Love My Life', 'Kids', 'Supreme' and 'Millennium'.