Robbie Williams has announced he will be playing a special stadium show in his hometown of Stoke-on-Trent next year.

The singer will be performing the one-off show at Port Vale FC's Vale Park Stadium on June 20, 2020.

The show will be in aid of three charities - the Donna Louise Hospice for Children and Young People, Unicef UK and The Hubb Foundation.

It's bound to be a sell-out event but early access to tickets is available for fans who purchase his new album 'The Christmas Present' from the official Robbie Williams store before 6pm on December 5.

Exactly how many tickets will be on sale is not known as the venue hasn't been properly assessed for an event like this yet, according to StokeonTrent Live .

The 45-year-old said: "Stoke-on-Trent made me. My heart, my humour, it’s all from Stoke. Cut me and it’s through me like a stick of rock.

“It has always been an ambition of mine to play a show at Port Vale and I’m delighted that now it’s actually going to happen. This is like the best Christmas present of all for me!

"I want to continue to help raise money for charities in the Stoke community, and to help children grow up happy, healthy and able to play.

"This event will be able to do just that and I’m proud to be doing this in aid of The Donna Louise, Unicef and The Hubb Foundation.”

He added in a tweet this evening: "I'm BEYOND excited by this announcement - I'M COMING HOME x"

The choice of venue will be emotional for Robbie as he's a Port Vale fan and donated £250,000 to save the club from administration in 2006.

Carol Shanahan, co-owner of Port Vale FC, said: “ When we took over at Port Vale just over six months ago, our aim was to create a place and atmosphere that would bring people to the football club and be a shining light in the heart of the community.

"To be asked to host such a magnificent event instils us with enormous pride and together, working with the Stoke-on-Trent community, we are delighted to welcome Robbie back home, to Port Vale Football Club.”