Brotish pop icon Robbie Williams was born on Stoke-on-Trent on February 13, 1974. He is one of Great Britain's most important musician, singer-songwriter, record producer, actor, composer and entertainers in modern history. Robbie was raised by two parents who ran a pub, which is where he got his first contacts with the music and party scene. As a youngster, Wiliams attended Catholic school before he decided to switch to dance school. This was the single most important decision of his career, he performed many musicals in his time at this dancing school. Robbie performed the famous 'Oliver!' musical there. He was clearly a natural-born entertainer from the early stages of his life.

Then along came turning 16 years old, which is when Robbie Williams joined Take That. He had little to none creative control over that group's music but he did sing the lead vocals in a number of their singles. It didn't take long for him to have strong disagreements with the group's manager, Nigel Martin-Smith. Robbie didn't agree with the rules he needed to follow as a member of Take That and he was also too exposed to the party scene of drugs or alcohol very young. At the age of 20, Robbie Williams suffered a near-death overdose and other events led for the other group members to expell him from it.

Robbie Williams' first record deal and current net worth

After a legal battle with Martin-Smith, Robbie was finally able to start a solo career and signed a new record deal with Chrysalis Records. That's where his current net worth began to form. Robbie Williams signed a contract with EMI in 2002 that was worth $150 million. To this day, that is the largest contract in British music history. Robbie is one of the best British record-selling artist by having sold an estimate of 75 million records in total. He once set a world record of selling 1.6 million tickets to one of his concerts in a single day. With numerous properties and all his endorsement deals combined, Robbie Williams is worth an estimated $300 million.