Horror, especially psychological horror, is one of the greatest vessels for telling stories of deeply personal, heart-wrenching tales. The darkest parts of humanity and the psyche can be explored with grace and caution or with all the care and precision of a bulldozer. Films, like the previously reviewed Jacob’s Ladder, can be some of the most disturbing, yet heart-warming and bittersweet movies ever made. With the advancement of technology, video games were slowly able to catch up to their cinematic horror counterparts.

The first Silent Hill is one of the first examples of psychological horror making its big break in games. Beyond its supernatural surface, the plot was a touching story about abuse, paternal love, and finding compassion in the worst of environments. Its psychological elements, namely the exploration of the psyche of Alessa Gillespie, weren’t put at the forefront, but instead went for a much more cinematic approach where exposition was all subtext, and the actual underlying themes were all but optional if you wanted the full picture of what was going on beyond the thick fog and snow.

Whereas the first game has more of a legacy of being the most revolutionary game of its kind rather than the best (similar to the first Resident Evil game), Silent Hill 2 is one of the most legendary games, let alone horror games, of all time. After the surprise success of the first game, 2 was given a significant upgrade in both budget and creative freedom for most of its development, a rarity for this series and the chokehold Konami has over it.

From the first moment of gameplay, Silent Hill 2 feels different. The man from the intro exits the bathroom, asserting himself in reality. James Sunderland is a young man around 30 years old. He’s almost conspicuously average looking with pale green eyes, parted blonde hair, and a fairly unathletic build. He wears a green military jacket based on the one Jacob Singer, played by Tim Robbins wears in Jacob’s Ladder (same initials as well), a gray polo shirt, and plain blue jeans.

Angela Orosco and Angela Bennett from The Net (Sandra Bullock).

James greets her, which startles her. He apologizes and asks if she knows the way to town. She points the way, but mentions the town is dangerous, although James cuts her off before she can say why. James says that he doesn’t really care if the town is dangerous, since he’s looking for someone. Angela says she’s looking for someone too, her mother - although at first she refers to her as “mama'' before correcting herself. They part ways, wishing each other well on their searches.

This first dialogue presents one of the biggest strengths of the game, and yet also one of the main criticisms of the game at the time. The voice acting is scattered in terms of delivery; lines are sometimes unemotive and stilted, and frequently have awkward pauses and strange gaps between statements. However, unlike the first game’s of-the-time subpar voice acting and direction, the clear intention of this emptiness is highlighted by emotional outbursts from the characters that show they clearly can act emotive, but generally remain monotone. It’s as if they’re all walking a tightrope between controlling themselves and completely snapping, only briefly allowing their true colors to show through.

It's another element of discomfort and uneasiness, coupled with the relatively aged look of the game and the motion capture work that brought the animations to life, that makes what would otherwise be relatively bad voice acting from people who were not really voice actors into an extra layer of creepiness. Each character is deep in the uncanny valley, are written realistically, designed realistically, but just detached enough in their stilted vocals and just slightly off-looking faces to be unsettling.

Continuing on, James finally gets into the town, which is just as foggy as it was in the forest, if not more so. You can get lost pretty quickly in the town, but for the sake of practicality, so you don’t just wander around aimlessly, the town will often put obstacles in the way of alleys and streets to vaguely guide you in the way you’re supposed to go. The town itself can eerily and supernaturally disappear depending on where you need to be. Exploration isn’t all downsides though, as you’ll find healing items, weapons, ammo, and small pieces of lore scattered around town. It’s not like you’re alone in the streets.

James comes to a street corner where he finds a dark red streak across the asphalt. Staring deep into the fog, he sees a figure limping away. James follows the figure to see if they’re okay or get directions, and soon finds himself at the end of an alleyway in a small tunnel. As you approach, you can hear a radio buzzing loudly. For those that played the first game, this immediately sparks caution. James, though, has no idea what that noise means, and as he picks it up and tries to fix it, a dark figure rises up behind him.

It looks human, silhouetted in the gray fog, but as it turns and you see it fully. It’s clear that whatever it is, it’s monstrous. It’s a tall, feminine creature with no discernible face with long, lithe legs ended with platform shoes infused to the creature’s ankles, and arms that seem to be contained within the very skin of the monster, like a grotesque, fleshy straightjacket. James, who is trapped with his back to a fence, grabs a plank in self defense.

Combat is about the same as in the first game, readying an attack with a trigger button before swinging with the action button. The targeting is a little better, but the combat is still just as haphazard and awkward in a way that always makes victory much less sure than much cleaner combat would be. Story-wise, similar to Harry from the first game, James is competent but not exceptional in a fight, being an average younger man and not a trained fighter. He awkwardly swings at the monster, called a Lying Figure, knocking it to the ground in a pool of deep red blood. It vocally disgusts him, and he exits the tunnel, taking the radio with him.

After the intro, the next hour or so of the game revolves around exploring a decrepit apartment. This sort of tutorial area teaches you how to deal with monsters and get through any given area. A series of notes scattered on the streets of Silent Hill tell you the demons are attracted to light and sound, and can be avoided if you stay quiet by not running, and staying in the dark without a flashlight when you get in the apartment. This isn’t a certainty though; if you get close enough to them, they may find you anyway, and with how cramped and claustrophobic this area can feel, you need to learn how to fight them in case you reach a situation where you cannot simply sneak past the demons.

Every given area gives you the freedom to explore wherever you’d like (within the aforementioned supernaturally placed boundaries), but some rooms won’t be open without a key, which begins the Silent Hill gameplay loop of getting a key item to solve a puzzle to get access to a new area. Puzzles are surprisingly thoughtful and not as cryptic as the first game’s a lot of the time and require checking the environment around you and putting a good bit of thought into what little clues you’re given, often in the form of a riddle. They don’t hold your hand at all, sometimes to a fault, with a rare few puzzles being too vague to figure out without at least a little trial and error with using whatever items you have (or a guide if you’re as terrible at riddles as I am). This can be a bit of a tedious process with how slow loading the menus can be on the original console.

He just stares through the bars as your radio blares at you, practically begging you to leave. Either mildly unsettled or frustrated at your inability to do anything, you go into the room to your right, get some supplies and leave. He’s gone when you get back.

For being the series’ spiritual mascot, Pyramid Head’s introduction isn’t a big boss fight, or a jumpscare, or a chase scene, it’s just him simply being there, and then disappearing. You now know he’s SOMEWHERE in the building, you know you’ll see him again. But when? Where? How? He doesn’t even attack you at first, so what’s his purpose? Is he going to be a Nemesis style chaser, just a recurring boss, or maybe have more significance?

Silent Hill 2 leaves you with such uncertainty and unease just by making its most significant monster stand there, doing absolutely nothing, which I think illustrates the brilliance of every single choice made with how the game is presented, and how it chooses to make the player feel. You may not be afraid for every moment of Silent Hill 2, but you’ll never feel an ounce of comfort either.

After another encounter with Pyramid Head (he assaults a duo of newly introduced Mannequin monsters in an apartment as you watch from a closet in a reference to the film Blue Velvet), you eventually have a first boss fight with him in the fire escape after assaulting a Lying Figure, again in a very suggestive way. Boss fights still aren’t really Silent Hill’s strong suit, or a lot of pre-Resident Evil 4 survival horror games, so it’s more or less just running back and forth in a room either shooting at him enough or avoiding him for a few minutes until he goes away, avoiding swings from his iconic Great Knife (portrayed in this game as half of a pair of scissors or shears as stated by Masahiro Ito, but also strongly resembling Angela’s knife), or his grab if you get too close, during which he apparently sticks out a tongue through a hole in his helmet to do… something to you.

Once they come out the other side, the two see Laura entering Brookhaven Hospital, easily the most intensely nerve-wracking area in the game, as well as the most recognizable. The first game’s hospital, Alchemilla, wasn’t really too aesthetically different from the rest of the game’s rust and blood in the otherworld, while the fog world’s aesthetic was just a fairly normal hospital. Brookhaven, on the other hand, is unsettling even when it’s in a normal state. Hospitals, I find, are creepy places as soon as you dim the lights, and Brookhaven barely has a single light on your entire way through.

The hallways are long and dark, but broad unlike the apartments. Instead of claustrophobia, Brookhaven uses blank, open space. You can see ahead of you just far enough to where you can maybe make out the glistening of an enemy’s flesh and hear the radio going off, but the enemies introduced in the hospital, the Bubblehead Nurses, are so much more aggressive than the last few that those few seconds of anticipation almost make you panic more as you wait for them to rapidly stumble towards you.

They’re difficult to exchange melee blows with since they hold rusty pipes and knives, but are also too fast to avoid with much ease. However, you still practically have to turn every corner blind with the fixed camera, so by the time they're close enough to hear you’ll likely be seconds from being beaten or slashed anyways. Brookhaven is a masterfully designed locale that combines both dangerous monsters and a floor plan designed to freak you out. It’s also one of the longest areas, having twice as many floors as the apartments, so you’ll be stuck in this hellscape for quite a while.

The Brookhaven Hospital Otherworld in progressively worst states.

You return to the room you left Maria, only to find her missing, and a strange, unsettling breathing sound filling the room, but before long you find her in the basement. James is relieved to see her, but doesn’t express it with any sort of urgency, which provokes Maria into another massive mood swing. She yells at him angrily, accusing him of not caring whether she lives or dies and abandoning her. James waits patiently until she calms down, and they make up to continue searching for Laura.

During this brief period of time, there’s a long elevator ride down from the third floor with Maria, which leads to one of my favorite moments in the game: The Trick or Treat Quiz Show. An announcer’s voice will suddenly cut in on a speaker somewhere with applause and cheering. He announces that the game is a simple enough trivia quiz, and you’ll be either be rewarded or suffer punishment for answering correctly, and says that today’s competitor is, somehow knowing, James. It asks three questions: the name of the amusement park in Silent Hill, the name of a murderer mentioned in a newspaper clipping you can find, and the name of one of the first streets you take in the game. It’ll tell you to collect your prize in the storeroom on the third floor, and cuts out. The character’s are just as befuddled as the player probably is.

If you go to the storeroom, you’ll find a box, which contains some very helpful supplies, but if not, you’ll get sprayed down with chemicals of some sort that hurt you, and can’t try again. It’s a weird moment in this otherwise pretty serious game, but I think one of many reasons Silent Hill 2 and 3, are so charming is that they aren’t always deadpan and know when to have brief moments of levity. From Eddie eating pizza in the middle of town, to the game show sequence, a number of moments in the third game that I won’t spoil until I get to it, to all of the joke endings, Silent Hill is really great at balancing brief, almost sitcom-esque moments with how disturbing and grim they otherwise can be.

As the two make their way through the basement, Pyramid Head returns, and chases them through a maze, always slightly slower but somehow increasingly closer and closer with each screen. Getting to the end, an elevator lies in wait, which James makes it into. Maria, however, gets grabbed by Pyramid Head, and after one final attempt to make it into the elevator after him, reaching a hand in, the monster runs her through. Her hand recedes through the door as the beast pulls her back, and James falls on his knees, feeling like he’s lost his wife all over again.

Pyramid Head’s crib.

Maria, somehow still alive, sits in a jail cell. James is dumbfounded, but Maria doesn’t even remember her supposed death, asking if he’s confusing her with someone else before calling him forgetful. She mentions a hotel in which she and James supposedly made a videotape, but James remembers having made it with Mary. James, likely as confused as the player, questions if Maria is Mary. She says she isn’t, but can be whatever James needs her to be. “I’m here for you James. See? I’m real,” she says, reaching through the bars to touch his face. She asks if he wants to touch her, but James seems hesitant at best. “I can’t do anything through these bars,” she says. “Come and get me.” James worriedly agrees and tells her to stay right where she is, and continues through the Labyrinth.

This is probably the single most cinematic scene in the game, and one of the best horror scenes in any game ever. The unnerving feeling of confusion that Maria is even here, let alone that she’s pretending nothing at all is wrong synergizes with her stilted, calm voice. She shifts between concerned and flirtacious, the lighting shadowing her eyes making her much more menacing in spite of her caring demeanor, and her voice tilts from ditzy playfulness to deadly seriousness from sentence to sentence. You sit on one side of the bars, free, and yet in most shots it almost looks like James himself is trapped, both physically and mentally. There’s always this odd sexual tension that the player themselves, as well as James, have no interest in, but Maria’s insistence of being perverse brings a lot of discomfort to the scene. It’s one of this game’s best displays of being intensely unnerving while never having to be directly scary.

Abstract Daddy.

James fights the monster and mortally wounds it. He offers a hand to Angela, who refuses and gets up herself. She begins kicking the creature, before picking a TV in the room and smashing it over its head, dealing the final blow. James tells her to calm down, making her even angrier and accusing him of ordering her around, trying to be nice to her to use her, only after one thing. She begins to break down, saying that he could always just force her like “he always did.” James tries to reach out, but she yells at him not to touch her, calling him a disgusting pig.

She finally stands up and asks James about Mary, but calls him a liar after he says she was sick. She goes even further and accuses him of wanting her gone and going out to see other women before leaving once more. James scoffs at how ridiculous her claim is before setting off to the end of The Labyrinth. He gets to Maria’s room finally, but finds that she’s been killed again. He questions why, before sadly muttering, “Mary…” to himself.

Before long, James comes to a graveyard. Here, you find the grave of Walter Sullivan, a murderer mentioned in a newspaper clipping earlier (as well as a character who would become very important in Silent Hill 4), alongside the graves of Eddie, Angela, and James himself. James makes one last jump into his own grave. At the end of a long, blood-soaked hallway, in a cold blue room, James finds Eddie surrounded by bodies.

James asks what happened, and Eddie doesn’t hesitate to tell James he killed them all. He talks about how his bully would call him ugly, fat, and disgusting, and always laugh at him. He's decided he’ll simply kill anyone who laughs at him. As he puts it, “It’s all the same once you’re dead! And a corpse can’t laugh.” James makes the error of asking if he’s gone nuts, and Eddie turns to him, accusing him of laughing at him behind his back too, shooting at him. This begins his boss fight.

After shooting him a few times, he’ll run into the next room, a meat locker. All of the hung up corpses have shorts on, and appear to be more human than normal. He talks about how he’s been tormented his entire life, picked on just for the way he looked, and eventually broke. He shot his bully’s dog, describing the horrifying way it died in glee, before he shot his bully in the leg and ran, finding himself in Silent Hill soon after, picking up Laura along the way.

James says he needs help, but Eddie snaps back, “Don’t get all holy on me James!” He, too, was drawn to the town for a reason, and Eddie believes he’s no different. Eddie comes out from hiding with a “Let’s party!” and the fight resumes, with James ending up killing Eddie, his first human kill. He’s horrified at himself, but begins to think back on Eddie’s words. He questions if Mary really died three years ago before finally exiting the descent of The Labyrinth. If you check Mary’s letter, it’s gone blank.

The Lakeview Hotel in its unburned state, exterior and interior.

Though the hotel had burned down years ago in an accident, it appears to be completely normal, completely unchanged even by the otherworld. For most of the exploration part of the level, there isn’t much plot, giving you time to process the story to this point before the climax. In the meantime, he has to collect three music boxes in order to get up to the third floor where James and Mary stayed on their vacation, in Room 312. He briefly encounters Laura, who finally shows James a letter she received from Mary to be given to James after he died.

Laura was an orphan and ended up in the hospital, where she met Mary through their shared nurse. They bonded in the time that Mary had been alive, to the point where Mary was like a mother to her. Before Mary died, she wrote a letter to be given to Laura after she died that said that she had gone to a “quiet, beautiful place,” which Laura interpreted as being Silent Hill rather than Heaven, unknowing Mary was dying.

It says that Mary had intended to adopt Laura had things worked out differently, loving Laura like her own daughter. She says to give James a chance (“I know you hate him because you think he isn't nice to me, but please give him a chance. It's true he may be a little surly sometimes, and he doesn't laugh much. But underneath he's really a sweet person.”), and wishes her a happy 8th birthday.

James immediately asks how old Laura is, and she says that she turned 8 the previous week, meaning that Mary couldn’t have died three years ago like James thought. With this, Laura runs off to look for another letter for James. James takes a moment to think, before continuing on his search for the music boxes.

Ultimately, you must leave your sanctuary and find Mary, so James walks up the stairs and finds Room 312. Mary isn’t there. Unchanged from when he visited, a TV with a VCR player sits against the window. A chair sits facing it, and James inserts the tape and takes a seat.

The videotape begins from James’ perspective. He’s filming Mary on their vacation in the room, talking about how beautiful the town is, making sense as to why it was a sacred place. She asks James to promise to take her back again, but begins coughing, likely being at the beginning of her illness. The screen begins to flicker to another shot of James standing over Mary in her bed. Her hand moves to his, either swatting him away or patting him in reassurance. He kisses her on the forehead, lovingly staring at her.

And then he smothers her with a pillow.

In what still remains one of the most disturbing scenes, and greatest twists, in any horror game, you find the truth of Mary’s death. There’s no blood and gore, nor is there any audio, just the buzz of the tape. Originally, you would have heard her screaming and struggling, but it was cut, once again choosing quiet horror where lesser games would choose much more graphic terror. The video flashes between the former shots of Mary and distorted, fuzzy footage of the smothering before it fades fully into static, and then back to James, sitting in his chair.

James sits in his chair, horrified, dejected, and silent. For nearly a minute, the camera circles around, and you’re left with the sad piano music and your own thoughts for that brief moment. This twist changes everything you know about James, about your journey, and about the relationship between character and player. James, as I’ve said, always knew more than you, but in a way, he also knew just a little as well. This repression of a terrible act made him, in his own eyes, an innocent everyman looking for his wife, not unlike Harry’s search for his daughter in the first game. Now, knowing what he did, the entire context of this nightmare crumbles, and you both have to face the truth for the first time.

Laura enters the room, asking if James found Mary. He tells her that Mary’s dead, which she believes is a lie at first before James gently, and straightforwardly, says it’s true. Laura, for once, becomes serious, and accepts it, asking if it was because of her sickness. James tells her the truth, immediately angering her and seemingly proving all her accusations of James not caring about her right. James barely reacts to her berating and hitting him, and she transitions from anger to sadness. She asks why, but he doesn’t even have an answer, and just apologizes mournfully. “The Mary you know isn’t here,” he says, standing to face her. Laura turns and leaves wordlessly, the last we see of her except for one ending.

James settles back into the chair, but after a moment his radio goes off, and through it comes the voice of Mary, loud and clear.

“James! Where are you? I’m waiting. I’m waiting for you. Please come to me. Do you hate me? Is that why you won’t come? James! Please hurry! Are you lost? I’m near. I’m waiting nearby James. Please. I want to see you James. Can’t you hear me? James… Please James… James… James… James….”

Angela says, “Thank you for saving me… but I wish you hadn’t. Even mama said it… I deserved what happened.” James says it’s not true, but the camera switches to first person and Angela retorts. In a response that’s both to James and directly to the player, she tells us not to pity her, that she doesn’t deserve it. Her demeanor quickly changes though, as she guesses that maybe we just want to save her, love her, take care of her, heal all of her pain.

As much as most of us would like to say we could, it’s an extremely difficult task to undertake. It takes a will and strength that most people don’t have to take care of such a damaged person no matter how much you care for them, and how much they deserve to be taken care of. Just talking to someone and trying to sympathize isn’t always enough.

To get someone the help they need and to have the self-stability to be by their side through their emotional journey is something that will affect both of you. Though we all want to say, “yes, I’d be there for you always,” having the compassion and emotional fortitude to actually do so is so much harder than you might think. James certainly can’t, and I don’t think I would have been able to either.

“That’s what I thought,” she says.

Switching back to third person, she demands her knife back, which James denies. “Saving it for yourself?” she almost jokes. James denies it. He’d never kill himself, of course. But then, he’d probably also never kill a person, would he? Angela turns around silently and walks up the staircase through the flames.

“It’s hot as hell in here,” James says to himself.

“You see it too? For me, it’s always like this,” she says, before continuing up and off into the flames. We never see her again.

Top

James inspects their bodies, and finds they’re holding two eggs, one rust-colored and one scarlet. As far as I’ve seen, most people see these eggs as representing new (the vibrant scarlet) and old (the washed out rust color), possibly the more recent death of Eddie and his fresh scarlet blood or the slightly less recent death of Mary, long enough for her blood to coagulate and become more of a rust color, or Maria being newer and fresher (scarlet also representing lust) and the rust representing the older, less lively Mary. It doesn’t really matter, nor has it ever been elaborated on, but it’s an interesting point of speculation.

Regardless, James places the eggs in slots on the sides of the doors and continues. Passing a door with a tormenting looking face on it that scared the shit out of me the first time I spotted it, he finds the final corridor. While you walk down the long hallway, you hear a conversation between Mary and James.

James brought her some flowers, but she yells at him about looking like a monster undeserving of flowers, and yells at him to leave over and over. She says she wishes they’d just put her out of her misery. She tells James to go one more time, and not to come back, and he listens. Immediately, she cries and begs him to come back and tell her she’ll be alright. “Help me,” she says, as the conversation ends. It’s all heartbreakingly sad, with Mary’s voice acting being genuinely phenomenal.

You hear James say to himself that he now understands what he came to do, having nothing without Mary. Audio of a car rapidly speeding up suddenly cuts out, and James says, “Now, we can be together”. The screen cuts to an underwater shot, James having driven himself, and the body of Mary, into the lake, finally joining her in death.

In “Leave”, the dialogue is mostly the same, but after James says that he wanted his life back, in one of the most heartbreaking lines in this entire heartbreaking game, says, “James… If that were true, then why do you look so sad?” Mary asks one last thing of him: to move on. The screen fades to black, and then back into the foggy graveyard where we first met Angela, and Laura passes by. James follows, seemingly taking up Mary’s wish to adopt her and moving on, though how he convinced her to go with him is unseen.

During all three endings, Mary or Maria hands James a letter that’s read out during the final shot (The parking lot in “Maria”, underwater in “In Water”, and the graveyard in “Leave”). This is the real letter that she wrote to him before she died, the one he was supposed to get after she passed away. It’s too long to write out, so I’ll just leave a video and audio of it, but in these final moments of the game, it was difficult not to well up. It’s so well acted and emotive and convincing, and so ridiculously sad after everything you’ve gone through. Without fail, “James… you made me happy,” gets me teary-eyed, and apparently the voice actress, Monica Taylor Horgan, cried after reading it, which you can hear in the final moments of it.

Silent Hill 2 is largely based off of Fyodor Dostoevsky’s book Crime and Punishment, which deals with how murder effects the psyche and how something so terrible can completely skew one’s morals. James’ entire journey is like a psychotic fever dream in which ever single aspect of it is designed to torture him and make him guilty. Every monster other than Abstract Daddy is directly connected back to James’ and Mary’s psyche.

The Lying Figure is how Mary sees herself. It uses vomit to attack, being sickly in nature, and appears trapped in its own skin. The Bubblehead Nurses represent Mary’s hospitalization and James’ unfulfilled lust while he was ill. The mannequins are literally just two pairs of feminine legs attached at the hip, and appear in a scene where Pyramid Head assaults two of them in what isn’t explicitly sexual, but clearly creates a very provacative image, intended to disturb the player as, according to director Takayoshi Sato, sex and death are at the very core of human thought.

Maria in particular is designed to be this perfect, libido-driven version of Mary that the designers made with the intention of being uncomfortable in her perfection. She’s the antithesis of a strong female protagonist on purpose: highly sexualized, dependent on a man to be saved, always doing the most to take care of him, and incredibly ambivalent in her motivations, easily swayed one way or the other. She’s a perfect woman from a completely male gaze intentionally. Takayoshi Sato described her as such, and compared a perfect person to someone who may appear more flawed. When you take a photo of them, they may have a slightly odd smile, but that small bit of human imperfect makes them that much more real. Maria’s perfection makes her so much less so.

However, as with her real counterpart, all the flaws are in the details, yet in her perfection she doesn’t try to hide it. She isn’t completely skinny, but wears a crop top anyways. She has a lot of darker patches around her neck and chest, but doesn’t wear concealer. Even her hair, which naturally would be brown, is dyed blonde with a hint of red at the ends for a bit of a streak of extra appeal. Despite appearing perfect, when inspected on a closer scale she appears more like a woman desperately trying to make themselves perfect, like Mary trying to make herself into the woman James seemed to want her to be. She feels unreal because she is, both metaphorically and literally: a real person trying to become perfect, and making themselves less real in the process.

The other two main characters, Eddie and Angela, are also dealing with the guilt of murder, on different spectrums of morality. Whereas James is morally grey, Angela is pretty thoroughly justified, killing in self-defense after being physically and mentally tortured for most of her life in a way that makes her paranoia and misandry all the more sad and understandable. Eddie, while still feeling somewhat tragic in his torment, was much less sympathetic considering he took out his anger on an innocent dog and thoroughly enjoyed the act of killing, justifying it to himself compared to the shame James and Angela feel.

These different levels of morality all come together right before you begin jumping into the holes in Toluca Prison. As previously mentioned, there are four gravestones: one for James, Angela, Eddie, and Walter Sullivan. You’re all killers, and you’ve all dug your own graves. In the end, they’re all murderers, and they’ll have to jump into their graves eventually. However, forgiveness is also a huge theme of this game. Eddie and Angela cannot forgive their tormenters, and are tragically overcome by their mental torment. Meanwhile, James’ mind and Pyramid Head serve as his tormenters, but unlike the others, it’s up to player themselves whether or not to forgive James.

In all this guilt, this constant suffering between the two lovers, the otherworld creating a living nightmare of his own creation, and of course through a being created for the sole purpose of punishing him with Pyramid Head, James gets his punishment. As Mary says in “In Water,” it’s enough. I think falling onto one side of James killing Mary over love or hate is way too simple for such a well thought out and complex game, and I think “Leave” best reflects both sides of this.

James has been punished, not by the law, but by the will of the town, and served his metaphorical time. Clearly, he did love Mary, but he did also undeniably resent her to some extent and felt repressed, emotionally and physically, selfishly. All of the game's imagery and displays of suicidal ideology and many of the things James says, and ultimate does in the “In Water” paint a picture of a man racked by depression and guilt with no will to go on anymore.

He’s not an innocent person, but he’s also genuinely kind, trying his best to help where he could in the depths of Silent Hill, and caring for Mary despite her largely taking out her frustrations on him, loving her until the end. In every ending, Mary’s letter always tells James to move on and live for himself, and “In Water” just feels like such a denial of her wishes, while “Leave” feels like a true fulfillment of James’ story as a story of the ultimate crime, its suitable punishment, but ultimately redemption in the face of sin.

The more ambient tracks in particular I think separate this game from its predecessor. The first game is heavy and oppressive in its industrial noise without many moments of safety, Silent Hill 2 is much more calm and, like I said, ghostly. I would describe it as the difference between a visceral nightmare and a surreal dream.

All of the game’s sound effects were also done by Yamaoka. Beyond a lot of the incredible detail, like his uses of dozens of unique footstep sounds for a more real sound, Yamaoka also wanted a unique take on the monsters’ sound design. He describes Resident Evil’s monster sounds as somewhat formal, sounds that aren’t really that unusual to hear. He instead went for a sound that was surprising and unsettling, something completely abstract that got a direct reaction out of the player.

2 also has a lot of small random noises that may or may not occur based on RNG (random number generator, a system that can determine certain random events based on what frame you started the game on). In the apartments, just before crossing over, you might hear a strange whispering that is completely indistinct.

For years, people thought it might have said something about Mary, but it turned out to just be gibberish from a sound effect collection. Alongside this, a certain door may or may not rattle when you pass by it, you may hear the sound of a faucet turning on, and the entire third floor has a breathing sound as if the building itself has come to life. The prisons also house some kind of invisible monster that doesn’t attack, but loudly stomps around chanting, “ritual,” and in one of the bathrooms, if you knock on one of the doors, when you move to leave a woman will scream and bang on the door, but only sometimes.

These weird noises with no explanation and, alongside the dreamy surrealism of the game’s ambience and much softer music, give this game’s soundscape a deeply tense atmosphere where it isn’t just utterly silent compared to Silent Hill’s panic-inducing hellscape filled with cacophony.

Graphically, Silent Hill 2 is leaps and bounds better than its predecessor obviously and hasn’t aged too terribly considering its been two decades. Whereas the genius of the first game’s fog and darkness was just a clever workaround for a small team working with limited hardware, the Playstation 2 was a different beast.

Monsters are much more animated, humans actually look like humans, and environments are significantly more detailed. A lot of small areas, like Heaven’s Night, are intricately detailed little environments that, in spite of their both narrative and functionless lack of purpose, put on display the sheer love put into creating a believable and lived in world. The lighting especially has vastly improved, creating much more harsh contrast between light and dark than the first game was capable of , and creating a lot of interesting aesthetical changes in environments through color choice alone. The PS2 version of the game unfortunately still had polygonally based lighting for the flashlight, but the Xbox and PC versions not much later were much cleaner looking, though those ports were also much less stable.

The town’s main street is based around San Bruno, California, with many buildings looking identical to buildings in the town. Being far larger than what the first game’s part of the city was capable of, there’s a lot of long stretches of practically empty roads with nothing but monsters. These moments, like the run to the Historical Society or the game’s opening walk through the forest create a sense of crippling loneliness, of helplessness almost. There are other people out in the fog, but they’re just as damaged and lost as you. In the end, you’re truly alone.

One complaint I do see frequently about Silent Hill 2 is that it isn’t really scary, especially compared to its immediate predecessor and successor, and while it is to me because horror games terrify me, I would have to agree that it isn’t really a downright terrifying game unlike the first game. I would, however, say it’s a much more horrifying game. Silent Hill made me jump and panic, and its primarily non-human enemies posed much more of a threat than many of the sequel’s much slower, humanoid foes. In the moment to moment gameplay it freaked me out significantly more, but Silent Hill 2 made me feel uneasy for weeks after I finished it.

Silent Hill 2 was fundamentally designed around pure psychological horror, and Team Silent took a lot of time studying the human psyche and coming up with ways to really shake people to their core. The strong themes of sex and death, the odd surrealism in contrast to the just as present realism, and the dreamy, mystical air of the town creates a world of ambiguity.

The player is always left in the dark, often confused or put off by the behaviors of characters, their uncanny but strikingly human faces and voices. The deformations of the human form that make up the monster cast make them all the more unsettlingly, and their femininity only adds to the dichotomy of sex and death. The world itself feels lived in, but abandoned and lonely, and every environment feels like a deterioration of reality itself.

This game creates such an unsettlingly fine line between reality and the completely unreal, the human and monstrous, between comfort and discomfort, that you always feel this sense of unnerving uncertainty. Like I said, where the first game is a pure nightmare, this one is an unsettling dream that you’ll never wake up from.

I generally prefer media that doesn’t leave my mind for a good while after, it’s why Jacob’s Ladder is my favorite movie and NieR Replicant is my favorite game: I still think about them both passingly, about how they made me feel and how they affected how I see the world. Silent Hill 2 disturbed me in ways I didn’t think a game would be able to, whereas Silent Hill scared me way more, but didn’t leave as strong an impact on me in the long run.

I guess it just really depends on if you prefer sheer, adrenaline fueled terror, or creepily, looming, uneasy horror. Considering I wrote a summary for this game three times as long as the entire Silent Hill review, I think you can guess which I preferred.

Top

Silent Hill 2 is one of the greatest games of all time, without a doubt the best Silent Hill game as a whole, one of the best horror games, and one of my three favorite games ever, the others being the aforementioned NieR Replicant ver. 1.22… and the other being Sonic Unleashed, so take that as you will.

I wish I could go into even more depth about the philosophy, symbolism, and theories surrounding this game, but this is 11,000 words already and I really want to write about something other than the horrors of the human mind for once this year. I’ll just say if you liked the story of this game, its layers and complexities extend so far outside of what’s stated in the game that I’d say it’s on par with, if not exceeding at times, its inspirations in terms of sheer philosophical debate and interpretation.

In the debate as to whether games can be considered art, my first and foremost example will always be Silent Hill 2. It’s a story of death and loss, the depravity of humanity and the darkest depths of the human mind, but it’s also a genuinely beautiful, twisted love story. Silent Hill 2 is so utterly beautiful in spite of, if not because of, its horror, in a way few other stories I’ve experienced have been able to convey. It’s thoughtful and sensitive, never using its more sensitive topics as gimmicky shock value or even being particularly explicit; it’s probably the least gory game in the series.

It’s a masterclass of Lynchian surrealism, a Shakespearean tragic romance, and one of the most unnerving, unforgettable horror experiences ever. I will never forget Silent Hill 2, and I hope this has convinced some of you to be interested in the game, if not the series as a whole. This game is where I started the series, and I think it’s a great kicking off spot for the series, if not the whole survival horror and psychological horror genre.

If you’re interested in playing it, the original PS2 version is the most reliable console version of it, with the Xbox re-release (Silent Hill 2: Restless Dreams), which includes cleaner flashlight lighting and a new short second scenario where you play as Maria before the events of the game, as well as the U.F.O. ending being a decent second choice. The HD Collection versions on Playstation 3 and Xbox 360 are the absolute worst versions of both Silent Hill 2 and 3, with tons of glitches, lighting and sound issues, the use of Comic Sans and new voice acting that I think is objectively worse since it completely misses the point of the stilted, unsettling dialogue.

The best version of the game, however, is the PC version, or more specifically Silent Hill 2: Enhanced Edition, a fan mod project that has served as a far better remaster than the HD Collection. It takes all of the extra content from the Xbox release, adds some bonus content like trailers and, of course, enhances the visuals, with improved textures, smoother lighting, an option to turn the static filter on and off, and higher resolutions and framerates. It also takes the higher quality CG cutscenes from the original PS2 versions to create the best looking version possible. While the PC version is expensive on disc, there are free ways to get it, if you get what I mean.

In my memories of that dream-like fog, in the game’s uncertain reality, through the horror and sadness, I don’t think I’ll ever forget those somber, beautiful words: In my restless dreams, I see that town. Silent Hill. You said you’d take me there again someday. But you never did. Well, I’m waiting there now, in our ‘special place’... waiting for you…