The director of the original Silent Hill movie. Christophe Gans, is returning to the franchise with a new movie titled Return to Silent Hill, which is based on the story of Silent Hill 2.

The movie has been described as more of a psychological horror story. The plan is to "make it modern, but also very true to the video game," and it will include familiar monsters, including the nightmarish Pyramid Head, which we have a first-look photo to share with you.

As you can see, Pyramid Head has been given an updated design for the film, and it looks seriously menacing!

The film will follow James (Jeremy Irvine), “a man broken after being separated from his one true love (Hannah Emily Anderson). When a mysterious letter calls him back to Silent Hill in search of her, he finds a once-recognizable town transformed by an unknown evil.

“As James descends deeper into the darkness, he encounters terrifying figures both familiar and new and begins to question his own sanity as he struggles to make sense of reality and hold on long enough to save his lost love.”

Gans talked about the film saying: “Return to Silent Hill is a mythological love story about someone so deeply in love, they’re willing to go to hell to save someone.

“I’m delighted to have the wonderful talents of both Jeremy Irvine and Hannah Emily Anderson take us on this journey into a psychological horror world that I hope will both satisfy and surprise fans of Silent Hill.”

Producer Victor Hadida added: “Christophe and I have been working closely with our partners at Konami, as they update the video game, to also create a version of Silent Hill for the theatrical audiences of today.

“You will still find the iconic monsters – but there will also be new designs. We are confident that this new film and Konami’s updated game together will propel the franchise forward for years to come.”

Gans previously talked about the story saying: "The film tells the story of a young guy coming back to Silent Hill, where he has known a great love and what he's going to find is a pure nightmare."

I’m exited about this movie! The first film was so great and it’s great to see Gans return to make another one!