Ronald Cheng left the hospital in May 2013 and returned home to find his condo empty.

During an abbreviated physical rehab following Cheng’s most recent hospitalization, someone had entered his place and cleared out the clothing and furniture.

The culprit: his 82-year-old mother, Linda Cheng.

Linda Cheng had moved her oldest son into her house. At 55, Ronald Cheng was a boomerang kid. He was also on the verge of starting the second act of his long career as a restaurateur.

During his convalescence, Ronald Cheng found comfort in his mother’s cooking and the inspiration to seek a new challenge. He plans to open Chinatown West Town at 2712 Bee Cave Road later this month in the same location where he opened his original Chinatown restaurant in 1983.

The owner of Austin’s two Chinatown restaurants entered the hospital with pneumonia in September 2012. His pulmonary specialist discovered an aneurysm. Another specialist confirmed that it was a splenic aneurysm, and Cheng opted for elective surgery. Billed as a three-hour procedure, the surgery mutated into a 13-hour marathon session requiring three separate surgeries, with doctors eventually removing Cheng’s damaged spleen. The situation turned dire. Cheng lost more than two quarts of blood. Doctors put him in a medically induced coma for 16 days.

After that brush with death, Cheng landed back in the hospital in the spring of 2013 because of complications with his pancreas. What should have been a six-week rehabilitation and recovery period was cut to five days when the stubborn Cheng showed enough physical strength to procure his release from the hospital. But Linda Cheng wasn’t convinced by her obdurate son’s claims of independence.

“I don’t believe that you can’t do something,” Cheng said recently from his Chinatown restaurant that overlooks MoPac Boulevard. “But she wanted to take care of me.”

Linda Cheng knows something about strong wills. She and her sister opened Austin’s first immigrant-owned Chinese restaurant in 1970 on Burnet Road, months after arriving in Texas from China. The Sisters started as a gift shop, with Linda Cheng expanding the operation to include a café in order to support her family.

The family moved into the house’s cramped bedroom, with Linda Cheng converting the master bedroom into a café with five tables. She became a staff of one, walking to the store daily to procure groceries for her restaurant and family. Her independence and determination set an early example for her three children. (Ronald Cheng’s father, Youn Fang, arrived in Texas in 1972 and died in 1991.)

“To see her walk every day and to carry two big bags full of groceries every day, to climb that hill, and then go home by herself every day to cook, and then take care of three kids and get up in the morning and work all day and all night, it taught me the lesson about working hard,” Cheng said, his voice softening and quavering.

Cheng started working for his mother around age 12, first washing dishes, then making his way from server to fry cook. By 19 he was working the line and cooking with his mother’s wok.

After graduating from the University of Texas with a degree in international business, Ronald Cheng briefly ran the Sisters before a sojourn to Houston, where he studied under the tutelage of legendary chef Peng Chang-kuei, the man credited with creating General Tso’s chicken.

Ronald Cheng returned to Austin with several of Peng’s chefs and opened the original Chinatown on Bee Cave Road on June 1, 1983. Over the next 20 years, driven by an ambition he credits to his mother, Cheng operated multiple traditional and fusion restaurants around town under the Chinatown brand, including Chinatown Grill, Chinatown Café, El Chino and Chinois. Chinatown Downtown opened in 1999 and is still in business on Fifth Street. Ronald’s ex-wife, Linda, operated a Chinatown at 3300 Bee Cave Road in the Westlake area from 1998 to 2012. Cheng opened the flagship location off MoPac in 1987, and claims it is the longest running Chinese restaurant in Austin.

But following his flurry of entrepreneurial activity, the man who could occasionally be spotted jumping in to help work the line in an Armani suit lost his motivation. He moved into a supervisory role at his successful restaurants and settled into complacency.

“For quite a while I didn’t have any more drive,” Cheng said. “I didn’t set new goals.”

His brush with death and his time with his mother changed that.

“She would make me eat her food,” Cheng said. “And, as I watched her, I started remembering the old way of cooking, and saw some of the spices and techniques she was using.”

As he watched his mother simmer and braise meat and prepare his daily meals, Ronald Cheng felt a spark of passion. He started conjuring new dishes and considered getting back in the kitchen. When the original Chinatown location became available last year (after the closing of Bistro 88), Cheng knew he wanted to tackle a new challenge.

The new menu will include items such as San Bei Ji (three-cup chicken), a Cheng family favorite and popular dish in Taiwan that derives its name from the major ingredients used to stew the chicken — soy sauce, rice wine and sesame oil. Linda Cheng’s influence on the new menu will also be seen in a steamed sea bass dish that Ronald will season with aged Chinese ham, a technique his mother uses to add flavor to many of her dishes.

While Cheng’s using his new space to “get back to his roots,” he plans to contemporize some dishes and play outside of the realm of classic Chinese cuisine, incorporating Thai basil and lemongrass, ingredients traditionally found in Vietnamese dishes.

The restaurant will also reflect the next generation of Chengs. Ronald’s daughter, Ashley is the vice president of Slow Food Austin, a nonprofit dedicated to educating people about the food they eat and where it comes from. She has influenced her father’s ideas regarding sourcing. Once the restaurant has found its footing, Ronald Cheng intends to introduce locally sourced and sustainable ingredients to his roster of daily specials.

Ashley, one of Cheng’s five children, and her fiancé have started Grass & Grain Meat, a distribution company offering humanely raised and sustainably sourced beef. Her father has agreed to be their first wholesale customer.

“I’m immensely proud of my father. When you grow up in the restaurant industry, you really see very little of your parents. It’s hard to understand as a child why everyone is always gone during normal dinner hours. With all the health scares of the last year though, our family wasn’t just reinvigorated; it was more like a much-needed jolting awake. My father is a different person today than when he went into that coma in 2013. Ironically, with the opening of another restaurant our family is actually growing even closer.”

The new restaurant in the old location symbolizes a return and a rebirth for Ronald Cheng. It also speaks to the former high school tennis player’s intense competitive nature. Austin’s food scene had grown exponentially in recent years, and Cheng wanted to use his “second chance in life” to prove to himself, his mother and his peers in the restaurant world that he still has the skills and the will to succeed.

More than 30 years after he opened his original restaurant in Austin, Cheng returns with renewed purpose to the place that launched his career. He’s back home on Bee Cave Road, and he’s back home with his mother, with no intention of leaving.

“It is actually very comforting to be home again,” Cheng said.

Of course, just as Linda Cheng devoted most of her time to her restaurant when her son was a child, Ronald will now obsess over the operational details of running a restaurant. Linda knows the toll that such a task can take and admits that, like any mother, she will always worry about her children, regardless of their age.

“I think he’s crazy. Restaurants are such hard work. Our family can’t help it though — it’s what we do,” said Linda Cheng, whose daughter, Freda Cheng, owns Freda’s Seafood Grille in Cedar Park. “In our culture, feeding people is an offering of love and respect.”

The indefatigable Ronald understands his mother’s concerns about his health but remains philosophical.

“A person never dies from working too much,” Cheng said. “You only die from being lazy.”

It’s a lesson he learned from his mother.