Ronald Y. Cheng, 79, under Hospice home visit care, left his life peacefully on September 12, 2011 at his Longmont home after 4 years of courageous battle with his Parkinson’s disease, surrounded by his loving family.

Ronald was born on May 27, 1933 in Shanghai, China, as the youngest son of a family of four children. He later grew up in Hong Kong.

In 1953, he went to England as an architecture major at the University of Liverpool, UK. One year later, following his ideals, he transferred to the University of London. There he received his B.S. in Sociology. Two years later he received his M.A. in Sociology at the University of Hong Kong. Then, he came to the United States and got his Ph.D. in Sociology at the University of California, Berkeley.

He started his teaching career at the University of Hawaii and continued at the University of Colorado, Boulder. During these years, he also spent one year at Fuller Theological Seminary and worked with Chinese students and visiting scholars.

He was an organizer of interdisciplinary comparative historical seminars at CU-Boulder. He also worked with a Channel 6 Denver TV program on his visits to the People’s Republic of China from 1977 to 1979.

As a Social Systems Analysis Specialist and an invited Sociologist professor, he lectured on the American and Chinese Modernization experience at fourteen of the most famous institutions and universities in China such as: Beijing, Zejiang, Chong Quing, Jiaotong and Hunan.

He chose an early retirement to pursue and focus on his research and book-writing. He had his eight major books published, some of them published internationally. He also wrote numerous articles in professional journals. Meanwhile, he even served on many committees. He had the honor to be nominated to the American Academy of Human Services for outstanding professionals in human service in 1973.

In addition to writing and reading, he enjoyed travel, sports, and especially helping people in need. He was one of the best players on his high school soccer team.

Ronald was such a caring, gentle person, a loving father and a wonderful husband.

He was generous to others but very stingy with himself. He himself kept a very simple life. He made many contributions to charities. He donated thousands of his collected, valuable books, including classic volumes written in several different languages.

After experiences living in cities around the world, he chose Longmont as his final, permanent home in 2001. </p> <p>Preceding him in death were his parents and an older sister.

He is survived by his two older brothers; his wife; his daughter; his son; his stepson; two nieces’ three grandchildren and all their families.

At his request, his private memorial service only for his immediate family and cremation are entrusted to Ahlberg Funeral Chapel and Crematory. Share condolences and memories with Ronald’s family at www.ahlbergfuneralchapel.com.

He will be deeply missed and loved forever and always.