Peace Court of Alfara de la Baronia

Address of the Justice of the Peace:

Locality: Sagunto

Province: Valencia

Phone: 962626001

Fax: 962627225

Municipality/Judicial District: Sagunto

Civil Registry Address: Avda. Doctor Palós, 24

Phone: 962617775, 962617774

Fax: 962617789

Public hours: Monday to Friday, from 9:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.

Civil registry of Comunidad Valenciana

The civil registry has universal validity, because it is the only public document that legally records the life of a person or their marital status, which is why it is also a right of each citizen to the benefits of the state.

Peace Court of Alfara de la Baronia: Registrations and certificates

Peace Court of Alfara de la Baronia is the public register whose purpose is to provide an official record of the facts and acts relating to the civil status of persons, such as the name, surname, birth, death, parentage, sex or nationality of persons occurring at Alfara de la Baronia.

The procedures that you can carry out remotely in the magistrate's court of Alfara de la Baronia

* Access to the professional management form through RegistryCivil.es

The procedures that can only be carried out in person in the magistrate's court of Alfara de la Baronia

Registration of newborns in the justice of the peace Alfara de la Baronia

Marriage registration.

Death registration.

Change of name and surname.

Sex registry rectification.

Therefore, in the justice of the peace of Alfara de la Baronia The acts of people that occurred in this locality are registered and certified, such as:

The birth.

Marriage.

Death.

Affiliation.

The name and surname, as well as their changes.

Emancipation and age entitlement.

Declarations of absence or death.

Nationality and neighbourhood.

Parental authority, guardianship and other representations provided for by law.

Judicial modifications of the capacity of persons or that they have been declared bankrupt, bankrupt or in receivership.

The certifications issued by the justice of the peace are the official document that reliably certifies the recorded facts. Due to this and the changes that may occur in the Registry entries, these certifications have a practical validity of 3 months.

To process birth, marriage or death registration, it is necessary to go in person; to request birth certificates, marriage certificates and death certificates, it can be done in person or remotely.

For in-person procedures, you may have to make an appointment or there may be specific days and hours for what you want, so we recommend that you find out these limitations in person or make your request remotely whenever possible.

If you need to request a certification from the magistrate's court of Alfara de la Baronia You can do it through our website, avoiding travel, wasting time and with professional management. Through the online service you can request birth certificates, marriage certificates and death certificates, both from the magistrate's court of Alfara de la Baronia like any other point in Spain.

Birth certificate in Alfara de la Baronia

The birth certificate in Alfara de la Baronia is the official document that attests to the fact of a birth that occurred in Alfara de la Baronia , date on which it took place, sex, and, if applicable, the time at which the birth occurred and the affiliation of the registered person.

You can request the birth certificate at Alfara de la Baronia of all those people born in this city if the fact had been registered in this registry. Legally, the place of birth is considered to be the town in which the entry was registered. Although through our portal you can also request the certificate for any birth celebrated and registered elsewhere in Spain or a foreign city (if registered at the consulate).

Requesting a birth certificate, also called a birth certificate, is very simple through our website. Simply click on request birth certificate and fill out our online form. If we detect that any important data is missing to process the certificate, we will contact you to ensure the effectiveness of the process, with a quick and secure process.

Marriage certificate in Alfara de la Baronia

The marriage certificate in Alfara de la Baronia It is the official document that certifies the act of marriage and the date, time and place in which it occurred.

You can request the marriage certificate at Alfara de la Baronia of those people who have contracted or have recorded their marriage registration in Alfara de la Baronia, whether civil or religious. Although through our portal you can also request the certificate for a marriage celebrated and registered anywhere in Spain or a foreign city (if it was registered at the consulate).

Requesting a marriage certificate, also called a marriage certificate, is very simple through our website. Simply click on request marriage certificate and fill out our online form. If we detect that any important data is missing to process the certificate, we will contact you to ensure the effectiveness of the process, with a fast and secure process.

Death certificate in Alfara de la Baronia

The death certificate in Alfara de la Baronia It is the official document that certifies the death of a person in Alfara de la Baronia and it is necessary for various subsequent procedures such as the adjudication of an inheritance.

The deaths in Alfara de la Baronia As in any other locality, they produce civil effects from their date, however for their full recognition it is necessary to register in the Peace Court and obtain the respective death certificate in Alfara de la Baronia.

Requesting the death certificate, also called a death certificate, is very simple through our website. Simply click on request death certificate and fill out our online form. If we detect that any important data is missing to process the certificate, we will contact you to ensure the effectiveness of the process, with a fast and secure process.