Emerging technologies of CubeSat communication and navigation systems enable new approaches such as larger bandwidths, spectrum and security decrement and high speed communications. In order to create a vantage point, young professionals and students from the four corners of the earth had performed a comprehensive study at the 2014 Space Generation Congress in Toronto, Canada under "CubeSat Swarms Communication Networks and Policy Challenges" working group. While potential possibilities are endless for the structure of Cubesat networks, decisions made amongst the group were based on existing technologies and guidelines. Therefore, the working group discussed (1) short and long term technical challenges (2) policy requirements, (3) radio communication bandwidth limitations, (4) data collection and transmission regulations and (5) the standardization of the CubeSat communication system. Technical challenges for small satellite missions involve limitations of link budgets, the size of the deployable high gain antennas, optical and laser communication and the restriction of the link budget due to the interferences. In addition, policy issues have immaturities for frequency allocation and registration complimenting the short lifespan of CubeSats. The standardization of mission operations enables a space communication network architecture that of which is similar to the internet, incorporated into CubeSat Swarms. The group suggests a CubeSat network system architecture including inter-swarm and intra-swarm constellations, optical and laser communications and delay-tolerant networks (DTN). The proposed CubeSat communication network also consists of inter-swarm constellation communications along with intra-swarm constellations sustained through four different basic data links, a mother-daughter satellite framework, and net-neutrality throughout the network. In the meantime, policy regulation recommendations allow global communication by reducing data downlink time. Governments, as well as service providers, treat all data used online the same regardless of its origins, platform, and users. The standardization of the CubeSat network system was formed by operator expectations for high downlink speeds, equal priority for data transfers, and streamlined registrations. The simplified registration process for CubeSat-Swarms is more efficient by establishing new baseline legal framework, rules, and standards. This would help all users and operators in this sector, including entrepreneurs, licensing bodies, and end-users. Saving time for everyone while achieving maximum efficiency, utilization of the time and results are the end result of proposed system architecture by the working group.

For the past decade, academia has depended on the amateur radio frequencies and the concept of “one ground station, one satellite” mode of operations. With the changes in the International Amateur Radio Union (IARU), this model is no longer acceptable. Satellites must share ground systems and radio frequencies. Government systems often were plagued by the same design paradigm. To address this, the federal government has focused on the multimission satellite operations center (MMSOC). With the affordable price point of small satellites, more and more of these spacecraft will be entering the operational space and will need to be able to communicate with the ground. With more satellites, there must be a way to download the data, simplify integration and turn data in to knowledge.

CubeSats have become an interesting innovation in the space sector. Such platforms are being used for several space applications, such as education, Earth remote sensing, science, and defense. As of May 31st, 2018, 855 CubeSats had been launched. Remote sensing application is the main sector in which CubeSats are being used, corresponding to about 45% of all applications. This fact indicates the commercial potential of such a platform. Fifty eight countries have already been involved with developing CubeSats. The most used CubeSat configuration is 3U (about 64%), followed by 1U (18%), while 6U platforms account for about 4%. In this paper, we present an analysis of the current situation regarding CubeSats worldwide, through the use of a dataset built to encompass information about these satellites. The overall success rate of the CubeSat missions is increasing over time. Moreover, considering CubeSat missions as a Bernoulli experiment, and excluding launch failures, the current succ...