While Prime Minister Paavo Lipponen can orate Millennium Declarations and President Martti Ahtisaari can swan around the world and win acclaim for ending Balkan wars, Sauli Niinistö has to juggle with the trickiest piece of internal EU diplomacy since the Union’s seven-year budget deal was slotted together in March.

This is the first time Finns have held the rolling presidency of the EU and most of the ministers are enjoying it. As for Niinistö, behind the scenes he is working the phones and piling up his SAS air-miles in a bid to secure the most ambitious tax harmonisation deal in the Union’s history in time for the show-piece presidency summit in Helsinki four weeks from now.

It is fortunate for him that this is what he likes doing. Throughout the summer, the youthful-looking 51-year-old — he must be the only EU finance minister to keep in shape by obsessive rollerblading — was under pressure from the conservative National Coalition Party (Kokoomus) he leads to stand for the country’s presidency.

The polls show him to be Finland’s most popular politician and he was seen as the only conservative party figure who could beat the centrist Swedish People’s Party candidate Elisabeth Rehn in the election early next year.

But Niinistö resisted the clamour. Disarmingly, he told everyone who wanted to hear that he was “not the presidential type”. According to one of his close aides: “He is just not ready to do something like that;

he likes the hectic life and the president’s life is much more limited than being party leader and finance minister.”

A more Machiavellian mind might suggest it also had something to do with the fact that recent constitutional reforms in Finland have stripped the presidency of much of its executive power. He or she can no longer choose who should build a coalition after an election and foreign affairs must now be conducted hand-in-hand with the government.

This was hardly likely to appeal to an ambitious politician like Niinistö.

Born in Salo, a small city 100 kilometres west of Helsinki and just outside Turku, he trod the standard path of the aspirant politician — a degree in law, followed by ten years of legal practice and a parallel career in the local city council before winning a place in the national parliament in 1987. Until then, post-war Finnish politics had been dominated by Social Democrat-led coalitions but, with the Communists’ split in 1985, the conservatives went into government with the centre-left.

Turku and its surroundings were and still are a Kokoomus stronghold with serious influence in the national party, so assuring Niinistö of support if he ever set his sights on high office. He did but not straightaway. His first six years in parliament were marked by an interest in legal affairs, and it was the committee on constitutional law he chose to sit on and eventually chair.

In 1990-93 came the crisis which Niinistö is still clearing up. With the implosion of the Soviet Union, Finland lost its biggest export market overnight. Recession is too kind a word for what ensued. Within three years, Finland’s gross domestic product slumped 13% and unemployment soared. In 1991 alone, the Finnish economy shrank 6% while the EU’s grew 1.6%. Prime Minister Esko Aho, leader of the agrarian and Eurosceptical Centre Party, dealt with the immediate consequences and paid the price.

With a general election approaching in 1995, Niinistö secured the support of the powerful Turku party and became National Coalition Party chairman and justice minister under Aho. But Paavo Lipponen’s Social Democrats returned to power in the April 1995 elections and Aho was consigned to opposition, having steered Finland into the EU only four months earlier.

“Niinistö took a very pragmatic approach to negotiating the coalition,” explains a former colleague. “He had been in the Aho cabinet, but the Social Democrats won so he wanted our party to be in their cabinet. Anyway, Lipponen is much more pro-European than the Centre Party so in some ways it was easier to do business with the left.”

Pragmatic he must have been because the coalition Niinistö joined included not just Social Democrats but also the ex-Communist Leftist Alliance, the Greens and the centre-right Swedish People’s Party. Still unable to shake off his taste for the law, Niinistö chose the justice ministry and put his party man into the treasury.

“I think he knew he had made a mistake doing that pretty early on,” says a party colleague. “As party chairman, he had to choose between putting himself in the second most powerful job in the cabinet or putting someone else from the party in there, which would have made people question who was the real power in the party.”

A year later, Niinistö was able to rectify his error and took the job of finance minister and deputy premier.

Despite his elevation, 1995 was a terrible year for Niinistö.

On her way to meet him at a party gathering, his wife Marja-Leena was killed in a car crash, leaving him to raise their sons Nuuti and Matias.

Fortunately, the early years in the ministry were relatively easy. Even though Finland was still dragging itself out of the early-Nineties slump, growth had accelerated to 4% and inflation was at record EU lows at below 1%. Niinistö’s greatest problem was squaring the circle of being a conservative dedicated to eliminating the government’s budget deficit and qualifying for economic and monetary union, while tackling 15% unemployment rate.

“Four years ago, I used to say the government has an easy time because the nation had difficulties,” he said recently. “Now it seems the nation has easier times, so the risk that the government will have difficult times is increasing.”

Budget-cutter he may be, but Niinistö remains popular. In this year’s elections, Kokoomus increased its tally of parliamentary seats from 39 to 46 while Lipponen’s Social Democrats returned as the largest party but with a reduced seat-count. “Lipponen recognised that Niinistö was in a stronger position. It does mean that his agenda is listened to more under this second coalition,” said an aide.

In July, Niinistö unveiled his budget plans for 2000 and put his new ascendancy to the test. As a conservative, he wanted to build up the budget surplus to h1 billion and use it to pay off part of the public debt and cut income taxes. As if that was not ambitious enough, there was more to follow. Finns would have to earn the income tax cuts by keeping wage settlements under wraps. In the face of left-wing opposition, he also pledged to cap corporate tax for four years.

In the EU’s corridors of power, Niinistö has been a quiet force. “He is not Oskar Lafontaine, that’s for sure,” says a diplomat who has watched Niinistö at work in ministerial negotiating sessions. “You have to strain to hear him sometimes, but he does try hard to accommodate different positions, which is exactly what a good Council president should do.”

However, some thought he slipped up during the difficult negotiations over whether to allow the chairman of the Euro-11 ministerial coordinating group to go to meetings of the Group of Seven as the euro zone’s political representative. “He made too many waves over that and, to be honest, something like that was not in Finland’s gift. This was something for the G7 countries to sort out amongst themselves,” said an official close to the talks.

The next four weeks will be the toughest test yet of Niinistö’s good cop/bad cop routine.

BIO

24 August 1948 Born in Salo, Finland