Early life

Van Dyke was born in Los Angeles, California, the son of Mary (Carey) Van Dyke and actor Barry Van Dyke. He has two brothers, Wes and Carey, and a sister, Taryn Van Dyke. He is the patrilineal grandson of the entertainer Dick Van Dyke. He is also a grandnephew of Jerry Van Dyke and first cousin once removed of Jerry's daughter Kelly Jean Van Dyke.

Van Dyke's professional acting career began after graduating from high school when he became involved with the theatre program at Moorpark College in California. He launched his television career as the smaller recurring character of Alex Smith, a medical student, on the CBS television show, Diagnosis: Murder, appearing in a total of 14 episodes. In 2002, he starred in the musical Annie.

Career

In the years following his role on Diagnosis: Murder, Van Dyke worked on other television shows including the long-running soap opera The Bold and the Beautiful, as well as the independent film Arizona Summer.

In the summer of 2007, Shane rejoined his grandfather and father in a series of Hallmark Channel Original Movies titled Murder 101. Around the same period, he also co-starred in the Hallmark mini-series, Shark Swarm, opposite John Schneider and Daryl Hannah.

Van Dyke is also a screenwriter, and gained literary representation with Mad Hatter Entertainment, a Hollywood production and management company with several notable clients, and has performed screenwriter duties for various films including Transmorphers 2, Street Racer, Paranormal Entity, and The Day the Earth Stopped.

As of 2009, Van Dyke resides in Los Angeles and is a film and television faculty member with Hollywood for Kids.

Van Dyke was the director and writer of the movie Titanic II and portrayed the ship's owner, Hayden Walsh. In 2012, he produced with his brother, Carey, and Oren Peli, the horror film Chernobyl Diaries.

In July 2013, Van Dyke appeared as Greg, a lifeguard in the SyFy film "Supershark" about a giant shark released from stone by an oil-drilling rig off the California coast.