Barry Van Dyke (born July 31, 1951) is an American actor and the second son of actor and entertainer Dick Van Dyke as well as the stepson of makeup artist Arlene Silver-Van Dyke and nephew of Jerry Van Dyke.

He was best known to audiences as Lieutenant Detective Steve Sloan, a homicide detective and the son of Dr. Mark Sloan (played by Dick Van Dyke) on Diagnosis: Murder. In the show, the characters' relatives were frequently played by real-life family members.

Funny, I just watched the abysmally-bad Galactica 1980 because of a random comment that suggested the reboot (probably some of the best television, ever) was based on a throwaway line from this abortion of a second season (for lack of any other description). Barry played the Starbuck-esque character, clearly because of his resemblance to Dirk Benedict, chiseled jawline and his feathered hair.

Not merely heterosexual, but a prolific BREEDER. Putting one in mind of a stud horse...

In 1974, he married Mary Carey; the couple had 4 children: Carey (born February 25, 1976), Shane (born August 28, 1979), Wes (born October 22, 1984), and Taryn (born June 1, 1986).

[post redacted because linking to dailymail.co.uk clearly indicates that the poster is either a troll or an idiot (probably both, honestly.) Our advice is that you just ignore this poster but whatever you do, don't click on any link to this putrid rag.]

I always thought he was very good looking in his 20s-40s-----------also very very good bod for the time period. I liked Grant Goodeve of eight is enough also, I had a thing for the slightly offbeat ones Iguess. Barry Vad Dyke s sons are nice looking as well

Jerry used to come into my Radio Shack store before I started working there. The sales staff I worked with said that he often spoke of his brother Dick in the most hateful terms. At that time, at least, it seemed he despised him.

Jerry's daughter Kelly Jean (an adult film star) killed herself. Her husband Jack Nance (a regular in David Lynch projects) was on the phone with her trying to talk her out of it when the power went out at the mountain lodge where he was staying. He was on location filming Meatballs 4. By the time he was able to call for help, she was gone.

He died alone at home a few years later of a head injury sustained while in an alcoholic stupor.

You can't make this stuff up.