Moses “Max” Beer was an Austrian-born Marxist economist, journalist and historian. Beer is best remembered as an early writer on the topic of imperialism and for a series of books, published in translation in several countries, which examined the nature of class struggle throughout human history.

Max Beer was born on August 10, 1864, in Tarnobrzeg, Subcarpathia, Poland. His birth geographical coordinates are 50° 34’ 23” North latitude and 21° 40’ 46” East longitude. Max Beer passed away at the age of 78 in 1943.

Astrologically, Max Beer falls under the Sun sign of Leo, with Scorpio as his Ascendant, Scorpio as his Moon sign, and Virgo as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Leo Moon Scorpio Mercury Virgo Venus Leo Mars Taurus Jupiter Scorpio Saturn Libra Uranus Gemini Neptune Aries Pluto Taurus Ceres Aries Chiron Pisces Eros Libra Hygiea Cancer Juno Sagittarius Pallas Pisces Vesta Leo Ascendant Scorpio Black Moon Lilith Virgo Midheaven Leo North Node Scorpio South Node Taurus Part of Fortune Aquarius Vertex Gemini

Sunin Leo17° 59’ 15”

The Sun in Leo in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for assertiveness and charm. You are passionate and dynamic, using your strengths to […] Read more »

Moonin Scorpio15° 10’ 48”

The Scorpio Moon in a Natal Chart makes you intense and passionate. You have a gift for revealing hidden wisdom and are obsessed with discovering […] Read more »

Mercuryin Virgo9° 27’ 54”

Virgo Mercury in the Natal Chart makes you rational and logical. You are thoughtful and intelligent. You use your intellectual gifts primarily and often ignore […] Read more »

Venusin Leo24° 20’ 35”

Leo Venus in the Natal Chart makes you bold and creative in love. You are attractive and popular, easily gaining attention. You are passionate about […] Read more »

Marsin Taurus21° 7’ 59”

Taurus Mars in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for security and stability. You are passionate about helping others to set a foundation for […] Read more »

Jupiterin Scorpio18° 46’ 33”

Scorpio Jupiter in the Natal Chart relates to a generation born with the mission to expose hidden secrets and find empowerment and vision. You are […] Read more »

Saturnin Libra13° 56’ 48”

Yet, when you face challenges, you can be a staunch advocate for others. You have a feisty side and can be passionate about your mission. […] Read more »

Uranusin Gemini28° 12’ 42”

Uranus in Gemini in the Natal Chart brings opportunities for breakthroughs that change telecommunications. You are part of a generation that helps expand understanding and […] Read more »

Neptunein Aries8° 6’ 38”

With Neptune Aries, you use your compassionate nature to help empower others. You are part of a generation born to elevate hidden truths. You help […] Read more »

Plutoin Taurus13° 16’ 54”

Taurus Pluto in the Natal Chart is a generational placement associated with dramatic changes to beauty, romance, and power. Your generation helps redefine security and […] Read more »

Ceresin Aries25° 28’ 23”

Ceres in Aries in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a generation obsessed with comforting and helping others. You are motivated and can […] Read more »

Chironin Pisces13° 48’ 40”

Chiron in Pisces is an ideal placement for a generation committed to healing. You are passionate about showing others you care. You can be self-sacrificing […] Read more »

Erosin Libra26° 0’ 51”

Eros in Libra in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for exploring lusty desires through creative, intimate encounters. You are attracted to people who […] Read more »

Hygieain Cancer15° 37’ 45”

Hygiea in Cancer in the Natal Chart indicates a desire to help others fulfill their potential. You are compassionate and devoted to encouraging your family […] Read more »

Junoin Sagittarius7° 10’ 28”

Juno in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart indicates an ideal placement for affection and desire. You bring abundance and love to your relationships and can […] Read more »

Pallasin Pisces13° 44’ 59”

Pallas in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you a generous and compassionate leader. You mentor others and can help create a path to success. […] Read more »

Vestain Leo2° 7’ 2”

Vesta in Leo in the Natal Chart makes you fiery and intense. You go to extremes to show your creative side. Your sacred mission involves […] Read more »

Ascendantin Scorpio5° 23’ 26”

Scorpio Ascendant makes you eager to use your image and appearance to convey authority and power. You are determined to show your influence by speaking […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Virgo4° 23’ 33”

Virgo Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you crave order and stability. You strive to set a foundation for growth, yet you can […] Read more »

Midheavenin Leo17° 23’ 19”

Leo Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you encouraging and enthusiastic. You are determined to succeed, and your optimistic and playful nature will help you […] Read more »

North Nodein Scorpio13° 40’ 18”

Scorpio North Node in the Natal Chart makes you a wise guide for others. You undergo dramatic change and navigate traumas. Your Karmic mission involves […] Read more »

South Nodein Taurus13° 40’ 18”

Taurus South Node in the Natal Chart indicates an ideal placement for compassion and charisma. You are determined and can be loyal and devoted. You […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Aquarius2° 34’ 59”

Aquarius Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you bright and charming. You are expressive and inspired by unconventional ideas. You use your individualistic […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon First House Mercury Tenth House Venus Tenth House Mars Seventh House Jupiter First House Saturn Eleventh House Uranus Eighth House Neptune Fifth House Pluto Seventh House Ceres Sixth House Chiron Fourth House Eros Twelfth House Hygiea Ninth House Juno Second House Pallas Fourth House Vesta Ninth House Black Moon Lilith Tenth House North Node First House South Node Seventh House Part of Fortune Third House Vertex Eighth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 20 major aspects, alongside 18 minor aspects, as well as 11 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Sun Square Jupiter Mercury Quincunx Neptune Saturn Quincunx Pluto Moon Opposite Pluto Mars Opposite Jupiter Sun Square Moon Sun Square Mars Venus Square Mars Sun Sextile Saturn Moon Conjunct Jupiter Mercury Trine Pluto Venus Sextile Uranus Sun Square Pluto Jupiter Opposite Pluto Sun Conjunct Venus Moon Sextile Mercury Moon Opposite Mars Venus Square Jupiter Saturn Opposite Neptune Mars Conjunct Pluto

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Max Beer’s life journey.

Sun Square Jupiterorb: 1°

The Sun square Jupiter in the Natal Chart makes you stifle your unique and independent nature. You crave freedom, but you may be grandiose. You […] Read more »

Mercury Quincunx Neptuneorb: 1°

Mercury quincunx Neptune in a chart creates a confusing dynamic between logic and creativity. A person with this aspect in their chart will possess both […] Read more »

Saturn Quincunx Plutoorb: 1°

Saturn quincunx Pluto in a chart typically indicates that a person is somehow disconnected from their inner self. They might want to transform themselves or […] Read more »

Moon Opposite Plutoorb: 2°

The Moon opposite Pluto in a Natal Chart can create a lot of wild and tumultuous emotions. A person with this opposition in their chart […] Read more »

Mars Opposite Jupiterorb: 2°

Mars opposite Jupiter in a chart typically indicates that a person has the potential to be highly successful. They will face challenges but are often […] Read more »

Sun Square Moonorb: 3°

The Sun square Moon in a Natal Chart is more potent than this aspect in a Transiting Chart. You inhibit your growth and block yourself […] Read more »

Sun Square Marsorb: 3°

The Sun square Mars can make you restless. You have an anxious personality and may be energetic and hyper. You find motivation to overcome insecurities, […] Read more »

Sun Sextile Saturnorb: 4°

The Sun sextile Saturn in the Natal Chart makes you sober and mature. Even as a child, you have uncanny wisdom and seem older than […] Read more »

Moon Conjunct Jupiterorb: 4°

The Moon conjunct Jupiter in your Natal Chart makes you idealistic and expressive. You can be emotional and project your intense feelings. You may have […] Read more »

Venus Sextile Uranusorb: 4°

Venus sextile Uranus in a chart typically indicates that a person is open-minded, artistic, and innovative. They are likely noticeably unique or different in some […] Read more »

Sun Square Plutoorb: 5°

The Sun square Pluto in a Natal Chart makes you fearful of change and loss. Until you accept core fears and weaknesses, you may overcompensate […] Read more »

Jupiter Opposite Plutoorb: 5°

Jupiter opposite Pluto in a chart creates the potential for growth, transformation, success, and abundance. It is not always easy to get those things due […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Venusorb: 6°

When the Sun is conjunct Venus in your Natal Chart, you are exceptionally romantic. Others see you as beautiful, and you have a gift for […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Mercuryorb: 6°

You are emotionally open and communicative if you’ve got the Moon sextile Mercury in your Natal Chart. You likely don’t find sharing your feelings challenging, […] Read more »

Moon Opposite Marsorb: 6°

The Moon opposite Mars in a Natal Chart can indicate that a person is passionate, impulsive, and volatile. Their emotions can get out of control […] Read more »

Saturn Opposite Neptuneorb: 6°

Saturn opposite Neptune in a chart typically indicates that a person will have issues with responsibilities, self-doubt, and confusion. They may have trouble connecting with […] Read more »

Mars Conjunct Plutoorb: 8°

Mars conjunct Pluto in a chart typically brings an intense and powerful energy. This energy is not always healthy or easy to work with, but […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Moon Trine Hygiea Saturn Quincunx Chiron Saturn Quincunx Pallas Saturn Quincunx South Node Pluto Sextile Pallas Pluto Opposite North Node Pluto Conjunct South Node Sun Conjunct Midheaven Moon Trine Chiron Moon Trine Pallas Mercury Square Vertex Venus Trine Ceres Jupiter Square Midheaven Neptune Trine Juno Pluto Sextile Chiron Moon Conjunct North Node Moon Opposite South Node Saturn Square Hygiea

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Max Beer’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Saturn Quincunx Chironorb: 0°

Saturn quincunx Chiron in a chart creates tension between the inner wound of Chiron and Saturn’s responsible, restrictive nature. This aspect makes it difficult for […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Chiron Conjunct Pallas Chiron Trine North Node Chiron Sextile South Node Pallas Trine North Node Pallas Sextile South Node Vesta Opposite Part of Fortune Ceres Opposite Eros Ascendant Sextile Black Moon Lilith Chiron Trine Hygiea Hygiea Trine Pallas Hygiea Trine North Node

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Max Beer’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Chiron Conjunct Pallasorb: 0°

Chiron conjunct Pallas in a chart connects wounds and wisdom. Chiron’s wounded and healing energies will blend with the intellect, strategy, and perception of Pallas […] Read more »

Ascendant Sextile Black Moon Lilithorb: 1°

The Ascendant sextile Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you unique and individualistic. You have a style unlike anyone else, and your eccentric […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.