Mariusz Kukiełka is a Polish former professional footballer who played as a centre-back or as a midfielder. Kukiełka made 20 appearances for the Poland national team, scoring three goals.

Mariusz Kukiełka was born on November 7, 1976, in Tarnobrzeg, Subcarpathia, Poland. His birth geographical coordinates are 50° 34’ 23” North latitude and 21° 40’ 46” East longitude. Mariusz Kukiełka is currently 47 years old.

Astrologically, Mariusz Kukiełka falls under the Sun sign of Scorpio, with Capricorn as his Ascendant, Taurus as his Moon sign, and Taurus as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Scorpio Moon Taurus Mercury Scorpio Venus Sagittarius Mars Scorpio Jupiter Taurus Saturn Leo Uranus Scorpio Neptune Sagittarius Pluto Libra Ceres Virgo Chiron Aries Eros Virgo Hygiea Virgo Juno Scorpio Pallas Leo Vesta Cancer Ascendant Capricorn Black Moon Lilith Taurus Midheaven Scorpio North Node Scorpio South Node Taurus Part of Fortune Cancer Vertex Virgo

Sunin Scorpio15° 10’ 26”

The Sun in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you enigmatic and sexually expressive. You are empowered and self-confident. You seek unique ways to express […] Read more »

Moonin Taurus20° 17’ 1”

The Taurus Moon in the Natal Chart makes you sensual and reasonable. You are empathetic and can be rational and down to earth. You are […] Read more »

Mercuryin Scorpio15° 12’ 48”

Mercury in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you intense and focused. You are thoughtful and communicate your strategic ideas. You are determined to succeed […] Read more »

Venusin Sagittarius21° 33’ 43”

Sagittarius Venus in the Natal Chart makes you intense and open in love. You are social and go to extremes to show someone special you […] Read more »

Marsin Scorpio20° 25’ 24”

Scorpio Mars in the Natal Chart makes you intense and mysterious. You have a probing nature and an insatiable appetite for knowledge. You seek hidden […] Read more »

Jupiterin Taurus27° 35’ 4”

Jupiter in Taurus in the Natal Chart is a generational placement that relates to having a materialistic vision. You are part of a generation that […] Read more »

Saturnin Leo16° 29’ 39”

Is Saturn in Leo good or bad? Leo Saturn in the Natal Chart makes you uplifting and determined to succeed. You are part of a […] Read more »

Uranusin Scorpio7° 58’ 2”

Uranus in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you eager to pursue your higher mission. You are focused and obsessed with rebelling against the status […] Read more »

Neptunein Sagittarius12° 39’ 37”

Sagittarius Neptune in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation born to help society expand. You help others grow and push boundaries. […] Read more »

Plutoin Libra12° 52’ 2”

Pluto in Libra in the Natal Chart indicates a generation devoted to exposing corruption within the legal system. You help society transform how it creates […] Read more »

Ceresin Virgo18° 30’ 1”

Ceres in Virgo in the Natal Chart is an ideal generational placement for practicality and nurturing. You are part of a healing and stable generation. […] Read more »

Chironin Aries28° 51’ 28”

Aries Chiron in the Natal Chart brings passion and persuasiveness. You help others heal from old wounds by showing your strength and tapping into your […] Read more »

Erosin Virgo24° 3’ 57”

What is Eros in astrology? The asteroid of passion and sexual obsession can spike your libido in most cases. Yet Eros in Virgo in the […] Read more »

Hygieain Virgo9° 51’ 44”

Virgo Hygiea in the Natal Chart gives you a grounded and sensible nature. You are down to earth and avoid going to extremes. You are […] Read more »

Junoin Scorpio0° 0’ 56”

Juno in Scorpio in the Natal Chart indicates a desire for love and intimacy. You are passionate about sharing your insights and can be persuasive […] Read more »

Pallasin Leo19° 55’ 8”

Pallas in Leo in the Natal Chart makes you persuasive and influential. You are charismatic and can be encouraging and supportive. Wondering, what is my […] Read more »

Vestain Cancer25° 38’ 52”

Vesta in Cancer in the Natal Chart makes you sensitive and nurturing. You can be emotional and use your gifts to comfort others. You are […] Read more »

Ascendantin Capricorn23° 2’ 22”

The Capricorn Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you responsible. You have the appearance of someone reliable and mature. Others look to you for guidance […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Taurus11° 23’ 57”

Taurus Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you daring and sincere. You are authentic and can be true to yourself, even when your […] Read more »

Midheavenin Scorpio25° 46’ 53”

Scorpio Midheaven in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for uncanny wit and instincts that help you thrive in your career. You rise to […] Read more »

North Nodein Scorpio2° 46’ 23”

Scorpio North Node in the Natal Chart makes you a wise guide for others. You undergo dramatic change and navigate traumas. Your Karmic mission involves […] Read more »

South Nodein Taurus2° 46’ 23”

Taurus South Node in the Natal Chart indicates an ideal placement for compassion and charisma. You are determined and can be loyal and devoted. You […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Cancer28° 8’ 57”

Cancer Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart indicates you are creative and comforting. You are nurturing and can be loving and sensitive. You are […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Ninth House Moon Third House Mercury Ninth House Venus Eleventh House Mars Ninth House Jupiter Fourth House Saturn Seventh House Uranus Ninth House Neptune Tenth House Pluto Eighth House Ceres Seventh House Chiron Second House Eros Eighth House Hygiea Seventh House Juno Eighth House Pallas Seventh House Vesta Seventh House Black Moon Lilith Third House North Node Ninth House South Node Third House Part of Fortune Seventh House Vertex Seventh House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 19 major aspects, alongside 6 minor aspects, as well as 7 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Sun Conjunct Mercury Moon Opposite Mars Neptune Sextile Pluto Sun Square Saturn Moon Quincunx Venus Mercury Square Saturn Moon Square Saturn Mars Square Saturn Saturn Trine Neptune Saturn Sextile Pluto Sun Opposite Moon Sun Conjunct Mars Moon Opposite Mercury Mercury Conjunct Mars Venus Trine Saturn Sun Conjunct Uranus Moon Conjunct Jupiter Mercury Conjunct Uranus Mars Opposite Jupiter

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Mariusz Kukiełka’s life journey.

Sun Conjunct Mercuryorb: 0°

Sun conjunct Mercury in the Natal Chart can make you bright, playful, and talkative. Your intellectual gifts are among your best characteristics. You can be […] Read more »

Moon Opposite Marsorb: 0°

The Moon opposite Mars in a Natal Chart can indicate that a person is passionate, impulsive, and volatile. Their emotions can get out of control […] Read more »

Sun Square Saturnorb: 1°

The Sun square Saturn in the Natal Chart makes you feel stifled and restricted. You struggle to adhere to rules and practical routines. With work, […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Venusorb: 1°

Stable romantic relationships might be difficult if you have the Moon quincunx Venus in your Natal Chart. This does not mean you’ll never find one, […] Read more »

Mercury Square Saturnorb: 1°

Mercury square Saturn in a Natal Chart can be an incredibly challenging square to work through. Many lessons can be learned from this aspect, but […] Read more »

Moon Square Saturnorb: 4°

The Moon square Saturn in a Natal Chart typically creates controlling tendencies in a person. Depending on how this is expressed, people might be more […] Read more »

Sun Opposite Moonorb: 5°

The Sun opposite the Moon in a Natal Chart means you were born during the Full Moon. You may have tension between your intuitive and […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Marsorb: 5°

Your Natal Chart aspects describe your personality and individualistic qualities. These placements create a lifelong influence on your personality. When the Sun is conjunct Mars […] Read more »

Moon Opposite Mercuryorb: 5°

Someone with the Moon opposite Mercury in their Natal Chart might feel like they are in a constant tug-of-war between their heart and mind. A […] Read more »

Mercury Conjunct Marsorb: 5°

Mercury conjunct Mars in the Natal Chart makes you outspoken and dramatic. You are intense and speak passionately. You are demanding and can be focused […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Uranusorb: 7°

The Sun conjunct Uranus in your Natal Chart impacts your personality in unusual ways. You can be innovative and creative. You are known for being […] Read more »

Moon Conjunct Jupiterorb: 7°

The Moon conjunct Jupiter in your Natal Chart makes you idealistic and expressive. You can be emotional and project your intense feelings. You may have […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Moon Square Pallas Mars Square Pallas Jupiter Sextile Part of Fortune Moon Trine Ceres Venus Trine Pallas Jupiter Opposite Midheaven

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Mariusz Kukiełka’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Vesta Trine Midheaven Chiron Opposite Juno Chiron Square Part of Fortune Eros Trine Ascendant Juno Sextile Vertex Chiron Trine Vertex Hygiea Trine Black Moon Lilith

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Mariusz Kukiełka’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.