The limestone layer has an average thickness of 80-100 metres. The pavement of Schrattenkalk limestone features highly intricate surface patterning: karren, razor-sharp rillenkarren (‘Schratten’), dolines (sinkholes) and much more.

The Schratteflue range is made up of sediment from the ancient Tethys sea, deposited in northern Italy some 100 million years ago and transported north as the Alps formed. As the Alpine divide formed, marine sediments were driven over the layers to the north, which explains why the Schrattenfluh resembles an oblique plate sloping sharply northwards. Plant life on the limestone pavement of the Schrattenfluh depends on altitude, with the lower elevations forested with conifers and deciduous trees. Above the tree line, moors alternate with meadows. At its highest elevation, the limestone pavement is completely devoid of vegetation. This gradation is partly due to a lack of ice coverage at higher altitudes during the last ice age.

Various speleologists have studied the many fissures of the Schratteflue since 1959. The largest cave, the Neuenburgerhöhle, was discovered very early on in these explorations and named after the home base of the explorers. Spanning 7.5 kilometres, it remains the longest cave found in the karst region to date. With many other caves ranging in size and depth, the Schrattenfluh conceals an unimaginably large water network. Rain takes just seconds to trickle through the exposed holes of the limestone pavement, draining as far as the underlying impermeable layer of stone (Drusberg marl) before disappearing into hidden subterranean streams and rivers. In the course of a water tinting exercise in 1970, it was found that water coloured in cave P55 (in the middle of the Schratteflue) did not, as expected, reach the inlets of the large Emme or Waldemme rivers, but travelled an incredible 20 km underground before emerging in Lake Thun 38 hours later. By contrast, more recent studies have shown that eastern parts of the Schrattenfluh drain into the Waldemme as expected.