"Blue in the Face" is the ninth episode of the second season of Disney Channel's That's So Raven and the thirtieth episode overall. It aired on April 16, 2004. It was written by Maisha Closson and directed by Sean McNamara.

Plot[]

Raven Baxter is asked by Devon Carter to go to a Blue Rain concert, but her grades are slipping due to spending too much time with him. Tanya Baxter tells Raven that she must get a good grade on a science project, or she'll be grounded and she'll have to miss the Blue Rain concert. When Victor gets a new paper shredder, he becomes totally obsessed with it. Meanwhile, Cory's intelligent friend William needs a makeover. Raven makes a deal with William, she'll give him a makeover if he'll help Raven with her science project. William does his share of the deal, but Raven had forgotten about her part. When William and Cory get mad, they shred the project, which Raven had to fix up a night. Asleep from lack of sleep, she groggily and mistakenly tells Victor that her paper is trash. He shreds the paper and Raven gets mad. Then by accident at school, she ends up creating an unstable chemical reaction in the science lab, which causes Raven and Victor (who had come to bring Raven her formula project paper) to get covered in some sort of blue substance that will not wash off for a two days. Raven is grounded until her grades improve and she's not allowed to go to the concert. That night, Devon tells Raven that since she can't go to the concert he's bringing Blue Rain to her. Meanwhile, Cory meets a girl named Madison, but she does not like William, and Tanya asks Cory if he wants to be with one who hates his best friend. In the end, Cory chooses William over Madison. Raven is given a second chance to bring her grades up by doing an extra credit project. She also gives William a makeover like she promised.

Cast[]

Starring[]

Raven-Symoné as Raven Baxter

Orlando Brown as Eddie Thomas

Kyle Massey as Cory Baxter

Anneliese van der Pol as Chelsea Daniels

T'Keyah Crystal Keymáh as Tanya Baxter

Rondell Sheridan as Victor Baxter

Trivia[]

Blue Rain is a parody of Blue Man Group.

Devon standing outside Raven's bedroom with a boombox is a reference to the 1989 film, Say Anything....

The title is a reference to the phrase, "Blue in the face".

See Also[]

That's So Raven episode list

[]

Blue in the Face on That's So Raven Wiki