Overview: Maclovia (Belleza Maldita in some countries) is a 1948 Mexican romantic drama film directed by Emilio Fernández and starring María Félix and Pedro Armendáriz.

Release date: 30 September 1948

Genre: Drama, Romance

Director: Emilio Fernández

On a small Mexican island dwells a group of Indians who live in the traditional manner and who disdain outsiders...

Overview: Reportaje ("Report News") is a 1953 Mexican film. The film brought together an extraordinary ensemble cast of the most important stars of the Golden Age of Mexican cinema and was held for charitable p ...

Release date: 13 November 1953

Genre: Drama, Comedy

Director: Emilio Fernández

A press mogul (Ferriz) offers 10 thousand pesos to the journalist who discover the best news on New Year's Eve...

Overview: Enamorada ("Enamoured") is a 1946 Mexican drama film directed by Emilio Fernández and starring María Félix and Pedro Armendáriz. It was shot at the Churubusco Studios in Mexico City and on location in ...

Release date: 25 December 1946

Genre: War, Romance, Drama, Comedy

Director: Emilio Fernández

In Mexican Revolution times, a guerrilla general (Armend?z) and his troops take the conservative town of Cholula...

Overview: The Torch (Spanish: Del odio nace el amor, meaning "love is born from hate") is a 1950 Mexican/American film directed by Emilio Fernández. The film is a remake of Enamorada (1946) and is also known as ...

Release date: 2 June 1950

Genre: Drama, Comedy, War, Romance, Adventure, Action

Director: Emilio Fernández

A revolutionary and his band take over a small Mexican town. The townspeople begin to take sides over whether to fight him, join forces with him or just ...

Overview: Pueblerina is a 1949 Mexican drama film directed by Emilio Fernández. It was entered into the 1949 Cannes Film Festival.

Release date: 6 July 1949

Genre: Drama, Romance

Director: Emilio Fernández

Aurelio Rodr?ez is released from jail, and tries to start a new life marrying Paloma and working his land. But the local landowners, the brothers Gonz?z ...

Overview: La Choca ("The Bump") is a 1974 Mexican drama film directed by Emilio Fernández and starring Pilar Pellicer. It won the Ariel Award for Best Picture at the 17th Ariel Awards in 1975.

Release date: 5 September 1974

Genre: Drama, Crime, Action

Director: Emilio Fernández

Martin lives in a mountain hut with his wife, La Choca, and his son, little Martin, and Flor, Choca's sister...

Overview: A Faithful Soldier of Pancho Villa (Spanish: Un dorado de Pancho Villa) is a 1967 Mexican drama film written, directed by and starring Emilio Fernández. It was entered into the 5th Moscow International ...

Release date: 22 June 1967

Genre: Drama, War, Adventure

Director: Emilio Fernández

Un Dorado de Pancho Villa opens on Pancho Villa addressing his faithful at the end of the Mexican Revolution...