‘Defend yourself, Govt. can’t do that for you’ – Jagdeo tells ‘Guyanese Critic’

Kaieteur News – Vice President (VP) Bharrat Jagdeo on Thursday told Mikhail Rodrigues, known as ‘Guyanese Critic’ to defend himself and not rely on the Government of Guyana (GoG) to do so....

Jagdeo: PPP will not act against Dharamlall before Police probe

Kaieteur News – General Secretary (GS) of the People’s Progressive Party (PPP) Bharrat Jagdeo, on Thursday stated that the party will not act against Nigel Dharamlall, an executive member of...

Govt. to rent additional 30 MW

Kaieteur News – Even as the Guyana Power & Light (GPL) is working to connect the 36 megawatt (MW) powership to the Demerara-Berbice Interconnected System (DBIS) yesterday afternoon Vice...

VP Jagdeo denies being beneficial owner of Kaieteur, Canje oil blocks

Kaieteur News – Vice President Bharrat Jagdeo has denied being one of the beneficial owners of the Kaieteur and Canje oil blocks. The Vice President was at the time responding to a question...

Soft questions for VP Jagdeo

Hard Truths by GHK Lall Kaieteur News – It is the season of questions, and since I have an inquiring mind, the blasphemous is done. I now place a little pamphlet of questions at the feet of...

Senegal’s newly elected President announces immediate probe and renegotiation of all Oil, Gas and Mining contracts handed out by former leader

Kaieteur News – In a televised address to the nation on Wednesday, Senegal’s newly elected President, Bassirou Diomaye Faye, revealed plans for a comprehensive audit of the nation’s...

‘Ali and Jagdeo don’t want to hold Exxon accountable for misuse of oil money – Norton says

Kaieteur News – Leader of the Opposition, Aubrey Norton has underscored that the opposition does not have the power to hold ExxonMobil Guyana Limited (EMGL) accountable for the allege misuse of...

French patrol vessel to save fishing industry $100M still to dock – Jagdeo

Kaieteur News – The French vessel that is to come to patrol Guyana’s waters, saving the country $100M through illegal fishing, is yet to dock here. The disclosure was made by Vice President...

‘Journalists are being killed around the world’

– VP Jagdeo in response to Human Rights body raising concerns about incident with K/News journalists at VP press conference Kaieteur News – In response to an article highlighting that the...

‘Govts must stop relentless borrowing’ – Top Central Banker warns

– risk plunging world into debt crisis The Telegraph – Governments must stop their “relentless” borrowing or risk plunging the world into a debt crisis, a top central banker has...

Police have enough evidence to probe Jagdeo for corruption – Norton

Kaieteur News – Amid complaints by the United Nations that the Guyana Government has failed to investigate allegations of corruption against Vice President, Bharrat Jagdeo, Opposition Leader,...

Govt. banking on high oil prices to rake in US$9B by 2027 – Jagdeo

Kaieteur News – The Government of Guyana, adamant that it will not engage ExxonMobil for a better deal, and is banking on high oil prices to repay the operator of the Stabroek Block swiftly so...

Jagdeo says he can only talk about jobs, local content and gas from Stabroek Block because his government not renegotiating

Kaieteur News – While foreign oil majors continue to boast of high returns from Guyana’s lucrative Stabroek Block, the country’s Vice President Bharrat Jagdeo said that he can only speak...

Guyana sending oil to T&T for processing not the answer to regional energy security – VP Bharrat Jagdeo

Kaieteur News – Despite a recent proposal by Trinidad and Tobago’s Energy Minister for Guyana to dedicate a portion of its oil barrels for processing in that nation, in an effort to address...

Govt. will do feasibility study to determine if processing gas here or in Trinidad more cost effective – VP Jagdeo

Kaieteur News – Vice President, Dr. Bharrat Jagdeo disclosed on Thursday that a feasibility study would have to be done to determine if it is more cost effective to pipe some of Guyana’s gas...

‘Tobago oil spill a stark reminder there is no safe way to produce or transport oil’

– Int’l Lawyer, Melinda Janki Kaieteur News – In the wake of the oil spill that has adversely affected the island of Tobago and is now encroaching on Grenada and Venezuela,...

Japanese company profits US$800M from Guyana for FPSO order last year

…annual leasing costs not included Kaieteur News – Japanese shipbuilder MODEC reported revenues of US$800 million in 2023 related to its Guyana work, which accounted for about a quarter...

Cart before the horse? Govt. inviting project proposals before ironing out gas strategy

Kaieteur News – The government has opened the floor for private companies to submit proposals for the design, finance, construction, and operation of vital gas infrastructure. This move is part...