February 3, 2011 – His Excellency Mr. Bharrat Jagdeo, President of Guyana visits Vydehi Institute of Medical Sciences & Research Centre

His Excellency Mr. Bharrat Jagdeo, President of Guyana along with Hon’able Dr. Bheri S. Ramsaran Minister in Ministry of Health, Government of Guyana, on their day long visit to Vydehi Institute of Medical Sciences & Research Centre (VIMS & RC) on February 3, 2011. During his visit to the Institute Mr. Bharrat Jagdeo and Dr. Bheri Ramsaran, were shown around the Institute by the Director Mrs. D. A. Kalpaja and team of doctors, related to infrastructure, medical facilities, and administration and functioning within the Institute. Various issues were discussed by His Excellency Mr. Bharrat Jagdeo and Hon’ble Dr. Bheri Ramsaran with the Hon’ble Chairman Dr. D. K. Audikesavulu and the team of VIMS & RC.

During the discussions, we understand that there is a need to set up a super-specialty hospital in Guyana. In this connection, Vydehi Group of Institutions proposes to build and operate a super-specialty Hospital Infrastructure for a 250 bedded hospital along with paramedical training facilities. This super -specialty hospital will be supported by an emergency health care call centre.

The super-specialty hospital to be set up is proposed to be named as Rajeev Gandhi and Chetri Jagan Medical Institute & Research Centre.

His Excellency Mr. Bharrat Jagdeo, Hon’ble Dr. Bheri Ramasaran and the delegates from Government of Guyana were later treated with some exquisite cultural presentation by the students of VIMS & RC, followed by this Director of VIMS & RC Mrs. D . A. Kalpaja welcomed His Excellency Mr. Bharrat Jagdeo, Hon’ble Dr. Bheri Ramasaran and the delegates from Government of Guyana. Hon’ble Chairman Dr. D. K. Audikesavulu of VIMS & RC addressed the gathering and extended his services towards the Government of Guyana and its people. His Excellency Mr. Bharrat Jagdeo, spoke about the need for having the medical facility and the economic scenario. He reiterated the strong ties between the countries on various issues. This was followed by signing of Mou by Hon’ble Dr. Bheri Ramasaran, Minister in Ministry of Health, Guyana and Hon’ble Chairman Dr. D. K. Audikesavulu of VIMS & RC.