As one of the nation’s leading providers of wealth management services, Wells Fargo Private Bank has extensive experience and a wide range of resources to help you achieve your financial goals. Whether you’re looking to build wealth, focus on maintaining what you have, or want to preserve your family legacy, our dedicated specialists will tailor wealth management solutions fit for you. Disclosures Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. offers various advisory and fiduciary products and services including discretionary portfolio management. Wells Fargo affiliates, including Financial Advisors of Wells Fargo Advisors, a separate non-bank affiliate, may be paid an ongoing or one-time referral fee in relation to clients referred to the bank. The bank is responsible for the day-to-day management of the account and for providing investment advice, investment management services and wealth management services to clients. The role of the Financial Advisor with respect to Bank products and services is limited to referral and relationship management services. Deposit products offered through Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. Investment and Insurance Products are: •Not insured by the FDIC or Any Federal Government Agency •Not a Deposit or Other Obligation of, or Guaranteed by, the Bank or Any Bank Affiliate •Subject to Investment Risks, Including Possible Loss of the Principal Amount Invested Wells Fargo Private Bank provides products and services through Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. and its various affiliates and subsidiaries. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. is a bank affiliate of Wells Fargo & Company. Member FDIC. NMLSR ID 399801. Opinions and comments do not necessarily represent the views of our firm. Additional guidelines can be found on wfa.com/social. © 2021 Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. Member FDIC All rights reserved. NMSLR ID 399801 CAR-0821-02219

Website

https://www.wellsfargo.com/the-private-bank/

External link for Wells Fargo Private Bank

Industry

Financial Services

Company size

10,001+ employees

Headquarters

San Francisco , CA

Type

Public Company

Specialties

Wealth Planning , Investment Management , Private Banking , Trust and Fiduciary Services, Family Dynamics , Philanthropic Services , and Business Advisory Services