1859

The Catholic Women’s Aid Society (Catholic Women’s Guild) helps immigrant plantation workers adjust to life in Hawai‘i by providing food, clothing, and medical aid. The association is later reorganized by Bishop Sweeney as Catholic Charities in 1942.

1944

The devastating impact of WWII creates an urgent need for social services in Hawaiʻi. Bishop Sweeney invites the Maryknoll Sisters from New York to help. A group of four sisters, led by Sr. Victoria Francis, arrives in Honolulu.

1947

Catholic Charities of the Diocese of Honolulu is officially chartered and established by the Maryknoll Sisters. The date of incorporation is July 29, 1947.

1940s-1960s

The Maryknoll Sisters see the struggles of immigrant workers and become strong advocates of plantation workers’ rights. The Family Life Movement is established to help strengthen families in the community. The agency offers family and general counseling. Under the Honorary Chairmanship of Governor John A. Burns and State Senator Mitsuyuki Kido, $275,000 is raised to purchase land located at 250 S. Vineyard Street. The new building opens in the fall of 1965.

1970s-1980s

The agency grows to provide services to assist the elderly, immigrants and refugees, women experiencing unplanned pregnancies, foster youth, families experiencing problems of child abuse and neglect, and a variety of advocacy services. Services expand to the Big Island, Maui and Kauai.

1990s-2000s

Catholic Charities adds specialized services including: services to medically complex babies, homeless families, victims and perpetrators of domestic violence, prevention of child abuse and neglect, money management, and enhanced services for disabled persons and elderly. Catholic Charities Housing Development Corporation (CCHDC) is incorporated as a subsidiary of CCH, to develop affordable rental housing.

2005

Catholic Charities Hawai‘i acquires a permanent site for its programs and services at 1822 Keeaumoku Street (the former First Presbyterian Church) and initiates a Capital Campaign which raises $21 Million. The new campus officially opens in 2010 as the Catholic Charities Hawai‘i Clarence T.C. Ching Campus, housing a larger part of its Oahu services.

2022

Celebrating its 75th anniversary, Catholic Charities Hawai‘i has grown into one of Hawai’s largest human services nonprofit organizations, providing help and hope to tens of thousands of people in need from all walks of life through over 40 programs and services statewide. During the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the CCH team mobilized to provide services to address rent relief, senior isolation, food security and mental health needs. The agency continues to evolve to meet the needs of the community.