Jamaica Inn, located on a pristine crescent shaped beach in Ocho Rios, is one of the loveliest intimate luxury resorts in Jamaica. Now over fifty years old it retains a gracious air of colonial Jamaica and attracts many well-known celebrities who return on a regular basis. It has been ranked among the top luxury hotels in the Caribbean.

“Marilyn Monroe and Arthur Miller toasted their honeymoon here.”

Ronald Dahl wrote about Jamaica Inn in “The Boys Who Talked with Animals” and Franklin D. Roosevelt had his own room. Katharine Hepburn and Ian Fleming, creator of James Bond, sipped martinis at the bar just like many more famous guests who stayed her.

“Here, it’s so romantic and relaxing, it whispers paradise!”

Swim in the calm Caribbean Sea, listen and hear thirty species of tropical birds flitter from tree to tree. Standing on my exquisite veranda taking in the magnificent Caribbean vista it all becomes clear; I definitely want to stay longer.

Kiyara Ocean Spa

On our way to our rooms we cross the Kiyara Ocean Spa.

An outdoors setting and treatments with local plants can give you this ultimate bliss-feeling. We drink some Lemongrass tea on the deck while listening to the sound of waves against the cliff below and we are tempted to take a dip in the sea.

The Turtle Watch

One thing we missed, as we weren’t in the right season, but a must see if you are:

The Turtle Watch: Experience the miracle of watching and helping to ensure that a nest of baby turtles make their safe passage to see. This is a once in a lifetime experience for many and the most active months for hatchings are August, September and October.

A night to remember

The evening comes and a memorable night follows. Dining at the outdoor restaurant crossing the beach with 15 other guests, we drink, we laugh, hear good and hilarious stories, the food is delicious and all that with the music of a merry Jamaican band covering old famous songs in the background. This is a night to remember!

This article was about Jamaica, Jamaica Inn resorts and spa. Would you like to share you’re experience about this destination, or give your opinion about this article, leave a comment below:

Want to continue your travel in Jamaica, read this article: Keep calm and go to Jamaica! Life is better at the beach!