Hi.

Anyone have experience to share about deploying production environment

with Joyent? TextDrive had a lot of instability problems I recollect

(possibly only with shared plans?).

Thanks for any input.

Morten

I’ve been with TextDrive two years, and I don’t recommend the shared

hosting. Stability has been much better over the last year, but

overall it’s been very difficult to get responses from support. My

feeling is Joyent/TextDrive’s heart is in the right place, but it’s

really all about the cool stuff, and not the fundamentals of quality

hosting.

All that said, the Accelerator is a one-of-a-kind setup in the

industry, and I am dying to try it because I really do believe it is

better than anything else out there. As far as VPS technology goes,

kernel-level support really makes the difference, and Solaris is by

far the most advanced in this area. Accelerator is leveraging

technology from the latest Solaris builds for a VPS that is both

burstable, scalable and more stable overall. No one else has anything

like it. I’d say it’s a pretty good bet for hosting your Rails app.

However, I would stick to just the web hosting and keep my email

somewhere else. Although my email account there has been pretty

stable, it’s high latency (email coming in is delayed by the spam

filtering from 2-20 mins), and when there IS a problem (such as being

flagged as spammy) they just don’t answer tickets in a timely manner

at all.

On May 28, 12:06 am, “removed_email_address@domain.invalid” removed_email_address@domain.invalid

wrote:

On May 23, 8:40 am, dasil003 removed_email_address@domain.invalid wrote:

I’m interested to hear what you perceive as the benefits of Joyent’s

offering -vs- a Xen based solution?

Although I’m not the OP, I’ll take a stab at why Solaris’ VPS solution

interests me over Xen at the moment.

The company I work for builds semi-custom web app tools which we then

host for the customer, so we use at least one server for each customer/

product. So far, we’ve been using Xen-based virtual servers, and this

setup has been working great so far. Until last week…

One of our production servers stopped responding. And by server, I

mean the physical box – every single VM on it was down. It turns out

we were hit by a bug in Xen[1] that’s been open since 2005 and seems

to affect the very core of the architecture. The layman’s description

of the problem is that the kernel in one or more of the virtual

servers develops an issue with (IIRC) its interrupt timing and starts

spending all of its available CPU cycles logging a message that “time

went backwards”. This somehow “infects” all of the other virtual

servers on the same box. The servers don’t actually go /down/, they

just run out of processing power to handle any other task within a

reasonable amount of time. We have, thus far, been unable to determine

what specific conditions cause this behavior to start happening; so

even though it hasn’t occurred on our other (physical) production

servers yet, we have no reason to believe that it won’t.

Now, I don’t want to blow the issue out of proportion, so I won’t go

so far as to say that Xen is unsuitable and no one should use it.

However, this has definitely shaken our confidence in the platform;

and that is why I’m currently taking a serious look at Solaris.

Since we co-locate our own servers, this isn’t a Joyent vs. Engine

Yard (or other Xen-based host) issue, but it’s pretty much the same

question.

[1] Citrix Hypervisor - Server Virtualization and Management Software - Citrix

–

Regards,

John W.

I’m looing at these a bit more from the sidelines, but there are a

couple

appealing things about Solaris in general to me, which then the

virtualization choice is more of a follow-on… One is DTrace. This is

quite a cool tool for diagnosing things. The other is how system

crashes,

crash logs, and reboots work - it’s simply more robust here. ZFS is

also

extremely appealing. I do hope ZFS can be brought to Linux. I think

it’s

somewhat unfortunate that there is a Linux vs. Solaris battle. I happen

to

use Linux a lot, but Solaris has become much more appealing lately

because

of the tools and, at least in my perception, more robust handling in

very

heavy load and heavy hardware situations. If I were building up my own

setup I’d be looking very seriously at it, in fact, I’d probably be

using it

automatically, if it weren’t for the fact that I simply don’t know the

OS as

well/I’m not as comfy with it as I am Linux. Obviously you’ve got folks

like Google and others using commodity stuff, and Linux (and older Linux

from what I understand), and working just fine, but it depends on what

your

situation is. Most folks aren’t building their own hardware, and can’t

be

slapping in new boxes all the time.

As for available solutions and cases where you are hosting on someone

else’s

system, I think you have to factor in a lot more. I happen to be a

Joyent

customer, but based on my experience, I’m not sure I would choose them

to

host an important system. I would have to look at the accelerators more

closely, and understand the support a lot better. My experience is

solely

based on shared hosting, and that has worked ok for me as I mostly

experiment in that space, and want something cost effective, but for a

production system I’d be looking at a lot more. EngineYard is very

impressive to me, and I’d be looking at it very seriously for Rails

apps.

Part of that is not just technology and the available solution, but the

people and approach. Having met several Engine Y. folks, and knowing

who

they have on staff, and their dedication to the particular market

segment,

they are absolutley a top choice IMHO. It likely just depends on your

particular needs.

On 5/28/07, Jesse P. removed_email_address@domain.invalid wrote:

and other features in Solaris really make it shine for web applications.

On May 28, 2007, at 9:46 AM, John W. wrote:

Although I’m not the OP, I’ll take a stab at why Solaris’ VPS solution

interests me over Xen at the moment.

–

Chris B.

removed_email_address@domain.invalid