Chicago Dealerships Can Increase Customer Satisfaction & Improve Communications With TEXT2DRIVE™

TEXT2DRIVE™ is a text messaging platform developed specifically for the unique needs of auto dealerships. It is the only full-featured text platform that optimizes communications both within the auto dealership and, most importantly, with customers to greatly improve their experience and, ultimately, improve efficiency and profitability.

Truly an industry game changer, TEXT2DRIVE™ ensures full legal compliance with all federal and cellular provider regulations regarding text message marketing laws. Which is why auto dealers, service directors and parts managers in Chicago, IL and across the United States, Mexico, Puerto Rico and Canada rely on us every day.

WATCH TEXT2DRIVE™ FEATURES OVERVIEW IN ACTION

View our Group Chat demo video on YouTube here.

0%

0%

0seconds

0%

94% of Consumers Prefer Auto Dealers That Can Text Message

Key Text Messaging Features

Eliminate the risk of fines with full legal compliance

Two-way text communications

Unlimited users and unlimited texting with no hidden usage costs

Protection of personal privacy

High response rate courtesy of service reminders

Individuals and departments can communicate with text messaging and group chat capabilities

Eliminate telephone tag and unanswered voicemails

DMS certified & integrated

No need for manual text entry thanks to standard templates

Single, central source for all dealership communications

Compatible with any computer or device

Website integration

Cloud-based, real-time

Improved mobility due to the ability to text message onsite or offsite

Security

Click to See Full List of Features

Streamline Service Department

Status updates are lightning fast

Eliminate misunderstandings with crystal clear, fast Repair Order (RO) authorizations

Service completion notification alerts

Automated CSI surveys

Accept customer payments via text message

No more long checkout lines and unwelcome surprises

Click to See More Service Dept Features

Close More Sales

Highest communication open rate

Make communications 10x faster and protect personal phone numbers

Potential for 100% increase in sales conversions

Expanded marketing database

Intuitive software is easy for anyone to learn

More time to sell thanks to less time spent struggling to learn technology

The freedom to move around freely while using the system

Click to See More Sales Dept Features

Cars And The Chicago Lifestyle

When it comes to cars and cell phones, millennials are ambivalent about one and very much taken with the other. Care to guess which is which?

Maybe millennials aren’t as obsessed with cars the way their parents were. But there’s a reason why the nation’s third-largest city and Midwest cultural mecca hosts an annual car show. Chicago, IL is a car town. According to Crain’s Chicago Business, dealerships are continuing to expand, even as sales are somewhat in decline. How does your auto dealership stand out from the competition? One highly effective way is to provide text messaging services that improve customer satisfaction, promote long-term loyalty and generate new sales opportunities.

Oh, and those millennials? Maybe they don’t love their cars as much as their cell phones, but auto dealer that text—the way millennials prefer to communicate—is the best way to ensure even reluctant car owners are enthused about doing business with you.

Here are some interesting auto industry statistics about Illinois:

Illinois was ranked 4th in the most automobile registrations in the U.S. in 2017

The auto industry has created 262,423 jobs in Illinois

Car sales in Illinois topped $20.15 billion in 2018 according to Auto Alliance

Even with all the transportation options, the city of Chicago still averages 1 vehicle per household

There are 750 auto dealers in Chicago, IL alone

TEXT2DRIVE™ Services Your Auto Dealership Needs

Drive More Sales When You Text Message

Here’s why sales managers consider TEXT2DRIVE™ integral to boosting sales and increasing dealership ROI:

Makes it easier to manage sales staff

Easy-to-use text messaging eliminates extensive training and time wasted on the continual instruction of older workers who are not technology-proficient

Easily connect and engage with leads, answer questions and provide vehicle descriptions

Effortless and quick capability to locate pre-owned cars for "buy-back" programs, search product inventory

Optimize customer and employee communications

Achieve Smoother Overall Operations When You Text

Here’s why service managers rely on TEXT2DRIVE™ to improve customer satisfaction and service department efficiency:

Improved CSI scores thanks to better and more accurate communications with customers

Better management and efficiency of repair schedules reduces downtime from missed appointments and results in higher commissions and overall shop revenues

No waiting for customers to get back to you; eliminated telephone tag

Templates eliminate manual keying of messages

No need to dial or manually enter customer cell numbers

Automatic routing of the customer to right department or person

Easy learning curve, quick adoption in use of text messaging

The TEXT2DRIVE™ Difference

Trusted Partner. Proven Performer. Industry Leader.

"Text2Drive is an innovative product and it makes my job so much easier. I’m texting you a big thank you!"

— Andy Pak, Service Advisor, McGrath Lexus of Chicago

New Features

E-Signature Speed CheckOut™

3-step process to approve, pay and authorize invoices.

Vehicle Health Report (VHR)

When the check engine light is activated in a customer’s vehicle, an alert is automatically sent to the dealership.

Upgraded History Profiles

Easy searchability and comprehensive access to customer profiles and vehicle search history.

Calendar Invite

Send a click-able invite for customers to save service dates to their mobile phones.

Click-to-Call

Call customers without sharing your personal cell phone number and record/archive conversations.

Group Chat

Communicate with a group of employees, individual departments or the entire dealership.

TEXT2DRIVE™ Mobile App

Communicate with customers securely and legally using our Mobile App, an extension of the communication platform.

Video Capabilities

Use our Mobile App to send customers photographs of car repairs and videos of any issues that arise.

Online Payments and Invoicing

Text invoices and receive payments. With E-Signature, customers can sign their invoice electronically right from their phone.

Tablet Text Communications Interface

Brings full desktop functionalities to iPad, Android, Surface tablets.

Drive Your Chicago Dealership’s Sales Department

Lead Generation

Get connected with shoppers; text response (with video) to customer inquiries containing stock numbers.

Sales Interactivity

Interactive vehicle search and text communication of vehicle information.

Service to Sales Mining

Easily locate pre-owned cars using the year, make and model of desired vehicles that enter your service bay.

Business Development Center eMarketing Functionality

Optimizes customer communications with full-featured text messaging sales and service software.

Drive Your Chicago Dealership’s Service Department

Automated Text Messaging

Puts service department on cruise control with automatic routing of who receives a message, which type of message is sent and when.

Automated Workflows

Quickly connect to customers, automated management of customer service and vehicle maintenance from point of purchase up to an including the purchase of a replacement or additional vehicle.

Automated Service Reminders

Higher response rates to text service reminders (even without offering discounts/coupons) improve dealer ROI.

Text Recall

Text recall notices fast and efficiently to ensure your customers are driving safely. We gather the data from your dealer’s database and you set your preferences.

Drive Your Chicago Dealership’s Marketing Department

Website Interactivity

Engage customers in real-time from your dynamic website, TEXTconnect with any employee, download coupons, get vehicle information, conduct live chats, schedule appointments, archive all communications.

Simplicity

Easy-to-use and powerful Dashboard Interface, templated text messages ensure easy and error-free communications, multi-messaging capabilities save time and effort.

Mobility

Connect to customers via secure text messages that are legally compliant to their mobile devices.

Compliance

Enjoy "legal peace of mind" that all customer text messages and associated programs are fully legally compliant.

Reporting and Analytics

All inbound and outbound text messaging recorded and securely archived; the database can generate a range of customized reports to better understand consumer behavior and needs.

What Major Manufacturers & Our Customers Are Saying About TEXT2DRIVE™

Rick Stubbs Talks About His Experience With TEXT2DRIVE

"The ability to send out recall notifications has netted us about an additional $48,000 a month in warranty revenue."

Text Marketing Software For Car Dealerships That WORKS!

"It’s going really well for us. It allows us to communicate with our customers more effectively in a fashion they prefer."

What Rick Walters Thinks Of TEXT2DRIVE

"I do not embrace technology in any way… but it has made my job a lot easier and customers are just elated."