Elisabeth Wiedemann was a German actress and best known for her role as Else Tetzlaff in Ein Herz und eine Seele.

Elisabeth Wiedemann was born on April 8, 1926, in Bassum, Lower Saxony, Germany. Her birth geographical coordinates are 52° 51’ 2” North latitude and 8° 43’ 40” East longitude. Elisabeth Wiedemann passed away at the age of 89 in 2015.

Astrologically, Elisabeth Wiedemann falls under the Sun sign of Aries, with Leo as her Ascendant, Aquarius as her Moon sign, and Leo as her Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Aries Moon Aquarius Ascendant Leo Midheaven Aries Mercury Aries Venus Pisces Mars Aquarius Jupiter Aquarius Saturn Scorpio Uranus Pisces Neptune Leo Pluto Cancer Ceres Leo Chiron Aries Eros Capricorn Hygiea Cancer Juno Aquarius Pallas Cancer Vesta Cancer Black Moon Lilith Leo North Node Cancer South Node Capricorn Part of Fortune Gemini Vertex Sagittarius

Sunin Aries17° 51’ 39”

The Sun in Aries in a Natal Chart makes you intense and spontaneous. As the first sign of the zodiac, Sun in Aries makes you […] Read more »

Moonin Aquarius21° 23’ 11”

The Moon in Aquarius in the Natal Chart makes you a humanitarian with instincts related to fairness and equality. You are intuitively attracted to group […] Read more »

Ascendantin Leo4° 34’ 24”

Leo Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you passionate and bold. You have a colorful personality and can be charming and persuasive. You go to […] Read more »

Midheavenin Aries10° 31’ 35”

Aries Midheaven in the Natal Chart indicates that you are on the path to visibility and status. Your career helps you show your strengths and […] Read more »

Mercuryin Aries3° 52’ 4”

Aries Mercury in the Natal Chart makes you focused and optimistic. You are cheerful and can be passionate about your ideas. You are open and […] Read more »

Venusin Pisces2° 1’ 27”

Pisces Venus in the Natal Chart indicates you are compassionate and have a spiritual connection to your loved ones. You are empathetic and affectionate, using […] Read more »

Marsin Aquarius11° 44’ 51”

Aquarius Mars in the Natal Chart makes you daring and impulsive. You are passionate and can follow your intellectual desires. You are inspiring and want […] Read more »

Jupiterin Aquarius20° 25’ 29”

Aquarius Jupiter in the Natal Chart is less individualistic than the closer planets. Given Jupiter’s slow transit, the planet’s journey through Aquarius takes over a […] Read more »

Saturnin Scorpio25° 10’ 43”

Is Saturn in Scorpio good or bad? Scorpio Saturn in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a generation obsessed with security and power. […] Read more »

Uranusin Pisces26° 42’ 10”

Pisces Uranus in the Natal Chart is a generational placement indicating people born at this time are on a Karmic mission to bring breakthroughs in […] Read more »

Neptunein Leo22° 9’ 34”

Leo Neptune in the Natal Chart makes you eager to bring healing and compassion to others. You are artistic and passionate about your dreams. You […] Read more »

Plutoin Cancer12° 36’ 54”

Pluto in Cancer in the Natal Chart indicates a generation with powerful intuition and desires. You are part of a social group obsessed with re-evaluating […] Read more »

Ceresin Leo13° 24’ 42”

Ceres in Leo in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a generation obsessed with comforting others. You bring excitement and passion into others’ […] Read more »

Chironin Aries27° 15’ 26”

Aries Chiron in the Natal Chart brings passion and persuasiveness. You help others heal from old wounds by showing your strength and tapping into your […] Read more »

Erosin Capricorn17° 48’ 7”

What does Eros in Capricorn mean for your personality? You are comforting and sensual. You are affectionate and can be gentle and romantic. You have […] Read more »

Hygieain Cancer13° 42’ 53”

Hygiea in Cancer in the Natal Chart indicates a desire to help others fulfill their potential. You are compassionate and devoted to encouraging your family […] Read more »

Junoin Aquarius22° 14’ 15”

Aquarius Juno in the Natal Chart indicates you have an intellectual and creative connection to your love interest. You have a rebellious spirit and can […] Read more »

Pallasin Cancer4° 50’ 2”

Cancer Pallas in the Natal Chart makes you empathetic and instinctive. You follow your feelings and can have an intuitive sense of strategies. You follow […] Read more »

Vestain Cancer0° 30’ 10”

Vesta in Cancer in the Natal Chart makes you sensitive and nurturing. You can be emotional and use your gifts to comfort others. You are […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Leo23° 1’ 35”

Leo Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you spontaneous and impulsive. You are dramatic and use your creative gifts to compensate for fears […] Read more »

North Nodein Cancer21° 8’ 28”

Cancer Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you maternal and caring. You take others under your wing and can be compassionate and loving. You are […] Read more »

South Nodein Capricorn21° 8’ 28”

Capricorn South Node in the Natal Chart makes you dependable and committed. You are reliable and have a gift for maintaining stability. You can be […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Gemini8° 5’ 56”

Part of Fortune in Gemini in the Natal Chart makes you intellectual and talkative. You are chatty and can be friendly and outgoing. You thrive […] Read more »

Vertexin Sagittarius21° 30’ 3”

Sagittarius Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you friendly and optimistic. You are encouraging and have a gift for helping others expand their minds. You […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon Eighth House Mercury Ninth House Venus Eighth House Mars Seventh House Jupiter Seventh House Saturn Fifth House Uranus Ninth House Neptune Second House Pluto Twelfth House Ceres First House Chiron Tenth House Eros Sixth House Hygiea Twelfth House Juno Eighth House Pallas Twelfth House Vesta Eleventh House Black Moon Lilith Second House North Node Twelfth House South Node Sixth House Part of Fortune Eleventh House Vertex Fifth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 24 major aspects, alongside 16 minor aspects, as well as 5 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Moon Conjunct Jupiter Moon Opposite Neptune Mercury Trine Ascendant Mars Sextile Midheaven Mars Quincunx Pluto Pluto Square Midheaven Jupiter Opposite Neptune Saturn Trine Uranus Sun Sextile Jupiter Venus Quincunx Ascendant Saturn Square Neptune Sun Sextile Moon Sun Trine Neptune Moon Square Saturn Sun Square Pluto Jupiter Square Saturn Uranus Quincunx Neptune Ascendant Trine Midheaven Sun Conjunct Midheaven Mars Opposite Ascendant Mercury Conjunct Midheaven Mercury Conjunct Uranus Venus Square Saturn Uranus Trine Ascendant

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Elisabeth Wiedemann’s life journey.

Moon Conjunct Jupiterorb: 1°

The Moon conjunct Jupiter in your Natal Chart makes you idealistic and expressive. You can be emotional and project your intense feelings. You may have […] Read more »

Moon Opposite Neptuneorb: 1°

When the Moon is opposite Neptune in a Natal Chart, this can cause a person to be completely confused and entirely unaware of themselves. They […] Read more »

Mars Quincunx Plutoorb: 1°

Mars quincunx Pluto in a Natal Chart typically indicates a person has a lot of ambition and a desire to be successful. They want to […] Read more »

Jupiter Opposite Neptuneorb: 2°

Jupiter opposite Neptune in a chart typically indicates that a person is curious and imaginative. They constantly question the world around them, but they tend […] Read more »

Sun Sextile Jupiterorb: 3°

The Sun sextile Jupiter in the Natal Chart makes you idealistic and expansive. You are outgoing and love meeting new people and can be thoughtful […] Read more »

Venus Quincunx Ascendantorb: 3°

Venus quincunx the Ascendant in a chart can create difficulties with people-pleasing and an overreliance on outside validation. People with this quincunx in their charts […] Read more »

Sun Sextile Moonorb: 4°

The Sun’s sextile Moon in the Natal Chart makes you easygoing and friendly. You are optimistic and share your charming nature without overwhelming others. You […] Read more »

Sun Trine Neptuneorb: 4°

The Sun trine Neptune in the Natal Chart makes you compassionate and spiritual. You are endearing and charming. You can be flirty and easily attract […] Read more »

Moon Square Saturnorb: 4°

The Moon square Saturn in a Natal Chart typically creates controlling tendencies in a person. Depending on how this is expressed, people might be more […] Read more »

Sun Square Plutoorb: 5°

The Sun square Pluto in a Natal Chart makes you fearful of change and loss. Until you accept core fears and weaknesses, you may overcompensate […] Read more »

Uranus Quincunx Neptuneorb: 5°

Uranus quincunx Neptune in a chart creates conflict between Neptune’s idealism and Uranus’ eccentricity. They may feel they are being pulled back and forth by […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Midheavenorb: 7°

The Sun conjunct Midheaven makes you outspoken and authentic. You openly share your talents and align your unique abilities with your public status. You are […] Read more »

Mars Opposite Ascendantorb: 7°

Mars opposite the Ascendant in a chart can result in impulsive, aggressive behavior and confrontations. Someone might project their inner issues onto others or find […] Read more »

Mercury Conjunct Midheavenorb: 7°

Mercury conjunct Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you intellectual and outgoing. Your career brings opportunities to express your creativity and intelligence. You are thoughtful […] Read more »

Mercury Conjunct Uranusorb: 7°

Mercury conjunct Uranus in the Natal Chart makes you unpredictable. You are rebellious and can speak your mind. You may blurt out your ideas impulsively. […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Sun Square Eros Moon Quincunx North Node Moon Sextile Vertex Neptune Opposite Juno Moon Conjunct Juno Mercury Square Pallas Jupiter Quincunx North Node Jupiter Sextile Vertex Neptune Conjunct Black Moon Lilith Neptune Quincunx South Node Neptune Trine Vertex Pluto Conjunct Hygiea Moon Opposite Black Moon Lilith Venus Trine Vesta Mars Opposite Ceres Jupiter Conjunct Juno

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Elisabeth Wiedemann’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Sun Square Erosorb: 0°

The Sun Square Eros makes you shy and inhibited in the bedroom. You avoid pursuing pleasure and criticize yourself for your hedonistic desires. But with […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx North Nodeorb: 0°

The Moon quincunx the North Node in a chart can highlight any disconnection between the past, what feels comfortable, and the future and fear of […] Read more »

Moon Conjunct Junoorb: 1°

The Moon conjunct Juno in a Natal Chart makes you fall in love quickly. You are emotionally devoted to a partner and crave a serene […] Read more »

Jupiter Quincunx North Nodeorb: 1°

Jupiter quincunx the North Node in a chart disconnects growth and destiny. It can be difficult for a person to find their true path and […] Read more »

Neptune Conjunct Black Moon Lilithorb: 1°

Neptune conjunct Black Moon Lilith in a chart creates an intuitive connection to someone’s shadow side and the more hidden, darker aspect of life in […] Read more »

Jupiter Conjunct Junoorb: 2°

Jupiter conjunct Juno in a chart creates the potential for personal growth and spiritual fulfillment, in and out of relationships. People with this conjunction in […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

North Node Quincunx Vertex Juno Opposite Black Moon Lilith Juno Quincunx North Node Juno Sextile Vertex Black Moon Lilith Trine Vertex

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Elisabeth Wiedemann’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

North Node Quincunx Vertexorb: 0°

The North Node quincunx of the Vertex in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for persistence and finding your destiny. You doubt your mission […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilith Trine Vertexorb: 2°

The Black Moon Lilith trine the Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you confident and open about your desires. You are independent and self-assured. You […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.