Britney Spears' ex-husband Kevin Federline has wished the pop star well amid her bombshell divorce from Sam Asghari.

Speaking via his lawyer Mark Vincent Kaplan, the 45-year-old former backup dancer shared a statement with ET on Thursday.

'He wishes them both the best,' Kaplan told the outlet, adding, 'If they reconcile, great, but hopefully it won't be a factor that makes her feel more alienated than she might otherwise be if she was still in an intact marriage.'

'He wishes her the best and hopes that things work out for her for the best,' Federline communicated through his attorney.

And Kaplan also said the father-of-six's advice to Spears is to 'be strong, be focused, and get good advice from those around you before making important decisions.'

Spears and Federline had a whirlwind romance in the early 2000s and married each other in 2004 after meeting at a nightclub.

The duo divorced in 2007, after welcoming sons Sean, 17, and Jayden, 16.

In May Britney approved Federline's plan to move their sons to Hawaii with him and wife Victoria Prince.

Kaplan told ET that the former couple's teenage boys are 'very happy there.'

'I mean, everyone in Hawaii is grieving for the horrible tragedy that was visited upon the people of Maui, and in particular the people of the Lahaina area. But aside from that, they're very happy,' he detailed. 'They're happy with the life they have there.'

Kaplan also noted that Federline has made a pointed effort to keep Sean and Jayden away from negative media coverage about Spears.

'Kevin tries to minimize media access to them wherever possible when they're out,' Kaplan said.

'I think Kevin tries to give them a realistic expectation of what's always going to be out there, because of who their parents are... [he] wants to make sure that they put the best foot forward and take care of themselves.'

Britney previously shared her heartache at having a strained relationship with her sons.

Last year, the singer admitted a 'part of her had died' as she had not seen her sons for six months and they didn't attend her wedding to Sam.

However, it was recently reported that the pop music sensation reconnected with the boys before their move.

She had been estranged from the two for at least a year before they moved to the island.

Earlier this month, a source told ET that Britney feels 'sad and disappointed' about her sons' decision to live with Federline and Prince.

The insider also said that she hopes they will be able to 'rekindle their relationship, get closer, learn from the past, and collectively work towards a brighter and healthier future someday.'

On Thursday Asghari broke his silence following the news of his divorce filing.

In a statement shared to his Instagram account, the entertainer, 29, wrote: 'After 6 years of love and commitment to each other my wife and I have decided to end our journey together.'

He continued, 'We will hold onto the love and respect we have for each other and I wish her the best always,' adding, 'S**t happens.'

'Asking for privacy seems ridiculous so I will just ask for everyone including media to be kind and thoughtful.'

Insiders on Thursday told TMZ that Asghari had suspected the Grammy-winning singer had cheated on him with a staffer at the Southern California home they shared, and that video footage shot on the property implicates Spears in being unfaithful.

Page Six reported that Britney has hired celebrity divorce attorney Laura Wasser — who boasts A-list clients such as Kim Kardashian, Kevin Costner and Johnny Depp.

But it's been alleged that Asghari is threatening to release 'extraordinarily embarrassing' information about his spouse if she refuses to renegotiate the terms of their prenup — something a source close to Spears told DailyMail.com is 'absurd.'

She previously enlisted Wasser's help in 2008 as she fought ex-husband Federline over custody of their two sons.

A judge ordered Spears to pay $20,000 a month in child support — a decision that Wasser said the Piece Of Me hitmaker felt 'great' about.

The monthly payments reportedly increased to $60,000 in 2018.