Kevin Federline is a pro dancer most known for his previous marriage to Britney Spears.

He welcomed two sons with the pop star, however, he has four other children.

Kevin has been married to Victoria Prince since 2013.

Brit made headlines on Aug. 16, 2023, for her reported split from her husband, Sam Asghari.

Any Britney Spears fan would know that the pop star shares two sons with her ex Kevin Federline. However, the former backup dancer isn’t only a dad to Sean, 17, and Jayden, 16– Kevin actually has six children! He and his family are back in the spotlight after their mom gave them the green light to relocate to Hawaii with the 45-year-old father.

Although Kevin’s lawyer claimed that Brit hasn’t seen her sons in over a year, she clapped back via docs obtained by Page Six on May 31, 2023. “To her credit, Britney Spears will not interfere with and consents to the relocation,” her team noted at the time. Britney made sure to also add that their eldest son, Sean, “will no longer be a minor” and that Jayden is “nearing the age of maturity.” The blonde beauty made headlines once more on Aug. 16, 2023, after TMZ reported that she is splitting from her husband Sam Asghari, 29, after one year of marriage. Amid the ongoing drama, below is everything to know about Kevin’s kids.

Kori Madison

Kevin’s eldest child, Kori Madison Federline, was born on July 31, 2002. Prior to his high-profile relationship with Britney, he was engaged to singer and Moesha actor Shar Jackson, with whom he shares Kori. The teenager has appeared in happy snaps on social media, however Kevin and Shar have largely kept her out of the spotlight.

Kaleb Michael

Kevin and his fiance welcomed their second child, Kaleb Michael on July 20, 2004. Despite sharing two kids, the pair called off their engagement while Shar was pregnant, and he began dating Britney. Shar said at the time that the pop star entered Kevin’s life before she and the rapper split. “It wasn’t like just breaking up a relationship,” she said in April 2004. “It was like breaking up a family.” A few years later, she opened up to People about her co-parenting relationship with Kevin, and revealed he was a present dad. “He’s a great dad and if you said his name right now, Kori would go crazy. That’s the love of her life,” the mother of two told the outlet in 2007. “Everything he does, as far as his career, and everything like that, he does it for his kids.”

Sean Preston

Britney gave birth to Sean Preston Federline, on September 14, 2005. Although this was Kevin’s third child, it was the first for Britney, who also said “I do” to Kevin one year prior. His arrival prompted a media storm, with paparazzi following Brit and baby Sean’s every move.

Jayden James

Kevin and Britney’s second child, Jayden James Federline was born on September 12, 2006, almost exactly 12 months after his big brother. Sadly, the couple would call it quits less than two years later, leading to a messy custody battle during a very tumultuous period in Britney’s life. Britney and Kevin now share custody of their teenage sons, with the “Toxic” singer holding 30% and Kevin the majority at 70%. However, he did request sole custody during divorce proceedings in 2008. Kevin’s lawyer explained, “Kevin went forward with the sole custody request because he didn’t feel the children were safe…There’s a lot of information that we don’t have, and until we have it, there’s not going to be any change of custody because the kids are doing very well with Kevin.”

Jayden has become more vocal in recent years, speaking out on Instagram Live about his relationship with his parents, and his grandfather. In March 2020, he went on an Instagram rant saying Brit’s dad Jamie, “can go die.” Later, in response to a follower who wrote, “kill your grandfather,” the teenager replied, “Bro, I was thinking the same thing.” Meanwhile, Jayden had nothing but praise for his dad. “I have the best dad ever,” he said. “My dad is literally Jesus.”

Jordan

After Kevin and Britney split in 2007, he began dating Victoria Prince. Their first child together, Jordan Kay Federline, was born in August 2011. Kevin and Victoria got married in Las Vegas in 2013, and celebrate their 8th wedding anniversary in 2021.

Peyton Marie

Kevin’s sixth child, and the second for him and Victoria, was born in April 2014. Peyton Marie Federline is the only one of his children with blue eyes, which he revealed on Instagram when announcing her birth. “Words cannot express the joy my children bring me,” Kevin wrote, adding that the newborn was the “only one out of six that will have blue eyes. Didn’t think it was possible.”