Kevin Federline, the ex-husband of pop star Britney Spears, is speaking out amid his ex-wife's highly publicized divorce from Iranian actor Sam Asghari.

The Princess of Pop has been married three times. She eloped with her childhood friend Jason Alexander in Las Vegas in 2004, but it was annulled after only 55 hours.

She was married to Kevin Federline from 2004 to 2007. The former couple shares two children together: Sean Preston, 17, and Jayden James, 16. Britney recently gave her consent to let her ex-husband move them to Hawaii on August 1. Fortunately, they did not move to Maui, and are reportedly safe from the devastating wildfires.

Trending:

Britney Spears Sparks New Concerns With Former Criminal Employee

Kevin Hart Sadly Ends Up In Wheelchair After Racing With Ex-NFL Star

Britney Spears Reportedly Paying $10K A Month For Sam Asghari’s New Luxury Home

Zendaya Gets Candid About WHY She Keeps Romance With Tom Holland Private

PETA Calls Britney Spears ‘Toxic’ For Buying, Not Rescuing, New Puppy

In 2016, Britney met Sam on the set of her "Slumber Party" music video. The two started dating throughout her conservatorship, which lasted from February 2008 to November 2021, when it was struck down by a judge. The two tied the knot in June 2022 in a star-studded wedding at her Thousand Oaks estate in California.

However, on August 14, 2023, Sam filed for divorce, citing "irreconcilable differences" as the reason for the split in court documents obtained by The Blast.

Britney Spears' Ex-Husband Kevin Federline Sends Positive Thoughts Amid Her Divorce From Sam Asghari

On Wednesday, August 16, Britney Spears and Sam Asghari went their separate ways amid allegations that the pop star had cheated on the "Special Ops: Lioness" actor, although those rumors have not been confirmed. The actor actually cited July 28, 2023, as their date of separation, making it clear that trouble had been brewing for a while.

The day the news broke, Kevin Federline's lawyer, Mark Vincent Kaplan, told NewsNation that K-Fed "just hopes that they work it out," as per Page Six.

“The media is a heavy focus on this one,” he continued, adding that the DJ "just hopes that everything works out for the best, whether that’s being together or not being together.”

Kaplan also said that Kevin "just hopes” that Britney and Sam are able to “make good decisions and work out, either go their separate ways or get back together.” He added, “Whatever is best for them. He wishes her the best.”

Kevin Is Reportedly 'Sorry' Britney's Relationship With Sam Didn't Work Out

Kaplan later went on to tell the outlet that K-Fed is "sorry" that Britney's third marriage did not work out for her and wished her well, noting that Kevin, who is now married to former volleyball player Victoria Prince, has not spoken to his ex-wife about her divorce.

"Obviously, if Britney reached out to [Kevin], he wouldn’t avoid her call but I don’t see any reason why they would be speaking because of her divorce to Sam," he said, adding that Kevin and Sam did not know each other personally.

However, he noted that Sam “seemed to make Britney happy and that was a good environment for Britney to be in.” On Thursday, Kaplan also gave Britney some advice (via ET), saying, Be strong, be focused, and get good advice from those around you before making important decisions."

K-Fed even wished the former couple well when they tied the knot in June 2022. At the time, Kaplan told Page Six that Kevin "wants her to be happy and believes this will be a positive step for her in a post-conservatorship era, building a healthy, happy future going forward.”

However, it is worth noting that their two teenage sons did not attend their mother's wedding, despite living in an adjacent neighborhood at the time. “They think the focus of this day should be on Britney and Sam, and they are very happy for her moving forward,” Kaplan said at the time.

It was only later that fans learned that Britney hasn't physically seen her sons in over a year. In fact, the two boys reportedly declined to see her shortly before they moved to Hawaii on August 1. It is unclear if Britney has been in contact with her sons since news of the divorce broke on Wednesday afternoon.

Unfortunately, despite Kevin's well-wishes, it appears that Britney's divorce will not go smoothly. On Wednesday night, a source told Page Six that the 29-year-old actor is reportedly "attempting to negotiate concessions beyond his prenup and threatening to go public with extraordinarily embarrassing information about Britney unless he gets paid."