The wiki acknowledges that the correct title is in fact Thunderbirds Are Go (minus the !), however to avoid confusion with the film we have retained the !, as erroneously reported by several news outlets before the official release.

Thunderbirds Are Go! is a remake of the original Thunderbirds television series. It started airing in 2015 to coincide with the series' 50th anniversary. The first episode, Ring of Fire Part 1 was broadcast in the UK by ITV 1, on Saturday 4th April 2015. The season 2 premiere, Earthbreaker, was broadcast on October 22, 2016 at 3:30pm on ITV. Season 3 started on March 31, 2018 at 8:00am on ITV with Chaos Part 1.

On May 17, 2019, David Graham (voice of Parker) confirmed that the series had wrapped and that no more episodes would be made.

Plot[]

The world of the 2060s is a dangerous place. Technology may have advanced in leaps and bounds, but disasters can arise and lives put at risk. Thankfully, there is hope. Operating from their hidden base on a remote island somewhere in the south Pacific, the five heroic Tracy brothers and their remarkable, cutting-edge craft are ready and willing to help those in need; from the depths of the oceans to the furthest reaches of space.

Main Cast[]

Main Vehicles[]

Episode List[]

Main article: List of Thunderbirds Are Go! Episodes

Timeline[]

Cast and Crew[]

Vocal Cast[]

Rasmus Hardiker: Scott Tracy, Alan Tracy

David Menkin: Virgil Tracy, Gordon Tracy

Thomas Brodie-Sangster: John Tracy

Rosamund Pike: Lady Penelope

David Graham: Aloysius Parker

Kayvan Novak: Brains, various male guest characters

Sandra Dickinson: Grandma Tracy

Teresa Gallagher: EOS, various female guest characters

Andres Williams: The Hood

Angel Coulby: Kayo

Adjoa Andoh: Colonel Casey

Chris Jarman: The Mechanic

Aimee-Ffion Edwards: Havoc

Craig Stein: Fuse

Marc Silk: Captain Wayne Rigby

Production Crew[]

Series Director: David Scott

Episodic Director: Theo Baynton

Executive Producer: Giles Ridge

Head Writer: Rob Hoegee

Composer: Ben Foster, Nick Foster

Gallery[]

Trivia[]

The first episode aired on the 4th of April 2015.

The new Thunderbirds.com website went live on December 19, 2014.

The credit reel for each episode contains concept art for the first season. Examples of these are:

An image of Thunderbird 2 leaving its hangar is seen, but the aircraft has significantly smaller air-intakes, as per the classic series.

Thunderbird 3 has giant white "3" sideways, as per the classic series.

The Tracy lounge is shown, but the portraits of the Tracy brothers are, firstly in the order of John, Scott, Virgil, Alan and Gordon, and secondly are pictures of their puppet counterparts, and not of the new CGI characters, as per the classic series.

Publicity Stunt[]

To promote the series launch, a Thunderbird 4 replica was launched on the River Thames.

Broadcast[]

Thunderbirds Are Go! first broadcast on April 4, 2015 on CITV. It later premiered on Gulli and Rai Gulp. In Denmark, the series premiered on April 23, 2016 on DR Ultra. In Norway, the series premiered on April 2, 2016 on NRK Super. In Finland, the series premiered on June 3, 2016 on MTV Juniori. In Sweden, the series premiered on June 17, 2016 on SVT. In Portugal, the series premiered on April 23, 2016 on Biggs.

[]