I’m simultaneously too young to have watched Gerry and Sylvia Anderson’s Thunderbirds TV show during its initial U.S. syndication and too old to have had any interest in it when it was repackaged in the mid-1990s (when Trey Parker and Matt Stone discovered it). Thus, I have no prior experience with — or nostalgia for — the show, of which this is the first of two big-screen extensions. What stands out to me is how good certain aspects of it are, namely the craftsmanship of the puppets and miniature sets, props, and costumes, and how awful other aspects are, notably the narrative, dialogue, and characterizations. I really have no choice but to split the difference in my rating.

The Andersons’…

There have been many occasions where popular British television shows make the jump to the big screen, often with very interesting results. Some are good, some are bad and the others are decent but nothing to make a big shout about. Thunderbirds are GO is a film that pretty much falls into the latter category. As a kid growing up in the early 2000's, I have very fond memories of watching the original Thunderbirds series, but I never knew that a spin off film had been made during the height of its popularity until recently. Having now watched it, I can say that while I enjoyed it, I was left wanting a lot more from it.

The film begins as…

Are you suggesting sir that we are incapable of handling our own security arrangements?

I have 862 pages here sir which say just that.

I recently finished my big rewatch of Series 1 of the show last night and thought I might as well include the two theatrically released movies during my marathon, so here we are again. I must have seen this film a dozen times when I was a young lad and boy has it stuck with me throughout my life for very good reasons. It's one of those films I saw when I was small that made a big impact on me later in life and gave me a full appreciation for films and media as an…

A low 2.5 star for me, this is largely dragged down by pacing.... I get what they're doing is technically fairly impressive but they often do this so slowly that it offsets any excitement that might come from it. The giant ship assembly thing this starts with, for example, goes on way longer than it should. Or rather, it goes way slower than it should without anything else to keep things interesting. Even though the model work is impressive.

This also feels a bit anticlimatic in that after Zero-X reaches Mars, all the events there are fairly boring an inconsequential, and that really doesn't seem to match the actual significance of going to Mars. Really, this seems to lose a…