Kent State University's public radio station WKSU is now weeks into being run by Cleveland-based news and classical music broadcaster Ideastream Public Media.

Full implementation and other changes remain months away and will include Ideastream moving WCLV’s classical music programming from 104.9 FM to 90.3 FM, currently home to WCPN. The end result will be WKSU becoming Northeast Ohio’s public radio news and information broadcast operation, including carrying NPR programming, under Ideastream oversight. The stations could reach 3.6 million people in 22 counties.

Ideastream, a private non-profit, is now signing the paychecks for WKSU as part of a new "public service operating agreement" worked out between the university and the Cleveland nonprofit news and music operation. The 10-year agreement took effect Oct. 1, with April 1 being deadline to make all of the planned changes.

The WKSU-Ideastream collaboration publicly emerged and was approved at Kent State University's board of trustees meeting in mid September amid some public criticism. It follows studies and discussions behind closed doors among university, radio station and Ideastream executives and with financial support from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.

Agreement not a merger

This agreement with Ideastream is about growth and finding ways to serve a common coverage area in a better way, not about deficits and expenses. And this collaboration is technically not a merger, station leaders said.

The goal essentially was, "how can we improve the service for those who rely and depend upon it?" said Kevin Martin, Ideastream's president and chief executive officer.

Ideastream has hired most of WKSU’s staff and is providing management and programming under the agreement.

WKSU: Expected to merge with Cleveland's Ideastream by Oct. 1

The agreement coincides with WKSU just starting to show a monetary surplus for the fiscal year ending June 30 after running annual deficits since changing to a news and information format in 2013.

"They have returned to profitability," Kent State spokesman Eric Mansfield said. The university starting in 2013 began budgeting $450,000 annually to support WKSU's operations, which to date works out to a total of $3.6 million. The full subsidy figure is closer to $4 million because of expenses related to the new agreement, Mansfield said.

Kent State to end subsidy

The expectation going back to 2013 was that WKSU, as revenues increased under its revamped format, eventually would repay the university, Mansfield said. Now, with WKSU being operated by Ideastream, the university essentially will begin paying itself back, he said. The university also will be getting revenue from rental of transmission towers, he said.

"We knew we would deficit spend for a period of time and anticipated WKSU will be able to pay it back," Mansfield said. "Before that happened, we reached this public service operating agreement."

Both university and Ideastream boards voted to approve the agreement, with the document signed Sept. 22. The agreement developed from a months-long analysis of WKSU and Ideastram operations, formats and their overlapping market coverage. Ideastream declined to release the full analysis citing proprietary data, and Kent State claimed it never possessed the report in a public records response to the Beacon Journal. Both provided an 11-page summary.

"It's not a merger. It's a public service operating agreement," Martin said. "If it was a merger then I would imagine we would hold the license. KSU still has the license. We, Ideastream Public Radio, just has the right to operate the station. They'll retain the asset."

Ideastream and WKSU have been collaborating on a number of fronts for years, he said.

Greater Akron area to remain focus

Followers of WKSU, which covers 22 counties that include the greater Akron area, will not see Cleveland news overshadow current coverage, Martin and WKSU's former top executive said.

WKSU is mandated by federal regulators to provide local news coverage, said Wendy Turner. Turner is WKSU's former executive director and general manager who this week was named general manager of Ohio public media services at Ideastream, reporting to Martin.

WKSU's 19-member community advisory board also will be joining Ideastream's advisory board, Turner said.

"This is a way to ensure that we are held responsible to coverage of the broader community," she said. "Our business model depends on voluntary, enthusiastic financial support from the community. That holds us accountable as well."

WKSU and Ideastream journalists live in the communities where they work, Turner said.

The combined WKSU and Ideastream editorial team is working together right now to find the right balance of broader coverage going forward, Turner said. "We're right at the beginning of this journey," she said.

Ideastream increased its head count by 20 to 150 with the addition of the WKSU employees, Martin said. The principal news space will be the Idea Center in Cleveland, he said. WKSU will continue to work closely with Kent State's School of Media and Journalism.

"We offered every WKSU employee a job," Martin said. "And the vast majority have accepted. So we're really thrilled about that. The majority of that staff will be in content."

Three people declined job offers, he said.

The agreement comes at a time when rapidly changing consumer trends in news and technology are creating profound impacts on traditional broadcasters and legacy print operations.

People now like to listen to podcasts and share content, not necessarily listen to traditional radio, Martin said. People increasingly turn to social media and other online resources, including mobile technology.

Ideastream and WKSU think they have opportunities to expand beyond conventional and traditional broadcast limitations, Turner and Martin said.

'This was way to grow'

Turner said she characterizes the Ideastream-WKSU agreement "more as a growth opportunity than saving money by eliminating duplicate services and programming for the same market."

Still, there will be cost savings. Ideastram and WKSU will no longer each have to pay for duplicative public radio news content that was going out to an almost identical coverage area.

As for WKSU's deficits, "There were no red flags about the expenses. It was moving in the right direction," Turner said.

Without the agreement with Ideastream, WKSU could continue to operate as it has been, she said.

"But we couldn't continue to do it any kind of aspirational way that we want to," she said. "This is the shortcut to the kind of achievement of our aspirational goals. ... The last couple of years we aspired to grow. The path to growth was this convergence. There was just no question that this was the way to grow."

FM dial changes

WKSU, which was founded in 1950, has undergone other significant changes over its history, including shifting frequencies; it started at 88.1 FM, then in 1962 moved to 89.7 FM, where it has stayed and will remain under the Ideastream operating agreement. It has repeater stations elsewhere in Northeast Ohio that broaden its coverage.

While WKSU is staying put, Ideastream's stations will be changing on an as-yet unannounced date, likely in 2022. WCLV, Ideastream's current classical music station at 104.9 FM, will change its call letters to WCPN and become a repeater station for WKSU. WCLV in turn will move to 90.3 FM where it will continue to offer classical music.

Jim Mackinnon covers business. He can be reached at 330-996-3544 or jmackinnon@thebeaconjournal.com. Follow him @JimMackinnonABJ on Twitter or www.facebook.com/JimMackinnonABJ.