Careers at Epic Systems

Mission

The mission of Epic Systems is to develop software to help people stay well and ensure better health of future generations. It aims to deliver exceptional quality healthcare management, professional and support services with a decided devotion to excellence, integrity and innovation, making a long-lasting difference in the lives of patients and our communities.

History

Epic Systems was founded by Judith Faulkner in 1979 in Madison, Wisconsin where she graduated in early 1970s in Computer Science. After her graduation, she taught at the University of Wisconsin and managed the clinical records systems of numerous departments at the university. In order to commercialize the systems, Faulkner, along with a few information managers, programmers and other institutions, put together $70,000 in 1979 to establish Human Services Computing, Inc., the company known as Epic today.

The company name was changed to Epic in mid 1980s and it was around the same time that the company shifted its focus on developing software apps for tracking inventory and medical costs. In 1987, it released Resolute Professional Billing, a new application which soon evolved into the best scheduling application in the industry. And by the end of the first decade since its formation, Epic Systems had attained numerous large clients such as Harvard, Ontario Ministry of Health and a large hospital constructed by the Sultan of Brunei.

The years ahead witnessed explosive growth of Epic. 1n 1992, Epic launched EpicCare, an Electronic Medical Record (EMR) product based on Windows. Being the first of its kind in healthcare industry, EpicCare was widely accepted by healthcare organizations.

Near the end of 20th century, Epic had begun to offer software applications in other areas too such as scheduling, billing and accounts receivable, managed care, and computerized medical records. Also, around the same time, EpicCare had become the nation's biggest EMR system and the company earned more than half of its revenues through EpicCare in year 1997.

In the same year, Epic introduced EpicWeb – the company's first e-health product which provided patients and caregivers information regarding documentation and scheduling. Before the end of 20th century, Epic released more products such as EpicCare Inpatient Clinical System modules in 1999 which allowed healthcare professionals to "integrate their inpatient and ambulatory care facilities".

In 2000, Epic witnessed booming sales and employees increased in number too with the introduction of new products by the company. Hyperspace was introduced in 2001. It saved the users the effort and time exerted in moving from one application to another to perform different tasks and let them streamline workflows. MyChart - an application which let the patients access their medical records and schedules at any instant - was also introduced in the same year.

Epic received high appreciation for its excellent customer services in early 2000s. KLAS Enterprises - an independent healthcare research organization - ranked Epic the top organization in the healthcare IT industry.

The following years brought more awards and recognition for Epic and the company kept expanding. Epic moved its headquarters from Madison to a large campus in the suburb of Verona, Wisconsin in 2005. The continued growth and expansion of Epic can be estimated from the fact that today, its software hold medical records of 54% of patients in the United States and 2.5% of patients worldwide.

Benefits at Epic Systems

Our team