Port Mathurin weather in September (Rodrigues, Mauritius)

Is Port Mathurin a good destination in September, weather-wise? Find out what kind of weather to expect during this month.

Temperatures

The weather in Port Mathurin is usually perfect in September, characterized by high temperatures and moderate rainfall. During the daylight hours, temperatures often reach 24°C. After dark they usually decrease to around 22°C.

Precipitation

Port Mathurin in September usually receives moderate rainfall, averaging around 34 mm for the month. You can typically expect 13 days days of rain this month, based on climate records.

Average sunshine

The days are predominantly sunny, with an estimated total of around 240 hours of sunshine. These sun-filled days are perfect for spending time outside. Whether it's playing sports, visiting a park, or going for a bike ride.

So this is a great month to visit if you prefer dry days with pleasant temperatures. April, May, June, July, August, September, October, November and December typically offer the most optimal weather. In contrast, January, February and March tend to have less optimal conditions.

For an in-depth look at the yearly conditions, visit our specialized Port Mathurin climate page with graphs.

Port Mathurin, monthly averages in September

Min Temperature 22°C

Max Temperature 24°C

Chance of Rain 44%

Precipitation 34 mm

Rainy days 13 days

Humidity 74%

Sunshine 240 hours

Percentage Sunshine

Where to go in Mauritius in September

Find out more about the weather in Mauritius and which places have the best travel conditions in this month.

Map not visible? Whoops sorry! Please refresh the page.

Legend perfect weather pleasant tolerable unpleasant poor

Perfect weather is subjective. On this map perfect weather has been defined with temperatures between 20°C and 29°C and not too much precipitation (less than 90 mm a month).

So, what should you wear in this month?

For visitors traveling to Port Mathurin, we recommend wearing layers. So maybe a skirt, t-shirt, shorts for during the day and jeans and a warm jacket for some days and evenings.

What To Do

We rated the following activities from 1 (least suitable) to 10 (best) to do.

Swimming 10/10

Cycling 10/10

Walking 10/10

Barbeque 9/10

Camping 10/10

Outdoor sports 10/10

Interested in more climate information?

This site provides you with all the information you need about the climate in Port Mathurin.

Our site offers climate and forecast data for every country in the world. Are you going to Mauritius? On this website you can find historical weather averages for many cities in Mauritius. Not sure yet where to go? We now have a tool which recommends destinations that suit your ideal travel conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.