What’s the climate like in Rodrigues?

The current climate in Rodrigues features temperatures ranging from a high of 31°C to a low of 26°C throughout the year. The average yearly temperature is around 29°C. At night, temperatures in the colder months average around 21°C and in the warmer months around 26°C.

The highest temperature recorded in Rodrigues in recent years was 39°C in March 2015. The lowest daytime temperature recorded was 21°C in August 2022.

On average, Rodrigues receives 1159 mm of rainfall each year. For comparison, United Kingdom gets 862 mm of rainfall annually.

Click on the month name to see more weather details, like daily averages, temperatures, and precipitation for the past years in that month.

The best time to visit Rodrigues for sunny weather is February and May through December. During this period, you'll have good temperatures and not too much rain, making it a great time to visit Rodrigues. In the other months of the year, there's too much rain or the temperature isn't ideal for a visit if you want sunny and pleasant weather.

The hurricane season in Rodrigues runs from November to April.

Check out the weather for Rodrigues

Climate Table of Rodrigues

The climate table of Rodrigues shows the average temperatures, rainfall, and UV index per month. The table gives an overview of the average day and night temperatures in degrees Celsius, the total amount of rainfall in millimetres, the total snowfall in centimetres, and the UV index for each month. Rainfall is always measured as water, even if it's snow or hail.

Click on the month name to see more weather details, like daily averages, temperatures, and precipitation for the past years in that month.

Average yearly temperature: 29°C

Highest temperature: 31°C in January, February and March

Lowest temperature: 26°C in July, August and September

Precipitation: 1159 mm per year, averaging 97 mm per month

Driest months: 41 mm in September, 52 mm in November and 53 mm in August

Wettest months: 202 mm in March, 154 mm in January and 143 mm in April

Average Temperature per Month in Rodrigues

This graph shows the average maximum temperatures per month in Rodrigues, Mauritius. The temperatures are shown in degrees Celsius and the average is calculated based on the recorded temperatures per month from past years.

Average Rainfall per Month in Rodrigues

This graph shows how much rainfall Rodrigues, Mauritius gets on average per month. Rainfall is always measured as water, even if it's snow or hail. This makes it easy to compare how much has fallen, regardless of the form of precipitation. The amount of rainfall is measured in millimetres and the average is calculated based on the recorded rainfall per month from past years.

Average UV Index per Month in Rodrigues

This graph shows the average UV index per month in Rodrigues, Mauritius. The UV index indicates the intensity of ultraviolet radiation and ranges from 0 to a maximum of 11.

Yearly Temperature in Rodrigues

This graph shows the average yearly temperature in Rodrigues, Mauritius. The yearly temperature, expressed in degrees Celsius, is the average of all twelve monthly temperatures summed up for that year.

Total Yearly Rainfall in Rodrigues

This chart shows the total yearly rainfall in Rodrigues, Mauritius over the past few years. The total yearly rainfall, measured in centimetres, is the sum of all the rain that fell in the twelve months of that year.