September has total rainfall of 5.1cm (2.0inches) making it mostly dry with only intermittent light showers. There are only 13.5 days with some rainfall so you can still enjoy the beach on the majority of days.

Sea temperatures are a warm 23°C (74°F). September is a good month for swimming in Rodrigues Island with comfortable temperatures for most people. The sea temperature in September is marginally warmer than the previous month and temperatures continue to rise slightly into October.

Also consider visiting Rodrigues Island in one of the other best months of May, October, November, for the best beach weather. Also consider one of our other suggestions for September.

Yes, September is a good time for sunbathing in Rodrigues Island.

September has average maximum temperatures of 25°C (78°F) which is very warm and perfect for sunbathing on clear days. The sunshine percentage is 49% making it quite sunny but with regular periods of cloudy and overcast skies. There are 5.9 hours of sunshine per day. September has total rainfall of 5.1cm (2.0inches) making it mostly dry with only intermittent light showers. There are only 13.5 days with some rainfall so you can still enjoy the beach on the majority of days.

More about September temperature and sunshine.

Yes, September is a good time for a holiday in Rodrigues Island.

September has average maximum temperatures of 25°C (78°F) which is very warm and perfect for sunbathing on clear days. The sunshine percentage is 49% making it quite sunny but with regular periods of cloudy and overcast skies. There are 5.9 hours of sunshine per day. September has total rainfall of 5.1cm (2.0inches) making it mostly dry with only intermittent light showers. There are only 13.5 days with some rainfall so you can still enjoy the beach on the majority of days. Sea temperatures are a warm 23°C (74°F). September is a good month for swimming in Rodrigues Island with comfortable temperatures for most people.

More about the September temperatures and sunshine.

Yes, Rodrigues Island is very warm and perfect for sunbathing on clear days in September.

The average maximum temperature in Rodrigues Island in September is 25°C (78°F). The average maximum temperature is 25°C (76°) in the previous month and 27°C (80°F) in the next month.

The average temperature in Rodrigues Island in September is 22°C (72°F). The average temperature is 22°C (71°F) in the previous month and 23°C (74°F) in the next month.

More info about the September temperatures and sunshine.