Normal weather for Rodrigues in September

It's warm in September in Rodrigues with an average temperature of 26°C. Temperatures this month range from a low of 26°C to a high of 27°C. At night, you can expect temperatures between 21°C and 22°C.

In September, there is an average of 41 mm of precipitation, spread over 14 days days. The wind speed is around 5 Bft, mostly coming from the Southeast.

The UV index is a maximum of 9 this month. That's a very high value on the intensity scale of 1 to 11. Unprotected skin can burn within 10-15 minutes.

The highest recorded temperature on September in recent years was 28°C in 2017. The lowest daytime temperature on this day was 21°C in 2016. The extreme night temperatures ranged from a low of 15°C to a high of 23°C.

Want nice weather? September is a great month to visit Rodrigues. You’ll get pleasant temperatures and not too much rain this month.

Check out the climate of Rodrigues for all months and discover the best travel time

Average daily weather in September

Click on a day for more details about the average weather on that day in September.

Daily Temperature in September in Rodrigues

This chart shows the average daily high temperatures in September in Rodrigues, measured in degrees Celsius. The bottom of the chart shows the days of September. Based on historical data, it shows the average daily temperatures for this month.

Daily Rainfall in September in Rodrigues

This chart shows the average daily rainfall in September for Rodrigues, measured in millimetres over the past years. Rainfall is always measured as water, even if it’s snow or hail. The bottom of the chart shows the days of September. Based on historical data, this chart gives an idea of how much rain you can expect each day.

Daily UV Index in September in Rodrigues

This chart shows the average daily UV index in September in Rodrigues, with the UV index ranging from 0 to a maximum of 11. The bottom of the chart shows the days of the month. Based on historical data, this chart provides an idea of the daily UV radiation levels you can expect.

Temperature in September in Rodrigues Over the Years

This chart shows the average temperature in September in Rodrigues, measured in degrees Celsius, over the past years.

Total Rainfall in September in Rodrigues Over the Years

This chart shows the average rainfall in September in Rodrigues, measured in millimetres over the past years. Rainfall is always measured as water, even if it’s snow or hail.

Weather experiences in September in Rodrigues

Have you been to Rodrigues in September?

Share your weather experience in September in Rodrigues.

When were you here?

How was the weather?

Describe your weather experiences:

What's your name?

What's your email?

Your email will not be shown in the review and will not be shared with others.

Average Weather in Rodrigues by Month

Click on a month below to see detailed weather info for Rodrigues. Based on historical weather data, you can see the average temperature, rainfall, wind, and UV index for each day of the month.

Or check out the climate of Rodrigues for all months at once