Port South East weather in September (Rodrigues, Mauritius)

What's the typical weather in Port South East for September? Is now the perfect time to visit? Find all the weather insights for this month on this page.

Temperatures

During September, Port South East experiences perfect weather, with high temperatures and moderate rainfall. Daytime temperatures generally settle around 24°C, while nighttime can see a dip to about 22°C.

Precipitation

Port South East in September usually receives moderate rainfall, averaging around 35 mm for the month. Delving into the climate records from the past 30 years, one can predict that nearly 13 days of the month will see rainfall.

Average sunshine

Expect a lot of sunshine this month, with about 240 hours of sunny weather. The abundant sunlight creates a lively and bright atmosphere.

If you're inclined towards comfortable temperatures and drier conditions, September is a prime time to visit Port South East. May, June, July, August, September, October, November and December typically offer the best circumstances. While January, February, March and April tend to showcase less optimal conditions.

For an in-depth look at the yearly conditions, visit our specialized Port South East climate page with graphs.

Port South East, monthly averages in September

Min Temperature 22°C

Max Temperature 24°C

Chance of Rain 44%

Precipitation 35 mm

Rainy days 13 days

Humidity 74% *

Sunshine 240 hours *

Percentage Sunshine *

* Data from: Port Mathurin, Mauritius (8 KM, 5 Miles).

Where to go in Mauritius in September

Find out more about the weather in Mauritius and which places have the best travel conditions in this month.

Map not visible? Whoops sorry! Please refresh the page.

Legend perfect weather pleasant tolerable unpleasant poor

Perfect weather is subjective. On this map perfect weather has been defined with temperatures between 20°C and 29°C and not too much precipitation (less than 90 mm a month).

So, what should you wear in this month?

For visitors traveling to Port South East, we recommend wearing layers. So maybe a skirt, t-shirt, shorts for during the day and jeans and a warm jacket for some days and evenings.

What To Do

We rated the following activities from 1 (least suitable) to 10 (best) to do.

Swimming 10/10

Cycling 10/10

Walking 10/10

Barbeque 9/10

Camping 10/10

Outdoor sports 10/10

Interested in more climate information?

This site provides you with all the information you need about the climate in Port South East.

Our site offers climate and forecast data for every country in the world. Are you going to Mauritius? On this website you can find historical weather averages for many cities in Mauritius. Not sure yet where to go? We now have a tool which recommends destinations that suit your ideal travel conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.