With WENDY BASHI, AGNES BRÜHWILER, ANGE DA COSTA, J-J DA COSTA, ANTJE DRINKUTH, CHRISTINE FISCHER, SEBASTIAN FISCHER, ANNE-SOPHIE AZIZÈ FLITTNER, LYDIA HAUTH, LOVA LOVA, CEDRICK NZOLO, KIZITO ODHIAMBO, CLAUDIA SIMONS, ANNE STORCH, DOROTHEE WENNER and many more

Concept and direction: DOROTHEE WENNER

19:00

Venue: studiobühneköln, Universitätsstraße 16a, 50937 Köln

Free admission

In english and german language

Booklet for the table talks

In this event we are getting to the heart of the question, as consequential as it is mysterious, of where images come from, in particular those images that we have in our heads of Africa of those that are projected from Europe onto that continent. Experts from the areas of fashion, media, literature, music, politics, education, and travel report on their projects in Africa/with African partners or topics, providing insight into everyday life, work practices, and basic personal questions. In dialogue with the audience they will present ideas, theses, and consequences for exerting positive influence on the collective production of images.

Cinema & Film Festivals

When was the last time you saw an African film? On the scandalous “lack of images” in the German TV and cinema landscape, its consequences, and counterstrategies.

With

SEBASTIAN FISCHER is artistic and managing director of the AfrikaFilmFestival in Cologne and works as an independent consultant for film production companies and the Goethe Institut.

ANNE-SOPHIE AZIZÈ FLITTNER appears as an actor at various German theaters. She also works as a director, writer, and translator. Since 2014 she has moderated the audience discussions at the AfrikaFilmfestival Cologne.

DOROTHEE WENNER works as a delegate of the Berlinale for the cinema of sub-Saharan Africa, is herself a filmmaker and curator of Kizobazoba.

Politics

Developmental politics, the business of donations, NGO jungle – On the defense mechanisms and repression efforts of experts and decision-makers in engaging with African realities.

With

WENDY BASHI is a Congolese filmmaker, journalist, and moderator. She moderated the fashion show at the presentation of the web series Kinshasa Collection at the Haus der Kulturen der Welt and participates in Kizobazoba as a performer.

CLAUDIA SIMONS is currently Africa consultant at the Heinrich Böll Foundation, previously she worked as a research associate at the Stiftung Wissenschaft und Politik. In addition she is a freelance consultant for foreign policy and security in the African Great Lakes region.

Fashion

What role does clothing play in mutual perception between cultures? About styling as religion, the search for inspiration, and a project with students from Kinshasa and Berlin.

With

PROF. DIPL.-DES ANTJE DRINKUTH, professor of collection concepts and collection presentation at the AMD Akademie Mode & Design, Berlin.

PROF. CEDRICK NZOLO NGAMBOU, designer and professor at the Institut supérieur des arts et métiers (ISAM), Kinshasa.

Education

What images of Africa are conveyed in German schools, and how do they mark our perception from an early age? How must educational work on African countries change so as not to constantly reproduce and further reinforce stereotypes? How can it even show us what links us with countries in Africa?

With

KIZITO ODHIAMBO is a Germany-based Kenyan social entrepreneur and independent educational consultant from Gemeinsam für Afrika. He works with small farmers in Kenya to develop on-site perspectives, and his educational work is concerned with global trade structures, the living conditions of children and adults, as well as with racism.

Travel

Can tourism be used ‘politically’– to the advantage of a progressive perception of Africa? Can travel effectively alter the “image of Africa”, and how does existing tourism work–for instance, in Kenya?

With

AGNES BRÜHWILER, M.A., Swahili lecturer at the University of Cologne, Institute for African Studies and Egyptology, researches the relationship of language to gender and ideology as well as sociolinguistics and African literature.

PROF. DR. ANNE STORCH, University of Cologne, Institute for African Studies and Egyptology. Specialized in African linguistics, researches what language might be beyond structural linguistic concepts–secret, magic, interpersonal relationships. In addition she has written articles on sociolinguistics, the history of science, language description.

Museum

Ethnological museums are in flux and must constantly scrutinize their social role and collection history. How can these controversial discussions be integrated, and what curatorial concepts can take hold?

With

CHRISTINE FISCHER, cultural scholar and Hispanist, works at the GRASSI Museum of Ethnography in Leipzig in the areas of program planning and audience development. She is involved in building up a museum program that promotes social participation, multi-perspectivity, and cultural diversity in events, workshops, and projects.

LYDIA HAUTH, ethnologist, has worked at the GRASSI Museum for Ethnography in Leipzig since 2014. As a volunteer and research associate she has coordinated and curated several special exhibitions in the series “Grassi invites”.

Music

“You’re ‘too white’, ‘too black’, ‘too African’, too German’ – Do ‘label makers’ influence the music industry, or do they just serve the audience’s expectations? Who fixes the terms, and how can we revolt against them?

With

ANGE DA COSTA, musician, singer-songwriter from Berlin with his own band that performs "Bantu-Soul": Bantu means people – Music for the people.

J-J DA COSTA, music producer and lecturer for music production in Cologne and at various educational and cultural institutions in NRW.

LOVA LOVA, aka Wilfred Beki from Kinshasa is a musician, performer, sapeur, and cultural activist. He is an important protagonist in the web series KINSHASA COLLECTION, for which he also composed the theme song.

Cooperation partners/Supporters: