The Child: Eleanora “Billie Holiday” Fagan

Eleanora Fagan, the soulful songstress we know today as Billie Holiday, was born to Sarah Julia “Sadie” Fagan and Clarence Halliday in Philadelphia, PA. Billie's mother, Sadie, did not have support from her own parents who lived in Baltimore, so she made arrangements for young Billie to stay with her Baltimorean half sister, Eva Miller & Eva’s mother-in-law Martha Miller.

For the first 10 years of her life, Billie Holiday was cared for mostly by others, because her mother had taken a traveling job with the railroad.

Billie frequently skipped school and when she was 9 years old, she was sent to a Catholic “reform” school. She was released later that year (1925) into the custody of her mother. Soon after, Billie’s mother moved to New York City for employment, and Billie joined her there in 1929.

Though Billie’s life was not an easy one, she found escape in music and was soon recognized for her incredible singing style and interpretation of songs. Early musical influences for Billie came from listening to records by Bessie Smith and Louis Armstrong, with whom she would later star in her first and only film feature, New Orleans (1947). In Billie’s composition, “Billie’s Blues” released in 1936, one can hear the influence of Bessie Smith.

It was in New York City that Eleanora Fagan changed her name to Billie Holiday, inspired by her admiration of film star Billie Dove.

And it was at Covan’s, a small jazz club in Harlem, New York that 18 year old Billie Holiday was discovered by producer John Hammond, who was instrumental in securing recording work with Clarinetist Benny Goodman and his Orchestra. Her first records with Benny, “Your Mother’s Son-in-Law,” sold 300 copies and “Riffin’ the Scotch” sold 5,000 copies.

Billie Holiday received many accolades and honors during her lifetime. In 1944 and several years to follow, Billie was awarded the Gold Medal for Best Leading Female Vocalist from Esquire Magazine. In 1948 she received three curtain calls after her sold-out concert debut at Carnegie Hall, and she starred in a Broadway musical, Holiday on Broadway, that same year. She was a guest on several television shows, including The Tonight Show, The Comeback Special, the aforementioned The Sound Jazz, and others. A Memorial statue of Billie stands at the corner of Lafayette and Pennsylvania, just blocks from the Baltimore Anchor Institution, the Arch Social Club.