The Johns Hopkins University Billie Holiday collection is an artificially assembled collection with manuscript material chosen by the curators of Special Collections, dating from approximately 1949 to 1993. The collection contains seven serials publications which feature images of Holiday, articles about her life and death, and selections of her own writing. The collection also includes a set of trading cards featuring Holiday, a tribute CD-ROM created by the Baltimore City Paper celebrating Holiday, and materials related to a 1972 biopic of Holiday's life titled Lady Sings the Blues. These items were created both during Holiday's life and after her death in 1959. Please see file descriptions for additional descriptive information on these materials.

Billie Holiday, birth name Elinore Harris, was an American jazz and blues singer born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania on April 7, 1915. Known as Eleanora, she and her mother used her maternal grandfather’s surname, Fagan, for a time. Her father was Clarence Halliday, also known as Clarence Holiday, a professional musician.

Holiday grew up in Baltimore, Maryland, and moved to New York City in 1928 where she began singing in nightclubs in Harlem. She adapted her professional name, "Billie," from movie actress Billie Dove. In 1933, Holiday made her first recordings; susbsequent recordings two years later brought her widespread recognition. Holiday’s recordings between 1936 and 1942 marked the peak years of her career. During this period she was often associated with saxophonist Lester Young, her friend and music partner who nicknamed her “Lady Day.”

Holiday was arrested for narcotics possession in 1947 and sentenced to a serve a year at Alderson Federal Prison Camp in West Virginia. Unable to obtain a cabaret license to work in New York City, Holiday nonetheless played New York’s Carnegie Hall ten days after her release in March 1948. She continued to perform in clubs outside of New York City, and made several tours during her later years.

Among the songs associated with her are “Strange Fruit,” "God Bless the Child," "The Man I love," “Fine and Mellow,” “Billie’s Blues,” and “I Wished on the Moon.” She wrote an autobiography titled Lady Sings the Blues in 1956 with American writer William Dufty. Holiday died on July 17,1959 in New York City.

Source: Britannica, The Editors of Encyclopaedia. "Billie Holiday." Encyclopædia Britannica. July 13, 2018. Accessed October 29, 2018. https://www.britannica.com/biography/Billie-Holiday.