Lorraine Toussaint - born April 4, 1960 in Trinidad, West Indies (now Trinidad & Tobago) - is an American television and film actress who portrayed Nancy Drake, in the Season Two episode, The Other Woman of ABC's Scandal.

Background & Personal Life[]

She was born in Trinidad, but moved to Brooklyn with her mother when she was only ten years old. She graduated from Manhattan’s High School of Performing Arts in 1978. Lorraine then attended the Julliard School’s drama division as a member of Group 11 (1978-1982), where her classmates in 1982 included Megan Gallagher, Penny Johnson of ABC’s Castle’s, Executive Producer of SyFy’s Warehouse 13, Jack Kenny and fellow actor Jack Stehlin. She graduated from Julliard with a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree.

Lorraine had to care for her mother, Janet Beane, who had multiple sclerosis while she was studying acting; her mother passed away in 1999. She is an aficionado of architecture, and an expert gardener and landscaper.

Career Background[]

She is most known for her role as Rene Jackson in the Lifetime drama series Any Day Now (1988-2002) starring alongside Annie Potts. From 2007 to 2010 Lorraine starred as Captain Kate Perry in TNT’s crime drama Saving Grace starring alongside Holly Hunter and Leon Rippy.

She was a featured recurring guest-star in the first few seasons of the legal drama Law & Order as defense attorney Shambala Green. Lorraine’s also had recurring guest roles on Crossing Jordan, Threat Matrix, The Closer, CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, Ugly Betty, Friday Night Lights, and currently - 2013 - has a recurring role on ABC’s crime drama Body of Proof.

Lorraine has had guest appearances on several TV shows, including Fraiser, Judging Amy, Numb3rs, ER, NCIS, Grey’s Anatomy, Drop Dead Diva and The Secret Life of the American Teenager.

Her movie credits include Point of No Return (1993), Dangerous Minds (1995), The Soloist (2009) and Middle of Nowhere in which she was nominated for an Independent Spirit Award for Best Supporting Female and a Black Reel Award for Best Supporting Actress. She’s appeared in several TV movies and a few short films as well. K

References[]

IMDb - http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0005501/

Wikipedia - http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lorraine_Toussaint