Publish date: 2024-06-13

Early Years

Lorraine Toussaint was born on April 4, 1960, in Trinidad and Tobago, a Caribbean country near Venezuela. She was born under the sign of Aries, and as of 2021, she is 61 years old. She is also of Trinidadian descent, follows the Christian faith, and is of Trinidadian ethnicity.

In an interview, she stated that she believes it is horrible to grow up in the British system for a child since it is so rigorous. She also said that he was routinely beaten and that her life as an artsy child was agony. Furthermore, her mother was a teacher who moved to Brooklyn with her in the late 1960s.

She graduated from the High School of Performing Arts in Manhattan in 1978. She then went on to study drama at the Juilliard School, where she was a member of Group 11 from 1978 to 1982. She went on to Juilliard School and earned a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree.

Body Measurement

Lorraine Toussaint stands 5 feet 9 inches tall and weighs 65 kilograms. She has dark brown hair and dark brown eyes. Apart from that, nothing is known regarding Toussaint’s other bodily measurements.

Career

Lorraine Toussaint began her career as a Shakespearean actor before moving on to television and cinema roles. She also worked on stage in New York for twelve years before going to Los Angeles to seek a career in cinema and television. She made her screen debut in the TV movie “The Face of Rage” in 1983, playing the character Stendahl.

She then starred in the 1986 TV film “A Case of Deadly Force” as the widow of a man shot and killed by Boston cops. She then had a recurring role as Vera Williams on the ABC television drama “One Life to Live.” She also starred in guest parts on shows including “227” and “Law & Order” in the 1990s, as well as in several television films. She made her film debut as a female lead in “Breaking In,” starring Burt Reynolds, in 1989.

Her first film, however, was a box office flop that earned positive reviews from critics. She then starred alongside Bruce Willis in Hudson Hawk and Michelle Pfeiffer in Dangerous Minds in 1991. She also starred in the 1990s in films such as “Mother’s Boys,” “Black Dog,” and “Point of No Return,” as well as television programs such as “Amazing Grace,” “Where I Live,” “Bodies of Evidence,” and “Leaving LA.” Following that, she starred alongside Annie Potts in the television series “Any Day Now” as Rene Jackson. From 2002 to 2004, she played Doctor Elaine Duchamps on the NBC television series “Crossing Jordan.”

Net Worth and Achievements

Lorraine Toussaint was nominated for five NAACP Image Awards for Outstanding Actress in a Drama Series for her role in Any Day Now. Her role in the series “Orange Is the New Black” earned her a Screen Actors Guild Award and a Critics’ Choice Television Award in 2014. She was also listed 28th on Rolling Stone’s list of “40 Greatest TV Villains of All Time” in 2016. She also received awards from the National Bar Association, the LA Femme Filmmaker Award, the Black Film Critics Circle Award, and others.

Lorraine Toussaint has amassed a sizable fortune through her acting career. She has an estimated nett worth of $2 million, according to several web sources, as a result of her roles in multiple films and television series.

Lorraine Toussaint estimated Net Worth, Salary, Income, Cars, Lifestyles & many more details have been updated below. Let’s check, How Rich is Lorraine Toussaint in 2020 -2021?

Lorraine Toussaint’s Net Worth:

$2 million

Estimated Net Worth in 2021$2 millionPrevious Year’s Net Worth (2020)$1 millionAnnual SalaryUnder Review. Income SourceActressNet Worth Verification StatusNot Verified

Status of the Relationship

Lorraine Toussaint married Michael Tomlinson in a private ceremony on June 25, 2017. However, on June 13, 2019, the pair chose to divorce, ending their nearly two-year marriage. She is also currently single and the mother of a girl named Samara Zane.

Lorraine Toussaint hasn’t been a part of the allegations and controversies surrounding her until now. She also prefers to spend her time with her daughter and avoids speculations that could harm her acting career.

Social media

Lorraine Toussaint is a frequent user of social media sites such as Instagram and Twitter. Her official Instagram account, @lorrainetoussaint, has a following of over 34 thousand people. Her official Twitter account, @LPToussaint, has over 31 thousand followers.

Related tags :

Rena Sofer | Bio, Age, Net Worth, Relationship, Career

Rena Sofer is one of them, having appeared in more than 50 films and crafting her own performing niche. The most outstanding work was produced by The General Hospital and The Bold and the Beautiful. Read More

Meet Minka Kelly’s Mother Maureen Dumont Kelly: Unsolved Mysteries

Late Las Vegas showgirl Maureen Dumont Kelly was an actress who appeared in supporting roles in shows like Roseanne (1988), Thirtysomething (1987), and Hell Squad (1985). Dumont, who passed away in th Read More

Belma Canciger

Belma Canciger estimated Net Worth, Biography, Age, Height, Dating, Relationship Records, Salary, Income, Cars, Lifestyles & many more details have been updated below. Let's check, How Rich is Bel Read More

ncG1vNJzZmion6XCra3Rm6CoZpOkunC4zqupmqGemnq1u9Ssqpqhnql8