Lorraine Toussaint is a Trinidadian-American actress. She has won various awards including Black Reel Award, Critics Choice Award for Her Television and Screen Actors Guild Award. She is best known for her television series Any Day Now, where she played Rene Jackson, and NBC’s legal drama Law & Order, where she often played defense attorney Shambhala etc.

Lorraine Toussaint was born in 4 April 1960 (Age: 62 Years, as in 2022) in Trinidad, Trinidad, and Tobago. She completed her schooling at Juilliard School High School of Performing Arts. Lorraine Toussaint is 5 feet and 9 inches tall, and her body weight is around 65 Kg.

Lorraine Toussaint Biography, Lifestyle, Wiki, Height, Weight, Birthday, Age, Movies, TV Serials, Instagram, Salary, Net Worth, Income, Boyfriend, Family, Father, Mother, Husband, Affairs, Marriage Life, Phone Number, Photos, House, Cars, Awards & Facts

Lorraine Toussaint Biography/Wiki

Lorraine Toussaint Personal Life

Lorraine Toussaint Education

Lorraine Toussaint Physical Statistics And More

How tall is Lorraine Toussaint?

How much does Lorraine Toussaint weigh?

How old is Lorraine Toussaint?

Lorraine Toussaint Body Measurements

Lorraine Toussaint Eye Color

Lorraine Toussaint Family & Relationship

Lorraine Toussaint Parents & Siblings

Lorraine Toussaint Boyfriend & Husband

Lorraine Toussaint Career

What is Lorraine Toussaint’s Salary?

Lorraine Toussaint’s main source of income is Acting, Modeling, and Brand Endorsements.

What is Lorraine Toussaint’s Net Worth?

Lorraine Toussaint has an estimated total Net Worth of $2 Million.

Lorraine Toussaint Cars And Bikes Collection

Lorraine Toussaint has a lot of luxury Cars collection including :

Not known

Some Lesser Known Facts About Lorraine Toussaint

• Toussaint made her screen debut in 1983. In 1986, she played Lawrence Shein in the television movie A Case of Deadly Force, based on O’Donnell’s book, where she played the widow of a man who was shot dead by Boston police.

• She later had a recurring role as Vera Williams on the ABC soap opera One Life to Live. Continuing her stage career, she made guest appearances on shows such as 227 and Law & Order (she made recurring appearances as Shambhala in The Defender Green).

• She also appeared in many TV movies in the 1990s. Toussaint made her film debut as the female lead opposite Burt Reynolds in her crime comedy Breaking In (1989). The film was well received by critics but did not perform well at the box office.

• She also appeared in the movies ‘Point of No Return’ (1993), ‘Mother’s Boys’ (1994) and ‘Black Dog’ (1998). On television, Toussaint appeared in the short-lived series Proof of Evidence (CBS, 1992), Where I Live (ABC, 1993), Amazing Grace (NBC, 1995).

• As a lead actress, she starred in critically acclaimed Lifetime TV role from 1998 to 2002, her role as Renee Jackson on her series Any Day Now, and her advocacy role on NBC’s legal drama Law & Order.

• She later appeared as a regular cast in NBC’s police trial Crossing Jordan (2002–03) and TNT’s crime drama Saving Grace (2007–10). Toussaint received critical acclaim for her performance in the 2012 drama film Middle of Nowhere and was nominated for The Independent’s Spirit Award.

• In 2014, she played the role of her main antagonist Yvonne “Vee” Parker in the second season of her Netflix comedy her drama Orange is the New Black, which received critical acclaim and Critics Choice won her a Television Award for Best Supporting Actor.

• She is an actor drama series actress. She also played the role of Amelia Boynton Robinson in the 2014 historical drama Selma, directed by Ava DuVernay.

• Toussaint has since appeared in ABC’s fantasy drama series Forever (2014-15), Fox’s comedy-drama Rosewood (2015-17), and AMC’s drama Into the Badlands (2018-19). She also appeared in the 2019 horror film Scary Stories in the Dark.

FAQ

1. What is the current Net Worth of Lorraine Toussaint?

At present, the Net Worth of Lorraine Toussaint is $2 million.

2. Where was Lorraine Toussaint born?

The birthplace of Lorraine Toussaint is Trinidad, Trinidad, and Tobago.

3. What is Lorraine Toussaint‘s true ethnicity?

She believes in Christianity.

4. What is the educational qualification of Lorraine Toussaint?

Not known

5. Is Lorraine Toussaint Married?

Lorraine Toussaint is married to a Name Not known.