Table of Biography

Lorraine Toussaint is an actress and producer with a Trinidadian-American ethnic background. Moreover, Lorraine Toussaint is popular for her performances in films like Hudson Hawk, Dangerous Minds, and Breaking In.

Early Life

Lorraine Toussaint was born in Trinidad and Tobago a Caribbean nation near Venezuela on April 4, 1960. She was born under the zodiac sign Aries and she is currently 63 years old as of 2023. Moreover, she holds Trinidad-American nationality, follows the Christian religion, and belongs to Trinidad-American ethnic background.

She claimed that she thinks it is horrific to grow up under the British system for a child which was very strict in an interview. Moreover, she also said that he was regularly beaten and her childhood was hell as an artistic child. Moreover, her mother worked as a teacher and moved to Brooklyn in the late 1960s with her.

In 1978, she completed her schooling at Manhattan’s High School of Performing Arts. After that, she enrolled in the Juilliard School’s drama division as a member of Group 11 from 1978 to 1982. Later, she graduated with a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree from Juilliard School.

Professional life

Lorraine Toussaint started her career as a Shakespearean actress before appearing as an actress in television and film. Moreover, she spent twelve years on stage in New York before moving to Los Angeles to pursue a career in film and television. In 1983, she made her screen debut as the character Stendah in the TV movie titled “The Face of Rage”.

After that, she appeared as the widow of a man shot and killed by Boston cops in the TV film “A Case of Deadly Force” in 1986. Later, she had a recurring role as Vera Williams in the ABC television show titled “One Life to Live”. Moreover, she appeared in guest roles in series like “227” and “Law & Order” and acted in severalevision films in the 1990s. In 1989, she made her film debut as a female lead in the film “Breaking In” opposite Burt Reynolds.

However, her debut film flopped at the box office but received positive reviews from critics. After that, she appeared in Hudson Hawk with Bruce Willis and in Dangerous Minds with Michelle Pfeiffer in 1991. Besides that, she also appeared in films like “Mother’s Boys”, “Black Dog”, and “Point of No Return” as well as television series like “Amazing Grace”, “Where I Live”, “Bodies of Evidence”, and “Leaving LA” in the 1990s. After that, she appeared in her biggest and leading role as Rene Jackson in the TV series “Any Day Now” with Annie Potts. She appeared as Doctor Elaine Duchamps in the NBC TV series “Crossing Jordan” from 2002 to 2004.

More Television and Film Appearances

After that, she guest-starred on “The Closer”, “Frasier”, “Judging Army”, “CSI Crime Scene Investigation”, “NCIS”, and “ER” in later years. She also appeared as Captain Kate Perry in the TNT TV series “Saving Grace” opposite Holly Hunter from 2007 to 2010. In 2006, she had a recurring role as Amelia ‘Yoga’ Bluman’ in the ABC TV show “Ugly Betty”. After that, she appeared as a hardworking mother in the film “Middle of Nowhere” written and directed by Ava DuVernay in 2012.

She then appeared in television series like “Grey’s Anatomy”, “Body of Proof”, and “The Fosters” in the following years. In 2014, she appeared as Yvonne “Vee” Parker in Netflix’s original series “Orange Is the New Black”. After that, she appeared in TV series like “The Young and the Restless”, “Forever”, “Black-ish”, “Rosewood”,” Shots Fired”, “Into the Badlands”, and many more in the following years.

Achievements

Lorraine received five nominations for her role in Any Day Now for an NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Actress in a Drama Series. In 2014, she won the Screen Actors Guild Award and Critics’ Choice Television Award for her performance in the series “Orange Is the New Black”. Moreover, Rolling Stone ranked her 28th in the list of “40 Greatest TV Villains of All Time” in 2016. Besides that, she also won the National Bar Association Award, the LA Femme Filmmaker Award, the Black Film Critics Circle Award, and more. Despite her popularity and fame, she has not received any brand endorsement deals as of now. However, it is possible that shortly, she might start to endorse brands.

Lorraine Toussaint – Net Worth 2023

Lorraine Toussaint has garnered a huge amount of money from her career as an actress. According to various online sources, she has an estimated net worth of $2 million from appearing in several films and television series.

Relationship Status

Lorraine married her husband Michael Tomlinson on June 25, 2017, in a private. However, the couple decided to divorce on June 13, 2019, which ended couples around two years of marriage. Moreover, she is currently single and she has a daughter named Samara Zane.

Talking about Toussaint’s rumors and controversy, she’s not a part of them until now. Moreover, she likes to spend her time with her daughter and avoids rumors that affect her career as an actress.

Body Measurement

Lorraine Toussaint has dark brown hair and dark brown eyes with a height of 5 feet 9 inches and a weight of 65 Kg. Besides that, there is no further information about Toussaint’s other body measurements.

Lorraine Toussaint – Social Media

Lorraine is pretty active on social media platforms like Instagram and Twitter. Her official Instagram account @lorrainetoussaint has over 34 thousand followers. On Twitter, she has over 31 thousand followers on her official account @LPToussaint.

More Actress

Lorraine Toussaint Fans Also Viewed

ncG1vNJzZmieoprAqbHRqaasrF6YvK57y6ipq5mZo7JuwM6uqqyZmaPBcA%3D%3D

Share!