SALT LAKE CITY — Derek Fisher was booed heavily by Jazz fans during introductions before he coached Tuesday for the first time at EnergySolutions Arena.

Nearly a decade ago, Fisher left the Jazz after one season in 2006-07 to go back to the Lakers, saying Los Angeles was better for his baby daughter, who was suffering from a rare eye disease.

Though Fisher is not well-liked in Utah, he almost had the last laugh because of his new Russian combo guard, Alexey Shved.

With Shved falling three assists short of a triple-double, the Knicks fought the 27-36 Jazz, one of the hottest teams in the NBA since the All-Star break, to the wire.

Utltimately the woebegone Knicks lost, 87-82, for their fifth straight defeat, but not before Shved had 21 points, 10 rebounds and seven assists in continuing to make a case for Phil Jackson to make him an offer for next season. The Post has reported Shved has eyed returning to Europe.

The Knicks — who led 71-69 with 8:30 left — fell to 12-51.

“He continues to get more comfortable,” Fisher said. “It’s great to see him playing with that kind of confidence. We want all the guys to play with that belief in themselves.”

Fisher is best known here for a memorable Western Conference semifinal game while with the Jazz. After being in New York that morning for his 10-month-old daughter’s eye surgery, he returned to hit a pivotal 3-pointer in overtime to help beat the Warriors.

Nevertheless, he gets treated harshly by the fans who feel he abandoned the franchise.

“I’m pretty much done talking about why people boo when I come here,’’ Fisher said. “My forever response to that is [my daughter] Tatum is doing just fine.’’

Fisher’s former Jazz coach, Jerry Sloan, visited after the game for a talk. The rookie coach said he has plucked things from all the coaches he played for.

“I think Jerry was fair and firm with every player and really wasn’t mesmerized whether it was John Stockton, Karl Malone or Booze [Carlos Boozer all] got the same level of expectation,’’ Fisher said before the game. “That’s something as a young coach like myself, I believe strongly in that. There are some political parts of the game and rules you have to play by but by and large, it’s a team game. You want it to be a team sport and you have to be held accountable to the same standards as everybody else.

The Knicks couldn’t contain former Net Derrick Favors, who has ripened into a stud and scored 20 of his game-high 29 points in the first half. He also had 12 rebounds.

Knicks backup center Cole Aldrich got his trademark shot to fall and racked up 17 points and 13 rebounds.

Tim Hardaway Jr. missed his second straight game with back spasms after saying Monday he planned to return. Hardaway wrenched his back Saturday versus the Pacers when he missed all nine of his shots.

Quincy Acy missed his second straight game with knee soreness, but said he didn’t take an MRI exam as planned.