Here’s a review of a book that I read recently. The book is written by Robin Sharma (a world renowned behavioral coach) and is titled ‘The Saint, the Surfer, and the CEO ‘. The book is a story of a man’s pursuit of happiness, health and wealth. The story begins in a hospital room, where the protagonist Jack Valentine meets another patient named Cal. Jack survives a gruesome accident and Cal is admitted for the treatment of cancer. What begins as a simple conversation unfolds into a journey. A journey larger than life.

The story takes a twist, when Cal succumbs to cancer. But, before his death, Cal leaves a letter addressed to Jack along with three airline tickets to three different places: Rome, Hawaii, and New York City. The letter turns out be the key that would provide Jack the answers to three critical questions: Have I lived wisely, Have I loved well, and Have I served greatly.

Jack, after his recovery begins his journey as per Cal’s instructions. His first trip to Rome turns out be a welcome change. A sweet smell in the air makes him smile. Bright streets with beautiful lawns turn out be a great sense of relief. This was in complete contrast to the dimly lit hospital lights coupled with the pungent smell of medicines. As Jack continues his walk on the streets of Rome, he comes across a cathedral. The doors of the cathedral were wide open. Its entrance was decorated with a bouquet of flowers and the dome was reverberating with baroque music. This scene brings Jack to tears. Jack goes on to meet Father Mike. Mike teaches him the laws of wisdom. Father Mike stresses how important it is to think with the heart and not with the mind. Jack proceeds on his onward journey to the land of beaches, Hawaii. He leaves Rome, wiser and stronger.

Moe Jackson, the surfer greets him in Hawaii with a big smile. Moe amazes Jack with his thoughtful quotes. For instance, the thought: “So many of us complain about not having enough time in our lives, and yet we waste much of the time we already have. And we spend our lives chasing this elusive pot of gold, only to discover that our best treasures were the simplest ones that we always had but never knew.” makes Jack ponder. Father Moe teaches Jack that gateway to fulfillment swings inward and not outward. He teaches him how important it is to love oneself, love others and love the world around us. Jack leaves for his final trip to New York with a deep sense of fulfillment is his heart.

Jack reaches New York, renewed and reinvigorated. Tall skyscrapers welcome him. As he reaches the fifty third floor of a brokerage firm, he is greeted by Tess Welch, the CEO of the firm. Tess explains Jack the importance of serving greatly. Tess teaches Jack the importance of human connections. Jack understands how important it is to develop other human beings and nothing could be of greater importance, than to bring a smile in a friend or a colleague’s face. Jack understands how elite performers create and build value by having an abundance mentality. Jack also learns that the wealthiest of the people are the ones that focus their energies on creating long lasting value in business and relationships.

Jack’s wonderful journey comes to an end in New York. Jack’s heart is filled with gratitude to the people who made a difference to him and his life: Cal, Father Mike, Moe and Tess. The story ends with the author’s magical touch. The three teachers hand over a journal to Jack, as a token of gift. Jack opens the first page of the journal to read the writing on it that says: “Gateways to a Beautiful Life.” Tears roll by Jack’s cheeks. And, they were happy tears!