The Saint, the Surfer, and the CEO

A Remarkable Story About Living Your Heart’s Desires

By

Robin Sharma

Courtesy:

Shahid Riaz

Islamabad – Pakistan

shahid@gmail

Introduction

This book is a work of fiction. It’s a story about a man named Jack Valentine, whose path in life was in many ways similar to my own. Feeling very incomplete as a human being, he set out on a search for wisdom to live a happier, healthier, and more beautiful life. Through a series of meetings with three remarkable teachers, Jack discovered a powerful philosophy to reshape his reality and access his destiny. The lessons Jack learned through his extraordinary adventure will cause you to create wonderful changes in your life as well. How do I know this? Because they’re the lessons that have transformed mine.

I’ve experienced many setbacks along this journey through my days. And yet, each stumbling block has eventually presented a stepping-stone that has brought me closer to my heart’s truth and my best life.

A number of years ago, I was a lawyer, chasing success and all the material trappings that went along with it, thinking that this was the way to lasting fulfillment. But as I worked harder and achieved more, I realized that nothing ever really changed. No matter how many material possessions I gathered, the man I saw in the bathroom mirror every morning was the same—I wasn’t any happier and didn’t feel any better. The more I reflected on the state of my life, I began to become aware of an emptiness within my heart. I started paying attention to its silent whispers, which instructed me to leave my chosen profession and begin some serious soul-searching. I started to think about why I was here on the planet and what my special mission was. I wondered why my life wasn’t working and what deep changes needed to be made to get me on track. I looked at the core beliefs, assumptions, and filters through which I saw the world, and I committed myself to cleaning up the less-than-healthy ones.

During this time of intense transformation, I read books on self-help, personal leadership, philosophy, and spirituality. I took personal-development course after personal-development course. I changed my diet, my thinking, and my behaviors. Eventually, the person I evolved into was someone more authentic, harmonious, and wise than the person I once was.

I’ll be the first to tell you that, in many ways, I’m still just a beginner on this journey of self-discovery. The top of one mountain is the bottom of the next for me, and my human exploration is a never-ending process. Even now, as I write these words, I’m moving through yet another period of massive personal transformation and reassessing my most fundamental values, along with the way I view the world. But I try to be gentle with myself. I remind myself that I must be patient and not “push the river.” Each day brings greater clarity, more certainty, and new blessings. And to me, that’s what this beautiful unfolding of life is all about.

I hope The Saint, the Surfer, and the CEO touches you at a deep level. If you really want to “own” this material, it’s very important that you teach it. I suggest that within 24 hours of completing the book you sit down and share the philosophy you’ve learned with someone you care about. This will clarify your understanding and assist in integrating the lessons into your life.

I also hope that you have fun living the knowledge of this book. Bringing a childlike sense of wonder and passion to what you’ll discover on the pages that follow is one of the best ways to grow into the person I know you’re meant to become. Thank you for giving me the privilege of sharing this work with you. I wish for you a life rich with

“Why am I all alone in this room?” I wondered aloud as I looked around. “I wouldn’t mind some company.”

“You’ve only been awake for a few minutes, Jack. Relax and give yourself some time to breathe. Be still. Your doctor will be here shortly—he was extremely worried about you.”

As the hours of that day passed and the barrage of doctors and nurses probed, checked, and encouraged me, I began to fully appreciate how serious my accident had been. The driver of the pickup truck had been killed instantly, and my doctor candidly informed me that he thought I’d never regain consciousness. “Never seen a case quite like this one,” he stated matter-of-factly.

But I had a knowing within me that this had all happened for a reason. Everything happens for a reason, and there are no accidents in life—I know you’ve heard that before. But I’ve personally come to know that this breathtaking universe of ours is not only strikingly intelligent in its operation, it’s also a very friendly place. This world wants us to live great lives. It wants us to be happy. And it wants us to win.

A quiet voice inside (which first appeared in that hospital room but would go on to comfort me during my most difficult and vulnerable times) informed me that something big was about to happen and that what I’d experience over the coming days and weeks would not only revolutionize my life, it would affect the lives of many others as well. It told me that my best was yet to come.

My guess is that many of us fail to listen to this quiet yet wise voice within us. There’s a place deep inside every single one of our hearts that knows all the answers to our biggest questions. Each one of us knows our truth and what needs to be done to create extraordinary lives for ourselves. Most of us have simply lost the connection to this natural source of pure wisdom because too much noise and clutter dominates our days. But I’ve found that when I’ve made time for silence, stillness, and solitude, the voice of truth begins to speak. And the more I’ve trusted its guidance, the richer my life has become.

It was about 9:30 that night when an orderly wheeled another patient into my room. I was grateful for the company and immediately raised my head to catch a glimpse of my new companion. He was an elderly man, probably about 75 years of age. He had thick silver hair that was slicked back in a stylish way and brown spots over his face from what appeared to be many years of sun exposure. I detected from his frail appearance and his labored breathing that this man was quite ill. I also noted that he was in some pain—he kept his eyes closed and moaned softly as the orderly transferred him into his new bed.

After about ten minutes, the visitor slowly opened his eyes. I was spellbound: His eyes were dazzling blue and revealed a clarity and brilliance that sent a shiver up my spine. I immediately felt that the man before me had a depth of wisdom that was rare in this world of quick fixes and fast lives. I felt I was in the presence of a master.

“Good evening,” he softly whispered in a dignified way. “Looks like we’re in here together for a while.”

“Yes—it’s not the greatest place to spend a Friday night, is it?” I replied with a warm smile. “My name’s Jack,” I said, raising my hand as a greeting. “Jack Valentine. I was in a pretty serious car accident about a week ago, and the verdict is that I’ll be in this bed for a while. I’ve felt alone all day, so I’m glad to meet you, sir.”

“Good to meet you too, Jack. I’m Cal. I’ve been in this hospital, in various wards, for the past seven months. I’ve been tested, treated, and tracked more than I ever could have imagined. I’m afraid that the way things are going for me, I’m never going to get out of here,” he offered quietly, his eyes darting up to the ceiling. He paused for a moment. “I came in here with a stomachache, which I thought was caused by something I ate. Six days later they had me in chemotherapy.”

“Cancer?” I asked, trying to be as sensitive as possible.

“Yes. By the time the doctors detected it, they saw that it had spread throughout my body. It’s in my lungs, it’s in my gut, and it’s now even in my head,” he said as he shakily passed his right hand through his mop of hair. “Anyway,” he continued in a reflective tone, “I’ve lived a pretty great life relative to most people. I grew up dirt poor, raised only by my mom. And what a noble woman she was.”

“Same as mine,” I interjected.

“I think about my mother every day,” Cal replied. “She was sensitive, feisty, and strong as freshly forged steel. She believed in me like no one else I’ve ever met and encouraged me to set great goals and dream big dreams. Her love for me was truly unconditional—and that’s the only kind of love that’s real, Jack. Makes me think of what Victor Hugo once wrote: ‘The supreme happiness of life is the conviction that we are loved.’ And boy, did I feel loved by that extraordinary woman. You don’t mind if I share my story with you, do you?”

“No, not at all,” I replied. “Actually, I’m intrigued.”

“Good. Well, my childhood was simple yet fun. Summers spent skinny-dipping at the swimming hole and winters spent in front of a roaring fire telling stories and reading great books.

My mom taught me to love books.”

“I love books, too,” I offered. “I really didn’t enjoy school that much, but I cherished my books.”

“I was a lot like that. As the great thinker Judah ibn-Tibbon observed so wisely: ‘Make thy books thy companions. Let thy cases and shelves be thy pleasure grounds and gardens.’”

“Lovely words, Cal.”

He continued. “School bored me, but I found great stimulation from books. I’ll never forget my mother saying that one idea read in one book had the potential to transform my life. The real thing, she said, was that we just didn’t know which book contained that one idea that would lead to our awakening! My duty, she would tell me with obvious love, was to keep searching for that book; once I found it, I had to have the personal courage to act on the idea so that results were brought into my life. Jack, since you love to read, too, I’ll share a another quick quote on the power of reading with you.”

“By all means.”

“‘The buying of more books than one can read is nothing less than the soul reaching toward infinity, and this passion is the only thing that raises us above the beasts that

want, and it shakes us out of our complacency. And so, even though we were uncomfortable from an economic point of view and our relationship still faced its challenges, I grew immensely as a human being. In fact, the distress of that period started me on a path of self-discovery and personal growth that I still travel on this very day. It totally changed my life.”

“So what happened next, Cal?” I asked with genuine interest, unconcerned that it was getting late and the lights in the hospital had all been turned off.

“I became a philosopher,” came the straightforward reply.

“A philosopher? What about your business? And what about Grace and your son?”

“Philosophy simply means ‘love of wisdom.’ What I’m telling you, Jack, is that I came to love wisdom just as much as I loved life itself. I’d spend entire days pondering life’s meaning and meditating on its deep issues. The things that I used to spend my days focusing on began to look trivial. Sadly, Grace and I began to drift apart even further and eventually we separated. Some people believe that relationships come to us as assignments. Some last for weeks, some for a lifetime—but they all come to teach us big lessons that are meant to spur our growth as people. All I know is that I learned so much from the time we had together. Unfortunately, she took our boy with her, and I never saw the two of them again. That crushed me,” Cal said, his voice trembling. “A piece of me died when that happened. I still have trouble forgiving myself over what I did to destroy my family life. And God, how I missed that child.

“Last I heard, Grace moved across the country and tried to raise our son with the limited resources she had. I tried to remain in contact with her and help her out, but I knew her heart had been broken, and proud as she was, she’d have nothing to do with me. It truly was the greatest mistake of my life, losing my family. My wife and son brought me such extraordinarily happy moments, which I didn’t see until it was too late. But our greatest mistakes also carry our largest lessons. I’m wiser now. I guess the real trick in life is to turn hindsight into foresight that reveals insight.”

“Nice way to put it, Cal. What I really hear you saying is that it’s important in life to let our past serve us. Is that right?”

“Very well put. That’s it exactly. There’s nothing wrong with making a mistake—that’s how human beings grow. We’re designed to make mistakes, for mistakes carry growth. We just shouldn’t keep repeating the same one. Turn a wound into wisdom, or, as you said, let your past serve you.

“Anyway, after Grace and our son left, I, in turn, went even deeper into myself, closing myself off from the world for a period of years, and becoming deeply involved in self- examination and internal questioning. My passion became my quest to discover who I was as a human being and why my life had unfolded as it did. In a world where most people live on the outside, I lived within. In a world where people run away from their fears, I ran toward them. And what I saw within the deepest parts of me was incredible.”

“Can you share what you saw within yourself?” I inquired eagerly, hanging on Cal’s every word.

“I’ll let you find that out for yourself, son,” he replied, deepening my already burning sense of curiosity. “You know, we all have to do our own interior work. It’s our highest responsibility. To examine yourself and get to know the real you—your true self—and all you are as a human being is the central aim of life. To know more about yourself so you

can be more for the world is the ultimate journey. Genuine success in life is an inside job, you know.”

“I understand completely.”

“What I’ve found is that the best treasures a person will ever discover are those hidden within their heart. The greatest gifts of life are the inner gifts that are only revealed to those with the courage to look beyond the surface of their lives.”

I thought about what he said for a moment. “Unfortunately, Cal, I’ve never been one for personal development. I work for an ad agency, so I spend my days in the corporate world. It’s all about making money and looking good. I’m not proud of the way my world operates, but I’ve learned to play the game. And I play it fairly well. I’ve got a slick car, or at least I had one. I’ve got a hot apartment and cool friends. But at the end of the day, I still don’t feel happy. Something’s missing. I really get what you’re saying about success being an inside job. If I felt good about myself, I know I’d feel a lot better about my life. So where could I start with this ‘interior work,’ as you call it?”

“You can begin by connecting to your mortality, Jack. Thinking about death is very life affirming, you know.”

“Really?”

“Sure. It’s only when we deeply and emotionally connect to the fact that our lives are short and our hours are limited that we can fully live, and give every bit of ourselves to our waking moments. If you had only one year left to live, I bet you’d live very differently than you do right now. You’d make certain that you lived without regrets; you’d take chances; you’d risk opening your heart for love; and you’d live with total passion, great gusto, and a lovely focus on the worthy.”

“What do you mean by a ‘focus on the worthy’?” I asked.

Cal slowly sat up and reached for the pencil that rested on the table beside him.

“Live like this pencil and you’ll have a fine life,” he offered in a confident tone. “Too many of us live our lives like a rounded edge. We need to sharpen our focus and live to the point—just like a pencil. This is how you design and then build an extraordinary experience of life for yourself. The writer Michel Eyquem de Montaigne put it this way: ‘The great and glorious masterpiece of human beings is to live to the point. All other things are at most but inconsiderable props and appendages.’ You see, Jack, most of us live our lives as if we had all the time in the world. We deny ourselves our passions and we postpone our dreams. But life really is a fragile gift, and it needs to be lived right now. Neither of us knows how many tomorrows we have left. Please trust me on this one.”

“I will,” I said sincerely, sensing how important this lesson was for my new friend.

“Focus on the things that truly count in your life. Now that I’m older and wiser, I’ve discovered that the things I once believed to be the big things in life are actually the little things. And all those things that I believed to be the little, insignificant things early on have turned out to be the big things—the things that actually matter the most.”

“And how would I go about connecting to my mortality?”

“Ask yourself The Final Questions,” came the clear reply.

“Yes, son,” Cal replied, clearly pleased by my openness to his philosophy on life. “Once you align yourself with these laws, you’ll access your authentic power. You’ll become a force of nature, and your life will move from a place of struggle into one of ease and flow. All that you’ve ever dreamed of being you will become. You’ll naturally draw into your life all that your heart has ever desired without effort. Your life will begin, to work, almost as if guided by magic.”

I absorbed what he said for a moment, and then said, “I’m wondering exactly where I should start, though. I’ll confess that this is a time of genuine struggle for me. I don’t really know who I am anymore, and I’m just itching to make my life better. I recently ended my relationship with my girlfriend. I can’t stand my job. I never have much money at the end of the month, even though I make a good salary. And I seem to have this deep ache within me that never leaves.”

“Trust that ache, son.”

“What?” I asked, unsure that I’d heard him correctly.

“Trust that ache,” Cal repeated. “I’ve learned from my teachers that only when we go into the feelings and longings that most of us run away from will we find our greatest answers. Our feelings grant us immense wisdom and carry the knowledge of our subconscious minds. And our subconscious minds are our link to the wisdom of the universe. Our conscious thinking is so limited, but our subconscious thinking is infinite.

“You know, most of us deny our feelings. Society has taught us to do that. From a young age, we divorce ourselves from the way we feel. We’re told not to cry, we’re told not to laugh too loud, and we’re told that it’s wrong to feel sad or even to experience our anger. But our feelings are neither right nor wrong—they’re simply our feelings, and an essential part of the human experience. Deny them and you begin to shut down parts of yourself. Keep doing that and you’ll lose the connection to who you truly are. You’ll begin living completely in your head, and you’ll stop feeling.”

Cal stopped for a moment and looked me in the eye. “I’d be willing to bet, Jack, that all you do, all day long, is think, think, think. Your mind is a nonstop chattering machine, and you have no inner peace. You’ve stopped living in the present moment and feeling what it’s like to be fully alive—you’re too busy living in the past or in the future. Did you know that the mind rarely lives in the present moment? It’s always worrying about the past or thinking about the future. But that stuff isn’t real. All that’s real is the moment right in front of you. Don’t miss that moment, because that’s where your life is.”

“So true,” I remarked, letting out a deep sigh. This man’s words reflected the truth—I felt it in my body. “This is all starting to make perfect sense,” I noted. “I wish more people would hear the wisdom you’re sharing with me and open up their eyes to it. The world would be a better place.”

“They’ll get it when they’re ready to get it. As the old saying goes, ‘When the student is ready, the teacher appears.’ You can’t push the river, you know.”

“I guess there’s just too much cynicism in the world today,” I answered. “We don’t believe in the great dreams we had as kids anymore. We don’t believe we have the power to create the lives we want. We don’t think that we can really make a difference by the things we do.”

Cal nodded. “And that’s exactly why so many of us are stuck. We have phenomenal power within us; we’ve just lost our connection to it. Part of the reason for this is fear.

The possibilities available to us in our lives are truly miraculous. The wonders we have the potential to create in our lives, once we align with the force of nature, are astounding—they really are. But all this potential also brings with it certain responsibilities... and this frightens us. So we don’t believe in ourselves. We deny our power and set up blocks to the achievement of the extraordinary lives that we’re meant to lead.”

“It’s almost like we sabotage ourselves. We run away from the very thing we want the most.”

“That’s exactly what we do. We pretend we don’t matter, and we act as if we’re not special. We close our eyes to the way the world really operates, so we don’t trust in these natural laws that govern it. And these laws only come alive in your life once you invest every bit of the trust you have as a human being in them. They don’t work if you don’t believe they will work. To access our best lives, each and every one of us must make some fundamental shifts of the mind. Maybe even more important, we each must make some fundamental shifts of the heart. And that begins by trusting these laws of nature I’ve been telling you about.”

“So first I should trust that these laws work—and then they will?”

“Correct. It’s set up a little like a fireplace. You need to put the logs in before you get the heat. Sitting in front of a logless fireplace just doesn’t get you any warmer. Most people don’t trust—they have no faith in the brilliance of the universe and their lovely role within it. That’s why there’s no magic in their lives. It’s because they fail to understand the way the world operates, and it’s also because they’re no longer leaders.”

I was puzzled by that remark. “What do you mean by that?”

“The starting point of enlightenment, a goal that every person should strive for, is inner leadership. Leadership is far more than something businesspeople do at work. Leadership is all about personal responsibility, self-discovery, and creating value in the world by the people we become. Too many people spend their time blaming others for all that isn’t working in their lives. We blame our spouses for our unhappy home lives; we blame our bosses for our distress at work; we blame strangers on the freeway for making us angry; we blame our parents for keeping us small. Blame, blame, blame, blame. But blaming others is nothing more than excusing yourself. Blaming others for the current quality of your life is a sad way to live. In doing so, all you’re doing is playing the victim.”

“Really?”

“Definitely. Because, in living like that, what you’re essentially saying is that you’re powerless to lead your life. What you’re saying is for your life to change, your spouse must change or your boss must change or the strangers on the freeway must change. That’s a very impotent way to live. Where’s the leadership in that philosophy of life?” Cal observed, his voice growing louder as his intensity increased. “The only way to lift your life to the next level is to act like a leader and assume real leadership over your life. The moment you look in the mirror and say to yourself, from the deepest place within you, ‘For my life to change, I must change’—that’s the moment you’ll grow up and walk through a doorway that will lead you to your best life.”

“Why is that so, I wonder?”

means to be a true leader of your life and live congruently with the natural laws of the world. They’re the masters. I’m only the student.”

Just then, Cal began to cough. It started off in a mild way but quickly grew acute. His face became red, and a line of sweat drizzled down his forehead.

“My God, Cal! Should I call the nurse?” I asked with concern.

“No, I’ll be okay,” he replied, wheezing and looking deathly pale. “I really think I need to get some sleep now. I promise that tomorrow will be a very big day for you—it may even be your biggest day yet. It just might be your new beginning,” he added with suspense, his blue eyes sparkling like stars on a cold winter’s night.

“It’s been really great meeting you, Jack,” Cal continued. “As I say, it was meant to be, this beautiful connection we’ve made. We entered each other’s lives tonight for a reason. That’s just the way the world works,” he said with a smile as he rolled over and pulled the covers over his shoulders, chuckling to himself. “That’s just the way the world works,” he repeated. “Life truly is beautiful.”

The room was silent for a moment.

“Oh, and by the way, son,” he added gently, “I love you.”

Chapter 2: Getting Onto the Path

“To Live In Hearts We Leave Behind Is Not To Die.” — Thomas Campbell

I awoke the next morning with bright sunlight streaming onto my face. I felt much better, and although I knew it would be a while before I would be completely recovered, I had a newfound sense of hope. I realized that, no matter what happened, I’d be okay.

The conversation I’d had the previous night with Cal—a most unique and intriguing man—had left me feeling a joy that I hadn’t experienced in years. His wisdom and philosophy about the way our lives unfold was nothing short of remarkable. And I couldn’t wait for him to introduce me to the three teachers who had transformed his life.

Although I thought it was odd that he’d told me he loved me as he drifted off to sleep, I assumed it was simply another of his practices for living a richer life and showing authentic leadership. I couldn’t wait to continue our dialogue and learn more from this man I’d quickly developed a deep respect for.

“Good morning, Cal,” I said enthusiastically as I stretched like a cat in my standard-issue hospital bed. “This is going to be a great day for us, my friend.”

Cal was facing the other direction and did not respond.

“Hey Cal, it’s already ten o’clock—time to wake up. Don’t make me come over there and get you,” I offered playfully.

But Cal didn’t move. A cramp quickly knotted my gut, my head started to spin, and I feared the worst. “Nurse!” I yelled. “Please, I need some help fast!”

Three nurses sprinted into the room.

“I think something’s wrong with Cal! He was okay last night until he started to cough. He told me he’d be okay, but now it doesn’t seem that he is.”

Cal remained still as the nurses tended to him.

“I really hope he’s okay,” I said, filled with worry.

“Cal’s dead,” the most senior of the three nurses stated. “I’m sorry,” she added with a little more gentleness.

“Cal’s been very sick for a very long time, Jack,” remarked another of the nurses. “His cancer had spread through his body, and we just couldn’t do anything for him. He specifically asked to be brought up here last night—none of us really knew why. It was his final request. And we were more than happy to comply with it.”

“He just said he knew you from a long time ago and he wanted to meet you,” the senior nurse stated. “Cal was always a pretty mysterious man, you know.”

“I know,” I replied. I felt true sadness in my heart over the loss of a person I knew had come into my life as an angel of sorts, guiding my life into a new direction and offering me the new beginning that I’d so longed for.

“Cal was an amazing man,” I said with respect. “I can’t believe he’s dead—in a short time he changed me in a way I’ve yet to fully appreciate.”

“That’s just the way the world works,” all three nurses said in unison, using one of the pet phrases of my departed roommate. They smiled at each other.

“We loved Cal,” one of them offered. “By the way,” she added as the other two covered Cal’s face with a sheet and tenderly wheeled him out of the room, “he left a package for you. We were instructed to give it to you this morning. It was almost as if he knew he would die last night,” she said softly, tears welling up in her eyes. “Let me get it for you.”

Within minutes the nurse returned. She passed me the package, which was covered with ornate wrapping paper that depicted little children swimming and frolicking in the sand. These images had been expertly drawn by hand and colored with crayons. And they were fantastic.

“Would you mind if I open this alone?” I asked the nurse. “I just feel that this is a personal moment for me, and I’d like to experience it by myself. It’ll be my way of honoring Cal.”

“Of course. No sweat,” she replied. “We’re all very sad about Cal, but just let us know if there’s anything we can do for you. We’ll just be down the hallway at the nurses’ station.”

“Thanks.”

I carefully unwrapped the package. I had to remove several layers of tissue paper to get to the gift within. And once I reached it, I was astonished by what I saw.

Neatly placed, one on top of another, were three airline tickets. As I looked more closely, I saw that they were first-class passages to three of the most remarkable places in the world: Rome, Hawaii, and New York City.

about to walk on, and just go into it with the curiosity of a child, knowing that you’ll come out on the other side as a new person, or to be more accurate, far more of the person who you truly are and have been created to be.

I wish I could guide you through all this, but this is a solitary journey that you alone must take. So I wish you well, son. I bless your life. I pray for your success. And I give you all my love.

Your father, Cal Valentine

I was astonished by this note, especially the way it ended. Could Cal have really been the father I never knew? Many questions remained unanswered as a barrage of thoughts rippled through my mind. Where had he been all these years? Why hadn’t he tried to contact me? Why didn’t he tell me who he was in his remaining moments? Should I feel love for him, or anger over the fact that he’d abandoned my mother and me so many years ago? I was completely confused. And I felt all my ancient wounds opening up again. I then looked down at the package, wondering whether the plane tickets were real and if the instructions Cal had provided could be trusted. Would this journey he recommended be safe?

But then something within me began to shift. Cal had been so very kind to me during our brief time together. I sensed that all he wanted to do in his last hours on Earth was to help me, guide me, and teach me. I felt his love and I knew it was true. His wish was for me to take this trip, and I felt compelled to do so. I’d deal with my hurt as the days went by—but I knew I’d be just fine.

As I sat alone in my hospital bed, one word dominated my consciousness at that time: trust. And so I did. I didn’t have to figure everything out right this second. My life was opening up, and I was just going to enjoy the ride. I’d spent far too much time trying to work it all out in the past—planning, thinking, and worrying. The world had presented me with a glorious opportunity, and I felt free to seize it. I told myself that if figuring things out in my head was the way to find the answers I needed to create the extraordinary life I’d always wanted, then I’d have those answers by now.

A voice within me said, “There’s another way to live, Jack. And it’s a far more powerful way to operate. It has nothing to do with figuring things out in your head—it has everything to do with listening to the whispers of the heart. Stop being so busy doing and begin to spend more time just being. Set an intention to align your life with the natural power that runs the world. It’s there that your answers lie.”

I once read a quote from the respected psychologist Abraham Maslow that has never left me. His words were most appropriate for the journey I was about to embark upon. I’d like to share them with you:

“We fear our highest possibilities.... We are generally afraid to become that which we can glimpse in our most perfect moments, under the most perfect conditions, under times of great courage. We enjoy and even thrill in the possibilities we see in ourselves in such peak moments and yet we simultaneously shiver with weakness, awe, and fear before these very same possibilities.”

As I closed my eyes, I felt the sunlight on my face and the rhythmic beating of my heart. I had a knowing inside the core of my being that my life—my best life—was moving toward me. I felt my destiny coming to get me.

Part I: The Saint

Chapter 3: Opening Up to the Way the

World Really Works

“Those who live nobly, even if in their life they live obscurely, need not fear that they will have lived in vain. Something radiates from their lives, some light that shows the way to their friends, their neighbors, perhaps to long future ages.” — Bertrand Russell

“Remember who you are, she said. You’re a master.” — Aniesa Thames

It was springtime, and I was in Rome. It was a beautiful time to be alive. I’d recovered completely from the accident and had never felt better. I’d taken a three-month sabbatical from my position at the advertising agency and had rented my apartment to an old college friend who couldn’t have been happier with her good fortune. I gained completion in the relationship with my former girlfriend, and I’m happy to say that we parted as friends. I was feeling good about my life for the first time in years. And I was ready for an adventure.

The experience I’d had with Cal never left my mind. Ever since our magical meeting, not one day had passed when I didn’t think about him and his wisdom for at least a few moments. His knowledge had sunk deep to my roots, and I’d gained fresh insights on his unique perspectives each and every day since his passing. And I discovered that he proved to be completely worthy of my trust: The first-class ticket to Rome was legitimate, and as he promised, everything about the trip had been arranged splendidly. Cal had clearly given a lot of thought to my personal transformation and had put great care in getting all the details of this unique voyage just right. I could feel his love for me right now.

I can’t believe it—here I am in Rome, with all the time in the world, and nothing but a backpack with a few items of clothing in it to worry about, I thought as I strolled along the narrow cobblestone streets in the older section of the city. There was a sweet smell in the air that made me smile and relax amidst this new environment. I felt as if I were meant to be in this incredible place, where my journey of self-discovery was set to begin. It was almost as if fate had attracted Cal into my life, and destiny had led me to where I stood now. All I could do was stay fully present in the moment and open up to whatever was meant to unfold for me. This was a completely different modus operandi for me, a far cry from the planned and rigid lifestyle that had characterized my days up until the car accident.

And yet, a part of me knew that this new way to be was far more powerful than the old one. My life now seemed to be leading me, and I was ready to enjoy the gifts and savor the surprises. To be even more specific, it was almost as if a set of hidden hands or an invisible force was guiding me in the direction of my highest and most authentic life. It really is hard to explain how this all felt at this time of my life. But I will say that I felt completely at ease and profoundly at peace.

I’ve since come to understand that this force, this invisible power, is the force of nature. It’s the same power that created the stars and gives rise to the sunset. It pulses through every living being and is available to anyone with the awareness to detect it and then align themselves with it.

life’s journey. So the man confronted God with this observation, expressing his disappointment that he was left alone when he most needed help. God lovingly explained that during the painful times, he carried the man.

I was thinking about this very special dream that changed the way the man viewed the world when a powerful voice bellowed from inside of the cathedral: “Jack, you made it! Great to see you here!”

A priest came running out to greet me. He was dressed in his traditional clothing of worship, with a rosary in one hand and a book tied with a bright red bow in the other. He sauntered down the steps and stopped directly in front of me, grinning.

“This is for you, Jack,” he said as he handed me the book. “Cal told me you’d be coming. We’re all set up for your stay. I hope you enjoy this gift—it’s a journal for you to record your insights in. Journaling is a powerful practice for self-change, and I know that you’ll have many observations to note over the course of your stay here.”

“My stay?”

“Yes, my young friend. You’ll be with me here at the cathedral for the next four weeks. I’ll be your life coach, helping you access your highest and best self. I’ll teach you about things such as destiny, authenticity, and integrity. I’ll show you how to access your true power, and I’ll get you to your spirit. We’ll have a great time together!” he exclaimed energetically.

“Thanks—but to be honest, I’m not really a religious person,” I admitted frankly.

“What I have to teach you has nothing to do with religion. Being a spiritual human being is really about being an authentic human being. It’s about living under your noblest personal values, being true in the way you conduct your life, and seeing the world in a more evolved and enlightened way.”

“Okay, I’m definitely into that,” I replied, placing my knapsack on the ground and taking a sip from my water bottle. “I couldn’t be more ready for changes in my life.”

“Perfect. Cal asked me to arrange everything for you, and I gladly obliged. I’m going to teach you about the meaning of life. I’ll explain exactly how to awaken your highest talents, how to access your deepest wisdom, and how to leave a legacy. Basically, I’ll show you how to live with wisdom—how to live a wise life.”

“The first of the Final Questions,” I noted, remembering the three important questions of life that Cal had explained to me during our unforgettable night in the hospital.

“Yes. I’ll see to it that when the time eventually comes for you to ask yourself, ‘Have I lived wisely?’ your answer will be, ‘Absolutely!’ I want you to live so wisely that you’ll die happily. Welcome to Roma!” he yelled with all the emotion and enthusiasm of an Italian opera star. “Forgive me for not introducing myself—I’m Father Michael Antonio Di Franco. My friends call me Father Mike,” he said with a wink.

“Great to meet you, Father Mike. I appreciate your warm welcome,” I stated sincerely, feeling completely comfortable in the company of this small man with the round face and slicked-back hair. “You knew Cal?”

“Oh, yes. Your father was a great man, Jack. A very special human being in so many ways. He told me all about you. Even though you’re a grown man now, you still look

much like the young boy in the photo he used to carry around with him. That’s why it was easy for me to recognize you today.”

“I still find it unbelievable that Cal was my father. Do you know why he left my mom and me? Why didn’t he ever try to contact me? If the man was my father, you’d think he would have tried to find me,” I said with anger welling up within me. “Fathers just don’t forget about their kids.”

“I don’t know a lot about what caused your parents to separate. All he told me was that he and your mother drifted apart after his business fell on difficult times. The sense I get is that your father began to go inward after he lost his fortune, and the way he experienced the world began to shift. I think a time came when the two of them just realized that they were moving in different directions as people. Cal told me that he still loved your mother, but I guess they just decided they had to move on. I can’t imagine how painful that must have been for you, Jack. But you should know that your father was a very loving man. He really cared immensely about people—and he cared the most about you.”

“Thanks for telling me that,” I said quietly. I’d spent so many sleepless nights as a child wondering about my father. He’d missed my Christmas concerts, my school plays, and my soccer games... I felt some solace in knowing that he really did love me.

“Your father nicknamed me ‘The Saint’ because I’ve devoted my life to living in a very noble, wise, and authentic way. He came to me many years earlier to learn the very lessons you’ll soon discover. Cal was a philosopher in the truest sense of the word. He loved to learn and was very committed to deepening himself. And as far as I’m concerned, that’s the best thing a human being can do. Did you know that he took the very journey that you’ve now embarked on? Like father, like son,” he chuckled. “Anyway, I’m so happy that you’re finally here.”

“I’m really excited to be here, too, Father Mike. But to be honest, I’m a little unsure about all of this. Actually, I’ll admit I’m feeling nervous. This has all been a lot to take in a short period of time.”

“I hear you, Jack. I hear you completely. You’re about to learn something new, so it’s natural that your fears are starting to come up, manifesting themselves as this uncertainty and nervousness. But you must trust—after all, isn’t it all about trust? Trust that Cal appeared when you most needed to meet him. Trust that you and I have connected for a special reason. Trust that there’s no better place for you to be than where you are now. And trust that the next four weeks with me will reveal an entirely new way of thinking and being. We can change the way we see the world in an instant, you know. One single shift that takes place in a single second just might be all it takes to awaken a new reality for you.”

“So you’re one of the great teachers that my father spoke of?” I asked as he put his arm around me and walked me up the stone steps of the cathedral.

“Yes, that’s correct. Your dad really was a wonderful man. I know he made mistakes in his life, such as not knowing you and showing you his love, but I’ve yet to meet a perfect human being. The very condition of the human being is one of imperfection, yet I’ve come to understand that we’re actually perfect in our imperfection. If we didn’t have our weaknesses, we’d have nothing to work on as we journeyed through life. As the mystics have said: ‘The path has no value when you have arrived.’ Our less-than-ideal traits are actually precious treasures that offer gateways into higher versions of the people that we currently are.”