LE1 1FZ is a postal code used within the United Kingdom for delivering mail.

Postcodes are made up of two parts. The part before the space (LE1) is called the outward code. The part after the space (1FZ) is called the inward code. The letters C, I, K, M, O and V are not allowed in the inward code. In addition to the inward and outward code, the postcode can be broken up into four parts:

Postal Area. In our case LE which means Leicester.

Postal District. In our case LE1.

Postal Sector. In our case LE1 1F.

Postcode Unit. The last two letters. In our case Z .

The regional mail center for the post area LE is the National Distribution Centre, which is located at Danes Way, NORTHAMPTON, NN6 7DD.

The final port of call for any post addressed to the LE1 1FZ postcode is the local delivery office (DO) which is . Here the post will be sorted ready for delivery.

The properties in the LE1 1FZ postcode have the street address of Charles Street

It is situated within the post town of LEICESTER within the old postal county of Leicestershire.

LE1 1FZ is within the city of Leicester.

The LE1 1FZ postcode area is composed of 0% residential properties, 11.11% commercial properties, and 88.89% public properties.

None Domestic Buildings in LE1 1FZ fall under these categories: .

The LE1 1FZ postcode belongs to a large building, typically reserved for corporate headquarters or sizable organisations receiving over 500 daily mail items. The current occupant is Leicester City Council, City Hall, 115 Charles Street.

Records indicate a Unique Property Reference Number of 2465058391 for this building, classified as a offices.

The Council for this Postcode is City of Leicester Council, who are a Unitary authority. This means that they are responsible for providing education, libraries and maintaining highways as well as normal council duties such as council tax, rubbish collection, housing, environmental health and planning.

You can visit the website for City of Leicester at the following link City of Leicester.

How much is the Council Tax?

City of Leicester Council is responsible for collecting council tax. This will vary depending on which council tax band the property falls within. You can check the council tax band at the gov.uk website.

Once you know the council tax band you can view how much City of Leicester charge for that band by visiting the The Council Tax section of their website.

Planning Applications

When moving house to a new post code it is worth checking out what will be built in the neighbourhood.

Few people want to live next door to a building site, have their garden overlooked or have the views from their property ruined.

Visit the local planning department and search for planning applications in this postcode granted within the last three years or still awaiting a decision. This will give an indication of what could still be built.