Find out how you can access the personal data we hold about you, and how you can apply to access non-confidential information we hold.

Data protection

You have the right to access your personal data held by the council, under the Data Protection Act. We regard your privacy as important, and all of our employees who have access to your personal data are obliged to comply with the act.

Requesting a copy of your personal information is easy. You need to download and complete a request form and provide identification, or apply online through My Account.

You can view full details on how to make a Data Protection Act request.

Please email [email protected] to report a data breach or write to Information Governance, 4th Floor, City Hall, 115 Charles Street, Leicester, LE1 1FZ.

Freedom of information

The Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) introduced a general right of access to all non-confidential information held by public bodies, such as councils.

We already publish a lot of information on our transparency and open data page.

Examples of the types of information requested include statistics, reports, minutes of meetings or council procedures.

Making a request to us is easy and free. You need to put your request in writing, provide sufficient detail for us to find the information you want, and supply a name, address and contact number or email address.

You can view full details on how to make a Freedom of Information Act request.

Policies

Use the links below to access policies:

Public funds

We have a duty to protect public funds we administrate, and may use information you provide us for the prevention and detection of fraud. We may also share this information with partner organisations responsible for auditing or handling public funds for this purpose. for further information, please email [email protected].

If you’re not happy with our service

You can complete our online complaints form, call us on 0116 454 1000, or visit us at any council office. You can also write to us at: Freepost YORKHOUSE (Please title your letter 'Comment, Compliment or Complaint' but do not write anything on the envelope except “Freepost YORKHOUSE” or it will not reach us.

If you have any complaints about how your personal data has been shared, or how your request for information has been handled, please submit your complaint in writing.