Fungi in the genus Cercospora cause crop losses world-wide on many crop species. The wide host range and success of these pathogens has been attributed to the production of a photoactivated toxin, cercosporin. We engineered tobacco for resistance to Cercospora nicotianae utilizing two strategies: 1) transformation with cercosporin autoresistance genes isolated from the fungus, and 2) transformation with constructs to silence the production of cercosporin during disease development. Three C. nicotianae cercosporin autoresistance genes were tested: ATR1 and CFP, encoding an ABC and an MFS transporter, respectively, and 71cR, which encodes a hypothetical protein. Resistance to the pathogen was identified in transgenic lines expressing ATR1 and 71cR, but not in lines transformed with CFP. Silencing of the CTB1 polyketide synthase and to a lesser extent the CTB8 pathway regulator in the cercosporin biosynthetic pathway also led to the recovery of resistant lines. All lines tested expressed the transgenes, and a direct correlation between the level of transgene expression and disease resistance was not identified in any line. Resistance was also not correlated with the degree of silencing in the CTB1 and CTB8 silenced lines. We conclude that expression of fungal cercosporin autoresistance genes as well as silencing of the cercosporin pathway are both effective strategies for engineering resistance to Cercospora diseases where cercosporin plays a critical role.

Cercosporoid fungi include a large number of mostly plant pathogenic fungi with a wide geographic distribution, being usually associated with leaf spots on a broad range of plant hosts. Here we initiate a series of studies on Chinese cercosporoid fungi, focussing on the identification of some common, rare and new plant diseases caused by these leaf-spotting ascomycetes. The aim of the series is to resolve the taxonomy and DNA phylogeny of this important group of phytopathogens in China. In this study, nine isolates of cercosporoid fungi were collected from five host species. Partial nucleotide sequence data of four gene loci (ITS, LSU, TUB and tef1-α rDNA) were generated for all isolates. Based on morphological characters in vivo and in vitro and phylogenetic data, a new species, Pseudocercospora pauciseptata (on living leaves of Pyracantha fortuneana), is introduced including a detailed description, illustration and comparison with similar species. In addition, Passalora circumscissa, Pseudocercospora cercidis-chinensis, P. lindericola, and P. prunicola are described, illustrated and phylogenetically characterized. Cerasus pseudocerasus represents a new host record for Passalora circumscissa in China, while Lindera reflexa is a new host for P. lindericola.

The paper presents characteristics of cercosporoid fungal species from three genera, Cercospora, Passalora, and Pseudocercospora, occurring in Poland and deposited in Polish herbaria or to be expected due to the occurrence of their host plants in the Polish flora. The physiographic literature, but primarily own collections, as well as those gathered in the national herbaria, were the object of the revision. This monograph provides morphological descriptions, lists of hosts and distribution in Poland and worldwide as well as detailed illustrations for 41 species. Dichotomous keys for identification of fungi parasitizing hosts from different plant families were prepared within the individual fungal genera. The present study represents a compilation of 115 cercosporoid species, of which 63 are reported from Poland and another 6 were doubtful and excluded. The fungi parasitize 221 taxa of host plants from 131 genera and 47 families, out of which 158 taxa from 94 genera and 29 families have been actually found in Poland. Fourteen species described in this book belong to Cercospora apii s. l. Nine quarantine species are listed, from which only three have been published so far. This study will be helpful to mycologists, plant pathologist, and Polish plant protection services for identification purposes of the fungi concerned.

This study considers the influence of temperature, incubation time and virulence in the production of the toxin cercosporin by Cercospora coffeicola, the causal agent of brown eye spot in coffee. The area under the progress curve of cercosporin production (AUPCCP) was also evaluated. A pathogenicity test was performed in a group with 58 isolates of C. coffeicola, which allowed the selection of four isolates, two representing the highest (LFP 12 and LFP 59) and two the lowest (LFP 24 and LFP 43) severity groups. The four isolates were cultivated in potato dextrose agar (PDA) and incubated in growth chambers at different temperatures (15, 20, 25 and 30°C) for 20 days. The experiments were conducted in a randomized complete block design with four replications. The cercosporin production decreased in all tested isolates at 30°C, resulting in a lower AUPCCP. The higher values of cercosporin were obtained at 20 and 25°C between 8 and 12 days of incubation. The isolates that produced the highest and lowest cercosporin concentrations were LFP 12 and LFP 43, respectively. After 15 days of incubation, toxin production is practically null in all isolates independently of the incubation temperature. Thus, the hypothesis for quantification of cercosporin production as a variability parameter within the species is suggested.

Cercosporin has excellent properties of photosensitization that have been widely used in organophotocatalyst and photodynamic therapy as well as an antimicrobial agent. Therefore, there is a need to quantify it accurately with accessible methods. A comparative analysis of cercosporin quantification obtained by spectrophotometry (SPEC) and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was performed for nineteen Cercospora coffeicola isolates from different coffee-producing municipalities in Brazil. Image analysis of cercosporin crystals was performed in isolates with either high or low production of the toxin. Our results show that SPEC and HPLC are equally valid for the cercosporin evaluation of C. coffeicola cultures grown in vitro. The isolates with high cercosporin production had a higher crystal number and size when compared to the one with low cercosporin production.