The generic types of four genera with unclear placement in Dothideomycetes were re-examined. These genera were hitherto poorly illustrated or described. The type specimens of Cocconia (C. palmae), Dianesea (D. palmae), Endococcus (E. rugulosus) and Lineostroma (L. banksiae), were re-examined in order to determine their familial and higher level placements, according to their morphology and based on modern taxonomic concepts. A resume of the history along with descriptions and illustrations of these genera are provided. Endococcus and Lineostroma are placed in families Lichenotheliaceae and Didymosphaeriaceae, respectively, based on morphology. The placement of Cocconia within Parmulariaceae is confirmed. Dianesea is retained in Dothideomycetes genera incertae sedis as it is not typical of any existing family of Dothideomycetes. Fresh collections of these genera are needed for further study, so that they can be epitypified and molecular data is needed to validate their phylogeny and natural classification.

This is the seventh of a series of papers in which we report on re-examination of herbarium types of Dothideomycetes genera, incertae sedis. By examining and re-describing the generic types which are not previously illustrated or are poorly described, we attempt to propose their familial and higher placement according to the morphology based on modern taxonomic concepts. In this paper the type specimens of Allosoma, Austropleospora, Dangeardiella, Griggsia and Karschia were re-examined and are illustrated. An overview of the history and descriptions and illustrations of these genera are provided. Based on morphological similarities, Allosoma is placed in Englerulaceae, while Austropleosporaand Karschia are transferred to Pleosporaceae, and Lichenotheliaceae, respectively. Dangeardiellais classified in Pleosporales, genera incertae sedis, while Griggsia is placed in Sordariomycetes, generaincertae sedisas it is not typical of any existing family of Dothideomycetes as it has unitunicate asci. Recollection, epitypifycation and multi-gene molecular analyses are needed for all type species of these genera in order to resolve their familial status. By illustrating and redescribing the type species, we expect to stimulate interest for these fungi to be recollected, sequenced and placed in a natural taxonomic framework in the Ascomycota.

The ascomycetous families, Didymosphaeriaceae and Montagnulaceae, have been treated in Pleosporales, Dothideomycetes, and both include saprobes, endophytes and pathogens associated with a wide variety of substrates worldwide. Didymosphaeriaceae was characterized by 1-septate ascospores and trabeculate pseudoparaphyses, mainly anastomosing above the asci, while species in Montagnulaceae had 1 to multi-septate ascospores and generally cellular pseudoparaphyses. In recent treatments, Bimuria, Didymocrea, Kalmusia, Karstenula, Montagnula, Paraphaeosphaeria, Paraconiothyrium and Letendraea were placed in Montagnulaceae, while only Didymosphaeria has been placed in Didymosphaeriaceae. New morphological and molecular data from recent collections have become available and thus the understanding of the families can be improved. Based on analyses of concatenated internal transcribed spacer (ITS) with LSU, SSU and β-tubulin gene sequences, the taxonomy of the genera classified in these families are re-assessed. Our phylogenetic analyses conclude that, the recently introduced Didymosphaeria rubi-ulmifolii with Paraconiothyrium brasiliense species complex, Alloconiothyrium, Bimuria, Deniquelata, Didymocrea, Kalmusia, Karstenula, Letendraea, Montagnula, Neokalmusia, Paraconiothyrium, Paraphaeosphaeria, Phaeodothis and Tremateia, forms a robust clade named here Didymosphaeriaceae. We therefore synonymize Montagnulaceae under Didymosphaeriaceae which is the oldest name and has priority and provide a new account of the family. Didymosphaeria is represented by Didymosphaeria rubi-ulmifolii. A new genus, Neokalmusia, is introduced in the family to accommodate the bambusicolous taxa Kalmusia brevispora and K. scabrispora. This introduction is based on molecular data coupled with morphology. One new species, Paraconiothyrium magnoliae and the sexual morph of Paraconiothyrium fuckelii, is also introduced. Julella and Barria are assigned to the family based on morphological similarity with Didymosphaeriaceae. Wilmia (previously referred to the Phaeosphaeriaceae) is synonymized under Letendraea (Didymosphaeriaceae). Furthermore, a new species, Letendraea cordylinicola, is introduced and placed in Didymosphaeriaceae based on phylogeny and morphology. The paraphyletic nature of Paraconiothyrium is partially resolved, but further sampling with fresh collections and molecular data of species in this genus are needed to obtain a natural classification. Keywords: Didymosphaeriaceae Montagnulaceae new species Phylogeny rDNA β-tubulin

Article 59.1, of the International Code of Nomenclature for Algae, Fungi, and Plants (ICN; Melbourne Code), which addresses the nomenclature of pleomorphic fungi, became effective from 30 July 2011. Since that date, each fungal species can have one nomenclaturally correct name in a particular classification. All other previously used names for this species will be considered as synonyms. The older generic epithet takes priority over the younger name. Any widely used younger names proposed for use, must comply with Art. 57.2 and their usage should be approved by the Nomenclature Committee for Fungi (NCF). In this paper, we list all genera currently accepted by us in Dothideomycetes (belonging to 23 orders and 110 families), including pleomorphic and nonpleomorphic genera. In the case of pleomorphic genera, we follow the rulings of the current ICN and propose single generic names for future usage. The taxonomic placements of 1261 genera are listed as an outline. Protected names and suppressed names for 34 pleomorphic genera are listed separately. Notes and justifications are provided for possible proposed names after the list of genera. Notes are also provided on recent advances in our understanding of asexual and sexual morph linkages in Dothideomycetes. A phylogenetic tree based on four gene analyses supported 23 orders and 75 families, while 35 families still lack molecular data.

Sordariomycetes is one of the largest classes of Ascomycota that comprises a highly diverse range of fungi characterized mainly by perithecial ascomata and inoperculate unitunicate asci. The class includes many important plant pathogens, as well as endophytes, saprobes, epiphytes, coprophilous and fungicolous, lichenized or lichenicolous taxa. They occur in terrestrial, freshwater and marine habitats worldwide. This paper reviews the 107 families of the class Sordariomycetes and provides a modified backbone tree based on phylogenetic analysis of four combined loci, with a maximum five representative taxa from each family, where available. This paper brings together for the first time, since Barrs’ 1990 Prodromus, descriptions, notes on the history, and plates or illustrations of type or representative taxa of each family, a list of accepted genera, including asexual genera and a key to these taxa of Sordariomycetes. Delineation of taxa is supported where possible by molecular data. The outline is based on literature to the end of 2015 and the Sordariomycetes now comprises six subclasses, 32 orders, 105 families and 1331 genera. The family Obryzaceae and Pleurotremataceae are excluded from the class.