Update: Beyond Good & Evil

Some details and screenshots from UbiSoft's beautiful BG&E.

UbiSoft's Beyond Good and Evil, which has been in development for three years, received high praise indeed when it was shown at this year's E3. Tha graphically lush and vast game worlds unfold in a game that's as much a work of art, as an intricately crafted videogame.

Based on an original idea by Rayman creator Michel Ancel, and developed by Ubi Soft's in-house studios, this title blends an ambitious, fluid new gaming experience with an epic storyline. BG&E boasts a strange and ever-changing universe - a place "beyond earthly imagination" that spans the galaxy and mines the very soul of Jade herself.

The vast, peaceful planet of Hyllis has fallen under siege by a relentless alien race. After a desperate struggle to defend her island, a Hyllian named Jade collapses in exhaustion - only to be tormented by disturbing visions. Despite public assurances that the planet has been secured, Jade begins to suspect that there's more to these invasions than the government has disclosed. When a rebel organization reinforces her doubts, Jade begins a harrowing journey to get to the core of the conspiracy.

Armed with her camera, aikido staff, and resolute investigative skills, Jade sets out to expose the truth and to liberate the minds of her deceived people. Pushed to the very edge of her physical and spiritual will, she soon discovers that even these limits are not what they seem. Her quest for the truth knows no bounds.

Diverse gameplay styles blend into one uniquely fluid and immersive experience, utilising the 'Jade' engine, built especially for Beyond Good & Evil to exploit a boundless quest with diverse gameplay and freedom of movement. Ubi are promising a mysterious, gripping saga where nothing is as it seems and unraveling the truth is the only hope of restoring freedom.

BG&E is released on all formats in November. Stick with Kikizo as we follow the progress of this highly promising videogame.