Oct 31, 2018 | 2:04 PM

Andrew Kooman, the Red Deer-born author and playwright, will be releasing the second novel in his YA series “The Battle for Acchora” on November 29.

The new book is is part of Kooman’s Ten Silver Coins series.

“After a nine-year wait, it’s finally time to release Book Two,” says Kooman, who looks forward to the day when his now two-year-old son will be able to read the adventure series.

“As kids growing up, my parents always had books around and we read stories out loud together— around the dinner table and before bed. I’m excited to contribute to the tradition of work that allows families to read stories aloud together and to help them create lifelong memories.”

Kooman says Ten Silver Coins: The Battle for Acchora is perfect for families, readers’ groups and book clubs that enjoy talking about adventure, the meaning of life, and what it means to be courageous in the world.

“This is a book series that children of all ages and adults young at heart will love,” Kooman says. “Readers can expect another adventure story that’s filled with thrills.”

Kooman returned to the series after diversions into other creative pursuits, including stage plays that saw his work appear off-Broadway, tour Canada, and that helped to raise hundreds of thousands of dollars for charity in Central Alberta.

Between writing the two YA novels, Kooman also wrote and produced his first feature film, the Alberta-made She Has A Name from his production company Unveil Studios which he runs alongside brothers Matthew and Daniel Kooman. The film has garnered acclaim and awards since its release in 2016.

The new novel picks up right where Book One left off, as the young heroine Jill Strong escapes with the mysterious Drylings from their hiding place in a once dormant volcano into the land of Acchora.

Two refugees who are discovered on the slope of the burning mountain and a mysterious visitor from a far-away land reveal a nation split into factions.

The battle for Acchora is a fight not only for survival but for the future. Even though Jill is an outsider caught up in the middle of the drama, without her, the battle for Acchora could be lost.

The print edition of the book is available for pre-order at www.andrewkooman.com. Both digital and print editions will ship on November 29.

(Troy Gillard)