Jan Montyn was a Dutch artist, specialized in etching. He was best known for his paintings of wars to which he had been an eyewitness.

Jan Montyn was born on November 13, 1924, in Oudewater, Utrecht, The Netherlands. His birth geographical coordinates are 52° 1’ 30” North latitude and 4° 52’ 5” East longitude. Jan Montyn passed away at the age of 90 in 2015.

Astrologically, Jan Montyn falls under the Sun sign of Scorpio, with Capricorn as his Ascendant, Gemini as his Moon sign, and Gemini as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Scorpio Moon Gemini Ascendant Capricorn Midheaven Scorpio Mercury Sagittarius Venus Libra Mars Pisces Jupiter Sagittarius Saturn Scorpio Uranus Pisces Neptune Leo Pluto Cancer Ceres Aries Chiron Aries Eros Capricorn Hygiea Taurus Juno Scorpio Pallas Pisces Vesta Aquarius Black Moon Lilith Gemini North Node Leo South Node Aquarius Part of Fortune Leo Vertex Virgo

Sunin Scorpio20° 51’ 1”

The Sun in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you enigmatic and sexually expressive. You are empowered and self-confident. You seek unique ways to express […] Read more »

Moonin Gemini12° 27’ 57”

The Moon in Gemini in the Natal Chart makes you lighthearted and compassionate. You are playful and use your creativity to help inspire others. You […] Read more »

Ascendantin Capricorn25° 44’ 51”

The Capricorn Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you responsible. You have the appearance of someone reliable and mature. Others look to you for guidance […] Read more »

Midheavenin Scorpio29° 23’ 51”

Scorpio Midheaven in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for uncanny wit and instincts that help you thrive in your career. You rise to […] Read more »

Mercuryin Sagittarius1° 32’ 5”

Mercury in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart indicates a gregarious and loving personality. You are idealistic and have a strong sense of conviction. You are […] Read more »

Venusin Libra13° 1’ 4”

Libra Venus in the Natal Chart makes you attractive and loving. You are optimistic and enjoy bringing out the best in others. You are attractive […] Read more »

Marsin Pisces10° 10’ 24”

Pisces Mars in the Natal Chart makes you imaginative and dreamy. You are expressive and loving, showing your unique talents through the arts and humanities. […] Read more »

Jupiterin Sagittarius22° 17’ 20”

Sagittarius Jupiter in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation that values spiritual growth and expansion. You are a truth-seeker and are […] Read more »

Saturnin Scorpio7° 2’ 10”

Is Saturn in Scorpio good or bad? Scorpio Saturn in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a generation obsessed with security and power. […] Read more »

Uranusin Pisces17° 40’ 16”

Pisces Uranus in the Natal Chart is a generational placement indicating people born at this time are on a Karmic mission to bring breakthroughs in […] Read more »

Neptunein Leo22° 33’ 22”

Leo Neptune in the Natal Chart makes you eager to bring healing and compassion to others. You are artistic and passionate about your dreams. You […] Read more »

Plutoin Cancer13° 22’ 47”

Pluto in Cancer in the Natal Chart indicates a generation with powerful intuition and desires. You are part of a social group obsessed with re-evaluating […] Read more »

Ceresin Aries29° 29’ 1”

Ceres in Aries in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a generation obsessed with comforting and helping others. You are motivated and can […] Read more »

Chironin Aries21° 6’ 42”

Aries Chiron in the Natal Chart brings passion and persuasiveness. You help others heal from old wounds by showing your strength and tapping into your […] Read more »

Erosin Capricorn6° 37’ 35”

What does Eros in Capricorn mean for your personality? You are comforting and sensual. You are affectionate and can be gentle and romantic. You have […] Read more »

Hygieain Taurus13° 10’ 45”

Hygiea in Taurus in the Natal Chart indicates a desire to pursue beauty and strength. You are helpful and use your nurturing gifts to encourage […] Read more »

Junoin Scorpio15° 30’ 48”

Juno in Scorpio in the Natal Chart indicates a desire for love and intimacy. You are passionate about sharing your insights and can be persuasive […] Read more »

Pallasin Pisces2° 11’ 12”

Pallas in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you a generous and compassionate leader. You mentor others and can help create a path to success. […] Read more »

Vestain Aquarius26° 26’ 8”

Vesta in Aquarius in the Natal Chart indicates a unique perspective. You can be rebellious and devoted to breaking tradition. You are passionate about your […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Gemini26° 19’ 14”

Gemini Black Moon Lilith makes you dramatic and eager to push boundaries. You can fall for extreme ideas and are attracted to taboo and unconventional […] Read more »

North Nodein Leo18° 11’ 58”

Leo North Node in the Natal Chart indicates you are passionate about overcoming obstacles. You pursue your destiny with zeal and energy. You are determined […] Read more »

South Nodein Aquarius18° 11’ 58”

Aquarius South Node in the Natal Chart makes you adept at embracing change. You may panic and disappear when relationships become too serious. Your lesson […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Leo17° 21’ 47”

The Part of Fortune in Leo in the Natal Chart makes you prosperous. You are attracted to wealth and attain status. You can manifest your […] Read more »

Vertexin Virgo3° 23’ 32”

Virgo Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you considerate and charming. You are thoughtful and intelligent, with a gift for accomplishing your mission quickly. You […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Ninth House Moon Fourth House Mercury Tenth House Venus Eighth House Mars First House Jupiter Eleventh House Saturn Ninth House Uranus First House Neptune Seventh House Pluto Sixth House Ceres Second House Chiron Second House Eros Twelfth House Hygiea Third House Juno Ninth House Pallas First House Vesta First House Black Moon Lilith Fifth House North Node Seventh House South Node First House Part of Fortune Seventh House Vertex Seventh House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 23 major aspects, alongside 11 minor aspects, as well as 4 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Venus Square Pluto Jupiter Trine Neptune Moon Trine Venus Sun Square Neptune Moon Square Mars Mercury Conjunct Midheaven Sun Trine Uranus Neptune Quincunx Ascendant Venus Quincunx Mars Mars Trine Saturn Mars Trine Pluto Ascendant Sextile Midheaven Uranus Trine Pluto Sun Sextile Ascendant Moon Square Uranus Venus Quincunx Uranus Jupiter Square Uranus Uranus Quincunx Neptune Mercury Sextile Ascendant Saturn Trine Pluto Sun Trine Pluto Neptune Square Midheaven Mars Conjunct Uranus

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Jan Montyn’s life journey.

Moon Trine Venusorb: 1°

When the Moon trines Venus in a Natal Chart, this can create an open, honest, and nurturing personality. Someone with this aspect in their chart […] Read more »

Sun Square Neptuneorb: 2°

The Sun square Neptune in the Natal Chart makes you dreamy and mystical. Yet you aren’t open to expressing your unique traits because you are […] Read more »

Moon Square Marsorb: 2°

The Moon square Mars in a Natal Chart typically indicates that a person has a high emotional attachment to their needs and desires. They gain […] Read more »

Mercury Conjunct Midheavenorb: 2°

Mercury conjunct Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you intellectual and outgoing. Your career brings opportunities to express your creativity and intelligence. You are thoughtful […] Read more »

Sun Trine Uranusorb: 3°

The Sun trine Uranus in the Natal Chart makes you shocking and eccentric. You are individualistic and balk against anything that stifles you. You are […] Read more »

Venus Quincunx Marsorb: 3°

Venus quincunx Mars in a chart typically indicates a person has a strong desire to look good to the people around them. They might be […] Read more »

Sun Sextile Ascendantorb: 5°

The Sun sextile Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you friendly and entertaining. You have a gift for sharing your creative talents. Being around friends […] Read more »

Moon Square Uranusorb: 5°

The Moon square Uranus in a Natal Chart creates a tie between emotions and chaos. Someone with this square in their chart likely seeks out […] Read more »

Venus Quincunx Uranusorb: 5°

Venus quincunx Uranus in a chart typically indicates that someone might have commitment issues, even though they often want to have a relationship and eventually […] Read more »

Uranus Quincunx Neptuneorb: 5°

Uranus quincunx Neptune in a chart creates conflict between Neptune’s idealism and Uranus’ eccentricity. They may feel they are being pulled back and forth by […] Read more »

Sun Trine Plutoorb: 7°

The Sun trine Pluto in a Natal Chart makes you self-assured and intense. You have a magnetic personality and exude charm. You may be mysterious […] Read more »

Mars Conjunct Uranusorb: 7°

Mars conjunct Uranus in a chart typically brings creativity and a vibrant, attractive energy. People with this conjunction in their Natal Chart are passionate, rebellious, […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Sun Quincunx Chiron Ceres Quincunx Midheaven Venus Quincunx Hygiea Saturn Sextile Eros Uranus Quincunx Part of Fortune Pluto Sextile Hygiea Ascendant Quincunx Black Moon Lilith Mercury Square Pallas Jupiter Trine Chiron Uranus Quincunx North Node Neptune Trine Chiron

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Jan Montyn’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Sun Quincunx Chironorb: 0°

The Sun quincunx Chiron in the Natal Chart makes you miss opportunities because you hold yourself back. What is Chiron in astrology? This asteroid is […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Vesta Trine Black Moon Lilith Pallas Opposite Vertex North Node Conjunct Part of Fortune South Node Opposite Part of Fortune

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Jan Montyn’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

South Node Opposite Part of Fortuneorb: 1°

The South Node opposite the Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you eager to move beyond familiar terrain. You have an adventurous spirit […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.