Plaid Cymru's manifesto is a long document, running to 126 pages in its English version.

Launched on Wednesday, it says a Plaid Cymru government would set Wales on a "new path" towards the party's vision of transforming the nation by 2030.

At its heart is a pledge to hold an independence referendum.

Plaid would likely need to be at least the largest party after the Senedd election for that to happen. Short of a referendum, the party calls for more powers to be handed to Cardiff among a broad plan of policies.

The manifesto promises an independence referendum in the first five year term, with a national commission to oversee the process of drafting a Welsh constitution.

Such a poll would be subject to negotiation with the UK government, but Plaid says it would legislate for a Welsh Self-Determination Act to pave the way for it.

Plaid says it would establish a distinct Welsh legal jurisdiction, and "introduce an order" to seek "immediate devolution of power" over things that are in the control, of Westminster, like broadcasting, welfare and rail.

Powers over what is and is not devolved rest with Westminster.

WALES ELECTION: THE BASICS

What elections are happening? On 6 May, people across Wales will vote to elect 60 Members of the Senedd (MSs). The party or parties that can command the support of a majority of members will form the Welsh government. Find out more here.

What powers does the Welsh Parliament have? MSs pass laws on many aspects of day-to-day life in Wales, such as health, education and transport. They also have control over some taxes. Defence, foreign policy and immigration are decided by the UK Parliament.

How do I vote? Anyone who lives in Wales and is registered to vote is eligible, so long as they are aged 16 or over on the day of the election. You can register to vote online, external.

Plaid Cymru promises to reduce carbon emissions in Wales to net-zero levels by 2035, including that all electricity generated is renewable by 2035.

It says that target date may have to change if, by the end of the decade, Wales is still reliant on decisions in Westminster.

The document also pledges to:

Plaid says it wants to "permanently end rough sleeping" through a rapid rehousing policy.

It says it would create 50,000 new homes over five years - including 30,000 council houses or other social housing, 5,000 cost rental homes at intermediate rent, and 15,000 "genuinely affordable" homes to buy.

Other pledges include:

Plaid promises to introduce a "Welsh Language Education Act to give every child the gift of fluency in Welsh".

It would put more funding into plans for a million Welsh speakers by 2050, making it a central part of government able to influence policy decisions.

The party would also set a target of 1,000 new Welsh language spaces, including cultural spaces and workplaces.

Plaid says it will help prepare a bid for Wales to take part as a nation in its own right in the Eurovision song contest.

It says it would set up a dedicated National Gallery of Contemporary Art outside of Cardiff, and would support proposals to develop Cyfarthfa Castle and Park at Merthyr Tydfil "into a national centre for industrial heritage".

The party pledged to create a Welsh Freelancers Fund "to support a corps of 1,000 freelance workers to work within the community and in schools, backed by a basic income of £1,000 a month for two years".