Plaid Cymru has launched a manifesto based around more devolution and a fight to protect funding and rights after Brexit, with its leader, Leanne Wood, saying only her party can protect Wales against an otherwise dominant Conservative government.

The 51-page manifesto, titled Action Plan 2017, calls for Wales to maintain free trading links with the rest of Europe after departure from the EU, and for guarantees over the £680m of annual funding a year from EU sources.

It also seeks a unilateral pledge on the rights of overseas Europeans living and working in Wales, and a proper post-Brexit deal for Welsh agriculture and industry.

In other areas the manifesto seeks more capital investment and better transport links, local powers in areas including benefits and taxation, a green energy programme and the scrapping of the Trident nuclear submarine replacement.

In her written introduction to the document, Wood said the election in Wales was “a straight fight between Plaid and the Tories”. Referring to Labour’s plummeting poll numbers, she added: “People in Wales are facing a tidal wave of attacks from the Conservatives. We can no longer hide behind the crumbling wall of Labour.”

Speaking at Penygraig in Rhondda to unveil the manifesto, Wood said Welsh voters should pick Plaid as a bulwark against an otherwise dominant Conservatives under Theresa May.

“We face grave risks ahead of this election – our farming, our communities, even our very identity as a nation,” she said. “All of that is under threat from a Tory party that can only be described as cruel and reckless.”

In the event of a May win, Wood warned “jobs will be jeopardised, our tourism and farming industries plunged into uncertainty and our public services targeted”, while existing devolved powers would face “a Westminster power-grab”.

She was disparaging about Labour’s efforts: “Labour is broken – too weak and too divided to stop them. They have abandoned ship and are now fighting over who gets the life rafts.

“Labour’s Welsh MPs, who are asking for Welsh votes, refuse to even name their own party leader. They’ve disowned the Labour manifesto and are recycling policies from the last assembly election.

“The left hand doesn’t know what the right hand is doing. Labour isn’t a party which has any hope of defending Wales.”

Plaid Cymru, which won three seats in the 2015 election, is fielding 40 candidates across Wales on 8 June.

Its manifesto calls for a new commission to more fairly distribute central funds across the UK, to avoid Wales losing out, and powers to set its own rates of taxes including corporation tax, VAT and air passenger duty.

On transport the manifesto seeks a £7.5bn investment programme, saying, arguing that Wales is, in particular, losing out to England over investment in new high-speed rail links.

On the health service, the manifesto promises to “hold the leave campaign to account and push for our share of the £350m promised to the NHS after leaving the European Union”.

Devolved social security powers would see Plaid seek to ban private firms from carrying out benefits assessments, and scrapping the so-called bedroom tax, and the “rape clause” connected to the two-child limit on child tax credit payments.

A renewable energy plan would involve tidal lagoons in Swansea Bay, Cardiff and Colwyn Bay.