Tom Hanks is a person whose name is associated with the words "talent" and "greatness." He knows how to play his characters so truthfully that it is impossible to doubt his sincerity. What secrets does the life of this incredible actor hide?

The actor has been at the top of the Hollywood community for many years and is considered one of the most pleasant personalities in the movie industry.

Tom Hanks profile summary

Full name: Thomas Jeffrey Hanks

Date of birth: July 9th, 1956

Age: 62 years old

Birthplace: Concord, California, USA

Marital status: Samantha Lewes (1978-1987), Rita Wilson (from 1988)

Nationality: American

Height: 183 centimetres (6 feet)

Profession: Actor, filmmaker

Net worth: $350 million

Social networks: Instagram, Twitter, Facebook

Tom Hanks age and bio

Tom Hanks biography is exciting. He was born in Concord, California, in a family of a hospital worker Janet Marylyn and an itinerant cook Amos Mefford Hanks. His mother is of Portuguese descent, and his father's — of British. When the boy was 5 years old, his parents divorced. Tom, along with his older sister and brother, was raised by Amos. The youngest child, Jim, stayed with his mother in Red Bluff, California. The father often moved with the children from place to place, until they finally settled in Oakland, where Hanks attended Skyline High School.

READ ALSO: Keanu Reeves net worth, relationships, girlfriends and gay rumors

After graduation, the guy went to Chabot College in Hayward. His decision to study drama at California State University in Sacramento was influenced by the work of the American playwright Eugene O'Neal. In 1977, he was invited to participate in the summer session of the Great Lakes Theater Festival in Cleveland, Ohio. A year later, he won the Cleveland Critics Circle Award for the best male role in the comedy The Two Gentlemen of Verona. The next few years, Tom spent every summer in various productions of Shakespeare's plays, and winter — working behind the scenes of the theatre troupe in Sacramento.

His list of movies is impressive. By the beginning of the 80s, after the third season of the Shakespeare Festival, Hanks moved to New York. After many auditions, he got a small role in the horror film He Knows You're Alone.

Tom was noticed by ABC authorities and played one of the leading roles in the television comedy series Bosom Buddies, even though the sitcom lasted only two seasons. Director Ron Howard invited Tom to his romantic comedy Splash with Daryl Hannah. The film became a hit almost immediately. Bachelor Party, The Man with One Red Shoe, Volunteers, The Money Pit, and Nothing in Common were also highly evaluated by viewers.

In 1988, the film Big directed by Penny Marshall appeared on the screens, where Hanks played a 13-year-old boy in the body of a 35-year-old body male. Both viewers and critics liked the film, and Tom received his first nomination from the American Film Academy for Best Actor. The following projects were less successful but revealed a wide range of Hank's talents: the crime comedy Turner & Hooch, Joe Versus the Volcano, and drama The Bonfire of the Vanities by Brian De Palma, etc.

In 1993, the actor starred in two films that became hits: in the romantic comedy Sleepless in Seattle with Meg Ryan and the drama Philadelphia by Jonathan Demme, which earned him an Oscar for the best male role. The following year, Tom starred in Forrest Gump by Robert Zemeckis. The film had a striking box office sales and won 6 Oscar awards. Tom Hanks became the first person in 50 years to receive the statuette twice in such a short time.

In 1995, the actor again starred with Ron Howard, in the historical drama Apollo 13. In the same year, Hanks' directing and screenwriting debut, That Thing You Do!, came out on screens. The following projects with his participation had tremendous success: the war drama Saving Private Ryan by Steven Spielberg, the romantic comedy You've Got Mail with Meg Ryan, the drama based on Stephen King's The Green Mile by Frank Darabont, the robinsonade cast Away by Robert Zemeckis, Road to Perdition by Sam Mendes and Steven Spielberg's biographical drama Catch Me If You Can with Leonardo DiCaprio.

In the 1990s, the actor had an impressive list of box office sales. He became a respected and in-demand actor in Hollywood. In 2002, the American Film Institute awarded Hanks an award for outstanding achievements, and he became the youngest actor to receive this honour.

In 2004, Tom starred in several films: in the crime comedy of the Coen brothers The Ladykillers, in the drama The Terminal by Steven Spielberg and the computer-animated adventure film The Polar Express. Hanks played the leading role in the long-awaited adaptation of Dan Brown's best-selling book The Da Vinci Code with Audrey Tautou. After the biographical comedy-drama Charlie Wilson's War, he returned to the role of Robert Langdon in the sequel Angels & Demons.

Tom Hanks had proven himself as a director and screenwriter in 2011 in the melodrama Larry Crowne. The fantastic Cloud Atlas film appeared on the screens a year later. Then came two films: Saving Mr. Banks and Captain Phillips. In 2015, we could see the actor in Steven Spielberg's historical drama Bridge of Spies.

Tom Hanks net worth is estimated to be $350 million.

How tall is Tom Hanks? Many fans want to know the answer to this question. Tom Hanks height is 183 centimetres or 6 feet.

Tom Hanks children

Tom Hanks is one of the few famous actors in Hollywood who does not give a reason for the yellow press to write something controversial about him. The actor is a wonderful family man, caring husband and father.

In 1978, he married a classmate from the University of California, Samantha Lewis. Being a new face in Hollywood, but they later divorced. Nevertheless, they gave birth to two children. Colin was born in 1977. He followed his father's footsteps and is also a successful actor now. Tom Hanks daughter Elizabeth was born in 1982.

In 1988, the actor married once again. This time actress Rita Wilson became his wife. The couple has two sons — Truman Theodore and Chester Marlon.

Tom Hanks is a great actor of the past and present. He is an amazing actor who pleases his fans with his unrivalled acting. This man is so talented that he can portray almost anyone. We hope to watch many more masterpieces with this legendary actor in the cast.

READ ALSO: Harrison Ford net worth, age, height, wife and children

Source: Legit.ng