How much do you really know about John Steinbeck, one of the most well-known American writers from the 20th century? Apart from that he wrote The Grapes of Wrath, what can you really tell about him? Even one of his close friends remarked that he just “couldn’t figure out Steinbeck.”

These facts about John Steinbeck are all about getting to know the Steinbeck you never learned about (properly) in any English class. Learning more than just that Steinbeck lived from 1902-1968 and published 16 novels, 11 non-fiction books, countless short stories, and a handful of both plays and screenplays. Yes, he won the most prestigious awards a writer can receive, including the Pulitzer and the Nobel Peace Prize. But who was he?

Although I’d read several Steinbeck novels in high school and during my undergraduate degree in literature, it was until recent years that I’ve really felt I’ve learned about him as a person and writer. I’ve read more of his books, visited his home and grave in Salinas, perused a Steinbeck museum, and even checked out places that inspired his books.

John Steinbeck has been called brilliant, antisocial, sadistic, compassionate. In the words of one of his wives, “He was a brilliant man but a strange man.” By the time you read these interesting facts about John Steinbeck, which I’ve distilled for you into one easy-to-read post, you, too, will have a much more well-rounded perspective on one of the greatest American writers.

Don’t forget to pin this post for later reference as you tackle the novels of John Steinbeck.

Whenever possible, I recommend buying books at local bookshops or throughBookshop.org, because shopping there puts the profits right into the hands of indie bookstores all over the country.

Steinbeck struggled learning how to read and called it torture

It’s a well-known stereotype, and with good reason, that authors are also avid readers. While this was eventually true for Steinbeck, the truth is, as a young child he simply hated reading. He called books “printed demons” and likened them to thumbscrews.

That is, until Steinbeck was nine, and his aunt gifted him a simplified version of Le Morte d’Arthur, or, the legends of King Arthur and his Round Table. He was intoxicated with the adventures of King Arthur and his knights, and this interest opened up for him the world of books and reading.

Steinbeck’s passion for King Arthur didn’t die out when he got older, either; he claims to have based some of the characters in Tortilla Flat on Arthurian characters, and later in life, he wrote his own version of King Arthur’s tales.

I can think of no better way to kick off these facts about John Steinbeck than this surprising one — that he hated reading, until that one book unlocked an entire world for him.

John Steinbeck was a college dropout who refused to take final exams

Perhaps relatably for many people, John Steinbeck wasn’t enthusiastic about college and attended Stanford University more to please his parents than to please himself. He floundered there, taking seemingly random classes, changing his career goals, but taking as many writing classes as he could.

The classes he was most interested in were English classes, but he often didn’t even show up for the final exams. Steinbeck explained to his roommate that he didn’t see any need to take a final when he already knew what he had learned from the class. I mean, it’s not wrong.

Perhaps it won’t surprise you, then, to learn that John Steinbeck did not graduate from college.

Tip: The John Steinbeck novella, Of Mice and Men, made my list of 15 classics for beginners, my recommendations for those just beginning to read classic literature.

Steinbeck was prone to freak accidents and illnesses

We can’t talk about John Steinbeck facts without acknowledging that the author’s life was plagued with an astonishing number of freak accidents and illnesses. Really, it’s a marvel the man lived as long as he did.

As a teenager, John Steinback contracted pleural pneumonia and nearly died. During his brief time living in New York City, his balcony railing fell off, and he with it. When traveling back from Asia later in life, he ruptured a spinal disc just by lifting a case of beer and later needed intensive spinal surgery as a result.

Steinbeck also experienced a stroke, a heart attack, and a detached retina during his lifetime. It’s a chilling reminder, like when Charles Dickens was involved in a deadly train crash, of how nearly the reading world was to going without some life-changing works of literature.

Steinbeck struggled for years with his first few books, which were flops

Oftentimes, we think of an author’s most famous works and marvel at how they could accomplish such a thing. While it’s true that some writers hit the lottery with their first writing attempts, the truth is that many struggle for a long time with their craft before producing the books for which we know them the best.

That’s true for Steinbeck, too. John Steinbeck was a poor, struggling writer for years before he met with any success. His first novels were strange, experimental things. He struggled to find anyone to publish them, entirely rewrote them multiple times, and even once they found publishers, they didn’t find a readership.

It was actually when Steinbeck was attending to his ill mother, at the Steinbeck house in Salinas, California, that he started to find his voice as a writer. In between tending to his mother, he wrote the novella The Red Pony as well as Tortilla Flat. Tortilla Flat was his first real success as a writer.

Salinas residents burned Steinbeck’s books during his lifetime

Today, if you visit Salinas, California, you cannot escape the name “Steinbeck.” In addition to the John Steinbeck sights to visit there, everything seems to bear his name, from the high school to local businesses and even a highway. The hometown pride is strong in Salinas, but one of the most interesting facts about John Steinbeck is that this was not always the case — quite the opposite, in fact.

During Steinbeck’s lifetime, his own hometown staged at least two public burnings of his books and in particular, of The Grapes of Wrath. On one occasion, a group of Salinas residents burned copies of the book outside the old library, and at another time, a local church member hosted a Steinbeck book burning.

While you might imagine an author would probably feel hurt by this vitriol from his hometown, Steinbeck seemed to take it in stride, writing that “no town celebrates a writer before he’s dead. It just isn’t done.”

Related: If you’re ever in Berlin, make sure you don’t miss Berlin’s book burning memorial, located in the place where the Nazis famously burned books in 1933.

John Steinbeck was married 3 times

It’s fascinating to examine the romantic lives of successful writers, from Charles Dickens’ marriage to the interesting story of Thomas Hardy’s two wives. In the case of John Steinbeck, the writer was married three times.

First, he married Carol Henning when he was in his mid-20s and still struggling to find foothold as a writer. He seemed to enjoy her company, though he wrote to friends multiple times that it was a shame she was so ugly.

Charming. Carol stuck by him during times when they struggled to pay their bills. She also assisted Steinbeck’s early writing career, typing his manuscripts and also serving as his go-to editor, though it’s reported she did have a mean streak and also wasn’t always faithful to Steinbeck.

During their marriage, Steinbeck had an affair with Gwyn Conger, a twenty-something nightclub singer who was half his age. Eventually, his marriage with Carol ended, and Steinbeck married Conger. Their marriage lasted five years and produced two sons, but ultimately, the pair also got divorced. Gwyn’s recollections of Steinbeck were later turned into a book, My Life With John Steinbeck, from which we learn some of these John Steinbeck facts.

Finally, Steinbeck found marital happiness with Elaine Anderson, to whom he remained married until his death. He wrote to a friend that it was “the first peace I have had with a woman.”

Steinbeck had a falling out with Alfred Hitchcock over race

Steinbeck was (eventually) a famous writer during his lifetime, which meant all sorts of interesting opportunities presented themselves. For example, the famous movie maker Alfred Hitchcock personally requested that John Steinbeck write a novella for him to turn into a movie. The result was The Lifeboat.

When Steinbeck saw the completed film, however, he was horrified at how Hitchcock had portrayed the black character from the novella. He wrote to the film company, 20th Century Fox, to request that his name be removed from the film, saying they had taken his black character with “dignity, purpose, and personality” and turned him into a “stock comedy negro.”

The film studio ignored the request and continued to market the film with John Steinbeck’s name on it.

John Steinbeck adored his pet rat and cried when it died

This is one of the interesting facts about John Steinbeck that come from Gwyn Conger’s recollections. She tells all sorts of bizarre tales about Steinbeck, including this, the very strange saga of the pet rat named Burgess.

According to her recollections, Steinbeck brought home the white rat when it was a baby, to Gwyn’s genuine delight. They named him Burgess, and they took him everywhere. On car rides, Steinbeck would perch Burgess on his shoulder.

Endearing? I’ll let you decide. But there’s more. Steinbeck apparently liked to amuse himself at other peoples’ expense when it came to Burgess. Conger says that he would let the rat loose on guests when they came over, just to watch the women scream.

When the rat contracted pneumonia, the veterinarian apparently refused to treat it. So, Steinbeck euthanized Burgess in the oven, apparently crying and saying, “There goes the last pure thing I ever loved.”

Gwyn said that that was the only time she ever saw John Steinbeck cry:

Steinbeck was described as “privately sadistic”

This will likely come as no shock after the previous John Steinbeck fact about his pet rat, Burgess: his second wife, Gwyn, claimed he was sadistic, but only in private.

He did indeed have a temper. Throughout the biography, Mad At the World, William Souder recounts many stories of his outbursts. For example, in his 20s, Steinbeck tried to kiss a girl at a party. When she rejected him, he apparently hung her out of the window by her ankles until another partygoer intervened.

This presents an interesting paradox, because what Steinbeck is perhaps best known for is championing the plight of the disadvantaged. His books were burned and banned largely because he called out the inhumane actions of the rich and wealthy and shed light on the plight of the working men and women of America.

It is hard to reconcile the sadistic, angry, “mad at the world” John Steinbeck with the Steinbeck who fought for the poor and struggling, but we needn’t ignore the contradiction just to put him more comfortably in a box. We do that all too often.

After Steinbeck won the Nobel Prize, he never published any more fiction

John Steinbeck was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1962, an immense honor by any measure. While it’s obviously worthwhile to acknowledge important writers, however, there’s this trend I’ve noticed that once writers attain these high honors, they tend to… stop writing. Such was (sort of) the case with John Steinbeck.

In his Nobel Prize acceptance speech (which you can watch him deliver), he begins by saying, “In my heart, there may be some doubt that I deserve the Nobel award over other men of letters whom I hold in respect and reverence.”

And while many cheered his recognition with the Nobel Prize, others mocked him for it, reinforcing that fear of his that he was unworthy. After receiving the Nobel Prize and being blasted for it by multiple media sources, Steinbeck never wrote fiction again.

Luckily for us, Steinbeck didn’t stop writing entirely. He continued to write non-fiction, including his travel memoir, Travels With Charley, which is one of my favorite John Steinbeck books and is also chronically under-appreciated.

Related: Similarly, Thomas Hardy never wrote another novel after the critical reception of Jude the Obscure, and though it didn’t stop her writing, Edith Wharton wasn’t very happy about winning the Pulitzer Prize.

John Steinbeck’s cause of death was heart failure

On December 20, 1968, Steinbeck died of heart failure at the age of 66. Though he died in New York, his body was moved to the family plot in his hometown of Salinas, California. Fans of his writing can visit John Steinbeck’s grave in Salinas to pay their respects and leave their personal tributes and mementos.

Related: Did you know that F. Scott Fitzgerald’s grave is in Rockville, MD, in an unexceptional churchyard?

John Steinbeck Novels

The following is a list of John Steinbeck novels, novellas, short story collections, and non-fiction books, in order of publication. I’ve put an asterisk next to my personal favorites.

Cup of Gold (1929)

The Pastures of Heaven (1932)

The Red Pony (1933)

To A God Unknown (1933)

Tortilla Flat (1935)

In Dubious Battle (1936)

Of Mice and Men (1937)

The Long Valley (1938)

The Grapes of Wrath (1939)

Forgotten Village (1941)

Sea of Cortez (1941)

The Moon Is Down (1942)

Bombs Away (1942)

Cannery Row (1945)

The Pearl (1947)

The Wayward Bus (1947)

A Russian Journal (1948)

Burning Bright (1950)

Log from the Sea of Cortez (1951)

East of Eden (1952)

Sweet Thursday (1954)

The Short Reign of Pippin IV (1957)

Once There Was A War (1958)

Winter of Our Discontent (1961)

Travels With Charley: In Search of America (1962)

America and Americans (1966)

Journal of a Novel (1969)

Viva Zapata (1975)

The Acts of King Arthur and His Noble Knights (1976)

Working Days: The Journal of The Grapes of Wrath (1989)

More recommended reading:

Mad at the World: A Life of John Steinbeck by William Souder

Steinbeck: A Life in Letters edited by Elaine Steinbeck and Robert Wallstein

My Life With John Steinbeck: The story of John Steinbeck’s forgotten wife as told to Douglas Brown

Hopefully, now you’ve read these facts on John Steinbeck, you have a better understanding of the famous American writer. I’m very much an advocate of seeing people for the complex individuals they are and were, the good and the bad and the in between. Steinbeck was undeniably a mix of all of the above.