Gazak Brown, P.S.C., in Louisville, Kentucky, focuses its experience on defending healthcare and other licensed professionals facing professional malpractice claims. Our attorneys pride themselves in services dedicated to health care professionals who have been sued or face other hurdles in the pursuit of their careers. This dedication runs not only to the individual healthcare provider, but also to the insurance companies, hospitals, and medical corporations within which they provide their professional services.

Our firm combines experienced litigation attorneys with a resource team of staff nurses who have decades of clinical experience. This combination yields medical and scientific defenses which are uniquely fashioned on behalf of each client. These backgrounds and experiences unite in a mastery of hospital-based, physician-owned, and corporate-based physician practices.

We likewise assist healthcare professionals with all corollary matters related to medical malpractice claims. Our experience includes helping professionals in litigation concerning medical malpractice, hospital credentialing and privileges issues, and licensure matters with the Kentucky Medical Licensure Board, Kentucky Board of Nursing, and Kentucky Board of Chiropractic Examiners, among others. We have similarly been called upon to represent fellow attorneys who have been sued in regard to their representation of their clients.

Our representation encompasses all aspects of litigation, from threatened claims, formal lawsuits, discovery, trial, post-trial practice, and all elements of appellate law. We defend professional liability insurance carriers, by and through their insured policy holders, as well as individually, as to allegations of first and third-party bad faith litigation. We are well versed in claims filed in circuit courts throughout the Commonwealth of Kentucky, as well as the State and Federal Boards of Claims, and surrounding Medical Review Panel Act Claims in Indiana.

Our team of attorneys, nurses, and paralegals also assists professionals facing personal financial consequences as well as the loss of their licenses due to malpractice claims. Exemplary legal representation involves the following:

Loss or suspension of medical license

Reporting to the National Practice Data Bank

Defense of Federal Multi-District or so-called “mass tort” litigation

Loss of insurance

Difficulty becoming reinsured

Board of Medical Licensure sanctions

Revocation of hospital privileges

Loss of personal assets

Loss of network provider privileges

Gazak Brown is likewise well-versed and experienced in issues facing the medical professional liability insurance industry within our State. From coverage questions and opinions, to interpretations of policy provisions and their applications to any particular situation, to the defense of claims directly against liability insurers, our attorneys are here to assist, advise, and represent professional liability insurers in both first-party bad faith claims as well as the more challenging-and-complex setting of third-party bad faith claims – a somewhat unique feature of Kentucky law.

Covering the entire state of Kentucky, our lawyers practice in both the state and federal court systems, and we are experienced at all levels of the appellate process as well. Gazak Brown attorneys have also been called upon to assist in the representation of physicians in other states, such as South Dakota, Tennessee, Indiana, and federal courts in Louisiana and California, and we are available to obtain limited admission into most states to assist with any matter. One of our attorneys is licensed in Indiana.