When you choose to see a drama in the movie theater, you are making a choice to feel deeply. Whether it's a tear-jerker, a good-natured dramedy, or a trek through a historical landscape, the drama genre's primary task is to trigger your emotions. Music is instrumental in this process; the right soundtrack can impact the audience's perception of a scene and enhance the levels of drama and suspense in the movie. Research shows a strong correlation between music and the brain: loud or particularly rhythmic songs can boost adrenaline, while slow, quiet music reduces the body's noradrenaline levels, helping you to relax. To increase the emotional impact of a film, a good director understands the physiological and psychological impact of music and puts as much emphasis on the soundtrack as the film itself. Here are some of the most successful drama movie soundtracks of all time.

'Schindler’s List'

No one could have pulled off the pain and suffering that exuded from Steven Spielberg’s film about the holocaust more than John Williams. The emotional weight behind the “Theme from Schindler’s List” matched with the shocking visuals will stick with audiences for years to come.

'The Big Chill'

This classic 1983 ensemble drama follows the reunion of a group of college friends, brought to life by megastars Glenn Close, Jeff Goldblum, William Hurt, and Kevin Kline. The soundtrack sets the nostalgic stage with iconic tunes from the 1960s, anchored with "I Heard it Through the Grapevine" by Marvin Gaye.

'The Breakfast Club'

Even decades later, The Breakfast Club's message about high school stereotypes and the fight for acceptance and understanding is still relevant. The undeniable onscreen chemistry of Brat Pack charter members Molly Ringwald, Emilio Estevez, Judd Nelson, Ally Sheedy, and Anthony Michael Hall is displayed across a backdrop of perfect 1980s songs. "I'm the Dude'' by Keith Forsey sets the stage for Emilio Estevez vaulting bookshelves, and "We Are Not Alone" by Karla DeVito highlights the bonding experience that occurs in the arrestingly choppy dance montage. But it's the powerful strains of "Don't You (Forget About Me)" by Simple Minds that drives home Judd Nelson's iconic fist in the air, which is one of the most memorable moments in cinema history.

'Crazy Heart'

This critically acclaimed honky-tonk drama stars Jeff Bridges, Colin Farrell, and Maggie Gyllenhaal. The Oscar-winning film boasts a high-quality country soundtrack engineered by legendary producer T Bone Burnett. "The Weary Kind" performed by Jeff Bridges is one of the reasons this movie ranks as having one of the best drama movie soundtracks of all time.

'Dirty Dancing'

With the fifth highest sales ever recorded for a movie soundtrack, Dirty Dancing moved audiences with its feel-good music, nostalgic themes, and swoon-worthy dancing. With hits like "These Arms of Mine" by Otis Redding and the original "She's Like the Wind" by the incomparable Patrick Swayze, the movie simultaneously stole hearts and embedded cheesy yet endearing lines in our collective memories. No one puts Baby in a corner.

'Shawshank Redemption'

This film stands the test of time, moving audiences in 1994 and audiences today. With themes of injustice, redemption (obviously), and friendship, the score captures those elements in triumph and in despair. Thomas Newman not only gave emotional life to the characters on screen, but also life to the prison itself, turning it into an almost antagonistic character.

'The Great Gatsby'

The incomparable Baz Luhrmann produced a glossy art-deco masterpiece with his 2013 film version of F. Scott Fitzgerald's The Great Gatsby. Along with splendid visuals, the movie includes a riveting musical track with cuts from Beyonce, Jay-Z, Fergie, and Lana Del Rey. This definitely places among the most fabulous of all drama movie soundtracks.

'Malcolm X'

This important historical Spike Lee film features Denzel Washington in a larger-than-life role set to a diverse compilation of classic hits like "Shotgun" by Junior Walker, "A Change Is Gonna Come" by Sam Cooke, and "Big Stuff" by Billie Holiday.

'Purple Rain'

It's hard to compete with Prince, and Purple Rain arguably includes the best movie soundtrack of all time. While the movie itself is controversial for its glaring misogynistic elements, you can't help being awestruck every time Prince steps up to sing. With hits like "Let's Go Crazy," "When Doves Cry," and, of course, the emotional title track, the multiple Oscar wins prove why it's one of the best drama movie soundtracks.

'Forrest Gump'

This classic drama is riveting and heart-wrenching all at once, so it’s only appropriate that the film score for Forrest Gump would be the same. Triumphant and heartbreaking, Alan Silvestri created a charming score that would move audiences for decades.

'A Star is Born'

The 2018 remake of Barbra Streisand's classic film boasts serious star power with Lady Gaga and Bradley Cooper, who provided outstanding onscreen chemistry and amazing vocals on the movie soundtrack. The film's breakout duet "Shallow" brought home the 2019 Oscar for Best Original Song, anchoring a soundtrack full of timeless tracks that underscore the heart-wrenching drama of the movie.

Learn the Songs from Drama Movie Soundtracks & Scores

The best drama movie soundtracks can transport us beyond our day-to-day lives, triggering our emotions, creating a catharsis of laughter and tears that can evoke a feeling of cleansing and renewal that transcends the movie-going experience. Even better than listening to songs from a good movie soundtrack is learning to play those songs yourself. If there is a movie or even just a single song from a drama movie that speaks to you, check out Musicnotes to find the sheet music. Whether you can sit down and play from sight or need to work on it for a while, learning a new piece of music, especially one that you have an emotional connection to, is undoubtedly good for the soul.