In the words of Bob Lanyon, “The brave deeds performed by the Merchant Marines must be recognized now.” Since 1983, the American Merchant Marine Veterans have been steadily recruiting members from all over the United States, with the aim of creating a sense of community among Merchant Mariners of all wars and raising public awareness of our bravery. We’ve come a long way from our primary success in obtaining Veteran status for WWII U.S. Merchant Mariners, but it is undeniably necessary to keep working for Just Recognition. Our members support current maritime activities, distribute historical literature, construct memorials, and use their voices to gain recognition for each and every one of our brave seamen.

The United States Merchant Marine, also known as the “Fourth Arm of Defense,” has served valiantly and honorably through each American conflict faced. Our members have achieved a great many honors, from supporting our military forces and cementing alliances, to fostering the growth of our country and advocating for active support of all U.S. maritime defenses. It is within our vision to work together and gain recognition for all of our men, in peace and war.

Using today’s technology, it is now easier than ever to keep up with the ongoings of our community and share in each other’s celebrations, achievements, and victories. With such rich histories to share, we would be remiss not to chronicle our efforts. To this end, we encourage all members and general attendees of events concerning the AMMV to share photos, stories, and footage that you’d like to see included in our blog articles.

With numerous chapters running all across the United States and the world at large, the AMMV actively educates and fights for Just Recognition to this day. Our members have physically supported the implementation of memorials, attended ceremonies for overdue honors, brought articles to Congress, and so much more. We hope to bring awareness to the continued adventures of our patriots. We aspire to share updates with our members as frequently as possible through the blog on our website, which you can visit at the link below.

Through our dedication and service to our country, in times of both peace and war, we have more than proven that the United States Merchant Marine is deserving of governmental recognition and support. Our seamen have turned the tides of battle with their supply missions, braving rough seas and losing many to them. All of this in order to supply our troops with the food, gear, and gas necessary to defend freedom and make it back home. So many years later, our courageous mariners are still pursuing ongoing legislation for the full provisions awarded to Veterans by the G.I. Bill of Rights after WWII. Our military counterparts have already received these benefits long ago. The AMMV continues to work through grassroots efforts, all the way up to Congress, to fight for what we have so rightfully earned.

From our AMMV Annual Convention to chapter reunions and so much more, our members actively participate in COVID-safe events across the United States today. We also often gather for national observances such as V-E Day, Memorial Day, National Maritime Day, and many others. Brainstorming bills for Just Recognition and meeting to lobby for co-sponsors isn’t unheard of. Of course, if there is an honors ceremony or a memorial event, you’ll find us front and center—and we’d love your support in attendance as well!

You’ll find that we keep our events calendar up to date with the latest gatherings we’ve confirmed among our Veterans. While we love highlighting our advocacy and championing our Proclamation and Purposes, many events are simply social. Reconnecting with old friends, making new ones, and sharing memories of service make some of our favorite get-togethers. We invite you to take a look at our upcoming events, and as always, we look forward to seeing your faces.

The Merchant Marine Act of 1920, also known as the Jones Act, was passed in order to provide for the promotion and maintenance of the American Merchant Marine. This federal statute helps regulate maritime commerce in U.S. waters and between U.S. ports. The act does contain multitudes for defining seamen’s rights, and overall provides a great benefit for our U.S. merchants at sea. The AMMV dedicates a great portion of its efforts to dispelling untruths and clearing up false assertions regarding the Jones Act today. We advocate for its continuation and closely watch all attempted repeals and rebukes with the care our protections deserve. We want to share the latest news here concerning the Jones Act, as well as any motions attempting to alter it.