Ryan Phillippe and Abbie Cornish have broken up after four years together. Ryan and Abbie’s relationship is thought to have hastened the end of his marriage to Reese Witherspoon. They met on the set of Stop Loss in 2006, when Ryan was still married. Perhaps proving the old adage “if he cheats with you…,” it was rumored back in December that Ryan was cheating on Abbie and macking on random women in clubs. It’s possible they were broken up back then, or that they were having problems and that Ryan was dealing with it the only way he knows how. Abbie’s spokesperson confirmed the breakup to People:

It’s over between actress Abbie Cornish and boyfriend Ryan Phillippe, her spokesperson confirms to PEOPLE exclusively.

“Abbie ended the relationship with Ryan and she moved out of their home,” the rep tells PEOPLE. On Sunday, the actress was spotted removing her belongings from the house she shared with Phillippe while he visited a friend with children Ava and Deacon.

The split follows months of tabloid speculation that Phillippe has been unfaithful to Cornish – regularly hitting the nightclubs and being linked to other women. When asked about the cause of the break-up and whether Phillippe cheated on Cornish, her rep replied, “No comment.”

Cornish, 27, and Phillippe, 35, met in 2006 on the set of the film, Stop-Loss, and survived intense media scrutiny following Phillippe’s divorce from Reese Witherspoon. Cornish has been in Vancouver for the last seven months shooting the film, Sucker Punch.

Reps for Phillippe could not be reached for comment.

[From People]

This story makes it sound like Abbie had to go out of town for work and just naively expected Ryan to be faithful to her while she was away. These two are very private, so maybe they called it quits a while ago and Abbie’s PR people convinced her she needed to let the public know about it. Ryan and Abbie were photographed at an event together at the end of January, though, so I would assume the breakup was recent. I’m thinking Abbie got fed up with Phillippe’s passive aggressive behavior and cheating. Sounds just like what Reese had to deal with.