Todd Manning is the illegitimate son of Victor Lord and his longtime mistress, Irene Clayton. Newborn Todd was adopted by Peter and Barbara Manning, Irene’s brother and sister-in-law. Barbara left her family when Todd was nine, leaving her son to be raised by the abusive Peter…

Children: Starr Manning (with Blair Cramer), Jack Manning (with Blair Cramer), Tommy McBain (with Margaret Cochran)

Mothers: Irene Manning Clayton (biological; deceased), Barbara Manning (adoptive)

Fathers: Victor Lord (biological; deceased), Peter Manning (adoptive; deceased)

Siblings: Viki Davidson (half-sister), Tina Clayton Lord, Tony Lord (half-brother; deceased), Meredith Lord Wolek (half-sister; deceased)

Nieces: Jessica Buchanan, Natalie Vega, Megan Gordon (deceased), Sarah “Flash” Roberts

Nephews: Kevin Buchanan, Joey Buchanan, CJ Roberts, Danny Wolek, Brian Kendall (deceased)

Aunts: Gwendolyn Lord

Uncles: Powell Lord (deceased), Peter Manning (deceased)

Cousins: Powell Lord II, Richard Abbott

Significant Romantic Relationships: Blair Cramer (1st, 2nd, 4th and 5th wife/annulled), Tea Delgado (3rd wife/divorced)

A Todd and Marty Shocker!

A controversial One Life to Live story line grows more controversial tomorrow. Here’s what happens between Todd and Marty.

One Life To Live Casting News and Notes

Here are a few notes on One Life to Live casting over the next few weeks. We’ve got actors – and dogs! – covered… Scott Evans re…

One Life To Live Featured in Newspaper

The Asbury Park Press recently wrote a feature on the filming of One Life to Live in New Jersey. Here are excerpts from it: The sun was …

Kamar de los Reyes to Host Charity Event

One Life to Live will support a co-star as he hosts a charity event in March. On Saturday, March 8, Kamar del los Reyes (Antonio Vega) w…

One Life To Live Season 39 Episode 74 Recap: October 29, 2007

PART I: As gets underway, Renee advises Natalie and Cristian to get a room after she finds them locking lips in the Palace’s restaurant. …

One Blog to Write: Jessica Buchanan Writes About Grandpa

On the official One Life to Live website, Jessica Buchanan recently blogged about the death of her grandfather. Here’s what has to say …