General Hospital spoilers reveal that One Life To Live’s Blair Cramer (Kassie DePaiva) will return to Port Charles.

This is not the first time Blair has appeared on GH. She, her daughter Starr Manning (Kristen Alderson), and her ex-husband Todd Manning spent some time in Port Charles in 2012, after the cancellation of the long-running OLTL.

General Hospital Spoilers – Who Is Blair Cramer?

Blair Cramer is the daughter of Addie Cramer (Pamela Payton-Wright), the mentally ill sister of Dorian Lord (Robin Strasser). She first came to Llanview to destroy her Aunt Dorian, but the two eventually became close.

Blair had many relationships and marriages on the soap, but her two greatest loves were Max Holden (James DePaiva) and Todd Manning (Roger Howarth). She and Todd share a daughter, Starr.

Starr arrived at General Hospital after a car crash that killed her daughter and boyfriend. Blair and Carly Corinthos (Laura Wright) spent some time bonding at the Metro Court.

Dad and daughter settled in Port Charles, while Blair returned to Llanview. Starr began a relationship with Michael Corinthos (Chad Duell).

It turned out that GH was not allowed to use OLTL’s characters on their show, so Starr and Todd both abruptly left Port Charles.

Both the actors returned as completely new characters. Kristen Alderson became the original Kiki Jerome, and Roger Howarth was Franco Baldwin and now plays Austing Gatlin Holt. Confusing?

GH Spoilers – Why Is Blair Cramer Coming To General Hospital?

Many longtime soap fans miss both One Life To Live and All My Children, so it is great to see some of their favorite characters spending time on GH.

We recently saw an appearance by All My Children’s Jackson Montgomery (Walt Willey), who is set to return again shortly. Now Blair will be coming to Port Charles.

There is a lot of mystery on GH right now. Who is Pikeman? Who Shot Curtis Ashford (Donnell Turner)?

Who burned down Anna Devane’s (Finola Hughes) house? Who is Tracy Quartermaine (Jane Elliot) working for? Who is Martin Gray’s (Michael E. Knight) ex-wife? Are any or all of these stories tied together?

Blair Cramer is probably not Pikeman. She doesn’t seem like an arms dealer, but then again, who knows?

She may be Martin’s ex-wife, who is paying him $50,000 a month in alimony. This could be the same person who is trying to destroy Deception with Tracy’s help. Her attorney, and possible love interest, might be Pine Valley’s Jackson Montgomery.

General Hospital Spoilers – Will Any Other Residents Of Llanview Arrive In Port Charles?

If Blair comes to Port Charles, will her daughter Starr be far behind? Could she cause trouble between Michael and Willow Corinthos (Katelyn MacMullen)?

What about Todd Manning? Many fans aren’t happy with the Austin character. The writers can easily kill him off and have Roger Howarth return (again) as Todd.