Kelly Children-American musician, author and TV personality, Kelly Clarkson was born on April 24th, 1982 in Forth Worth, Texas in the United States of America.

Clarkson was born to Je anne Taylor, a first grade teacher and Stephen Michael Clarkson, a former engineer. She shares the same parents with her two siblings; Alyssa Clarkson and her half-brother, Jason Clarkson from her father’s second marriage.

When she was six years old, her parents got divorced, and she continued to live with her mother while her sister and brother moved in with an aunt.

Later, Clarkson’s mother wed Jimmy Taylor. Clarkson has ancestors from England, Wales, Ireland, and Greece. Her mother is related to Republican state lawmaker Isaiah Rose, whose biography was covered on Clarkson’s Who Do You Think You Are? episode from 2013. Clarkson was a Southern Baptist growing up.

Clarkson attended Pauline Hughes Middle School for his education. Cynthia Glenn, the choir instructor at the school, overheard her singing in a hallway in the seventh grade and invited her to try out for the chorus. She never received any formal vocal training, according to Clarkson

.

In 2000, Clarkson graduated from Burleson High School, where she appeared in a number of musicals including Brigadoon, Annie Get Your Gun, and Seven Brides for Seven Brothers. Clarkson started voice lessons in an effort to get a music scholarship for college. Clarkson declined full scholarships to Texas universities after graduating from high school.

READ ALSO: Kelly Clarkson Husband: Is Kelly Clarkson Still Married?

She moved to Los Angeles in 2001 to pursue a singing career. She briefly collaborated with musician Gerry Goffin to record five demo tracks in an effort to land a record deal. She made appearances as an extra in several television series, including Sabrina, the Teenage Witch, and Dharma & Greg.

Clarkson was forced to move back to Burleson due to a lack of job options and a fire that broke out in her apartment. There, she worked as a cocktail server in a comedy club, advertised Red Bull energy drinks, worked as a telemarketing, and worked at a movie theater.

Clarkson gained notoriety in 2002 when she won the inaugural season of American Idol and signed a record deal with RCA. The best-selling track in the nation in 2002 was her debut hit, “A Moment Like This,” which peaked at number one on the US Billboard Hot 100.

It was a part of her first studio album, Thankful, which came out in 2003 and debuted at number one on the Billboard 200. For her second studio album, Breakaway, Clarkson

left the management of American Idol in an effort to change her image.

Breakaway sold more than 12 million copies worldwide and won two Grammy Awards. It was supported by four US top-ten singles, including the title tune, “Since U Been Gone,” “Behind These Hazel Eyes,” and “Because of You.”

For her third studio album, My December (2007), Clarkson had even more creative control by co-writing every song and serving as the album’s executive producer. The heavier rock music on the album, however, disappointed her label, and it was reluctantly pushed.

All I Ever Wanted (2009) and Stronger (2011), Clarkson’s fourth and fifth studio albums, respectively, reverted to a lighter mood and pop-rock sound. The former became her second US number-one album, and the latter made her the first performer to win the Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album twice.

Later, Clarkson released Wrapped in Red, which became the year’s best-selling Christmas album. The record’s lead single, “Underneath the Tree,” was awarded the most well-known Christmas music released in the twenty-first century by ASCAP.

Over 25 million albums and 45 million singles by Clarkson have been sold globally. She has nine top-ten singles in the UK, Canada, and Australia in addition to her eleven top-ten singles in the US. She made history by becoming the first performer to ever top the pop, adult contemporary, adult pop, country, and dance charts on Billboard.

From the show’s fourteenth to twenty-first seasons, Clarkson also coached contestants on The Voice. As of 2019, she has also hosted her own talk show, The Kelly Clarkson Show.

Kelly Clarkson children: Meet the children of Kelly Clarkson

Clarkson had two children with her ex-husband, Brandon Blackstock. The names of her two kids are River Rose Blackstock and Remington Alexander Blackstock.

River Rose Blackstone was born in June 2014 and she is currently 8 years of age. Remington Alexander Blackstock was born in April 2016 and he is currently 6 years old.

Source: www.Ghgossip.com

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7qLTGqKqsoaBjsLC5jqScpaSpYrCtrdGkqqimXZi1qrjDq5ynZZ2asrV506GcZpuYnrmlvsSnZKieXaCyrbjYZpqlmaKgwLC6jg%3D%3D