Kelly Clarkson didn't have to look far to be inspired to write a children's book.

That's because the three-time Grammy Award winner and O.G. "American Idol" champ found plenty of literary fodder in hanging out with her own 19-month-old daughter, River Rose.

"I'm officially a children's book author!" the singer tweeted Tuesday, with the hashtag #NewProject. "River Rose and the Magical Lullaby comes out this October!"

In a 2-minute, 30-second promotional video embedded in that tweet, Clarkson explains that the idea for the book stemmed from the adventures she shared with her young muse on tour.

https://www.instagram.com/p/-jlStOozof

"We were going on trips to the U.K. and Asia and Australia — you know, just all these amazing places that she was too little to remember, basically," said Clarkson, who wrote and performed a lullaby to accompany the book. "So, I started writing down these little fun stories — of, like, when we went to Australia and she got to hang out with some kangaroos. I thought I'd just write little cute stories for her and put little pictures with it. And that was the initial idea. Those little stories ended up turning into a book for each place we kinda went."

According to publisher HarperCollins, Clarkson's story is illustrated by Laura Hughes and follows a fictional version of River Rose, who is "so excited to see the animals and ride the carousel that she can’t fall asleep —until a magical lullaby from her mom sends her off on an amazing adventure."

https://www.instagram.com/p/7G5pCGIzl6

Clarkson also had fun with the last minute of her promotional video, joking in a behind-the-scenes segment that her daughter was "out of hand" and a "micro-manager" with "attitude" throughout the shoot. Moments later, the singer shouted "Get off me!" at some nearby balloons and contended, "I don't know where she gets it from."

In a series of clues shared on social media in the days leading up to her announcement, Clarkson hinted that her new project that involved "balloons, magic and a lullaby." And on Super Bowl Sunday, she joked that she couldn't afford to air one of those expensive TV ads for the big game, so she posted a dramatic video of River Rose on Instagram instead.

RELATED: Super Bowl 50: Watch the best commercials (and vote for your favorite!)

https://www.instagram.com/p/BBgbZvLozjg

"She's coming," teases superimposed text in that adorable video, for which River Rose is dressed in a robe in front of a makeup mirror. "The DIVA has arrived."

https://www.instagram.com/p/9L52RzIzsL

Clarkson and her husband, Brandon Blackstock, announced in October that they're also expecting a son. There's no word just yet on whether the boy will inspire books of his own.

RELATED: Kelly Clarkson is pregnant with a baby boy

In the meantime, fans can pre-order Clarkson's book, which hits shelves Oct. 4.