Information Full name

Kelly Brianne Clarkson

Born

April 24, 1982 (age 38)

Occupation

Singer, songwriter, actress, record producer

Labels

RCA, 19, S

Website

Website

Kelly Brianne Clarkson (born April 24, 1982) is an American singer, songwriter, occasional actress, and children's book author. In 2002, she came to prominence after winning the first season of American Idol, and has since been established as "The Original American Idol".

Personal life[]

Clarkson began dating talent manager Brandon Blackstock in February 2012. In May 2012 interview, Clarkson told the Daily Mail, "Brandon is my manager's son. I've known him for six years, but he was married. Then, suddenly, there he was at the Super Bowl and he was single."

In December 2012, Clarkson announced via Twitter her engagement to Brandon Blackstock, writing on her personal Twitter page: "I'M ENGAGED!!!!! I wanted y'all to know!! Happiest night of my life last night! I am so lucky and am with the greatest man ever." Blackstock is the son of Clarkson's manager, Narvel Blackstock, and stepson of singer Reba McEntire. Clarkson also celebrated her engagement with a performance of her song "Catch My Breath" on Vh1 Divas—her third performance on the show to date. They both got married on October 20, 2013, at Blackberry Farm in Walland, Tennessee. Upon her marriage, Clarkson became a stepmother to Blackstock's son and daughter from his previous marriage. Their first child, a daughter, River Rose Blackstock, was born on June 12, 2014. In August 2015, during her concert in Los Angeles, Clarkson announced that she is pregnant with her second child. On October 23, 2015, she announced that she is having a boy.

Books[]

In February 2016, it was announced that Clarkson had signed a book deal with Harper Collins. Her first children's book titled "River Rose and the Magical Lullaby" will be available on October 4, 2016. The book will feature an original lullaby written and performed by Clrkson.

Credits[]

One Direction[]

Up All Night

"Tell Me a Lie" — writing[1]

[]

@kelly_clakrson — Twitter