Google or Bing allow for quick searches, like "What was Tuesday's Red Sox score?" But what if your query is less concrete, and you simply want to surf the Web for Boston baseball news without sifting through pages of text results.

That's where StumbleUpon comes in. Billed as a discovery — not a search — engine, the site sends users through an Internet rabbit hole of sorts, offering new and different webpages based on personal Like or Dislike ratings.

"What the founders were thinking was that they wanted to be able to click a button and receive content that was personalized just for them," StumbleUpon CEO Mark Bartels explained.

Web users began stumbling more than a decade ago, first via a built-in Mozilla Firefox toolbar application, then later on the standalone website and mobile app. Today, the site has more than 30 million active users — up from 6 million accounts in 2009, when the company once again became independent after two years under eBay ownership.

StumbleUpon still lives on the Web, where anyone can stumble through sites on humor, photography, fashion, sports, food, and more than 500 other topics.

But the company has also embraced the cultural shift toward mobile devices, introducing iOS and Android-based applications that provide the same surfing experience on the go, or on the couch. In about three years, StumbleUpon has gained a massive mobile following, boasting about 40 percent of its usage from cell phones and tablets.

All together, StumbleUpon has amassed more than 40 billion stumbles, more than 1 billion ratings, and more than 100 million pages indexed, and counting.

Bartels recently spoke with PCMag about the difference between search and discovery, advertising tricks, and the power of the thumb.

PCMag: How did StumbleUpon get its start?

Mark Bartels: StumbleUpon was started in 2002 in Canada by Geoff Smith and Garrett Camp, [who] came down to San Francisco in 2005. [The site was] bought by eBay in 2007, [but] in 2009, they spun off from eBay and became an independent company again. From there we've continued to grow. We're now at 75 employees and are based in San Francisco.

PCMag: What was the original intent behind the creation of StumbleUpon? Has that changed at all in the past 10 years?

MB: We're a personalization engine. Yes, we recommend the news, but we recommend content across every vertical you can think of, from music to videos to products. Essentially, we're a personalization engine that had its roots in Mozilla, where there was a toolbar that users downloaded, and they'd have that toolbar embedded in their browser, and you click the "Stumble" button and it recommended content, based on what your interests were.

One of the bigger changes that we saw in 2009 was that we started to move toward the Web toolbar. At the same time, we started to see the users moving over to mobile. We've followed our users and continued to see a bigger adoption on the mobile side — iOS and Android and tablets and so on.

The exciting thing about Stumble back then, and something we continue to invest in now, is our community. It was a community-curated website, where users would submit great content, they would rate their content, they would share their content, and they would categorize their content. As the user, you would come in and say, 'Here are my interests. I'm interested in golf, surfing, and cooking.' When you click that button, you were not only getting content that was within that target, but it's also been rated and reviewed by a very strong and active community. People talk about personalization engines and recommendation engines, and I think that's the challenge, for any company, is giving the user content that they're interested in but haven't asked for. And that was the problem that Garrett and Geoff tried to solve.

PCMag: Is that still the overarching goal of the company?

MB: [Yes], it's still to recommend great content. I think what has changed is the sources of content. When Garrett and Geoff and the other founders came up with this, things like Twitter and Facebook and MySpace were also just getting started. We've now had to adapt to the different areas of content and where that content's coming from. Now you have Twitter and Facebook, you have Tumblr, and you have Quora; you have all this other user-generated content that we are now ingesting, as well. I think that's what has changed, but the underlying goal — to recommend great content to our users based on what their interests are — hasn't changed. I think people still want that.

PCMag: What changes have you seen both in StumbleUpon as an entity as the discovery/search platform in which it lives?

MB: I don't think people saw the value in discovery [when StumbleUpon launched in 2002]. This has become a big problem that people are trying to solve: How do you customize your feed? How do you curate the fire hose of information that's hitting you through all of these different platforms? It's becoming something that companies like Twitter and Facebook and Google and Amazon want to solve. And so I think we found ourselves in the right place at the right time, with a very large community of users, and a lot of information around different pieces of content. That's been very good for us. What we've also found is that the way users consume content has changed. People now use their smartphones, they use their tablets; they like the lean-back experience. People tend to consume different content at night, and consume different content in the morning. With the advent of all of these other social networking sites and content creators, the landscape's changed. Interestingly, the landscape's changed for the advertisers, as well.

Continue Reading: Paying to Stumble?>

PCMag: Is StumbleUpon something you would ever consider turning into a paid platform?

MB: We used to have a membership that people used to pay a small fee for, but we've discontinued that. At the moment, it's still a free platform. We do have our paid discovery platform, which essentially funds us. We've got 80,000 advertisers using StumbleUpon. At the moment, the paid discovery platform is working really well for us; it's just a matter of scale. The more stumbles, the better for monetization.

PCMag: Can you describe the back-end process when a user clicks the thumbs up or thumbs down icon on any given page?

MB: We have a number of different recommendation methods that we're constantly experimenting with, so it depends on how we serve you that content. If you thumb up a piece of content from someone you follow on StumbleUpon, what you're telling us is that yes, you like the content, but you also might be interested in other content that that person is already curating. It depends on how we served that up to you. Are you getting this piece of content because you're following that person? Are you getting this piece of content because you opted into that type of interest? Or you may have received a piece of content because people shared it with you. You also may have received a piece of content because it may be one out of 20 pieces of paid content that we've served.

When you thumb it up, at times we may exploit that and serve you more content within that same category. If it's a share from another user, you may not have elected that content, so what we do then is we guide you into maybe selecting that. We'll have a pop-up that says, 'You just thumbs upped something in sports. You didn't ask for that, so do you want to see more of this?' It's about constantly expanding your interest space as well.

That's the exciting thing about the platform: You start to go down a rabbit hole, and you start to realize that you are interested in that topic. As soon as that happens, we take it back into the system and we start to recommend and essentially test you. If you thumb that content down, that doesn't necessarily mean that you're not interested, but it may mean that we'll serve you less content from that particular user.

One of the things we rolled out last year was something called lists, which is essentially a tool that allows you to group pieces of content together and then share that content. Someone who's interested in searching, can come up with a list of URLs that have different articles or different videos on it. And that's proved to be very popular. People can then choose that list and start to stumble through that list.

PCMag: Do you chalk up StumbleUpon's massive growth to anything in particular?

MB: A lot of it has been mobile. With the adoption of iOS and Android and the Stumble experience working well on a mobile device, that's definitely proved popular. As we moved away from the downloadable toolbar and moved into the Web toolbar, where you can stumble from anywhere, and then launched our iOS and Android apps — that really helped adoption.

PCMag: What do you consider StumbleUpon's biggest competition?

MB: Our biggest competition is peoples' time. Where do they want to spend their time? When you come home at night, are you going to watch Netflix, or are you going to get on StumbleUpon for an hour? We've got to the point now where we know that people want to use this product in the morning on their commute; they want to get back at night and use it sitting down on the couch and watching TV.

We are trying to curate the whole Web, while some of these other companies are focusing on one particular vertical. If you look at any of the other big competitors out now, I think they're all trying to get into personalization, whether it's on the Facebook wall or on your Twitter feed. I think it just elevates the space that we're in right now, which is: People want their feed personalized. And that's what we're trying to do.

One of the things we like to think we're building here at StumbleUpon is a interest graph; it's not your social graph, it's what you're interested in. That's a combination of what you like, who you follow, who you share to. That amalgamation results in a great recommendation.

PCMag: Are there certain StumbleUpon topics that are resoundingly more popular than others among users?

MB: People love humor and they love comedy; that's a very popular topic. Food and cooking, technology, shopping — most of the usual suspects. Travel, music, and videos … Your classic memes.

PCMag: What sort of feedback do you receive from users?

MB: Our community is very engaged. Sometimes people ask why they received a piece of content, or why they're getting a certain recommendation; people ask for different types of features. We do a lot of outreach and a lot of user surveys to understand what's working and what's not working. We're still a pretty small company and pretty agile; with that type of thing, we can move pretty quickly.

PCMag: What are some features StumbleUpon is working on for the future?

MB: On the community side, we continue to invest in lists; it's a very popular feature, and our users have adopted it. The second thing is platforms. I think everybody accepts that mobile is something we all have to invest in. We also want to move into the living room. StumbleUpon is the perfect product for television, especially our lean-back experience. That means the Stumble experience needs to be the same whether you're on a tablet, whether you're on a smartphone, whether you're on a desktop, or whether you're in the living room on the television. We continue to invest in new platforms across the market across the market.

PCMag: What technology do you and your staff carry on a daily basis?

MB: We are very Apple-centric. Obviously our guys are building Android applications, so we have a lot of them [Android smartphones and tablets] lying around, but on a day-to-day basis we definitely support Apple.

Interview edited for length.

For more, check out PCMag's interviews with:

Pandora Chief Technology Officer Tom Conrad

Pulse co-founder Akshay Kothari

Ouya founder Julie Uhrman

Quixey CEO Tomer Kagan

Songza co-creator Elias Roman

Rdio co-founder Drew Larner and CEO Carter Adamson

Shazam CEO Andrew Fisher

Square CTO Bob Lee

Tumblr's David Karp

Boxee CEO Avner Ronen

Kickstarter co-founder Yancey Strickler

Box CEO Aaron Levie

BuzzFeed CEO Jonah Peretti