Memphis Grizzlies forward Shane Battier is widely considered one of the most cerebral NBA players in the league today. Born to a black father and a white mother, Battier struggled with somewhat of an identity crisis in his childhood days. But he persevered through his pubescent years to become what many would consider a model player and person.

Batter graduated high school with a 3.96 grade point average. He attended Duke University, earning a degree while enjoying a four-year playing career for the men's basketball team. He helped lead the Blue Devils to two Final Fours and the 2001 national championship. In the NBA, Battier has become one of the league's best defenders.

Early on, as a 13-year-old kid, you struggle with expectations. But I quickly figured out that it's OK to be me. And me at my best is pretty darn good.

I was lucky to have good parents who didn't allow me to get caught up in a lot of what's wrong with AAU basketball. For me, it really was just about the basketball. It wasn't about what basketball could do for me at that age. And I think that's a problem for a lot of kids coming up nowadays. It's a broken system. No question about it.

Smarts are more important than physical skills. People don't realize the best players in this league are also the smartest.

At Duke, I learned the importance of bringing it every single day. Consistency. Hard work. Accountability to myself and to my team. I wouldn't be here today without those lessons.

Coach K taught me the importance of the next play. That's a metaphor for life. On the basketball court, if you make a terrible play, you turn it over, what do you do? Do you sit and cry about it? No. You get your tail back and try to get the ball back.

I think the Michael Lewis story shed light on a different way to look at basketball. I've been able to make a career out of it. It wasn't validation for me. I'm proud of my career.

I think advanced statistical analysis is a good way to re-evaluate the game. Is it the end all be all? No. But it's a piece in the puzzle that hasn't been examined before that I think will change the way the game is looked at by everybody.

I enjoy the challenge of basketball. I enjoy the self-improvement. It's great to be in the locker room with these guys and in a battle and play for something that's bigger than yourself.

I'm going to do this for as long as I can and then move on to something else. I don't know what that is.

Hopefully I can be in a position where I can do something every single day that fulfills me and makes me happy and allows me to help others.

I'm most interested in my kid. My 2 1/2-year-old. He's the most interesting thing in the world to me right now.

Being a good teammate means that you have accountability for your actions. For yourself and for the greater benefit of the team.

Mike Dunleavy is my favorite player to guard. He was my college roommate. We usually have a beer on the line over the outcome of the game.

I still think Kobe is the toughest to defend. He has all the tricks.