A few minutes after the Grizzlies beat the Spurs 96-86 on Jan. 9 at FedExForum, Pau Gasol reflected on what had been a vintage duel between him and his brother.

"We don’t know how many of those are left, so we have to enjoy the heck out of each and every one," Pau said.

With several members of their family in the crowd, Marc scored 26 points and had 14 rebounds while 38-year-old Pau nimbly grabbed 12 rebounds and scored seven points in his third game back from missing extended time with a foot injury.

It was a vintage Gasol night in the building and city that launched each of their NBA careers.

And it turned out to be the final time the two would play against each other at FedExForum.

In town again Tuesday with the Spurs, Pau acknowledged that being in Memphis without a Gasol as part of the Grizzlies would be "very different."

"It's going to take me some time to get used to that fact," he said before his Spurs took on the Grizzlies at FedExForum. "But I feel in some way that name and our presence will always be here, whether somebody is wearing that jersey or not."

When the Grizzlies traded Marc to the Raptors last week, the franchise lost affiliation with the Gasol family for the first time since the franchise moved to Memphis in 2001 and acquired Pau, who played six and a half seasons with the team.

The Grizzlies traded Pau to the Lakers in 2008 and acquired the rights to Marc, who debuted as a 23-year-old NBA rookie at the beginning of the 2008-09 season.

Marc played 10 and a half seasons with the Grizzlies, and team owner Robert Pera announced last week that he will have his jersey retired someday.

"I think our legacy and our presence here – especially Marc's because he has been here quite a bit longer than I was – will always be here," Pau said. "His period here will always be here, just like Mike (Conley). I think a lot of Memphians feel that way and the Grizzlies franchise feels that way."

Pau left the Grizzlies as the franchise's all-time leader in points, rebounds and several other categories. Marc left last week as the all-time leader in many of the same categories, including points and rebounds.

Like his brother, Marc was traded to a title contender in second-place Toronto.

"I just think it speaks highly of the appreciation and respect to the player when you put them in a position to succeed and you put him in a position that he wants to be in," said Pau, who won two NBA titles with the Lakers. "They did that with me, and I'll forever be grateful. And I think they've done that with Marc as well. We cannot be more appreciative of the people involved in making those calls, ownership and management."

And while their time playing against each other with Marc as a member of the Grizzlies is over, the brothers appear destined for at least one more meeting.

The Spurs and Raptors play Feb. 22 in Toronto in the first game after the All-Star break.

Reach Grizzlies beat writer David Cobb at david.cobb@commercialappeal.com or on Twitter @DavidWCobb.

More: How Jonas Valanciunas fits with Grizzlies

More: How C.J. Miles fits with Grizzlies