Before a group of screaming fans yelling his name, Pau Gasol asked them a simple question that sent them into a louder frenzy.

“Do you want to be on my team?” Gasol asked.

He uttered those words Monday at the Boys & Girls Club in downtown Los Angeles to mark the beginning of his self-named foundation.

As part of his initiative to promote a healthy lifestyle, Gasol and his brother, Marc, of the Memphis Grizzlies will coach two different teams in what’s called “The Healthy Competition 2013” running from June 10 through Aug. 2.

Using gifted Nike Fuelbands (retailed at $149) to track the teams’ progress, either Pau or Marc will have to shave their beard if their respective team loses.

The 150 elementary school kids eagerly took up Gasol’s invitation.

It remains to be seen, though, whether the Lakers will become just as enthusiastic in keeping Gasol.

For the second consecutive year, the Lakers have offered no definite assurances on Gasol’s future in what would be the final year of his contract worth $19.3 million.

“It’s kind of like the usual,” Gasol said. “It’s nothing different. Nothing too exciting. The franchise is going through a little bit of a transition with Dr. (Jerry) Buss’ passing so that’s inevitable.”

The Lakers have plenty of uncertainty this offseason. They’ll find out how the dynamic between Jim Buss (vice president of player personnel) and Jeanie Buss (vice president of business operations) works without their father’s leadership. They’ll also wait for Dwight Howard to decide whether he will to return.

He would sign a five-year deal worth $118 million with the Lakers, as opposed to a four-year deal worth $87.6 million with any other teams.Once he becomes an unrestricted free agent July 1, Howard still plans to test the open market and views the Lakers, Houston, Dallas, Atlanta and Golden State as possible considerations.

“I haven’t talked to him,” Gasol said. “I think he has to make the decision. It’s a big decision. We’ll see what he ends up deciding. I understand he’s going to take his time and I’m sure he’s going to continue to do that. It’s his future and his life. You have to respect that.”

Although he described his uncertain future as “draining” and “not ideal” in his exit interview last month, Gasol also said he respects the Lakers for their indecisiveness toward him.

“I think the team has shown they would like to keep me,” Gasol said. “But I understand there’s a lot of other factors that come into place. Those factors cannot be ignored.”

There’s plenty.

First, the Lakers won’t do anything with Gasol unless they receive clarity on Howard’s future. If Howard stays, the Lakers have to weigh various scenarios.

The Lakers could trade Gasol in hopes of finding a younger and more suitable player for Mike D’Antoni’s perimeter-oriented system after Gasol averaged a career-low 13.7 points on 46.6 percent shooting. The Lakers could waive Gasol via the amnesty provision. Or the Lakers could listen to Kobe Bryant’s insistence to keep Gasol, hoping he’ll become the dominant post player that secured three consecutive Finals appearances and two NBA championships after the Lakers acquired him from Memphis five years ago.

Gasol didn’t offer that this season, partly because he missed 33 games due to various ailments, including knee tendonitis, a concussion and plantar fascia in his right foot. He underwent the so-called “Fast Technique” procedure on three weeks ago, which entailed having a probe inserted into both of his knees to direct to eliminate scar tissue without damaging the healthy tissue.

Four days after walking without crutches, Gasol appeared mobile enough to move with ease and playfully block shots with kids at the Boys & Girls Club.

“It’s getting better,” said Gasol, who plans to swim soon to test out his knees. “It’s a long recovery. I’m still in the early stages of it.”

The Lakers expect Gasol to return to basketball-related activities within nine weeks. As he heads to his native Spain this week, Gasol hopes that time span also coincides with assurances his last days in Los Angeles didn’t serve as a definitive goodbye.

“Regardless of what happens in the basketball side, I’m always going to do certain things that I love to do,” said Gasol, who also threw out the first pitch Monday at when the Dodgers hosted San Diego at Dodger Stadium. “Whether basketball is going great or not working out so good, I’m going to continue to do my activity and support with the organizations I’m involved with. Now that I have my foundation, it’s a huge motivation for me.”