Everything happens for a reason. Mistakes and achievements both come with lessons. I’m a firm believer in that.

As I drove from FedExForum on Sunday night, I thought about some of the moments that positioned me to become the Memphis Grizzlies beat writer at The Commercial Appeal — in the city where I was born and raised.

The first professional basketball game I attended was a Grizzlies game in the second grade after winning tickets at Getwell Elementary. My brother and I also won posters, so Pau Gasol and Shane Battier hung out on our bedroom door.

More: Dillon Brooks' 37 points can't save Memphis Grizzlies' five-game win streak

I thought about the streetball hoops. Putting a basketball goal at the end of the road with a tire and bricks holding it down and playing until the streetlights came on or someone scraped their knee too hard on the pavement.

Or even when I got older and entered the journalism industry. I went to a meeting for students interested in broadcast TV at the University of Tennessee during my freshman year. I felt the interview process wasn’t thorough, and ultimately, I wasn’t selected. I was crushed. This was what I always wanted to do. But losing out on that opportunity opened the door for me to work at the student newspaper, where I covered tennis, soccer, baseball, softball, football and basketball.

Good or bad, those events — and many others — led me to a desirable destination.

The Grizzlies are one of the NBA’s youngest teams and have a stable core that is beginning to taste success, led by Ja Morant. I was a college intern when Jaren Jackson Jr.’s draft-day news conference was held in the FedExForum lobby in 2018, and now he’s blossoming into a two-way star.

As Memphians, there is something different about our work ethic, which is why the Grit and Grind Grizzlies captured the fervor of the city in such a meaningful way.

It’s also why during my senior year of college at UT, I worked for four media outlets. I covered high school sportsfor two, had my own radio show and provided digital content for the student newspaper. After leaving college and interning at Sports Illustrated, I spent the past two-and-a-half years at The Philadelphia Inquirer. I started covering college basketball and boxing before being promoted to sports culture reporter, which gave me the time to explore topics in the NBA and other sports that many journalists often can't.

In my new job, you can expect me to chronicle how the Grizzlies intersect with the culture of this city. I pride myself on being detailed and working with that grind synonymous with Memphis. Everything in a Grizzlies game will happen for a reason, and I want to dissect those small turning points with large consequences.

But basketball is often bigger than 48 minutes. Sneakers, fashion, music, community work and food are all big parts of NBA culture. Each of those will be incorporated into our coverage.

As I pulled into the driveway at home on Sunday night, I sat for another 15 minutes. I thought about the times I would get The Commercial Appeal newspaper after I hit a home run for my alma mater, Overton High School, just to see my name under the game score.

Now, my byline will appear as the one telling stories on one of the NBA’s rising teams. Grab a seatbelt and take this ride down I-240 with me.

I'm ready for a fun journey.