Hello guys!

Today’s second entry for Black History Month will be all about Afro-Cuban singer ‘La Lupe’ (Lupe Victoria Yoli Raymond) also known as the Queen of Latin Soul. It is important to me to also put out facts of one of salsa’s forgotten voices, while we already know a lot about Celia Cruz, a lot of the newer generation (25 and under like me) don’t know about La Lupe other than the portrayal from the Celia series (she was the inspiration for antagonist role Lola Calvo played by Carolina Gaitan). To those who don’t know, she was one of the first unapologetic sexual women in Latino culture back in the day, she used to strip in her performances which was controversial yet iconic at the same time, once again, black women were doing some real shit back in the day: You had Celia Cruz who broke boundaries on how salsa music should be sung and on the other side of the spectrum you had La Lupe who brought sensuality and femininity to boleros but these two had their differences, they did admire each other to an extent but where was no friendship to speak of in real life.

Here are five facts you must know about La Lupe:

Born and raised in Santiago de Cuba in 1939 then moved to La Habana. She enrolled in the University of Cuba to become a teacher, later graduated.

She married her first husband Eulogio ‘Yoyo’ Reyes and formed a musical trio in 1958 called Los Tropiccuba that later broke up her marriage in 1960. Her beginnings as a solo performer saw the release of her debut album ‘Con El Diablo en el Cuerpo’ (With the Devil Inside) on RCA Victor.

Her singing style and lyrics were not well seen by the Cuban Revolution which is why she had exiled to Mexico in 1962. It is said her manager told her to move to New York due to its liberalness, she recorded ten records in five years.

Her first televised performance caused some frenzy in viewers due to her sexually charged lyrics (In short, she had ‘em S H O O K)

Her back catalog not only covered boleros, it also explored Puerto Rican bomba and plena, Caribbean genres.

The decline of her career was due to poor sales and rise of salsa with Celia Cruz under Fania Records, it was also her performance inconsistency that led to her downfall. Yes, she did have mental health issues but she was a lot more than her own addiction, people tend to consider La Lupe as ‘the lost one’ because of how she indulged in promiscuity (unlike Celia Cruz), drugs, she lived her own life, minding her own business in such controversial times so all she wanted to do was make music and find somebody to love.

Was there any beef between Celia and La Lupe? Well, there was.

Off the record interview: La Lupe expressed her discontent with Cruz taking over Tico Records (who was bought by Fania) and feeling she was not well managed. She got fired after an ultimatum by Celia to the label. In short, bad management, privileges over a favorite and poor sales led to her downfall, I guess her provocative style also played a role in this because let’s keep it real, the 70s were not as free as today, the ‘hoe’ vs ‘saint’ stereotype had to do a lot with how these two were seen. No one can deny her energy on stage, she knew how to put on a show and her vocals … holy shit, she knew how to belt, keep it sexy, just look at her.

Remember her for the lovely soulful voice and energetic performances she gave at the time, sex positive before it became a thing. She was truly … magic.

Rocio 💋