Rev. Msgr. John Joseph Sullivan 1926 ~ 2005 Monsignor John Joseph Sullivan, a native of Tooele, Utah, died St. Patrick's Day, March 17, 2005. He was born May 28, 1926. After attending public schools in Tooele, he attended Saint Joseph's College in Mountain View, California, and St. Patrick's Seminary in Menlo Park. He was ordained a priest in the Cathedral of the Madeleine May 13, 1951. Most of his priestly life was dedicated to parish ministry, where his love for people, especially the poor, made him so well loved. He served as pastor at Saint Olaf Parish, Bountiful, in Bingham Canyon and Copperton, at Saint Patrick's in Salt Lake City, Saint Marguerite's in Tooele and finally at Saint Ann Parish, Salt Lake City. In each assignment, Monsignor encouraged devotion to the Most Holy Eucharist and devotion to the Blessed Virgin Mary, evidenced by the annual Rosary rally at Saint Ann Parish. It was his practice to visit homes of parishioners, to reach out to those in need, especially through the Legion of Mary. He enjoyed parish socials that built community spirit. Monsignor Sullivan was known as a builder. In Copperton, West Jordan and Tooele he built parish facilities, as he did at Saint Ann's in Salt Lake. So too, he was a builder of pride and self-esteem for minority groups, especially Hispanics. During his tenure in Bingham Canyon he was an ardent supporter of workers' rights to unionize. His support for Catholic Education epitomized his love for youth. His efforts to counteract gang influence amongst youth were outstanding. At the Diocesan level Monsignor served as a consulter to two bishops, and on numerous committees. He was named a Prelate of Honor in January of 1988, and a Protonotary Apostolic in April of 2001 by Pope John Paul II, in recognition of his years of faithful devotion to the works of the Catholic Church. He was a member of the Equestrian Order of the Holy Sepulcher of Jerusalem. He worked hard, served generously, and spoke his mind as occasion required. His personal lifestyle was simple, his charity unseen. He is survived by his sister, Eileen Kramer, of Anchorage, Alaska; and three nephews, Joseph, Timothy, and Charles; as well as many friends throughout Utah. He was preceded in death by his niece, Diana Crapps. Special thanks to staff and residents at Christus St. Joseph Villa, where Monsignor's last years were specially blessed. In lieu of flowers, please make donations to the scholarship fund for needy students at Keams-St. Ann School. A Funeral Mass will be celebrated Wednesday, March 23, 2005, 11 a.m. at the Cathedral of the Madeleine, 331 E. South Temple. A vigil service will be held Tuesday at 7 p.m., March 22, 2005 also at the Cathedral with a viewing to follow. Committal, Mt. Calvary Catholic Cem-etery, 4th Ave. and T Street. Funeral directors, Neil O'Donnell & Sons.