The following report is courtesy of Paul Borchert from Moregoatthangoose.com:

Concert photographs can tell a person a lot about the band that is performing. A good photographer is able to capture the energy of a show, whereas a great photographer is able to make the observer feel as if they were actually present watching the band live. After spending some time flipping through A 2007 Punk Rock Calendar: Nardwuar The Human Serviette VS. Bev Davies I feel as if I have been time warped back to the 1980s, experiencing punk music for the first time. The calendar, a collaboration between photographer Bev Davies and music journalist Nardwuar, reads more like a book than any calendar I have ever seen before. In 12 pages Davies and Nardwuar capture the essence of the early days of punk rock including shots of numerous Canadian legends such as DOA and the SUBHUMANS as well as punk staples like the RAMONES and THE CLASH.

Each month features a full page band photograph. Below each photograph is a short interview in which Nardwuar asks Davies a series of questions regarding the picture, providing insight into the bands and the early days of punk music in Vancouver.

Some of the photographs are absolutely outstanding including my personal favourite, a photo of Johnny Thunders wrapped in an Italian flag while performing at Vancouver's Rock Room in 1981. Apparently the show was the band's first appearance in Canada, Thunders showed up at the border with only a New York City Library Card as ID, luckily the show's promoter had connections in the border guard and was able to get the group into Canada to play the gig. Behind every photo Davies takes there is an interesting story that follows. Other highlights include a haunting photo of the late Joe Strummer turning his back to smoke a cigarette while the rest of the band handles questions from the media during a 1983 press conference. The month of May features an action shot of DOA, a band that both Davies and Nardwuar suggest were the roots of punk music.

"A 2007 Punk Rock Calendar" examines an era of punk music showcasing such bands as THE AVENGERS, BLACK FLAG, Motörhead, POINTED STICKS, GANG OF FOUR, THE DEAD KENNEDYS as well as the afore-mentioned bands. A 2007 Punk Rock Calendar is the perfect alternative to cutesy animal or swim suit calendars. Bev Davies and Nardwuar chronicle a generation of music and the calendar is a resource for all music enthusiasts.