Manchester Museum (website) is owned by the University of Manchester. The museum displays works of archaeology, anthropology and natural history. It holds one of the largest Egyptology exhibitions.

It is the UK’s largest university museum, serving as a major visitor attraction and as a resource for academic teaching and research. From the beginning of September, schools around Greater Manchester are able to hire an Inflatable Manchester Museum to help children experience history closer to their schools. It has around 360,000 visitors each year.

The museum’s first collections were assembled by the Manchester Society of Natural History formed in 1821 with the purchase of the collection of John Leigh Philips. The Manchester Geological Society’s collections were added in 1850. By the 1860’s both societies encountered financial difficulties and, advice from an evolutionary biologist Thomas Huxley, the University of Manchester (then called the Owens College) accepted responsibility for the collections in 1867. The museum in Peter Street was sold in 1875 after Owens College moved to new buildings in Oxford Street.

Alfred Waterhouse, architect of London’s Natural History Museum, was commissioned to design a museum, in order to house the collections for the benefit of students and the public on a site in Oxford Road (then Oxford Street). The Manchester Museum was opened to the public in 1888. At the time, the scientific departments of the college were immediately adjacent, and students entered the galleries from their teaching rooms in the Beyer Building. The 1927 extension was built to house the ethnographic collections.

Here are some photographs from the Museum.

I enjoyed the skeletons collection, because these show how someone or something was built. They are also quite interesting to sketch.

Here is a small part of the monetary collection displayed permanently in the Museum.

Another section, were the various fossils and collections from different parts of the world.

In few of the jars, there were spiders, butterflies, worms and other insects.

The other section that I always get back to is just around the balcony where the ‘Jars’ collection is.

These always remind me of prints and the experimentation processes, as well as sketchbook work that we do in art.

Okay, so that’s it. 😀