As a fan of 80s horror and sci-fi/horror sometimes I tend to forget how rapey some of those creature features were, and that can all be traced back to the influence of Alien (1979). The xenomorph in that flick went through three stages and two of them were kind of rapey; the facehugger Kane got on his face, and what the hell did the adult stage do to Lambert?! The last we see of it its tail is coming up between her legs and then those god-awful screams over the ship’s intercom. I’d say it got fairly rapey with her. Being the success Alien was the inevitable rip-offs and homages came about, two of them came from prolific filmmaker Roger Corman, but only one of them had something rapey in it; I’m talking about the infamous giant-maggot-rape-scene in Galaxy Of Terror (1981). Another Alien rip-off called, Xtro (1982), also had a stage evolving extraterrestrial and, yeah, you guessed it, it got pretty damn rapey. More aliens, more rapists are also seen in Breeders (1986) and Inseminoid (1981).

On a brief side note, supernatural rapists also entered that era in The Entity (1982), The Incubus (1982) and Mausoleum (1983). Entity and Incubus were essentially flipsides of the same coin, both were about Incubi, with Entity being done more as a plausible haunting and Incubus being done more as a creature feature, both are based on novels, and Entity on a real life case. Mausoleum was more about a woman possessed by a succubus-type demon, notable for the munching mouths she had on her tits. And then there’s Lifeforce (1985), based on the novel by Colin Wilson, the only big-budget theatrically released film about space vampires, energy sucking extraterrestrials who’s main antagonist is a hot female who uses sex as a weapon, obviously engaging in Succubus-style rapey scenarios to get her “food.”

And now we come to the flicks I’m reviewing right here, two monster movies, Humanoids From The Deep (1980) and The Beast Within (1982), who are indeed extremely rapey, but not to inflict random, psychopathic sexual violence upon women and get off on it, but to spawn, to breed, to mate. Coincidentally, both have a H.P. Lovecraft vibe, neither are direct adaptations of anything Lovecraft wrote though, but in the case of Humanoids, the inspiration of “The Shadow Over Innsmouth” is kind of there for those of us who are fans of that author to notice. And in Beast, names of Lovecraft’s characters from the novella “The Case Of Charles Dexter Ward” (“Curwen” and “Dexter Ward”) are given to a couple of characters, though Curwen is spelled Curwin in the movie, and despite the direct name drops it too has an overall Lovecraftian vibe, in fact the concept of his Innsmouth tale and The Beast Within tackle the same horrific concept of a lineage of corrupt spawning, of a main character who starts out human, but is pulled back to his “hometown” as an adult due to the mutant genetics within him and the urge to keep the corrupt spawning going.

Loosely based on a novel of the same name by Edward Levy, The Beast Within (1982) is about a type of supernatural revenge plot against a specific family line (the Curwins) down in the deep south that uses the cycle of the 17-year cicada as its metaphoric basis. It has one of the best trailers for a monster movie I’ve ever seen, check it out at the end of the review, using as its selling point the incredible transformation sequence in the final act!

The movie is divided into three chapters: The First Night, The Second Night, and The Final Night, with each night showcasing a murder of a Curwin, with only one happening in the day, and not to a Curwin, but to a friend of the murderer, Tom Laws (Ron Sable), a Native American who knew Billy Connors when they were boys. The movie never delves into how Connors was able to exact this kind of revenge, and it never delves into his character much to begin with, using only dialogue from the town physician Doc Schoonmaker (R.G. Armstrong), Laws, and our “possessed” lead, 17-year old Michael MacCleary (Paul Clemens), to relate what kind of boy he was, and how this revenge has warped his soul. Well, I would assume revenge of any kind tends to do that. What’s that old saying, when you seek revenge, you dig two graves, one for your enemy and one for yourself? With that in mind, yes, this movie has an incredibly downbeat ending for Michael, even though Connors succeeds in getting his revenge from beyond the grave 17 years later, and whether he intended for it to happen or not, to carry on the “cycle.”

So, what’s this revenge all about? The movie is constructed as a type of mystery as our lead, Micheal, his father Eli (Ronny Cox) and his mother Caroline (Bibi Besch), are pulled back to Nioba, Mississippi, where 17 years before Caroline was raped after their car got stuck on the side of the road one dark night while on their honeymoon. Eli went off on foot back to the gas station, leaving her in the car alone, and this thing came upon her, chased her into the woods and raped her as she lay unconscious after concussing herself by running into a tree. Some people laugh at things like that happening in horror movies, but trust me running in the woods at night—yes, there is the possibility you can run full force into a tree and knock your ass out. Never happened to me, but I almost put an eye out running into a stick; thankfully, the stick jabbed me in the eyebrow, any lower and it would have poked my eye clean out.

Anyhow, Michael is born, but now that he’s 17 he has a problem with his pituitary gland, and it’s essentially out of control and killing him. Eli wants to take him to a better hospital in Houston, but Caroline forces him to come to the realization he might not be Eli’s but that “dude,” that raped her. At this point in the movie everyone presumes the rapist was a man—well, they’re half right, he started out as a man. There’s two plot lines going in this film, one concerning Eli and Caroline looking for information about the rape, and Mike’s, who under the “possession” of Billy Connors is able to get himself well enough to go out and stalk the night and seek out a Curwin to murder, and we won’t get the “why” until deep into the third act when Judge Curwin (Don Gordon) is finally forced to tell what the fuck is going on. He tells a story of his wife cheating on his brother with a dude named, Billy Connors; when the brother found out he killed his wife and locked Billy in the basement. We only ever get a nanosecond flashback to this incident through a dream Mike has of a shadowy figure tossing someone down the stairs. He kept Billy there until he was starving, he then tossed the body of his wife down and told Billy, “you wanted her—here she is,” and Billy made the choice to quench that hunger by feeding on her corpse. This brother, being the town undertaker, found it pathetically easy to steal corpses to feed Billy. I guess at this point he didn’t want to kill the kid outright, but to continue torturing him in this sick, twisted manner.

According to Laws, in an encounter with possessed Michael, who’s now more Billy than Mike for this interaction, drunk Laws cryptically relates something Billy might have learned, something related to Native American lore, “Can you get through anything by becoming something else?” It’s the only “hint” how this Connors, who was known to be more in tune with nature, may have concocted this very specific and insidious plot of getting even for his torture and death. To essentially rebirth himself like a cicada. For those not aware there’s an insect known as a 17-year cicada that remains a nymph in the ground for 17 years, then it climbs a tree to shed its skin to become a winged adult where it goes off to mate and start the cycle all over again. I think there are also 13-year cicadas. Yes, this magnificent practical effect transformation in the final act is Mike shedding his skin to become a freakish, humanoid creature, so it can kill the rest of the Curwins, and mate with the movie’s love interest Amanda Platt (Kitty Moffat), who’s father, Horace (John Dennis Johnston), is the Judge’s cousin, or was; he meets a bloody end during the transformation sequence.

I enjoyed how the plot bounces from parents to son. Characterization of Mike and Bily ares kept sketchy and ambiguous, at points; it’s mostly surface level, with dreams he has. Clemens puts in a damn fine performance as Mike, and as Billy; the personality change when he’s murderous is accentuated by really creepy makeup by FX artist Tom Burman, who also created the transformation sequence and the final creature. When you watch Clemens, always keep in mind when he’s Mike, I think there’s a subconscious undertone of Billy controlling him, so most of the decisions he makes when interacting with characters other than his parents gives you the vibe everything this kid is doing feels premeditated towards getting the Curwins dead. Even wooing Amanda, who Mike seems genuinely smitten with, but when the shit really begins to hit the fan, you’ll understand Billy may be more in control here, because she’s a Curwin and she too has to die, but after shedding his skin, I guess, genetics took over and he “mated” (aka raped) with her instead in a scene reminiscent of how Caroline was raped in the 1964 prologue.

The first murder is cannibalistic, with Mike destroying newspaper editor Edwin Curwin (Logan Ramsey); the Judge finding his body with half his arm eaten off. Most of the supporting actors put in very good performances that captures Southern small town life, with Luke Askew putting in an understated and eccentric performance as town undertaker, Dexter Ward. L.Q. Jones who plays Sheriff Bill Poole also puts in a very good understated performance. I saw him later in the Chuck Norris pseudo-western Lone Wolf McQuade (1983). Undertaker Ward is basically embalmed alive; Laws is electrocuted, and the Judge faces off with fully transformed Billy in a section of the movie that turns into a siege with all the surviving characters holing up in the police station as the creature attempts to get inside to take out the Judge. Ultimately, the Judge has his head ripped off, the monster shoving his arms through a wall to do it.

Full circle, back to the prologue—Billy was able to finally break out of his prison basement but not as the kid who went into it. Revealed through dialogue shared by the Sheriff it sounds like he then killed Curwin and then burned his house down. We’re never shown what he looks like, all his scenes in the prologue are POV, with overlain sounds that make him sound like a monster now. After Caroline was raped we hear gunshots in the distance, the assumption being he was found and gunned down, but his deformed, skeletal remains are found back in the basement later on, so he went back there after the carnage he created and, I guess, it was then he was probably gunned down?

Thank God I was alive in the 80s (ages 11-20 for me), and a lover of movies, especially monster movies, in my opinion the 80s was essentially the best decade not just for them, but for all kinds of genre flicks! The early 80s specifically saw a big leap forward in what FX artists were willing to try to make human-to-monster transformations more believable. They were pushing the makeup, puppetry, cable and bladder technology to their breaking point for that elusive realism not yet seen. The year of 1981 is noteworthy in this regard, the first movie on the scene to show this off was The Howling (1981); Rob Bottin would go down in the annals of history (with some assistance from FX artist Rick Baker) to be the first to show us what an actual transformation of human to werewolf might look like. Later that year, Baker would try his own hand at seeing if he could do one better by showing us his man-to-werewolf transformation in An American Werewolf In London. Both Bottin and Baker’s takes on lycanthrope are impressive, with Bottin’s lycans being more humanoid and Baker’s being more more four-legged. The remake of Cat People (1982) came next, the shapeshifting was not as impressive, but coming in more artistic. Tom Burman created the effects for that one, he also created the effects for The Beast Within, and the shapeshifting in this film is much more impressive, I’d say on the scale of Bottin and Baker’s effects, just with a different type of monster that still weirdly feels like an original take on the werewolf mythos. Just as a side note, Rob Bottin would also create the “Humanoids” for the next flick in this review, and would end up outdoing himself in 1982 (with some help with another upcoming “God” of effects, Stan Winston) by creating the Lovecraftian shapeshifting alien of John Carpenter’s The Thing! A feat yet to be surpassed, despite there being a prequel made in 2011 that had most of its practical effects replaced with CGI. Beyond this early 80s period practical effects would continue to get more refined and better as new makeup technology and ingredients were created, and then summarily sidelined for some time once Jurassic Park (1993) proved this thing called computer generated effects (CGI) had the potential to make monsters and transformations ultra realistic. And it has, given you have the right people, the right amount of money, and the right level of artistry to pull it off. But we’re so deep into the era of CGI, the youth who weren’t alive in the practical effects days are just now discovering these 80s monster movies and as expected, and as I hoped, are marvelling at how more realistic they look than CGI. Have no fear though, there are still monster movies being made that still prefer using practical over CG; and truth be told it is possible to blend the two, making a perfect symmetry of using mostly practical, with CG used as a “cleanup tool” to erase wires and green screen/objects/actors that in the olden days would have to be taken out of frame by clever cinematography. Now that I’m done setting the stage, just giving you some historical color, for the showstopper of a transformation in The Beast Within that I’m going to hit you with in the next few paragraphs. Oh, and with more photos too!! By the way, fun factoid, Paul Clemens also played the monster in this movie!

I vividly remember seeing the trailer for this late one night, and back in the day, even though TV spots were cut to advertise movies on the ole’ boob tube, on occasion it wasn’t uncommon to see a full movie trailer. I caught the full trailer for Near Dark (1987) late one night on basic TV too. I was 12 when I saw The Beast Within’s trailer. I had a friend in school who told me about how he’d seen it, and I believe by the time I saw it a mere day or two had passed. As usual parents and brother were already asleep, and I was in the living room, lights out, watching whatever I was watching that night when suddenly the trailer airs!! Part of the transformation is shown, and I quickly noticed it appears to be happening to a kid in a bed, which gave me shivering memories of The Exorcist (1973)!! I thought, oh, no, not that movie again?! William Friedkin’s film scarred me, and it still gives me the willies to this day.

After Mike tries to kill himself he’s taken back to the makeshift hospital Doc Schoonmaker is keeping him in, it might be a room next to his private practice, I was never sure, but he warns everyone around him if they don’t kill him soon, they’re not going to be able to stop him. This all coming to a head on ‘The Third Night.’ He’s tied to the bed after he freaks out and now he’s looking a lot like Regan tied to her bed in The Exorcist. Not quite, actually, but scriptwriter Tom Holland must have been influenced by that movie for this final, shocking part. A quick montage photo below encapsulates the transformation!! Clemens did a pitch perfect job acting in the makeup, and making it look painful and traumatizing. Aside from American Werewolf In London, what a lot of these transformation movies have in common is there’s always a witness(es) to the transformation. Back when I was a kid I never questioned it until I got older and realized, why are they just standing there?! Run the fuck away!! Doc and Mike’s mother just stand there watching him transform, at least in the mother’s case, Besch puts in an excellent performance of being shocked to shit at what she’s seeing. Then the Judge and Horace rush into the room, Horace planning on blowing the kid away, and they too end up “mesmerized” by the transformation!!

Later on, after Mike kills Horace, and rampages out of the building, his shed skin is found in the woods nearby!! Now, as I understand it, Holland’s transformation sequence couldn’t be done the way he wrote it due to the limited technology at the time, and the design of the thing Mike turns into was a lot more insectile. That’s interesting and all, but I do like the design Burman and his crew came up with, it’s more humanoid freakish, more believable, almost a second cousin to the monster Rick Baker and Craig Reardon came up with for Tobe Hooper’s The Funhouse (1981).

Here are some behind-the-scene FX photos of Tom Burman’s monster you can find in the Photo Gallery on Arrow Video’s (UK) blu-ray. Click photos to enlarge.

Top: The Doc and Mike’s parents come across his shed skin. Middle: Made up Clemens sits next to his shed skin. Bottom: Cut from the film, Burman designed a mutated sex organ to be deployed during the rapes, but it was deemed to explicit, you can see it in its resting position on the final suit in this photo though. You can’t see it all in the movie.

Unlike The Beast Within, Roger Corman’s Humanoids From The Deep (1980) is not about the internal conflict of a person slowly metamorphosing into a monster; it’s more cut and dry, the lines drawn are fairly black and white, there are indeed monsters, plural this time, but no one’s transforming, and it’s more species versus species: humans combatting humanoid fishmen. The only similarity with The Beast Within is the rape element, and the need to “mate,” and like Philippe Mora’s film there are exactly two rapes, though not bookending the film, both are spaced apart in the middle. However, if you check out the deleted scenes on the blu-ray there were three other girls who were attacked, two were clearly raped, while one was kidnapped as she waded into the water, most likely taken to some secret place where she was raped though. I’ll go more into the deleted scenes later.

Director Barbara Peeters’ film has a motley crew of characters making you wonder which ones are the leads and which ones are creature fodder. As a kid I was naturally drawn to the two young couples: Jerry Potter (Meegan King) and Peggy Lawson (Lynn Theel), and Linda Beale (Denise Galik) and Tommy Hill (Breck Costin). Shockingly everyone but Tommy in this demographic ends up dead by the end, and his condition is dire the last time we see him. A Humanoid slammed his head several times against a dock and he was quickly rushed to a hospital once their friend Johnny Eagle (Anthony Pena) was able to blow the motherfucker away before it had a chance to kill him outright. So, it would appear the bit older demographic are our leads: Jim Hill (Doug McClure), Tommy’s much older brother, his wife Carol (Cindy Weintraub), scientist Dr. Susan Drake (Ann Turkel) and the movie’s “human monster” Hank Slattery (Vic Morrow). A lot of these monster movies generally feature a human antagonist to complicate matters. The Beast Within had three, with Horace Platt being the most unhinged. Generally, though, these “human monsters” careen headfirst into Karma during the film. Humanoids upends that trope, giving racist Slattery an unexpected hero moment during the final act rampage of the monsters at a festival, saving a little girl and reluctantly accepting help from Native American Eagle. Slattery’s goon squad of bullies, however, end up meeting bloody ends!

This tale of rape and mating takes place in the harbor town of Noyo, California; looking at it through the eyes of Lovecraft, Noyo could be Innsmouth before the “Deep Ones” took it over and made it a hub of transforming hybrids, with the Humanoids standing in for the “Deep Ones.” Unfortunately all the background info on this movie I’ve ever come across never reveals if the screenwriters were fans of Lovecraft. If not, I’m guessing their inspiration was probably let’s do a R-rated Creature From The Black Lagoon (1954). Some reviews, though, theorize this is more a R-rated The Horror Of Party Beach (1964) scenario. I can see that, that’s a dopey movie about teens being menaced by goofy looking humanoid fishmen. Noyo is a blue collar fishing community that’s torn whether they want this new cannery from a company called, CanCo, to be built nearby. It’ll supply the community with bigger and better salmon, but Johnny Eagle and the rest of his Native American friends are fighting it. Slattery, Hill and everyone else are fishermen who are for it; Slattery, however, sees Eagle as an impediment to this happening and isn’t above doing underhanded and illegal shit to get hm out of the way. One such act involves blowing up his cabin with the most explosive molotov cocktail ever made; and kicking the shit out of him at a local meet and greet (and dance) with CanCo royalty.

Mixed into this subplot are the “humanoids” that are already on the scene when the movie starts: their M.O. when encountering a couple is to gruesomely kill the dude and then rape/mate with the chick. Jerry and Peggy meet that criteria, so does Tim and Linda, but the latter two managed to escape that fate. I already mentioned Tim’s fate; Linda, though, ends up dead by accidentally driving her truck off a bridge and getting blown up in it. Yes, this is the 80s, and vehicles back then had a tendency to randomly explode upon any kind of impact, hard or soft. In her defense, she was fighting a humanoid who was trying to get at her.

There’s also a random couple camping on a beach the humanoids encounter; they’re about to have sex when the poor dude is killed. Becky (Lisa Glaser) manages to run like hell away, stark naked, but bumps into a humanoid that tosses her ass onto the ground and starts humping her. She’s never seen again. Peggy is the only raped chick found and taken to a hospital; found in a section of out-of-the-way beachfront the humanoids are using as a lair, drowned in seaweed she is, and barely alive. Her fate is seen in a quick prologue I’ll get to later. It’s not good, is all I’ll say, people. Not good at all.

Retrospective article from Fangoria #265 (2007). There’s also a 40 year retrospective in issue #25 (2020) of Delirium Magazine. Click photos to enlarge & read.

Okay, let’s get to the meat and potatoes of this creature feature, I know what ya’ll are thinking, so, who’s responsible for bringing these horny fishmen into creation? That would be the aforementioned scientist Dr. Susan Drake. After Drake, Hill and Eagle stumbled upon Peggy, and had to gun down a few Humanoids in the process, she takes one of the corpses back to CanCo, and reveals the new DNA she’s been injecting into the salmon to speed along their life cycle, some of the test subjects got out into the ocean, and for whatever reason she theorizes a thought-to-be-extinct fish known as a coelacanth (since they’ve been found recently to be inhabiting the local waters) ate them and evolved into these humanoid creatures, and with it came an overwhelming urge to mate with humans.

Before FX artist Rob Bottin (pronounced Boe-teen) got well known for creating the mindblowing effects for John Carpenter’s The Thing (1982), he designed and created the Humanoids for this flick. Another famous FX artist helped him, Chris Walas, the dude who created the effects for David Cronenberg’s remake of The Fly (1986). Until I got a hold of Scream’s 2010 disc I had no idea Walas worked on this film. Bottin left the business some time ago, and apparently doesn’t like to do interviews anymore, at least the kind talking about his work, so Walas is interviewed instead on the disc instead.

I’ve always loved Bottin’s design, especially the tail: yeah, that tail pulls it all together in my book. When I first saw them, before we get an explanation to where they came from, I thought they might be some kind of mutant, humanoid salamander, just based on the tail. They’re other standout feature are their exposed brains!! They’re not hard to kill either; bullets, a spear gun, stabbing them repeatedly until their guts fall out, the best and easiest is to just bonk them on their exposed brains. Eagle does that to save Tim, he throws a stick at it, hits the fucker right on the top of the head and bursts it open, and it looked like he didn’t even throw it that hard. Jaws (1975) was obviously an influence; a kid is killed in the beginning, but not in as bloody a fashion as in Jaws, and the subplot of having some kind of “public outing” occur where the monster can have its pick of whom to scarf down is also copied. In this flick it’s a nighttime carnival/festival right there on a stretch of the harbor; of course the Humanoids see this as the perfect opportunity to hunt poontang, and to carve up any dude in their way of that. The unsuspecting humans, in a couple of cases, fight back pretty well, though. Another Humanoid gets wailed right in the brain and killed, and in my favorite payback moment comes when a group corners ones of the beasts, surrounds it, and beats it death.

The only flaw I saw in the design of the Humanoids was one of them was given these ridiculously long arm extensions. Though, that one is only seen briefly when the lair is discovered (killed I might add), again ever so briefly during their walk down festival lane, and one last time when Carol and her baby are under siege at their cabin. Carol puts up a good fight too, and shockingly isn’t killed. In fact none of the leads are killed off. She manages to scoop up a knife and keeps stabbing the fucker until his guts spill out.

Another thing I loved about this flick is it comes with a couple of quick epilogues. I’m not entirely a fan of horror movies that just abruptly end after the maniac and/or monster is killed. I can think of one exception at the moment, Halloween (1978), but then again Myers wasn’t killed at the end of the first one, but it does end right after Loomis shoots him off the Strode house balcony. On the opposite end of that the out-of-left-field abrupt ending of An American Werewolf In London (1981) has always been frustrating to watch. But that’s mostly due to the fact director John Landis believed once the monster is killed the movie should end. I read that quote of his somewhere. He’s referring to the old monster movies from days of yore (40s, 50s, 60s); those movies would end exactly like that, once the werewolf, giant tarantula, giant vulture, giant octopus, what have you was killed off, ‘The End’ popped up on screen. Well, Humanoids From The Deep, comes with two epilogues: the first is the morning after as Jim and Carol race back to the festival, and the camera slowly pans the length of road it was held on and we see all the carnage, bodies being taken out, people wandering around in shock—the local Sheriff even looks like he’s in shock. Jim asks where Drake is, and he tells him she went back to her lab. This will lead in to the film’s last epilogue and Peggy’s fate!! Yeah, she got knocked up, and it looks like it don’t take no nine months for a humanoid baby to get born. The movie’s final scene is Drake presiding over the birth of Peggy’s monster, and in a more than perfect ending for this movie, it bursts from her stomach, killing the poor girl, and uttering a gurgly screech!! This ending managed to freak me out, because before she dies, Peggy sits up, opens her eyes and spits out blood. It was the creepy contacts she wore that freaked me out.

Booklet included with Scream Factory’s 2010 DVD. Click photos to enlarge & read.

The gore is quite plentiful, in fact the death of the dudes was so graphic some of it had to be cut down for fear the film would get an X rating, according to Corman’s interview in the Delirium retrospective; what’s left in the film should appease gorehounds. Most of these deaths come in the festival rampage where humanoids cleave off part of a disc jockey’s rib cage, he’s left twitching on the ground; another is bear hugged until blood starts gushing from his chest, the most graphic is when one Humanoid says, fuck it, I’m just gonna tear this dude’s dome right off his fuckin’ neck! We see it, and then we get a shot of the humanoid hanging on to his dangling head by the hair. This scene was trimmed in the American cut. Earlier in the movie I mentioned Peggy’s main squeeze was taken out before she was raped—Jerry had half his face ripped off; and that dude who was about score on the beach in the tent, had a deep, gnarly gash put into his back, I mean right down to the spine.

The movie was filmed under the title, Beneath The Darkness, but once Corman had a look at the finished product, it wasn’t up to his exploitive standards, so he changed the title and had another director reshoot the rape scenes. Peeters did a great job filming the gruesome deaths, but she shot the rapes artistically, as in only hinting something foul was happening using shadow. And he beefed up the festival onslaught with more Humanoid attacks. For in depth coverage of the what, whys and hows I recommend reading that Fangoria retrospective and/or the booklet above.

That friend in elementary school I mentioned earlier, who told me about The Beast Within trailer, eventually saw it during a class trip he went on to Boston to see the Red Sox play. I was the only person who didn’t go, and he told me there was time to sightsee and he snuck into a theater that was showing it. I almost think he saw part of Humanoids From The Deep during then too, but I can’t remember. All I know is he was also the one who told me about about that flick. So, basically, I knew all about these two movies before I ever saw them on cable. Sadly, I have no memory of seeing Humanoids for the first time. I do know, though, it was late 1983, because I had just started high school, and I was in the cafeteria during lunch and overheard a kid telling someone about the movie, which had just been on the night before.

The most vivid memory I have of Humanoids, though, is seeing it for the first time on VHS in 1999. This is three years after DVD hit the market, and they were still making VHS, and I either bought it or ordered it; unfortunately, how I acquired it is also gone from my memory, but I remember the back of the case said it was ‘digitally remastered’ and when I saw it that night, I was blown away by how colorful and crystal clear the transfer was. I remember thinking it looks like it was made yesterday, and how blue Doug McClure’s coat looked!! I gained a whole new appreciation for the movie then, something I eventually learned a restoration/remaster has a tendency to do, even with movies I wasn’t a fan of.

The Beast Within (1982) got its first disc release on basic DVD through MGM’s Midnite Movies sublabel back in 2001. It’s first blu-ray here in the US came from Shout! Factory’s genre sublabel Scream Factory back in 2017. Both are now out of print. The blu-ray version I’m reviewing is the standard version from UK’s Arrow Video that hit the market in 2017; their limited edition (slipcase, booklet) version came out back in 2014. This standard version is still in print and available on Amazon UK and on Arrow’s site here! As of this review there is no UHD in existence. Also, this release is region locked, which means you’ll need a region free blu-ray player to see it, if you’re from anywhere but the UK. You can find one at 220-electronics!

Humanoids From The Deep (1980) got its first DVD and blu-ray release also through Shout! Factory’s sublabel Scream Factory back in 2010. I used to own both of them, buying the blu after I finally went HD. Scream then decided to give it an upgrade in 2019 as a limited edition steelbook, with a new remaster! While the old blue is still in print, their steelbook isn’t. You can buy that old blu on Amazon and on their site here, and if you want to spend the arm and a leg for the steelbook, it’s also on Amazon! As of this review there is no UHD in existence.

REVERSE COVER ART

VIDEO/AUDIO/SUBTITLES (THE BEAST WITHIN): 1080p 2.39:1 High Definition Widescreen—2.0 English LPCM—English SDH Subs Only

I used to own Scream’s blu-ray, but got rid of it when I read a review saying Arrow’s had a better transfer, and while I can’t recall what Scream’s transfer looked like now, Arrow’s is quite good looking.

EXTRAS INCLUDED . . .

Audio Commentary With Director Philippe Mora, Moderated By Author Calum Waddell

I Was a Teenage Cicada: The Making Of The Beast Within (43:49)

Storyboarding The Beast (13:29)

Image Gallery (4:42/53 Photos)

Theatrical Trailer (1:27)

VIDEO/AUDIO/SUBTITLES (HUMANOIDS FROM THE DEEP): 1080p 1.85:1 High Definition Widescreen—2.0 English DTS-HD Master Audio—English SDH Subs Only

One of the things I like more with this steelbook is the returning of its title to HUMANOIDS FROM THE DEEP, the title it was shown under when I saw it as a kid. When Shout acquired the film, it was the “Uncut International Version,” a very short gore scene was restored when it was shown overseas and that version sported the alternate title, MONSTER, with the original title in tiny font right underneath. That’s the transfer used on their first blu. This new transfer is still the “Uncut International Version,” but Shout decided to restore its original US title and I applaud them for doing that! The upgraded 4K scan they did really makes this new transfer shine! Colors and clarity pop like hell; though that scene with stark naked Lisa Glaser running on the beach is now dark to the point where you can’t really see her body until she gets close to the camera. This scene is in the Making Of and the lighting is a lot brighter, so you can see her naked body better from a distance. I’m guessing it’s darker in this transfer to more accurately represent the late evening setting? That’s just a guess though. I can’t imagine it was darkened to hide her nudity.

EXTRAS INCLUDED . . .

The Making Of Humanoids From The Deep (22:45)

Deleted Scenes (5:45)

Leonard Maltin Interviews Roger Corman (3:27)

Theatrical Trailers (4:37)

TV Spot (:34)

Radio Spot (:35)

Still Gallery (6:34) (NEW)

There are some substantial differences between Scream Factory and Arrow Video’s blu-rays of The Beast Within. The first is the inclusion on Arrow’s of a very info/anecdotal heavy featurette (‘I Was a Teenage Cicada: The Making Of The Beast Within’) on its making with stars Paul Clemens, Kitty Moffat and John Dennis Johnston, along with writer Tom Holland and FX artist Gary Elmendorf. Featured within are a bunch of behind-the-scenes FX photos I’ve never seen anywhere. Talked about, and never realized by me, was how it flopped at the box office but got real popular once it hit cable and has a sizable cult following. All three actors interviewed are still fans of the film and had a great time making it. Holland on the other hand is very vocal about liking the first half but not the latter half, as a lot of his dialogue on exactly how Billy Connors pulled off this supernatural feat of revenge was seriously truncated in that scene between drunk Tom Laws and Mike. He also stresses how the FX technology at the time wasn’t able to pull off the transformation he wrote. The commentaries are also different, with Scream’s having two: one with Director Philippe Mora and Clemens and one with Holland, while Arrow has one with Mora, but it’s not a port over of Scream’s, it’s an entirely new one.

Then there’s the odd release in Japan of a blu-ray by a label called, Happinet, who’s noteworthy feature, as I understand it, is a half hour on its making titled ‘Within The Beast Within: A Oral History’ that includes even more behind-the-scenes photos that have never been seen anywhere. As I also understand it, interviewed are Clemens, Mora, Holland and lead FX artist Tom Burman. I’m keeping my fingers crossed someone here in the US (cough—Vinegar Syndrome—cough) picks this one up from MGM and gives it a spiffy UHD release, with a combination of extras from all three distributors.

The Deleted Scenes on Humanoids From The Deep are just about in as good condition as Scream’s transfer; they come with a disclaimer the sound elements for them are gone, so some of the scenes are silent or partly. I remember Scream mentioning if they had the sound for all of them and knew where they went in the movie they would’ve restored them to the final film. With these scenes you get more nudity as well, and more full frontal nudity at that. Revisiting the Making Of I was surprised they managed to get a couple actresses to comment on their time doing the film, like Cindy Weintraub and Linda Shayne, who played Sally, the chick crowned Miss Salmon at the festival. I’m not surprised they couldn’t get Ann Turkel, she vehemently objected to the reshot rape scenes. Mark Goldblatt edited the movie together and did a damn fine job; Bottin only made three Humanoid suits, but with the added scenes Goldblatt was able to edit it in such a way it looks like there’s a bunch of Humanoids laying waste to that festival. Corman, composer James Horner and second unit/assistant director James Sbardellati, who reshot the rape scenes, are also interviewed. About the music, there are some beats Horner created he reused for the score he did for Wolfen (1981). He doesn’t mention that, but if you’ve seen both movies the similarity of those beats are unmistakable. According to reviews there was a Still Gallery on the first blu and DVD, the new one here has a lot more than just posters, it’s has some very nice shots of the Humanoids as well.

Mixed in with trailers for each film below I managed to find the retrospective extra ‘I Was a Teenage Cicada,’ and the Making Of for Humanoids From The Deep, on YouTube.