Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University is an student-centered, research intensive and globally involved university of over 140-year history.

Innovative education methods, long-term teaching traditions and close links with public institutions and businesses raise competitiveness of our graduates and help them contribute to the development of our society and state.

Over 8 thousand students do courses in 45 majors. Long-term educational traditions and philosophy of servant leadership ensures personal development of students and staff. Building trust relationships and promoting important social values are the basis for the corporate culture of Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University.

Going global is one of the priorities for the university. It is a member of the International Association of Universities,the European University Association (2013) and the European Health and Fitness Association. It has over 60 agreements signed with universities and organizations from over 20 countries. We are involved in joint projects with the World Bank, Co-Serve International, the British Council in Ukraine, the USETI Alliance (Ukraine Standardized External Testing Initiative) etc.

Looking for new academic opportunities, learning from international experience provide our staff and students with great opportunities of professional growth.

International research activity of the staff includes guest lecturing, joint projects with researchers from universities of other countries.The University Mission is to serve person, community and society.

Advanced Pedagogical Training Courses for the primary schools teachers were launched in Kiev.The University now consists of six Institutes (Institute of Journalism, Institute of Human Sciences, Institute of Arts, Institute of In-Service Pedagogical Training, Institute of Philology, Pedagogical Institute), four Faculties (Faculty of History and Philosophy, Faculty of Health, Physical Education and Sports, Faculty of Information Technology and Management , Faculty of Law and International Relations), and the University College.

The corporate culture of our University is a holistic system of unique identifying features, which are based on the values that define the philosophy of its activities, the idea (vision) and mission form the traditions, rules and styles, ways of business and interpersonal relationships, of students and staff’s behavior, reflecting the level of excellence, integrity and attractiveness of the university brand in modern socio-cultural, scientific and educational space.

The corporate culture of our University is based on the principle of servant leadership. This type of leadership is focused on personal growth and well-being of people and communities the leader works with. While a traditional leadership involves one person on top of the power pyramid, servant leaders is grounded on the shared power, common problems solving and helping other people to grow, develop and share the best results.

University supports students as individuals in several ways. First, our main goal is providing quality training. Second, students’ personal growth is provided by a variety of extra-curricular activities: seminars, workshops, meetings with prominent personalities and experienced professionals, functioning clubs and circles. University lecturers and professors are given opportunities to improve their professional skills attending workshops and master classes, distance learning.

The social project “With Kyiv and for Kyiv” was launched by the University staff and students three years ago. It is aimed at meeting the educational and developmental, cultural, sports and recreational demands and needs of residents of our city. Social project helps our students and staff to participate actively in public life. With the help of this project, our students can contribute to serving the community and every resident of Kyiv, has the opportunity to contribute their own personal development, gaining new knowledge and skills.

University tradition is an important part of corporate culture. As in any family, Grinchenko University’s one holds some manners every year.Our holiday is the solemn dedication of the students and University Day celebration. In addition, we carry elements of corporate attributes on the University Day and during conferences, the Academic council of scientific-methodical seminars, graduations, dedications to students. We wear national dress on Ukraine Flag Day, Independence Day, Taras Shevchenko Birthday and Memorial Day of Borys Grinchenko .

Relationships at the University are based on trust, goodwill, support and cooperation, honesty, justice, dignity and respect of the rights of each member of the team. We support the mission and vision, share the values of the University, appreciate its reputation and contribute to the formation of its positive image in the community.

The most important thing you should know about the corporate culture is that it is supported by each stakeholder. It involves students, staff and even university graduates. Each of us is responsible for what our corporate culture is like, and for the atmosphere in B. Grinchenko Kyiv University family.