Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University is a modern multi-profile municipal higher educational institution. It is the only University in Ukraine which is subordinated to Kyiv City Council and primarily meets the needs of Kyiv educational system. University trains highly competitive specialists based on the international standards in Bachelor, Specialists, Master and PhD (Aspirantura and Doctorantura) programs. It holds the 6th position in the Ukrainian National Ranking of Humanitarian and Pedagogical Universities. - The University's motto: "We strive for excellence" - The activities of the University are based on a modern education paradigm which looks at education as the main factor and mechanism for personal development; forming spiritual, moral, intellectual and creative qualities of an individual. - The Aim of education at the University is training competent, humanistically oriented specialists who have mastered the complex of contemporary fundamental knowledge, skills of self-study, high responsibility, ability of professional self-assessment. - The University guarantees transparency, freedom and variability of education process, interaction of staff with the students, excludes authoritativeness in teaching and communication, directs teachers and students in the way of humanistic reflection of pedagogical science.

Read more

Borys Grinchenko Kyiv University is a modern multi-profile municipal higher educational institution. It is the only University in Ukraine which is subordinated to Kyiv City Council and primarily meets the needs of Kyiv educational system. University trains highly competitive specialists based on the international standards in Bachelor, Specialists, Master and PhD (Aspirantura and Doctorantura) programs. It holds the 6th position in the Ukrainian National Ranking of Humanitarian and Pedagogical Universities. - The University's motto: "We strive for excellence" - The activities of the University are based on a modern education paradigm which looks at education as the main factor and mechanism for personal development; forming spiritual, moral, intellectual and creative qualities of an individual. - The Aim of education at the University is training competent, humanistically oriented specialists who have mastered the complex of contemporary fundamental knowledge, skills of self-study, high responsibility, ability of professional self-assessment. - The University guarantees transparency, freedom and variability of education process, interaction of staff with the students, excludes authoritativeness in teaching and communication, directs teachers and students in the way of humanistic reflection of pedagogical science.

Read more

Reach More Decision-Makers with Scale Plans

Let us show you how our accurate B2B company and contact data can help you reach the right decision makers and close more deals.

What can you expect?

See how Lusha can speed up your workflow

Learn how to reach your ideal prospects

Discover the practices of the best performing sales teams

Trusted by 280,000+ revenue teams of all sizes