Former state Sen. Raphael J. Musto solicited and accepted kickbacks from a Luzerne County public official for nearly two decades in exchange for political favors, including support for an $11 million state loan to a local municipal authority, an indictment handed down Thursday charged.

Musto took a $1,000 bribe and "other things of value" from the municipal official in October 2006 just days before voting in favor of the loan, the grand jury indictment claims.

The payoff came during a nearly 20-year span in which the longtime Pittston area lawmaker traded his influence for a "stream of benefits" that included cash, meals and gifts, the indictment charged.

"In violation of his duties to the public, Senator Musto was unlawfully influenced in his official duties by bribes and kickbacks he received from individuals known and unknown to the grand jury," a line of the indictment reads.

The superseding indictment, replacing one used to charge the 84-year-old in November 2010, details Musto's alleged corrupt dealings with the municipal official and the body that provided the loan, the Pennsylvania Infrastructure Investment Authority, known as PENNVEST. Musto served on the board of PENNVEST, a state-run authority that funds sewer, storm water and drinking water projects around the state.

While the indictment didn't identify the official or the municipality, PENNVEST records indicate the authority approved an $11 million low-interest loan to Salem Township for a sanitary sewer project on Oct. 24, 2006, the day referenced in the indictment.

Musto pocketed another $1,000 payment from the official, only referred to court papers as Participant No. 2, in June 2008 for his support of another project that was awarded more than $1 million in PENNVEST loans, the indictment alleges.

The ex-senator also a took $3,000 bribe from someone "affiliated with" a local municipal authority -- only called Participant No. 1 in court papers -- as a reward for Musto's official action to help the authority, the indictment says.

"This stream of benefits, which began in the 1990s and continued through 2008, included meals, home repairs, transportation, and cash," read the indictment, which alleges Musto conspired to "secretly use his official position to enrich himself."

The indictment reveals FBI agents seized $6,500 in cash stuffed in various envelopes found around Musto's home when federal authorities executed a search warrant in April 2010, just months before he retired from office.

Musto's trial, scheduled for January, has been delayed for years due to claims by Musto and his defense team that his deteriorating health prevents him from helping with his defense. Just this week, his attorneys again asked Senior U.S. District Judge Richard Caputo to indefinitely postpone the case, saying the stresses of a trial could kill Musto.

"The United States has not agreed to this request and will be filing a response asking Judge Caputo to schedule a hearing where the defense will be required to prove that Senator Musto is unable to withstand trial and/or assist his attorneys," the U.S. Attorneys Office said in a press release announcing the new charges.

Musto was not home when a reporter visited his Market Street, Pittston Township, residence around 7 p.m. Thursday, according to his wife, Frances.

"He just went out. He won't be back for awhile," she said.

Asked if the ex-lawmaker was aware of the new indictment, she said, "Yea, we heard about it."

Musto's wife wouldn't say where her husband was or how he could be reached. She said she would provide a reporter's phone number to her husband when he returned, but Musto did not call Thursday night.

The eight-count indictment charges Musto with three counts of honest services fraud, three counts of corrupt receipt of a reward, and two counts of making false statements to the FBI.

Federal authorities accuse Musto of lying about accepting an envelope of cash received from Participant #1 and denying he accepted more than $40,000 in cash and free construction services from a company that worked on a building Musto sold to his son for use as a physical therapy center. Musto accepted the kickbacks in exchange for supporting state funding for development projects for the company, authorities allege.

The company was not named in either indictment, but federal agents had been investigating Musto's ties to wealthy Wilkes-Barre developer Robert K. Mericle.

In April 2010, just weeks after conducting a search of Musto's home, FBI agents served a subpoena on the Pittston township municipal office seeking building permits for renovations to the building in 2006. Township records show Mericle Construction sought permits for $40,000 of work on the building, which Musto sold to his son for use as a physical therapy center later that year.

The indictments allege a firm described only as "Company A" was contracted by Musto for renovations in January 2006. "Company A" billed Musto about $47,900 for the work, which he paid by check, according to the grand jury, but the company later gave Musto $25,000 in cash.

In 2007, "Company A" performed $10,000 in additional repairs on the building at the senator's request, but never billed Musto, according to the indictment. In return, Musto urged state agencies to make grants to "Company A" for construction of a "multimillion-dollar commercial development in Luzerne and Lackawanna Counties" and persuaded unnamed local officials to take responsibility for the roads in the development so "Company A" could avoid the costs of maintenance, the grand jury alleged.

"Local officials acquiesced to Senator Musto's request," the indictment says.

For years, the indictment says, "Company A" showered Musto with annual holiday gifts, which prosecutors previously described as pricey electronic equipment and gift certificates for lobsters.

The new indictment notes Musto filed false statements of financial interest each year "to conceal from public disclosure his ongoing financial relationship, involving bribery and kickbacks, with 'Company A' and its representatives."

The delay in Musto's case continues to put off Mericle's sentencing for his role in another part of the Luzerne County public corruption scandal. Mericle is expected to testify as a prosecution witness at Musto's trial. Prosecutors say Mericle paid $2.1 million to former county judges

Michael T. Conahan and Mark A. Ciavarella Jr., who placed juveniles in two for-profit detention centers built by Mericle's construction firm. Mericle pleaded guilty in September 2009 to failing to report a felony in the case and is expected to serve federal prison time after he testifies in the Musto case.

Efforts to reach representatives for Mericle were not immediately successful Thursday.

Distributed by MCT Information Services