RAY MUSTO HEADSHOT.jpg

Former state Sen. Raphael J. Musto (Citizens-Voice photo)

Good Monday Morning, Fellow Seekers.

Hopefully you're enjoying the two-hour delay brought on by the Snowstorm That Wasn't. So while you drink your coffee and maybe contemplate the wonder that is the cronut, we'll get right into the rest and the best of the day's headlines.

We begin in northeastern Pennsylvania, where our friends at the

Citizens-Voice

report that former state

The judge said federal law required Musto to be hospitalized in a treatment facility. An evaluation will determine whether it is likely that Musto could continue with a trial in the future, the newspaper reported. Musto was admitted to the federal prison hospital on Feb. 3.

The rest of the day's news starts now.

Duck Dynasty star Phil Robertson has been invited to a pro-Second Amendment rally put on by Rep. Daryl Metcalfe, R-Butler, on April 29, The Morning Call reports. Get your duck calls ready.

John Hanger and Brad Koplinski respectively won straw polls for Guv and Lt. Guv during this weekend's PA Progressive Summit in Harrisburg, PoliticsPA reports.

Colorado is the first state to clamp down on fracking pollution. Bloomberg News reports that state regulators approved groundbreaking controls on emissions from oil and natural gas operations after an unusual coalition of energy companies and environmentalists agreed on measures to counter worsening smog (h/t Post-Gazette).

The push is on to strengthen Pennsylvania's exception-riddled indoor smoking ban, WITF-FM in Harrisburg reports.

,

The Post-Gazette

reports.

Penn State's

next president is ready for the spotlight to shift away from the Jerry Sandusky child sexual abuse scandal and on to the many things Pennsylvania's largest university has to offer,

The Associated Press

reports.

With not a little bit of glee, Keystone Politics notes that "even the Tribune-Review has given up on Tom Corbett."

And in an unusual editorial,

What Goes On.

The Legislature and executive branch offices under

Gov. Tom Corbett's

control are on a two-hour delay this morning

onaccounta

the storm. Enjoy another cronut on us.

Heavy Rotation.

Ok. Now we can officially say we've seen everything. Here's

Bruce Springsteen

, down under, performing a cover of "

Royals

," by

Lordes.

Monday's Gratuitous Soccer Link.

The Guardian has highlights from this weekend's Premier League and Capital One Cup action. That includes City's 3-1 win over Sunderland, cheering our colleagues Michael Sedor and Jeff Frantz.

And now you're up to date. See you all back here later this morning.