TIM HENMAN is a national treasure but unfortunately never managed to make it to a Grand Slam final.

The 43-year-old made a successful move into the commentary box after retiring and has been a respected member of the BBC punditry team since.

Who is Tim Henman?

Timothy “Tim” Henman was born in Oxford. He is a retired English professional Tennis player.

Henman was ranked British No 1 in 1996 and again from 1999 to 2005, after which he was succeeded by Andy Murray.

"Tiger Tim" was a star at Wimbledon, but never managed to reach the final - making the semi-final four times but sadly missing out, each time losing to the eventual champion.

He also made four other quarter-finals at SW19.

An expert on grass for much of his career, 2004 was his best season as he also made the semi-finals at the French and US Open.

He reached a high of World No 4 in three periods from July 2002 to October 2004, before finally retiring in September 2007.

He has been a part of BBC coverage since 2008.

What was his early life like?

Henman began playing tennis before the age of three with a shortened squash racket in his family owned garden tennis court.

The Oxford-born star came from a long line of Wimbledon legends.

Both his maternal grandfather, Henry Billington, and his maternal grandmother, Susan Billington, were regulars in the 1950s - and even played mixed doubles together at Sw19.

His maternal great-grandmother, Susan Billington, also played and was reportedly the first woman to serve overarm.

Henman was picked up by the Slater Squad at the age of 11 where he was coached by David Lloyd.

Slater continued to fund Henman despite the youngster missing two years with injuries, because of insistence from Lloyd who believed in Henman's tennis abilities.

From seven to eleven he was enrolled in the private Dragon School in Oxford. He was appointed the school's captain of tennis and led the school's tennis team to win 21 out of 27 matches.

At the age of 16, Henman told his mother that it was impossible for him to achieve good grades while keeping up in the tennis world.

In 1990 he dropped out of school and focused on becoming a singles player with the support of coach David Lloyd.

How was his tennis career?

Henman played both singles and doubles across his career.

He managed to win 11 ATP titles and at the start of his career won a brilliant silver medal at the Atlanta Olympics in 1996.

Earning a reputation as a nearly man, Henman reached six Grand Slam semi-finals but lost all of them - four of those in agonising fashion at Wimbledon.

He was the first British player to reach the semis since Roger Taylor in the 1970s.

He reached his highest ever career ranking of World No 4 on July 8, 2002.

At his last Grand Slam appearance ever, he lost in the second round to Frenchman Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in four sets.

As a doubles player, Henman won another four ATP titles.

Henman made more than £10million in prize money during his career.

Is Tim Henman married?

On 11th December 1999, Henman married his long-time girlfriend Lucy Heald, in Hampshire.

They have had three daughters.