Tim Henman was born on 6 September 1974 in Oxford.

He has won over $10 million in prize money, and was a consistent performer on the ATP tennis circuit, but the title, which he most coveted, that of Wimbledon Champion eluded him.

An excellent way of following Tim Henman's Wimbledon performance is to visit the BBC's Tim Henman Wimbledon Timeline.

Tim Henman comes from a family steeped in tennis. His grandfather, Henry Billington, competed at Wimbledon; whilst Henman's great grandmother, Ellen Stawell Brown, was the first lady tennis player to serve overarm at Wimbledon in 1901.

Tim Henman began playing tennis before he was three. He once said:

"At five or six years-of-age, I went to Wimbledon and that was the first time that I saw Bjorn Borg play, and he was a big influence."

In 1983 Henman was a finalist in the short tennis tournament for nine-year-olds and under and he won the Oxfordshire Closed under 10 singles.

A member of the British Davis Cup team since 1994, in 1997 Tim Henman won the first of his singles title. The last of Henman's 11 career titles to date was at the Paris Masters in 2003.

Henman has been awarded the OBE for service to tennis. He is married to Lucy and they have two daughters. He has founded The Tim Henman Charitable Foundation.

Tim Henman is a keen golfer and was influenced by Nick Faldo. In terms of tennis, Henman highlights the influence of Stefan Edberg.

In October 2006 Tim Henman reached the final of the Japan Open. He was beaten by Roger Federer. It was Henman's first final since Indian Wells in 2004.

In August 2007, Tim Henman announced that he will play his final Grand Slam at the U.S. Open and will then retire in September after Great Britain's Davis Cup tie against Croatia at Wimbledon.

In the event it was a victorious finish to Henman's career as his victories in the singles and doubles helped GB to beat Croatia.

Tim Henman's career had included six Grand Slam semi-finals, and a Masters Series title.

In April 2008, the BBC announced that Tim Henman was joining their team of experts at the Wimbledon Championships.

Back to Top