As Hollywood A-list weddings go, the marriage of Daniel Craig and Rachel Weisz last week was not exactly overflowing with the usual razzmatazz.

Gone were the usual myriad wedding planners and stylists in attendance or a celebrity magazine team on hand to chronicle the minutiae of the happy day over endless pages of breathless fawnography.

Instead, the James Bond star and his Oscar-winning lover chose a simple service at the home of mutual friends in the seclusion of upstate New York, watched only by four witnesses, including their children from previous relationships.

Jilted: Daniel Craig left his lover of six years, Satsuki Mitchell, to marry Rachel Weiz

The whole event, which apparently was followed by a quiet meal and an early night, was carried out amid the sort of secrecy of which 007 himself would no doubt have been proud. But it has not exactly gone down well with friends of 43-year-old Craig back home.

They are miffed, it seems, that the first they learnt of the nuptials was when the actor’s Los Angeles-based PR Robin Baun put out a terse statement last weekend confirming that they had taken place.

One long-time actor friend of Chester-born Craig, who has worked regularly with him - and shared more than a few of the drunken nights to which the Bond star is occasionally partial - told the Mail this week: ‘Frankly, I think it’s a bit much he couldn’t let his old pals know. I really don’t understand why he feels the need for all this cloak-and-dagger silliness.’

Unofficially, those surrounding the new Mr and Mrs Bond were letting it be known this week that the pair had decided on a low-key event ‘out of respect for their previous partners’.

New Bond girl: Rachel Weisz

Which does seem rather strange, given that according to the camps of both Craig and Miss Weisz they only began their affair after splitting with their respective long-term exes.

Why, then, the need for such secrecy?

Perhaps it has something to do with the whirlwind nature of their race up the aisle - at the first hint of hasty nuptials, many would assume that the bride was already expecting. Could that be why Miss Weisz was so eager to become Mrs Craig?

Whatever the case, few can deny that things have been moving at warp- speed for the couple who have only been officially dating for six months.

Craig’s now ex-fiancée Satsuki Mitchell - a 32-year-old Hollywood producer - is said to be ‘absolutely bewildered’ at the pace at which he and Miss Weisz have formalised their fledgling relationship.

Her own six-year romance with him netted her nothing more permanent than the consolation prize of an admittedly impressive Cartier diamond engagement ring he presented her with in 2007.

While some of her circle in LA were letting it be known this week that the Japanese-American Miss Mitchell had stoically moved on, her father Christopher confessed to the Mail this week that her emotions remain very much on the raw side.

So much so, in fact, that she can’t bear to hear mention of Craig’s name.

‘His sudden marriage came out of nowhere,’ Mr Mitchell told us.

‘We heard about it like everyone else, by reading the newspapers. She doesn’t mention his name now and tells me off if I do.

‘Satsuki has only just reached a happy place. She has since said, more than once, that the break-up was the best thing for her.

‘She knew he was not the man she wanted him to be and there was something wrong in the relationship.’

Mr Mitchell said that Craig and his daughter had been house-hunting in New York when the relationship started to unravel early last year, although all must have appeared well when, a few months later in May 2010, the couple bought a £1million penthouse in Manhattan’s trendy TriBeCa.

Rachel Weisz and Daniel Craig attended a private screening of Enduring Love at the MGM screening room September in New York City in 2004

Satsuki showed obvious strain after the split and her father says she was so upset that her weight plummeted, even prompting him to ask if she was suffering from an eating disorder.

‘I have suggested to her on a number of occasions that she might have one,’ he said. ‘Yet whenever we’re together she eats like a horse.’

Her devastation is hardly surprising, perhaps, given that she is said to have considered London-born Rachel a friend, after the two women spent time together on the Canadian set of the upcoming horror film Dream House last year, in which Weisz stars with Craig.

Satsuki, who also shared Craig’s £4 million home close to London’s Regent’s Park, is said to have discounted rumours circulating on set that the leading man and lady had become close.

Members of the crew were already whispering that 41-year-old Miss Weisz, the star of the blockbuster movie franchise The Mummy, had fallen ‘head-over-heels’ for her rugged-looking screen love interest.

However, Craig is said to have insisted to the willowy Satsuki that he was nothing more than good friends with Rachel, whom he has known for ten years.

The actor, who made his name in the acclaimed BBC drama Our Friends In The North, had already been linked with at least one of his previous leading ladies. Six years ago, a Sunday newspaper claimed that —behind Satsuki’s back — he had begun an affair with Sienna Miller, with whom he starred the previous year in the Brit flick Layer Cake.

Licence to thrill: Daniel Craig in his familiar guise of James Bond

The blonde Miss Miller’s alleged affair with her muscular co-star is said to have been the reason she was dumped by her then boyfriend Jude Law, who — embarrassingly for Craig — had been a one-time close friend.

For her part, Benenden-educated Rachel announced the end of her nine-year relationship with Brooklyn-born film director Darren Aronofsky, 42 — the father of her five-year-old son, Henry — shortly before she and Craig were photographed together as a couple for the first time.

The pair were seen hand-in-hand, enjoying a snowy Christmas break at a £1,000-a-week rented cottage in Dorset at the turn of the year.

But while her spokesman was insisting her relationship with Aronofsky, director of this year’s Oscar-winning Black Swan, had been over for several months, in an interview just weeks earlier he had given no indication that all was not well between the couple.

'They looked like the world's hottest couple'

The bespectacled filmmaker has since moved out of the five-storey townhouse the couple shared in New York’s fashionable East Village — and it’s reported he’s gone from their London home, too — while Weisz has remained with their little boy.

Despite the split, sources close to Weisz and Aronofsky insist they are determined to stay on friendly terms for the good of their son, of whom they have agreed to share custody.

Meanwhile, those who have witnessed the lovebirds together say that Craig, the son of a merchant seaman turned pub landlord, is utterly besotted by the fiercely intelligent Miss Weisz.

One source who spotted them kissing in a New York grocery store said: ‘They looked like the world’s hottest couple.’ However, it does seem to be a case of opposites attracting for Craig, who left school at 16 before eventually attending drama school, while she read English at Cambridge.

Rachel Weisz was brought up in leafy Hampstead, North-West London, the daughter of a Jewish\Hungarian medical inventor father and Viennese psycho- therapist mother.

Spotted when her picture appeared in society magazine Harper’s And Queen at the age of 13, she began modelling and was offered a role opposite Richard Gere in the 1985 Hollywood movie King David.

She turned down the part to continue her studies and became known as a radical feminist during her days at Trinity College, Cambridge, where she founded an award-winning student theatre group, which she later took to the Edinburgh Festival.

She found international fame with her role as a bookish librarian in the 1999 hit The Mummy and went on to win a Best Supporting Actress Oscar for her role alongside Ralph Fiennes in the 2005 film The Constant Gardener.

Along the way, she has dated a string of famous men, including comedian Ben Miller and American actor Alessandro Nivola. But she was devastated in 2001 when she was dumped by her then-lover of three years, film director Sam Mendes, for Kate Winslet.

In the past, she has shown a taste for men who fit into the ‘bit of rough’ category — notably Men Behaving Badly actor Neil Morrissey, with whom she starred in the low-budget comedy My Summer With Des in 1998.

It is a bracket which, some might say, also includes the brooding Craig, who plays her husband in Dream House, a psychological murder thriller set in New York State, which is due for release this autumn.

He is, according to mutual friends, the opposite of the rather geeky, if thoroughly amiable, Harvard graduate Aronofsky.

However, Craig has in recent years attempted to portray himself as something of a renaissance man with a liking for poetry, heavy philosophical tomes and an eclectic taste in music, at odds with his tough guy image.

Indeed, you rather get the impression Craig, who worked for three years with the RSC, is more than a little bit embarrassed about his role as Bond (though his reported £15 million-a-movie salary must soften the blow).

Following a two-year hold-up due to studio financial problems, he is about to take on the part of the secret agent for the third time in the, as yet unnamed, instalment due for release in October 2012.

Even so, the actor, who trains for seven hours with no fewer than three bodybuilding coaches in the run-up to appearing as 007, remains touchy about being written off as a celluloid beefcake.

In 2007, after missing out on a Bafta for his role as the secret agent in Casino Royale, he was reported to be ‘incandescent with rage’ when a gay journalist complimented him on the skimpy blue swimming trunks he wore in the film.

His then-girlfriend Miss Mitchell was said to have led him away from the encounter at an after-show party in London’s Grosvenor House hotel before punches were thrown.

Like Miss Weisz, the actor has had something of a chequered love life. In 1992, he married Scottish actress Fiona Loudon.

They had a daughter, Ella, now 19, who — along with Weisz’s son — was one of the guests at last week’s wedding, but the couple split up after only two years.

Since then he has been linked with a succession of beautiful and famous women, including Kate Moss and blonde German actress Heike Makatsch.

Prior to last week’s ceremony, however, it was Miss Mitchell who was said to have come closest to getting him to go up the aisle again.

Indeed, a year ago there was speculation they had secretly tied the knot after they were spotted wearing matching wedding bands.

One can only imagine, then, how it must feel to see her eligible ex bagged by the ambitious Miss Weisz.

This week Rachel, who has recently been talking nostalgically about returning from New York to live in the UK, has had workmen refitting her £3 million North London home amid reports the couple are about to move in. They are also said to be looking for a six-acre property on the south coast as a holiday retreat.