Jilted: Daniel Craig left his lover of six years, Satsuki Mitchell, to marry Rachel Weiz

Craig’s now ex-fiancée Satsuki Mitchell - a 32-year-old Hollywood producer - is said to be ‘absolutely bewildered’ at the pace at which he and Miss Weisz have formalised their fledgling relationship. Her own six-year romance with him netted her nothing more permanent than the consolation prize of an admittedly impressive Cartier diamond engagement ring he presented her with in 2007.

While some of her circle in LA were letting it be known this week that the Japanese-American Miss Mitchell had stoically moved on, her father Christopher confessed to the Mail that her emotions remain very much on the raw side. So much so, in fact, that she can’t bear to hear mention of Craig’s name.

‘His sudden marriage came out of nowhere,’ Mr Mitchell told the Mail. ‘We heard about it like everyone else, by reading the newspapers. She doesn’t mention his name now and tells me off if I do. Satsuki has only just reached a happy place. She has since said, more than once, that the break-up was the best thing for her. She knew he was not the man she wanted him to be and there was something wrong in the relationship.’

Mr Mitchell said that Craig and his daughter had been house-hunting in New York when the relationship started to unravel early last year, although all must have appeared well when, a few months later in May 2010, the couple bought a £1million penthouse in Manhattan’s trendy TriBeCa. Satsuki showed obvious strain after the split and her father says she was so upset that her weight plummeted, even prompting him to ask if she was suffering from an eating disorder. ‘I have suggested to her on a number of occasions that she might have one,’ he said. ‘Yet whenever we’re together she eats like a horse.’

Her devastation is hardly surprising, perhaps, given that she is said to have considered London-born Rachel a friend, after the two women spent time together on the Canadian set of the upcoming horror film Dream House last year, in which Weisz stars with Craig.