Camp Rock is 15 years old, and the world just keeps on spinning.

It’s hard to believe that it’s been a decade and a half since we saw Demi Lovato take on the role of Mitchie Torres, while the Jonas Brothers took on the alias Connect 3 in the Disney Channel hit.

It truly was a film that launched Demi’s career into the stratosphere, but so much has changed for the cast since their teeny-bop days that it’s hard to keep track.

Demi, for one, has launched her very own sex toy – the Demi Wand – along with coming out as non-binary, while Joe Jonas went on to marry high-profile actress Sophie Turner and welcome two kids.

Daily Star is checking up on where the cast ended up.

Demi Lovato

Life hasn’t been easy for Demi Lovato since her Disney Channel days. The star – who came out as non-binary in 2021 and uses she/her and they/them pronouns – was candid about her horrific rape ordeal.

Demi claims she was raped as a teen while working for Disney, and “had to see this person all the time” after the horrific attack.

She opened up in her documentary Demi Lovato: Dancing with the Devil, in which she also addressed her battle with drug addiction and near-fatal overdose.

Demi said on the YouTube series: “I lost my virginity in a rape. I called that person back a month later and tried to make it right by being in control, and all it did was just make me feel worse.”

She claimed that her Disney co-star was never removed from the film he was in, but declined to name him.

Since then, Demi has gone on to own her own sexuality and her own beliefs, launching her non-binary sex toy the Demi Wand with adult toy company Bellesa in November 2021.

She’s also been candid about her belief in extraterrestrials, going on the hunt for aliens in her documentary Unidentified – though she says calling them “aliens” is derogatory.

Demi said: “I think that we have to stop calling them aliens because aliens is a derogatory term for anything. I call them ETs.”

The Jonas Brothers

Since starring as Connect 3 in Camp Rock, the Jonas Brothers have gone from strength to strength. Joe, on his part, tied the knot with Game of Thrones star Sophie Turner, with whom he shares two children.

Joe dated Demi at the beginning of 2010, shortly after the pair had starred in Camp Rock together, and has had a whole host of other high-profile relationships, dating everyone from Taylor Swift to Twilight star Ashley Greene.

As for his brother Kevin, he went on to marry wife Danielle and welcome two daughters. Aside from his music career, Kevin is also the CEO of The Blu Market Company – and has even starred in The Real Housewives of New Jersey.

Nick, who played drummer Nate Gray in Camp Rock, has focused on his acting career along with serving as a coach on The Voice.

He tied the knot with Baywatch actress Priyanka Chopra in a stunning destination wedding in India back in 2018, and the pair welcomed their daughter Malti in 2022.

Their younger brother Frankie – who only appeared in the sequel to Camp Rock in 2010 – caught the wrong hand of the law in 2016 when he was allegedly caught smoking weed while in Nashville.

TMZ reported the star was arrested in front of a convenience store, but since then he has stayed out of trouble and headed to Columbia University to study astrophysics.

Frankie has been candid about his struggle to stay sober and addiction to alcohol – opening up about his suicidal thoughts in a 2021 interview.

Alyson Stoner

Cheaper By the Dozen star Alyson Stoner played Caitlyn Gellar in Camp Rock and the sequel, and since then their life has been, well, wild.

In 2018 the star opened up about their sexuality and confessed that they had fallen in love with their female dance instructor.

Alyson told Teen Vogue: “There she was, wearing loose jeans and a backward snapback. She flipped and rolled her body around with adventure and total abandon. As a Type A perfectionist, I was mesmerised and intimidated.”

The pair were soon in a relationship, and Alyson said they “fell in love with a woman”, but “pursued physical relationships with men to convince myself that my love for her was just a spiritual battle attacking my character and discernment.”

Eventually, Alyson confirmed they are “attracted to men, women, and people who identify in other ways” and use they/them pronouns.

Alyson was hospitalised two years after Camp Rock after struggling with anorexia and bulimia, and later entered into therapy to help with their recovery.

They now look totally unrecognisable, too, shaving their head in 2019 and sporting a cropped hairdo since then.

They told People magazine: “Shaving my head is an act of mental health and confidence, not self-destruction.

“I can't tell you how many beliefs and opinions and insecurities fell to the floor with every tuft of hair, and I'm leaving them there."

Meaghan Martin

Shooting to fame as Tess Tyler in Camp Rock, Meaghan Martin went on to appear in the Mean Girls sequel, and made her stage debut in the West End production of The Actor’s Nightmare in 2019.

The actress went on to tie the knot with British actor Oli Higginson in 2016, and ditched the US for the UK.

In 2023, Meaghan was starring in Smoke at the Southwark Playhouse.

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle

Along with looking very different from her days as Ella Pador in Camp Rock, Anna Maria Perez de Tagle has gone on to find love – in a very A-lister wedding ceremony.

Orange is the New Black alum Uzo Aduba served as her maid of honour when she married Scott Kline Jr., with whom she now shares daughter Amelia Grace.

Anna Maria went on to have a career on Broadway, and it’s no surprise she found such success – both her parents, her grandmother, aunt, uncle and cousin are also in the showbiz world.

Roshon Fegan

For more of the latest showbiz news from Daily Star, make sure you sign up to one of our newsletters here.

Rocking up as dancer and rapper Sander Loyer in Camp Rock, Roshon Fegan later appeared in Disney’s Shake It Up alongside Bella Thorne and Zendaya.

In 2012 it was time for a change, and he headed to the dance floor to compete on the American version of Strictly, Dancing With the Stars.

That’s not all. Roshon decided to start up his own record label – named 3inaRo Entertainment – and releases music under the stage name ROSHON.