MOVIE REVIEW

Camp Rock:

Disney Channel Original Movie starring the Jonas Brothers.... about a rockin' teen summer camp that's highly appealing to tweens and young teens.

CAST:

Joe Jonas ... Shane Gray

Kevin Jonas ... Jason

Nick Jonas ... Nate

Demi Lovato ... Mitchie Torres

Alyson Stoner ... Caitlyn

Meaghan Jette Martin ... Tess Tyler

Anna Maria Perez de Tagle ... Ella

Jasmine Richards ... Peggy

Maria Canals-Barrera ... Connie Torres

Daniel Fathers ... Brown Cesario

PLOT:

According to IMdb.com -

Camp Rock tells the rock n' roll Cinderella story of Mitchie Torres (Demi Lovato), a teen with an amazing voice and a driving ambition to be a pop singer who wants to spend her summer at a prestigious rock camp. Unfortunately, an expensive music camp is a bit out of reach for her family, but her mother gets a job as Camp Rock's cook so that Mitchie can attend as long as she helps out in the kitchen between classes. Befriended by fellow camp member Caitlyn (Alyson Stoner) but intimidated by the immensely talented Tess Tyler (Meaghan Jette Martin) and her friends Peggy (Jasmine Richards) and Ella (Anna Maria Perez de Tagle), Mitchie lives a double life hiding that she is the cook's daughter and posing as a well-to-do camper in order to become part of the hottest clique at camp. When she's overheard singing, but not seen, by teen pop star and celebrity camp instructor, plus lead singer of Connect Three, Shane Gray (Joe Jonas), he is completely taken and sets out to find the girl behind the beautiful voice. Meanwhile, Shane Gray is having a bit of trouble shaking off his bad boy image, which is causing trouble with his band members, Jason and Nate (Kevin and Nick Jonas) and Mitchie will have to learn how to confront her fears, by stepping out of the kitchen and into the spotlight.

Movie Review:

A totally decent and fun movie for Children, Tweens, Young Teens, Music Lovers, and Jonas Brothers fans. The movie plot was a bit cheesy, at times, but most of the characters were believable and much of the acting wasn't too bad. The singing was a bit unrealistic, as everyone sounded studio fixed when they sang and not natural, but young fans surely will not notice or care, and will be singing "We Rock" just as much as they sang "We're all in this Together" from High School Musical.

My favorite scenes were those with Alyson Stoner, Sarah Baker from the Cheaper by the Dozen Movies, and the 3 or 4 scenes in which all the Jonas Brothers acted in together.

The songs were all mostly cute and catchy... young fans will surely love singing them!

SEE or SKIP:

See with your family!

Thank you for signing up!

ONE MORE STEP...

To receive emails - look for your first newsletter from It's a Wonderful Movie in your inbox and confirm your email address.