1. 7/1/1436 1 Monief Eid BSc, Lean Six Sigma Black Belt, PROSCI, C A P, ITIL V3 Foundation and Prince2 Certified National PACS Program Director The National BIG Picture: Tele-medical Imaging, The Vision for Patient Services (modified based on non-disclosing information about MOH)

2. 7/1/1436 2 National Tele-Radiology Project - Partnered with Canada Infoway to build up the RFP. Also participated in the evaluation - Choose IHE Approach - Build up use cases and business scenarios - Build up Project standard - Project is targeting all MOH hospitals into stages

3. 7/1/1436 3 MOH Tele-Radiology Project Developing Imaging Use Cases Like most eHealth programs around the world, the challenge to identify and document the very large number of business use cases and variants is avoided by using a “middle- out” methodology. The core requirements start with the Interoperability Use Cases, especially when those are “classical use cases” that have been analyzed by the profiles and standards development organizations in their prior work. Middle-Out Methodology Steps for the eHealth Standard based Interoperability Specification and Policy Project illustrates the main steps of such a methodology, where the knowledge of the array of Business Scenarios come from the stakeholders and a validation performed through their experiences (i.e. issues and gaps corrected based on their feedback). The Interoperability Use Cases provide a description of the workflows that need to be addressed and the main exception situations. They are not expected to cover all design details in term of error codes, data element specification and terminology code sets to be used.

4. 7/1/1436 4 MOH Tele-Radiology Project Developing Imaging Use Cases ……. Definitions Business Scenario: A Business Scenario is a sequence of activities by one or more users (e.g. patients, clinicians, etc.) that reflects a real-world “story”. From this “story”, various use cases are derived. Some of these use cases relate to interactions between systems and facilities sharing health information, and are called Interoperability Use Cases. Interoperability Use Case: In software engineering, a Use Case is a technique for capturing the potential requirements of a new system or a software change. Each Use Case provides one or more process flow scenarios that convey how the system should interact with the end user or another system to achieve a specific business goal. In the context of the specification of interoperability requirements, a use case provides one or more scenarios in the form of information flows that convey how systems should interact with other systems as driven by the end user to achieve a specific business or clinical goal.

5. 7/1/1436 5 MOH Tele-Radiology Project Imaging Use Cases Institutes (Hospital, PHC, Clinic) with Local RIS/PACS – and Tele-Rad Service Not Used (But connected to DIRS/TRS) a) Acquire imaging study on local PACS b) Local PACS accesses local and Saudi Imaging Repository prior images and reports  1 - Q/R Images and Reports c) Radiologist reads images and creates report on local RIS/PACS d) Store newly acquired images and reports into Saudi Imaging Repository  2 – Store Images and Reports

6. 7/1/1436 6 MOH Tele-Radiology Project Imaging Use Cases Institutes (Hospital, PHC, Clinic) with No Local RIS/PACS – and connected to National DIRS/TRS Service (But no Tele-Rad) - Shared TRS/DIRS Service Platform - used as if local RIS/PACS - Gateway acts as a RIS/PACS - communicates with local HIS & Modality (acquires images) - Gateways use the same common standards (e.g. HL7 and DICOM) - very well understood and implemented in many KSA hospitals, therefore not specified a) Acquire imaging study from local modalities b) Q/R prior images and reports from Saudi Imaging Repository 1 – Q/R Images and Reports c) Radiologist reads images and creates report on National TRS (using PACS Wks.) d) Store newly acquired images and report into Saudi Imaging Repository 2 – Store Images and Reports

7. 7/1/1436 7 MOH Tele-Radiology Project Imaging Use Cases Institutes (Hospital, PHC, Clinic) with No Local RIS/PACS – National DIRS/TRS and having Tele-Rad Services a) Acquire imaging study from local modalities b) Store Images on Saudi Imaging Repository 1 – Store Images c) Issue Order to Tele-Rad Service d) Tele-Rad Mgr. manages workstation (reading worklist, relevant prior images and reports, etc.)  2 – Q/R Images and Reports e) Tele-Rad Wks. creates report, Tele-Rad Mgr. stores report on Saudi Imaging Repository  3 – Store Report f) Tele-Rad Manager updates order status to “complete” g) National TRS/DIRS Q/R report and displays on National PACS Workstation 4 – Q/R Report

8. 7/1/1436 8 MOH Tele-Radiology Project Imaging Use Cases Institutes (Hospital, PHC, Clinic) with Local RIS/PACS Uses Tele-Rad as Back Up Service Tele-Rad Service used when local radiologist is not available a) Acquire imaging study on local PACS and store images to Saudi Imaging Repository.  1 – Store Images b) Issue Order to Tele-Rad Service 2 – Issue Tele-Rad Order c) Tele-Rad Mgr. manages Tele-Rad workstation (reading worklist, relevant prior images and reports, etc.) 3 – Q/R Images and Reports d) Tele-Rad Wks. creates report, Tele-Rad Mgr. stores on Saudi Imaging Repository. 4 – Store Report e) Tele-Rad Manager updates order status to “complete” 5 – Status Update f) RIS/PACS Q/R report to store locally 6 – Q/R Report

9. 7/1/1436 9 MOH Tele-Radiology Project Imaging Use Cases Interoperability Comparison for the Four Configurations 1. Local RIS/PACS Tele-Rad Service Not Used 2. Local RIS/PACS Uses Tele-Rad as Back Up 3. No Local RIS/PACS National RIS/PACS Service (no Tele-Rad) 4. No Local RIS/PACS National RIS/PACS and Tele-Rad Services 1&3 – Same Interoperability Requirements 2&4 – Same Interoperability Requirements Standalone RIS/PACS Workflow  Q/R Images and Reports (prior)  Store Images and Reports (new) RIS/PACS Using Tele-Rad Workflow  Store Images (new)  Q/R Images and Reports (prior)  Issue Tele-Rad Order (new)  Store Report (new)  Update Order Status (completed)  Q/R Report

10. 7/1/1436 10 MOH Tele-Radiology Project Use Case Actors Example:

11. 7/1/1436 11 MOH Tele-Radiology Project Use Case Actors Example:

13. 7/1/1436 13 MOH Tele-Radiology Project Use Case Actors: Imaging Information Source • Produces and publishes imaging documents Imaging Information Consumer • Queries and retrieves images Imaging Report Consumer • Queries and retrieves reports Imaging Repository • Store and provide access to images and reports • Maintains metadata

14. 7/1/1436 14 MOH Tele-Radiology Project Benefits of National Tele-Radiology Project: Sharing Images and Reports • Timely access to studies and reports • Reduce duplicated Imaging • Support for Tele-radiology Tele-radiology Orders • Access to radiologists during off-hours • Access to specialists from all over Saudi • Load balancing during periods of heavy load • Better care and reduced errors

17. 7/1/1436 17 MOH Tele-Radiology Project Publish Document(s) Query/Retrieve Document(s) Notification of Document Availability Retrieve Images Send Images LegendLegend Service Actor Imaging Information Source Imaging Information Consumer Imaging Report Consumer Imaging Repository Service Model

18. 7/1/1436 18 MOH Tele-Radiology Project Tele-Radiology Order Creator Tele-Radiology Order Fulfiller Tele-Radiology Order Forwarder Manage Order Service Model