Mark Do Couto

Mark Do Couto

Global Sales Strategy Leader @ Altair | AI, Machine Learning, Data Analytics

Published Apr 30, 2015

Are you looking to solve these questions?

How should products be bundled?

Which customers are most likely to leave?

What are customers talking about?

Who are the most valuable customers?

How can we improve marketing campaign response?

Customer Analytics has the Answers

Businesses are now able to collect more data about their customers than ever before, and need to plan to increase their marketing analytics capabilities. By leveraging customer data, businesses can understand how to attract new customers, improve customer retention, and enhance marketing campaign performance.

Angoss customer analytics can help build, host and maintain industry-based predictive models for analysts, in order to discover new patterns and trends in their data and accurately predict customer behavior.

The Customer Analytics Lifecycle allows for a complete analysis of your marketing, CRM and customer intelligence.

Stages in the Customer Analytics Lifecycle:

Customer Segmentation allows analysts to understand the landscape of the market in terms of customer characteristics and whether they naturally can be grouped into segments that have something in common.

Customer Acquisition is used to acquire new customers and increase market share, and often involves offering products to a large number of prospects.

Upsell/Cross Sell aim to provide existing customers with additional or more valued products.

Next Product/Recommendation aims to promote additional products to existing customers when the time is right.

Best Communication Channel Model, combined with Next Best Product Model can help marketing departments to target the right customer, with the right offer, through the right communication channel, at the right time.

Customer Retention/Loyalty/Churn aim at maintaining and rewarding customer loyalty and reduce customer defection.

Customer Lifetime Value is used to design programs to appreciate and reward valuable customers.

Product Segmentation allows for the optimization of using product affinity; in most cases using Market Basket Analysis.

Voice of the Customer is used to understand what customers are saying about the company, its competitors and predict customer behaviour through unstructured text-based data.

Building an Analytics Foundation

Angoss customer analytics are offered through Angoss KnowledgeSEEKER™, KnowledgeSTUDIO™, KnowledgeREADER™, andKnowledgeSEEKER Marketing Edition and KnowledgeSCORE™ providing customer analytics solutions for data profiling and visualization, Decision Tree analysis, predictive modeling, and scoring and strategy building.

Banks, retailers, telcos, and healthcare providers use Angoss analytics to develop their customer analytics lifecycle.

Help improve contributions

Mark contributions as unhelpful if you find them irrelevant or not valuable to the article. This feedback is private to you and won’t be shared publicly.