Financial Statistics/Marketing Seminar #21

The twenty-first in a series of Financial Statistics/Marketing seminars wase held on Friday, February 11, 2005, 2:00 - 3:30 pm, at the SAS Institute in Toronto.

Title: The 11th Commandment: Know thy Customer

Speaker: Michael Hurwich, The Foundation Group

Financial Statistics/Marketing Seminar #16

The sixteenth in a series of Financial Statistics/Marketing seminars was held on Tuesday, September 23, 2003, 2:00 - 3:30 pm, at the Royal Bank Training Centre in Toronto.

Title: "Decision Tree Predictive Models / Recent developments in OLE DB DM scripting for data mining models within databases."

Speaker: Dr Mamdouh Refaat, ANGOSS Software Corporation

Financial Statistics/Marketing Seminar #11

The eleventh in a series of Financial Statistics/Marketing seminars was held on Thursday, October 17, 2002, 2:00 - 4:00 pm, at the Royal Bank Training Centre in Toronto.

Are you interested to know the Outlook for Borrowing in Canada in Uncertain Times? Have you ever wondered how your property assessment value is generated? Would you have thought that statistical inference would have been used in the development of this value?

Special Topic: "Consumer Credit: A New Context. The Outlook for Borrowing in Canada in Uncertain Times"

Speaker: Alberta Cefis, Executive Vice President, Retail Lending Services, Scotiabank

Keynote Topic: "AVM: How to value over 3 million properties . . . every month!"

Speaker: Anthony Percaccio, Manager Research, Product Development - Property Values, Municipal Property Assessment Corporation

Financial Statistics/Marketing Seminar #7

Do you present statistical analysis results to senior management?

Do you sometimes have problems understanding your statisticians' technical jargon during presentations?

If so, you are invited to attend the seventh of a seminar series of Applied Financial Statistics and Marketing seminars sponsored by SORA (the Southern Regional Association of the Statistical Society of Canada and the Southern Ontario Chapter of the American Statistical Association). Co-sponsorship for these seminars is provided by Scotiabank and Royal Bank.

This practical seminar is targeted towards business people who would like to upgrade their skills and knowledge in Statistics. The examples used in this seminar will relate directly to the banking industry. For example, tests for differences due to gender, age, and card types among VISA card customers will be discussed.

The effectiveness of your presentation is important in capturing an audience's attention. Our speaker, Tamara Arenovich, will teach us some simple yet powerful statistical methods to design and develop useful models for decision making, and to present the results in an effective and intuitive manner.

The seventh in a series of Financial Statistics/Marketing seminars was held on Tuesday, February 27, 2001, 2:00 - 5:00 pm at the Royal Bank Training Centre in Toronto. Tamara Arenovich presented "Statistics 101", an introduction to statistical methods for the benefit of non-statisticians.

Financial Statistics/Marketing Seminar #1

The Bank of Nova Scotia hosted the first in a series of Financial Statistics/Marketing seminars on Wednesday, September 15, 1999, 2:00 - 5:00 pm at the National Trust Boardroom in Toronto. The speaker was Gary Saarenvirta of The Loyalty Group. Click here for more information. You can get copies of some of Gary's work online at http://www.db2mag.com/ . "The Intelligent Miner for Data Applications Guide" is at http://www.redbooks.ibm.com/.