This letter was written by John Sowers, who enlisted in August 1861 in Co. N, 28th (“Goldstream” Regiment) Pennsylvania Infantry. The extra companies in this regiment, including Co. N, were transferred into 147th Pennsylvania Infantry when it was organized in October 1862. John Sowers entered Co. C of the 147th P. V. as a private but was later promoted to corporal. The regiment participated in the Battles of Chancellorsville and Gettysburg before fighting in Tennessee at the Battle of Lookout Mountain and during the Chattanooga-Ringold Campaign. The 147th also participated in the Atlanta Campaign advancing through Northwest Georgia during June and July 1864. Sowers was wounded at Pine Knob, Georgia on 15 June 1864. He died from his wounds in Nashville on 6 July 1864 and was buried in the National Cemetery there (Section I, Grave 367) under the name John Sower.

John was the son of Henry Sowers (1797-@1875) and Sophia Reicheldeofer (1806-Aft1851) of Carbon county, Pennsylvania. John had an older brother who also gave his life in the Civil War. Penrose Sowers (1831-1864) served in Co. K, 81st Pennsylvania Infantry, the “Fighting Chippewas.” He was killed on 12 May 1864 at the Battle of Spotsylvania.

Transcription

Berlin, Maryland

November 28, 1861

Respected Father & Mother,

I seat myself down to drop a few lines to you. I am well, hoping and wishing that these few lines may find you and mother enjoying the same state of health. I must say, father, the army has become quite a home to me. I must say, father, I like it much better than I thought I would.

Our company is still out on picket duty along the Potomac river and our enemy is still on the other side of the Potomac river. We can see the Rebels every day.

Our regiment at the present time consists of 1,711 men. You can think, father, we have quite a regiment. This is the largest regiment that Pennsylvania has out for the campaign. Our regiment has good health at present, and our company has extra good health so far.

The weather here at night is very cold along this river and through the day the weather is quite fine. And further I must say our living is not as good as it might be for this present time. But our quarter master don’t attend to his business like he ought to. My weight at present is 184 lbs. That is not bad for your son John. I hope the Lord will give me such good health at all times. I further wish he will give me health and strength to return back home again.

I don’t think we will lay here long. The talk is we will go further south. That part would suit me very well. I would be pleased to go away from this state. I was in Virginia on a scouting party last week, but we could not catch any Rebels. They were as smart as we was on this day. I am in this regiment three months and nine days. Father, we have received no pay yet, but as we get paid, what money I don’t want, I will send it home to you for safe keeping. We expect the paymaster every day. So father, I will bring my letter to a close.

From your son, — John Sowers