1861

September The 49th Pennsylvania Infantry Regiment was recruited in the counties of Centre, Chester, Huntingdon, Miffin and Juniata and organized at Lewistown and Harrisburg under the command of Colonel William Irwin (who had been Colonel of the 7th Pennsylvania Infantry), Lieutenant Colonel William Brisbane and Major Thomas Hulings.

Organization of the Regiment:

Company A – Centre County – Captain Joseph M. Green

Company B – Chester County – Captain George F. Smith

Company C – Huntingdon County – Captain John B. Miles

Company D – Huntingdon County – Captain James D. Campbell

Company E – Mifflin County – Captain Henry A. Zollinger

Company F – Chester County – Captain Benjamin H. Sweeney

Company G – Centre County – Captain John Boal

Company H – Mifflin County – Captain Ralph L. Maclay

Company I – Juniata County – Captain Calvin De Witt

Company K – Mifflin County – Captain John F. Reynolds

September 22 Left Pennsylvania for Washington, D.C. September Duty near Lewinsville, Va., Defenses of Washington, D.C., attached to Hancock’s Brigade, W. F. Smith’s Division, Army Potomac

1862

March Attached to 1st Brigade, 2nd Division, 4th Corps, Army Potomac March 10-15 Advance on Manassas, Virginia. The Confederates had retreated from their fortifications, and the regiment marched to Alexandria.Captain George F. Smith of Company B transferred to the 61st Pennsylvania as major. He was replaced by Captain Baynton J. Hickman. March 24 Loaded on transports in Alexandria to join McClellan on the Virginia Peninsula. March 26

Peninsula Campaign

Landed at Newport News and marched for Yorktown.

April 1 Arrived at Yorktown. April 5-May 4

Siege of Yorktown

Engaged in picket duty, digging rifle pits, and constructing corduroy road on the left bank of Warwick River.

April 16 Lee’s Mills, Burnt Chimneys May Attached to Hancock’s 1st Brigade, 2nd Division, 6th Corps, Army Potomac May 5

Battle of Williamsburg

At midmorning Hancock’s Brigade advanced against Fort Magruder on the Confederate left flank. The fort opened fire with artillery, followed by an attack by Early’s Brigade. Hancock ordered his line to retreat by alternate battalions around one hundred yards before turning and halting Early’s advance with heavy volley fire. The brigade then charged, scattering the Confederates. Nearly three hundred prisoners were gathered. Casualties were light. Both Generals Hancock and McClellan praised Colonel Irwin and the regiment for its conduct.

May-June Pursuit to the Chickahominy River and picket duty near New Bridge. June 5 Crossed the Chickahominy on the Grapevine bridge and continued picket duty and digging rifle pits. June 25-July 1

Seven days before Richmond

June 27

Garnett’s Farm

Posted on Garnett’s Hill under heavy artillery fire, repelling an attack at sundown.

June 28

Golding’s Farm

Relieved and moved to Golding’s Farm, where fighting continued. The regiment lost 10 killed and 23 wounded in fighting on the 27th & 28th

June 29

Savage Station

The regiment moved to Savage Station and went into line along the railroad. It was with the rearguard of the army, which was haphazardly withdrawing south. McClellan had abandoned the army leaving no overall commander in charge of the retreating men. The Confederates attacked at sunset but were driven back, and the regiment withdrew across White Oak Swamp.

June 30

White Oak Swamp Bridge

The regiment was under artillery fire but was not engaged as it withdrew to Malvern Hill.

July 1

Malvern Hill

The regiment went into line on the right flank of the army but was not engaged. It withdrew that night to Harrison’s Landing.

July-August

At Harrison’s Landing

At one point 60% of the regiment was on the sick list.

August 16-22 Marched via Williamsburg and Hampton to Fortress Monroe. August 23-26 Moved by transports to Alexandria and camped near Fairfax Seminary. August 27-31 Marched six miles to Annandale and then to Centreville, occupying the earthworks. August 30

Second Battle of Bull Run (Second Manassas)

Assisted in checking Pope’s rout.

August 31-September 1 Left Centreville and covered the retreat to Fairfax Court House, where the regiment again camped at Fairfax seminary. September 5-24

Maryland Campaign

September 5-14 The regiment marched in easy stages toward Frederick to South Mountain. September 14

Crampton’s Pass, South Mountain

The regiment bivouacked in Pleasant Valley.

September 16-17

Battle of Antietam

The 49th Pennsylvania Infantry Regiment was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Willliam Brisbane while Colonel William Irwin commanded the 3rd Brigade.

From the War Department marker for Smith’s Division at Antietam:

Smith’s Division left camp between Crampton’s Pass and Rohrersville in Pleasant Valley at 5:30 A.M. of the 17th, crossed the Antietam at Pry’s Ford and arrived at the front about noon. Hancock’s Brigade was put in position on the left of Sedgwick’s Division of the Second Corps, its right near the Poffenberger Lane, its left extending in front of and parallel to the East Woods, Irwin’s Brigade advancing took cover behind the ridge south of the Smoketown Road and in front of the Church… The Division remained in position with some slight changes until the morning of the 19th, when it advanced and ascertained that the Confederates had recrossed the Potomac.

The regiment held its assigned location under an artillery fire that killed and wounded several men, but it was not engaged, was never ordered forward, and did not fire a singal shot in the battle.

Drummer Charles Edwin King of Company F was mortally wounded, shot through the torso. At the age of 13 years, 5 months, 17 days, he was the youngest documented soldier to be killed in the Civil War.

September-October Duty in Maryland October 10 Moved to Cunningham’s Cross Roads to intercept Stuart’s Confederate cavalry, who were engaged on a ride behind Federal lines. The regiment marched via White Plains, Warrenton, Catlett’s Station, and Stafford Court House to Belle Plain, but never caught up with Stuart’s men. October 15 Lieutenant Colonel William Brisbane resigned. Major Thomas Hulings was promoted to lieutenant colonel and Captain John Miles of Company C to major. Lieutenant J. R. Eckebarger was promoted to Captain of Company C. October 29-November 19 Movement to Falmouth, Va. December 12-15

Battle of Fredericksburg

The regiment crossed the Rappahannock on the 13th and supported Federal batteries on Franklin’s flank. It was under fire ut was not engaged. They returned across the river on the 16th and camped near White Oak Church.

1863

January 9 Consolidated to a battalion of four companies under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Hulings. Colonel William Irwin, Major John Miles and other unneeded officers were ordered on recruiting service. January 20-24

“Mud March”

February-April At White Oak Church. The army was reorganized, and the 49th Pennsylvania was attached to the 3rd Brigade, 1st Division, 6th Army Corps. It would remain in this organization for the rest of the war. April 10 Colonel William Irwin returned to take command of the regiment, which had been reinforced up to strength over the winter. April 27-May 6

Chancellorsville Campaign

April 28-May 2

Operations at Franklin’s Crossing

April 29 The regiment carried pontoon boats on their backs down to the river so as not to warn the Confederates. But halfway across the river they opened a deadly fire. Colonel William Irwin was wounded and Captain William Freeburn of Company B was mortally wounded. Two privates were killed, and and eight other men were wounded. But the 49th landed successfully and pushed back the Confederate defenders so that engineers could construct a pontoon bridge and other troops could cross. April 30 Withdrew to the river bank and remained under cover. May 3

Maryes Heights (Second Fredericksburg)

The 49th advanced to the plain to the east of Fredericksburg. It remained there three hours under a heavy artillery fire until marching through Fredericksburg and up the Plank Road to Fairview Farm, where it deployed in skirmish line.

May 4

Salem Church

The regiment fought on the skirmish line, throwing back two enemy assaults. A third assault at dusk was successful, and the 49th fell back to a defensive line around Bank’s Ford.

May 5

Banks’ Ford

The regiment recrossed the Rappahannock.

May 8 Returned to the regiment’s old camp at White Oak Church. May

At White Oak Church

June 6-11

Deep Run Ravine

The 49th again crossed the Rappahannock on a pontoon bridge at Deep Run, where it occupied rifle pits in support of a scouting raid by Federal cavalry. They recrossed on the 11th when the cavalry returned from it’s scout.

June 12-July 14

Gettysburg Campaign

June 12 – 30 The 49th Pennsylvania Infantry Regiment moved north in easy stages, although still suffering from extreme heat which caused a number of cases of sunstroke. It marched through Dumfries and Fairfax Station, crossed the Potomac at Edwards’ Ferry, and arrived near Westminster Westminster on the 30th. July 1-4

Battle of Gettysburg

Very late on July 1 the regiment learned of the disastrous first day at Gettysburg and was ordered to march north to Gettysburg “with all possible dispatch.” The men moved out at first light on July 2 at the quick step (180 rather than 120 steps per minute) and reached the field at 2 p.m. They were deployed behind the Fifth Corps.

The 49th Pennsylvania Infantry Regiment was commanded at Gettysburg by Lieutenant Colonel Thomas M. Hulings. It brought 318 men to the field in four companies (A-D).

On July 3 the regiment was formed in line from Round Top to Taneytown Road, perpendicular to the main line of battle and protecting its flank, roughly where the regiment’s monument is located today. The men were under a heavy artillery fire which was overshooting the main Federal lines, but the regiment suffered no casualties.

On July 4 Company was sent out as sirmishers to the Devil’s Den.

From the monument to the 49th Pennsylvania at Gettysburg:

The regiment made a continuous march from Manchester Md. arriving on the field the afternoon of July 2. Occupied this position in reserve from the morning of the 3rd until the enemy’s assault in the afternoon when it moved to support centre thence to Round Top.

July 5 Began the pursuit of Lee’s army, running into his rear guard near Fairfield and resulting in a light sirmish. July 6-11 Marched through Emmettsburg and Mechanicstown and arrived at dusk at the foot of the Catoctin Mountain. The infantry took a side road over the mountain while the corps artillery took the main road. It was a dark night , with the rain descending in torrents. “The men were worn out and faint with fasting, and many were shoeless, the sharp stones inflicting severe wounds as they wended their way up the rugged mountain in the impenetrable darkness. Many straggled by the way, and upon the summit the column halted for them to come up.” The regiment drew rations and shoes at Middletown and was allowed one full night’s rest. July 12-14 The 49th deployed as skirmishers near Antietam Creek, losing one officer wounded as they drove the Confederate skirmishers back on their main line. The remained on the skirmish line. ready for an attack, until they learned the Confederates had slipped away across the Potomac. July-October Duty on line of the Rappahannock October 9-22

Bristoe Campaign

The regiment lost three men to guerillas.

October 24 Colonel William Irwin resigned. November 7-8 Advance to line of the Rappahannock November 7

Rappahannock Station

The regiment and its brigade carried the enemy earthworks in a bayonet charge at sundown which captured over 1600 prisoners from Hayes’ Louisiana and Hoke’s North Carolina brigades while losing 3 men killed and 27 wounded. Captain Hutchinson and Lieutenant Stuart were wounded.

From General Sedgwick’s order of conglatulation:

“The enemy was attacked in an intrenched position of great strength, in enclosed works defended by artillery and infantry, and compelled to surrender after a sharp conflict, to an assaulting column actually inferior in numbers to the force defending the works. Four pieces of artillery, four caissons filled with ammunition, the enemy’s pontoon bridge, eight battle flags, two thousand stand of arms, and sixteen hundred prisoners, including two brigade commanders and one hundred and thirty commissioned officers, are the fruits of the victory…

The Sixth Maine and Fifth Wisconsin, for carrying the redoubts, the One Hundred and Twenty-first New York, Fifth Maine, Fortyninth and One Hundred and Nineteenth Pennsylvania Volunteers, for taking the line of rifle-pits with the bayonet, and seizing the enemy’s bridge, deserve especial honor.”

November 19 260 men reenlisted and were granted a 35 day Veteran’s furlough November 26-December 2

Mine Run Campaign

Captain Quigly and 4 enlisted men were wounded.

December 2 Returned to winter quarters at Hazel Run.

1864

April 22 Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Hulings was promoted to colonel, Major John Miles to lieutenant colonel, and Captain Baynton J. Hickman of Company B to major, effective to October 24. First Lieutenant Robert G. Barr was promoted to Captain of Company B. May 4-June 13

Rapidan Campaign

Orders came on the afternoon of the 4th to prepare to march at 4 a.m. the next morning.

May 5-7

Battle of the Wilderness

May 5

Battle of the Wilderness – Germania Ford

The 49th Pennsylvania Infantry Regiment crossed the Rapidan at Germania Ford and moved ahead on the Plank Road before forming a line of battle and advancing into the woods. They ran into the enemy at a distance of thirty yards and exchanged fire until the Confederate line fell back. Firing continued through the night.

The 49th lost 11 men killed and Lieutenant Decatur Lytle and 22 other men wounded.

May 6

Battle of the Wilderness – Day 2

In the morning the brigade advanced a short distance before again coming under fire. They drove the Confederates back some distance then erected breastworks. Fighting continued during the entire day. The Sixth Corps was now the far right of the Union line, with the 49th on the left of the brigade adjoining the Fifth Corps.

At sundown there was a heavy attack on the far right flank of the Sixth Corps which was successful in turninng its flank. But the attack was forced back repulsed and the fighting ceased shortly after dark. At midnight the Sixth Corps quietly moved off by the left, following the Fifth Corps.

May 7

Battle of the Wilderness – Day 3

In the morning the regiment was awaiting attack. It held its position all day with only skirmish firing. after dark it marched again by the left flank on the road to Spottsylvania Court House,

May 8

Laurel Hill (Spotsylvania Court House)

At midmorning the 49th Pennsylvania arrived near Laurel Hill behind the Fifth Corps, which was being hard pressed. The regiment moved to the front. The arrival of fresh troops causedthe Confederates to retire, and the regiment remained on the field through the night.

May 9

Spotsylvania Court House

The Sixth Corps moved to the left, losing General Sedgwick to a sharpshooters as it was moving into position. Three companies were moved forward as skirmishers while the remainder of the regiment were in line of battle under artillery fire.

At 6 p.m. the regiment prepared for a “packs down charge” on the Confederate positions to be led by Colonel Emory Upton. The attacking column formed in a wood only one hundred yards from the Confederate line under cover of a small rise of ground. The formation was a dense phalanx, three regiments wide and four lines deep with intervals of ten paces. The 49th Pennsylvania was on the right of the second line.

Upton’s Assault

“At the sound of the bugle the whole column advanced upon the run. As it emerged from the woods, a sheet of fire burst from the enemy’s rifle pits that swept it with terrible effect. Never faltering for an instant, it rushed on and carried the works, capturing nine hundred prisoners and several guns. But the enemy rallying in great force on front and flanks, it was forced to retire and to abandon its captures.”

“The return was even more terrible than the advance; for that open plain was swept by both infantry and artillery, and the enemy swarmed out on all sides, pouring in a concentrated and most destructive fire. Never were works more gallantly charged, nor more successfully carried; but, alas! at a fearful cost.

The regiment lost heavily in an unsuccessful assault. Colonel Thomas Hulings, Lieutenant Colonel John Miles, Captain William Kephart, Lieutenants Lytle and Calvin De Witt and 61 enlisted men were killed. Captain Robert Barr was mortally wounded. Captain Stuart, Lieutenants Downing, Irvin, Russel, and Thompson, Adjutant Hilands and 195 enlisted men were wounded. Major Baynton J. Hickman took over the regiment as senior surviving officer.

May 12

Assault on the Salient

The remnants of the regiment supported Hancock’s great attack on the bulge in the Confederate line. Heavy firing continued all day. “Many muskets were heated to such a degree as to be rendered useless, and those found upon the bodies of the dead and wounded were taken to supply their places.” The Confederates retired during the night, and Union forces moved up to occupy their positions. “The sight presented within was sickening to behold. So terrible had been the destruction of life, and so horribly were the dead torn and mangled, that it was ever after known as the slaughter-pen. ”

Captains James Quigley and F. W. Wombacker and Lieutenant John Rogers were wounded. From May 4 – 14 the regiment lost 392 casualties, and at the end of the battle could muster only 130 men.

May 23-26

North Anna River

May 28-31

Totopotomoy

May 31-June 12

Battle of Cold Harbor

The 49th Pennsylvania Infantry Regiment assaulted the Confederate line, taking and holding the first trench, which it held for twelve days in the face of their second line, 100 feet distant. The 49th lost 8 men killed and Captains Wakefield and Hutchinson and 18 enlisted men wounded

June 13 During the night the regiment was quietly withdrawn from the lines and moved to the James River to lay a pontoon bridge.It then crossed to the south side of the James and camped behind Butler’s lines. June 15 Major Baynton J. Hickman was promoted to lieutenant colonel and Captain A. W. Wakefield of Company A to major June 17-19

Before Petersburg

Siege of Petersburg begins.

June 22-23 The regiment moved to the left and was positioned along Jerusalem Plank Road. June 29

Weldon Railroad

Destroyed track along the railroad, permanently cutting one of the main supply routes into Petersburg from the south.

July 11 Left the lines at Petersburg and loaded onto transports for Washington D.C. July 12-13

Repulse of Early’s attack on Washington

The regiment unloaded from the transports, marched through town, and engaged Early’s men north of the fortifications.

July 14-18

Pursuit of Early

The regiment followed Early’s retreat back into Virginia through Poolesville, crossed the Potomac at Edward’s Ferry, moved through the Loudon Valley and over the Blue Ridge, then caught up with him at the Shenandoah River and followed him on to Berryville.

Wright was then ordered to return the 6th Corps to Washington. It retraced its steps, with the intention of returning to the Petersburg front.

July 24-29 The Sixth Corps had barely arrived in Washington when news arrived of Early’s defeat of Crook at Kernstown and the scattering of Federal forces in the Lower Shenandoah Valley. It was ordered back to the Shenandoah Valley and attached to the Army of the Shenandoah. The regiment reached Harpers Ferry on the 29th. August

Sheridan’s Shenandoah Valley Campaign

Temporarily attached to Reserve Division, Dept. West Virginia.

September Returned to 3rd Brigade, 1st Division, 6th Corps, Army of the Shenandoah September 19

Third Battle of Winchester (Battle of Opequan)

The 49th Pennsylvania Infantry Regiment was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Baynton J. Hickman. It was on the extreme left of the Sixth Corps line.

Lieutenant Joseph Wallace and 10 enlisted men were killed and Captain John Thompson, Lieutenant Downing and 35 enlisted men wounded. A shell burst atop the regimental colors, destroying what little remained of it.

Adjutant Hilands wrote,

“As the line came on the plain, east of Winchester, we on the left had a full view of the whole field, and a magnificent sight it was. The enemy’s line was broken; his artillery, cavalry and infantry were in inextricable confusion, and having turned their backs were making fast time from the field, while off to the right was our own line, in perfect order, stretching away in the distance, steadily advancing in the bright sunlight, with colors, which looked more beautiful than ever, waving in triumph. It was worth three years’ hard service to be a participant in the battle of Winchester, under the command of Phil. Sheridan.”

September-October Guard duty at Winchester and Martinsburg, where many of the Confederate prisoners were taken. The regiment missed the Battle of Cedar Creek. October 26 A new state flag was presented to the regiment to replace the one destroyed at Winchester. October 29 The 49th Pennsylvania rejoined the corps at Cedar Creek. November 10 Marched to Kernstown. December 1

Siege of Petersburg

Ordered to Petersburg, Va. and returned to the Army of the Potomac

December 5 The regiment went into winter quarters at Fort Wadsworth, along the Weldon Railroad December 13 Moved to Hatcher’s Run, but was not engaged.

1865

March 25

Fort Steadman

Advanced to relieve the fort, which had been captured in a surprise night attack, but was not needed as the fort had been retaken before it arrived.

February 5-7

Battle of Dabney’s Mills, or Hatcher’s Run

April 1-April 9

Appomattox Campaign

April 2

Fall of Petersburg

The regiment packed up its camp during the night of April 1 and moved to join the attacking force. The dawn attack broke through the Confederate lines, and the regiment followed the enemy as they retreated through Petersburg and moved north across the Appomattox River.

April 3-5 The pursuit of Lee’s army continued through Jettersville, and Amelia Court House. April 6

Sailor’s Creek

The pursuing Federal fell on Lee’s struggling army, killing or capturing a third of the enemy.

Lieuteant G. E. Hackenberg was killed, Lieutenant John Rogers mortally wounded and Captain Wombacker was wounded. Detached to escort prisoners after the battle.

April 7-9 The 49th Pennsylvania was detailed to escort prisoners from Sailor’s Creek following the main Federal army. They caught up with the army at Appomattox Court House as Lee was surrendering his remaining forces. April 23-27 Marched to Danville. The regiment covered one hundred miles in four days. April 28-May 23 Duty at Danville May 23 Moved by easy marches to Richmond, Va and to Washington DC Junee-July Stationed at Hal’s Hill June 8 Corps Review June 28 Lieuteant Colonel Baynton J. Hickman resigned.