The whole idea of punk-fed pop music took some time to get used to, but is clearly not going anywhere. When Green Day and Fall Out Boy come up for Grammy awards, there is no surer sign that this brand of music is embraced by a wide audience.

The Starting Line is making its way along the path opening up for punk-poppers, having just signed a deal with Virgin Records and put together its first headlining tour.

“I always wanted this for the band, but you’re never sure it’s going to happen,” said Kenny Vasoli, The Starting Line’s singer and bass player.

The Starting Line is playing tomorrow at The Palladium, 261 Main St, Worcester. Copeland, Gatsby’s American Dream, Cartel and Suicide Pact are also on the bill.

The band’s youthful demeanor belies the fact that the Starting Line has been around since 1999 and generated a string of LPs and EPs leading up to last year’s breakthrough effort “Based on a True Story.”

On that album, the Starting Line went beyond the pop-punk-emo formats it used well early in its career and crafted a record that sounded more resonant and assured. The songs on “Based on a True Story” are more intricately arranged and present more demanding performances by the group (which is why The Starting Line is bringing along an auxiliary keyboard player for this tour). The record’s cinematic theme provided a structure for this studio project the way a good set list carries a live show.

“I always hoped that our fans would like a record like this. I know it’s different, but we’ve grown up. I just reasoned that when we made that record our fans would be older, too,” Vasoli said, acknowledging that bands that veer from established routes easily lose their fans. “It’s a group effort, but I’m the one who pushed the band this time to explore our capabilities and play beyond what we think we can do.”

When it came out last year on Drive Thru Records, the indie label that signed The Starting Line in 2000, “Based on a True Story” was positively received. And when the band toured with Fall Out Boy along last year’s Fusion Tour, it generated frenetic responses. Those developments prompted many of the larger record labels to woo The Starting Line. But Vasoli said that Virgin Records seemed the most sincere about letting The Starting Line work the way the band wants to.

Vasoli and guitarist Mat Watts formed The Starting Line after tenures in other bands in their native Philadelphia. The two actually connected via e-mail correspondences, and additional electronic grapevine chatter brought in drummer Tom Gryskiewicz and guitarist Mike Golla. Vasoli explained how early on The Starting Line’s penchant for playing music inspired by Get-Up Kids and Saves the Day didn’t go over so well in its hometown.

“Trying to bring emotional punk to the scene we had around us didn’t work at first. We had to go to New Jersey to play shows. It was only an hour’s drive away, and eventually we made our way back to Philadelphia,” Vasoli said.

The Starting Line’s melodic brand of punk teamed well with the work of other up-and-comers such as Taking Back Sunday, and the band got some boosts on tours with Drive Thru label mates New Found Glory and Finch.

The Starting Line’s first full-length album, “Say It Like You Mean It,” sounded custom-made for Warped Tour exposure (and the band was part of that punk-rock summer caravan in 2002, 2003 and 2005). But the band grew and developed its material to make its sad and heartfelt songs ring a bit more authentic. “Based on a True Story” finally offered a studio version of The Starting Line that was exciting as the band’s live shows.

While The Starting Line is looking to have its Virgin Records debut ready by year’s end, Vasoli said the band is foremost happiest about hitting the road again.

•

Union Blues goes out in style this week with final performances from Roomful of Blues tomorrow and David Foster’s Mohegan Sun Allstars on Saturday. Union Blues proprietor Lee Beaudoin decided early this month to close the two-year-old nightclub located in Union Station, Washington Square, Worcester. While Beaudoin was forced by finances to throw in the towel, his efforts should be appreciated. He built a top-notch venue that sounded great and presented superb acts. Inexperience proved his undoing, as the novice nightclub operator simply could not calibrate the delicate finances it takes to stay afloat in a business notorious for devouring its young. Hopefully Beaudoin at the very least opened a pathway for someone else to come along and drive a hard bargain of the sort that can ensure the space remains a room for blues and jazz.

Apollo Sunshine proved to be a great band in the wrong place when it opened for Wu-Tang Clan earlier this month at The Palladium. Apollo Sunshine’s explosive brand of pop music fell flat before the rabid Wu warriors but should be a perfect fit at Ralph’s Chadwick Square Diner, 148 Grove St., Worcester, on Saturday. Ralph’s is also cranking tomorrow with Mike Thibodeau’s annual birthday bash, which this year features his band the Bee’s Knees plus Huck, the Curtain Society and Lusting Kay.

The improvisational trio Vorcza headlines tonight at Tammany Hall, 43 Pleasant St., Worcester. The Boogaloo Swamis brings a bit of Mardi Gras to the Bull Run, Route 2A, Shirley, tomorrow.

Walter and Valerie Crockett take their band to The Green Rooster Coffeehouse inside the United Congregational Church, 6 Institute Road, Worcester, on Saturday. Jennifer Kimball and Session Americana are featured Saturday at Cafe Fantastique inside Rotmans, 725 Southbridge St., Worcester.

Cafe Fantastique is also now offering an open-mike night on Thursdays. The new Zodiac Cafe at 50 Lake Ave., Worcester, is also starting an open-mike series, and launches it tomorrow with featured performer Patty Keough.

Scott McLennan can be reached at tgmusic1@yahoo.com.