Aim (purpose):

Victor Hugo is most famously known for his novels, Les Misérables and The Hunchback of Notre-dame. These two novels, as well as his other works, shed light on the injustice towards the lower classes of his time and various other issues politically and socially. Throughout his works, he portrayed the cruelty of the upper classes towards the lower classes through their actions and ideas. In The Hunchback of Notre-dame, he writes of a society that forgets of the significance of architecture and the “harsh criticism of the society that degrades and shuns the hunchback Quasimodo” (Biography). Victor Hugo was also a well-known poet, whose poems captured raw and human emotions of events that happened in his own life as well as others. For example, he writes of the sudden and accidental death of his daughter in the poem Á Villequier (At Villequier), “I keep looking at that moment of my life / when I saw her open her wings and fly away!” (Hugo). Several of his poems written throughout his life lament on this event. Hugo is also famous for his poems that voice his opinions towards leaders and political events, which is evident in the poems Les Châtiments, which is notable for his satire approach towards Louís Napoleon.

Audience:

His intended primary audience for his works is targeted towards the royalty and the privileged. His works are most notable for criticising the rich’s way of life. Hugo is able to show the negative consequences of their actions and the ignorant approach to society’s issues. According to “A Brief Summary of His Life,” “He began to realise, however, that his moral and political ambitions were not shared by his political allies, and his relationship with them soon deteriorated.” His secondary audience is the other components of society. He includes these audiences to show that each class a connection to each other. He analyzes the social injustices and morals of each class in order for a clearer understanding of their actions. Some assumptions that Victor Hugo has to make is that his audience is open to an outside point of view of their society. With this assumption, Hugo can pinpoint specific actions and characteristics that he deems as unfair and negative.

Historical:

Several of Victor Hugo’s literature focus on the French Revolution of 1848 and the social injustice in that time period. Victor Hugo was known as a “passionate supporter of republicanism” (Wikipedia). He was able to voice his desire for a Republic form of government, where he soon found that other political forces disagreed with him. Because of this, he was considered a traitor and a threat to society, forcing him into exile in Guernsey, where he wrote extensively. Some of his most known works is the novel, Les Misérables and the collection of poems, Les Châtiments. These events fueled his passion for writing, and allowed for others to connect with his writing. Many readers began to share the same political views for justice and order in France, which also called for change in society. Victor Hugo’s written works enhanced the opposition towards dictatorship and the need for a republic.

Cultural: