Heartwarming, emotional and funny are the three words that can be best used to describe the national touring production of Mrs. Doubtfire based on the 1993 movie by the same name.

In the movie, the lead character Mrs. Doubtfire/Daniel Hilliard was portrayed by the late Robin Williams, who also produced the film. Williams earned a Golden Globe Award for his iconic performance.

But this is 2024, a different time, and the man-in-the-dress story is tricky. J. Harrison Ghee, who originated the role of Andre in Mrs. Doubtfire on Broadway, earned a Tony Award for their portrayal of Jerry/Daphne in last season’s Some Like It Hot, so it is possible to tell this story honorably. The key is to approach the role with genuineness and respect.

On the tour, the title character is played by Rob McClure, who originated the role first in Seattle and then on Broadway. McClure brings his own spin to the character of Daniel Hillard, while paying homage to Williams. McClure’s comedic timing, energy, and innate talent make him the perfect fit for this role and one of the few people who could successfully pull it off. Moreover, his respect for the material is creditable, which keeps the show focused on Daniel’s primary motivation for donning the plaid skirts, which is solely to be with his children.

One of the most impressive parts of the musical is the sheer amount of costume changes. With 30 quick changes throughout the show, there is little room for error. McClure and the crew execute these so seamlessly, both on stage or off, they make it look easy.

Alongside McClure is his real-life wife, Maggie Lakis as Miranda Hillard. Lakis’ portrayal of Miranda is well-balanced. But it is Giselle Gutierrez, as the Hillard’s eldest child, who truly grounds the show and offsets McClure’s zaniness.

While Mrs. Doubtfire deals with some hard, and emotional themes, the show’s funny moments outweigh its seriousness. That said, it ends with a heartwarming message that love is love and families come in all forms.

The danger with film-to-stage adaptation, particularly with such a beloved property as Mrs. Doubtfire, is that fans of the film might leave disappointed. But if audiences come into the theater with an open heart and mind, they just might find a loving, reimagined Doubtfire, with a sweet message, that is entertaining enough for the entire family.