La Supercopa de España is a tournament with an important tradition in Spanish soccer, which has historically pitted the League champion against the winner of the Copa del Rey. The format has varied, as there has also been a four-way final, with the runner-up in La Liga and the finalist in the Cup, over two legs (home and away), or also in a single format.

Record of the Spanish Supercup

The Supercopa de España has a very rich and varied list of champions. Of course, as usual in our country, the dominance of FC Barcelona and Real Madrid is very large. The third in discord is Atlético de Madrid, while other teams such as Deportivo de La Coruña, Athletic de Bilbao, Valencia, RCD Mallorca, Sevilla FC, Real Zaragoza and Real Sociedad have at least one title in their trophy cabinets.

Leo Messi is the player, by far ahead of Raúl González Blanco, with the most goals scored in the Spanish Super Cup. The Argentine star scored 14 goals in the FC Barcelona jersey, compared to 7 for the Real Madrid striker.

Teams with more Supercopa de España titles

The two teams with by far the most titles and runners-up in the Supercopa de España are FC Barcelona and Real Madrid. As is the case in the history of Spanish soccer, there is a significant parity between them, also in the Supercopa competition.

Behind them are Deportivo de La Coruña, Atlético de Madrid and Athletic de Bilbao. The Lions are a team with a great tradition in the Copa del Rey, in addition to their success in La Liga, although with the arrival of the 'Bosman Law', they logically lost a lot of strength, due to the fact that they only have players from the Basque Country or Navarre.

In the third step, other historic teams such as Valencia, RCD Mallorca, Sevilla FC, Real Zaragoza and Real Sociedad have at least one title in their trophy cabinets. Also teams such as Real Betis and RCD Espanyol have played the Spanish Super Cup, but have not won the trophy.

History of the Supercopa de España: since when has it been played?

The Supercopa de España competition originated in July 1982. At that time, the assembly of the Royal Spanish Football Federation, at the proposal of the then president of FC Barcelona, José Luis Núñez, approved the creation of a Super Cup. The original idea was that it would annually measure the League and Cup champions.

Its direct predecessor was the Eva Duarte Cup, which was last held in 1953. Therefore, this RFEF event had not been held for almost thirty years. In its beginnings, the tournament was held in the middle of the season.

The difficulty of finding free dates in the calendar forced the suspension of some editions, as in 1986 and 1987. There was also no final in 1984 and 1989, since the League and Cup champion in those seasons were the same team, winning the title automatically.

In order to promote the tournament, starting with the 1994 edition, the Federation decided to move the Super Cup forward in the calendar. It placed it at the end of the preseason and the start of the league championship. Likewise, in 1996, the Spanish Federation agreed that, in the event that a team had achieved the double, the Super Cup title would be disputed by the League champion against the Cup runner-up. This situation has occurred in the 1996, 1998, 2009, 2015, 2016 and 2018 editions.

However, in 2018 it was played for the first time outside Spain and in a single match. The match was played on August 12 between Sevilla F. C. and F. C. Barcelona in Morocco.