What is the Henry Dunant Medal?

The idea of having a medal bearing the name of the founder of the International Red Cross, which later became the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, was submitted to and approved by the Council of Delegates, meeting on the 100th anniversary of the Red Cross in 1963. Thanks to the generosity of the Australian Red Cross, the Henry Dunant Medal was established by the International Red Cross Conference in Vienna in 1965.

The purpose of the Medal is to acknowledge and reward outstanding services and actions by an individual, mainly of international significance. These may include:

exceptional contributions to international operations; to the Movement’s cohesion, unity, influence and/or governance bodies; to developing and promoting international law and policy in the humanitarian field; or to preserving and promoting the heritage and ideals of the Red Cross / Red Crescent on an international scale;

exceptional and/or pioneering achievements in the humanitarian field at national or local level, which have been a source of inspiration and/or influence within the Movement or have enhanced international outreach by the Red Cross / Red Crescent.

The exceptionality of these services may be enhanced by great bravery and/or tenacity shown by the nominee in the face of the risks run and arduous conditions endangering his or her life, health or freedom.

The Henry Dunant Medal should preferably be given to living individuals so that they know the recognition of their peers and of the Movement for their exceptional work and can be honoured as inspiring examples for others. The Henry Dunant Medal may be awarded posthumously to a person who has died recently in accordance with the conditions set out in the Regulations and Guidelines for awarding the Medal.

The Standing Commission is empowered to award a maximum of five Henry Dunant Medals every two years, unless exceptional circumstances justify awarding more. The ceremony for presentation of the recipients normally takes place at a plenary session of each Council of Delegates.