THE NOBEL Peace Prize was established in 1985 as a means to recognize those who have greatly contributed to physics, chemistry, physiology or medicine, literature, and for work in peace.

The prize is awarded to five deserving individuals every year on December 10, the anniversary of the founder's death.

Who established the Nobel Peace Prize?

Alfred Nobel was a Swedish inventor, entrepreneur, scientist, and businessman who believed in doing his part to make a positive impact on the world.

He established the first Nobel Peace Prize in 1885, in the wake of his death.

Nobel had acquired a small fortune, the majority of which was left behind to fund the creation of the peace prize as dictated in his will.

He described the Nobel Peace Prize as worthy of going "to those who, during the preceding year, have conferred the greatest benefit to humankind.”

He directed that the Nobel Peace Prize be distributed to five worthy recipients, stating each prize would be handed out by category.

The first prize would go to the individual who had made "the most important discovery or invention in the field of physics."

The second prize, he said, would go to "the person who made the most important chemical discovery or improvement."

The third prize would be distributed to "the person who made the most important discovery within the domain of physiology or medicine."

The fourth prize would go to "the person who, in the field of literature, produced the most outstanding work in an idealistic direction.

The fifth and final prize would be given to "the person who has done the most or best to advance fellowship among nations, the abolition or reduction of standing armies, and the establishment and promotion of peace congresses."

Who was the first recipient?

The first Nobel Peace Prize was handed out in Alfred Nobel's home of Stockholm, Sweden, on the five-year anniversary of his death in 1901.

There were only two Nobel Peace Prizes awarded in its first year and they were received by Frédéric Passy from France and the Swiss Jean Henry Dunant.

Passy was awarded the prize for his work to establish international peace conferences, his efforts at diplomacy and arbitration.

He founded the first French Peace Society in 1878 and held a congress that year in Paris at the World Exhibition.

Dunant received the prize for his humanitarian efforts as he helped wounded soldiers and created international understanding.

What was Alfred Nobel known for?

Although Alfred Nobel is now best known for his invention of the Nobel Peace Prize, during his life, he'd been known for inventing dynamite which led to the advanced construction of tunnels, roads, and canals.

His invention was made public in 1866 as the first safely manageable explosive device to be created outside of gunpowder.

He accrued a substantial amount of wealth, which later went to fund the Nobel Peace Prize, by selling patent rights to other dynamite products worldwide, but when the US started using it for military-grade weaponry, Nobel became concerned at the outcome his invention had created.

It has been widely questioned if it was guilt at creating a deadly weapon that prompted him to establish the Nobel Peace Prize after his death.