Benazir Bhutto (Urdu .: بینظیر بھٹو, Karachi , 21 of June of 1953 - Rawalpindi , 27 of December of 2007) was a political Pakistan , Prime Minister of Pakistan on two occasions (1988-90, and 1993-96) and daughter elder of ex-president and ex-prime minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto .

Biography[]

He studied in the United States at Harvard University (1969-73) and later in England at Oxford University , where in 1976 he obtained a degree in philosophy , political science and economics . After his return to his country in 1977 , his father was overthrown in a military coup and executed in September 1979 . She began to suffer numerous persecutions by the dictator Mohamed Zia ul-Haq , her political struggle representing the People's Party of Pakistan(PPP) landed her in jail on numerous occasions. He spent a total of six years either behind bars or in temporary detention and in April 1984 he returned to London .

In late 1985, he took advantage of the lifting of martial law to return to Pakistan. In 1987, on the tenth anniversary of her father's overthrow, she was arrested again; But this time, the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) imposed on the dictator the setting of a date for holding democratic elections. In August 1988, the death of the Pakistani strongman in a plane crash facilitated the elections, in which, in addition to the PPP, the pro-government Islamic Democratic Alliance participated .

Bhutto during a visit to Washington DC in 1988 .

On December 2, 1988 , after the victory of her party, of social democratic tendency , she was elected Prime Minister of her country and became the first woman to lead the designs of a Muslim country. In August 1990 she was removed from office by the President of the Republic Ghulam Ishaq Khan , on charges of corruption and violation of the Constitution.

In the elections held in October 1993 the PPP won a plurality of votes, and Bhutto again became head of a coalition government. Under new charges of corruption, economic mismanagement, and a decline in public security, his government was overturned in November 1996 by President Farooq Leghari .

He published several books. In 1978 he published ´´Foreign Policy in Perspective´´ (Foreign Policy in Perspective) and in 1989 his autobiography Daughter of Destiny (Daughter of Destiny).

In 1988 he received the Bruno Kreisky Award for Human Rights and in 1989 the Honorary Phi Beta Kappa Award from Radcliffe.

The constitutional reform of 2002 prohibits a Prime Minister from serving two terms. This disabled Bhutto from re-accessing the position, as did former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif .

Bhutto left Pakistan under the threat of a judicial investigation for corruption shortly after General Pervez Musharraf , who is also the army chief, seized power in a coup in 1999. Until 2007, Bhutto lived in Dubai , United Arab Emirates , from where he maintained contacts with the PPP and its followers, and continually traveled abroad to give lectures.

Return to Pakistan and death[]

The 18 of October of 2007 , the former Pakistani prime minister returned to Karachi after eight years of exile in Dubai and London . His return to Pakistan was framed in an agreement with President Pervez Musharraf , who promulgated an ordinance that annuls the corruption cases opened against him. That pact was concluded before the presidential elections of October 6 , 2007, in which Pervez Musharraf won the majority.

On the same day of her return to Pakistan , the delegation accompanying Ms Bhutto suffered a series of attacks in Karachi , killing about 126 people and injuring more than 400.

Bhutto said that he still expected more attacks by Al Qaeda and the Taliban. The former Pakistani prime minister remained very unhappy with Musharraf's dictatorial policies and hoped to win the elections to establish a democracy in Pakistan. He was able to return thanks to the mediation of the United States and Great Britain with the Pakistani president, a leadership that was called into question by the arrival of Bhutto.

They were not made to wait Bhutto harsh criticism of the declaration of President Pervez to suspend the President of the Superior Court of Justice and the abolition of individual guarantees on 4 November of the 2007 . The former Prime Minister called for widespread protests led by the Pakistani People's Party (PPP).

The 27 as December as 2007 , Benazir Bhutto was killed in a suicide attack in Pakistan. The blast occurred minutes after a speech in Rawalpindi , before thousands of people, and Bhutto was taken to a hospital where she eventually died of her injuries. It has been known that Bhutto was shot in the neck and another in the head, then the terrorist detonated an explosive charge. At least 25 other people were also killed in the attack.