At the end of the twenty-first century, Earth is under the control of a single intelligence, the apparently benign One True. Mars, meanwhile, is slowly terraforming, and the human settlers there are still free of One True's control...but they need a pressure suits to survive outside, and it will be a century or more before the planet's fit for terrestrial life.

Terpsichore Murray is growing up on Mars. She wants to quit school and become, like her father, an ecoprospector. He has other ideas: he wants her to stay in school. He does want her along on his next long trip but only to conduct a group of younger kids from the highlands at Mars's equator back to school in Wells City.

What happens next will change Terpsichore, will change Mars, and will open the door to a new chapter in the history of intelligent beings in the solar system . . . all of them.

At the Publisher's request, this title is being sold without Digital Rights Management Software (DRM) applied.

Praise for this book

“John Barnes convinces. He may well be the new writer on whom the mantle of Robert Heinlein falls.” —Poul Anderson

“John Barnes knows how to make readers care. . . . Barnes combines philosophical speculation, high-speed action, and character development in a way that is the hallmark of a master.” —Los Angeles Reader

About the Author

John Barnes is the award-winning author of Orbital Resonance, A Million Open Doors, Mother of Storms, Earth Made of Glass, The Merchants of Souls, Candle, and many other novels. With Apollo 11 astronaut Buzz Aldrin, he wrote the novels Encounter with Tiber and The Return. He lives in Colorado.

Title: The Sky So Big and Black

Author(s): John Barnes

Volume: 4

ISBN: 9781429970679

Copyright 2007

Release Date: April 01, 2007

Publisher: Tor Publishing Group

Countries: United States, Canada | Learn more about available countries

Language: English

Format: ePub,mobi | Learn More about our supported formats

Dragonmount is a proud provider of DRM-free eBooks. By purchasing any eBook from our store, you are not only helping support our website, but you are helping small businesses thrive in a market traditionally dominated by large companies. Learn more in our eBook FAQ.