A Million Open Doors

John Barnes. Tor Books, $19.95 (315pp) ISBN 978-0-312-85210-8

In Barnes's ( Orbital Resonance ) futuristic universe, the Thousand Cultures are planets that have developed in virtual isolation. The world of Nou Occitan is based on a romanticized medieval Europe: duels are fought, artistic endeavors are encouraged, and sexism (the true face of chivalry) is fiercely institutionalized. Caledony is a society that has combined capitalism and Christianity into an oppressive milieu where artistic creativity is considered irrational. The advent of ``springers,'' which provide instantaneous travel from place to place, is bringing these cultures together, and a delegation from Nou Occitan goes to Caledony to help them assimilate. Narrator Giraut Leones starts an arts school where Nou Occitan ways are taught, the repressions of the Caledon community are questioned and the students become liberated through music, poetry, art and fencing. The analogy to '50s repression and '60s rebellion is fairly obvious: we see youth questioning authority through music and poetry performed at the Occasional Mobile Cabaret, reminiscent of period coffeehouses; there's the Joseph McCarthyish Rev. Saltini; the characters even go on a road trip in multicolor vans. Most engrossing, however, are Giraut's evolution from petulant, bratty jovent of Nou Occitan to Caledonic hero, and the creative mishmash of European languages from which Barnes produces the language of Nou Occitan. (Oct.)

close

Details

Reviewed on: 09/28/1992

Genre: Fiction

Mass Market Paperbound - 320 pages - 978-0-8125-1633-3

Amazon

Apple Books

Barnes & Noble

Bookshop

Share

Tweet

Copy Link

Print

More By and About this Authorchevron_right

John Barnes

Barnes (Candle) is up to his old tricks in creating a sharp novel that is not about who or what readers will think it is and that comes with a perfect, Continue reading »

John Barnes

To the delight of sci-fi fans, the scoundrel-hero Jak Jinnaka returns for another tale of high adventure, spying, double-crossing and intergalactic mischief. Just when Jak thinks that looking out Continue reading »

John Barnes

"Daybreak"—an assault against modern civilization conceived and developed through the Internet—has begun. As plastics and other petroleum products deteriorate and bring the world crashing down, Continue reading »

John Barnes

In the dozen stories presented here, Barnes (Mother of Storms; A Million Open Doors) deals with social mechanization, nonhuman intelligence, extraterrestrials, the biology and politics of the far Continue reading »

John Barnes

Thirteen-year-old Melpomene Murray lives on the Flying Dutchman , an asteroid set into an Earth-Mars orbit, for use in shipping resources back to a devastated Earth. Its Planners devised a scheme for Continue reading »

John Barnes

This futuristic disaster novel by the author of A Million Open Doors opens in the year 2028, when a preemptive missile strike releases billions of tons of methane trapped in the ocean floor. The Continue reading »

John Barnes

A stunning evocation of humanity's violent downward slide, Barnes's fourth SF novel is set on Mars during the early part of the 22nd century, in a universe chimerically similar to that of his first, Continue reading »

John Barnes

An original SF talent has now turned to humorous fantasy. In the Kingdom of Underhill, the toddler Prince Amatus sips the Wine of the Gods--and his left side vanishes. The King orders the execution Continue reading »

PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR

THE BEST NEW BOOKS

PW EDITORS’ PICKS FOR THE BEST NEW BOOKS