Infobox_Person

image_size = 150px

name = Bob Guiney

imagesize = 200px

caption =

birth_date = birth date and age|1971|5|8

birth_place = Riverview, Michigan

death_date =

death_place =

occupation = Host/Presenter

spouse = Rebecca Budig (2004 - present)

children =

relations =

Robert "Bob" Guiney (b. May 8 1971, Riverview, Michigan) was a contestant on the first season of "The Bachelorette". Later, he was chosen to pick his own perfect lady on the fourth season of "The Bachelor".

Guiney is a 1989 graduate of Riverview Community High School. He graduated from Michigan State University and was a member of the Alpha Tau Omega fraternity. Guiney was a walk-on quarterback for their football team.

He started his own company, Allied Home Mortgage, with his childhood friend, Greg Clausen in 1999.

Guiney was shown to have a winning personality on "The Bachelorette", so... when Trista failed to give him a rose to advance (but still invited him to her wedding), ABC executives decided that Guiney should be the "Bachelor" that next season.

On the fourth season of the reality show, in the fall of 2003, Guiney wooed 25 girls (one of whom was Mary Delgado, who was ultimately cut and returned for the sixth season) and eventually picked Estella Gardinier, a California mortgage broker, in the show's finale. Soon after the show aired, they broke up.

Guiney was originally in a band called Fat Amy which was based in Lansing, Michigan; the band is now known by the more memorable &mdash; and presumably more saleable &mdash; name The Bob Guiney Band. While making the rounds on the talk-show circuit, audiences discovered that he was a musician and came to know that a new album was in the works. Late in 2003, Guiney's 3rd studio album, "3 Sides", first hit music stores.

He later published a book in 2003, titled "What a Difference a Year Makes: How Life's Unexpected Setbacks Can Lead to Unexpected Joy'", sketching his adventures in his life leading up to his appearance on "The Bachelorette", and detailing the lessons he learned from his family and friends as he went through a divorce the year previous to his debut on ABC.

Personal life

Guiney is married to actress Rebecca Budig who portrays Greenlee Smythe on "All My Children". The couple have been married since 2004. Currently living in Los Angeles, California, Guiney is finishing up his 4th studio album and also performing with his Celebrity Charity Band "BAND FROM TV" (made up of some of television's favorite celebrities... Greg Grunberg (Heroes), James Denton ("Desperate Housewives"), Hugh Laurie ("House"), and Bonnie Somerville ("Cashmere Mafia").

Guiney can be seen with his band "THE BOB GUINEY BAND", or working on various projects such as the host of ABC's comedic interstitial programming, the primary field correspondent for "The View", co-host of WE's "3 Men and a Chick Flick", as well as co-hosting Bravo's "Battle of the Network Stars", ABC Super Bowl coverage, and specials for E! and TV Guide Channel. Guiney currently hosts his own makeover show, "Date my house" for TLC.

External links