31.1 Umpire not to give batter out without an appeal

Neither umpire shall give a batter out, even though he/she may be out under the Laws, unless appealed to by a fielder. This shall not debar a batter who is out under any of the Laws from leaving the wicket without an appeal having been made. Note, however, the provisions of 31.7.

31.2 Batter dismissed

A batter is dismissed if he/she is

either given out by an umpire, on appeal

or out under any of the Laws and leaves the wicket as in 31.1.

31.3 Timing of appeals

For an appeal to be valid, it must be made before the bowler begins his/her run-up or, if there is no run-up, his/her bowling action to deliver the next ball, and before Time has been called.

The call of Over does not invalidate an appeal made prior to the start of the following over, provided Time has not been called. See Laws 12.2 (Call of Time) and 17.2 (Start of an over).

31.4 Appeal “How’s That?”

An appeal “How’s That?” covers all ways of being out.

31.5 Answering appeals

The striker’s end umpire shall answer all appeals arising out of any of Laws 35 (Hit wicket), 39 (Stumped) or 38 (Run out) when this occurs at the wicket-keeper’s end. The bowler’s end umpire shall answer all other appeals.

When an appeal is made, each umpire shall answer on any matter that falls within his/her jurisdiction.

When a batter has been given Not out, either umpire may answer an appeal, made in accordance with 31.3, if it is on a further matter and is within his/her jurisdiction.

31.6 Consultation by umpires

Each umpire shall answer appeals on matters within his/her own jurisdiction. If an umpire is doubtful about any point that the other umpire may have been in a better position to see, he/she shall consult the latter on this point of fact and shall then give the decision. If, after consultation, there is still doubt remaining, the decision shall be Not out.

31.7 Batter leaving the wicket under a misapprehension

An umpire shall intervene if satisfied that a batter, not having been given out, has left the wicket under a misapprehension of being out. The umpire intervening shall call and signal Dead ball to prevent any further action by the fielding side and shall recall the batter.

A batter may be recalled at any time up to the instant when the ball comes into play for the next delivery, unless it is the final wicket of the innings, in which case it should be up to the instant when the umpires leave the field.

31.8 Withdrawal of an appeal

The captain of the fielding side may withdraw an appeal only after obtaining the consent of the umpire within whose jurisdiction the appeal falls. If such consent is given, the umpire concerned shall, if applicable, revoke the decision and recall the batter.

The withdrawal of an appeal must be before the instant when the ball comes into play for the next delivery or, if the innings has been completed, the instant when the umpires leave the field.

© Marylebone Cricket Club 2017