Lol at the last five. Where's Norman Gifford?

Also, Lock hardly counts as a bowler.

I just picked the guys with 100+ Test wickets, plus Leach who will almost certainly get there. Gifford was nowhere near 100 Test wickets. If we go by first class form, Charlie Parker should be in ahead of Gifford surely.

Who would be the best left arm spinner in test cricket?

Verity, Lock, Underwood, Bedi, Shakib, Vettori, Herath . . .? Who would it be?

Rhodes and Wardle would be ahead of Lock in my rankings, for sure. Lock's overall average is very misleading. He took 47 wickets @ 7.80 against New Zealand who at that time were amongst the weakest Test sides ever seen. Against all the other sides, he took 127 wickets at 32.15. He averaged over 25 with a strike rate over 74 against every other side. Given the favourable era in which he played, when compared with contemporaries like Laker, Wardle and Appleyard who all averaged under 22, this is a relatively run of the mill bowling resume; despite what his overall average may suggest at first glance from a modern perspective.

The throwing controversy

November 3, 1960, will go down as a momentous day in cricket

The attitude to this was summed up by one West Indies writer who, when I suggested that in the best interests of the game he ought to oppose such bowling, replied: "Why should we do anything while you permit Tony Lock to throw?"

..........................

As for England, they have by no means been free of criticism. Tony Lock, the Surrey slow left-hander, for a long time had a suspicious action, particularly when sending down his faster ball. Indeed, he was no-balled for throwing by Fred Price in 1952, yet in 1953-54 he was chosen to tour West Indies where he was again no-balled, three times in one day against Barbados and also in the first Test at Kingston.

To Lock's credit he realised his problems and set about remedying them. Twice he changed his action completely and he obviously made a tremendous effort to put himself right.