From Domestic Devotion to the Church Altar : Venerati g Icons in the Late Medieval and Early Mod rn

Margarita VoulgaropoulouAdriatiMargarita Voulg

History

Although traditionally associated with Eastern Christianity, the practice of venerating icons became deeply rooted in the Catholic societies of the broad Adriatic region from the Late Middle Ages…

Spaces for Domestic Devotion in the Noble Residences of Palermo in the Age of Catholic Reform

Valeria Viola

History

Domestic Devotions in Early Modern Italy

In the mid-eighteenth century, Francesco Maria Emanuele Gaetani, Marquis of Villabianca (1720–1802), acknowledged that in Palermo the prestige and distinction of a palace had depended on the presence…

Vittore Carpaccio, Martin Mladošić, and Saint Jerome: A Mirror of Late Medieval Devotion

I. Ivić

History, Art

This paper focuses on the representation of St Jerome in the Zadar Polyptych, painted by Vittore Carpaccio around 1496 and commissioned by Martin Mladošić. Approaching it as a commission and offering…

Women and Men in Renaissance Venice: Twelve Essays on Patrician Society

D. Epstein

History

teenth century in Spain. A criticism that could be made it is that the concept of “religious authority” is never fully explained and the reader is at times left searching for an overarching theme to…

Describing the Virgin

Jessica Winston

History, Art

Descriptions of the Virgin began to emerge in Italian popular devotional literature in the fifteenth century and in theological texts in the sixteenth century. In such texts, worshippers and readers…

The art of devotion in the late Middle Ages in Europe, 1300-1500

H. V. OsRijksmuseum . Rijksprentenkabinet

Art, History

One of the mainsprings of the revolution in art that took place throughout Europe in the late Middle Ages was the growth and development of individual piety or "private devotion." The movement began…

The Cabinet of Eros: Renaissance Mythological Painting and the Studiolo of Isabella d'Este

S. J. Campbell

Art, History

The Renaissance studiolo was a space devoted in theory to private reading and contemplation, but at the Italian courts of the fifteenth century, it had become a space of luxury, as much devoted to…

The Laity in the Middle Ages: Religious Beliefs and Devotional Practices

André VauchezD. BornsteinM. J. Schneider

History

In these lively and incisive essays, Andre Vauchez, a leading French historian of medieval religious life, explores the religious beliefs and devotional practices of laypeople in medieval Europe.…

Paolo Veronese: Piety and Display in an Age of Religious Reform

R. Cocke

Art

Introduction - Early career in Verona: Venice - the rooms of the Council of Ten in the ducal palace - Daniele Barbaro consolidation - the frescoes at Villa Barbaro Maser consoliation in Venice - San…

Gender, ownership and domestic space: inventories and family archives in Renaissance Verona

Allison Smith

History

Since Burckhardt, historians have characterized the Italian Renaissance as a unique and deeply significant moment in the history of material culture. Very little attention has been paid, however, to…

Crossing the Boundaries. Christian Piety and the Arts in Italian Medieval and Renaissance Confraternities

Konrad Eisenbichler (book editor)Marsha Groves (review author)

History, Art

This collection is the second publication arising from a conference held in 1989 at the University of Toronto—the first collection was published as a special issue of Renaissance and Reformation 13:1…

Woman and Home: the Domestic Setting of Late Medieval Spirituality

D. Webb

History

‘From the earliest days of Christianity, the domestic community has served as a unit of worship’. In the later medieval period, the home certainly played an important part in the religious…