H. Robert Horvitz received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2002. He is the David H. Koch Professor of Biology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT); an Investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute; Neurobiologist at the Massachusetts General Hospital; and a Member of the MIT McGovern Institute for Brain Research and the MIT Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research.

Robert received S. B. degrees in mathematics and economics from MIT. He performed his PhD studies at Harvard University with James Watson and Walter Gilbert. Robert was a postdoctoral fellow with Sydney Brenner at the Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology in Cambridge, United Kingdom. He joined the faculty of the Department of Biology at MIT in 1978 and became Professor in 1986.

He is a former President of the Genetics Society of America. Robert has served on many editorial boards, visiting committees and advisory committees and has received numerous awards and honours. He has been a consultant to companies in the field of biomedicine.

Professional position

Member, David H Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Investigator, Howard Hughes Medical Institute

Professor of Biology, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Council, Institute of Medicine

Scientific Advisory Board, Novartis Institutes For BioMedical Research (Cambridge), Novartis International AG

Chair, Medical & Scientific Advisory Board, MPM Capital

Executive Committee, Coalition for the Life Sciences

Board Observer, PureTech Ventures

Chair, Board of Trustees, Society for Science and the Public

Consultant, Epizyme

Board Observer, KEW Group

Neurobiologist, Massachusetts General Hospital

Member, McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Nominations Committee Member, American Academy of Arts and Sciences

Scientific Advisory Board, Mitokyne

Subject groups

Biochemistry and molecular cell biology

Biochemistry and molecular biology

Anatomy, physiology and neurosciences

Development and control of behaviour, Cellular neuroscience

Awards