WHEN Philip Caveney's 11-year-old daughter Grace asked to read one of his books, the Heaton Moor-based author didn't think it was such a good idea.

"My adult novels are pretty racy, to say the least," he says. And with titles such as Speak No Evil, Slayground, and Bad to the Bone, it's not hard to imagine why.

"I told her I would write a story just for her. We had a favourite movie, an old Danny Kaye film called The Court Jester, and it occurred to me that I'd never seen a children's book with a jester as the lead character.

"It went from there. I visualised an opening scene and I was off! I wrote a chapter at a time and read it to Grace. About half way through I realised I was really enjoying writing this stuff, and that I had created characters whom I could happily take on to other adventures."

The result is Sebastian Darke: Prince of Fools, coming to bookshops this month. It features a jester with a difference: he can't crack a joke to save his life.

"I thought how much more interesting it would be if he just wasn't funny. There are people like that - they hear a comedian tell a great joke and repeat the routine word-for-word, but somehow it just doesn't work. It's something about them."

As with many comedians, good things come in pairs, and it's Sebastian's companion, Max, who will get children giggling.

"Max is funny in a sort of dismal Tony Hancock fashion," says Caveney. "Much of the humour originates from him. He forms a double-act with Sebastian."

Max, by the way, is a buffalope, an animal new to science and children's literature. He looks like a Highland cow - an ambling, hairy beast - but with all the charm and one-liners of Victor Meldrew.

"At first, Max was going to be a horse, but then I thought: 'no, something big and shaggy, something morose but with an 'aah' factor.' And then I thought: 'supposing the creature can talk?' And there was Max, ready to start complaining, something he does all through the book!"

Personal grail

It's this quirky pairing that drives the story forward, as Sebastian searches for his personal grail - the job of court jester to a faraway king. And, like all good fantasies, there are plenty of traps for the duo to fall into, and escape from.

Despite being an established author with an enviable track record (12 adult novels to his name), Caveney struggled to get Sebastian Darke into print. "I'd finished writing it, and as it was my first children's book I decided to get an agent, but they said `the market is way too crowded, you'll never get this off the ground.'"

Undeterred, he started sending it directly to children's publishers, but as rejection letters arrived, he tried a change of tack. "I stepped back from children's fiction and wrote a young adult novel. It's hard-hitting and, like many of my adult books, it's set in Manchester. My plan was to get publishers to notice me.

"I sent it to Random House, who loved it, then decided against publishing it as it's so controversial. But it had opened a door for me, and they asked if I had anything else. So last March I sent them Sebastian Darke, and in a few days I got to lunch. We pretty much agreed a three-book deal over the table."

Sebastian Darke might just catapult the former Great Universal Stores copywriter into the children's bestseller lists - and not just in the UK.

"They took it to the children's trade fair in Bologna, Italy, and next thing I know I'm getting text messages from my editor saying: `We've just sold the US rights; we've got Germany; we've got Spain!' It was sold to 10 countries in four days. Unbelievable!"

Does the move into children's fiction mean no more books for adults? "I have plenty of unpublished adult manuscripts, so who knows? Never say never again."

But what does Grace, who inspired this change of direction in her father's writing, think of his new book? A pupil at St Bede's College, Manchester, now aged 13, she says: "Even though I read a lot of books, I haven't read anything else like it. I especially liked the ending, which was really different from what I expected - but I won't spoil it by giving it away!"

Sebastian Darke: Prince Of Fools by Philip Caveney is published by The Bodley Head. WE have 10 copies of Sebastian Darke: Prince Of Fools to give away. Send your name and address on a postcard to: Sebastian Darke/M.E.N. Offer, Marketing Department, Random House Children's Books, 61-63 Uxbridge Road, London W5 5SA. The first 10 cards to arrive will each win a book.