ADVERTISEMENT

Emmylou Harris is a singer and songwriter, who has released 26 studio albums including “Elite Hotel”. Discover who Emmylou Harris siblings are.

Emmylou Harris Biography

Emmylou Harris was born on 2nd April 1947 in Birmingham, Alabama USA,

Emmylou Harris was born to a family of military people.

Speaking about her education, Emmylou Harris started getting a degree in drama. While at university, she became interested in music, learned to play the guitar and performed songs by famous artists of that time.

While taking part in war actions held in Korea in 1952, soldiers lost their colleague – Harris’ dad. As it was later revealed, he was taken prisoner and managed to escape almost one year later. Emmylou was raised according to Christian canons.

ADVERTISEMENT

Emmylou is a child of Marine Corps officer Walter Harris and his wife, Eugenia. Her father spent ten months as a war prisoner in Korea, but eventually returned to his family.

Emmylou grew up in Woodbridge, Virginia, and attended Gar-Field Senior High School, matriculating as class valedictorian.

Interestingly, the future star didn’t complete her bachelor’s degree – she left the educational establishment for the sake of concentrating more on her music career.

So, young Harris began giving concerts with a local music group at most crowded pubs and served there as a waitress at the same time to earn a living.

In her young age, Emmylou Harris sacrificed by her education to put a dream of becoming a music star into reality.

ADVERTISEMENT

She is known for music projects related to sharp issues, such as social and gender inequality, environmental problems, care for our planet.

However, in the `90s, her popularity began to decline and she received less airplay since the stations focused on new wave performers.

Still, she released three albums, but without any major success. Nevertheless, she returned in the 2000s, with albums “Red Dirt Girl” which reached No. 5 on the US Country chart, continuing with releases “Stumble Into Grace” (2003) and “All I Intended to Be”, which reached No. 4 and No. 5, respectively.

Emmylou Harris’ net worth is evaluated at $16 million. Generally, she earned money for her music and appearing in various brands’ commercials.

Speaking about Emmylou Harris’ relationships, she has had several husbands. 1969 was marked by the beginning of her first marriage with Tom Slocum.

The two welcomed a daughter named Hallie and parted ways in 1970. Seven years later, Harris shared vows with a new partner Brian Ahern. In 1979 they became parents of a daughter Megan Ahern. However, in 1984, the spouses officially annulled their marriage.

In 1985 she married her boyfriend Paul Kennerley. They split up in 1993. Emmylou Harris has several grandchildren.

Who are Emmylou Harris siblings? Meet Linda Ronstadt

Linda Maria Ronstadt is a retired American singer who has worked and recorded in a variety of musical styles, including rock, country, light opera, the Great American Songbook, and Latin.

Source:Ghgossip.com

ADVERTISEMENT

ADVERTISEMENT

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7qLTGqKqsoaBjsLC5jrCfqGWRp7JuscymsKWnpWK1or7Roqpmq5mXuaq6xqxkpp2VqXqttc2dmGaqn6PAta3DrWY%3D