The IW Engine is a game engine developed by Infinity Ward, based on id Tech 3, which was first used on the highly successful game Call of Duty 2. Since then, it has been continually upgraded and used on the games Call of Duty 4, Call of Duty: World at War, Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2, and Call of Duty: Black Ops.

The engine you are trying to view is not available on IndieDB. Only engines which have games released on IndieDB are listed. View IW Engine on ModDB.

Continue browsing the engine list, to find the profile you are after.

OEngine

Commercial Released 2012

OEngine is a multiplatform C++ engine with an WYSIWIG editor. It's made to be very flexible, and has been used in many internal prototypes, and is currently...

SAGE (Strategy Action Game Engine)

Proprietary Released 2001

The SAGE engine is a game engine used by Westwood Studios and Electronic Arts for real-time strategy games.

Unigine

Commercial TBD

Unigine is a multi-platform (Windows / Linux / Mac OS X / PlayStation 3 / Android / iOS) real-time 3D engine, which unleashes the ultimate power for creating...

IW Engine

Commercial Released 2005

The IW Engine is a game engine developed by Infinity Ward, based on id Tech 3, which was first used on the highly successful game Call of Duty 2. Since...

Custom

Commercial Released 2007

The engine used to build this game was a once-off creation, designed explicitly to run this particular title. This is not a _real_ game engine, this is...

Leadwerks Game Engine

Commercial Released 2014

Leadwerks Game Engine is the easiest way to build 3D games. With a rapid development pipeline, support for Lua and C++ programming, and plenty of learning...

WOLF RPG Editor

GPL Released 2015

WOLF RPG Editor is a game construction tool that can create complex role playing games. It is often regarded as being aimed at advanced users, so keep...

Dunia

Proprietary Released 2008

The Dunia Engine is a game engine designed by Kirmaan Aboobaker while working at Crytek. It is based on the CryEngine but was heavily modified by the...

GameMaker Studio

Commercial Released 1999

GameMaker Studio caters to entry-level novices and seasoned game development professionals equally, allowing them to create cross-platform games in record...

Unreal Engine 3

Commercial Released 2007

Unreal Engine 3 is a complete game development framework for next-generation consoles and DirectX9-equipped PCs, providing the vast array of core technologies...

Unity

Commercial Released 2005

Unity is a multiplatform game development tool, designed from the start to ease creation. A fully integrated professional application, Unity just happens...

RPG Maker 2003

Commercial Released 2002

Three years after RPG Maker 2000, RPG Maker 2003 came along. This release fixes many of the drawbacks of RPG Maker 2000 and features many completely revamped...

No engines were found matching the criteria specified. We suggest you try the engine list with no filter applied, to browse all available. Join now to share your own content, we welcome creators and consumers alike and look forward to your comments.