The IW Engine is a game engine developed by Infinity Ward, based on id Tech 3, which was first used on the highly successful game Call of Duty 2. Since then, it has been continually upgraded and used on the games Call of Duty 4, Call of Duty: World at War, Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2, and Call of Duty: Black Ops.

The engine you are trying to view is not available on IndieDB. Only engines which have games released on IndieDB are listed. View IW Engine on ModDB.

Continue browsing the engine list, to find the profile you are after.

Cube

Zlib Released 2002

Cube is a landscape-style engine that pretends to be an indoor FPS engine, which combines very high precision dynamic occlusion culling with a form of...

Wade Game Engine

Proprietary Released 2013

With our web-based visual editor, making HTML5 games and apps has never been so easy. Drag and drop objects, move, rotate and resize sprites, set up events...

RPG Maker VX Ace

Commercial Released 2012

Simple Enough for a Child; Powerful Enough for a Developer RPG Maker VX Ace improves every aspect of RPG creation, making it not only the latest, but...

Raycasting Game Maker

Public Domain Released 2007

The Raycasting Game Maker is a free easy to use game editor that creates simple raycasting games in the style of Wolf3D. The finished game needs only...

Dunia

Proprietary Released 2008

The Dunia Engine is a game engine designed by Kirmaan Aboobaker while working at Crytek. It is based on the CryEngine but was heavily modified by the...

Unigine

Commercial TBD

Unigine is a multi-platform (Windows / Linux / Mac OS X / PlayStation 3 / Android / iOS) real-time 3D engine, which unleashes the ultimate power for creating...

Unity

Commercial Released 2005

Unity is a multiplatform game development tool, designed from the start to ease creation. A fully integrated professional application, Unity just happens...

Gideros

MIT Released 2011

Gideros provides the cross-platform technology to create amazing games. In a couple of hours, you’ll find yourself building and running your next great...

Chrome Engine 6

Proprietary Released 2014

Chrome Engine is a proprietary 3D game engine developed by Techland. The current version, Chrome Engine 6, supports Microsoft Windows, Xbox 360, and PlayStation...

IW Engine

Commercial Released 2005

The IW Engine is a game engine developed by Infinity Ward, based on id Tech 3, which was first used on the highly successful game Call of Duty 2. Since...

Unreal Engine 5

Commercial TBD

The world’s most open and advanced real-time 3D creation tool, Unreal Engine 5 will be available in preview in early 2021, and in full release late...

GameMaker Studio

Commercial Released 1999

GameMaker Studio caters to entry-level novices and seasoned game development professionals equally, allowing them to create cross-platform games in record...

No engines were found matching the criteria specified. We suggest you try the engine list with no filter applied, to browse all available. Join now to share your own content, we welcome creators and consumers alike and look forward to your comments.