BASIC GAME INFORMATION

Release date November 6 2015 years

Genre First person shooter

developer Treyarch

Publisher Activision

Call of Duty: Black Ops III is a 3D first-person shooter computer game developed by Treyarch. The twelfth game in the series and the fourth game in the Black Ops series.

Call of Duty: Black Ops III will take place in the future in 2065, 40 years after the events of Call of Duty: Black Ops II. Countries around the world have developed a new air defense system, DEAD, now aviation is useless and all battles take place on the ground. Science and technology has radically changed the world, as well as the future of the human world, with society trying to stop further advances, so called by scientists as "progress". Military technology has progressed to the point where robots play a major role in combat, and super soldiers have also been developed to fight on the battlefield.

THE GRAFICAL PART

This subsection of our review highlights the main graphical aspects of this game. Particular attention is paid to the version of the graphics engine used, the version of the API used, graphic settings and the quality of development of the main visual aspects.

Supported OS and graphics API

Call of Duty Black Ops III is supported by major Windows operating systems, which include Windows 7 and Windows 8/10. Other operating systems are not currently supported by developers and will not receive support.

The priority and main graphics API for Call of Duty Black Ops III is DirectX 11.

Game engine

Call of Duty Black Ops III was developed by Treyarch and is based on IW engine. In 2002, the 3D shooter Medal of Honor: Allied Assault was released - one of the games in the Medal of Honor series, which takes place during World War II. This game used the id Tech 3 game engine (then known as Quake 2015 Engine, after the name of the first game in which it was used) from id Software as a technological base. Allied Assault was developed by studio XNUMX, Inc., some of whose employees left the company after the game's release to found Infinity Ward.

Infinity Ward's first game was 2003's Call of Duty, which, like Medal of Honor: Allied Assault, is set in World War II. This game is also built on the id Tech 3 engine. The choice of this technology is obviously explained by the fact that Infinity Ward employees already had experience working with it. Compared to the original id Tech 3, the graphics component of the engine has undergone a number of changes. Thus, the game began to actively use post-effects (for example, “image blur”), water is processed using shaders, which made it possible to create realistic reflections, the lighting system was complicated and dynamic soft shadows appeared. Subsequently, an official addon was also released for Call of Duty - Call of Duty: United Offensive.

This diagram illustrates the history of the development of game engines in the “IW Engine” series. On October 25, 2005, the game Call of Duty 2 was developed by Infinity Ward, which is a full-fledged continuation of the first part. Call of Duty 2 is considered the first game to use the IW engine. Technically, this engine is a largely redesigned id Tech 3, an evolved version of the engine used in the very first part.

Compared to the original engine, this version has many improvements and changes built into it: instead of the OpenGL API, the image is processed using Direct3D, several bump texturing techniques are used, shadow processing is complicated, the particle system and post-effects are significantly improved. The next game based on the IW engine was Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare in 2007. This game uses the third version of the engine (IW engine 3.0); the technology was once again refined and improved: facial animation, processing of water surfaces, lighting effects were complicated, new post-effects appeared, such as depth of field, and the possibilities of color correction of the image were widely used to give it a special stylization.

In 2008, the fifth part of the game series was released - Call of Duty: World at War (developer: Treyarch). The game is built on the third version of the engine (IW engine 3.0), which was modernized by Treyarch developers. Another Treyarch game, Quantum of Solace: The Game, was made using the same version of the engine. In 2009, Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2 was released (development was again transferred to Infinity Ward). This game uses the next version of the engine, IW engine 4.0, with a number of improvements, including Streaming Textures technology.

On November 9, 2010, the seventh part of Call of Duty, Black Ops, was released. This game uses a significantly improved version of the IW engine 3.0, which was used in Call of Duty: World at War, which is likely due to the fact that the development of the game began in parallel with the creation of Modern Warfare 2. Compared to previous parts of the game, the graphical code was changed Several major improvements have been made, in particular, among other things, the lighting system has been completely redesigned and the operation of the particle system has been improved.

In the same year, the game GoldenEye 007, the “spiritual successor” of the original 007 GoldenEye 1997 for the Nintendo 64, was released on the Wii console. Eurocom was responsible for the development, and Activision was in charge of publishing. This game, according to some sources, also uses an internal modification of the IW engine (the exact version is unknown).

On November 8, 2011, Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 3 was released, based on an updated version of the IW 4.0 engine (working title - MW3 Engine); Infinity Ward, Sledgehammer Games and Raven Software were responsible for development. In October, Glen Schofield, founder of Sledgehammer Games, stated in an interview that the IW engine resembles a Porsche, and that criticism of the engine in reviews of Modern Warfare 3 was unfounded, as the developers are constantly modifying the technology and reworking it.

On May 1, 2012, the ninth game in the series and the sequel to 2010's Call of Duty: Black Ops, Call of Duty: Black Ops II, was announced. The game uses an updated version of the IW 3.0 engine used to create the first Black Ops game. HDR lighting, self-shadowing, bounce lighting and reveal mapping were added to the engine, and the PC version of the game had support for DirectX 11. According to Treyarch, their main priority is 60 frames per second (FPS) on any platform. The game was released on November 13, 2012.

Call of Duty: Ghosts was released in 2013. The game was developed by Infinity Ward with the participation of Raven Software and Neversoft Entertainment. At the announcement, the game engine was described by representatives of the publishing house as “completely new”, but later the developers clarified that the engine is a development of their own engine - IW 6.0; Thus, the studio's animator, Zach Walker, said: “It is impossible to develop a new game engine from scratch in the two-year cycle that our games go through. We do things differently - we conduct research and draw conclusions about which systems and main parts of the engine are obsolete and update them, bringing them to the modern level. How much do we update them? I think enough to allow ourselves to call this engine new.”

Advanced Game Settings

All graphic settings for Call of Duty Black Ops III Beta are located in two menu sub-items.

Below we have provided screenshots of the game at various graphics settings, where our readers can see the difference between the minimum, medium and maximum graphics quality settings.

Various quality modes

As we can see, the picture quality between different graphics settings is noticeable, but not critical.

Screenshots in 4K

Comparison of anti-aliasing modes

The highest quality anti-aliasing is SMAA, which is slightly better than the “soapy” FXAA.

General visual design and game physics

The graphics in Call of Duty Black Ops III were a little disappointing - we still have the same long-standing graphics engine, which has been slightly improved, which has led to a rather immodest appetite for the game itself.

Next, we will move directly to gaming tests and determine what impact this game has on modern computer hardware.

TEST PART

GPU test

All video cards were tested at maximum graphics quality using MSI Afterburner. The purpose of the test is to determine how video cards from different manufacturers behave under the same conditions. The average and minimum FPS were taken as performance indicators. Below is a video of the test segment:

Our video cards were tested at different screen sizes of 1920x1080, 2560x1440 and 3840x2160 at the maximum graphics quality settings allowed by Call of Duty Black Ops III. Dual-chip solutions from AMD and NVIDIA currently have good game support. It is worth noting that the game performs best on NVIDIA solutions, in particular, on “older” generation video cards.

Fury AMD was taken away for additional reviews, so they won’t appear with us again before Star Wars.

Testing at 1920x1080 resolution

Testing at maximum quality settings 1920x1080

With these settings, video cards of the Radeon HD 7970 or GeForce GTX 960 level showed an acceptable FPS. The optimal solutions will be Radeon HD 7990 or GeForce GTX 690.

Testing at 2560x1440 resolution

Testing at maximum quality settings 2560x1440

With these settings, video cards of the Radeon R9 290 or GeForce GTX 690 level showed an acceptable FPS. The optimal solutions will be Radeon R9 Nano or GeForce GTX TITAN.

Testing at 3840x2160 resolution

Testing at maximum quality settings 3840x2160

With these settings, an acceptable FPS indicator was shown by video cards of the level Radeon R9 295X2 or GeForce GTX 970 SLI. The optimal solutions will be Radeon R9 Fury X CF orGeForce GTX 980 Ti and higher.

Testing of video memory consumed by the game was carried out by the program MSI Afterburner. The indicator was based on results on top video cards from AMD and NVIDIA with separate screen sizes 1920x1080 and 2560x1600 with different anti-aliasing settings.

Testing at maximum memory GPU quality settings

The recommended amount of video memory usage for a resolution of 1920x1080 will be 4096 MB of video memory, for a resolution of 2560x1440 - 6144 MB of video memory, and for a resolution of 3840x2160 about 6144 MB of video memory.

CPU test

We tested processor dependence on 16 models of basic configurations that are relevant today. The test was carried out in those places where the value of video cards for the game is minimal and its load was less than 99%, this time at a resolution of 1920x1080 with the given graphics quality settings. Below is a video of the test segment:

Testing at maximum quality settings 1920x1080

The CPU performance in the game is sufficient for all models.

Loading of processor coresat maximum quality settings 1920x1080 Intel%

Loading of processor cores at maximum quality settings 1920x1080 AMD%

Call of Duty Black Ops III uses up to 16 computing threads, which is very commendable.

RAM test

The test was carried out on the basic configuration of Core i 7 5960X@4.6 GHz with 16GB DDR4 2400 MGz pre-installed memory. The entire used operational memory was taken as an indicator. The RAM test on the entire system was carried out on various test benches without launching third-party applications (browsers, etc.).

Testing the game's RAM consumption at various quality settings

As we can see, with various quality settings, the amount of RAM consumed in Call of Duty Black Ops III is within 7-8 gigabytes.

Testing system RAM consumption

If you have a system with 6 gigabytes, Call of Duty Black Ops III is not very playable. In the presence of a system with 8 gigabytes, the RAM consumption of all RAM was 8 gigabytes. With a 16 GB system, the total memory consumption was almost 12 GB. And with 32 gigabytes of RAM, the system consumes 14 gigabyte of RAM.