illa in Annandale, VA. Woodburn Village in Annandale, VA. Woodburn Village in Annandale, VA. Woodburn Village in Annandale, VA. Woodburn Village in Annandale, VA.

If you like trees you will love Woodburn Village. Living in Woodburn Village is like living in a Forest. But, it is located close to everything in the Northern Virginia - Washington D.C. area. Woodburn Village is located; twelve miles west of Washington, D.C., five miles south of Tysons Corners Shopping Center, two miles south of the Dunn Loring Metro Station, half a mile west of the belt way (I-495), and 100 yards south of the INOVA Fairfax Hospital.

Woodburn Village has 606 condominiums located on approximately forty acres of land. Most of the condominiums have two bedrooms. But there are also units with one bedroom, three bedrooms, and four bedrooms.

Woodburn Village has a large swimming pool, two tennis courts, a basketball court, a volley ball court, a fitness trail, two play ground areas, and a dozen picnic areas.

The Fairfax bus and the Metro bus have a bus stop only 100 yards from Woodburn Village. So it is easy to get around even if you do not want to use your car.

If you have any questions or comments about this site please send a message to me at: Sweetland@WoodburnVillage.Net or 571 274 6614. Richard Sweetland - Realtor

After Hours / Emergency 703 600-6000

Several people have asked me what a Blog is and how they can use it.

A Blog is an open forum that lets people who visit a web site leave a message to other people who visit the web site. When you leave a message in the Blog site everyone who visits the Blog site can read your message; and make a comment about your message, or leave their own message. At this time there is only one Blog site at this web site.

To get to this Blog site click on the word "Blog" in the top left hand corner of this page.

Read the the opening statement in the Blog page.

Then click on the word "Comments" below the opening statement.

Read the comments that other people have left.

You can then leave your own comments in the space provided.

You can use this Blog site to tell other people your opinions about: parking in Woodburn Village, security in Woodburn Village, the actions of the Board of Directors, special events at Woodburn Village, problems with this web site, etc...