Video about Eels.

Eels are an order of fish which consists of four suborders, 20 families, 111 genera and approximately 800 species. Most eels are predators. The term “eel” (originally referring to the European eel) is also used for some other similarly shaped fish, such as electric eels and spiny eels, but these are not members of…the Anguilliformes order.

Description:

Eels are elongated fish, ranging in length from 5 cm (2.0 in) in the one-jawed eel (Monognathus ahlstromi) to 4 m (13 ft) in the slender giant moray. Adults range in weight from 30 grams (1.1 oz) to well over 25 kilograms (55 lb). They possess no pelvic fins, and many species also lack pectoral fins. The dorsal and anal fins are fused with the caudal or tail fin, forming a single ribbon running along much of the length of the animal. Most eels live in the shallow waters of the ocean and burrow into sand, mud, or amongst rocks. A majority of eel species are nocturnal, and thus are rarely seen. Sometimes they are seen living together in holes, or “eel pits”. Some species of eels also live in deeper water on the continental shelves and over the slopes deep as 4,000 m (13,000 ft). Only members of the Anguilla family regularly inhabit fresh water, but they too return to the sea to breed. Eels begin life as flat and transparent larvae, or leptocephali. Eel larvae drift in the surface waters of the sea, feeding on marine snow, small particles that float in the water. Eel larvae then metamorphose into glass eels and then become elvers before finally seeking out their juvenile and adult habitats. Freshwater elvers travel upstream and are forced to climb up obstructions, such as weirs, dam walls, and natural waterfalls. Lady Colin Campbell found, at Ballisodare, the eel fisheries were greatly improved by the hanging of loosely plaited grass ladders over barriers, enabling the elvers to ascend. The heaviest true eel is the European conger. The maximum size of this species has been reported as reaching a length of 3 m (10 ft) and a weight of 110 kg (240 lb). Other eels are longer but do not weigh as much, such as the slender giant moray which reaches 4 m (13 ft).

Classification:

This classification follows FishBase in dividing the eels into 15 families. Additional families included in other classifications (notably ITIS and Systema Naturae 2000) are noted below the family with which they are synomized in the Fish Base system. Identifying the origin of the freshwater species has been problematic. Genomic studies indicate they are a monophyletic group which originated among the deep-sea eels. Suborder Anguilloidei

Anguillidae (freshwater eels)

Chlopsidae (false morays)

Heterenchelyidae (mud eels)

Moringuidae (spaghetti eels)

Muraenidae (moray eels)

Myrocongridae (thin eels)

Protanguillidae

Suborder Congroidei

Colocongridae (worm eels)

Congridae (congers)

Including Macrocephenchelyidae

Derichthyidae (longneck eels)

Including Nessorhamphidae

Muraenesocidae (pike congers)

Nettastomatidae (duckbill eels)

Ophichthidae (snake eels)

Suborder Nemichthyoidei

Nemichthyidae (snipe eels)

Serrivomeridae (sawtooth eels)

Suborder Synaphobranchoidei

Synaphobranchidae (cutthroat eels)

Including Dysommidae, Nettodaridae, and Simenchelyidae