We are a Livery Company (London’s version of a Guild) set up in the City of London by Royal Charter in 1482. Since then, the Company of Cooks, along with over 100 other City Livery Companies, has supported the City in trying to make London a better place in general, whilst improving the craft of cookery in particular.

Careful stewardship of our assets allows us to support our four key objectives: charitable donations; development of careers in cookery; initiatives to benefit the City of London; and, the fellowship of our members. Our values of tradition, honesty, mutual respect, generosity of spirit and loyalty to the Company, characterise all our dealings.

Meet the 2023/24 Officers

Mr PNA Galpin (Paul) The Master (November 2023 - November 2024)Paul Galpin became a Freeman of the City of London in May 2000 and was admitted to the Livery of the Worshipful Company of Cooks of London in November 2009. He was elected to the Court of Assistants in July 2015, and as Honorary Treasurer in 2021. He sits on both the Investment Committee and the Trustees Advisory Panel and was elected as Warden in November 2021.

Paul has a degree in Banking and International Finance from City, University of London, starting work in the City with The Chase Manhattan Bank in 1979 and, apart from a recent spell in New York, he has always worked within the Square Mile. While a banker by training and trade, and apart from six years with US rating agency Standard & Poor’s, for most of his career Paul’s primary focus has been the insurance industry – providing financial and advisory services to global insurers and reinsurers for more than 35 years. He now works as an independent consultant advising the insurance industry.

Paul joined the Honourable Artillery Company in 1978, serving with the regiment for 12 years before transferring to the veteran list. He subsequently joined the Company of Pikemen and Musketeers in 2000, rising to the rank of Ensign Quartermaster before returning to the ranks to take leave of absence on moving to New York. He is an Honorary Steward at Westminster Abbey.

Mr PV Kenyon (Peter) The Second Master (November 2023 - November 2024)Peter joined the family funeral directing company, J H Kenyon Ltd, in 1981 having previously been a buyer for a wholesale chemist and a paper merchant in the city. He became a qualified funeral director and an expert in major incident and disaster management. When the family company merged with another funeral company in 1989, he took the opportunity to start Arnold Funeral Service in South Buckinghamshire, near his home in Little Kingshill. He is also a Director of the General Cemetery Company, Kensal Green. A privately owned cemetery opened in 1834, the cemetery is a great source of historical record and has a number of Grade 1 listed buildings and monuments.

The success of his company, Arnold Funeral Service, has enabled him to progress his interests in the Cooks Company. He is pleased that his son Jack has joined him both in the business and the Cooks. His family are six generation funeral directors and six generation Cooks.

A lot of Peter’s spare time is spent at Amersham and Chiltern Rugby Club where he is President. He played rugby at all levels and for many teams but always ended up back at Amersham and Chiltern, playing his final match for Amersham’s fourth fifteen at the tender age of fifty-two, retiring due to a head injury.

Peter has a wife, Julie, and two adult children Katie and Jack. Apart from rugby, he has four old cars, collects Church mugs and has a vegetable patch and garden to tend.

Mr JD Bennet (John) The Warden (November 2023 - November 2024)John Bennett became a Freeman of the City of London in July 2001 and was admitted to the Livery of the Worshipful Company of Cooks of London in November 2008. He was elected to the Court of Assistants in July 2017. He sits on The Master’s committee and was elected as Renter Warden in November 2022.

John has a Masters Degree in Business Administration from Westminster University and started working in the Hospitality Industry in 1977 first in Hotels and then Food Service.

John worked in several sectors covering Hospitals, Schools but mainly focusing on the Business and Industry sector.

John worked for Sutcliffe Catering, Granada Food Service, Compass catering and finally becoming CEO of Baxterstorey in 2012 where he remained until the summer of 2021 when he decided to step down and is now a Non-Executive Director.

Mr MP Richardson (Mike) The Renter Warden (November 2023 - November 2024)Mike Richardson became a Freeman of the City of London in September 2012 and was admitted to the Livery of the Worshipful Company of Cooks of London in November 2013. He was elected to the Court of Assistants in July 2018, and became both Renter Warden and Assistant Honorary Treasurer in November 2023; the latter is a temporary role for one-year only. As the Assistant Honorary Treasurer, he sits on the Masters Committee, the Property Committee, the Assistance of Cookery Committee and the Cooks Trustees Advisory Panel.

Mike joined the Royal Navy in 1978 as an 18-year-old Logistics Officer, serving most of his 27 years’ service at sea; a notable shore appointment was NATO HQ Naval Command Southern Region and living with his young family in Naples, Italy for two years. Qualified as an All-Arms Commando Green Beret officer in 1981, Mike saw operational service in the Falklands War 1982 (and returned home as a “survivor” on the QEII after his warship, HMS COVENTRY, was sunk during enemy action).

Mike has worked exclusively in the Catering industry since 2005 with a focus on the Defence, Offshore & Remote and Education sectors. A previous Fellow of the Institute of Hospitality, Head of Royal Navy Catering and Company Director, Mike retired in August 2023.

A School Governor of a Primary School on the south coast, Mike is married to Kim, and they have two adult children, Kate and Ben, who in turn are both married with their own children – grand parent duties are part of his and his wife’s everyday life! A recently lapsed FA Referee after ten years, Mike wishes to expand his limited knowledge of volunteering, gardening, growing fruit trees and keeping bees.

The Master and the Court are supported by the Clerk, who takes care of all administrative matters, and the Beadle, who is responsible for the smooth running of ceremonial events.

The Clerk

Brigadier James Stopford CBE

The Beadle

C. John Cash MBE