BACKGROUND

As a livery company our membership is drawn from the international trade fraternity, with the aim of raising the awareness and understanding of, and standards of practice within, world trade. We are

101st in the Order of Precedence of the London 111 Livery Companies. Our mott is Commerce and Honest Friendship with All which is taken from Thomas Jeffersons Inaugural Presidential Address.

Since 1988 the Companys hallmark annual event is the Tacitus Lecture, one of the largest intellectual events in The City of Londons calendar. This provides a platform for both independent and positive discussion and the encouragement of world trade amongst a broad range of nationalities and cultures.

THE CLERKS ROLE AND RESPONSIBILTIES

The Clerk is responsible for the day-to-day administration of the Company on behalf of The Court - the governing body of the Company - which consists of Court Assistants, Past Masters, together with a Master and Wardens elected each year from amongst their number. The Court have responsibility for the good governance of the Company within its Royal Charter requirements, for attracting members, managing the Companys finances, delivering the Companys formal events, and maintaining the key interfaces with the Members and The City Civic and Mayoralty.

The role of the Clerk is varied. Whilst The Clerk is the principle administrative and legal officer of the Company, they also have significant ceremonial duties, oversee and create a positive community feeling within the membership, and generally provide continuity year-on-year within the Company. They work closely with each new Master, who have ambitions of what they wish to achieve during their year. A key role of the Clerk is that of helping the Master of that year achieve their agreed ambitions whilst always safeguarding the values and mission of the Company and maintaining its name and fame.

The Clerk has a ceremonial role at the Companys formal functions. There is also an expectation that the Clerk supports and accompanies the Master to selected daytime and several evening civic and livery events throughout the year. They are an important ongoing representative of the Company.

Administration

Day-to-day management and administration of the company, including preparing and minuting Court and Master & Wardens meetings

Maintain an up-to-date register of members, with new admissions and terminations/leavers. Help organise Freedom of the City applications and liaise with the Chamberlains office. Keep the list of Liverymen able to vote at Common Hall updated

Assist and support the Master and Court of Assistants

Adhere to any relevant regulations and compliance requirements, monitor the controls in place and communicate with the Court and Master about any issues

Maintain the companys regalia and jewels

Manage the Assistant Clerk

Committees

The Court is served by several other specialist Committees which the Clerk attends as an ex officio member and is responsible for the oversight of committee constitutions, providing

advice to individual Chairmen

The Company currently has the following committees: Master & Wardens Committee, Charities Committee (recommend projects to charity), Communications, Education & Armed Forces Committee, Events Management, Finance, Membership, Professional Development Committee (aiming to support young world trader professionals), Tacitus Committee (organises the annual Tacitus Lecture)

Finance

Responsible for keeping the companys accounts up to date. Liaises with the Hon. Treasurer on monthly management accounts

With the Treasurer, is responsible for producing annual accounts and annual returns

Responsible for paying and collecting money, including members quarterage, on behalf of the company

Responsible for ensuring that the company maintains adequate insurance

Communications, Events

Working with the Communication Committee, the Clerk is the first point of contact for all external and internal communications and the public presentation of the Company to the City and other organisations

Manage external partners in conjunction with the relevant committees, such as military affiliations, charity affiliations and other City institutions

Maintain good communications with the members and external stakeholders, including regular emails to members

Plan and run events for the company, including Tacitus Lecture, Installation Dinner and Election Dinner, and plan attendance at third-party events such as Common Halls for election of Sheriffs and the Lord Mayor, United Guild Service etc

Manages the company website and social media channels

Representational

Represent the company at events and attend all official functions to which the Clerk is customarily invited

If required, to be the Companys spokesperson

Provide guidance to the Master and to members of ceremonial matters

To support the Companys aims in promoting world trade

Military Affiliations

The Company regards its formal affiliations with units of His Majestys Armed Forces as extremely important; 1st Rifles, HMS Dauntless, RAF Benson 28 Squadron, 1475 (Dulwich) Squadron Air Training Corps, Chiswick Sea Cadets are the current affiliations

The Clerk is responsible for maintaining and encouraging active liaison and reciprocal activities with these units including, whenever possible, facilitating opportunities for serving personnel to take part in Company activities and City events

PERSON SPECIFICATION

This could be the ideal role if you wish to join an active, forward-looking Company. You will need to:

Demonstrate strategic awareness with the ability to deliver agreed objectives

Be flexible, able to work under pressure across multiple roles, be adaptable to change

Have excellent hands-on administrative and organisational abilities

Have excellent verbal, written, presentation and communication skills

Have confident and up-to-date IT and social media skills

Demonstrate sound financial management

Be comfortable managing formal ceremonial events and the protocols involved

Be friendly and approachable, with excellent people skills and an ability to inspire confidence

Be a team player with commitment and energy

Become or be already - well networked in The City of London

Be based within easy reach of The City of London

EMPLOYMENT TERMS & CONDITIONS

Location: Home based - with frequent travel, primarily to the City of London.

Hours of work: The responsibilities outlined can be managed within a 3-day working week but there is a requirement to work late on several occasions per month, particularly when attending 3rd party events in The City, or when delivering the main Company events. There is also an occasional requirement to work over a weekend but that is usually on no more than two occasions per year.

Remuneration: £40,000 per annum for 3 days per week (Pro rata FTE of £66,600).

Benefits: A pension scheme is available plus other benefits to be discussed on appointment.

Holiday: 17 days of paid holiday plus bank holidays per annum (preferably not during the three weeks leading up to the Tacitus Lecture each February).

Probation Period: There will be a probation period of six months. During this time either party may give one months notice. After the satisfactory completion of the six months the position will become permanent. Thereafter the notice period will be six months.

Full details and terms and conditions of employment will be issued when an offer of employment is made.

HOW TO APPLY

Please download further details of the position from our website:

www.maryleboneexecutivesearch.com/jobs

For an informal confidential discussion call Richard Evans on 07958 984161 or 020 3126 4858 or Kevin Everett on 07771 783265

Apply online with a full Curriculum Vitae detailing your skills and experience together with a Covering Letter clearly outlining your motivation to undertake the role and how you meet the competencies required for the position as stated in the Person Specification.

Closing date for applications: 12 August 2024

Long List interviews: 14 22 August 2024

Final Panel Interviews: 3 September 2024