Lesotho is a small, mountainous, landlocked country surrounded by its much larger neighbor, South Africa. It has a population of about two million and a per capita gross domestic product (GDP) of $999.7 in 2022. Lesotho is classified as a lower middle-income country. It is primarily highlands, with its lowest point 1,400 meters above sea level. Previously a British protectorate, the nation gained its independence in October 1966. Lesotho is a constitutional monarchy, ruled by a King as Head of State, and governed by a 33-member Senate and a 120-member National Assembly.

The current government came into power in November 2022 and is led by Prime Minister, Samuel Ntsokoane Matekane’s Revolution for Prosperity (RFP) party in coalition with the Movement for Economic Change (MEC) Alliance for Democrats (AD) and Basotho Action Party (BAP) parties.

The government extended Lesotho’s Second National Strategic Development Plan (NSPD II) 2018/19–22/23 for another five years until 2027/28. The NSPD II’s four priorities are: enhancing inclusive and sustainable economic growth and private sector-led job creation; strengthening human capital; building enabling infrastructure; and strengthening national governance and accountability systems.

Economic growth

The economy expanded by 2% in 2023, mainly driven by the public sector and construction, especially the Lesotho Highlands Water Project-II megaproject and its spillover effects on transportation, logistics, and financial services. The project experienced some delays in early 2024 owing to strikes, particularly on the dam construction work, but activity has since resumed. On the downside, weaknesses in public investment management and efforts to control spending are delaying the implementation of capital projects. On the supply side, the industrial sector grew by about 5%, while the expansion of the agricultural sector, while still positive, decelerated significantly.

Headline inflation decreased from its peak of 9.8% in July 2022 to 8.2% in January 2024, owing primarily to the moderation in fuel and food prices. The central bank revised upwards the net international reserves target floor to $750 million in January 2024 to maintain a one-to-one exchange rate peg between the loti and the rand and increased the policy rate to 7.75% in July 2023, which stands below the South African policy rate.

The fiscal balance improved dramatically, from a deficit of 4.3% of GDP in 2022 to a surplus of 5.5% of GDP in 2023, owing to the more than doubling of SACU revenue. The government has spent more than half of SACU windfall in 2023 to increase public investment and recurrent spending by 2 percentage points of GDP each. The latter was driven by transfers to other public sector bodies, social benefits, and subsidies. The public sector wage bill as a share of GDP remained constant, even though it increased above inflation. Little progress has been made on the clearance of arrears, which have emerged owing to recurrent fiscal deficits in the past, and weaknesses in public financial management and in public procurement.

The public debt stock is estimated to have declined slightly to 57.5% of GDP in 2023, compared to 60.6% in 2022 mainly due to the redemption of Treasury bonds. The majority of public debt is contracted from external sources, accounting for about 77% of total debt, while domestic sources contribute the remaining 23% of total debt in 2023. In terms of shares to GDP, external and domestic debt stood at 46.2% and 13.6% of GDP in 2023, respectively. Lesotho’s risk of external and overall debt distress remains moderate but risks to debt sustainability have risen.

Other Development Challenges

Agricultural Productivity and Rural Development: Traditional, low-input, low-output rain-fed cereal production and extensive animal grazing systems face challenges due to agro-ecological and climatic conditions, including recurrent cycles of drought, erratic rainfall, hail, and frost.

Human Capital Development: Skills development with equity is a priority, and there is a need to strengthen skills and employability of the youth, ensuring a gender-nuanced approach, and close gaps in key infrastructure, particularly in electricity, sustainable and safe road connectivity, and information and communications technology.

Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability: Sustainable financial and human resources models are needed to manage climate shocks, and investments in land management practices, protection of forests and woodlands, improved management of water resources, and building resilience against shocks through responsive social protection are crucial.

Last Updated: Apr 09, 2024

Private Sector Development and Job Creation

The Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (CAFI) Project ($52.5 million) is designed to enhance the business environment and bolster key sectors such as horticulture and textiles. It also focuses on SMEs/entrepreneurship, disaster resilience, and access to finance for MSMEs. Nine local entrepreneurship support organizations have received capacity building training and five have been selected to run entrepreneurship programs. The project is also establishing the Lesotho Horticulture Incubation and Training Center to support 15 commercial horticulture farms, scaling-up from three farms established under the prior project. CAFI intends to support 500 startups and innovative SMEs over six years focusing on youth and women.

Agriculture

The Smallholder Agricultural Development Project II accomplished the following:

A total of 2,830 farmers and 387 extension staff have been trained on 5 prioritized CSA initiatives (Improved crop varieties and livestock management, Protected agriculture (shade nets and Plastic tunnels) water harvesting and drip irrigation, conservation agriculture and agroforestry) across the country.

1,200 farmers have been trained in irrigation technologies and management.

The project has rehabilitated irrigation schemes (namely Makoabating (Maseru), Nkhunkhu (Mohale’s Hoek) and Tsitsong (Quthing)). These schemes are also used for demonstration and trial excercises for protected agriculture versus open field farming. The first cycle of production has already been harvested.

2,353 farmers have been trained in agri-business, marketing skills, and group formation under horizontal alliances.

330 grants, including youth grants, have been awarded to smallholder farmers and agri-businesses as capital investments to increase their agricultural production and enhance commercialization.

104 Nutrition Clubs with 1,702 households have been selected for Nutrition Sensitive Grants and to date, 45 nutrition clubs have already received funds for procurement and construction of 3 x 9 meter shade-nets, covering 732 households in Thaba-Tseka, Leribe, Berea, Maseru, and Mafeteng.

Social Protection and Jobs

The Pathways to Sustainable Livelihood Project is enhancing the efficiency and equity of selected social assistance programs and strengthening the livelihoods of poor and vulnerable households. In early 2024, the project supported 45,000 households facing food insecurity with emergency cash transfers. It also promotes economic inclusion to boost productivity and employment outcomes, particularly for vulnerable youth and women. The project is digitalizing delivery of social assistance grants, enhancing the transparency and efficiency of these systems.

Education

The Lesotho Education Quality for Equality Project (LEQEP) benefitted 91,450 students of which 52% were girls. With the project’s support, 73 classrooms were constructed with new furniture, 48 latrine blocks for boys, 120 latrine blocks for girls and 48 latrine blocks for teachers (male and female) were constructed at the 25 schools. Having their own latrines is a significant improvement in the learning environment for the girls. Learning and daily attendance at school have both improved.

Last Updated: Apr 07, 2024