Manchester City have been charged by the Premier League with a number of breaches of financial rules across nine consecutive seasons, reaching back as far as 2009-10.

There are over 100 breaches listed in total, many of them referring to sponsorship and contracts, but also more recently to the club’s alleged lack of cooperation with the Premier League’s investigation.

There are also alleged issues relating to manager remuneration between 2009-10 to 2011-12, alongside breaches regarding player contracts.

Over that period, City have been the most successful domestic team in English football, winning six Premier Leagues, two FA Cups and six EFL Cups.

What have Man City been charged with?

By Euan O’Byrne Mulligan

The alleged breaches span a period from the 2009-10 season to the 2017-18 campaign.

First, the club are alleged to have breached league rules requiring provision “in utmost good faith” of “accurate financial information that gives a true and fair view of the club’s financial position”.

The league says the information that was required relates to “revenue (including sponsorship revenue), its related parties and its operating costs”.

The second set of breaches refers to the alleged breaking of rules “requiring a member club to include full details of manager remuneration in its relevant contracts with its manager” related to seasons 2009-10 to 2012-13 inclusive.

The club’s manager between December 2009 and May 2013 was current Italy boss Roberto Mancini.

The second set also refers to requirements for a club to include full details of player remuneration within the relevant contracts, for the seasons 2010-11 to 2015-16 inclusive.

The third section deals with alleged breaches of Premier League rules requiring clubs to comply with Uefa Financial Fair Play regulations, between 2013-14 to 2017-18.

The fourth set of alleged breaches relates to the Premier League’s profitability and sustainability rules in seasons 2015-16 to 2017-18 inclusive.

Finally, the club are alleged to have breached league rules requiring member clubs to co-operate with and assist the Premier League with its investigations, from December 2018 to date.

Why now?

By Mark Douglas, i northern football correspondent

The complex nature of the enquiry has made it difficult for the Premier League, which has taken four years to reach this point. The league also claim City have have used delaying tactics when required to hand over documents – and part of the charges are about the club’s lack of co-operation.

An arbitration panel in 2021 ordered City to provide documents to the league and “make inquiries of third parties”. City had attempted to prevent the arbitration panel from even hearing the case – but lost their case.

These charges are the result of a four-year investigation, sparked by German news site Der Spiegel publishing documents discovered by Portuguese computer hacker Rui Pinto in the Football Leaks cache.

City deny any wrongdoing and previously called the Football Leaks revelations a “clear and organised” attempt to damage the club’s reputation.

A club statement on Monday said: “Manchester City FC is surprised by the issuing of these alleged breaches of the Premier League rules, particularly given the extensive engagement and vast amount of detailed materials that the EPL has been provided with.

“The club welcomes the review of this matter by an independent commission, to impartially consider the comprehensive body of irrefutable evidence that exists in support of its position. As such we look forward to this matter being put to rest once and for all.”

Potential punishments

By Sam Cunningham, i chief football correspondent

The independent commission set up to determine if Manchester City should be punished for alleged financial breaches spanning more than a decade will have the power to strip the club of its previous titles, i can reveal.

Under section W.15.10 of the “Commission’s Powers” in the Premier League rulebook it states that the commission can “make such other order as it thinks fit”. These chilling eight words form the key regulation that leaves it open for the commission to remove Manchester City’s titles won during the breach periods. Between 2011 and 2022, Manchester City won six Premier League trophies.

Other sanctions include a fine “unlimited in amount”, a points deduction and even expulsion from the Premier League.

You can read Sam Cunningham’s full analysis here

‘Relegation a possibility’, warns former City advisor

By Katherine Lucas, i sports journalist

Stefan Borson, a former financial advisor to the club, who is also a City fan and financial expert, writes on Twitter: “Alarmist or not, the sheer extent of the Premier League charges are at a level that IF found proven, must lead to relegation.

“Some of the charges look likely time barred unless deliberate concealment is proved. And yes 50 lawyers will fight hard but so will the PL’s 50 lawyers. All the same firms/chambers/quality/reputations. City have no financial advantage at all in the level of lawyers available.”

Don’t expect any immediate action, though, as Borson adds: “As I’ve said many times, the scale and seriousness (dishonesty/fraud/concealment) of the allegations are totally ill suited to a PL Panel and a short timetable. I don’t know how this is dealt with but seems to me this could still be YEARS from conclusion.”

What happens next?

By Sam Cunningham, i chief football correspondent

The Premier League introduced a new system in 2020 around how it dealt with breaches of the rulebook. Given the League’s strange existence as a body representing all 20 of its member clubs, a governing body of the league in charge of creating rules and regulations and the body in charge of handing out punishments, it required a way of putting disciplinary decisions at arm’s length from itself.

So the chair of the Premier League Judicial Panel, Murray Rosen KC, will now appoint the relevant people to sit on an Independent Commission who will assess the evidence relating to the allegations against Manchester City and determine appropriate sanctions. The process has been used this season, but given the unprecedented nature of the seriousness of the breaches it is not yet known how many people will sit on the Independent Commission. They do, however, have a broad range of powers and sanctions can include points deductions and even expulsion from the Premier League.

Equally, it is not yet known how long the process will take. The investigation took more than four years to come to the decision to refer Manchester City’s alleged breaches to an Independent Commission, in offences spanning a staggering nine seasons, so it’s expected to take a long time to reach conclusions.

Will we have to rewrite history?

By Daniel Storey, i chief football writer

Manchester City will be permitted to operate as normal in the meantime; the innocent until proven guilty principle applies. They issued a statement expressing surprise at the alleged breaches and welcoming the review. That may well be enough to satisfy Pep Guardiola, who has always stressed that he was assured no wrongdoing had taken place and that he would leave if he had been lied to. We can predict an outpouring of indignant reaction from some City supporters – at least from those who boo the Champions League anthem at the Etihad.

The initial reaction, at least in the court of public opinion, will obsess over the potential punishments, ostensibly because the details of the case are not that sexy but also because that is where there is much scope for imagination to run wild. There has already been fevered, frothy-mouthed social media discussion over enforced relegation, transfer bans, stripped titles and points deductions. The only thing we do know is that very little isn’t on the table. But that is a conversation for a different time and, most likely, a different year.

For that is not why this day is so monumental. The Premier League is an interconnected nexus of interests. Every club in part relies upon the actions, reactions and results of every other. Your seasons – and, as such, your history – are defined by the competition within the league.

If City are found guilty, the fabric of the league’s decade between 2009 and 2019 changes entirely. The league table never lies, we are told. Clubs end up where they deserve to end up because we are all playing by the same rules. Money drives success, the uber-wealthy offering shortcuts with their spending power, but the construct of the league remains within the same basic parameters.

Manchester City have helped to write that history. In December 2019, when websites and newspapers prepared their lists of the greatest moments of the previous decade, Sergio Aguero’s title-winning goal sat on the top across the board. The Premier League, as an organisation, know this. They are aware that they are pursuing a verdict that will automatically ask questions of how the competition within their own league was warped.