August 30th, 2021- Simcere Pharmaceutical Group Co., Ltd. (2096.HK, hereinafter referred to as “Simcere”) and AlphaMa Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as “AlphaMa”) jointly announced that they have successfully signed an exclusive license agreement for the new anti-tumor drug ALM005 . According to the agreement, Simcere Pharmaceuticals will obtain the rights to develop all indications of ALM005 and commercialize it worldwide. Simcere Pharmaceuticals will make the first payment, R&D milestone payment and sales milestone payment to AlphaMa, according to the agreement.

AI-powered drug design is an emerging disruptive technology with great potential, which can provide strong technical support for the discovery of the new generation of drug molecules that are highly selective or modulating undruggable targets. The AI technology platform can continuously assist Simcere’s deployment of innovative drug research in critical disease areas.

Mr. Jinsheng Ren, founder and chairman of Simcere Pharmaceuticals, said:

“We are looking forward to cooperating with AlphaMa on the research and development of innovative drugs. ALM005 is a valuable compound discovered from AlphaMa’s AI technology. This discovery provides an exciting opportunity for cancer treatment. Combining AlphaMa’s AI-DEL technology platform and Simcere’s innovative drug development platform, we will discover more valuable new drug targets and projects, and provide more effective theprapeutics to patients as soon as possible.”

The principal of AlphaMa:

“I am very pleased to see that AlphaMa and Simcere collaborating on ALM005. Simcere is a leading R&D-driven pharmaceutical company in China with a R&D team of nearly 1,000 people and a wealth of pipeline products under development. We look forward to closely working with Simcere’s first-class R&D, clinical development, and commercialization teams to promote ALM005 to clinical, which would benefit Chinese patients as soon as possible.”

About Simcere

Simcere Pharmaceutical (2096.HK) is a R&D-driven pharmaceutical company in China’s top 100, rapidly transforming to innovation. It has been approved by the Ministry of Science and Technology to build a “State Key Laboratory of Translational Medicine and Innovative Drugs”. The company focuses on the three major diseases of tumor, central nervous system and autoimmunity, and is committed to provide patients more effective drugs as soon as possible. Simcere Pharmaceuticals adheres to an open and innovative R&D strategy and has become strategic partners with many multinational companies and biotechnology companies to actively promote to fulfill the value of life science achievements from global to China.

For more information, please visit：

www.simcere.com