I’ve been waiting for a game to really show off the PlayStation3’s graphical powers. There have been some really nice ones so far,but “MotorStorm” is the first to truly impress me.

“MotorStorm” is an off-road racing game that takes place inUtah’s Monument Valley. Vehicles of all types — cars, trucks,buggies, motorcycles, even semis — tear through mud-filledcaverns.

The Utah desert is absolutely gorgeous and as photorealistic asI have seen in a video game. The cars themselves look great. Theyshow damage as you crash your way through the courses, and mudcovers the cars and even splatters onto the camera.

There are multiple ways around each course, some up high onledges, others at the bottom of canyons. Figuring out where to gois crucial to winning; in smaller vehicles such as motorcycles, youhave to stay up high or be plowed over by the bigger vehicles.

The goal is to win races, but it’s also without rules. Theartificial intelligence can be brutal, using the vehicles asweapons to knock you around or even off the course.

It’s fun, but for how long? There’s no off-line multiplayerracing, only single-player and online, which is a hugedisappointment. The single-player game also lacks depth, as thereare only eight tracks and not a lot to do on them once you havefigured out the paths to take with which vehicle. There aren’t anyother racing modes, and once you have unlocked all the tracks,you’re likely kind of bored.

Probably the only way to extend the life of “MotorStorm” is withthe online play, which allows for up to 12 racers. Once you havebeaten (or are tired of) the single-player experience, you can goonline and play with real people. And racing against real people isalways more fun.

I just wish there were more to the off-line game. Not everybodylikes to play online, and if I’m going to fork out $60 for a game,I want it to have a more robust single-player experience.

Contact Aimee Green at (402) 473-7326 orAimee.Green@lee.net.

‘MotorStorm’

Publisher: Sony

Platform: PlayStation 3

Rated: Teen

Cost: $59.99

Score: 7.5/10

Scores are based on an evaluation of game play (4 points),visuals (2), sound (2) and replayability/value (2).