An aurora is a natural display of colored light in the night sky that occurs primarily in high latitudes of both hemispheres. Auroras in the Northern Hemisphere are called the northern lights, or aurora borealis. In the Southern Hemisphere auroras are called the southern lights, or aurora australis. Auroras are named for the Roman goddess of the dawn.

The beautiful and mysterious lights of the auroras have fascinated humans for thousands of years. Descriptions of the lights are found in writings and folklore of many cultures across history. In some traditions the lights were revered as spirits of the dead or as a positive omen, while in other cultures they were feared as a sign of impending disaster.

Auroras are caused when electrically charged particles (electrons and protons) from the solar wind collide with atoms of atmospheric gases. These interactions take place mainly at high latitudes in oval-shaped zones centered around Earth’s magnetic poles. During periods of high solar activity, the auroral zones may shift toward the middle latitudes; in the Northern Hemisphere, auroras have been seen as far south as 40° latitude. Auroral emissions typically occur at altitudes of about 60 miles (about 100 kilometers); however, they may occur anywhere between 50 to 155 miles (about 80 to 250 kilometers) above Earth’s surface.

Auroras get their energy from charged particles driven by the solar wind from the sun toward Earth, where most are deflected by Earth’s magnetic field. However, some of the solar particles enter Earth’s atmosphere, where they collide with oxygen and nitrogen atoms, knocking away electrons to leave oxygen and nitrogen ions in excited states. These ions emit radiation at various wavelengths, creating the colors of the aurora. Collisions with oxygen produce either green or red colors, depending upon both how energized the oxygen is and the altitude at which the collisions occur—collisions about 60 miles (about 100 kilometers) above Earth’s surface produce green colors, whereas those at high altitudes result in red lights. Nitrogen collisions generally produce blue and purplish colors.

Auroras take many forms, including curtains, arcs, bands, and patches. Vertical rays, like searchlight beams, are common. In the beautiful corona form of aurora, rays seem to meet overhead in a starlike shape. In the spectacular flame type, tonguelike rays ripple upward. Vertical rays rising from curving bands are called draperies. The uniform arc is the most stable form of aurora, sometimes persisting for hours without appearing to vary in shape.

The northern lights generally can be viewed across the northernmost parts of North America (specifically northern Canada and Alaska), Greenland, Scandinavia, and Russia. The southern lights are not often seen because they occur mainly over Antarctica and the southern Indian Ocean. However, some displays may be visible in parts of New Zealand, southern Australia, and the southernmost parts of Chile, Argentina, and South Africa.