classic

great book, loved it when I read it back when, really enjoyed the nostalgia! It's not as intricate as some more modern contemporary books, but it holds up well!

The book feels... Unfinished.

What did you like best about The Boat of a Million Years? What did you like least?

The concept was fantastic, but because it was shoehorned into one book, I feel that an opportunity to paint a more vivid landscape with each era was missed. The character development came up short as well. i found it hard to empathize with any of the main characters; they were not as deep as they should have been to make this a successful book in my opinion.

What do you think your next listen will be?

1635

If this book were a movie would you go see it?

I would. A movie, with awesome CGI would make this story amazing. Film can set up eras with something as simple as an aireo shot.

Any additional comments?

Now that I have read this, i will take down my copy in my library and trade it for something that will fit better.

Terrible narration

Was The Boat of a Million Years worth the listening time?

I read this book when it first came out in the late 80's, and it has been in my thoughts ever since. So for maybe 25 years I have, with some regularity, thought back to it. Very few books affect me in this way.I was delighted when it came out in audio form, and spent a whole credit on it.

I still have not finished it. The narration is the most uninspired and monotonous I have ever experienced in a audio fiction book. Akin to a bad lecturer in a subject I'm not really interested in.

Don't waste your credits for this terrible rendition of a wonderful book.

Long winded and boring...

It took me several hours of overly detailed descriptions and background information before anything happened of interest and by then it was too late. I was extremely happy to quite this one and move on to other more interesting titles. Not for fans of action oriented works, found it long winded and boring...

20 hours of really dumb science ficition

What disappointed you about The Boat of a Million Years?

I can't start to tell you how bad this book is. Immortals eventually deciding to leave Earth for another star system. It was just as bad as Highlander 2 except the Immortals were not out to kill each other.

An agonizing read.

What would have made The Boat of a Million Years better?

Less prehistory

Has The Boat of a Million Years turned you off from other books in this genre?

No.

How could the performance have been better?

Characterization of voices confusing and acents too similar.

You didn’t love this book... but did it have any redeeming qualities?

Not really

Any additional comments?

The author is great but this is his most disappointing work.