Gretchen Wieners will attempt to make fetch happen for the third time. On December 9, the initial cast list for Mean Girls: The Musical was revealed. Yes, that means we can look forward to a movie adaptation of the Broadway musical adaptation of the 2004 classic starring Lindsay Lohan, Rachel McAdams, Amanda Seyfried, Lacey Chabert, and Lizzy Caplan. Though none of these leading ladies will be reprising their original roles in the screen-to-stage-to-screen production, Tina Fey will be serving as screenwriter once again.

“I’m very excited to bring Mean Girls back to the big screen,” Fey said in a statement in January 2020. “It’s been incredibly gratifying to see how much the movie and the musical have meant to audiences. I’ve spent 16 years with these characters now. They are my Marvel Universe and I love them dearly.”

Here's everything we know about the Mean Girls movie musical.

Who’s directing the Mean Girls movie musical?

We seem to be in good hands. Aside from her screenwriting duties, Fey will be producing the Paramount+ film alongside SNL's Lorne Michaels. In addition to writing the original Mean Girls script, Fey wrote the 2017 Broadway show with music by her husband, Jeff Richmond. Nell Benjamin is behind the musical's lyrics, while Samantha Jayne and Arturo Perez Jr. are set to direct.

Is the plot the same?

The original film followed Cady Heron's (Lohan) first foray into American high school dynamics after moving to the suburbs from Africa. In an attempt to help her new friend Janis Ian (Caplan) score revenge on HBIC Regina George (McAdams), Cady finds herself joining the tyrannical popular group known as The Plastics. Honestly, you know what this movie is about and can probably quote it line by line. The musical was pretty much the same deal.

Who’s in the cast?

On December 9, 2022, The Hollywood Reporter announced four actors who have signed on for leading roles in the Mean Girls musical.

Cady will be played by Angourie Rice, who is best known for her roles in Mare of Easttown and Marvel's Spider-Man films.

Regina George will be played by Reneé Rapp, who originated the role in the Broadway musical and stars in the HBO Max series The Sex Lives of College Girls.

Janis Ian will be played by Auli'i Cravalho, who is known as the voice of Disney princess Moana.

Tony-winning actor Jaquel Spivey has been cast as Janis's best friend Damian (portrayed by Daniel Franzese in the original film). He wants his pink shirt back.

Mean Girls creator Tina Fey confirmed that she will be returning to North Shore High School alongside another familiar face from the original film. In an appearance on Late Night With Seth Meyers, Fey confirmed that she and Tim Meadows will appear in the remake. She later revealed that they will both reprise their original roles of Ms. Norbury and Principal Duvall, respectively.

Jenna Fischer will play Cady's mom, the role originated by Ana Gasteyer in the movie. Honestly? Kinda perfect; she and Angourie Rice have super similar faces! So fetch.

Busy Philipps plays “cool” mom (you know, as opposed to a “regular mom”) Mrs. George, while Jon Hamm makes an appearance as your least favorite coach/sex ed teacher, Coach Carr.

The Summer I Turned Pretty heartthrob Christopher Briney is perfectly aloof as Aaron Samuels. I really hope that boy figured out what day it is!

Is there a trailer?

Frustratingly set to “Get Him Back!” by Olivia Rodrigo instead of one of the original songs, the trailer nonetheless gives us our first view of the new and improved Plastics.

When will the film be released?

After originally planned as a Paramount+ streaming exclusive, this baby is headed to the big screen!! Mean Girls hits theaters on January 12, 2024.