“Mean Girls” is arguably one of the most talked about films of all time.

The comedy movie stars Lindsay Lohan (Cady Heron), Rachel McAdams (Regina George), Amanda Seyfried (Karen Smith), and Lacey Chabert (Gretchen Wieners), and was written by Tina Fey.

Due to the popularity of the film, many fans have been trying to convince the cast to do a sequel. As of late, many of the original cast members have even spoken out about a sequel to the 2004 film.

Now yet another actress says she, too, is on board!

Article continues below advertisement

Lizzy Caplan Talks 'Mean Girls 2'

Lizzy Caplan, 40, recently opened up and gave her thoughts on reprising her role of Janis Ian in a "Mean Girls" sequel.

"Of course I would want to be a part of it; I would be an idiot not to join," she told Grazia USA. However, the Emmy-nominated actress also addressed that she feels the story has nowhere else to go. "But to me it feels like Mean Girls had a really good beginning, middle and end. I don't know what's left of the story."

Article continues below advertisement

Others Who Are On Board For A 'Mean Girls' Sequel

Lacey Chabert, who portrayed Gretchen Wieners in the 2004 comedy, recently addressed the possibility of a sequel and even had an idea for a script and storyline.

During a recent appearance on “The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon,” the host of the show brought out a photo from the set of “Mean Girls" to show Chabert. The photo, which had Lindsay Lohan, Rachel McAdams, Amanda Seyfried, and Lacey Chabert on stage in their holiday outfits from the scene where The Plastic performed “Jingle Bell Rock,” had Chabert smiling from ear to ear.

Fallon then asked the actress if he would ever be on board for a sequel to “Mean Girls,” to which she quickly exclaimed, “Oh absolutely!”

Article continues below advertisement

Chabert even had an idea for what direction the movie could go. “I think it would be so much fun to see where these women are now and if their kids are the new mean girls,” she said. “I would love to know what they’re doing.”

She then concluded with, “Let’s do it!”

Article continues below advertisement

Article continues below advertisement

And in 2020, Lindsay Lohan spoke with David Spade about a sequel to “Mean Girls,” and she admitted she would be on board with a sequel. “I think I was hanging on to [Mean Girls] for a really long idea,” Lohan said. “I wanted to come back with a Mean Girls 2 with the same cast, work with Tina [Fey] and the whole crew again and [Mean Girls director] Mark Waters…but that’s all in their hands, really.”

This is something Lohan also said more recently, while on “The Tonight Show With Jimmy Fallon.” When the host, Jimmy Fallon, asked the actress if she would be on board for a “Mean Girls” sequel, she replied by saying, “I think that’s in Tina Fey’s hands and Lorne Michaels,” referring to the writer and producer of the film.

Fallon turned toward the camera and said, “Tina, I know you’re watching. Let’s make that happen.”

Article continues below advertisement

Rachel McAdams, who portrayed the iconic Regina George, also said she would love to take on the role again. ““It would be fun to play Regina George later in her life and see where life took her!” she said during the “Heroes of Health: COVID-19 Stream-a-thon.”

Adams added that there have been some “joking” conversations regarding a “Mean Girls 2,” but there has not been any serious talk.

Technically speaking, there has already been a “Mean Girls 2,” but fans were not impressed. The sequel was released in 2011 with an entirely new cast. The only character to reprise their role was Tim Meadows, who portrayed Principal Duvall.