At the 75th annual Primetime Emmy Awards, Lizzy Caplan took a moment to reflect on the 20th anniversary of Mean Girls, in which she starred as Janis Ian, and her excitement for being an Emmy nominee.

Speaking with ET's Nischelle Turner on the red carpet, Caplan expressed her surprise at how quickly time had passed. "I'm so shocked that it's been 20 years, so that's upsetting in many ways," she said of the Mean Girls anniversary.

Caplan told ET that she eagerly anticipated the release of the new Mean Girls film, which hit theaters last weekend. "I'm really excited to see the movie. Obviously it's so connected to the film that we made, but I've also seen the Broadway musical and it's like a direct movie of that one," she said. "I love it, the Mean Girls cinematic universe -- why not."

As for Auli'i Cravalho now portraying Janis Ian in the 2024 film, Caplan shared her excitement for the expansion of the Mean Girls universe.

"I love Janis, too. I'm very grateful that I get to be her forever. Honestly, it's a good thing," said Caplan, who also touched on sending flowers and a note to congratulate Cravalho when she landed the part in the new movie.

Speaking with ET's Rachel Smith last week at the New York City premiere of the reimagined version of the iconic 2004 film, 23-year-old Cravalho described how Caplan supported her leading up to the film's release.

"I got back to my hotel this afternoon after doing press all day. I was tired, I was overwhelmed and I got a beautiful bouquet and a heartfelt note from Lizzy Caplan and Barrett [Wilbert] Weed," Auli'i told ET.

Weed originated the role of Janis Ian in the stage adaptation of Mean Girls, which the new version pulls its music from.

"They are like, 'Congratulations on being the third generation of Janis and we'll meet up with each other, and have a drink and we'll plot the next best revenge. It was just the most incredible thing," the actress shared.

Meanwhile, Caplan had lots to celebrate at the Emmys. She was nominated for her role as Libby Epstein in Fleishman Is In Trouble, and spoke with ET about her journey with the coming-of-age show that garnered multiple nominations at the ceremony, including Outstanding Limited or Anthology Series, Outstanding Lead Actress for Caplan, and Outstanding Supporting Actress for Claire Danes.

Reflecting on her decision to join the project, Caplan said, "I read the book, and I loved the book, so I knew that there was a good shot of loving the show. But it’s always a risk, especially if it is based on a book. It really is the show that we set out to make."

The 75th Primetime Emmy Awards, originally set to take place last September, was postponed due to the SAG-AFTRA and WGA strikes. Hosted by Anthony Anderson at L.A. Live's Peacock Theater in Los Angeles, the ceremony aired live Monday, Jan. 15 at 5 p.m. PT, 8 p.m. ET on Fox, and will be streamed Tuesday, Jan. 16 on Hulu. Keep checking ETonline.com for complete Emmys coverage and for the full winners' list.