Mozart Flute Concerto No 1 in G Major K313-Flute and Piano

Arr Paul Edmund Davies

Publisher-Kevin Mayhew

About

This version has been edited by Paul Edmund-Davies, and the Piano Reduction has been arranged by John Alley.

Flute works by W.A. Mozart

Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart

Mozart was born in Salzburg in 1756 and was a hugely influential composer of the Classical era. He began composing music at the aged of 5 and was a child prodigy. He was also extremely competent on the keyboard and violin. Mozart composed over 600 works including symphonies, chamber works, operas, and keyboard works amongst a huge array of other works.

Mozart composed works for flute including a concerto for flute and harp, concerti in G Major and D Major, Andante in C and flute & string quartets.

https://www.britannica.com/biography/Wolfgang-Amadeus-Mozart

Flautist-Paul Edmund-Davies

Paul Edmund-Davies established his international reputation as a flautist and soloist in the 20 years he was Principal Flute of the London Symphony Orchestra and then the five years in the same position at the Philharmonia Orchestra.

He has edited and published more than 25 books on flute music. His ‘The 28 Day Warm up Book for all Flautists…eventually!’ is a best seller and has been translated into Japanese, Spanish and Russian.

In 2015 Paul launched his online flute education resource, Simply Flute. The site provides free and subscription materials to help flute players and teachers on their respective journeys.

https://pauledmund-davies.com/

If you have any queries, please call us on 020 7388 8438 (UK) or +44 (0)20 7388 8438 (International)

Product Delivery

We dispatch all sheet music within the UK via Royal Mail unless otherwise requested.

We will endeavour to dispatch your order by return and availability of stock if received before 2.30 pm

Stocked items may not always be immediately available. Click here to find out more.

We use a secure courier service for overseas deliveries outside of the United Kingdom. Delivery charges will vary depending on the location and weight of the goods.