Briccialdi Portafoglio Per i Dilettanti Op 67-Two Flutes and Piano

Publisher-AureaCapra Editions

2 Flutes & Pian0

Edited and Revised by Elisabeth Parry, Edmund-Davies

Piano accompaniment revised by John Alley

About

A wonderfully melodic and virtuosic work for two flutes and piano. This new and fully revised edition of a little-known 19th-century Italian gem makes a fine recital alternative to the Doppler works for the same combinations. Piano play-along tracks and rehearsal duo scores are available for download.

Giulio Briccialdi-Flautist/Composer

Briccialdi (1818-1881) was an Italian virtuoso flautist, professor of flute, composer and flute technician and innovator who made significant contributions to the modern-day flute. In particular, he invented the Bb thumb key for the Boehm system flute.

Born in Terni, Italy, he began his flute studies with his father and continued in Rome. He rapidly gained recognition as an esteemed performer securing notable positions including flute professor for the Count of Syracuse, brother of King Ferdinand of Bourbon of Naples. In 1871, he became a flute professor at the Florence Conservatory, where his own flute model was adopted.

As a composer, Briccialdi focused primarily on creating paraphrases and variations of operatic themes, a genre immensely popular among audiences. He wrote a vast array of compositions including vocal music, symphonic works and operas. He also wrote an incredible 183 works for flute for the following combinations:

Flute and Piano: Works on Operatic Themes

Flute and Piano: Transcriptions of Non-Operatic Works

Two Flutes and Piano

Solo Flute

Two Flutes

Four Flutes

Chamber Music

Flute(s) and Orchestra

https://www.giuliobriccialdi.com/

Flautist-Paul Edmund-Davies

Paul Edmund-Davies established his international reputation as a flautist and soloist in the 20 years he was Principal Flute of the London Symphony Orchestra and then the five years in the same position at the Philharmonia Orchestra.

He has edited and published more than 25 books on flute music. His ‘The 28 Day Warm up Book for all Flautists…eventually!’ is a best seller and has been translated into Japanese, Spanish and Russian.

In 2015 Paul launched his online flute education resource, Simply Flute. The site provides free and subscription materials to help flute players and teachers on their respective journeys.

https://pauledmund-davies.com/

Aurea Capra Editions

This publishing company aim to produce beautiful, high-quality editions of fine music for the flute. Their journey started with the discovery of some long-forgotten 19th-century Italian flute music which they were determined to bring back to life. Other projects soon followed, with a focus on expanding the repertoire for two flutes and piano.

Revised and edited to the highest standard by Elisabeth Parry (the Italian editions in collaboration with Paul Edmund-Davies), and with piano accompaniments and arrangements by John Alley, these new publications offer musical opportunities for players of all standards. High-quality piano play-along at rehearsal and performance tempi plus duo rehearsal scores for the more advanced works are available to download for each publication.

If you have any queries, please call us on 020 7388 8438 (UK) or +44 20 7388 8438 (International) Product Delivery

We dispatch all sheet music within the UK via Royal Mail unless otherwise requested.

We will endeavour to dispatch your order by return and availability of stock if received before 2.30 pm

Stocked items may not always be immediately available. Click here to find out more.

We use a secure courier service for overseas deliveries outside of the United Kingdom. Delivery charges will vary depending on the location and weight of the goods.