Raúl García starred in Athletic Club’s exhibition of desire, swagger and goals on La Liga week 20, scoring twice at home against Getafe in a 5-1 scoreline to ensure his team’s remarkable momentum continues under manager Marcelino.

Getafe took the lead inside a minute through Marc Cucurella, but Athletic—who paraded its Spanish Super Cup trophy before ruling this fixture—found its vintage best, with García at the forefront.

€10 million ($11.2 million) was the amount Athletic paid Atlético Madrid for García in 2015. Now aged 34, he is enjoying his sixth season at San Mames and remains a unique presence in the squad. In García, Athletic has an auxiliary forward who complements his faster attacking teammates, for whom there are plenty.

If García proves anything, it is that players can increase or maintain their value by adapting their role in a team. For Atlético, the Spaniard was more of a midfield presence. Since his transfer to Athletic, he’s morphed cleverly into a focal point in attack.

Seemingly content in a side making huge steps forward, García still has a lot to offer. All roads lead to another contract extension, which Spanish media questioned him on following the Getafe triumph. While he refused to make anything concrete, a renewal seems increasingly likely.

The Spaniard is thriving in his late career, but one player with many years ahead is 21-year-old Riqui Puig, who came off the bench to score his first league goal for Barcelona in a win at Elche.

Puig had appeared out of favor at Barcelona, despite other midfielders leaving on permanent or loan deals. Now, boss Ronald Koeman can’t ignore his talents.

Developed at Barcelona’s La Masia academy, Puig has the natural flair and soccer education to succeed at Barcelona. His next challenge will be to make the most of any new opportunities, as he did to great effect in Alicante.

There were talking points from the other La Liga fixtures too, not least Youssef En-Nesyri—previously mentioned in this weekly column—who scored a sensational hat-trick as Sevilla made short work of Cádiz.

As for the strikers deployed to drag their teams from relegation trouble, this was a fine week for Osasuna’s Ante Budimir, whose two finishes helped sink Granada.

On loan from second division team Mallorca—who he couldn’t save from the drop last season—Budimir has goalscoring instincts but has lacked the numbers to match his abilities this season.

His form will be vital for Jagoba Arrasate’s team. Osasuna need all the goals it can get or risks swapping places with Budimir’s parent club next year, with Mallorca well-positioned to return to the top flight.