The Harvey Prize

URL: https://harveypz.net.technion.ac.il/conditions-of-the-prize/

OBJECTIVES:

The Harvey Prize is awarded annually in a variety of disciplines within the categories of Science & Technology and Human Health. The Harvey Prize has also been awarded for Contribution to Peace in the Middle East.

Harvey Prize winners are selected by a council of world-renowned scientists and experts in each field through a rigorous selection process. The Harvey Prize Council, comprised of the President of the Technion, one Vice-President, Dean of the Graduate School, two representatives of both the Israel National Academy of Science and the Technion Senate, reviews all nominations. The Council then makes recommendations, which are scrutinized by professional evaluation committees in the respective fields, and then to the Technion Senate Committee for Honorary Degrees and Prizes. Once the Harvey family and the American Technion Society (ATS) have been formally notified of the choice of finalists, the President of the Technion informs the awardees of their impending honor.

Laureates are requested to come to the Technion – Israel Institute of Technology to receive their awards. While in Israel, recipients give lectures and meet with Israeli scientists, academicians, and leaders at Technion and other universities. Material from these lectures is published in a continuing library, the Harvey Prize Papers.

Guidelines for The Harvey Prize Nominations

The Harvey Prize is derived from a donation made by the Lena P. Harvey Foundation to the American Technion Society in September 1971. Two awards of $75,000 each are made annually. The prize winners receive their awards at the Technion.

FUNDING INFORMATION: $75,000

ELIGIBILITY RESTRICTIONS:

Nominees should remain unaware that they are being nominated. Please do not inform a proposed nominee that you are submitting them for consideration.

INTERNAL SELECTION PROCESS:

Interested investigators should submit the following materials via InfoReady Review by DATE: 4/10/2020

Questions outlined in InfoReady Review application;

A letter of recommendation from the appropriate department chair or dean

A brief statement (up to 2 pages) by the candidate describing their scientific achievements and proposed project;

A brief budget outline for the proposed research

Up-to-date CV or biosketch.

A faculty committee drawn from both campuses will review internal proposals and select nominees. Foundation Relations will work with the nominees to develop and submit the institutional nomination letter and applicant materials by 4/10/2020

DEADLINES:

Internal Materials Due: Friday, April 10, 2020

Sponsor Deadline: Friday, May 1, 2020