Description

ELSA Brno is hosting its 14th Summer ELSA Law School and you have a chance to embark on a special journey! This year's edition of SELS Brno on Contract Law is taking place from July 28 - August 4, 2024. The entire event will be held in Brno, the second-biggest Czech city which is nestled in the heart of Europe. Pack your essentials and immerse yourself in a warm atmosphere filled with unforgettable experiences and breathtaking adventures. Be prepared to be captivated by our vibrant city and its friendly people.

SELS Brno will give you the unique opportunity to dive into Contract Law. A realm where rules meet creativity and agreements form the foundation of human interactions. Contracts are often hailed as the cornerstone of law. The main focus of the Academic Programme therefore lies in its interactivity and wide thematic scope. Its main objective is to delve the participants into the art of drafting and negotiating contracts to establish an environment where interests are protected by mutual agreements. Apart from lectures, the program will also consist of an institutional visit, interactive workshops, and competitions.

The people of Brno take great pride in their city’s rich culture and history, which ELSA Brno wants to showcase. From flavours of the local cuisine, corners of the elegant architecture, and picturesque landscapes of Moravia to the buzzing places where crowds meet in Brno - that is what we offer. Join us on the social calendar full of engaging activities to ensure your time with us is unforgettable.

ELSA Brno boasts extensive experience in organising international events. In recent years, we have proudly hosted prestigious gatherings such as the International Strategy Meeting of ELSA and the Regional Round of the John H. Jackson Moot Court Competition, among others. Our dedicated team at ELSA Brno eagerly anticipates the opportunity to create unforgettable memories during our time spent together with you. We are committed to ensuring a remarkable and rewarding experience for all involved.