The Swedish opera scene Dalhalla's founder, Margareta Dellefors, is dead. Margareta was one of my biggest idols and in recent years also a friend. I wrote several publications about her amazing life's work. In the last scientific article, "Innovation in the arts - lessons from the creation of Dalhalla", published in the International Journal of Music Business Research, I developed the meaning of the concept of innovation and used both the etymological background to the concept and the case of Dalhalla. In the etymological study, I was able to derive the rights of the concept of innovation to the playwright Aristophanes, who made theater where society's new inventions and partial craziness were regulated. It was so much fun to have Dalhalla as an example because the concept started within the performing arts. A few words about Dellan's life's work: In collaboration with, among others, the world-famous soprano Birgit Nilsson and the architect Erik Ahnborg, Margareta Dellefors, starting when she was 65, transformed a limestone quarry into a new type of stage for opera and classical music. After the production of the Wagner opera "The Ring" in 1996, the opera magazine Der Neue Merker in Vienna named the Dalhalla the most powerful opera arena in Europe. Brian Kellow, the editor-in-chief of Opera News in New York, wrote that it was amazing to be able to perform opera entirely acoustically in such a large arena. In the report by CNN, attention was paid to the magic of nature, not least the emerald green water and the rock walls. Sweden had thus gained a world-famous destination on its map. What happened next is a complex story and I refer to my publications because it would be far too long a Linkedin post. Instead, I just want to say that I admired Dellefors very much. She was indeed troublesome and stubborn as sin, but God what she accomplished! We need people like her in our society, i.e. we need true innovators who know the art of developing original concepts and making them gain a footing into society. Margareta died on Birgit Nilsson's birthday, 17 May. One of the photos here shows how she sketched out her vision with an alcohol pen on top of a photo of the old limestone quarry, which some wanted to turn into a soup dump instead. One of the pictures shows the timeline I included in one of the books. Check it out! Creating innovative masterpieces is no cakewalk! For those who want to read about her life's work, Dalhalla: Frankelius, Per (2017). Innovation in the Arts – Lessons from the Creation of Dalhalla, International Journal of Music Business Research, Vol. 6, No. 2, pp. 6–40. Frankelius, Per (2011). ”Innovative processes: experience drawn from the creation of Dalhalla”. In Ivo Zander and Mikael Scherdin (Eds.): Art Entrepreneurship, Cheltenham, UK and Northamton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar Publishing, pp. 98-141.