KRISTINA News

Kristina från Duvemåla concert at Dalhalla in 2022

Kristina från Duvemåla, the Benny Andersson and Björn Ulvaeus masterpiece will be performed at Dalhalla on Saturday 13 August 2022. Dalhalla is an internationally established event venue that has been described as one of the most mesmerising and beautiful outdoor arenas in Europe. During the summer months, a wide range of events are arranged which attract close to 100,000 visitors. A spectacular Swedish venue for a Swedish musical classic ‎Dalhalla, or Draggängarna as it was previously called, is the name of a former limestone quarry. In the lead roles of Kristina and Karl Oskar are Viktoria Tocca and John…

‘Kristina från Duvemåla’ opens in Stockholm as ‘Mamma Mia!’ closes on Broadway

On Saturday 12 September 2015, almost 20 years after Kristina från Duvemåla first premiered at Malmö’s Musikteater, the latest and last official production of the Benny Andersson, Björn Ulvaeus and Lars Rudolfsson musical opened at Cirkus theatre on the Stockholm island of Djurgården. Benny, Björn and Lars on stage at the Stockholm premiere of 'Kristina från Duvemåla' We will not ourselves stage ‘Kristina’ again. We have done it six times now and we all feel that is enough - Benny Andersson. The red-carpet event was attended by all three of the show’s creators accompanied by their wives, family members and…

Benny and the cast of ‘Kristina från Duvemåla’ perform at ‘Allsång på Skansen’

Maria Ylipää, Benny & Robert Noack backstage at 'Allsång' - Photo: Niklas Lindman Yesterday evening, Maria Yilpää and Robert Noack, who will portray the roles of Kristina and Karl Oskar in Cirkus Theatre’s forthcoming production of Kristina från Duvemåla, performed two songs from the musical. Du måste finnas and Min lust till dej were previewed at Stockholm’s annual music festival Allsång på Skansen (Sing-along at Skansen). The soloists were accompanied by Benny Andersson on piano and backed by members of the ‘Kristina’ cast and the Sveriges Radios Symfoniorkester (Swedish Radio Symphony Orchestra) conducted by Anders Eljas. Benny accompanied the Kristina cast…

GöteborgsOperan ‘Kristina från Duvemåla’ trailer

Not seen Kristina från Duvemåla before? Or even if you have, this wonderful collection of scenes and songs from the GöteborgsOperan production is sublime: Kristina från Duvemåla from GöteborgsOperan on Vimeo.