Botch Concert Tickets

Experience the hard-hitting sounds of heavy metal with Botch tickets. Botch is a four-piece metal band from Washington. They are known for playing in the mathcore subgenre, an intricate style of heavy metal music that combines elements from punk and art rock. The members of Botch are Dave Verellen, Tim Latona, Dave Knudson and Brian Cook.

Botch was founded in 1993 in Tacoma, Wash. The group spent several years as a garage band only, releasing a handful of demos and EPs before attracting the attention of Hydra Head Records. Botch signed to Hydra Head Records in the late '90s, releasing their albums American Nervoso and We Are the Romans through the label in 1998 and 1999, respectively.

In the years that followed, Botch’s profile continued to grow. They amassed a devoted cult following due to their sophisticated musicianship and tongue-in-cheek lyrics. By the early 2000s, the band had toured with well-known acts like Ink & Dagger, The Dillinger Escape Plan and The Blood Brothers. Though Botch disbanded in 2002, they reunited in 2022 and continue to tour and record today.

Do not miss your chance to see this hard-hitting rock group perform live. Claim your Botch tickets today to secure your seat in front of the stage.

How much are Botch tickets?

The average get-in price can start in the $53 - $70 range. Botch ticket prices can also run higher if you want to get a premium spot or take in a concert festival performance. General admission to the annual Aftershock Festival at Discovery Park in Sacramento, California will typically be offered in the $649 range with VIP options hovering around $2,296.

When do Botch tickets go on sale?

Admission is typically available within days after tour date information is released. We will often have Botch concert tickets available before they go on sale to the public so you can secure a great seat. A pre-sale code is not needed. Buy early and get ready to enjoy the show.

Botch Tour Dates & Concert Schedule

Hard rock/metal shows are among the most widely performed. There will likely be numerous Botch tour dates stopping at cities across the United States and abroad. Popular genre-related events like Aftershock Festival are superior platforms on which the artist can perform live. Other great opportunities may arise on the Botch concert schedule like a show at the Chicago Open Air Festival in Illinois, Las Rageous in Las Vegas, Nevada or Louder Than Life in Louisville, Kentucky. A bevy of hard rock and metal artists often play at large-scale venues and hit big cities like Los Angeles, California. The Forum in Inglewood, California and the Hollywood Bowl has been known to host dynamic shows. Musical possibilities are endless so make sure to check out a live show in a city near you.

The 2024 Botch tour doesn't have any shows left on its schedule.

Songs from the Botch Tour Setlist

Botch's setlist while performing in Seattle , WA at “Showbox” included the following songs:

Showroom Dummies

Swimming the Channel vs. Driving the Chunnel

To Our Friends in the Great White North

Mondrian Was a Liar

John Woo

Japam

Spaim

Framce

Oma

Thank God for Worker Bees

One Twenty Two

Vietmam

Transitions From Persona to Object

Hutton's Great Heat Engine

Encore

Afghamistam

C. Thomas Howell as the "Soul Man"

Saint Matthew Returns to the Womb

Hives

Source: Setlist.fm