Obituary of William N. Williams

() -

Funeral service for William N. Williams, 65 years old, operator of a Towson avenue grocery store and resident of the city for 45 years, who died at 4 o'clock Friday morning at his home, 701 South Twenty-first street, will be conducted from the residence at 2:30 o'clock Saturday afternoon with Rev. Dana Dawson, pastor of the First Methodist church, officiating.

Burial will be in the Catholic cemetery beside the grave of his wife, Mrs. Lillian Rounds Williams, who died Aug. 31. Msgr. Patrick F. Horan, pas- tor of the Church of the Immaculate Conception, will officiate.

The body was returned late Friday afternoon to the family residence from the Putman Funeral home, in charge of arrangements.

Death of Mr. Williams followed an illness of only a few hours. He was apparently in good health Thursday and went on a fishing trip, returning late the same day. He became ill at 10 o'clock Thursday night.

Born Oct. 26, 1866, at Henry, Tenn., Mr. Williams came with the family to Fort Smith 45 years ago. His father, Rev. James Riley Williams, Metodist minister, died in Fort Smith 20 years ago.

Survivors include a brother, D. Williams, Sallisaw, Okla.; a sister-in-law, Mrs. Virgil Suggs, Fort Smith; four nieces, Mrs. Ernest Peninger and Miss Bess Williams, both of Fort Smith, Miss Clara Williams, Norman, Okla., and Mrs. John Godfrey, Little Rock; and a nephew, Charles Williams, Sallisaw.

Mrs. Lillian Williams Dies at Home Monday

Southwest American (Fort Smith, AR) - 1 September 1931

Funeral services for Mrs. Lillian Rounds Williams, 59 years old, wife of William Williams who died Monday at 10:10 o'clock as the result of a period of ill health which extended over a period of three years will be conducted at a requiem mass Wed at the Church of the Immmaculate Conception.

Msgr. Patrick F. Horan will officiate at the service at 8:00 o'clock. Burial will be at the catholic cemetery.

The body was taken late Monday evening from the Putnam Funeral Home to the home of Mr. and Mrs. Williams, 701 South 21st street, to remain until the funeral hours.

The death of Mrs. Williams following a critical illness of two months. Mrs. Williams was a lifelong resident of Fort Smith. She was born February 14, 1872 and was the daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Frank Rounds. She was educated in Fort Smith and was among the first well known business woman of the city. She was employed as an executive in the telephone office. She was married May 24, 1901.