Introducing Patti D’Arbanville: the stunning American actress who has graced the big and small screens for over four decades! Her fame began at age 19 when she starred in her breakout performance as an ingénue opposite legendary Marlon Brando in The Panic in Needle Park (1971).

Now approaching her 70th birthday, she is known as a bold, beauty icon. From touring with rock stars to smashing runway conventions and challenging gender norms, this accomplished star is certainly not done yet!

Learn more about this powerhouse of grace and get ready to be truly inspired by the amazing tale of Patti D'Arbanville – Celebrity of Stage and Screen.

Where Is Patti D’Arbanville From and Where Was Patti D’Arbanville Born

Patti D’Arbanville is an American actress who was born in New York City on May 25, 1951. She has appeared in a variety of films and television series throughout her long career, including Star Trek: Voyager, Melrose Place, Beverly Hills 90210 and many more.

As of June 10th 2023, she continues to act as well as producing and directing projects for the entertainment industry. With her glamorous good looks, warm personality and versatile acting skills Patti D’Arbanville is an inspiration to all aspiring actresses wanting to make it in show business.

From the earliest days of watching "Fame" at the movie theater through to starring in popular TV shows such as "Three’s Company" Patti continues to wow audiences with her talent, beauty and charisma. Now aged 72 she has maintained her ability to bring characters to life which have enabled her success across almost five decades of film history.

A true veteran of Hollywood's silver screen Patti serves both as a reminder of times past while looking forward into the future with anticipation!

How Old is Patti D’Arbanville? Patti D’Arbanville Age and Birthday Info

Patti D'Arbanville is 71 years old, having celebrated her 71st birthday on May 25th, 2021. She was born in New York City and has since become a much-admired actress with a long list of iconic roles that have earned her both awards and critical acclaim.

Now into her 70s, Patti still radiates the same grace and beauty that first made her famous – much to the delight of fans around the world who remain captivated by this living legend! She's known for constantly reinventing herself, recently popping up in new films and TV shows while also exploring a range of creative interests off-screen.

This multitalented icon is an inspiration to us all; showing no signs of slowing down any time soon despite the challenges presented by age. We can’t wait to see what she does next!

What is Patti D’Arbanville’s Zodiac Sign

Patti D’Arbanville is a Gemini. Geminis are passionate, versatile communicators who excel at multitasking and thrive under pressure.

For Patti D’Arbanville, an actor/actress for almost 50 years in both film and theater circles, this couldn't be more true. Her chameleon-like persona allows her to embody any character she chooses and bring them to life on stage or screen with great ease and accuracy.

She has been lauded for her remarkable range of emotions from sorrowful to over-the-top comical - all possible thanks to her unique ability as a Gemini to swiftly adjust styles at the drop of a hat. Her natural charisma also helps her stay connected with fans while still keeping up with the everchanging trends in show business by listening intently and staying abreast on current events in acting circles.

True to form, Patti D’Arbanville's nimble thinking and hearty work ethic have allowed her to remain a bright star in the industry since she began performing back in 1974!

Patti D’Arbanville Net Worth and Earnings

Patti D’Arbanville has a net worth of $2 Million, as of June 10th, 2023. After years of starring in movies and television shows, Patti D'Arbanville continues to carry her style with grace and poise into her well-deserved retirement.

At the age 71, she looks back on a career that defined an era; from her first big break in Flesh & Blood to more recent roles in Law & Order: Criminal Intent and To Tell The Truth - she can be seen as one of Hollywood's true veterans. Her wealth is testament to her acting prowess which brought fame to many moviegoers throughout the years.

For those unaware, it would come as a pleasant surprise when they learn that this grand dame is still leading the way for so many aspiring actors out there who want to taste success like Patti did all those decades ago.

Patti D’Arbanville Nationality and Ethnicity

Patti D'Arbanville is an American actress of French, Irish, English, Swiss-German, German and Norwegian descent. Her unique heritage has had a large influence on her career and has enabled her to portray characters from all walks of life with ease.

She often plays the role of someone not quite like her but with whom she can relate on many levels. She draws from all sides of her family tree to create the multi-dimensional people she brings to life onscreen.

Thanks to her diverse ancestry, Patti D’Arbanville is able to take audiences on a journey of discovery into different cultures and backgrounds that are both familiar and unfamiliar at the same time.