Grey-eyed beauty, Patti D’Arbanville is not just a woman who has managed to stay gorgeous even into her 60s, the former model has built a successful Hollywood acting career spanning over fifty years. She has not only acted in American films, she has also spread her wings to French films. Some of her most notable works include playing the character Bilitis in David Hamilton’s 1977 film of the same title, portraying Lt. Virginia Cooper on the FOX series. New York Undercover and starred in the first New York production of Shanley’s play, Italian-American Reconciliationwhich won her the Drama-Logue Award for Best Actress in 1987. She is also popular for the lead role in the film Andy Warhol. Love (1973).

By taking only a few excerpts from her other works, this American actress also showed us that she was gifted in the field of cinema such as Erotic Salad (1967), The flesh (1968), Big Wednesday (1978), Time after time (1979), Modern Problems (1981), True Genius (1985), The Boys Next Door (1985), The Division (2003), Wild Card (2005), and Morning Glory (2010). Looking for more information on this amazing Hollywood? You are in the right place!

Who is Patti D’Arbanville?

Born in the biggest apple in the world, New York, Patti’s hometown is Manhattan. Patricia D’Arbanville was born on May 25, 1951, her zodiac being Taurus. Her first attempt at acting came when she was just 8 years old – when she got the chance to show off her amazing acting skills in a New York University student film called Tuesday and BlueSilk which details the story of a girl and her cat. Patti completed her high school education at the School for Professional Children in Quintana. At the age of 13, while performing as a disc jockey, she met her breakthrough after her discovery by Andy Warhol who cast her three years later to play a role in his 1968 film titled Flesh. .

Following her standout performance in Flesh, there was no looking back on her journey to stardom. Patti D’Arbanville seized the opportunity by exploiting her stunning figure when she moved to London and landed modeling contracts. After loving modeling, she embraced acting completely, watching movies and TV shows. This period saw her work on the film sets such as L’Amour and Bilitis for which she remains most recognized. Patti has lived in France for ten years and is fluent in French. This irrefutably beautiful actress is as tall as 5 feet 4 inches.

Family – Patti D’Arbanville Husband and Children

This dazzling actress hasn’t been so lucky in love considering how her love life has turned out like a blockbuster. Her modeling days in London saw her establish herself in a romantic relationship with British singer, multi-instrumentalist and philanthropist Cat Stevens. His relationship with Cat was adorable while it lasted, the singer was so in love with the actress that he wrote two hits dedicated to her. Songs titled Lady D’Arbanville and Wild World were released after her breakup, leaving London to explore the supermodel in Paris and New York.

Patti was married three times with her first husband being French actor, Roger Miremont, whom she tied the knot with in 1975. The marriage ended five years later in 1980. The same year she married Steven Curry, but the union fell through as she divorced less than a year later. in 1981. She then dated Mick Jagger and Bud Cort before falling into a romantic relationship with fellow actor, director, producer, singer and songwriter, Don Johnson.

With Don, she had her first child, Jesse WayneJohnson (b. 1982). The relationship lasted for years before falling apart in 1986. She tried her luck again, marrying former New York City firefighter Terry Quinn in 1993. She and their son have three children, Emmelyn (born in 1990), Alexandra. (born in 1991) and Liam (born in 1992). Their relationship fell apart in 2002 but it remains her longest marriage.

His parents and siblings

Little is known about this aspect of the life of the actress. We can only say that her father, George D’Arbanville, worked as a bartender while her mother, Jean (née Scott), is an artist. It is unknown whether Patti has any siblings or not.