MBTI Type: INFJ

Mongkut breaks with former tradition in bringing a British woman to the nation to teach his children and wives English, since he knows the future of his country relies on trade between the English and the people of Siam. He spends a lot of time pondering the future, and arranging for it, ensuring his son has the appropriate education and behavior, finding ways to connect to and better understand Anna through intuitively reading her and asking interesting questions to better form his impression of her (he accuses her of lying and saying she has moved on from her husband, but “you have not, and that is why you cannot accept gift”; he says she is also overly protective of her son for the same reason, fear of losing him). When she gives his son Uncle Tom’s Cabin to read, Mongkut sees instantly the parallels between the slavery issue and the current circumstances in Siam, and says it is not the time for his son to read that book. He also keeps the big picture in mind better than Anna – she tends to react, he carefully thinks in advance, and her swift actions often ruin his intentions (“Now, I cannot intervene as planned, because YOU dared to suggest you can tell king what to do!”). He shows very little Se, except in his willingness to risk his life / endanger himself recklessly to make his general less suspicious of the circumstances (he could have died on that bridge). He always knows the right thing to say, and can figure out how to force people to work together in pleasant ways – such as when he sends “food for one” to Anna when his son refuses to do his “I will not fight in school” punishment on the blackboard. He finds gentle ways to tell Anna she has stepped out of line and is forthcoming with his feelings. He’s aware of the social norms of Siam and unwilling to step too far outside them to get things done; when he fears impending war, he knows he should recruit the British to his side and reaches out to them in friendship, to form a union by catering to their social needs. Mongkut also spends time pondering, internalizing, learning, studying, and getting lost in his head. He is upfront with his feelings about losing his daughter and refuses to let anyone tell him how to mourn. He’s also willing to sacrifice his life if necessary to save his children – and if anything, is too compassionate and kind. He opted to let the general “live with his humiliation” (Fe) rather than kill him.

Enneagram: 3w2

Reputation is everything to him. Mongkut will make allowances (“Just for one night” may the servants stand in his presence) but whenever he feels threatened, he defends his reputation. Anna oversteps her bounds, she tries to tell him what to do, she gives others the impression he does not make his own choices—and when that happens, Mongkut has to play the role he has chosen and be a “severe” king. He will not intervene in certain situations because of appearances (to do so would upset “a powerful family”). His 2 wing is personable, warm, and friendly, eager to help and accommodate others –within reason, and on his terms (he may made Anna wait for her house longer, to keep up 3 appearances).