Overview

The New York City Tourism Foundation is a 501(c)(3) charitable organization that helps sustain New York City’s extraordinary nonprofit arts community through cultural tourism development, audience education and outreach projects. Since its inception, the Foundation has focused on educating domestic and international audiences about the vibrant and diverse cultural community throughout all five boroughs of New York City.

To promote its mission, the Foundation has created a range of programs that educate domestic and international audiences about the vibrant and diverse cultural community throughout New York City. Programs have included NYC Arts on Tour, the Culture Spot monthly campaign and the This is Culture Arts Locator map. The Foundation has also funded programs such as the Borough Cultural Tourism Development Grant Program, which supports audience development for cultural organizations in all five boroughs, as well as scholarships to support the education and development of the next generation of nonprofit cultural professionals.

New York City Tourism Foundation Events

The 2024 Summer Soiree was held on Wednesday, June 5 at Pearl Alley on Pier 17 (89 South Street). For more information, please read our press release. Save the date for the 2024 Foundation Gala: Monday, December 9 at the Plaza Hotel. Details will be announced soon.

The 2023 New York City Tourism Foundation Gala honored the Greater New York Hospital Association; Liz Neumark and Great Performances Catering; and United Airlines. The Lifetime Achievement Award was presented to Jonelle Procope, President and CEO Emerita of the Apollo Theater. For more information about the evening and each of our awards recipients, read our press release.

Borough Cultural Tourism Grant Program

Since 1999, the Foundation has provided nearly $4.5 million in grants across the five boroughs. Grant recipients do everything from supporting music- and art-making workshops uptown at the Sugar Hill Children’s Museum of Art and Storytelling to helping our visitors learn about Historic Richmond Town by promoting the work of the Staten Island Historical Society. The nearly 300 organizations funded since the program's inception benefit directly from your support of the Foundation at the Gala and through other channels. We returned the grants program to full funding in 2023, supporting nearly 60 organizations representing diverse aspects of the City’s cultural fabric during an unprecedented time of continued need.