Sumeet Raghavan has spent over four decades in the industry with quite a few prominent roles in television. Hugely known as Dr. Sahil Sarabhai of Sarabhai vs Sarabhai by the masses, Sumeet is currently playing the role of Rajesh Wagle in Wagle Ki Duniya – Nayi Peedhi Naye Kissey. While the actor has been a part of many TV shows, he has done a few films in Bollywood. Speaking to ETimes TV exclusively, Sumeet shares his experience of being a part of Wagle Ki Duniya, being selective about his projects and also why he didn’t pursue a career in Bollywood.

It has been great so far. I have been working with the channel for a long time and this is my 3rd show with them back-to-back. Right from Sarabhai vs Sarabhai to Badi Door Se Aaye Hai, I have been associated with this production house. Coming back to the show, Wagle Ki Duniya itself is such a big brand, as children, as teenagers, this show has been watched. When I was offered this show, there was no chance to refuse. It was a golden opportunity as Bharti ji (Achrekar) and Anjjann ji (Srivastav) were also a part of this show. They bring in a lot of experience and goodwill. Whenever you say Wagle, theirs are the two faces that audiences connect to. Without them, Wagle Ki Duniya is not complete. Their blessings and company were very important. And the way the story is written and the feedback that we’ve been receiving is terrific. Our TRP has doubled and that says a lot. I thank the audience for the love they’ve showered on us.

The kind of writing that is involved in the show and the kind of stories that we are dealing with is absolutely unique. I wouldn’t say it is a typical comedy show. This show beautifully depicts and plays on those moments, which we tend to ignore in our day-to-day lives or don’t give that much importance. E.g one of the episodes dealt with how to make curd at home. It is a situational comedy. We highlight the non-issues of our lives.

I have been very selective about choosing my projects throughout my career. I have never worked only for money. I have always given importance to the kind of work I do. In the span of my career I want to be remembered for all the roles I have played like Sarabhai vs Sarabhai, Sajan Re Jhoot Mat Bolo, Badi Door Se Aaye Hain and now Wagle. This is the kind of work I have done and how people remember me. Also, there are chances of burning out while working in too many shows. I have done a lesser number of shows and I have liked them.

Honestly speaking, nobody asks me in Bollywood. Let’s be very frank about this. It’s quite shameful but true. You know which face works on TV or films. Struggling to get a role in a film was never in my nature. Whatever happens, happens for good. You should learn to find your own happiness. I never pursued films per se.

I will give 100 % credit to the TV shows for my career. Maintaining the freshness of a character in a show is not only the director or writer’s job but also an actor’s. Maintaining that freshness and being street-smart for a comedy role is important and I feel I do it well. And that’s why people also love the shows I have done.