Bill Gray, a Portland native and former Oregon State All-American and NFL player, died last week at age 88.

Gray, who also worked 30 years as an administrator in Portland Public Schools, had a unique football career. He played for Rose Bowl championship teams with the Beavers and also with USC before playing professionally and snapping the ball to the legendary Sammy Baugh.

After playing at Benson Tech, Gray began his Oregon State career in 1941. As a freshman, though, he could not play in the Beavers’ 20-16 Rose Bowl win over Duke in January of 1942, the year the bowl was moved Pasadena to Durham, N.C., because of the attack on Pearl Harbor.

He lettered with the Beavers in the 1942 season before joining the Marines and being stationed in Los Angeles. There, he was allowed to play for USC, a “Marine Trojan’’ in the V12 program, and was a member of the 1943 USC team that beat the University of Washington.

“Here we were defeating Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan while our service academies held back their football players and won national championships,’’ Gray said in “What it Means to be a Trojan’’ by Steven Travers. “What a morale boost for America, and you have to think the German and Japanese high commands looked at that and just thought, ‘We can’t beat these people,’ which they couldn’t.’’

After serving as a Marine Lieutenant in China, Gray returned to the United States and was asked to play again for USC, but he wanted to return to Oregon State.

In Corvallis, Gray came back and played for coach Lon Stiner in 1946. As an All-American center, Gray led the Beavers to a 7-1-1 record and was then drafted by Washington.

Gray played two seasons in the NFL for Washington, led by Baugh, one of the greatest quarterbacks of all time.

Gray was a member of the Oregon State University Athletic Hall of Fame and also made the list of Ripley’s Believe It or Not Athletes after a game played in Portland in 1941.

Playing for Oregon State at Multnomah Stadium against the Huskies, Gray took the ball off the toe of the Washington kicker and ran it back all the way for the Beavers’ only touchdown in a 9-6 win that made the Rose Bowl a possibility.

Gray also played for the national collegiate all-star team that beat the Chicago Bears at Soldier's Field in 1947. He later earned numerous awards for his work in education, at Cleveland, Marshall, Washington and Roosevelt High Schools and became a member of the Portland Public Schools Athletic Hall of Fame.

He is survived by his wife Adele H. Gray; children Karen Keefer, Lizbeth Gray and Jennifer Arbanas; eight grandchildren and three great-grandchildren.

A celebration of life will be held at 2 p.m. Sunday at First Presbyterian Church, 1200 SW Alder St., Portland, with a reception following in the Church Garden Plaza. In lieu of flowers, contributions may be made in the name of his son, William R. Gray III, Providence Cancer Research Foundation, 4805 NE Glisan St., Portland, OR 97213.