William "Bill" D. Gray, 77, of North Buffalo Township, passed away Friday, October 5, 2018, at his residence.

He was born February 25, 1941, in Kittanning, a son of the late Turney W. and Nettie Jane (Cornman) Gray.

Bill attended the Cornerstone Baptist Bible Church, South Buffalo Township. He was a fencing contractor and owned Foxfire Fencing Company in North Buffalo Township. Prior to owning his fencing business, he worked at Drexel Refractory in Kittanning, owned and operated a Pepsi Cola Distributorship in Mansfield, OH, in the 1960s, and managed Roy Jones Petroleum Company in New Castle in the 1970s.

He was a former road master and supervisor for North Buffalo Township. Bill served on the Board of Directors of the Armstrong County Sewage Authority, and the Board of Governors of the Armstrong County Sports Hall of Fame. He was also a former president of the Armstrong County Supervisors Association, and served on the Rules Committee and Legislative Committee of the PA State Association of township supervisors. He was also a member of the Fort Armstrong Horseman's Association.

Bill was a former coach for little league baseball and the Armstrong Indians football team. He loved his cat, "Bob", horses, and endurance racing. He was proud of winning the groundhog 50-mile race at Pymatuning with "Elverado". He enjoyed vacationing and camping in Gettysburg with his wife, children, and grandchildren. Bill also liked car shows, and was a fan of the Steelers and college football. Most importantly, he was very proud of his children and grandchildren.

Bill is survived by his wife, Sandra F. (Pore) Gray; his children, Kerri Lynn Gray of Elderton and her friend, Bob, Kelli S. (Rich) Burdett of North Buffalo Township, William T. (Cindy) Gray of Chardon, OH, and Erik W. (Kristen) Gray of Delmont; his grandchildren, Jeremy Henderson, Dustin Henderson, Kylie Henderson, Dylan Henderson, Colton Henderson, Kati Burdett, Alyssa Burdett, Andrew Gray, Mariah Gray, Julia Gray, Ethan Gray, Marc Gray, and Lauren Gray; a great-grandchild, Marlee Henderson; a brother, John (Pat) Gray of Georgia; and a sister, Jayne (Rod) Elgin of Columbus, OH.

In addition to his parents, he was preceded in death by two sisters, Beverly Thompson and Connie Gray; and a brother Larry P. Gray.

Friends will be welcomed from 4-8 p.m., Monday, in the Welch Funeral Home, 1032 Fourth Ave., Ford City. Additional visitation will be offered at the Cornerstone Baptist Bible Church, on Tuesday from 10 a.m., until the time of services at 11 a.m., with Rev. Mark Thomas officiating. Interment will be held privately. Memorial contributions may be made to Cornerstone Baptist Bible Church.

To send flowers to the family or plant a tree in memory of William "Bill" D. Gray, please visit our floral store.