Discussion

Some of the forms presented in Table 1 are claimed by Dakin and Wichmann (Reference Dakin and Wichmann2000) to have in fact been native to Nawa and to have been borrowed into the languages that we consider their sources. We discuss those cases in which their data are more or less accurate to help make the inference methods explicit. In no case is there a cogent case for the borrowing having been from Nawa; in most, there is a strong case that the borrowing was into Nawa.

The direction of borrowing of some words can be determined because the borrowed form shows sounds that could not have descended into the language from native resources. For example, there is a proto-Yuta-Nawan diminutive suffix *tsi, but this could not be the source of proto-Nawan *-tzi(:)n, because */tzi/ regularly yields /chi/ in Nawa, and {-ch} is in fact attested (frequently but not productively) as a diminutive suffix on Nawa nouns.

Contrastive phonology plays a major role in determining the direction of borrowing: the phonetics of the word in the source language determines the way the word will be pronounced in the borrowing language. For example, glottalized consonants in Mayan languages are borrowed as unglottalized consonants in languages that lack phonetically glottalized consonants. Thus, a form such as Wasteko net'etx, with glottalized t', is predictably borrowed into Nawa as netech. The reverse direction of borrowing is not feasible, because Mayans do not interpret Nawa plain consonants as glottalized; there is not a single plausible loan-word from Nawa into any Mayan language in which a Nawa plain consonant has been borrowed as a glottalized consonant. Similarly, the q of Totonako saqat would be borrowed into Nawa as k, yielding saka-tl; because Nawa did not have [q] as an allophone of /k/, Nawa saka-tl cannot have been the source of the Totonako word (contrary to Dakin and Wichmann Reference Dakin and Wichmann2000:68).

Wichmann (Reference Wichmann, Blench and Spence1998) and others make the mistake of supposing that (or operating as though) phonemic inventories rather than phonetic interpretation are a reliable basis for establishing directionality. This is illustrated by the example of proto-Mije-Sokean *tu(7)nuk and Nawa to:tol-in. The two can be compared after undoing the effects of Nawa reduplication, with Mije-Sokean n corresponding to Nawa l. Because Mije-Sokean languages have n but not l in native roots in ordinary vocabulary, Wichmann argues that the directionality of the borrowing is from the language that has /l/ (Nawa) to the language that lacks /l/ (Mije-Sokean). On the surface, this parallels the earlier discussion of glottalized versus plain consonants in Mayan versus Nawa. However, it is the phonetic realization of Mije-Sokean n that is at issue, and in many languages that lack phonemic /l/, phonemic /n/ may have a range of pronunciations, including some that more closely approximate the [l] than the [n] of languages in which these are phonemically distinct. Since it is the phonetics of the source sound that is at issue, the n:l correspondence does not provide evidence that the borrowing was from Nawa rather than into Nawa. There is further evidence in other cases involving other languages that Mije-Sokean /n/ was occasionally perceived as [l].

Totonako puuchuut ‘silkcotton tree’ compares closely with proto-Nawa *po:cho:-tl. The vowel difference is not revealing, because both Totonako and Nawa have only one rounded vowel. Totonako u would be borrowed into Nawa as o, and Nawa o would be borrowed into Totonako as u. The linguistic distributions of the words are similar: one is found in Totonako but not in Tepewa and one in Nawa but not in other Yuta-Nawan languages. The internal diversity of Totonako and Nawa are comparable. There is little doubt that borrowing is involved, since the meaning is so narrow, and the agreement in meaning is precise.

To determine the direction of borrowing of this word, the most telling feature is the p that begins it. Any non-verb in Nawa with initial p is a strong candidate for a borrowing, because p regularly disappears in word-initial position, except in some words that habitually occur with prefixes so that the p is not usually initial. Dakin and Wichmann (Reference Dakin and Wichmann2000:59b) attempt to support a Nawa origin by claiming that it is derived from a Nawa verb meaning ‘to card (cotton)’. The verb in question is pochi:na (for ‘to card [cotton]’; Dakin and Wichmann mistakenly give po:chewa, which in fact means ‘to get smoky’). There is no variation in vowel length of a Nawa morpheme when it occurs in different words, so pochi- is not plausibly an etymological source of po:cho:-tl within Nawa. Finally, this direction of borrowing makes sense. Nawas came from an area in which the silkcotton does not grow and only got a word for it on their arrival. Totonakos live in an area where silkcottons are found.

One feature of this word that might suggest borrowing from Nawa is the seeming correspondence of final t in Totonako to final tl in Nawa. Totonako does not allow tl at the end of words, so had it been borrowed from Nawa, the final t of puuchuut is expected. Our account of the borrowing, from Totonako to Nawa, requires that the final t must have been reanalyzed in Nawa. This sort of reanalysis is not uncommon in language-contact situations.

The Nawa borrowing of Totonaka puuchuut illustrates a general regularity that words for local plants, when not expressed by neologisms created out of native resources, are adopted by newcomers to an area from people already living there unless they have previously wiped out the indigenous inhabitants. Dakin and Wichmann cite their misanalyzed example of po:cho:-tl as part of a rationale for their “perception that Nahuatl has received very few loans from other languages but has resorted to resources of the language to produce new descriptive terms.” This is highly unusual as a pervasive pattern in the case of names for new plants, and it is especially unusual that indigenous people would systematically adopt newcomers' invented names for indigenous plants. Methodologically, it is not cogent to build systematically on an “impression” that is so much at variance with established trends. Such a claim requires compelling evidence of several unproblematic and unambiguous borrowings of native Nawa words, derived from Yuta-Nawan sources, for plants that they encountered in Mesoamerica, to provide support for such a borrowing in any ambiguous instance.

Several of the plant names listed in Table 1 show clear evidence that they are not native to Nawa—for example, the initial p of pa(:)wa(-tl) ‘avocado species’ is suggestive of borrowing. The Wasteko term for ‘breadnut’ shows a Wasteko innovation, the shift of proto-Mayan *7ojx to Wasteko 7ojox; this shifted form is the basis for the Nawa loan. The word itself is no longer widely distributed within Nawa. However, it survives in place names from several parts of Mexico—for example, Ojitipa = ohoxih-ti=pan in San Luís Potosí and Ojitlán = ohoxih-tla:n in Oaxaca; it is also reflected by the word ujushte ‘breadnut’ in the local Spanish of southeastern Chiapas and Guatemala—a borrowing from Nawa ohox-tli, a variant of ohoxih-tli. The broad distribution of the word in Nawa shows that it was borrowed by Nawa, probably from Wastekan, at an early stage in its history. The borrowing between Wastekan and Nawa could not have gone the other way. The Mayan form in languages with a contrast between h and j have j in this word; had the word been borrowed from Nawa into Mayan, these languages would show h rather than j. (For conformity with Spanish orthograhy, in Mayan languages without a contrast between h and j, the sound is spelled as j even when, as in Wasteko 7ojox, it is pronounced as [h].) In addition, some Mayan languages develop two syllables, with a repeated vowel, in words whose original shape was *CVjC, while original *CVjVC does not reduce to a single syllable. In summary, proto-Nawa ohox-tli would have been borrowed into Mayan languages as 7ohox, with two syllables and with h rather than j, a contrast not found in Nawa. In terms of the antiquity of the forms, it is widely distributed within Mayan, a very diverse language family. In contrast, ohox(ih)-tli is found only in Nawa, with no other Yuta-Nawan attestation. Nawa is a weakly differentiated language group.

Proto-Nawa wahkal-li ‘crate; gourd bowl’, which Kaufman (Reference Kaufman1994–Reference Kaufman2004) cites as a borrowing from Totonako wajkat, is cited by Dakin and Wichmann (Reference Dakin and Wichmann2000:69a) as, instead, a borrowing from Nawa into Totonako. Their evidence is the incorrect claim that it can be analyzed etymologically as consisting of a putative Nawa root wah meaning ‘plank’ + kal, glossed as ‘box’ (really ‘house’ and, by extension, perhaps ‘container’); but ‘plank’ is not wah but wapal-li.

The Nawa word xikal-li ‘gourd dipper’ has been borrowed into several individual Mesoamerican languages (though not into any ancient ancestral languages) and into Spanish. Contrary to Dakin and Wichmann (Reference Dakin and Wichmann2000:69a), it is not a native Nawa term but a borrowing from a Sapotekan language. For proto-Sapotekan, a root *eka7 can be reconstructed. This root occurs with one of two different classifiers: with *xi prefixed, as *xika7, it refers to a gourd dipper or cup/bowl; with *k prefixed, as *keka7, it refers to a bottle-gourd. This shows that *xika7 ‘gourd dipper’ is a native Sapotekan word for a gourd dipper. This form cannot have arisen by reanalysis of an existing Nawa word xikal-li, since when it appears with the classifier *k, the underlying vowel surfaces as e rather than i. The word is ancient in Sapotekan, which is far more diverse than Nawa, and is found in both branches of the family. Loan-word data correlated with archaeological data, presented later, show that Chatino and Sapoteko separated no later than about 200 b.c.

One anomaly in this borrowing is that, in xikal-li, Nawa has innovated a final l where perhaps final h (“saltillo”), corresponding to Sapotekan *7, might be expected, yielding xikal-li instead of xikah-tli. Possibly, l was substituted for h because most Nawa nouns with a CVCVC shape end in l, x, tz, or ch. Such a consideration may also account for the stem-final l of Nawa wahkal-li borrowed from Totonako wajkat. No more than two nouns (nehmat- ‘right hand’, i:lamat- ‘old woman’) end in t in Nawa, and in both cases some forms of Nawa drop the stem-final t or change it to h.

A more complex example is Totonako saqat ∽ seqet ‘grass’, which compares closely with proto-Nawa * saka-tl ‘grass’. If this is a borrowing rather than a chance resemblance, then the relevant form to compare is saqat, since the seqet variant disagrees with *saka-tl in the vowel quality. There are two differences in the pronunciations involved. Totonako distinguishes between *k and *q in words with no mid vowels, so Nawa saka-tl would have been borrowed into Totonako as sakat, not saqat. This excludes Nawa as a possible source for the Totonako word. The only viable external source of the q in this word is Mijean *sokot, since Mije-Sokean *k is borrowed into Totonako as q in words with e or o. However, apart from this item, the vowel variation found in saqat~ seqet, is found only in native Totonako words. This variation is therefore evidence that the word is in fact native to Totonakan and suggests that the similarity with Mijean is due to chance rather than to borrowing, which is also suggested by the unexplained discrepancy in vowels. In contrast, there is no evidence for any particular antiquity of the form in Nawa, as there is no convincing related form in any other Yuta-Nawan language. Finally, the final t of the Totonako form was reshaped to -tl on borrowing, as in the case of po:cho:-tl.

All of these borrowings occurred by the proto-Nawa stage, since they are widespread in the Nawa group and can be reconstructed to proto-Nawa, and most presumably arose earlier, since proto-Nawa is the earliest we can go on purely distributional grounds. However, some are demonstrably earlier than proto-Nawa, because they underwent changes that took place in pre-Nawa.

Sonoran and Yuta-Nawan *u shifted to in Kora, Wichol, and pre-Nawa. The vowel is a high back unrounded vowel, structurally but not phonetically equivalent to u. By proto-Nawa times, this * had shifted to i, except in a few words in Central Nawa where it shifted to e. An example is the word for ‘ant’. Two variants can be reconstructed for Mije-Sokean, proto-Sokean *jaj=tzuku(7) and proto-Mijean *tzuku(n). The first element, jaj, in the Sokean compound recalls Mayan (proto-Mayan *ha7h) words meaning ‘fly’ or ‘grub’, so this is probably its relevance here. The element *tzuku(7) ~ *tzukun goes back to proto-Mije-Sokean. Proto-Nawa *tzi:ka- ‘ant’ must have arisen from a pre-Nawa *tz :ka or earlier *tzu:ka, since proto-Yuta-Nawan *tsi shifts to chi in Nawa. We have no evidence concerning the difference in the final vowels of pre-Nawa *tz :ka and Mije-Sokean * tzuku(C). The Mije-Sokean term was perhaps more plausibly *tzuku or *tzuku7 than the Mije variant *tzukun.

Similarly, proto-Southern Yuta-Nawan *t became tl before *a; afterward, some instances of Southern Yuta-Nawan short *a became e. Both of these changes occurred before the proto-Nawa stage. These changes occurred after Sokean *pata7 ‘mat’ was borrowed by Nawa, since this word yields proto-Nawa *petla-tl. These pre-Nawa loans from Mije-Sokean suggest that the influence of the Mije-Sokean elite language of the Basin of Mexico spread as far north as, say, Zacatecas by, say, the year a.d. 200. Another possible scenario might have Nawas arriving in the Basin of Mexico by circa a.d. 200 to have direct contact with Mije-Sokean elites in and around Teotihuacan (see “Culture-Historical Inferences”), but not yet to constitute an important presence in this new dwelling place.

General Features of Borrowings into and out of Nawa

Before evaluating Dakin and Wichmann's specific arguments, they can be framed in the context of what is known about lexical diffusion in Mesoamerica more generally. Our view that Nawa kakawa-tl is a borrowing from Mije-Sokean, and not into it, is concordant with a number of facts about linguistic diffusion in Mesoamerica that are set forth in the previous section, while the contrary view is not consistent with what is otherwise known about diffusion from Nawa. Setting aside the contested case of the word for cacao, four empirical observations can be made about cleanly established borrowings between Nawa and other Mesoamerican languages:

(1) Nawa in general is heavily influenced by Mije-Sokean and Totonakan, and to a lesser degree by Wastekan in its pre-Nawa stage (see “Demonstrating Borrowing”). In contrast, neither Mije-Sokean in general nor Totonakan in general is much influenced by Nawa. Even Wasteko (a single language rather than a family of languages), which has had Mesoamericanized Nawa as a neighbor since at least a.d. 900, has relatively few lexical borrowings from Nawa. This makes Nawa look like a relative newcomer to Mesoamerica, not in a position to provide very early loans into languages throughout Mesoamerica.

(2) More specifically, proto-Nawan—the common ancestor of all forms of Nawa—shows substantial borrowing from Mije-Sokean languages in both vocabulary and grammar.

(3) Setting aside the contested case of the word for cacao, proto-Mije-Sokean does not show a single plausible instance of a lexical borrowing from Nawa or Yuta-Nawan, and neither does proto-Mijean or proto-Sokean or any other genetic subgroup of Mijean or Sokean. (Individual Mije-Sokean languages have borrowed some Nawa lexical material.)

(4) Setting aside the contested case of *kakawa, there is no demonstrated instance of a Nawa loan into any Mesoamerican language that clearly predates the Late Classic period. In particular, no loans from Nawa have undergone sound changes characteristic of any genetic group of languages. Rather, Nawa loans in Mesoamerican languages reflect Nawa phonology as we know it from the sixteenth century and therefore cannot go back earlier than about a.d. 1000.

There are proposed counterexamples to these claims, mostly by Dakin, but none is cogent. (See “Demonstrating Borrowing”, earlier, for refutations of a sample of such proposals.)

Given points (2)–(4), compelling evidence is required to make a case for a word of Nawa origin having diffused into Mesoamerican languages at a substantially earlier time period, especially one that was borrowed as widely as *kakawa.

There are two other general problems with the claim of widespread early borrowing of *kakawa from Nawa.

(5) Nawa nouns are almost always borrowed in their unpossessed form and reflect the absolute suffix -tl~-tli~-li when this suffix is present in the Nawa model (Kaufman Reference Kaufman2000–2007). In Mayan and Mije-Sokean languages in particular, then, one would expect to find something like kakawat*, rather than the attested kakaw, if this word were indeed a borrowing from Nawa. By way of illustration, we first discuss a set of borrowings into a single language, and then we discuss borrowings that are widespread in a particular language family.

Table 3 presents all of the Nawa loans in Kaufman's data on Soteapan Gulf Sokean (Kaufman and Himes Reference Kaufman and Himes1993–2005), which can serve as a typical instance of how the Nawa absolute suffixes—in particular, -tl(i)—appear in loans into other languages. In all 15 cases where the Nawa source has a word-final -tl or -tli, Soteapan Gulf Sokean has a straightforward reflex of it. In five cases, Soteapan Gulf Sokean has a reflex of -tl, -tli, or -li where present-day Gulf Nawa lacks the suffix (taanajti, kukujti, lupujti, manteeka7t, xik7ipiili). These borrowings into Soteapan Gulf Sokean presumably reflect an earlier stage of Gulf Nawa, though one that postdates the arrival of Spanish speakers.

There are 13 nouns of Nawa origin that have a fairly wide spread in Mayan languages. In each case, some languages are likely to have adopted the word directly from Nawa, while others probably received it from another Mayan language.

Three of these—#mis ~ #mistuun ‘cat’, #masa:t ‘deer’, and #xunakat ‘onion’—date from after the arrival of the Spanish.

Eight are found in the Guatemala highlands and bear the traits of Gulf Nawa or Pipil: #koht ‘eagle’, #to:ch(in) ‘armadillo’, #karat ‘frog’, #chikiwit ‘basket’, #no:chti7 ‘prickly pear’, #matzahti7 ‘pineapple’, #nakatamal ‘meat tamale’, #nawal ‘shape-shifter’. Whatever absolute suffix was present in Gulf Nawa is also present in the Mayan borrowing. Gulf Nawa /kohti/ ‘eagle’ has been shortened to make it look more Mayan.

Two Nawa loans into Mayan present interesting problems:

Nawa tena:mitl ‘fortified place’ (possessed theme -tena:n) appears in Mayan languages of Huehuetenango and in Wasteko as #tena:m ‘fenced-off area, town’. These forms seem to lack the Nawa absolute suffix. However, the possessed form of tena:mitl is Poss-tena:n, which ends in /n/, not /m/, so the possessed form was not the basis of the borrowing. It is plausible that, if the form #tena:m is borrowed directly from Nawa tena:mitl, it has been shortened by Mayans, and that is why the /m/ was kept. K'ichee7an languages borrow tena:mitl as #tina:mit ‘town’, and the absolute suffix is preserved. However, there is room for doubt as to whether the word is of ultimate Nawa origin, since it is found in only some varieties of Nawa and is not analyzable. While one may start by hypothesizing that the segment /te-/ corresponds to the root {te} ‘stone’, the sequence /-na:m(i)/ is not a known Nawa morpheme. Thus, the word may have originated outside Nawa. While there can be no doubt that #tina:mit comes from Nawa, the form #tena:m is only possibly of Nawa origin, not definitely so.

The last item constitutes an exception to the norm that nouns of Nawa origin are borrowed with a reflex of the Nawa absolute suffix, when one is in fact present in the Nawa original. The word #xa:n ‘adobe brick, wall’ occurs so widely in Mayan that a form *xa:n would be reconstructed for proto-Mayan if the Nawa word xa:mitl, possessed-xa:n ‘adobe’ were not attested. The Mayan word definitely seems to reflect the possessed form of the Nawa noun. It is irrelevant that Nawa xa:mitl is in turn borrowed—from Mije-Sokean. The motive for borrowing ‘adobe’ in its possessed form is not obvious.

Two other proposed borrowings, from Nawa into Mayan, are not demonstrably early loans from Nawa. One is not demonstrably a loan, and one is demonstrably not early.

One word, *ku:m ‘pot’, is reconstructible for proto-Yukatekan, which broke up circa a.d. 1000. This word is likely to share a common history with Nawa ko:mi-tl ‘pot, water jar’. This could conceivably be by borrowing from Nawa, but the word has no Sonoran etymology, and it is equally plausible that it entered both languages from another source. It may be entertained that the word entered Nawa from an ancestor of proto-Yukatekan, but it is not clear where the contact could have occurred that would make this a realistic option.

On the basis of Ch'ol chikib' and Ch'orti7 chiki7, Kaufman and Norman (Reference Kaufman, Norman, Justeson and Campbell1984:118) reconstructed *chiki7 to proto-Ch'olan because it was formally possible to do so. As a historical statement, however, this was misleading in that the form chiki7 reflects a contraction from Nawa chikiwi-tl that is otherwise known only in Gulf Nawa, which probably did not become distinct from other forms of Nawa before a.d. 800, whereas epigraphic evidence and glottochronology both put the breakup of Ch'olan before that date. The Ch'ol and Ch'orti7 forms therefore represent independent borrowings from some kind of Gulf Nawa.

In summary, out of ten pre-Columbian borrowings from Nawa in Mayan languages, only one was borrowed without the absolutive suffix. These data bear on generalizations about tendencies in the process of borrowing Nawa nouns (see “Evidence that *kakaw(a) was not Borrowed from Nawa …”, below).

(6) Cacao does not grow anywhere near the Basin of Mexico, nor farther north in areas from which Nawas entered Mesoamerica. It is completely plausible that Nawa would have borrowed its word for cacao from a language localized in the area in which it grows. This is in fact the norm when newcomers encounter unfamiliar plants and animals, whenever they do not devise neologisms using native resources. Nawa was strongly affected by one or more Mije-Sokean languages in its vocabulary, its morphology, and its syntax. Apart from Mije-Sokean, early forms of Nawa show substantial influence only from Wasteko and Totonakan, and the word kakaw of Wasteko and Totonakan, if borrowed into Nawa, would have been expected to yield kakaw-tli rather than kakawa-tl. On the face of it, Mije-Sokean is the only plausible source for Nawa kakawatl.

Given these characteristics of lexical diffusion from Nawa, any proposal for a widespread lexical borrowing from Nawa in the Preclassic or Early Classic has to be approached with skepticism and requires compelling linguistic evidence to be accepted. We show below (“Refuting the arguments …”) that the evidence presented by Dakin and Wichmann for a Nawa origin of the word for cacao does not meet such a standard. Instead, their proposed Yuta-Nawan etymology is speculative, as is their attempt to deal with the absence of the Nawa absolute suffix—the only one of the linguistic issues that they address—and the supporting arguments for each of these proposals are invalid. In addition, nothing in the evidence provided by Dakin and Wichmann undermines the arguments that Mije-Sokean *kakaw(a) was the source of the word for cacao.

Dakin and Wichmann's proposed scenario for the diffusion of kakawa from Nawa involves the hypothesis that the word for cacao was diffused by Nawa-speaking Teotihuacanos who controlled the Mesoamerican trade in cacao. But Teotihuacan had a massive impact on other Mesoamerican societies. This level of impact would have been accompanied by a substantial impact on at least the vocabularies of many other Mesoamerican languages. Their historical scenario therefore requires a substantial body of early Nawa loans into Mayan, Xincan, Sapoteko, Wastekan, and probably Tarasko and Matlatzinkan languages. So substantial an early impact would be detectable in a large number of obvious and unproblematic candidates for early borrowings.

Dakin and Wichmann's proposal for the diffusion of kakawa from Nawa in association with Teotihuacan's interactions with other Mesoamerican societies raises a further chronological problem. They argue (Dakin and Wichmann Reference Dakin and Wichmann2000:57) that internal evidence within Mije-Sokean shows that “a word kakawa or one close to that in form was borrowed into the [Mije-Sokean] linguistic family, but at a time when it was still at an early stage of differentation.”

The breakup of Mije-Sokean probably took place between about 1200 and 800 b.c. (1) Elsewhere (Kaufman Reference Kaufman2000–2007; Kaufman and Justeson Reference Kaufman, Justeson, Arnold and Pool2007), we provide evidence that the source of Mije-Sokean loans in central Mexican languages was a northern branch of Mije-Sokean that was in the Basin of Mexico. The loans reflect a vocabulary that was not differentiated between Mijean and Sokean, so the speakers of this language probably arrived before or around the time of the breakup of Mije-Sokean proper. Archaeologically, their arrival can be dated to 1200 b.c. or earlier. (2) This constraint agrees with the glottochronological estimate of 1000 b.c. for the breakup of Mije-Sokean. (3) The previous section shows that a body of Sokean loans, including names of four animals associated with day names, entered pre-Sapoteko from Sokean, so Mijean and Sokean must have been well differentiated at that time. One of these borrowings can be dated to before 200 b.c. (4) Epi-Olmec data from the La Mojarra stela (a.d. 157) and the Tuxtla Statuette (a.d. 162) show only two lexical retentions from proto-Mije-Sokean that are now associated with Mijean but 37 words that are now found only in Sokean. This much differentiation is likely to require at least 1,000 years to develop. Certainly, it does not occur within as few as 500 years of differentiation, after which dialects are always close enough to be inter-intelligible. The Epi-Olmec data therefore put the early differentiation of Mije-Sokean well before 300 b.c., and probably back to 800 b.c. or earlier.

Even the latest of these estimates is far too early for the diffusion of anything from Teotihuacan, which was not established until around 150 b.c., and whose non-local impact did not begin until the second century a.d. It is even further out of line with the known timing of lexical diffusion from Nawa.

In the remainder of this paper we show that, contrary to Dakin and Wichmann, the Mije-Sokean data are consistent with a Mije-Sokean origin for kakawa and that their alternative Yuta-Nawan origin in a reduplicated form, descending from a word for egg, is impossible.

The Timing of the Origin of *chikol=a:-tl

A further wrinkle is that neither form of the Nawa word is even attested from the first decades of the Spanish colonization. It is not found in Alonso de Molina's Vocabulario en Lengua Castellana y Mexicana and Vocabulario en Lengua Mexicana y Castellana (neither in the 1551 edition nor in the expanded 1571 edition) or Bernardino de Sahagún's Historia general de las Cosas de Nueva España (1577). Given the lateness of its first citations, reasonable doubt may be entertained as to whether the Nawa forms chikola:tl and/or chokola:tl even existed in pre-Columbian times. Indeed, Corominas [1980–1983:2:385–386] and many other students of the history of Spanish do not believe that Nawa chokola:tl existed in the pre-contact period.

The drink made from cacao certainly existed in pre-Columbian times, but, among other things, it may simply have been called by the name of its principal ingredient. In Zinacantán Tzotzil, /kokow/ refers both to the seed and the drink (Laughlin Reference Laughlin1975:176). This is probably true in other forms of Tzotzil and in Tzeltal, in which /kokow/ (Tzotzil) or /kakaw/ (Tzeltal) is translated both as ‘cacao’ and ‘chocolate’. In Q'anjob'al of Santa Eulalia, /kakaw/ means both ‘cacao’ and ‘chocolate’ (Mateo-Toledo, personal communication 2005).

In Nawa itself, the word for cacao could also be used to name drinks that were made from it. In sixteenth-century Nawa, Sahagún (Reference Sahagún and Sullivan1558–1561, 1577) refers to the drink made from cacao as /kakawa-tl/ (“cacao”) (see Anderson and Dibble Reference Anderson and Dibble1951–Reference Anderson and Dibble1982:8.39–40, 11.119-120; Sullivan and Stiles 1988:202). Sahagún (Reference Sahagún and Sullivan1558–Reference Sahagún and Sullivan1561) has the following passage in a section dealing with feasting by nobles:

Sahagún Reference Sahagún, Anderson and Dibble1577 also refers to <quauhnecujo cacaoatl> /kwaw=nekw.yoh kakawa-tl/ ‘honeyed cacao’, <xochiocacaoatl> /xo:chi.yoh kakawa-tl/ ‘flowered cacao’, <chichiltic cacaoatl> /chi:.chi:l.ti.k kakawa-tl/ ‘red cacao’, <vitztecolcacaoatl> /witz=tekol=kakawa-tl/ ‘thorn-charcoal cacao’, <xochipalcacaoatl> /xo:chi=pa.l=kakawa-tl/ ‘flower-painted (i.e. pink or orange-colored) cacao’, <tiltic cacaoatl> [sic] /tli:l.ti.k kakawa-tl/ ‘black cacao’, and <itztac cacaoatl> [sic] /ista:-k kakawa-tl/ ‘white cacao’—all referring to kinds of chocolate (the drink), not kinds of cacao. Molina (Reference Molina1571:Nawa-to-Spanish section 10v, column b) has <cacauaatl> /kakawa=a:-tl/ (“cacao water”) ‘beuida de cacao’ (cited also in Siméon 1885:56b). Molina (Reference Molina1571:161a) lists <xochiayo cacauatl> /xo:chi=a:.yoh kakawa-tl/ (“flowerwater-having cacao”) ‘beuida de cacao con ciertas flores secas y molidas’ (drink made from cacao with certain dried ground up flowers). Molina (Reference Molina1571:Spanish-to-Nawa section 22r, column a) lists ‘cacao, beuida’, meaning by this “cacao—a drink”, “the drink called cacao”, showing that for Molina, chocolate was called simply cacao in his use of Spanish. On page 19r of the Spanish-to-Nawa section, Molina lists ‘beuida de cacao con mayz’ (drink made from cacao with maize): <cacaua atl> /kakawa=a:-tl/ (“cacao water”); ‘beuida de cacao con axi’ (drink made from cacao with chilli pepper): <chillo cacauatl, chilcacauatl> /chi:l.loh kakawa-tl/ (“peppery cacao”), /chi:l=kakawa-tl/ (“pepper cacao'); ‘beuida de cacao ſſolo’ (drink made from cacao alone): <atlanelollo cacauatl> /ah tla-nelo:.l.loh kakawa-tl/ (“unmixed cacao”). All these are cited as well in Molina's 1551 edition (right-hand column on page 34), which also cites ‘beuida de cacao compueſta con flores’ (drink made from cacao put together with flowers): <xochiayo cacauatl >, <xochayo cacauatl> /xo:ch(i)=a:.yoh kakawa-tl/ (“flower-watery cacao”)].

Bierhorst (Reference Bierhorst1985:54) cites <cacahuaoctli> /kakawa=ok-tli/ (“cacao pulque”) from the Cantares Mexicanos, which date from circa 1582 and lack the word <chocolatl> or <chicolatl > . The word /kakawa=oktli/ is probably the same as the /ok.yoh kakawa-tl/ mentioned in Sahagún (Reference Sahagún and Sullivan1558–Reference Sahagún and Sullivan1561).

In the Nawa poems Romances de los Señores de la Nueva España (from 1582) there are two instances of kakawatl naming the drink chocolate:

[a] <ma xocon cua in cacahuatl, in cacahuaxochitl: ma ya on ihua in>

ma: xo-k-on-kwa in kakawa-tl, in kakawa=xo:chi-tl; ma: ya on-i:-wa in

‘may you eat the cacao, the cacao flower; may it already be drunk’

[poem 5, lines 13-15 (Garibay Reference Garibay Kintana1993:9]

[b] <o ya noconi izquicacahuatl xochitl>

o ya no-k-on-i iski=kakawa-tl xo:chi-tl

‘oh, already I drank toasted cacao, the flower’

[poem 55, line 30];

In the Spanish document Relación de Juan Bautista de Pomar (Tezcoco, 1582) (Garibay 1993:193), the following passage occurs:

Su bebida de los poderosos era cacao

(The drink of the powerful was cacao).

Fray Diego Durán's Historia de las Indias de Nueva España and his Islas de la Tierra Firme, written before his death in 1586, do not use the word chocolate, but they do use the word cacao 16 times in reference to the drink and 27 times for the seeds of or for ground-up cacao (Durán Reference Durán and Kintana1965).

Hernando Ruiz de Alarcón's 1629 Treatise on the Heathen Superstitions that Today Live among the Indians Native to this New Spain (cf. Andrews and Hassig Reference Andrews and Hassig1984:132; Coe and Whittaker Reference Coe and Whittaker1982:188), which reports on magical practices by Nawa speakers in Guerrero, refers to the drink made from cacao by the Spanish word cacao. The kind of Nawa found in Ruiz de Alarcón is from the same general dialect group as the Nawa of the Basin of Mexico, which can be called Central Nawa.

The foregoing is evidence suggesting that, in the Nawa of the Basin of Mexico—and perhaps in Central Nawa generally—no word chikola:tl or chokola:tl existed in the sixteenth century or before and that drinks made from cacao were referred to as kakawatl or by expressions that included it. The words chikola:tl and chokola:tl may have arisen in a peripheral type of Nawa, at an undeterminable date, and only spread later to Central Nawa.

The first known use of the Nawa word chokola:tl is cited in Corominas (Reference Corominas1980–1983:2.385–386) from Francisco Hernández (Reference Hernández1959 [1577]) as <chocollatl>. In Chapter lxxxvii (“cacahoaquáhuitl árbol del cacao”), where Hernández discusses cacao and its varieties (Hernández Reference Hernández1959 [1577]:2:303–305), a good deal of information is presented. On page 304, he names four varieties of what he considers to be the same basic plant, which must be Theobroma cacao: <quauhcacahoatl> /kwaw=kakawa-tl/ “tree cacao”, <mecacacahoatl> /meka=kakawa-tl/ “vine cacao”, <xochicacahoatl> /xo:chi=kakawa-tl/ “flower cacao”, and <tlalcacahoatl> /tla:l=kakawa-tl/ “earth cacao” (not the homophonous ‘peanut’, discussed later). On pages 304–305, he considers adding <quauhpatlachtli> /kwaw=patlach-tli/ “broad/flat tree” to this group. Sahagún Reference Sahagún, Anderson and Dibble1577 distinguishes three types of cacao by the color of the fruits (Anderson and Dibble 1951–1982:8:39). Hernández (Reference Hernández1959 [1577]:2:304 says that “hacen tambien de ella una bebida” (they also make a drink from it [cacao]), but he goes on to describe four different drinks made with maize (maize dough, as Clavijero's description makes clear) and <cacahoatl> /kakawa-tl/, by which term he specifically refers to the kernel:

1. <atextli> /a:=tex-tli/ (“water flour”) ‘pasta aguada’: ground <cacáhoatl> mixed with ‘grano indio’ (maize)—for refreshment and nourishment; also as an aphrodisiac;

2. [unnamed]: made from kernels of <cacahoapatlachtli> /kakawa=patlach-tli/ (“broad/flat cacao”), <cacáhoatl> , and ‘grano indio’ (maize)—for nourishment and refreshment;

3. <chocóllatl> /chokol=a:-tl/: made from an equal number of kernels of <pochotl> /po:cho:-tl/ (Ceiba) and <cacahoatl> , with ‘grano indio’ (maize)—drunk lukewarm as a fattener and as a medicine for tuberculosis;

4. <tzone> /tzon.eh/ (“hairy”, “furry”): equal parts of roasted ‘grano indio’ (maize) and <cacáhoatl>—for refreshment and nourishment, not as medicine.

Before describing these four drinks, he mentions another use: a drink made from the cacao kernel alone that medicinally serves to reduce heat in the body (Hernández Reference Hernández1959 [1577]:2:305).

Other plants reported by Hernández that contain the element {kakawa} include <quauhcacáhoatl> /kwaw=kakawa-tl/ “tree cacao” (Hernández Reference Hernández1959 [1577]:2:305) and <tlalcacáhoatl> /tla:l= kakawa-tl/ (“earth cacao”) ‘peanut’ (Hernández Reference Hernández1959 [1577]:2:306–307; both are apparently different from the terms of identical form listed above); <iztactlalcacáhoatl> /ista:-k tla:l=kakawa-tl/ ‘white peanut’ (Hernández Reference Hernández1959 [1577]:2:307); <cacahoaxóchitl> /kakawa=xo:chi-tl/ “cacao flower” (Hernández Reference Hernández1959 [1577]:2:307–308; in Huasteca Nawa this is Hamelia patens, ‘scarletbush’], <cacahoapatli> /kakawa=pah-tli/ “cacao medicine” (Hernández Reference Hernández1959 [1577]:2:308). None of these is identified as a kind of <cacáhoatl>. (The acute accents on Nawa words cited by Hernández were probably added by the Latin-to-Spanish translator.)

The next known citation of the word chokola:tl in Nawa is from Clavijero (Reference Clavijero1780), who cites Nawa <chocolatl> with the gloss ‘alimento hecho con almendras de cacao y semilla del árbol llamado pochotl, en partes iguales [a food made from cacao kernels (“almonds”) and the seed of a tree called po:cho:tl (Ceiba, silk-cotton tree), in equal parts]’ (Siméon Reference Siméon1977:107).

Clavijero (cited in Santamaría Reference Santamaría1992:412), who was born in Veracruz, writes as follows of drinks made from cacao:

Con el cacao formaban varias bebidas comunes, y entre ellas las que llamaban chocolatl. Molían igual cantidad de cacao y de semilla de pochotl; ponían todo junto en una vasija, con una cantidad proporcionada de agua; allí lo meneaban y agitaban con el instrumento de madera llamado molinillo en español; hecho esto, ponían aparte la porción más oleosa que quedaba encima. En la parte restante mezclaban un puñado de pasta de maíz cocido y lo ponían al fuego hasta darle cierto punto, y después de apartado, le añadían la parte oleosa y esperaban a que se entibiase para tomarlo. … Los mejicanos solían perfumar su chocolate y las otras bebidas de cacao, o para realzar su sabor, o para hacerlas más saludables, con tlilxochitl o vainilla, con flor de xochinacaztli, o con el fruto del mecaxochitl, y las dulcificaban con miel como nosotros hacemos con azúcar.

[From cacao they made several common drinks, among them the ones[!] they called chokol=a:-tl. They ground the same amount of cacao and the seed of po:cho:-tl; they put it all together in a vessel with an appropriate amount of water; there they stirred and shook it with the wooden tool called molinillo in Spanish; having done this, they set aside the oiliest part that came to the top. In the remaining part they mixed a handful of corn dough, and they put it [the preparation] on the fire until it reached a certain point; after taking it off the fire, they added the oily part and waited till it was lukewarm to drink it. … The Mexicans were accustomed to perfume their chocolate and the other drinks made from cacao, either to bring out their flavor, or to make them healthier, with tli:l=xo:chi-tl (“soot flower”) or vanilla, the flower of xo:chi=nakas-tli (“flower ear”), or with the fruit of meka=xo:chi-tl (“vine flower”), and they sweetened it with honey like we do with sugar.) [All of the English past-tense verbs are in the imperfect in Spanish and would more accurately be rendered in English as “used to VERB” or “would VERB”.]

Clavijero's description (from 1780) matches that given by Hernández (from circa 1580) in a great many (not all) of the details. Though Hernández's descriptions of drinks made from cacao do not specify any sweeteners (and this has wrongheadedly been made much of by historians of chocolate), Sahagún (Reference Sahagún, Anderson and Dibble1577) does refer to “honeyed cacao”.

Apparently because it is not attested in the earliest sixteenth-century sources, etymologists of Spanish (see, Corominas Reference Corominas1980–1983:2:385–386) seem universally to agree that chokola:tl is not a genuine Nawa word. Rather, they think chocolate is a Spanish word created by Spanish speakers through the mangling of a Nawa word or expression. As a result, etymologists of Spanish have proposed a great number of hypothetical origins for this word. Not a single one of the etymologies suggested by members of this brotherhood seems to have a chance of being correct. By way of illustration, we discuss proposals by Corominas (Reference Corominas1980–1983:2:385–386). He discusses and discards several proposed etymologies of chokola:tl and chocolate that depend on Spanish speakers' mangling the pronunciation of some no longer extant Nawa expression, and then this mangled word being borrowed into Nawa in the guise of a Nawa word. Then he offers his own suggestion. According to Corominas, since chocolate was made from equal amounts of cacao (Nawa kakawa-tl) and ceiba (Nawa po:cho:-tl) kernels, the Nawas probably called it pocho-kakawá-atl “ceiba cacao drink”. This was contracted to cho(ca)cahuatl, and this, in turn, would have been mangled into chocolatl in the mouths of Spaniards. He also contemplates that a form something like xochayocacahuaatl* (which is a misspelling of Molina's <xochiayo cacauatl>) could be the source of chocolatl, again through mangling in the mouths of Spanish speakers.

This proposal is so fraught with speculation that it hardly merits serious discussion. In the interest of explicitness, we observe the following specific difficulties. First, the premise is incorrect. There were many types of cacao drinks, as discussed above, and not all were made with ceiba seeds. Furthermore, there is no evidence of any such word as po:cho:=kakawa-a:-tl* in Nawa, and deriving chokola:tl from it requires four separate manglings: the loss of two non-adjacent syllables, the initial syllable po and one of the ka syllables; the change of a in the remaining ka to o; and the change of w to l, a substitution not found in established Spanish borrowings from Nawa. Deriving chokola:tl from Molina's <xochiayo cacauatl> requires loss of three syllables (xo, chi, and ya) and the following segment y, along with the changes of a to o and w to l. These are wholly implausible hypotheses.

The fact is that the Nawa forms chokola:tl and chikola:tl are not plausibly the re-Nawatizations of Spanish chocolate and chicolate. There is no evidence that any Spanish word of the shape /.. te#/ was ever borrowed into Nawa ending with /..V:tl/, and it is clear from the discussions of both Hernández and Clavijero that they thought that chocolatl was just as much a Nawa word as all the other Nawa terms they brought under discussion.

The first occurrence of the Spanish word chocolate is found in Book 4, Chapter 22, of Joseph (José) de Acosta's Historia Natural y Moral de las Indias (Reference Acosta1590): “El principal beneficio deſte cacao es, vn breuaje que hazen q <ue> llaman Chocolate, que es coſa loca lo que en aquella tierra le precian, y algunos q <ue> no eſtan hechos a el, les haze aſco [The main benefit of this cacao is a drink that they make that they call chocolate, which in that land they prize like mad: some who are not used to it are disgusted by it].” An English translation of Acosta's work from 1604 provides the first citation of chocolate in the Oxford English Dictionary. The Spanish word chocolate also occurs in the Motul dictionary of Yukateko as the gloss for <chacau haa> ; this work is thought to have been produced around 1590.

This evidence also shows that in the Spanish of central Mexico, chocolate was called cacao until well into the seventeenth century, and we know of no evidence of the word chocolate or chicolate being used there at that time, even though José de Acosta, who lived in both Mexico and Peru, was using the word chocolate by 1590. We must suppose that his usage in Spanish was simply different, for reasons that we are not at the moment able to determine, though his place of writing, his place of origin, and his social-group affiliation are all possibly relevant. Its use in the Motul dictionary suggests that chocolate may have been used by 1590 in Spanish in the Yucatan.

The use by Hernández of Nawa chokola:tl (spelled <chocollatl>) shows that the word existed in Nawa by 1577, but it does not show where in the Nawa-speaking world it was used. Hernández collected information in various parts of Mexico, as well as in Peru and the Philippines. The fact that the next known citation of this Nawa word is in Clavijero (Reference Clavijero1780) shows that there are serious gaps in our documentation of this Nawa word.

Epigraphic Mayan Evidence about Cacao, Pataxte, and Chocolate

As in the case of colonial Nawa, several Mayan languages use their word for cacao as a word for the drinks made of cacao. This is true in Epigraphic Mayan as well. This section explores the linguistic expressions used in Classic Mayan texts to refer to such drinks. Our conclusions are in general agreement with Stuart (Reference Stuart and McNeil2006), in part because both were completed after his 2005 workbook and in part because Justeson and Stuart discussed many of the issues before our respective papers were written. We differ on the interpretation of a few individual terms in the passages to be discussed, but mainly in our grammatical analyses and correlated issues involving relationships among ingredient terms. Our interpretation of elements of the phrase makes use of mostly the same data as that cited by Stuart (Reference Stuart2005) in his workbook, although we originally extracted it from Mora-Marín's (2003) database.Footnote 2

The key sign that represents ‘cacao’ is a depiction of a fish, sometimes rendered as the head of a fish with fins at the back. It has long been known that this sign represents the syllable /ka/ in some contexts, in which it may be transcribed as <ka2> (<ka> is the transcription of a separate syllabogram). Stuart (Reference Stuart1988) demonstrated that this sign is regularly used in spellings of the word for cacao in the Primary Standard Sequence (PSS) on Classic Mayan vases. The attested spellings show the following pattern of variation, ordered by their approximate relative frequencies in Mora-Marín's (2003) database:

80% <ka2-wa>

10% <ka-ka2-wa>

5% <ka2>

5% <2ka2-wa>

The spellings <ka2-wa> and <ka2> show that this sign is generally treated as a logogram for cacao in these contexts; we transcribe it here as <CACAO>. The spelling <ka-ka2-wa> can be treated as a fully phonetic spelling or as a logographic spelling with phonetic complements, <ka-CACAO-wa>. The spelling <2ka2-wa> shows that Mayan scribes made use of the sign in two logically distinct values in this context. Similar variation is found in other logosyllabic writing systems.

These spellings of the word for cacao almost always occur in a noun phrase within the part of the PSS that refers to the drinking vessel of a prominent person, used for some kind of cacao. This phrase usually has the following formulaic structure:

which should be translated as ‘NAME's drinking vessel for (a drink made of) NOUN1 (and NOUN2 …)’.

The word kakaw is usually the head of the noun phrase specifying what the drink was made of. Because Epigraphic Mayan had no regular way to express “and”, this meaning and parsing mostly has to be supplied by the reader. Grammatically, a modifier of an expression parsed as a conjunction of two phrases can apply only to the first of those phrases.

About 10% of these phrases consist of a mere noun phrase rather than a prepositional phrase. About 5% consist of a string of two or more prepositional phrases; each of these prepositional phrases applies to y-uk'-ib' but cannot qualify one another. The word kakaw is to be understood as the head only of the prepositional phrase that it ends and not of any preceding or following prepositional phrase.

We have investigated the structure of references to drinks made from cacao in Mayan hieroglyphic texts, using as our corpus mostly the texts transcribed by Mora-Marín. To anticipate our conclusions, these drinks are referred to by their ingredients. The most commonly mentioned ingredients are (1) cacao (<CACAO-wa>, etc. /kakaw/); (2) “tree cacao” (e.g., <TREE-(7e-)le CACAO-wa> /te7-e:l kakaw/); and (3) maize (<MAIZE>, <7i-MAIZE> /7ixi:m/). In some cases, the drink itself may be referred to as kakaw.

If we restrict our attention to those texts that make explicit reference to cacao, the following observations summarize these occurrences:

(1) In one case (on K2777), the spelling of the word for cacao is used with a final syllabogram <la>, which spells a suffix {-a:l}, seemingly reflecting an adjectival use as a modifier of a subsequent word (Stuart Reference Stuart and McNeil2006:191–192).

(2) In all other PSS texts, the word for cacao, when present, is the final word in the phrase referring to the contents of the vessel. In about 10% of cases, it is not preceded by a modifier but immediately follows the word y-uk'.ib' ‘his drinking vessel’. Typically, it is preceded by one or two modifying nouns or adjectives. In about 8% of cases, three or more modifiers precede it.

(3) With one exception, there is no statistically significant tendency for any pair of modifiers of ‘cacao’ to occur together. The exception is that there is a strong tendency for a word spelled by a sign <MAIZE>, depicting the head of the young maize god, to occur in the same noun phrase as te:7 or te7-e:l (spelled <TREE > , <TREE-le>, or <TREE-7e-le>). In about 80% of the instances in which one of these occurs, the other occurs as well, and the order is always with ‘maize’ before te7-e:l. Often they occur together in the same glyph block. It seems that they are (or might be) part of a single expression.

Martin (Reference Martin and McNeil2006) provides an interpretation of this association in terms of a mythological complex that he identifies and analyzes through its iconography. One key piece of this iconographic complex is a set of depictions of a cacao tree bearing ears of corn. Martin suggests that this tree is named by the glyphic sequence <MAIZE TREE> in the noun phrases referring to the contents of drinking vessels in the PSS. Stuart (Reference Stuart and McNeil2006:197) proposes that <MAIZE> is to be read as ixim (transcribed by us 7ixi:m) based on two cases in which the sign is preceded by <7i> (K791, K8764). Both Martin and Stuart read <MAIZE TREE> literally as <7iximte'> ‘maize tree’. (In our representation, this would be 7ixi:m=te:7.)

In our view, Martin has provided substantial evidence for the existence of an iconographic and mythic complex associating maize with cacao trees. However, he does not provide detailed argumentation for the reading as iximte' of the glyphic phrase discussed above. We show here that this reading is inconsistent with the range of variation in spellings of this phrase, and we provide an alternative interpretation that is consistent with all of the data known to us. Before doing so, however, it is relevant to point out that the expression 7ixi:m=te:7 is widely found in Mayan languages of the highlands, sometimes referring to the breadnut (Spanish ramón)—a fruit that is eaten in times when the maize harvest is poor—and otherwise to a large, very tall tree that grows in the rain forest. (In most Mayan languages the breadnut is called by a form descending from proto-Mayan *7ojx.) Among Lowland languages, it is found only in late colonial Yukateko where it refers to a kind of bush; and in modern Ch'orti7, where it refers to a wild tree, Karwinskia calendroni, whose leaves are used medicinally (Stuart Reference Stuart and McNeil2006:198–199, citing a personal communication from Johanna Kufer). In existing Mayan languages, these terms do not name a mythological “maize tree” or define “maize tree cacao” as a variety of cacao. The most we can squeeze out of all this is that maize is a highly evocative plant and has spawned several plant names that are morphologically the same but do not otherwise refer to biologically related plants.

In spite of their strong statistical association and consistent word order, the two terms ‘maize’ and te7-e:l appear to have separate relevance to the chocolate drink. This is certainly the case in a text in which the two seem to occur separately as modifiers of ‘cacao’ <yu-k'i-b'i MAIZE CACAO-wa TREE-le CACAO-wa> (K5857)—that is, in the expression “his drinking vessel [for] maize (and) [plain/default] cacao (and) tree-type cacao”. Their separate relevance is further suggested by the fact that ‘maize’ and either te:7 or te7-e:l each occurs about 20% of the time without the other when ‘cacao’ follows. These examples do not support an interpretation of <MAIZE TREE> or <MAIZE TREE-le> as spelling a single (compound) lexical item.

(4) In 90% of the texts mentioning cacao, there are noun and/or adjective modifiers before that word. The norm in these cases is for the string of modifiers to begin with a preposition, indicating that the vessel is “for” a drink made with the stated type of cacao. In case there are no modifiers, the norm is for no preposition to occur (the word ‘cacao’ is directly preceded by the preposition in a few cases, although only in a minority of instances in which this word occurs without modifiers).

(5) In a few instances, more than one phrase or term is preceded by a preposition (the word <yu-ta-la> or <yu-ta> is preceded by one of these prepositions in most of these cases, and kakaw is involved in about half of them):

In these situations, the prepositional phrases are separate statements, and cannot be conjoined to modify the word ‘cacao’. The same thing occurs when the word ‘cacao’ does not appear in the text, including cases that are followed by nominal phrases and so do not involve truncation of the portion of the text that names the contents, as in:

Details of sign execution and text content suggest that these texts, along with K7459, are not independent cases.

(6) With this background, it is possible to arrive at a straightforward interpretation of the meanings of many of these expressions that is also consistent with the detailed accounts of cacao and cacao-based drinks from colonial Nawa sources.

The term kwaw=kakawa-tl “tree cacao” refers to a particular variety of the cacao plant mentioned by Hernández for colonial Nawas (see “The Timing of the Diffusion of chikol=a:-tl”, above). In fact, all of the Nawa terms in which a word for a general class of plants (not specific plants) is used as a modifier of kakawa-tl were used to distinguish varieties of cacao. “Tree cacao” is also known in Sokean: kuy kakawa7 in Tecpatan Soke refers to the cacaté “tipo de fruta como nuez silvestre que es amarga [a kind of fruit like a wild (wal)nut which is bitter]” (the fruit resembles an almond, and it is toasted, salted, and eaten), while in Soteapan Gulf Sokean, it refers to cacao. We take te:7 kakaw and te7-e:l kakaw to have been a variety of cacao plant, “tree cacao”, and we interpret almost all cases of te7-e:l in these texts as meaning “tree-type”, even if the head of the construction has been left out.

A viable alternative interpretation entertained by Mora-Marín (Reference Mora-Marín2003:Figure 1) is that te7-e:l kakaw refers to ‘forest (i.e., uncultivated) cacao’. The comparative support makes “tree cacao” seem to us a more attractive hypothesis, but in either case, the term would designate a kind of cacao plant, not a kind of drink.

Since half of the vessels in which kakaw takes a modifier use the term te7-e:l kakaw to refer to the contents of these vessels, and no frequent modifier of kakaw is in complementary distribution with it, this must have been a common type of cacao for use in these vessels. It could have been the type of cacao that was implicit when the word kakaw was used without te:7 or te7-e:l as a modifier, but it is also possible that kakaw and te7-e:l kakaw labelled contrasting varieties of Theobroma cacao. Further evidence for this interpretation is provided below, under point (7).

It should be noted that the word kakaw may have referred, and probably did refer, to a range of related varieties of T. cacao. It was no doubt possible to make these varieties explicit, but readers would have had the knowledge to infer what varieties were intended as default interpretations of these terms in particular contexts. We today lack this knowledge, so certain types of information will not be readily accessible to us.

Nawa sources have no word that literally translates as “maize cacao” or the like. However, in these sources, all of the terms in which words for foods or food ingredients were used as modifiers of kakawa-tl were used to refer to drinks made of cacao that used those ingredients. We suggest that the use of the word for maize was such a usage. A similar case is nal kakaw, attested in the phrase <yu-k'i-b'i TA-?? na-la CACAO-wa> on an Early Classic vessel (Stuart Reference Stuart and McNeil2006:192; Mora-Marín, personal communication 2005, interprets some of the MAIZE logograms as spelling nal).

As in the case of te7-e:l, half of the vessels in which kakaw takes a modifer have MAIZE in these phrases. This suggests that cacao mixed with maize was a very common type used in these vessels. Most of the drinks made from cacao by the proto-historical Nawas were prepared from ground-up roasted cacao kernels combined either with maize dough or with ground-up roasted maize kernels. This includes most of the cacao-based drinks distinguished terminologically by Nawas that were discussed in the previous section. This practice continues to the present day in indigenous communities in Mesoamerica, including among Mayans, Mije-Sokeans, and Nawas, and was doubtless general in proto-historical Mesoamerica.

It may be noted that 7ixi:m is the only one of the frequent terms in these phrases that precedes kakaw and that does not occur with a -V:l suffix. All of the other terms show variation (although in the case of tzi:h ~ tzih-i:l, the form with a -V:l suffix is rare).

Under the interpretations presented here, the phrase <yu-k'i-b'i ta MAIZE TREE(-le) CACAO(-wa)> can be read y-uk'.ib' ta 7ixi:m [and] te7-e:l kakaw and can be translated, ‘his drinking vessel for [a drink made from] maize [and] tree cacao’.

The order of these terms is consistent in always placing all ingredient terms before the only recognized plant-type modifiers.

Color terms were used among the Nawas in names of types of cacao and in names of other kinds of trees that include the root kakawa. Sahagún mentions that some types of cacao plants were distinguished by the colors of their fruit. On these analogies, <k'an-na CACAO-wa> seems more likely to be spelling k'an kakaw (‘yellow cacao’ or ‘ripe cacao’) and less likely k'a:n kakaw ‘prized cacao’) in <ta yu-ta k'an-na CACAO-wa> (K625), and the expression might refer either to a variety of cacao from which a drink is made, or it could be a general modifier of an ingredient, describing the state (ripe) of the cacao kernel.

(7) Two other words that occur in phrases referring to the contents of the drinking vessels are <tzi>~<tzi-hi>~<tzi-hi-li>, and <yu-tai(-la)>. MacLeod and Reents-Budet (Reference MacLeod and Reents-Budet1994:118) identify this word with pre-Cholan *tzi:h (which, however, means ‘unripe, uncooked/raw’ rather than ‘fresh’, as she translates it). This appears to be a feasible interpretation, and we know of no other root whose distribution in the Mayan family suggests that it could be cognate with a Lowland Mayan form consistent with the phonetic spellings. Unlike the other terms considered so far (with the exception of k'an if for ‘ripe’ rather than ‘yellow’), the word tzi:h refers neither to a variety of the cacao plant nor to an ingredient in the drink. In the frequent phrase tzi:h(-i:l) kakaw ‘raw cacao’, the word kakaw must refer to the cacao kernel or pulp—thus, to cacao as an ingredient and not as the name for a drink.

Stuart (Reference Stuart and McNeil2006:188) notes that <yu-tai(-la)> occurs in a possessed form <7u-yu-ta-la> on a carved vase illustrated by Dütting (Reference Dütting1992:Figure 17); another possible instance is on K8088, which seems to be <7u-yu-ta2-la>. This shows that we are dealing here with a noun yut (presence of vowel length unverifiable). We know of no prior interpretation of this term that is consistent with Stuart's observation. We raise the possibility that <yu-tai(-la)> may imply the ability to confer good fortune. In colonial Yukateko, <yut> or <yutal> (whose possessed form is <u yutal>) names the bezoar, a stone found in the stomachs of some deer when they are butchered. This type of stone is believed to confer good luck on its owner even by present-day Mesoamerican Indians. If this is the correct connection for yut(-a:l), the word may imply either the power of the bezoar or the use of it in the preparation of the cacao drink. From descriptions provided to Kaufman by some present-day Indians, the bezoar is not really a stone but more like a hair ball and is made of organic matter. Others say it is indeed a stone.

Further progress in the interpretation of these words depends on distributional analysis in terms of other words that appear in the same phrases. Such analysis is complicated by the fact that there is a general absence of multiple terms within the phrases under discussion, apart from 7ixi:m and te7-e:l.

In 75–80% of the texts in which two or more terms precede the word for cacao, 7ixi:m and te7-e:l are among them. Only 10% of texts that mention cacao have two or more added terms when 7ixi:m and te7-e:l are not both among them. Since it is rare for more than two added terms to occur together, except in the case of 7ixi:m and te7-e:l with one another, the occurrence of any one term is usually negatively correlated with the occurrence of any other. As a result, most of these terms can tell us little or nothing about any uninterpreted terms in these phrases.

This statistical pattern, however, may explain one seeming anomaly in the data: 80% of references to te:7 kakaw and te7-e:l kakaw are preceded by 7ixi:m as a modifier, but only about 15% of references to kakaw are preceded by it. Apart from 7ixi:m and te:7 ~ te7-e:l, the presence of one modifier reduces the likelihood of the use of any other modifier, so just the opposite effect would be expected. Accordingly, te7-e:l kakaw is more strongly associated with a specification of maize as an ingredient than is kakaw. It is known that maize was typically mixed with kakaw, so this cannot be the reason for the difference; rather, it is presumably due to a far greater susceptibility of kakaw than of te7-e:l kakaw to the use of tzi:h and yut(-a:l). This supports the view that kakaw and te7-e:l kakaw are names for two different varieties of T. cacao.

A more involved set of inferences shows that neither yut(-a:l) kakaw nor tzi:h kakaw refers to a variety of the cacao plant.

In several texts, the word tzi:h alone refers to the contents of the drinking vessel. In many of these texts, a reference to the owner follows, so that these expressions do not involve truncation, which sometimes occurs in the PSS when space is lacking for completing the text.

When tzi:h and yut(-a:l) occur in the same phrase, they can occur in either order. Otherwise, each is usually the first of the modifiers in any phrases in which it occurs that specify the contents of the vessel. The only exception is in K2323, in which ta 7ixi:m is followed by ta yut-a:l kakaw—that is, in which yut-a:l is the first element after the preposition in a prepositional phrase in the content phrase. The order of terms in the phrases specifying contents are therefore largely consistent overall and may be fully consistent within a prepositional phrase.

The order among adjectives is likely to relate to the semantics or relevance of these modifiers; in many languages, semantically defined classes of adjectives occur in a fixed sequence except when departures have a specific contextual motivation. The distributional properties of tzi:h(i:l) and yut(a:l) indicate that these words precede both ingredient and plant-type modifiers of kakaw. If ingredient modifiers precede plant-type modifiers, as suggested above, then tzi:h(-i:l) and yut(-a:l) are not plant-type modifiers. They could both be ingredient modifiers, or they could both be modifiers of a third category that itself precedes both ingredient and plant-type modifiers. Another likely example of such a modifier in the PSS is <7a-ch'a> for proto-Greater Tzeltalan *7ach' ‘new’ or pre-Ch'olan *7a:ch' ‘wet’ in K8713 <ti 7a-ch'a ka2-CACAO-wa> (Zender Reference Zender2002).

As with the other terms in these phrases, when the word tzi:h (-i:l) appears with kakaw, it is most often the only modifier of kakaw. When another modifier appears with tzi:h, it is almost always te7-e:l; yut(-a:l) does not occur in these cases. When tzi:h(-i:l) appears without kakaw, usually none of the other terms occurs with it, but te7(-e:l) or yut(-a:l) appears in about a third of these cases. In about a third of the phrases with te7-e:l but not 7ixi:m, tzi:h occurs before it; tzi:h rarely or never occurs when 7ixi:m appears without te7-e:l (and rarely accompanies the phrase 7ixi:m te7-e:l). One possible interpretation is that cacao was more often uncooked than was maize in these drinks. Another is that the descriptive terms associated with the word kakaw might affect a reader's default interpretation of which particular variety of cacao was being alluded to.

In contrast, yut(-a:l) appears at about the same rate before 7ixi:m kakaw, before te7-e:l kakaw, and before 7ixi:m te7-e:l kakaw—in each case, about once in four instances. This word yut(-a:l) has one somewhat puzzling but potentially revealing association. Sixteen (70%) of the 23 cacao vessels in Mora-Marín's database whose owner is labelled <7i-tz'a-ti> are among the 77 with yut(-a:l) as the first modifier, while only seven are among 124 that lack it. This association is statistically significant (p=0.001). In colonial Yukateko, the adjective <idzat> is attested, with the meanings ‘clever, crafty, wise’. There may be a connection between possession of a lucky charm and cleverness.

(8) Another possible modifier in the phrase specifying contents, each time preceding <CACAO-wa>, is <LORD TREE-le>~<LORD-wa TREE-le>~<LORD TREE>. The first word is most likely 7aja:w ‘lord’. It could form a compound with te7-e:l—thus, 7ajaw=te:7 or 7ajaw=te7-e:l. A Mayan etymon *7a:ja:w=tye:7 ‘white sapote (Casimiroa edulis)’ is known from all Central Mayan branches, but it names a highland fruit tree. The corresponding word in Yukateko has a different referent. We do not know whether white sapote is a plausible ingredient of any cacao drink.

Along with the Central Mayan *7a:ja:w=tye:7 ‘zapote blanco, matasano // white sapote (Casimiroa edulis)’, as attested in Tzeltal 7aja[w]=te7 and Tzotzil 7aj=te7, we have the Ch'ol form käk=te7=pa7 (“cacao tree [of] gully”) ‘zapote de agua (fruta parecida a la del zapote)’. The terminological connection between certain types of sapote with both 7aja:w and kakaw suggests that <LORD TREE> as an ingredient of a cacao drink might reflect the Central Mayan term *7a:ja:w=tye:7, even though it is a highland tree.

In any case, it is feasible to analyze te7-e:l as the same one that specifies a variety of cacao, and to treat <7AJAW-(wa)> as a general modifier meaning ‘lordly’. In all cases, <LORD> is the first element of the sequence, consistent with being a member of the same class as tzi:h(-i:l) and yut(-a:l).

(9) Another possible rare modifier is <k'in>, which appears at most once in the corpus, on K3472. The sign is not entirely clear, and Stuart (personal communication 2005) points out that parts of this vase have been repainted. The sign at issue occurs in a spelling <ta k'i-?k'in>. Repainting seems to have affected parts of the preceding and following glyph blocks, since the ubiquituous fine lines due to root damage do not cross thickly applied black paint outlining parts of some signs, but we see no evidence of repainting of the <ta k'i-?k'in> sign group. The identification of the uncertain sign as <k'in> is due to Mora-Marín (Reference Mora-Marín2003), who marks the transcription as uncertain. However, the surviving details appear to be consistent with <k'in> and not with any other sign that is known to take a <k'i> superfix. If the sign's identification is valid, it seems likely to spell the Lowland Mayan word *k'ihn ‘hot’. This would make it a general modifier appropriate to the drinks made with cacao. It could, however, simply represent the word *k'i:n ‘sun’, which would have to be a once conventional but no longer current usage as the name of a type of cacao plant or drink.

(10) Stuart (Reference Stuart and McNeil2006:194) identifies place names as another class of modifiers for ‘cacao’, suggesting that they indicate cacao from particular locations (so far, all in the eastern Peten). There are two clear examples and one likely example. One of these is the only modifier of kakaw in its phrase, and two of them immediately follow yuta:l and precede kakaw.

In summary, we distinguish three classes of terms that precede kakaw in the phrases describing the contents of the drinking vessels: a class whose members appear immediately before the word kakaw and specify a biological variety of cacao (III); a class of nouns whose members appear before biological variety labels and specify ingredients of the drink made with cacao (II); and a general class consisting of all other terms, all of them seemingly general types of modifiers (I). They can be charted as follows:

Only one of these modifiers seems to require that the ‘cacao’ referred to in the PSS is the drink itself rather that the ingredients—<k'in> k'ihn (if for ‘hot’ and not ‘sun’)—and this may not be a correct reading of the original text. Certain of these modifiers seem to require that the cacao be an ingredient rather than the drink: <tzi(-hi)> tzi:h ‘raw, uncooked’; probably place names (presuming that they are places where a particular kind of cacao comes from); and <k'an> (if it is not for k'a:n ‘prized’). Other mentions of cacao provide no evidence that shows whether kakaw in those instances refers to an ingredient or to a prepared drink.

Table 7 presents the attested combinations of kakaw with its associated terms.

On a few cacao vessels (/y-uk'.ib'... kakaw/) we find the expression <JAGUAR × CACAO>, a superimposition of jaguar markings on the <CACAO> logogram, which we interpret as b'ahlam kakaw ‘pataxte’ on the basis of forms with this meaning in Q'eqchi7 and in Ayapa Gulf Sokean that literally mean “jaguar cacao”; see “The Mije-Sokean Hypothesis”, above. All examples are of 7ixi:m te7-e:l b'ahlam kakaw. We do not know whether te7-e:l b'ahlam kakaw is the Epigraphic Mayan word for pataxte or for a “tree-type” variety of pataxte. In either case, it may relate to the origin of the later Ch'olan term, *b'ahlam=te:7, for pataxte. All of the examples refer to the drinking vessel being for a mixture of maize with pataxte, but since the few examples known to us seem to come from a single scribe or scribal school, the lack of variation in these rare references to pataxte is probably misleading. Other examples with dark markings on the face or body of the CACAO logogram, which may also be intended to represent a word for pataxte, occur with a broader range of ingredients.