IMS Aug. 2021 Article by V. Garth Norman is on pp, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8 -- titled "Measure and Geometry Design in Ancient Maya Art and Architecture compared with that of the Middle East". Excerpts are from Norman's book: "Cubit Connection in Ancient World Migrations" (2018). The Babylonian and Egyptian Cubits were used to create the majority of the ancient pyramids, architecture and art in Mesoamerica, and eventually through migration also inot North and South America.

This work extends to Mesoamerica a research on archaic geometry previously performed on architectures of the " Old World ". CAD tools are used to fit theoretical forms to spatial segments on archaeological plans. The analyses provide quantitative information on the forms, on the numbers involved and on the used length-units. Everywhere, numbers mainly appear to be multiples of 9, 10 and 13, rather than pertaining to Squaring Triads which nonetheless are attested in all regions. Three length-units are found: a " Teotihuacán unit " t = 0.575 ±0.002 m, a " Monte Albán unit " ma = 0.504 ±0.007 m and a " Chichen Itza unit " ci = 0.665 ±0.015 m. Units t and ma clearly appear to be linked to the distances between the main monuments, associated with the Tzolkin calendar numbers 13-20 at Teotihuacán and with the Haab calendar numbers 18-20 at Monte Albán.

This chapter addresses the relationship between traveling to distant places and claims to political authority in Classic-period inscriptions from the southern Maya lowlands. Classic Maya lords relied on various narrative strategies involving evocation of and traveling to locations in deep time, historical places beyond the immediate confines of the Classic Maya world, and powerful political centers near the protagonists. Some Maya rulers practiced fundamentally different strategies in relating themselves to the historical and deep-time landscapes. Along with other contributions to this edited volume, the overview of Maya travel logs indicates that the Classic-period landscape of distant places was neither uniform nor structured along the notion of vertical layers of heavens and underworlds.

A book-length resource for teachers and students to explore multiple facets of ancient Maya culture, history, science, and more. Over 300 pages of teacher resources (including rubrics and answers) and student pages provide a greater depth and breadth to Maya studies than any other resource for middle and secondary students. Many pages are also translated into Spanish. Individual components are uploaded separately in both English and Spanish for easier reference. This work is modular; each section can be used in isolation if desired to support instruction in Social Studies, math, English, or other topics.

It is an accepted fact that people of the pre-Columbian Mesoamerica used a sophisticated calendar enabling them to observe and record a long period of time. However, not too much is known about their concept and understanding of time partitioning one Earth orbital cycle. This paper proposes that they recorded a method addressing the conceptual use of a system similar or identical to our present hours/minutes approach.