We educate! Through all of our services, we will help you to gain the knowledge and skills to confidently navigate the financial markets. Through education and ongoing communication will aid you in reaching your financial objectives. Sign up today, and gain the training you need to protect and grow your money!

Dr. Ellen Bruno Ramsey

Director of Proprietary Analysis

Dr. Ellen Bruno Ramsey, is the daughter of Peter Bruno, the Founder of the Institute of Wall Street Studies Corp. She was the host of her own and very popular financial talk show radio call-in program: “Buy, Sell, or Hold.” and at the time, the youngest talk show radio host in the country dealing with finance. Her radio program was heard on the Beasley Media Group radio stations on its “Money Talk” Radio Station WSBR 740 AM radio. This daily radio program accepted all listener caller questions relating to investments and at times left callers on its full bank of telephone lines still holding on at its programs end. In addition, she was the Director of Research for the Investment Advisory money management firm of the Wall Street Money Management Group and still conducts proprietary analysis for the family-owned Institute of Wall Street Studies Corp and their specialized Concierge Investment Services.

In 1994 she began teaching at Lynn University after receiving her Master’s Degree with a concentration in International Business. She was one of the first professors at the university to develop online business courses. She was coined by Dr. Don Ross, President Emeritus of Lynn University, as its first “Triple Knight” after receiving all three of her degrees from the university (including her PhD).

Ellen Bruno Ramsey was instrumental in promoting an original form of investment research analysis called Cycle Analysis which has the ability to forecast directional market movement for any and all investment vehicles. Ellen, along with her daughter Megan, spearhead the research and services offered through the Concierge Roundtable Services, a wholly owned subsidiary and division of the Institute of Wall Street Studies Corp.

Megan Ramsey

Director of Algorithmic Research

Megan Ramsey has always been intrigued by the stock market since a very young age. At only seven years old, she recorded a commercial for Peter Bruno’s daily radio program called Managing Your Money. which attempted to appeal to other grandchildren suggesting that their grandparents prepare for higher living expenses in times to come. Megan has always been on an accelerated pace in her academics, starting in elementary school when her teachers recognized her academic achievements and an assessment confirmed that she was gifted. She completed her bachelor’s degree at Lynn University in three years instead of four and graduated Summa Cum Laude with a 3.97 GPA. Her high GPA led to her recognition at Lynn University’s Honors Convocation for being part of the President’s Honors Society as a result of consistently being on the Dean’s list. Because of her exceptional grades, she was awarded a medal to wear at her graduation ceremony for being in the highest GPA bracket. She is continuing her education by pursuing a master’s degree also at Lynn University which she is on track to receive early, in two years instead of three.

Through working at the Institute of Wall Street Studies as a statistical research analyst as well as the Director of Research, a job her mother had, Megan has brought our original cycle research to the 21st century and beyond. With the advancement of computer technology sequencing, Megan has developed algorithmic trading systems to generate buy and sell signals as well as the ability to predict investment market trends. These systems have been created through the use of Artificial Intelligence with the objective of mathematically eliminating emotions from trading. This proprietary research has resulted in a 93% degree of accuracy in previous and profitable winning trades.

With the advancement of computer technology sequencing over the past few years, The Firm has incorporated its unique cycle analysis research within the development of various algorithmic trading systems to generate buy and sell signals as well as the ability to predict investment market trends. These systems have been created through the use of Artificial Intelligence, requiring an increase knowledge of computer coding and statistical review with the objective of mathematically eliminating emotions out of trading.