Bibliography on Georgian Folk and Secred Music

A

Akvnis Nana (Lullaby). 2000. Kalandadze-Makharadze, Nino (compiler). Tbilisi, Scientific and Methodical Center of Folk Art of the Georgian Ministry of Culture (in Georgian with English summary)

Akhobadze, Vladimer. Essay on Georgian Folk Songs (Achara) . In: Echoes from Georgia: Seventeen Arguments on Georgian Polyphony. Focus on Civilizations and Cultures – Music. 2009. Editors: Rusudan Tsurtsumia, Joseph Jordania. Reviewers: Simha Arom (France), Polo Vallejo (Spain) Nova Science Publishers. Inc. New York.

Andriadze, Manana. 1991. Kartuli Saghvtismsakhuro Galoba. Sagaloblebis Zhanrebi (Georgian Liturgical Chant. Genres of Chants). In Dzveli Kartuli Propesiuli Musika. Istoriisa Da Teoriis Sakitkhebi (Old Georgian Professional Music. Aspects of History and Theory). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 81-92. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Andriadze, Manana. 1997. Samusiko Nishnebi da Mati Amokhsnis Shesadzlebloba Erti Kartuli Khelnatseris Mikhedvit (Musical Signs and the Possibility of Their Deciphering According to One Georgian Manuscript). In Musikismtsodneobis Sakitkhebi (Problems of Musicology). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 106-121. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with Russian and English summary)

Andriadze, Manana. 2001. Gulanebshi Datsuli Chrelebis Shesakheb(On Chreli Preserved in Gulani). In Sasuliero Da Saero Musikis Mravalkhmianobis Problemebi (Problems of Polyphony in Sacred and Secular Music). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editior). Materials of the International Conference on 2000 Anniversary of Christianity and 3000 Anniversary of Georgian Statehood, pp. 49-58. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with English summary)

Andriadze, Manana and Chkheidze, Tamar. 2003. Chrelis Sistema Kartul Samgaloblo Praktikashi (System of Chreli in Georgian Sacred Music). The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia Rusudan and Jordania Joseph (editors), pp. 442-457. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Andriadze, Manana & Tamar Chkheidze. 2010. Moduses in Georgian Church Singing. The Fourth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 449–460. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Andriashvili, Akaki and Makharadze, Vasil. 1971. Kartuli Khalkhuri Simgherebi (Georgian Folk Songs). Tbilisi: Ganatleba

Arakchiev (Araqishvili), Dimitri. 1905. Kratki Ocherk Razvitiya Gruzinskoi Kartalino-Kakhetinskoi Narodnoi Pesni; O Gruzinskoi Dukhovnoi Narodnoi Muzike (Essay on the Development of Georgian Kartli-Kakhetian Folk Song; On Georgian Sacred Folk Music) Moscow: Menshov publishing (in Russian)

Araqishvili, Dimitri.Svan Folk Song. In: Echoes from Georgia: Seventeen Arguments on Georgian Polyphony. Focus on Civilizations and Cultures – Music. 2009. Editors: Rusudan Tsurtsumia, Joseph Jordania. Reviewers: Simha Arom (France), Polo Vallejo (Spain) Nova Science Publishers. Inc. New York.

Arakchiev (Araqishvili), Dimitri. 1908. Narodnaia Pesnia Zapadnoi Gruzii (Imeretii); Guriiskaia Vetv; Mingrelsakaia Vetv; Neskolko Zamechanii o Rachinskikh Pesniakh; O Gruzinskikh Muzikalnikh Instrumentakh iz Sobranii Moskvi i Tiflisa (Folk Song of Western Georgia (Imereti); Gurian Song; Megrelian Song; Rachan Song; On Georgian Musical Instruments from Moscow and Tbilisi Collections), includes 83 folk songs. Moscow. Excerpts from “Materials of the Musical-Ethnographic Commission” at Moscow University. Volume II. Lissner and Sobko publishing (in Russian)

Arakchiev (Araqishvili), Dimitri. 1916. Gruzinskoe Narodnoe Muzikalnoe Tvorchestvo; Narodnaia Pesnia Vostochnoi Gruzii i Severnogo Kavkaza; Narodnaia Pesnia Gruzin-Gortsev Vostochnoi Gruzii; Narodnaia Pesnia Zapadnoi Gruzii (Georgian Folk Music Art; Folk Song of Eastern Georgia and North Caucasus; Folk Song from Highland Regions of Eastern Georgia; Folk Song of Western Georgia), includes 225 folk songs and 39 instrumental melodies. Moscow. Excerpts from “Materials of the Musical-Ethnographic Commission” at Moscow University. Volume V. Lissner and Sobko publishing (in Russian)

Arakelov, Khristofor. 1983. O Poliladovosti v Gruzinskikh Narodnikh Pesniakh (On Polymodality in Georgian Folk Songs). In Kartuli Khalkhuri Musikis Kilo, Melodika Da Ritmi (Mode, Melody and Rhythm of Georgian Folk Music). Shaverzashvili, Aleksandre (responsible editor), pp. 171-193. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Russian)

Arakelov, Khristofor. 1985. Fenomen Poliladovosti v Narodnikh Khorovikh Pesniakh Kartli i Kakheti (The Phenomenon of Polytonality in Kartlian and Kakhetian (East Georgia) Multipart Songs). In Voprosi Narodnogo Mnogogolosia (Problems of Folk Polyphony), Jordania, Joseph (compiler and editor), pp. 42-46. Tbilisi: Sabchota Sakartvelo (in Russian with English summary)

Arakelov, Khristofor. 1987. Tematism i Formoobrazovanie v Khorovodnikh, Pliasovikh i Igrovikh Pesniakhv Kartli iKakhetii (Themes and Forms of Choral, Dance and Game Songs from Kartli and Kakheti). Part I. In Kartuli Musikis Melodiis, Harmoniisa Da Pormis Sakitkhebi (On musical Melody, Harmony and Form of Georgian Music). Tumanishvili, Ketevan (editor), pp. 121-137. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Arakelov, Kristofor. 1990. Tematizmi da Pormiskmnadoba Kartlisa da Kakhetis Saperkhulo, Satsekvao da Satamasho Simgherebshi (Themes and Form-Formation in Kartli-Kakhetian Round Dance, Dance and Game Songs). Part II. In Mashtabur-Tematuri Strukturebi Saperkhulo, Satsekvao da Satamasho Simgherebshi (Scale-Thematic Structures in Round Dance, Dance and Game Songs). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 131-167. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (I n Georgian with Russian summary)

Arakishvili, Dimitri. 1925. Kartuli Musika (Georgian Music). Tbilisi: Metsniereba Sakartveloshi (in Georgian)

Arakishvili, Dimitri. 1925. Kartuli Musika (Georgian Music). Kutaisi: Adgilobrivi Meurneobis Stamba (in Russian)

Arakishvili, Dimitri. 1940. Khalkhuri Samusiko Sakravebis Aghtsera Da Gazomva (Description and Measurement of Georgian Folk Instruments. Tbilisi: Teknika Da Shroma (in Georgian)

Arakishvili, Dimitri. 1948. Obraz Narodnoi Pesni Vostochnoi Gruzii (Types of Folk Songs in East Georgia). Tbilisi: State Publishing House of Georgian SSR (in Russian)

Arakishvili, Dimitri. 1950. Rachuli Khalkhuri Simgherebi (Rachan Folk Songs). Tbilisi: Khelovneba (in Georgian)

Arakishvili, Dimitri. 1950. Svanuri Khalkhuri Simgherebi (Svan Folk Songs). Tbilisi: Khelovneba (in Georgian)

Arakishvili, Dimitri. 1954. Dasavlet Sakartvelos Khalkhur Simgherata Kilos Tsqoba (Modal Scale of Western Georgian Folk Songs). Tbilisi: Khelovneba (in Georgian)

Arndt, Matthew. 2018. Some Statistical Properties of Harmony and Voice Leading in Shemokmedi School Georgian Chant. The Eight International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 474–483. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Arom, Simha & Vallejo, Polo. 2010. Towards a Theory of the Chord Syntaxof Georgian Polyphony. The Fourth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 321–335. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Arom, Simha & Vallejo, Polo. 2012. Outline of a Syntax of Chords in Some Songs from Samegrelo. The Fifth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 266–277. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Asanidze, Maia. 1991. Chrelisa da Kilos Sakitkhisatvis Dzvel Kartul Propesiul Musikashi (On Chreli and Mode in Old Georgian Professional Music). In Dzveli Kartuli Propesiuli Musika. Istoriisa da Teoriis Sakitkhebi (Old Georgian Professional Music. Aspects of History and Theory). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 112-122. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Ashuba, Vadim. 1986. Apkhazuri Khalkhuri Simgherebi (Abkhazian Folk Songs). Tbilisi: SSR Kavshiris Musikaluri Pondis Sakartvelos Ganqopileba (in Georgian, Abkhazian and Russian)

Aslanishvili, Shalva. 1954-1956. Narkvevebi Kartuli Khalkhuri Simgherebis Shesakheb (Essays on Georgian Folk Songs) Volumes I and II. Tbilisi : Khelovneba publishing (in Georgian)

Aslanishvili, Shalva. 1970. Kartl-Kakhuri Khalkhuri Sagundo Simgherebis Harmonia (The Harmony of Kartli-Kakhetian Choral Folk Songs). Tbilisi. Ganatleba publishing (in Georgian)

Aslanishvili, Shalva. 1991. Dzveli Kartuli Sanoto Nishnebis Sakitkhisatvis. Sanoto Nishnebis Sistema Dzvel Kartul Khelnatserebshi / X-XII saukuneebi / (On Old Georgian Note Signs. The System of Note Signs in Old Georgian Manuscripts / 10th-11th centuries/). In Dzveli Kartuli Propesiuli Musika. Istoriisa da Teoriis Sakitkhebi (Old Georgian Professional Music. Aspects of History and Theory). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 22-61). Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Aslanishvili, Shalva. Forms of Multipart Singing in Georgian Folk Songs . In: Echoes fromGeorgia: Seventeen Arguments on Georgian Polyphony. Focus on Civilizations and Cultures – Music. 2009. Editors: Rusudan Tsurtsumia, Joseph Jordania. Reviewers: Simha Arom (France), Polo Vallejo (Spain) Nova Science Publishers. Inc. New York.

Akhobadze, Vladimer. 1956. Apkhazuri Khalkhuri Simgherebi (Abkhazian Folk Songs). Tbilisi: Tbilisis Sakhelmtsipo Konservatoria (in Georgian and Abkhazian)

Akhobadze, Vladimer. 1957. Kartuli (Svanuri)Khalkhuri Simgherebi (Georgian /Svan/ Folk Songs). Tbilisi: Teknika Da Shroma (in Georgian and Russian)

Akhobadze, Vladimer. 1961. Kartuli (Acharuli)Khalkhuri Simgherebi (Georgian /Acharan/ Folk Songs). Batumi: Sakhelmtsipo Gamomtsemloba (in Georgian and Russian with English summary)

B

Baghashvili, Gia. 2006. Kartuli Musikaluri Polkloris Estetikuri Polistadiuroba (The Aesthetic Polystageness of Georgian Musical Folklore). The Second International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 52-54. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Baghashvili, Gia. 2010. The Aesthetic Mechanism of the Paucity of Melismatic in Georgian Folk Music Genres of the Pre-Christian Provenance. The Fourth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 71–77. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Baghashvili, Gia. 2014. Antinomy of “One” and “Many” on Early Stages of the Aesthetics of Georgian Folk Music. The Sixth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 133–137. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Baghashvili, Gia. 2015. Another Turning Point in Georgian Musical Thinking. The Seventh International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 221–225. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Baghashvili, Gia. 2018. The Aesthetic Category of Eternity in Kartli-Kakhetian Table Songs. The Eight International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 91–95. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Baramidze, Baram. 1971. Sakulto Saritualo Zhanri Kartul Musikalur Polklorshi (Cult-Ritual Genre in Georgian Musical Folklore). Journal Sabchota Khelovneba, N9, pp. 17-22 (in Georgian)

Benashvili, Andria. 1886. Kartuli Khmebi. Saeklesio Galoba Tsm. Ioane Okropiris Tsirvis Tsesisa. Kartl-Kakhetos Kilozed. Khalkhuri Simgherebi (Georgian Voices. Church Chanting according to St. John Chrisosthomos Rules. Kartli-Kakhetian Mode. Folk Songs). Tpilisi: Stamba Melikishvilisa

Berger, Larisa. 1983. Gruzinskoe Narodnoe Mnogogolosie i Ego Sviazi s Zapadnoevropeiskoi Polifoniei (Georgian Folk Polyphony and its Links with West-European Polyphony). In Kartuli Khalkhuri Musikis Kilo, Melodika Da Ritmi (Mode, Melody and Rhythm of Georgian Folk Music). Shaverzashvili, Aleksandre (responsible editor), pp. 224-244. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Russian)

Bithell, Caroline. 2018. Polyphony, Heritage and Sustainability. The Eight International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 48–54. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Bloom, Michael. 2003. Georgian Singing in the United Kingdom – Joys and Pitfalls. The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia Rusudan and Jordania Joseph (editors), pp. 564-576. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Bolle Zemp, Sylvie. 2001. Khmovnebi da Akordebi. Simghera Zemo Svanetshi (Vowels and Chords. Singing in Zemo Svaneti). In Sasuliero Da Saero Musikis Mravalkhmianobis Problemebi (Problems of Polyphony in Sacred and Secular Music). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editior). Materials of the International Conference on 2000 Anniversary of Christianity and 3000 Anniversary of Georgian Statehood, pp. 292-303. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with English summary)

C

Chavchavadze, Ilia. 1886. Kartuli Khalkhuri Musika (Georgian Folk Music). Newspaper Iveria, N250 and 251 (in Georgian)

Chijavadze, Otar. 1962. Kartuli Khalkhuri Simgherebi. Kakhuri (Georgian Folk Songs. Kakheti). Part I. Tbilisi: Tsodna (in Georgian with Russian and English summary)

Chijavadze, Otar. 1969. Kartuli Khalkhuri Simgherebi. Kakhuri (Georgian Folk Songs. Kakheti). Part II. Tbilisi: Ganatleba (in Georgian with Russian and English summary)

Chijavadze, Otar and Tsagareishvili, Valerian. 1964. Gruzinskie Narodnie Pesni (Georgian Folk Songs). Moscow: Muzika

Chijavadze, Otar. 1985. Gruzinskoe Narodnoe Mnogogolosiei i Evropeiskaia Srednevekovaia Polifonia (Georgian Folk Multi-Part Singing and European Polyphony). In Voprosi Narodnogo Mnogogolosia (Problems of Folk Polyphony), Jordania, Joseph (compiler and editor), pp. 59-60. Tbilisi: Sabchota Sakartvelo (in Russian with English summary)

Chijavadze, Otar. 1991. Kartuli Saeklesio Galobis Stsavlebis Mmetodikis Sakitkhisatvis Dzvel Sakartveloshi (On Teaching Methods of Georgian Sacred Chant in Old Georgia). In Dzveli Kartuli Propesiuli Musika. Istoriisa Da Teoriis Sakitkhebi (Old Georgian Professional Music. Aspects of History and Theory). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 193-203. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Chijavadze, Otar. 1997. Kartuli Khalkhuri Simgheris Moamageni (Patrons of Georgian Folk Song). In Musikismtsodneobis Sakitkhebi (Problems of Musicology). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 63-77. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with Russian and English summary)

Chkheidze, Tamar. 1993-1994. Martlmadidebelta Liturgia Da Katolikuri Mesa – Saerto Da Ganmaskhvavebeli Nishnebi (Orthodox Liturgy and Catholic Mass – Similarities and Differencies). In Musikismtsodneobis Sakitkhebi (Problems of Musicology). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 126-144. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Chkheidze, Tamar. 1997. “Dialogis” Printsipi Ghvtismsakhurebashi. Misi Roli, Punktsiebi Liturgiashi (The Dialogue Principle in the Divineservice. Its Role, Function in the Liturgy). In Musikismtsodneobis Sakitkhebi (Problems of Musicology). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 130-153. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with Russian and English summary)

Chkheidze, Tamar. 2001. Martlmadidebluri Liturgiisa Da Katolikuri Mesis Musikaluri Kompozitsiis Taviseburebani / shedarebiti analizi (Peculiarities of Musical Composition of Orthodox Liturgy and Catholic Mess / comparative analysis). In Sasuliero Da Saero Musikis Mravalkhmianobis Problemebi (Problems of Polyphony in Sacred and Secular Music). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor). Reports of the International Scientific Conference Dedicated to the 3000th Anniversary of Georgia’s Statehood and the 2000th Anniversary of Christ’s Birth; pp. 7-16. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with English summary)

Chkheidze, Tamar. 2006. Chrelta Nuskhisa Da Nevmuri Sistemis Urtiertmimartebis Sakitkhisatvis (On the Interrelation of a List of Chreli (Type of Hymns) and System of neums). The Second International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 399-403. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Chkeidze, Tamar. 2018. Functions and Roles of Voices in the Formation of Eclesiastic Polyphony in Georgian Church Chant. The Eight International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 452–458. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Chkhikvadze, Grigol. 1948. Kartveli Khalkhis Udzvelesi Samusiko Kultura (Ancient Musical Culture of the Georgian People). Tbilisi: Musical Foundation of the Georgian SSR

Chkhikvadze, Grigori. 1957. Drevnegruzinskaya Muzikalnaya Kultura (Old Georgian Musical Culture). In Gruzinskaya Muzikalnaya Kultura (Georgian Musical Culture). Tsulukidze, Anton (editor-in-chief), pp. 7-20. Moscow: Gosidarstvennoe Muzikalnoe Izdatelstvo (in Russian)

Chkhikvadze, Grigori. 1964. Osnovnie Tipi Gruzinskogo Narodnogo Mnogogolosia (The Basic Types of Georgian Folk Multi-Voiced Singing). Moscow: Nauka publishing (VII International Congress in Anthropology and Ethnography) (in Russian and English)

Chkhikvadze, Grigol. 1965. Doistoricheskaia Gruzinskaia Kostianaia Salamuri-Fleita (The Pre-historic Georgian Bone Salamuri-Flute) Separatum. Budapest. Akademiai Kiado / Europa et Hungaria. Congressus Ethnographikus in Hungaria. Budapest. 16-20 October, 1963 (in Russian)

Chchikvadze, Grigol. 1968. Grundtypen der Mehrstimmigkeit im grusinischen Volkslied. (Types of Georgian Folk Song). Sonderdruck aus: Beiträge zur Musikwissenschaft. Heft 3. Berlin (in German)

Chchikvadze, Grigol. 1969. La cultur musicale populaire géorgienne (Georgian Folk Musical Culture). Bedi Kartlisa. Revue de kartvélologie. P. XXVI. Paris (in French)

Chkhikvadze, Grigol. The Types of Georgian Polyphony. In: Echoes from Georgia: Seventeen Arguments on Georgian Polyphony. Focus on Civilizations and Cultures – Music. 2009. Editors: Rusudan Tsurtsumia, Joseph Jordania. Reviewers: Simha Arom (France), Polo Vallejo (Spain) Nova Science Publishers. Inc. New York.

Chokhonelidze, Evsevi. 1973. Diatonur Kilota Sakitkhebisatvis Kartul Khalkhur Musikashi (On Diatonic Modes in Georgian Folk Music). In Sametsniero Shromebi (Scientific Works). Shaverzashvili, Alexandre; Tumanishvili, Ketevan et al. (editorial board), pp. 127-143. Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Chokhonelidze, Evsevi. 1983. Kartuli Khalkhuri Simgheris Kilouri Sapudzvlebis Shesakheb (On the Basic Modal Principles of Georgian Folk Song). In Kartuli Khalkhuri Musikis Kilo, Melodika Da Ritmi (Mode, Melody and Rhythm of Georgian Folk Music). Shaverzashvili, Aleksandre (responsible editor), pp. 3-30. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with Russian summary)

Chokhonelidze, Evsevi. 1988. Khmata Koordinatsiisa Da Harmoniis Zogierti Tavisebureba Kartul Khalkhur Mravalkhmian Musikashi (Some Peculiarities of Vocal Coordination and Harmony of Georgian Folk Polyphonic Music). In Kartuli Musikis Poliponiis Sakitkhebi (On the Polyphony of Georgain Music). Gabunia Nodar; Tsurtsumia Rusudan et al. (editorial board), pp. 29-42. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Chokhonelidze, Evsevi. 2000. Improvizatsiis Khelovneba da Kartuli Poliponiuri Musika (Art of improvisation and Georgian Polyphonic Music). In Khalkhuri Mravalkhmianobis Problemebi (Problems of Folk Polyphony). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor). Materials of the International Conference dedicated to the 80th Anniversary of Tbilisi State Conservatoire, pp. 195-207. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with English summary)

Chokhonelidze, Evsevi. 2001. Kilos Tsnebis Zogierti Istoriuli Da Teoriuli Aspektis Shesakheb (On Some Historical and Theoretical Aspects of Mode). In Sasuliero Da Saero Musikis mravalkhmianobis Problemebi (Problems of Polyphony in Sacred and Secular Music). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editior). Materials of the International Conference on 2000 Anniversary of Christianity and 3000 Anniversary of Georgian Statehood, pp. 304-315. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with English summary)

Chokhonelidze, Evsevi. 2003. Kartul Musikalur-Estetikur Azrovnebashi Tvisebrivi Gardatekhis Erti Mnishvnelovani Periodis Shesakheb (On an Important Period of a Qualitative Shift in Georgian Musical-Aesthetic Thinking). The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 105-108. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Chokhonelidze, Evsevi. Some Characteristic Features of the Voice Coordination and Harmony in Georgian Multipart Music. In: Echoes from Georgia: Seventeen Arguments on Georgian Polyphony. Focus on Civilizations and Cultures – Music. 2009. Editors: Rusudan Tsurtsumia, Joseph Jordania. Reviewers: Simha Arom (France), Polo Vallejo (Spain) Nova Science Publishers. Inc. New York.

Chokhonelidze, Tamar. 1988. Kartuli Khalkhuri Poliponiuri Simgheris Zogierti Taviseburebis Shesakheb(On Some Peculiarities of Georgian Folk Polyphonic Song). In Kartuli Musikis Poliponiis Sakitkhebi (On the Polyphony of Georgain Music). Gabunia Nodar; Tsurtsumia Rusudan et al. (editorial board), pp. 17-28. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

D

Dekanosidze, Natia. 2015. The Compositional and Dramaturgical Peculiarities of Acharan Helpers’ Songs (Naduri) (Problem of Symphonism). The Seventh International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 248–256. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English).

Dgebuadze, Tamar. 1993-1994. Orovelas Genezisis Sakitkhebi (On the genesis of Orovela). In Musikismtsodneobis Sakitkhebi (Problems of Musicology). Tsurtsumia Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 60-73. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Diasamidze, Ekaterine. 2010. On Some Aspects of Polyphony inGeorgian Chanting. The Fourth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 466–469. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Diasamidze, Ekaterine. 2012. Polyphonic Forms in 17th century Russian Liturgical Music. The Fifth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 452–458. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Dolidze, Dali. 1990. Galobis Roli Adrebizantiur Samrevlo Ghvtismsakhurebashi Dzveli Kartuli Liturgikul-Himnograpiuli Dzeglebis Mikhedvit. Mtsukhri (The Role of Chant in Early-Byzantine Liturgy According to Old Georgian Liturgical and Hymnographic Sources. Vespers). In sametsniero Shromebi (Scientific Works). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 215-223. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with Russian summary)

Dolidze, Dali. 1991. Ghamistevis Lotsvis Sagalobelta Liturgikuli Taviseburebani Kartul Saghvtismsakhuro Praktikashi (Liturgical Peculiarities of All-Night Service in Georgian Liturgical Practice). In Dzveli Kartuli Propesiuli Musika. Istoriisa Da Teoriis Sakitkhebi (Old Georgian Professional Music. Aspects of History and Theory). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 193-203. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Dolidze, Dali. 2001. Dzveli Kartuli Sinodikoni (The Old Georgian Synodikon). In Sasuliero Da Saero Musikis Mravalkhmianobis Problemebi (Problems of Polyphony in Sacred and Secular Music). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor). Reports of the International Scientific Conference Dedicated to the 3000th Anniversary of Georgia’s Statehood and the 2000th Anniversary of Christ’s Birth; pp. 17-35. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with English summary)

E

Emsheimer, Ernst. 1989. Folk Music of the Caucasus in the Records of German Travellers. Journal Sabchota Khelovneba, N1, pp. 121-124 (in Georgian)

Erkomaishvili, Anzor. 1980. Kartuli Khalkhuri Simgherebi. Guruli (Georgian Folk Songs. Guria). Tbilisi: Khelovneba (in Georgian)

Erkvanidze, Malkhaz. 1991. Kartuli Musikis Tsqoba (Scale System in Georgian Music). In Dzveli Kartuli Propesiuli Musika. Istoriisa Da Teoriis Sakitkhebi (Old Georgian Professional Music. Aspects of History and Theory). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 172-193. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Erkvanidze, Malkhaz. 2001. Kartuli Mravalkhmianobis Buneba. Pormata Ertianobis Shesakheb(Nature of Georgian Polyphony. On Unity of Forms). In Sasuliero Da Saero Musikis Mravalkhmianobis Problemebi (Problems of Polyphony in Sacred and Secular Music). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor). Reports of the International Scientific Conference Dedicated to the 3000th Anniversary of Georgia’s Statehood and the 2000th Anniversary of Christ’s Birth; pp. 86-100. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with English summary)

Erkvanidze, Malkhaz. 2003. Kartuli Musikis Bgerattsqoba (On Georgian Scale System). The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 178-184. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Erkvanidze, Malkhaz. 2008. Revival-Reconstruction of Georgian Sacred Hymns – One of the Priorities of Georgian School of Chant. The Third International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 456–468. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Erkvanidze, Malkhaz. 2015. The Georgian Musical System (a Short Review). The Seventh International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 456–470. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Erkvanidze, Malkhaz. 2018. On the Canon and Canonic Thinking in Georgian Traditional Music. The Eight International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 489–501. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Essays on Georgian Ethnomusicology. 2005. International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire

F

Foedermayr, Franz & Deutsch, Werner A. 2010. Transcribing HistoricalSound Recordings: Multipart Songs from Guria Recorded by Robert Lach in 1916. The Fourth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 376–394. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Föedermayr, Franz. 2012. Three Masterpieces of Megrelian Song Recorded by Robert Lach in 1916. The Fifth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 506–513. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Foreign Scholars and Collectors of Georgian Folk Music. 2011. Compiled by Nino Nakashidze. Editor: Vakhtang Rodonaia. Khobi – The International Charity Foundation, Culture and the Revival of Spirituality, The International Center for Georgian Song, Ministry of Culture and Monuments Protection of Georgia. Tbilisi: “Ustari” (in Georgian and English)

Foutz, Jeremy. 2012. Ancientness and Traditionality in Georgian Traditional Vocal Music. The Fifth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 394–400. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

G

Gabisonia, Tamaz. 1985. Nekotorie Voprosi Garmonicheskoi Funktsionalnosti v Megrelskikh Narodnikh Mnogogolosnikh Pesniakh (On Harmonic Functionality in Megrelian /West Georgia/ Polyphonic Songs). In Voprosi Narodnogo Mnogogolosia (Problems of Folk Polyphony), Jordania, Joseph (compiler and editor), pp. 29-30. Tbilisi: Sabchota Sakartvelo (in Russian with English summary)

Gabisonia, Tamaz. 1988. Kartuli Khalkhuri Mravalkhmianobis Kompozitsiuri Printsipebi da Tipebi (Compositional Principles and Types of Georgian Folk Polyphony). In Kartuli Musikis Poliponiis Sakitkhebi (On the Polyphony of Georgain Music). Gabunia Nodar; Tsurtsumia Rusudan et al. (editorial board), pp. 3-17. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Gabisonia, Tamaz. 1993-1994. Kartuli Khalkhuri Mravalkhmianobis Sintezuri da Gardamavali Pormebi (Synthetic and Transitional Forms of Georgian Folk Polyphony). In Musikismtsodneobis Sakitkhebi (Problems of Musicology). Tsurtsumia Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 40-59. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Gabisonia, Tamaz. 1997. Punktsiuri Initsiativa Kartul Khalkhur Simgherashi (Functional Initiative in Georgian Folk Song). In Musikismtsodneobis Sakitkhebi (Problems of Musicology). Tsurtsumia Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 51-62. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with Russian and English summary)

Gabisonia, Tamaz. 2000. Kartuli Khalkhuri Vokaluri Mravalkhmianobis Tipologiuri Klasipikatsia Typological Classification of Georgian Folk Vocal Polyphony). In Khalkhuri Mravalkhmianobis Problemebi (Problems of Folk Polyphony). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor). Materials of the International Conference dedicated to the 80th Anniversary of Tbilisi State Conservatoire, pp. 49-65. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with English summary

Gabisonia, Tamaz. 2001. Kartuli Saeklesio Sagaloblisa da Kartuli Khalkhuri Simgheris Urtiertmimartebis Ramodenime Aspekti (Aspects of the Interrelation between Georgian Sacred Hymns and Georgian Folk Song). In Sasuliero Da Saero Musikis Mravalkhmianobis Problemebi (Problems of Polyphony in Sacred and Secular Music). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor). Reports of the International Scientific Conference Dedicated to the 3000th Anniversary of Georgia’s Statehood and the 2000th Anniversary of Christ’s Birth; pp. 209-222. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with English summary)

Gabisonia, Tamaz. 2006. Hipotezebi Kartuli Mravalkhmianobis Chamoqalibebis Protsesis Shesakheb (Hypotheses about the Process of the Formation of Georgian Polyphonic Singing). The Second International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 73-78. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Gabisonia, Tamaz. 2008. The Notion Of Polyphony On The Example Of Georgian Folk Music. The Third International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 76–83. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Gabisonia, Tamaz. Criteria for Determining the Types of Polyphony of Georgian Folk Songs. In: Echoes from Georgia: Seventeen Arguments on Georgian Polyphony. Focus on Civilizations and Cultures – Music. 2009. Editors: Rusudan Tsurtsumia, Joseph Jordania. Reviewers: Simha Arom (France), Polo Vallejo (Spain) Nova Science Publishers. Inc. New York.

Gabisonia, Tamaz. 2010. Forms of the Georgian Folk Instrumental Polyphony. The Fourth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 417–424. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Gabisonia, Tamaz. 2012. The Starting Voice in Georgian Polyphony. The Fifth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 201–210). Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Gabisonia, Tamaz. 2015. Semiotic Dimensions of Drone in Traditional Music. The Seventh International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 141–147. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Gabisonia, Tamaz. 2018. Regularities of Bass Tuning in Georgian Traditional Music. The Eight International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 265–275. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Garaqanidze, Edisher. 1985. Mnogogolosie v Kartli Na Segodniashnem Etape (Multipart Singing in Kartli /East Georgia/ Today). In Voprosi Narodnogo Mnogogolosia (Problems of Folk Polyphony), pp.33-35. Tbilisi: Sabchota Sakartvelo (in Russian with English summary)

Garaqanidze, Edisher. 1985. Pikrebi Kartuli Khalkhuri Simgheris Shemsruleblobaze (Thoughts on the Performance of Georgian Folk Song). Journal Sabchota Khelovneba, N1, pp. 72-83 (in Georgian)

Garaqanidze, Edisher. 1987. Zogierti Kartuli Musikaluri Dialektis Dadgenisatvis (On Ascertainment of Some Georgian Musical Dialects). Journal Sabchota Khelovneba, N6, pp. 91-96 (in Georgian)

Garaqanidze, Edisher. 1988. Improvizatsiis Sakheebi Kartul Khalkhur Simgherebshi (Types of Improvisation in Georgian Folk Songs). In Kartuli Musikis Poliponiis Sakitkhebi (On the Polyphony of Georgain Music). Gabunia, Nodar; Tsurtsumia, Rusudan et al. (editorial board), pp. 62-76. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Garaqanidze, Edisher. 1989. Nekotorie Voprosi Ispolnitelstva Gruzinskikh Narodnikh Pesen i Ansambl “Mtiebi” (Some Aspects of Performance of Georgian Folk Songs and Ensemble Mtiebi). In Traditsionni Folklor i Sovremennie Narodnie Khori i Ansambli (Traditional Folklore and Contemporary Folk Choirs and Ensembles). Lapin, Victor (responsible editor), pp. 124-132. Leningrad: Izdatelstvo LGITM i K (in Russian)

Garaqanidze, Edisher. 1990. Kartuli Musikaluri Dialektebi Da Mati Urtiertmimarteba (Georgian Musical Dialects and Their Interrelationship). PhD dissertation, Tbilisi State Conservatoire (with Russian abstract)

Garakanidze, Edischer. 1991. Georgien. Dreistimmigkeit, Volksmusik, Staadtische Musik (Georgia, three-part singing, folk muisc, town music) In Musik aus Kaukasus. Berlin. (in German)

Garaqanidze, Edisher. 1994. Shereuli Shesrulebi Shesakheb Kartul Khalkhur Sasimghero Shemokmedebashi (On Mixed Performance of Georgian Folk Song). Journal Khelovneba, N1-3, pp. 24-29 (in Georgian)

Garaqanidze, Edisher. 1997. Guruli Musikaluri Dialektis Shesakheb (On Gurian Musical Dialect). In Guria, Mkharis Kvleva-Dziebis Shedegebi (Guria, the Results of the Regional Study). Sadradze, Vazha (editor), pp. 187-196. Tbilisi: Metsniereba (in Georgian with Russian and English summary)

Garaqanidze, Edisher. 1997. Zogierti Kartuli Musikaluri Terminis Raobisa Da Etimologiis Garkvevisatvis (On the Meaning of Some Georgian Musical Terms and Their Etymology). In Musikismtsodneobis Sakitkhebi (Problems of Musicology). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 39-50. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with Russian and English summary)

Garaqanidze, Edisher. 1997. Kartuli Khalkhuri Simgheris Ganvitarebis Erti Adreuli Etapis Shesakheb (On One of the Earliest Stages in the Development of Georgian Folk Song). In Musikismtsodneobis Sakitkhebi (Problems of Musicology). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 18-38. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with Russian and English summary)

Garaqanidze, Edisher. 2011. Georgian Musical Dialects and Their Interrelationship. Editor: Vakhtang Rodonaia. Khobi – The International Charity Foundation, Culture and the Revival of Spirituality, The International Center for Georgian Song, Ministry of Culture and Monuments Protection of Georgia. Tbilisi: “Sakartvelos Matsne” (in Georgian with English summary)

Garaqanidze, Edisher. The Role of Responsorial Singing in Development of Georgian Polyphony.In: Echoes from Georgia: Seventeen Arguments on Georgian Polyphony. Focus on Civilizations and Cultures – Music. 2009. Editors: Rusudan Tsurtsumia, Joseph Jordania. Reviewers: Simha Arom (France), Polo Vallejo (Spain) Nova Science Publishers. Inc. New York.

Garaqanidze, Giorgi. (Gigi). 2014. On One Unknown Example of Ethnomusic Theatre (Zedashe Lullaby). The Sixth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 305–311. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Gelashvili, Maia. 2012. On the Study of the Traditional Music of the Kists (Chechens and Ingushes) from the Pankisi Gorge of Georgia. The Fifth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 159–162. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Gelashvili, Maia. 2018. The Gurian Nanina. The Eight International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 413–418. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Gelzer, Stuart. 2003. Testing a Scale Theory for Georgian Folk Music. The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 186-200. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Georgian Folk Song. The First Sound Recordings. 1901-1914. 2006. Authors: Anzor Erkomaishvili, Vakhtang Rodonaia. With 4 CD. Tbilisi: “Omega Tegi”. (In Georgian and English)

Ghambashidze, Nino. 2006. Chonas Traditsia Da Misi Genezisis Zogierti Sakitkhi (The Tradition of Chona (Easter Ritual) and Some Issues of its Genesis). TheSecond International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 248-253. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Ghambashidze, Nino & Nino Makharadze. 2014. Chvenieroba Festival and Traditional Music Related to It. The Sixth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 252–260. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Gogoladze, Lia. 1987. Ostinatos Gamoqenebis Pormebi Kartul Khalkhur Musikashi (The Forms of Ostinato in Georgian Folk Music). In Kartuli Musikis Melodiis, Harmoniisa Da Pormis Sakitkhebi (On Musical Melody, Harmony and Form of Georgian Music). Tumanishvili, Ketevan (editor), pp. 34-51. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Gogotishvili, Vladimer. 1983. Ob Odnoi Sisteme Melodicheskikh Ladov v Gruzinskoi Mnogogolosnoi Pesne (On a System of Melodic Modes in Georgian Multi-Part Song). In Kartuli Khalkhuri Musikis Kilo, Melodika Da Ritmi (Mode, Melody and Rhythm of Georgian Folk Music). Shaverzashvili, Alexandre (responsible editor), pp. 193-224. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Russian)

Gogotishvili, Vladimer. 1985. O Sisteme Ladov Kvintovoi Diatoniki v Gruzinskoi Mnogogolosnoi Narodnoi Pesne (The ”Fifth Diatonic” Mood System in West Georgian Polyphonic Songs. In Voprosi Narodnogo Mnogogolosia (Problems of Folk Polyphony), pp. 54-55. Tbilisi: Sabchota Sakartvelo (in Russian with English summary)

Gogotishvili, Vladimer. 1988. Poliponiuri Guruli Simgheris Shesakheb (On Gurian Polyphonic Song). In Kartuli Musikis Poliponiis Sakitkhebi (On the Polyphony of Georgain Music). Gabunia Nodar; Tsurtsumia Rusudan et al. (editorial board), pp. 77-99. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Gogotishvili, Vladimer. 1993-1994. Svanuri Sagundo Mravalkhmianobis Pakturuli Taviseburebebis Sakitkhisatvis (On the Textural Peculiarities of Svan Choral Polyphony). In Musikismtsodneobis Sakitkhebi (Problems of Musicology). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 3-39. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with Russian and English summary)

Gogotishvili, Vladimer. 2000. Megruli Lirikuli Simgheris Kilo-Intonatsiuri Tsqobis Taviseburebebis Shesakheb (On Characteristics of Mood-Intonational System in Georgian /Megrelian/ Lyrical Songs). Materials of the International Conference dedicated to the 80th Anniversary of V. Sarajishvili Tbilisi State Conservatoire pp. 66-97. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with English summary)

Gogotishvili, Vladimer. 2001. Mravalkhmiani Kartuli Khalkhuri Simgherebis Kilouri Tsqobis Zogierti Taviseburebis Shesakheb (On Certain Characteristics of Mode Systems of Georgian Polyphonic Folk Songs). In Sasuliero Da Saero Musikis Mravalkhmianobis Problemebi (Problems of Polyphony in Sacred and Secular Music). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor). Reports of the International Scientific Conference Dedicated to the 3000th Anniversary of Georgia’s Statehood and the 2000th Anniversary of Christ’s Birth; pp. 233-259. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with English summary)

Gogotishvili, Vladimer. 2003. Kartl-Kakhuri Grdzeli Supruli Simgherebis Kilo-Intonatsiuri Tsqobis Zogierti Taviseburebis Shesakheb (On Some Characteristics of Mode-Intonational Scales in Kartli-Kakhetian /Eastern Georgia/ Long Table Songs). The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 312-323. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Gogotishvili, Vladimer. 2006. Kartul Khalkhur Sasimghero Mravalkhmianobashi Gabatonebuli Monotonikuri (Araoktavuri) Kilos Avtentikuri Da Plagaluri Sakheobebis Shesakheb (On Authentic and Plagal Types of Monotonic (Non-Octave) Scales in Georgian Traditional Vocal Polyphony). The Second International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 218-226. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Gogotishvili, Vladimer. 2008. Peculiarities of Mode-Intonational Scale in “Georgian Cadence” of Type I. The Third International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 275–281. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Gogotishvili, Vladimer. 2010. Specificfutures of the “Fourth Cadence” in Multipart Kartli-Kakhetian Songs. The Fourth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 258–266. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Gogotishvili, Vladimer. 2011. Theoretical Issues of Georgian Folk Music. (Collected Articles). Tbilisi: Tbilisi Vano Sarajishvili State Conservatoire; National Academy of Science of Georgia (in Georgian and Russian)

Gogotishvili, Vladimer. On Authentic and Plagal Types of Monotonic (Non-Octave) Scales in Georgian Traditional Vocal polyphony. In: Echoes from Georgia: Seventeen Arguments on Georgian Polyphony. Focus on Civilizations and Cultures – Music. 2009. Editors: Rusudan Tsurtsumia, Joseph Jordania. Reviewers: Simha Arom (France), Polo Vallejo (Spain) Nova Science Publishers. Inc. New York.

Gotsiridze, Giorgi & Ghambashidze, Nino. 2008. Liturgic Nature of the Georgian Traditional Feasts, Exulations and Festive Hymns. The Third International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 495–505. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Gough, Richard. 2003. Georgian Song in Wales and Beyond (Part I – An Account of Beginnings, Imaginings and Savouring. The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 588-592. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Graham, John A. 2010. The Role of Memory in the Transmission of Georgian Chant. The Fourth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 498–515. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Graham, John A. 2012. Ivliane Nikoladze: The Alternate Redacteur of the Georgian Heirmoi. The Fifth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 432–446. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Gruzinskie Narodnie Pesni. (Georgian Folk Songs). 1956. Chkhikvadze, Grigol (recorder, editor-in-chief, author of preface and comments). Moscow: Gosudarstvennoe Muzikalnoe izdatelstvo

Gruzinskie Narodnie Pesni. (Georgian Folk Songs). 1972. Erkomaishvili, Anzor (compiler, recorder and transcriber). Moscow: Muzika

Gurian Folk Songs. 2006. Veshapidze, Levan (compiler). Chokhkonelidze, Kukuri (editor). Tbilisi (in Georgian and English)

Gvarjaladze, Gulnara. 1983. Ritmicheskie Osobennosti Gruzinskoi Narodnoi Pesni (Rhythmical Peculiarities of Georgian Folk Song). In Kartuli Khalkhuri Musikis Kilo, Melodika Da Ritmi (Mode, Melody and Rhythm of Georgian Folk Music). Shaverzashvili, Alexandre (responsible editor), pp. 115-136. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Russian)

Gvarjaladze, Gulnara. 1985. Nekotorie Voprosi Ritmicheskoi Vzaimosviazi Slova i Napeva v Gruzinskoi Narodnoi Pesne (On the Rhythmic Interrelationship of the Verbal and Musical components in Georgian Folk Songs). In Voprosi Narodnogo Mnogogolosia (Problems of Folk Polyphony), pp. 31-33. Tbilisi: Sabchota Sakartvelo (in Russian with English summary)

Gvarjaladze, Gulnara. 1987. Metqvelebiti Da Musikaluri Intonatsiis Urtiertkmedebis Sakitkhisatvis Kartlur Da Kakhur Khalkhur Simgherebshi (On the Interrelationship of the Verbal and Musical Components in Folk Songs from Kartli and Kakheti). In Kartuli Musikis Melodiis, Harmoniisa Da Pormis Sakitkhebi (On Musical Melody, Harmony and Form of Georgian Music). Tumanishvili, Ketevan (editor), pp. 110-120. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

H

Haeusermann, Thomas. 2003. Observations on Georgian Christmas Songs. The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 362-379. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Haeusermann, Thomas. 2006. Chona-Kartuli Saaghdgomo Kardakar Sasiarulo Simghera (The Georgian Calendar Song for Easter Chona). The Second International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 233-241. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Hisaoka, Kae. 2014. Structure of Authenticity of Polyphony and Musical Practices in Georgia. The Sixth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 182–186. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Hisaoka, Kae. 2015. The Origin of Drone: The Historical Role of Wandering Paired Pipe Musicians as Drone Mediators. The Seventh International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 199–204. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Hisaoka, Kae. 2018. New Tushetian Female Songs as an Alternative to Georgian Male Polyphonic Culture. The Eight International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 378–381. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Husseinova, Zivar. 2001. “Sakartvelos Saegzarkosos Sasuliero Moambis” Musikaluri Purtslebi (Musical Pages of Sakartvelos Saegzarkosos Sasuliero Moambe). In Sasuliero Da Saero Musikis Mravalkhmianobis Problemebi (Problems of Polyphony in Sacred and Secular Music). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor). Reports of the International Scientific Conference Dedicated to the 3000th Anniversary of Georgia’s Statehood and the 2000th Anniversary of Christ’s Birth; 168- 83. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with English summary)

I

Iashvili, Mzia. 1975. Kartuli Mravalkhmianobis Sakitkhisatvis (On Georgian Multi-Part Singing). Tbilisi: Ganatleba (in Georgian)

Iashvili, Mzia. 1985. Dva Zhanra Drevnegruzinskoi Professionalnoi Muziki i Priemstvennost Traditsii Mnogogolosia (Two Kinds of Georgian Professional Music and the Successiveness of the Tradition of Polyphonic Singing). In Voprosi Narodnogo Mnogogolosia (Problems of Folk Polyphony), pp. 10-11. Tbilisi: Sabchota Sakartvelo (in Russian with English summary)

Iashvili, Mzia. 1997. Kartuli Liturgikuli Praktikidan: Kanoni (From the Georgian Liturgy Practice: Canon). In Musikismtsodneobis Sakitkhebi (Problems of Musicology). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 122-129. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with Russian and English summary)

Inaishvili, Aslan, Noghaideli, Jemal and Chkhikvadze, Grigol. 1961. Masalebi Acharuli usikaluri Polkloridan (Materials from Acharan Musical Folklore). Tbilisi: Sakartvelos SSR Metsnierebata Akademiis Gamomtsemloba

J

Jambakur-Orbeliani, Alksxandre. 1861. Iverianelebis Galoba, Simghera Da Ghighini (The Chanting, Singing and Ghighini of the Iberians. Journal Tsiskari, N1, pp. 141-160 (in Georgian)

Jangulashvil, Svimon. 2010. More than Three-Part Chants in Georgian Liturgical Tradition. The Fourth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 479–490. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Jangulashvili, Svimon (Jiki). 2012. Specific Features of the Polyphonic Musical Texture Transformation in Decorated Chanting. The Fifth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 409–424. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Jangulashvili, Svimon (Jiki). 2015. Georgian and European Polyphonies of the Middle Ages: Several Parallels. The Seventh International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 406–427. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Javakhishvili, Ivane. 1938. Kartuli Musikis Istoriis Dziritadi Sakitkhebi (Basic Aspects of Georgian Folk Music History). Tbilisi: Pederatsia. 2nd edition: 1990. Tbilisi: Khelovneba

Javakhishvili, Ivane. The Views and Theories of Georgian Authors. In: Echoes from Georgia: Seventeen Arguments on Georgian Polyphony. Focus on Civilizations and Cultures – Music. 2009. Editors: Rusudan Tsurtsumia, Joseph Jordania. Reviewers: Simha Arom (France), Polo Vallejo (Spain) Nova Science Publishers. Inc. New York.

Jordania, Josef. 1983. Harmoniuli Punktsionalizmis Sakitkhisatvis Kartul Khalkhur Simgherebshi (On Harmonious Functionality in Georgian Folk Songs). In Kartuli Khalkhuri Musikis Kilo, Melodika Da Ritmi (Mode, Melody and Rhythm of Georgian Folk Music). Shaverzashvili, Alexandre (responsible editor), pp. 53-71. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with Russian summary)

Jordania, Josef. 1985. K Voprosu Vozniknovenia Burdonnogo Trekhgolosia v Gruzinskom Narodnom Muzikalnom Tvorchestve (Emergence of Three-Part Bourdon Singing in Georgian Folk Music). In Voprosi Narodnogo Mnogogolosia (Problems of Folk Polyphony), pp. 21-24. Tbilisi: Sabchota Sakartvelo (in Russian with English summary)

Jordania, Josef. 1989. Gruzinskoe Traditsionnoe Mnogogolosie v Mezhdunarodnom Kontekste Mnogogolosnikh Kultur (Georgian Traditional Polyphony in the Context of Polyphonic Cultures). Tbilisi: Tbilisi State University (in Russian with English summary)

Jordania, Joseph. 2006. Who Asked the First Questions? (The Origins of Human Choral Singing, Intelligence, Language and Speech). Tbilisi Ivane Javakhishvili State University, Institute of Classikal Bizantine and Modern Greek Studies; International Research Centre of Traditional Polyphony. Tbilisi: “Logos”.

Jordania, Joseph. Georgian Traditional Polyphony in Comparative Studies: History and Perspectives. In: Echoes from Georgia: Seventeen Arguments on Georgian Polyphony. Focus on Civilizations and Cultures – Music. 2009. Editors: Rusudan Tsurtsumia, Joseph Jordania. Reviewers: Simha Arom (France), Polo Vallejo (Spain) Nova Science Publishers. Inc. New York.

Jordania, Joseph. 2011. Why Do People Sing? (Music in Human Evolution).International Research Centre of Traditional Polyphony; The University of Melburne; Tbilisi Ivane Javakhishvili State University, Institute of Classikal Bizantine and Modern Greek Studies

Jordania, Joseph; Gabisonia Tamaz. (2011). Georgia: traditional vocal polyphony and folk terminology. In: European Voices II (Cultural Listening and Local Discourse in Multipart Singing Traditions in Eupore).Ardian ahmedaja (ed). Pp 335-375. Bohlau Verlag Wien-Koln-Weimar.

Jordania, Mindia. On the Question of Modzakhili – High Bass. In: Echoes from Georgia: Seventeen Arguments on Georgian Polyphony. Focus on Civilizations and Cultures – Music. 2009. Editors: Rusudan Tsurtsumia, Joseph Jordania. Reviewers: Simha Arom (France), Polo Vallejo (Spain) Nova Science Publishers. Inc. New York.

K

Kalandadze-Makhradze, Nino. 2000. Zari – Mravalkhmiani Glova Kartul Polklorshi (Zari-Multi-Voiced Dirge in Georgian Folklore). In Khalkhuri Mravalkhmianobis Problemebi (Problems of Folk Polyphony). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor). Materials of the International Conference dedicated to the 80th Anniversary of V. Sarajishvili Tbilisi State Conservatoire pp. 121-134. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with English summary)

Kalandadze-Makhradze, Nino. 2001. Vokaluri Shtabechdilebebis Msoplio Antologia Da Kartuli Mravalkhmianoba Parizis Adamianis Muzeumis Etnomusikologiuri Departamentis Ponokolektsiashi (World Anthology of Vocal Impressions and Georgian Polyphony in Ethnomusicological Department Phonocollection of Paris Museum of Man). In Sasuliero Da Saero Musikis mravalkhmianobis Problemebi (Problems of Polyphony in Sacred and Secular Music). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor). Reports of the International Scientific Conference edicated to the 3000th Anniversary of Georgia’s Statehood and the 2000th Anniversary of Christ’s Birth; pp. 223-232. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with English summary)

Kalandadze-Makharadze, Nino. 2003. Mravalkhmiani Kartuli Khalkhuri Sasimghero Metqvelebis Erti Artukulatsiuri Taviseburebis Shesakheb (On One Peculiarity of Articulation in Georgian Polyphonic Singing). The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 340-349. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Kalandadze-Makhradze, Nino. 2006. Glovis Zari Kartvel Mamakatsta Traditsiul Mravalkhmianobashi (The Funeral Zari in Traditional Male Polyphony). The Second International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 166-178. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Kalandadze-Makharadze, Nino. 2010. The Multipart Lyrical Cradle Song in Georgia. The Fourth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 183–197. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Kalandadze-Makharadze, Nino. 2015. Polyphonic Thinking: an Uninterrupted Georgian Tradition (Based on the Example of Chants Performed by Polikarpe Khubulava). The Seventh International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 233–242. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Kane, Frank. 2003. Learning Techniques for Georgian Singing be Georgian Choruses Abroad. The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 558-563. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Kapanadze, Otar. 2006. Aghmosavlet Sakartvelos Mtisa Da Kartl-Kakhuri Saperkhulo Simgherebis Urtiertmimarteba (The Interrelationship between the Round-Dance Songs of the East Georgian Mountains and Plain Regions). The Second International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 259-270. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Kapanadze, Otar. 2015. The Contemporary State of Traditional Polyphony in the East Georgian Mountain Regions (Based on Materials Recorded in Dusheti District, 2012). The Seventh International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 188–192. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Karbelashvili, Vasil. 1897. Kartl-Kakhuri Galoba Karbelaant Kiloti. Mtsukhri (Kartli-Kakhetian Chanting in Karbelaant Mode. Vespers). Part One. Tbilisi: Stamba M. Sharadzisa da Amkhanagobisa (in Georgian and Russian)

Karbelashvili, Vasil. 1898. Kartl-Kakhuri Galoba Karbelaant Kiloti. Mtsukhri (Kartli-Kakhetian Chanting in Karbelaant Mode. Matins). Part Two. Tbilisi: Stamba Tsnobis Purtseli (in Georgian and Russian)

Kargareteli, Ia. 1909. Kartuli Khalkhuri Simgherebi (Georgian Folk Songs, in Georgian)

Kartuli Galoba. Aghmosavletis Skola / Kartl-Kakhuri Kilo (Georgian Hymns). 2005. Erkvanidze, Malkhaz (compiler), volume III. Tbilisi: Anchiskhati Church Choir (in Georgian and English)

Kartuli Galoba. Gelatis Skola. Tormet Sauplo da Udzrav Dghesastasulta Sagaloblebi (Georgian Chant. Gelati School. Twelve Great Feasts and Immovable Feasts). 2002. Erkvanidze, Malkhaz (compiler), volume II. Tbilisi: Chant Center of the Georgian Patriarchy (in Georgian and English)

Kartuli Galoba. Gelatis Skola. Mtsukhris-Tsiskris-Zhamistsirvis, Tormet Sauplo da dzrav Dghesastasulta, Pasekis, Panashvidis Da Kortsinebis Sagaloblebi (Georgian Chant. Gelati School. Matins, Vespers, Twelve Great Feasts and Immovable Feasts, Easter, Requiem and Wedding). 2003. Erkvanidze, Malkhaz and Veshapidze, Levan (compiled and prepared for publication). Tbilisi: Chant Center of the Georgian Patriarchy (in Georgian)

Kartuli Galoba. Guruli Kilo. (Georgian Chant. Gurian Mode). 1976. Rosebashvili, Kakhi (recorder and transcriber). Tbilisi: Georgian Section of the USSR Musical Foundation (in Georgian and Russian)

Kartuli Galoba. Imerul-Guruli Kilo. (Georgian Chant. Imeretian-Gurian Mode). 1968. Rosebashvili, Kakhi (recorder and transcriber). Tbilisi: Georgian Section of the USSR Musical Foundation (in Georgian and Russian)

Kartuli Galoba. Kartl-Kakhuri Kiloti. Liturghia. Ts. Ioane Okropiris Tsirvis Tsesi (Georgian Chant. Kartli-Kakhetian Mode. Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom.) 1899. Ipolitov-Ivanov, Mikheil (transcriber) with the support of P. and V. Karbelashvili, A. Molodinashvili and G. Mghebrishvili. Tbilisi: Stamba M. Sharadzisa da Amkhanagobisa

Kartuli Galoba. Mtsukhri. Tsiskari. Tsirva. Ighumen Ekvtime Kereselidzis da Dekanoz Razhden Khundadzis Khelnatserebis Mikhedvit (Georgian Chant. Vespers. Matins. Liturgy. According to Father Superior Ekvtime Kereselidze’s and Deacon Razhden Khundadze’s manuscripts). 2004. Erkvanidze, Malkhaz (compiler). Volume I, 3rd edition. . Tbilisi: Chant Center of the Georgian Patriarchy (in Georgian and English)

Kartuli Khalkhuri Kalakuri Simgherebi (Georgian Folk Town Songs). 1970. Mshvelidze, Archil (compiler). Tbilisi: Georgian Section of the USSR Musical Foundation (in Georgian and Russian)

Kartuli Khalkhuri Musika. Guria. Artem Erkomaishvilis sanoto krebuli (Georgian Folk Music. Guria. From Artem Erkomaishvili’s collection). 2005. Tbilisi: The International Centre for Georgian Folk Song

Kartuli Khalkhuri Musika Avksenti Megrelidzis Arkividan (Georgian Folk Music from the Archives of Avksenti Megrelidze). 2005. Moistsrapishvili, Nato (compiler). 1st edition. Tbilisi: The International Centre for Georgian Folk Song (in Georgian and English)

Kartuli Khalkhuri Musika. Samegrelo (Georgian Folk Music. Samegrelo). 2003. Chokhonelidze, Kukuri (compiler). Volume I. Tbilisi: The International Centre for Georgian Folk Song. The International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of V. Sarajishvili Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Kartuli Khalkhuri Musika. Samegrelo (Georgian Folk Music. Samegrelo). 2005. Chokhonelidze, Kukuri and Kalandadze, Nino (compilers). Volume II. Tbilisi: The International Centre for Georgian Folk Song. The International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of V. Sarajishvili Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Kartuli Khalkhuri Musikaluri Shemokmedeba / Sakhelmdzghvanelo konservatoriis sashemsruleblo pakultetis studenttatvis (Georgian Folk Music / for performance majors at the Conservatoire with audio material on 2 CDs and corresponding transcriptions). 2005. Tbilisi: The International Research Centre for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire

Kartuli Khalkhuri Simghera (Georgian Folk Song). 1960. Chkhikvadze, Grigol (compiler and editor). Volume I. Tbilisi: Sabchota Sakartveli (in Georgian and Russian)

Kartuli Khalkhuri Simghera (Georgian Folk Song). 1981. Rosebashvili, Kakhi (recorder and transcriber). Tbilisi: Georgian Section of the USSR Musical Foundation

Kartuli Khalkhuri Simgherebi. Anchiskhatis gundis repertuaridan/ (Georgian Folk Songs. From the repertoire of the Anchiskhati Choir). 2005. Shughliashvili, Davit (compiler and transcriber); Erkvanidze, Malkhaz (editor). Tbilisi: Globusi (in Georgian and English)

Kartuli Khalkhuri Simgherebi. Megruli (Georgian Folk Songs. Samegrelo). 1974. Chijavadze, Otar (compiler). Tbilisi: Khelovneba (in Georgian, with Russian and English summary)

Kartuli Khalkhuri Simgherebis Krebuli. Guria (Collection of Georgian Folk Songs. Guria). 1973. Parts I and II. Chumburidze, Vladimer (compiler). Tbilisi: Georgian Ministry of Culture. Republican House of Folk Art

Kartuli Khalkhuri Simgherebis Krebuli (Collection of Georgian Folk Songs). 1983. For children’s choirs. Goderdzishvili, Durmishkhan (compiler). Tbilisi: Georgian Ministry of Culture; Republican House of Folk Art and Republican Scientific-Methodical Centre of Cultural-Educational Work (in Georgian)

Kartuli Khalkhuri Simgherebis Krebuli. Imeruli, Guruli, Rachuli, Svanuri da Kartl-Kakhuri. (Collection of Georgian Folk Songs: Imeretian, Gurian, Rachan, Svanetian and Kartli-Kakhetian). 1910. Paliashvili, Zakaria (recorder and compiler). Tbilisi: Tpilisis Kartuli Pilarmoniuli Sazogadoebis Gamotsema N5 (in Georgian and Russian)

Kartuli Khalkhuri Simgherebis Krebuli. Racha, Lechkhumi, Svaneti (Collection of Georgian Folk Songs. Racha, Lechkhumi, Svaneti). 1975. Berishvili, Pavle and Chikovani, Nikoloz (compilers). Tbilisi: Georgian Ministry of Culture. Republican House of Folk Art

Kartuli Saeklesio Galoba. Shemokmedis Skola. Artem Erkomaishvilis Chanatserebis Mikhedvit (Georgian Church Chant. Shemokmedi School. From Artem Erkomaishvili’s Recordings). 2002. Shughliashvili, Davit (transcriber and compiler). Tbilisi: Chant Center of the Georgian Patriarchy (in Georgian and English)

Kartuli Saeklesio Galoba. Gelatis Skola. Didi Markhvisa Da Zatikis Sagaloblebi (Georgian Church Chant. Gelati School. The Lenten Triodion and Pentecostarian Chants). 2006. Erkvanidze, Malkhaz (compiler and musical editor), volume IV. Tbilisi: Chant Center of the Georgian Patriarchy (in Georgian and English)

Kartuli Saeklesio Galoba. Shemokmedis Skola. Artem Erkomaishvilis Chanatserebis Mikhedvit (Georgian Church Chant. Shemokmedi School. From Artem Erkomaishvili’s Recordings). 2006. Second edition. Shughliashvili, Davit (transcriber and compiler). The International Centre for Georgian Folk Song. Tbilisi State Conservatoire. Tbilisi: Iota Ltd. (in Georgian and English)

Kartuli Saeklesio Sagaloblebi. Kartl-Kakhuri Kilo (Georgian Church Chant. Kartli-Kakhetian Mode). 1909. St. Ioane Okropiri’s Liturgy arranged for mixed male-famale choir by Zakaria Paliashvili. Performed at the concerts of Georgian Philharmonic Society. Publication of Georgian Philharmonic Society, N3 (in Georgian and Russian)

Kartuli Traditsiuli Musika. Saeklesio Da Salkhino Sagaloblebi. Guruli Kilo (Georgian Traditional Music. Church and Feast Hymns. Gurian Mode). 2003. Given by Dimitri Patarava, recorded by Mamia Patarava. Erkvanidze, Malkhaz (compiler and musical editor). Tbilisi: Chant Center of the Georgian Patriarchy (in Georgian and English)

Kavtaradze, Marine. 2003. Traditsiul Musikalur Kulturata Urtiertoba da Transpormatsia Tipologiurad Utskho Kulturul Garemoshi (Transformation of Traditional Musical Cultures within Typologically Foreign Cultures). The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 515-520. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Kavtaradze, Marina & Buchukuri, Ekaterine. 2012. The Problem of Interrelation Between Polyphony and Monophony on the Example of Georgian Urban Musical Folklore. The Fifth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 91–96. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Kavtaradze, Marina. 2014. Monophony and Polyphony: Cultural-Historical Aspects of the Paradigmatic Changes (A View on European Polyphony). The Sixth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 144–148. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Khardziani, Maka. 2003. Mravalkhmianobis Tipis Gansazghvris Da Samkhmianobis Tsarmoshobis Sakitkhisatvis Svanur Musikalur Polklorshi (Formation of Three-Part Singing and Determination of the Type of Polyphony in Svanetian Traditional Music). The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 330-333. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Khardziani, Maka. 2006. Samonadireo Traditsiebis Asakhva Svanur Musikalur Polklorshi (Reflection of the Tradition of Hunting in Svan Musical Folklore). The Second International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 205-208. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Khardziani, Maka. 2010. Svan Hunting Song. The Fourth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 222–227. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Khardziani, Maka. 2012. On the Change of Three-Part Songs into One-Part Songs in Georgian Traditional Music (Racha and Svaneti). The Fifth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 168–172. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Khundadze, Razhden. 1911. Kartuli Galoba. Liturghia Ioane Okropirisa, Vasilsi Didisa da Grigori Ghvtismetqvelisa. Gurul-Imeruli Sada Kiloze (Georgian Chant. Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom, Basil the Great and Grigol the Theologian. Gurian-Imeretian Plain Mode). Tpilisi: Elektrombechdavi Stamba A. Kereselidzisa

Klenovsky, N. 1896. Pesnopenia. Na Liturgii Cv. Ioanna Zlatoustago Gruzinskago /Kakhetinskago / Raspeva (Chants of Georgian / Kakhetian / Mode at St. Ioane Okropiri’s Liturgy). Private property of the publisher P. Urgenson (Commissioner of Royal Choir, Emperor’s Russian Musical Society and Moscow Conservatory). Moscow-Leipzig: Parovaia skoroerchatnia not P. Urgensona v Moskve (in Russian)

Kochlamazashvili, Ekvtime. 1991. Iovane Okropiris Tsirva (Liturgy of Iovane Okropiri). In Dzveli Kartuli Propesiuli Musika. Istoriisa DaTeoriis Sakitkhebi (Old Georgian Professional Music. Aspects of History and Theory). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 203-231. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Kokeladze, Grigol. 1977. Zogi Ram Kartul Tsekvaze (On Georgian Dance). Tbilisi: Khelovneba

Kokeladze, Grigol. 1979. 50 Kartul Khalkhuri Simghera (50 Georgian Folk Songs). Book 1. Tbilisi: SSR Kavshiris Musikaluri Pondis Sakartvelos Ganqopileba (in Georgian and Russian)

Kokeladze, Grigol. 1984. Asi Kartul Khalkhuri Simghera (One Hundred Georgian Folk Songs). Book 1. Tbilisi: Khelovneba (in Georgian and Russian)

Kokeladze, Grigol. 1985. Kartul Khalkhuri Simgherebi. Tkmulebebita Da Komentarebit (Georgian Folk Songs. With Legends / Histories and Comments). II Edition. Tbilisi: SSR Kavshiris Musikaluri Pondis Sakartvelos Ganqopileba (in Georgian and Russian)

Koridze, Pilimon. 1895. Kartuli Galoba. Liturgia Ioane Okropirisa (Georgian Chant. Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom.) Score N1. Tpilisi: Stamba M. Sharadzisa da Amkhanagobisa

Kotrikadze, Sopo. 2015. Georgian Traditional Polyphony and Youth (The Results of Sociological Observation). The Seventh International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 529–531. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Kraveishvili, Giorgi. 2015. Polyphony in the Musical Folklore of Chveneburebi – the Georgians Living Abroad. The Seventh International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 315–325. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Kraveishvili, Giorgi. 2018. Klarjetian Folk Music and Its Parallels with Meskhetian (a Process of Monophonization). The Eight International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 352–357. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Kvizhinadze, Marina. 2003. Guruli Simghera “Aguna” (Gurian Song Aguna). The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 383-386. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Kuzmich, Andrea. 2008. Non-Change in Tbilisi Ensembles. The Third International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 437–446. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Kuzmich, Andrea. 2012. The Transnational Ancestry of Georgian Polyphony: Other Practitioners of Traditional Georgian Songs and Narratives of the Past. The Fifth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 284–289. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Kuzmich, Andrea. 2014. Not a Revival, a Tradition of Revivals: Rereading Georgian Traditional Polyphony Trough the Ensemble Traditions. The Sixth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 154–159. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Kvizhinadze, Marina. 2006. Ghvinis Ghvtaebisadmi Midzghvnili Simgherebis Ritmul-Intonatsiuri Taviseburebani (Rhythmic-Intonational Features of the Ritual Songs Dedicated to the Deity of Vine). The Second International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 299-306. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Kvizhinadze, Marina. 2015. Notes on Performing Traditional Multipart Songs in Abkhazia (Abkhazeti). The Seventh International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 93–100. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

L

Lechleitner, Franz. 2008. The Georgian Wax Cylinder Collections – Recording Technology and Recommendations for Restoration. The Third International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 581–583. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Lechleitner, Gerda & Lomidze, Nona. 2008. Georgian and Bukharian Jews in Vienna. The Third International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 570–577. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Lechleitner, Gerda; Lechleitner, Franz; Lomidze, Nona. 2014. CD-Project: Recordings from the Caucasian Region, 1909 and 1915–16. The Sixth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 433–440. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Lobanov, Mikhail. 2005. The Polyphonic Performance of Folk Songs and the Systematization of Tunes. The Second International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 362–364. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Lomidze, Nona. 2006. Phonogram Archive and Georgian Records. The Second International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 516-522. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Lomidze, Nona. 2008. Georgian Songs: Transcription and Computer. The Third International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 401–412. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Lomidze, Nona. 2012. Challenges in Musical Transcriptions of Kakhetian Songs. The Fifth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 541–551. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Lomidze, Nona. 2015. Georgian Jews in Vienna – Their Traditions and Integration. The Seventh International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 51–56. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Lomsadze, Teona. (2015). The Tree of Life Mythologema in Georgian Musical Folklore (On the Poplar and Rituals Associated with It). The Seventh International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 345–352. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

M

Machabeli, Davit. 1864. Kartuelta Zneoba (Morals of the Georgians). Journal Tsiskari, N5 (May), pp.49-73.

Maghradze, Valerian. 1983. Meskhuri Khalkhuri Simgherebis Damakhasiatebeli Intonatsiebi (The Intonations Characteristic to Meskhetian Folk Songs). In Kartuli Khalkhuri Musikis Kilo, Melodika Da Ritmi (Mode, Melody and Rhythm of Georgian Folk Music). Shaverzashvili, Aleksandre (responsible editor), pp. 171-193. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Russian)

Maghradze, Valerian. 1985. K Voprosu Mnogogolosnogo Khorovogo Penia v Meskhetii (On Multi-Part Choral Singing in Meskheti). In Voprosi Narodnogo Mnogogolosia (Problems of Folk Polyphony), pp. 54-55. Tbilisi: Sabchota Sakartvelo (in Russian with English summary)

Maghradze, Valerian. 1987. Kartuli / Meskhuri / Khalkhuri Simgherebi (Georgian / Meskhetian/Folk Songs). Tbilisi: Khelovneba (in Georgian)

Magradze, Valerian. On The Problem of Polyphony in Meskhetian Songs. In: Echoes fromGeorgia: Seventeen Arguments on Georgian Polyphony. Focus on Civilizations and Cultures – Music. 2009. Editors: Rusudan Tsurtsumia, Joseph Jordania. Reviewers: Simha Arom (France), Polo Vallejo (Spain) Nova Science Publishers. Inc. New York.

Maisuradze, Nino. 1971. Aghmosavlet Sakartvelos Musikaluri Kultura (Musical Culture of Eastern Georgia). Tbilisi: Metsniereba (in Georgian with Russian summary)

Maisuradze, Nino. 1989. Kartuli Khalkhuri Musika Da Misi Istoriul-Etnograpiuli Aspektebi (Georgian Folk Music and Its Historico-Ethnographical Aspects). Tbilisi: Metsniereba (in Georgian with Russian summary)

Maisuradze, Nino. 1990. Drevneishie Etapi Razvitia Gruzinskoi Narodnoi Muziki (The Oldest Stages of Development of Georgian Folk Music). Tbilisi: Metsniereba (in Russian)

Maisuradze, Nino. 2003. Zogi Ram Kartuli Traditsiuli Mravalkhmianobis Shasekheb (On Some Problems of Georgian Traditional Polyphony). The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 288-292. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Makarashvili, Lela. 2006. Kartuli Khalkhuri Musikaluri Shemokmedebis Katedris Monatsemta Baza (Georgian Folk Music Database System). The Second International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 357-358. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Managadze, Khatuna. 2001. Didi Markhvis Liturgikul-Istoriuli Da Musikaluri Aspektebi (Historico-Liturgical and Musical Aspects of Lent Chants). In Sasuliero Da Saero Musikis Mravalkhmianobis Problemebi (Problems of Polyphony in Sacred and Secular Music). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor). Reports of the International Scientific Conference Dedicated to the 3000th Anniversary of Georgia’s Statehood and the 2000th Anniversary of Christ’s Birth; pp. 36-48. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with English summary)

Managadze, Khatuna. 2006. Tsminda Andria Kritelis “Sinanulis Kanoni” Ioane Petritsis Estetikis Shukze (Heirmoses of St. Andrew of Crete’s “Canon of Repentance”). The Second International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 409-414. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Manjgaladze, Ketevan. 2006. Krimanchulis Nairsakheobebi Dasavlet Sakartvelos Khalkhur Simgherebshi (Varieties of Krimanchuli (Yodel) in West Georgia’s Folk Songs). The Second International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 289-292. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Martashvili, Lasha. 2018. A System for the Flawless Notation of Georgian Polyphonic Folk Music. The Eight International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 203–213. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Maruashvili, Leila. 2012. Refraction of Georgian Folk Polyphony in Professional Music. The Fifth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 562–572. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Masako, Morimoto; Manabu, Honda; Emi, Nishina; Norie, Kawai; Tsutomu, Oohashi. 2012. Study on Sound Structure of Georgian Traditional Polyphony: Quantitative Analysis of Its Fluctuation Structure. The Fifth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 521–526. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Meskhi, Tamar. 2000. Kartuli Kalakuri Mravalkhmiani Simgherebi (Georgian Urban Multi-Voiced Songs). In Khalkhuri Mravalkhmianobis Problemebi (Problems of Folk Polyphony). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor). Materials of the International Conference dedicated to the 80th Anniversary of Tbilisi State Conservatoire, pp. 135-142. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with English summary)

Meskhi, Tamar. 2001. Kalta Mravalkhmianobis Sakitkhisatvis (On Women Polyphony). In Sasuliero Da Saero Musikis Mravalkhmianobis Problemebi (Problems of Polyphony in Sacred and Secular Music). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor). Reports of the International Scientific Conference Dedicated to the 3000th Anniversary of Georgia’s Statehood and the 2000th Anniversary of Christ’s Birth; pp. 281-291. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with English summary)

Meskhi, Tamar. 2003. Sabchota Periodis Kartuli Samusiko Polkloris Shesakheb (On Georgian Traditional Music in the Soviet Period). The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 493-507. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Mills, Joan. 2003. Georgian Song in Wales and Beyond (Part II – The Development of Interest in Georgian Song within the “Community Choir” Movement and in Performance Training. The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 593-598. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Mingrelskie Pesni (Megrelian Songs). 1894. Transcriptions by K. Grozdov enclosed to the collection of materials describing the regions and tribes of the Caucasus. Vol. XVIII. Tiflis: Tipografia Kants. Namestnika Ego Imperatorskogo Velichestva na Kavkaze i K. Kozlovskogo (in Russian)

Mzhavanadze, Nana. 2018. On One Cadence Articulation in Svans’ Singing Repertoire. The Eight International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 365–374. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Mzev Shin Shemodio. 2004. Kartuli Khalkhuri Musika Bavshvebs (Georgian Folk Music for Children). Kalandadze-Makharadze, Nino (compiler). Part 1. Tbilisi: The International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire

N

Nadel, Siegfied F.. Georgian Songs. In: Echoes from Georgia: Seventeen Arguments on Georgian Polyphony. Focus on Civilizations and Cultures – Music. 2009. Editors: Rusudan Tsurtsumia, Joseph Jordania. Reviewers: Simha Arom (France), Polo Vallejo (Spain) Nova Science Publishers. Inc. New York.

Nakashidze, Ketevan. 2003. Mravalkhmianobis Sakitkhi Kartul Glovis Simgherebshi (On Polyphony in Georgian Funeral Songs). The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 299-305. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Nakashidze, Nino. 2015. Audio Recordings and Performers of the Berlin Phonogramm-Archiv and Tbilisi State Conservatoire Joint Project. The Seventh International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 176–180. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Naneishvili, Nino. 2012. Ornamented Structural Formulas in the Easter Heirmoses. The Fifth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 475–481. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Naneishvili, Nino. 2015. On the Religio-Cultural Conglomerate in Dedoplistsqaro (Kakheti). The Seventh International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 333–338. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Nikoladze, Ketevan. 2003. Mravalkhmianobis Tipebis Urtiertmimartebis Sakitkhisatvis Vokalur Da Sakravier Musikashi (On the Problem of Interrelationship between the Forms of Polyphony in Vocal and Instrumental Music). The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 418-424. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Ninoshvili, Lauren. 2008. Sacred Music in the Orthodox Diaspora : A Case for Georgian Hymns in English. The Third International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 524–530. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Nishina, Emi; Honda, Manabu; Maekawa, Tadao; Nakamura, Satoshi; Morimoto, Masako; Yagi, Reiko; Norie, Kawai; Oohashi Tsutomu. 2005. Hyper-Symbolic Sound Structure of Kartuli Polyphonia. The Second International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 343-349. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Norie, Kawai; Nakamura, Satoshi; Tsuchiya, Yuriko; Yajima, Arika; Kametani, Mikio. 2005. Historical Overview of Geinoh-Yamashirogumi’s Approach to Kartuli Polyphonia: 1969–2004. The Second International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 530–537. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Norie, Kawai; Masako, Morimoto; Manabu, Honda; Eiko, Onodera; Emi, Nishina; Tsutomu Oohashi. 2012. Study on Sound Structure of Georgian Traditional Polyphony: Analysis of Its Temperament Structure. The Fifth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 532–537. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

O

Oniani, Ekaterine. 2001. Zogierti Mosazreba Kartuli Gamshvenebuli Galobis Shesakheb (Sone Considerations on Georgian Beautiful Chanting). In Sasuliero Da Saero Musikis Mravalkhmianobis Problemebi (Problems of Polyphony in Sacred and Secular Music). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor). Reports of the International Scientific Conference Dedicated to the 3000th Anniversary of Georgia’s Statehood and the 2000th Anniversary of Christ’s Birth; pp. 59-68. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with English summary)

Oniani, Ekaterine. 2003. Galobis Gamshvenebis Sakitkhisatvis Kartul Sagalobo Praktikashi (On the Problem of decoration /Gamshveneba/ of Hymns in Georgian Chanting). The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 463-469. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Oniani, Ekaterine. 2012. On the Polyphony of Georgian Chant. The Fifth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 381–386. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Ositashvili, Mariam. 1983. Kartuli Rva Khmis Sistema Da Misi Kilo-Intonatsiuri Sapudzvlebi (Georgian System of Octoechos and Its Mode-Intonational Fundamentals). In Kartuli Khalkhuri Musikis Kilo, Melodika Da Ritmi (Mode, Melody and Rhythm of Georgian Folk Music). Shaverzashvili, Alexandre (responsible editor), pp. 93-114. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with Russian summary)

Ositashvili, Mariam. 1985. Gruzinskaia Sistema Osmoglasia (Georgian System of Octoechos). In Voprosi Narodnogo Mnogogolosia (Problems of Folk Polyphony), pp. 56-59. Tbilisi: Sabchota Sakartvelo (in Russian with English summary)

Ositashvili, Mariam. 1986. Kartuli Galobis Erti Problemis Shesakheb (A Problem of Georgian Sacred Chant). Journal Sabchota Khelovneba, N3, pp. 75-84 (in Georgian)

Ositashvili, Mariam. 1991. “Chrelebis” Shestsavlis Zogierti Sakitkhi (On the Study of the Chreli). In Dzveli Kartuli Propesiuli Musika. Istoriisa DaTeoriis Sakitkhebi (Old Georgian Professional Music. Aspects of History and Theory). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 93-111. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Ositashvili, Mariam. 2003. Dzveli Kartuli Propesiuli Musikis Zogierti Taviseburebis Shesakheb On Some Peculiarities of Georgian Old Professional Music). The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 476-480. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Ositashvili, Mariam. 2006. Kartuli Saero Da Sasuliero Mravalkhmianobis Urtiertkavshiris Shesakheb (On the Interconnection of Georgian Secular and Sacred Polyphony). The Second International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 434-444. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

P

Partskhaladze, Aleksandre. 1936. Acharis Khalkhuri Tsekvebi da Simgherebi (Acharan Folk Dances and Songs). Samusiko-Etnograpiul Masalata Krebuli (Collection of Musical-Ethnographic Materials). Batumi: Acharis Sakhelmtsipo Gamomtsemloba

Pirtskhalava, Nino. 1991. Kartuli Himnograpiis Estetikis Sakitkhisatvis (On Easthetics of Georgian Hymnography). In Dzveli Kartuli Propesiuli Musika. Istoriisa DaTeoriis Sakitkhebi (Old Georgian Professional Music. Aspects of History and Theory). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 67-80. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Pirtskhalava, Nino. 1993-1994. Nartis Shesakheb Ioane Petritsis Tkhzulebashi (On Narti in Ioane Petritsis Work). In Musikismtsodneobis Sakitkhebi (Problems of Musicology). Tsurtsumia, Rusudan (responsible editor), pp. 86-101. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with russian and English summary)

Pirtskhalava, Nino. 2000. Tsneba “Bamtan” Dakavshirebit Ioane Petritsis Ganmartebashi (Ioane Petritsi’s Aesthetics and Georgian Three-Part Singing). Materials of the International Conference dedicated to the 80th Anniversary of Tbilisi State Conservatoire, pp. 156-163. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian with English summary)

Pirtskhalava, Nino. 2003. Petritsis Pilosopia Da Kartuli Mravalkhmianoba (Ioane Petritsi’s Philosophy and Georgian Polyphony). The First International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 119-126. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Pirtskhalava, Nino. 2006. Ioane Petritsis Mnishvnelobis Shesakheb Kartuli Himnograpiis Istoriashi (On the Significance of Ioane Petritsi in the History of Georgian Hymnography). The Second International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 61-65. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Pirtskhalava, Nino. 2008. The Georgian Term Mortuleba, An Equivalent to The Word Harmony in Ioane Petritsi’s Work Ganmartebai… ( The Interpretation). The Third International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 92–96. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Pirtskhalava, Nino. 2010. Ioane Petritsi’s Musical and Aesthetic Thinking According to Nemesius of Emesa’s “On Human Nature”. The Fourth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 541–549. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Pirtskhalava, Nino. 2014. On the Interrelation Between Ebani, Bani and Bami. The Sixth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 120–126. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Pirtskhalava, Nino. 2015. On a Musical Analogy in Ioane Petritsi’s Composition Interpretation of Proclus Diadochos’ and Plato’s Philosophy. The Seventh International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 481–487. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Pirtskhalava, Nino. 2018. For the issue of Ioanne Petritsi’s Musical terminology. The Eight International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 442–446. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

R

Razmadze, Nino. 2012. The Dynamics of the Evolution of One Song (on the example of Patara Saqvarelo – My Little Love). The Fifth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 368–374. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Razmadze, Nino. 2015. Dzikr as an Expression of the Identity of the Kists from Pankisi Gorge. The Seventh International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 302–307. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Rosebashvili, Kakhi. 1973. Galobis Traditsiis Sakitkhisatvis Sakartveloshi (On the Tradition of Chant in Georgia). In Sametsniero Shromebi (Scientific Works). Shaverzashvili, Alexandre; Tumanishvili, Ketevan et al. (editorial board), pp. 144-162. Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Rosebashvili, Kakhi. 1988. Kartuli Khalkhuri Simgheris Kilos Gansazghvris Sakitkhisatvis /Aghmosavlet Sakartvelos Khalkhuri Simgherebis Magalitze (On the Determination of the Mode of Georgian Folk Songs / On the Example of East Georgian Folk Songs). In Kartuli Musikis Poliponiis Sakitkhebi (On the Polyphony of Georgain Music). Gabunia Nodar; Tsurtsumia Rusudan et al. (editorial board), pp. 42-61. Tbilisi: Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian)

Rukhadze, Teona. 2008. Achara-Shavshetian Maqruli (Best men’s) Songs. The Third International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 356–364. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Rukhadze, Teona. 2018. Gudastviri in the Traditional Music of Georgians Living in Georgia and beyond its Borders (Polyphony and Other Peculiarities of Performance). The Eight International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 549–555. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

S

Salamuri. Sakhalkho Simgherebi (Salamuri. Folk Songs). 1896. Chkhikvadze, Zakaria (recorder and compiler). Tpilisi: Tsera-Kitkhvis Gamavrtselebeli Sazogadoebis Gamotsema N 28, Stamba M. Sharadzisa da Amkhanagobisa

Samshoblo Khmebi (Voices of Motherland). 1878. Machavariani, Mikheil (compiler). Tbilisi: Khelnatseri Gamotsema

Samsonadze, Victoria. 2014. Genre Peculiarities of Meskhetian Musical Dialect. The Sixth International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors), pp. 360–367. Tbilisi: International Research Center for Traditional Polyphony of Tbilisi State Conservatoire (in Georgian and English)

Scherbaum, Frank; Arom, Simha; Kane, Frank. 2018. Graphical Comparative Analysis of the Harmonic Structure of the V. Akhobadze Corpus of Svan Songs. The Eight International Symposium on Traditional Polyphony. Turtsumia, Rusudan and Jordania, Joseph (editors