PHILADELPHIA — Willie Green scored a season-high 20 points, Andre Iguodala also had 20 and the Philadelphia 76ers kicked off a seven-game homestand with a 104-94 win over the pesky Washington Wizards on Friday night.

The Sixers built a 15-point lead in the first half, then watched it evaporate against the worst team in the NBA. The Wizards briefly went ahead late in the third quarter, only to lose their fifth straight game.

Royal Ivey hit a pair of tiebreaking 3-pointers in the final 2 minutes of the third, the latter of which gave the Sixers the lead for good.

Antawn Jamison had 25 points and 15 rebounds for the Wizards.

The Sixers (23-22) have won 10 of 12 and moved above .500 for the first time since they were 7-6 on Nov. 23. They lost four straight after that mark in a skid that eventually cost former coach Maurice Cheeks his job. The Sixers are 14-8 under Tony DiLeo and were counting on a strong showing on their longest homestand of the year to push them up the Eastern Conference standings.

They won this one, but may have lost center Samuel Dalembert for a bit.

Philadelphia was hoping to pair Dalembert and power forward Elton Brand in the frontcourt from the opening tip. Brand came off the bench for the fourth straight game, easing back into the lineup as he recovers from a dislocated right shoulder. Dalembert could miss at least Saturday’s game against New Jersey because he sprained his ankle going up for an offensive rebound at the end of the first half.

Dalembert, who was scoreless in 13 minutes, went down in a heap and immediately grabbed his ankle. X-rays were negative.

Thaddeus Young filled in with 18 points and nine rebounds in 43 minutes.

Green scored 16 points in the first quarter, going 7-for-10 from the floor, to spark Philadelphia to a fast 15-point lead.

The Sixers needed all of it, because the Wizards got the better of them most of the rest of the way.

Jamison’s layup off a turnover gave Washington a 64-63 lead and Javaris Crittenton immediately followed with an off-balance bucket to cap an 18-4 run.

The Sixers, though, got big baskets down the stretch from Iguodala and Lou Williams.

First, deep reserve Ivey brought them back with the long ball.

He sank one 3 that tied the score then hit another for a 71-68 lead. Williams, who scored 14 points, buried a 27-footer as the quarter expired.

Williams scored seven points during an 11-2 run in the middle of the fourth that pushed the lead back to 10. Iguodala scored the next six for the Sixers.

Notes:@ DiLeo said he has enjoyed coaching the Sixers, but will wait until the end of the season to decide if he wants to return. … DiLeo said Brand hasn’t complained about coming off the bench. “He’ll do anything to help us win. He’s truly sincere about that,” he said. … The Sixers don’t play on the road again until after the All-Star break, when they go to Indiana on Feb. 17.