With first place in the Southeast Division on the line, and Miami losing in Toronto, the Wizards beat the Sixers, 111-108, at the Verizon Center on Wednesday night. Trailing by double digits early, the Wizards went to work in the second quarter, then blew the game open in the third to improve to 38-32. The exclamation point came at the buzzer in the third quarter when Caron Butler, returning from a six-game absence, threw the ball from the far free throw line and watched it fall through the hoop. That could have been the end of the Sixers, but they didn’t give up, using a 19-4 run in the fourth and tying the game at 101 with a 3-pointer from Kyle Korver. But the Wizards held on down the stretch, and Andre Iguodala’s 3 at the final buzzer missed. The loss dropped the Sixers to 28-43. The visitors were shorthanded when the game began. Although Iguodala (sore back) and Andre Miller (knee bruise) were able to play, guard Willie Green sat out with a sore knee. You’d never know that Iguodala’s back was bothering him. The third-year swingman put up 26 points to lead the Sixers while dishing out 15 assists and pulling down seven rebounds. Samuel Dalembert added 24 points and had nine boards. Washington encountered problems of its own, but gladly got Caron Butler back after an absence of six games. DeShawn Stevenson led the Wizards with 28 points and Butler added 21. The Sixers had won two in a row entering the game, including a 19-point comeback Saturday night against Miami. In Washington, they didn’t allow the Wizards to get the jump on them, taking a 10-point lead in the first quarter. Midway through the second, they were up by eight before the Wizards staged a 13-0 run. Trailing 52-49 at halftime, the Sixers kept pace with the Wizards until the final few minutes of the third quarter. Ever wonder what a coach says to his players, or in the case of Maurice Cheeks, to the fans during an NBA game? Last Friday, during the first half of the 76ers’ game against the Celtics, people watching its Comcast SportsNet telecast will be able to listen when Cheeks wears a microphone. Cheeks isn’t much of a screamer, so he’s not too worried about the experiment. “Hopefully, it’s a game we’re winning from end to end so we don’t have to worry about what you say,” Cheeks said with a smile Wednesday night before the Sixers took on the Wizards. Along with calling plays and talking to players, Cheeks often interacts with fans in the stands during games. During the course of his team’s historic, 50-point loss March 18 to Houston, the Sixers grabbed two rebounds in a row. Cheeks told fans near the bench that such a turn of events didn’t seem right. “It looked like we were going on a spurt because we got two rebounds in a row,” he said. Cheeks has been talking to fans since he first became a head coach in Portland. “They have a good time talking to me, we have a good time talking back and forth,” he said. “They enjoy it, I enjoy it.” There are perks to it as well. “When you talk to the fans, I think they’re a little nicer, anyway,” Cheeks said. “I’ve had people in the front row and we’re getting beat and they start booing and I tell them, ‘Don’t boo.’ I don’t say it like that, but we figure out how to say don’t boo.” SMITH’S BUSINESS Sixer forward Joe Smith missed Wednesday’s game for a personal matter. Without him, Cheeks was down to two big men, Samuel Dalembert and Steven Hunter, excluding rookie Louis Amundson, a 10-day player who recently signed for the rest of the season. “The last couple days, we had more time to watch him practice,” Cheeks said of Amundson. “He’s a banger, he’s a rebounder. I’m not afraid to put him in a game. Prior to that, we hadn’t really seen him a lot, but the last few times we had more time to practice.” Amundson got his chance in the first half against Washington. GREEN OUT, TOO The Sixers also were without Willie Green, who has a sore right knee. It was the second time this season Green missed a game with pain in his right knee. The shooting guard had his left knee surgically repaired in 2005.