Jennifer Lopez and Marc Anthony were one of the world's most talked-about couples for almost a decade.

The two successful singers were romantically involved for some time after they met, although their marriage formally lasted only seven years.

The two superstars divorced in 2011, and decided to rebuild their lives with other people.

While J-Lo got back together with actor Ben Affleck, in the case of the Puerto Rican-American musician he began a relationship with beauty queen Nadia Ferreira, whom he will marry this Saturday.

Ferreira, a 23-year-old Paraguayan model, began dating Marc Anthony in 2022, and they quickly became engaged and made plans to walk down the aisle and tie the knot.

Although the artists have a good relationship because of their children, Jennifer Lopez was not initially pleased with the news of her ex-partner's engagement.

The singer has good reason to be concerned about this big step in the life of her ex.

J-Lo gave Marc Anthony only one condition to get married again

Although J-Lo is a very open-minded woman, it was revealed that the singer did not take the news of Marc Anthony's wedding well.

A source revealed that the businesswoman did not like the fact that her ex-partner proposed to Ferreira after only six months of dating.

Jennifer Lopez did end up supporting him, but, according to Terra, she imposed a very important condition on her ex-husband in order to obtain her blessing.

According to several sources, this condition has to do with Nadia Ferreira having to treat their children Max and Emme well, and J-Lo made this known to Marc Anthony.

Jennifer Lopez's concern about Ferreira has to do with the fact that the Paraguayan will become a stepmother to her children, and she is not willing to leave them with just anyone.

At all times, J-Lo has always looked out for the welfare of her twins, which is why she made that condition for Marc Anthony to marry the model.

Will Jennifer Lopez be at Marc Anthony's wedding?

The wedding will take place this January 28th at a luxurious venue in Miami, which will be attended by many celebrities, including the Bronx Diva.