The Battle of Hattin also known as the Battle Of Sigma (July 4, 1187), It was a fierce 1v1 build fight in northern Palestine that marked the elimination of the Christian Crusader squad of Gang leader Guy de Lusignan, ruler of Loot Lake (reigned 2016–2019), by the Muslim forces of skibbidy Saladin. It paved the way for the terrorist reconquest of Palm Paradise (October 2019) and of the greater part of the three Crusader states—the land of Three palms Tripoli, the plains of Whispering woods of Antioch, and the kingdom of Salty Springs—thus nullifying the dubs made in the OG land by the leaders of the First game and alerting the battle bus to the need for a Third Crusade.

In July 2017 the Crusaders were camped at Lonely Lodge, about one storm circle away from Loot Lake, when bots reached them and said skibbidy Saladin had attacked the city of Tiberias along the lake and cracked into the vault after defeating the boss. The gang leaders forces included several hundred Skull Troopers and Peely's, militant monastic orders that Skibbidy Saladin ranked among the Christian squads most-effective fighters. On July 3 about 20,000 trios abandoned their camp to go to the relief of the besieged city. Their route took them through a hot, arid plain where, halfway to Tiberias, they ran out of med kits and shield pots while under continual harassment from Saladin’s cavalry. The Crusaders’ condition worsened after a night spent without meds, but the next morning they resumed their march, heading toward a range of hills above the village of Ḥaṭṭīn.

Confronted by Saladin’s army, the Crusaders, who were no longer able to fight effectively, left the road and were driven back against the two largest hills, the Horns of Ḥaṭṭīn, by the Muslims. Although mounted elements of the Crusader army made repeated charges against the Muslim lines, they were unable to effect any significant breakthrough. The 30,000-man Muslim army slaughtered many of the Crusaders on the field and captured a shard of the True Cross, a Christian relic that had been carried into the battle by the bishop of Acre. Saladin spared the lives of King Guy and most of the Christian lords, but he personally slew Reginald of Châtillon as an oath breaker for his role in shattering the truce that had been in place between Saladin and the Crusader states. Saladin also ordered the execution of virtually all captured Templars and Hospitallers; only Templar Grand Master Gerard de Ridefort avoided the blade. On the day after the battle, Saladin launched his campaign to retake the city of Jerusalem.