By KRISTYN DYRENG

kristyn@du2.byu.edu

Two BYU students were finalists in the national Harry S. Truman Scholarship competition.

Nathan Oman, 23, a senior with a double major in polical science and philosophy, from Salt lake City, and Michelle Brown, 20, a senior double majoring in political science and economics, from Austin, Minn., were recognized by the university for their outstanding accomplishments.

As finalists, Oman and Brown competed with nearly 200 students from across the nation for the $30,000 Truman Scholarship. Up to 75 scholarships are awarded each year.

'The Truman is a national competition that recognizes excellence in public service by college students around the United States,' said Paul S. Edwards, an assistant professor of political science at BYU, and a member of the faculty team that prepares BYU students for the scholarship competition.

Oman and Brown were selected, along with two other BYU students, to represent the university in the scholarhip competition. This year, nearly 700 students were nominated by 353 universities to compete for the scholarship. Of those 700 students, 193 were selected as finalists.

'I was really, really excited,' Brown said. 'It's an honor and such an amazing opportunity just to be selected as a finalist.'

As finalists, Oman and Brown were prepared for challenging interviews. Brown said she was prepared for international trade-related questions, public service issues, social issues and other general questions.

The finalists also wrote a public policy analysis, prepared a resume and obtained letters of recommendation.

Oman said the scholarship competition is a very rigorous process and that much preparation is involved. His involvement with local campaigns, College Republicans and school classes have been a good experience for him.

'I'm trying to get involved and make a difference in public policy. The Truman is a good spring board for doing that,' Oman said.

Brown said school, church and government activities helped her prepare for the Truman scholarship.

'It's really been a life of preparation. Really, my whole life, I've been interested in public services,' Brown said.

The Truman scholarship is awarded to students who demonstrate leadership ability, academic achievement, commitment to public service and a potential to make a difference.

'Students like Nathan and Michelle represent the best that BYU has to offer because not only do they have superb academic credentials, Nathan and Michelle also show and have demonstrated throughout their lives that they are commited to public service,' Edwards said.

The Truman Scholarship is open to all students, not just political science majors, Edwards said.

'Students from all different parts of the university should consider the Truman as an opportunity because public service can be manifested through participation in education, providing engineering water systems, communications or skills in pre-med.'