With album release shows commencing end of May through June, the announcement of an autumn headline tour of the UK and EU shows Demob Happy’s strong campaign in support of their new full length. The band’s forthcoming third album, Divine Machines releases next Friday and will see the trio continue to walk the fine line of heaviness and melody.

Having earned the covers of The Rock List and New Noise on Spotify with January’s raucous ‘Voodoo Science’, as well as airtime from BBC Radio with Clara Amfo and Jack Saunders, with the latter describing the band as “like Daft Punk got abandoned in the desert and found by Josh Homme of Queens Of The Stone Age.” Further support came from CLASH, DIY, Dork and Rolling Stone UK amongst others.

Pre-order Divine Machines HERE

Continuing to draw upon the influences of Queens Of The Stone Age, glam and an instinctual knack for melody, the band now also look to the aesthetics of sci-fi futurism in the vain of Blade Runner to draw comparisons to the capitalist structures of modern society. Describing the inspiration behind this album cycle, frontman Matthew Marcantonio states “I really see what’s happening to the human race as a moment in a hero’s journey. We’re at the point in the James Bond film where the villains reveal themselves and tell us the plan. We’ve got Elon Musk and Jeff Bezos, these absolute supervillains with their rockets doing whatever the fuck they want, and software guru Bill Gates buying vast swathes of farmland for who knows what. They’re all revealing their plans to humanity and we’re all still going, ‘I hope they’re the good guys!’ What we need is inspiration to change because we only win this war if the change starts with us. There’s huge ripples of that in society, and it’s distorted through social media, but you can see people becoming more self-aware. That’s what I wanted to write about – inspiring that change.”

Off the back of 2015’s Dream Soda and 2018’s Holy Doom, Demob Happy have toured the US four times, played with Jack White, Band of Skulls, Royal Blood and The Amazons and ben featured on festival line ups such as Reading and Leeds and SXSW. The band have built their way towards the point they reach on Divine Machines, and reflect on the journey to get there thusly: “We’ve never chased the dragon of success, even though we’ve been encouraged to, but we’re not interested in doing it like that. We’ve always done what we wanted, but now it seems like it might align with what other people want as well.”

Demob Happy upcoming shows – Tickets available HERE

Friday 26th May – Rough Trade East, London

Saturday 27th May – Resident, Brighton

Sunday 28th May – Rough Trade Records – Bristol

Monday 29th May – Jacaranda Records, Phase One – Liverpool

Tuesday 30th May – Vinyl Whistle, Leeds

Wednesday 31st May – Rough Trade, Nottingham

Thursday 1st June – Banquet Records Signing, Kingston Upon Thames

Wednesday 6th September – Thekla, Bristol

Thursday 7th September – Mama Roux, Birmingham

Friday 8th September – The Key Club, Leeds

Saturday 9th September – Yes (Pink Room), Manchester

Sunday 10th September – Audio, Glasgow

Tuesday 12th September – The Cluny, Newcastle

Wednesday 13th September – Bodega, Nottingham

Thursday 14th September – Village Underground, London

Friday 15th September – Chalk, Brighton

Tuesday 19th September – Helios37, Koln

Wednesday 20th September – Melkweg, Amsterdam

Friday 22nd September – Pumphuset, Kobenhavn

Saturday 23rd September – Mejeriet, Lund

Tuesday 26th September – Bahnhof Pauli, Hamburg

Wednesday 27th September – Badehaus, Berlin

Thursday 28th September – Kranhalle, Munchen

Friday 29th September – Werkk, Baden

Saturday 30th September – Arci Bellezza, Milano

Monday 2nd October – La Nau, Barcelona

Tuesday 3rd October – Moby, Madrid

Wednesday 4th October – Le Pingouin Alternatif

Friday 6th October – La Boule, Paris

Saturday 7th October – Effenaar, Eindhoven