Norman Reid — may refer to: Norman Reid (cricketer) (1890–1947), South African cricketer Norman Reid (museum director) (1915–2007), director of the Tate gallery See also Norman Read (1931–1994), New Zealand racewalker Reid (disambiguation) for other uses of… … Wikipedia

Wisden Cricketer of the Year — Wisden Cricketer of the Year, littéralement « Joueur de cricket Wisden de l année », est une distinction décernée chaque année par le Wisden Cricketers Almanack, un almanach anglais spécialisé dans le cricket. Il récompense les joueurs… … Wikipédia en Français

Contributors — ▪ 2000 Adams, Andy. Editor and Publisher, Sumo World. Author of Sumo; Sumo World Record Book. • sports and games: Judo; Wrestling: Sumo Ahn, Ki suk. Assistant Editor, Shindonga of Donga Ilbo. • biographies (in part) Alder,… … Universalium

List of English people — This is a partial list of English people of note and of some notable individuals born in England, alphabetically within categories.Actors and actresses*Dame Julie Andrews (born 1935) *Naveen Andrews (born 1969) *Gabrielle Anwar (born 1970) *Rowan … Wikipedia

Townsville — This article is about the metropolitan area of Townsville. For the Townsville CBD suburb, see Townsville City, Queensland. For the local government area, see City of Townsville. For other uses, see Townsville (disambiguation). Townsville… … Wikipedia

List of people from Kent — List of notable residents of the county of Kent in England. Persons are grouped by occupation and listed in order of birth. Kent is defined by its current boundaries.Politicians, statesmen and lawyers*John Scott of Scott s Hall (–1485) – Lord… … Wikipedia

Wisden Cricketers of the Year — The Wisden Cricketers of the Year are cricketers selected for the honour by the annual publication Wisden Cricketers Almanack, based primarily on their influence on the previous English season .[1] The award began in 1889 with the naming of Six… … Wikipedia

New Year Honours 2006 — The New Year Honours 2006 for the Commonwealth Realms were announced on 31 December, 2005, to celebrate the year passed and mark the beginning of 2006.The recipients of honours are displayed here as they were styled before their new honour, and… … Wikipedia

2006 New Year Honours — The New Year Honours 2006 for the Commonwealth realms were announced on 31 December 2005, to celebrate the year passed and mark the beginning of 2006. The recipients of honours are displayed here as they were styled before their new honour, and… … Wikipedia

List of University of Cambridge members — The following persons attended the University of Cambridge but did not necessarily complete a degree course there.This selective list of alumni and members of the University has been divided into categories, but it should be noted that these… … Wikipedia