BLACKWATER THE

RISE

OF

WORLD'S

THE

MOST

POWERFUL MERCENARY JEREMY

ARMY

SCAHILL

$26.95

IT W A S T H E MOMENT T H E W A R TURNED: O n March 31, 2 0 0 4 , four A m e r i c a n s w e r e a m b u s h e d and b u r n e d near their j e e p s by a n a n g r y mob in the Sunni stronghold of Fallujah. Their charred corpses were hung from a bridge over the Euphrates River. T h e ensuing slaughter by U.S. troops would fuel the fierce Iraqi resistance that haunts occupation forces to this day. But these men were neither American military nor civilians. T h e y were highly trained private soldiers sent to Iraq by a secretive mercenary company based in the wilderness of North Carolina. Meet Biackwater U S A , the powerful private army that the U.S. government has quietly hired to operate in international war zones and on American soil. Its contacts run from deep inside the military and intelligence agencies to the upper echelons of the White House. Biackwater is the elite Praetorian Guard for the "global war on terror," with its own military base, a fleet of twenty aircraft, and twenty thousand troops at the ready. Run by a multimillionaire Christian conservative who bankrolls President Bush and his allies, its forces are capable of overthrowing governments, yet most people have never heard of Biackwater. T h i s is the unauthorized story of the epic rise of one of the most powerful and secretive forces to emerge from the U.S. military-industrial complex. It traces Blackwater's beginnings in 1996, with visionary executives opening a private military training camp "to fulfill the anticipated demand for government outsourcing"; to its secret deployment in Afghanistan following 9/11; to the blood-soaked streets of Fallujah and a fierce gun battle in Muqtada al-Sadr's stronghold of Najaf. T h e story races from Blackwater's expedition to the oil-rich Caspian Sea to set up a military base miles from Iran; to N e w Orleans, where its forces patrolled the hurricane-ravaged streets; to the chambers of power in Washington, D.C., where Biackwater executives are welcomed as new heroes in the war on terror. T h e admin­ istration hails Biackwater as a revolution in military affairs; others see its rise as nothing less than a dire threat to American democracy.

J E R E M Y S C A H I L L is a Polk A w a r d - w i n n i n g investigative journalist. He is a frequent contribu­ tor to The Nation magazine and a correspondent for the national radio and television show Democracy Now! Scahill has reported extensively from Iraq, the former Yugoslavia, and Nigeria. H e is currently a Puffin Foundation Writing Fellow at T h e Nation Institute. Scahill lives in Brooklyn, New York. Blackwater: The Rise of the World's Most Powerful Mercenary Army is his first book.

Jacket design by Whitney Cookman Cover photograph by© Kim Komenich/San Francisco Chronicle/Corbis Author photo by Jared Rodriguez

NATION BOOKS A n imprint of Avaion Publishing G r o u p , Inc. www.nationbooks.org Distributed by Publishers Group West

B L A C K W A T E R

BLACKWATER THE R I S E OF THE W O R L D S POWERFUL MERCENARY

JEREMY

SCAHILL

NATION BOOKS

MOST ARMY

BLACKWATER

The Rise of the World's Most Powerful Mercenary Army Copyright © 2007 Jeremy Scahill Published by Nation Books An Imprint of Avalon Publishing Group, Inc. 2 4 5 West 17th Street, 11th Floor New York, NY 10011

AVALON

Nation Books is a copublishing venture of the Nation Institute and Avalon Publishing Group, Incorporated. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system now known or to be invented, without permission in writing from the publisher, except by a reviewer who wishes to quote brief passages in connection with a review written for inclusion in a magazine, newspaper, or broadcast. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available. ISBN-10: 1-56025-979-5 ISBN-13: 9 7 8 - 1 - 5 6 0 2 5 - 9 7 9 - 4 9 8 76 5 Interior Design by Maria E. Torres Printed in the United States of America Distributed by Publishers Group West

For unembedded journalists, particularly Arab media workers, who risk and often lose their lives to be the eyes and ears of the world. Without their courage and sacrifice, history would indeed be written by self-declared victors, the rich and the powerful

CONTENTS ix

Author's Note

Xi

3.31.04

xiii

Preface: Making a Killing CHAPTER ONE

1

THE LITTLE P R I N C E CHAPTER TWO

25

BLACK WATER B E G I N S CHAPTER THREE

F A L L U J A H B E F O R E BLACKWATER CHAPTER FOUR

61

G U A R D I N G BUSH'S M A N I N B A G H D A D CHAPTER FIVE

81

SCOTTY G O E S TO WAR CHAPTER SIX

91

THE A M B U S H CHAPTER SEVEN

105

"WE WILL PACIFY F A L L U J A H " CHAPTER EIGHT

117

NAJAF, IRAQ:

kMM

CHAPTER NINE

133

"THIS I S FOR THE A M E R I C A N S OF BLACKWATER'

CHAPTER TEN

1«

M R . P R I N C E G O E S TO W A S H I N G T O N CHAPTER ELEVEN

167

CASPIAN PIPELINE DREAMS CHAPTER TWELVE

181

BLACKWATER'S M A N I N C H I L E CHAPTER THIRTEEN

211

" T H E W H O R E S OF W A R " CHAPTER FOURTEEN

237

THE CRASH OF BLACKWATER 61 CHAPTER FIFTEEN

261

COFER BLACK: THE G L O V E S C O M E OFF CHAPTER SIXTEEN

281

DEATH S Q U A D S . M E R C E N A R I E S A N D THE "SALVADOR OPTION" CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

297

JOSEPH SCHMITZ: CHRISTIAN SOLDIER CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

321

BLACKWATER D O W N : BAGHDAD ON THE BAYOU CHAPTER NINETEEN

3U

" T H E K N I G H T S OF THE R O U N D T A B L E "

379

Acknowledgments

383

Notes

^39

Index

AUTHOR'S NOTE

THIS B O O K would not have been possible without the tireless efforts of my colleague Garrett Ordower. Garrett is a remarkable investigative jour­ nalist who spent countless hours filing Freedom o f Information Act requests, researching complicated people and events, digging up facts and figures, and interviewing sources. He also wrote solid first drafts o f some chapters for this book. I am forever grateful to Garrett for his diligent and careful work on this project and his unflinching dedication to old-fash­ ioned muckraking. This book is as much his as it is mine. I look forward to Garrett's future endeavors in law and journalism and would be honored to work with him again.

X

BLACKWATER

I also wish to alert the reader to the fart that Blackwater refused to grant me interviews with company executives. A spokesperson did write to "thank" me for my "interest in Blackwater" but said that the company was "unable to accommodate" my request for interviews with the men who run Blackwater. I am indebted to the solid reporting of Jay Price and Joseph Neff of the Raleigh News & Observer and Bill Sizemore and Joanne Kimberlin of the Virginian-Pilot newspapers. These reporters and their groundbreaking work have done the public a great service in chronicling the Blackwater story and the explosive growth o f the private military industry. Special thanks also to T Christian Miller o f the Los Angeles Times and Anthony Shadid and Rajiv Chandrasekaran o f the Washington Post, as well as authors P. W. Singer and Robert Young Pelton. I would encourage readers to read the acknowledgments at the end o f this book for a more comprehensive under­ standing o f the number o f people who contributed to this process.

3.31.04

March 31, 2004, 9:30 a.m. Fallujah, WHEN

Iraq THE four Americans rolled into Fallujah in their two Pajero jeeps, the

Iraqi mujahedeen in the city of mosques were waiting for them. The main drag that cuts through the city is lined with restaurants, cafes, and souks, and on ordi­ nary days throngs of people mill around. But early that morning, a small group of masked men had detonated an explosive device, clearing the streets and causing shopkeepers to shutter their stores. From the moment the convoy of Americans entered the city limits, the men stood out—driving vehicles known as "bullet mag­ nets" and sporting wraparound sunglasses and Tom Cruise haircuts. Shortly after they entered Fallujah, the jeeps began to slow. To their right were shops and mar-

BLACKWATER

xii

kets; to the left, open space. They had hit some sort of a roadblock. As the vehicles came to a standstill, a grenade was hurled at the rear jeep, quickly followed by the rip of machine-gun fire. Bullets tore through the side of the rear Pajero like salt through ice, fatally wounding the two men inside. As the blood gushed from them, masked gunmen moved in on the jeeps, unloading cartridges of ammo and pounding their way through the windshield. Chants of "Allah u Akbar" (God is Great) filled the air. Soon, more than a dozen young men who had been hanging around in front of a local kebab house joined in the frenzy. By the time the rear jeep was shot up, the Americans in the lead vehicle realized an ambush was under way. They tried to flee, but it was too late. The crowd quickly swelled to more than three hundred people, as the original attackers faded into the side streets of Fal­ lujah. The jeeps were soon engulfed in flames, the scorched bodies of the Ameri­ cans were pulled out, and men and boys literally tore them apart, limb from limb. In front of the TV cameras, a young man held a small sign emblazoned with a skull and crossbones that declared in English, "Fallujah is the graveyard of the Americans!" The mob hung the charred, lifeless remains of the Americans from a bridge over the Euphrates, where they would remain for hours, forming an eerily iconic image that was seen on television screens throughout the world. Thousands of miles away in Washington, D.C., President Bush was on the campaign trail, speaking at a fundraiser dinner. "This collection of killers is trying to shake our will, " the president told his supporters. "America will never be intim­ idated by thugs and assassins. We are aggressively striking the terrorists in Iraq. We will defeat them there so we do not have to face them in our own country. " The next morning Americans woke up to news of the gruesome killings. "Iraqi Mob Mutilates 4 American Civilians" was a typical newspaper headline. Somalia was frequently

invoked, referring to the incident in October 1993 when rebels in

Mogadishu shot down two Black Hawk helicopters, killed eighteen American sol­ diers, and dragged some of them through the streets, prompting the U.S. to with­ draw its forces. But unlike Somalia, the men killed in Fallujah were not members of the U.S. military. Nor were they "civilians, " as many news outlets reported. They were highly trained private soldiers sent to Iraq by a secretive mercenary company based in the wilderness of North Carolina. Its name is Blackwater USA.

PREFACE: MAKING A KILLING

THE

W O R L D was a very different place on September 10, 2001, when

Donald Rumsfeld stepped to the podium at the Pentagon to deliver one o f his first major addresses as Defense Secretary under President George W. Bush. For most Americans, there was no such thing as Al Qaeda, and Saddam Hussein was still the president o f Iraq. Rumsfeld had served in the post once before—under President Gerald Ford from 1975 to 1977—and he returned to the job in 2001

with ambitious visions. That September day

in the first year o f the Bush administration, Rumsfeld addressed the Pen­ tagon officials in charge o f overseeing the high-stakes business o f defense contracting—managing the Halliburtons, DynCorps, and Bechtels. The Secretary stood before a gaggle of former corporate executives from Enron,

BLACKWATER

xiv

Northrop

Grumman,

General Dynamics, and Aerospace Corporation

whom he had tapped as his top deputies at the Department of Defense, and he issued a declaration o f war. "The topic today is an adversary that poses a threat, a serious threat, to 1

the security o f the United States of America," Rumsfeld thundered. "This adversary is one o f the world's last bastions of central planning. It governs by dictating five-year plans. From a single capital, it attempts to impose its demands across time zones, continents, oceans, and beyond. With brutal consistency, it stifles free thought and crushes new ideas. It disrupts the defense o f the United States and places the lives of men and women in uni­ form at risk." Pausing briefly for dramatic effect, Rumsfeld—himself a vet­ eran Cold Warrior—told his new staff, "Perhaps this adversary sounds like the former Soviet Union, but that enemy is gone: our foes are more subtle and implacable today. You may think I'm describing one of the last decrepit dictators o f the world. But their day, too, is almost past, and they cannot match the strength and size of this adversary. The adversary's closer to home. It's the Pentagon bureaucracy." Rumsfeld called for a wholesale shift in the running o f the Pentagon, supplanting the old DoD bureaucracy with a new model, one based on the private sector. The problem, Rumsfeld said, was that unlike businesses, "governments can't die, so we need to find other incentives for bureaucracy to adapt and improve." The stakes, he declared, were dire—"a matter o f life and death, ultimately, every American's." That day, Rumsfeld announced a major initiative to streamline the use of the pri­ vate sector in the waging o f America's wars and predicted his initiative would meet fierce resistance. "Some might ask, How in the world could the Secretary o f Defense attack the Pentagon in front o f its people?" Rumsfeld told his audience. "To them I reply, I have no desire to attack the Pentagon; I want to liberate it. We need to save it from itself." The next morning, the Pentagon would literally be attacked as American Airlines Flight 77—a Boeing 757—smashed into its western wall. Rumsfeld would famously assist rescue workers in pulling bodies from the rubble. But it didn't take long for Rumsfeld, the chess master of militarism, to seize the

JEREMY SCAHILL

almost unthinkable opportunity presented by 9 / l l t o put his personal w a r laid out just a day before—on the fast track. The world had irreversibly changed, and in an instant the future o f the world's mightiest military force had become a blank canvas on which Rumsfeld and his allies could paint their masterpiece. The new Pentagon policy would draw heavily on the pri­ vate sector, emphasize covert actions, sophisticated weapons systems, and greater use o f Special Forces and contractors. It became known as the Rums­ feld Doctrine. "We must promote a more entrepreneurial approach: one that encourages people to be proactive, not reactive, and to behave less like bureaucrats and more like venture capitalists," Rumsfeld wrote in the summer of 2002 in an article for Foreign Affairs titled "Transforming the Mil­ 2

itary." Rumsfeld's "small footprint" approach opened the door for one o f the most significant developments in modern warfare—the widespread use of private contractors in every aspect o f war, including in combat. Among those to receive early calls from the administration to join a "global war on terror" that would be fought according to the Rumsfeld Doc­ trine was a little-known firm operating out o f a private military training camp near the Great Dismal Swamp o f North Carolina. Its name was Blackwater USA. Almost overnight following the great tragedy o f September 11, a company that had barely existed a few years earlier would become a central player in a global war waged by the mightiest empire in history. "I've been operating in the training business now for four years and was starting to get a little cynical on how seriously people took security," Blackwater's owner Erik Prince told Fox News host Bill O'Reilly shortly after 9/11. "The phone is ringing off the hook now."

3

But the story o f Blackwater doesn't begin on 9/11 or even with its execu­ tives or its founding. In many ways, it encapsulates the history o f modern warfare. Most of all, it represents the realization of the life's work of the offi­ cials who formed the core o f the Bush administration's war team. During the 1991 Gulf War, Dick Cheney—Rumsfeld's close ally—was Secretary of Defense. One in ten people deployed in the war zone at that time was a private contractor, a ratio Cheney was doggedly determined to

xv

xvi

BLACKWATER

ratchet up. Before he departed in 1993, Cheney commissioned a study from a division o f the company he would eventually head, Halliburton, on how to quickly privatize the military bureaucracy. Almost overnight, Halliburton would create an industry for itself servicing U.S. military operations abroad with seemingly infinite profit potential. The more aggressively the U.S. expanded its military reach, the better for Halliburton's business. It was the prototype for the future. In the ensuing eight years o f governance by Bill Clinton, Cheney worked at the influential neoconservative think tank the American Enterprise Institute, which led the charge for an accelerated priva­ tization o f the government and military. By 1995, Cheney was at the helm of Halliburton building what would become the U.S. government's single largest defense contractor. President Clinton largely embraced the privatiza­ tion agenda, and Cheney's company—along with other contractors—was given lucrative contracts during the Balkans conflict in the 1990s and the 1999 Kosovo war. One military consulting firm, the Virginia-based Military Professional Resources Incorporated, staffed by retired senior military offi­ cials, was authorized by the Clinton administration in the mid-1990s to train the Croatian military in its secessionist war against Serb-dominated Yugoslavia, a contract that ultimately tipped the balance of that conflict. That contract was a foreshadowing of the kind of private-sector involve­ ment in war that would become standard in the war on terror. But privati­ zation was only part o f the broader agenda. Cheney and Rumsfeld were key members o f the Project for a New American Century, initiated in 1997 by 4

neoconservative activist William Kristol. The group pressed Clinton to enact regime change in Iraq, and its principles, which advocated "a policy 5

of military strength and moral clarity," would form the basis for much of the Bush administration's international agenda. In September 2000, just months before its members would form the core of the Bush White House, the Project for a New American Century released a report called Rebuilding America's Defenses: Strategy, Forces and Resources for a New Century. In laying out PNAC's vision for overhauling the U.S. war machine, the report recognized that "the process of transformation, even if

JEREMY SCAHILL

xvii

it brings revolutionary change, is likely to be a long one, absent some cata­ 6

strophic and catalyzing event—like a new Pearl Harbor." A year to the month later, the 9/11 attacks would provide that catalyst: an unprecedented justification to forge ahead with this radical agenda molded by a small cadre o f neoconservative operatives who had just taken official power. The often-overlooked subplot of the wars o f the post-9/11 period is the outsourcing and privatization they have entailed. From the moment the Bush team took power, the Pentagon was stacked with ideologues like Paul Wolfowitz, Douglas Feith, Zalmay Khalilzad, and Stephen Cambone and with former corporate executives—many from large weapons manufac­ turers—like Under Secretary o f Defense Pete Aldridge (Aerospace Corpora­ tion), Army Secretary Thomas White (Enron), Navy Secretary Gordon England (General Dynamics), and Air Force Secretary James Roche (Northrop Grumman). The new civilian leadership at the Pentagon came into power with two major goals: regime change in strategic nations and the enactment of the most sweeping privatization and outsourcing opera­ tion in U.S. military history—a revolution in military affairs. After 9/11 this campaign became unstoppable. The swift defeat of the Taliban in Afghanistan emboldened Rumsfeld and the administration as they began planning for the centerpiece o f the neo­ conservative crusade: Iraq. From the moment the U.S. troop buildup began in advance o f the invasion, the Pentagon made private contractors an inte­ gral part o f the operations. Even as the U.S. gave the public appearance o f attempting diplomacy, behind closed doors Halliburton was being prepped for its largest operation in history. When U.S. tanks rolled into Baghdad in March 2003, they brought with them the largest army o f private contractors ever deployed in a war. By the end o f Rumsfeld's tenure, there were an estimated 100,000 private contractors on the ground in Iraq—an almost one7

to-one ratio to active-duty U.S. soldiers. To the great satisfaction o f the war industry, before Rumsfeld stepped down, he took the extraordinary step o f classifying private contractors as an official part o f the U.S. war machine. In the Pentagon's 2006 Quadrennial Review, Rumsfeld outlined what he

BLACKWATER

xviii

called a "roadmap for change" at the DoD, which he said had started in 8

2 0 0 1 . It defined the "Department's Total Force" as "its active and reserve military components, its civil servants, and its contractors—constituting]

its

warfighting capability and capacity. Members o f the Total Force serve in thousands o f locations around the world, performing a vast array of duties to accomplish critical missions." Coming as it did in the midst of an open-ended, loosely defined global war, this formal designation represented a radical rebuke of the ominous warnings laid out by President Eisenhower in his farewell address to the nation decades earlier during which he envisioned the "grave implications" of the rise of "the military-industrial complex." In 1961, Eisenhower declared, "The potential for the disastrous rise o f misplaced power exists and will persist. We must never let the weight of this combination endanger our liberties or democratic processes. We should take nothing for granted. Only an alert and knowledgeable citizenry can compel the proper meshing of the huge industrial and military machinery of defense with our peaceful methods and goals, so that security and liberty may prosper together." What has unfolded in the ensuing years and particularly under the Bush adminis­ tration is nothing less than the very scenario Eisenhower darkly prophesied. While the war on terror and the Iraq occupation have given birth to scores o f companies, few if any have experienced the meteoric rise to power, profit, and prominence that Blackwater has. In less than a decade, it has risen out o f a swamp in North Carolina to become a sort of Praetorian Guard for the Bush administration's "global war on terror." Today, Blackwater has more than 2,300 private soldiers deployed in nine countries, including inside the United States. It maintains a database o f 21,000 former Special Forces troops, soldiers, and retired law enforcement agents on whom it could call at a moment's notice. Blackwater has a private fleet of more than twenty aircraft, including helicopter gunships and a surveillance blimp division. Its 7,000-acre headquarters in Moyock, North Carolina, is the world's largest private military facility. It trains tens of thousands of fed­ eral and local law enforcement agents a year and troops from "friendly"

JEREMY SCAHILL

xix

foreign nations. The company operates its own intelligence division and counts among its executives senior ex-military and intelligence officials. It recently began constructing new facilities in California ("Blackwater West") and Illinois ("Blackwater North"), as well as a jungle training facility in the Philippines. Blackwater has more than $500 million in government contracts—and that does not include its secret "black" budget operations for U.S. intelligence agencies or private corporations/individuals and for­ eign governments. As one U.S. Congressmember observed, in strictly mili­ tary terms, Blackwater could overthrow many o f the world's governments. Blackwater is a private army, and it is controlled by one person: Erik Prince, a radical right-wing Christian mega-millionaire who has served as a major bankroller not only of President Bush's campaigns but o f the broader Christian-right agenda. In fact, as of this writing Prince has never given a penny to a Democratic candidate—certainly his right, but an unusual pat­ tern for the head of such a powerful war-servicing corporation, and one that speaks volumes about the sincerity o f his ideological commitment. Blackwater has been one of the most effective battalions in Rumsfeld's war on the Pentagon, and Prince speaks boldly about the role his company is playing in the radical transformation of the U.S. military. "When you ship overnight, do you use the postal service or do you use FedEx?" Prince recently asked during a panel discussion with military officials. "Our corpo­ rate goal is to do for the national security apparatus what FedEx did to the postal service."

9

Perhaps the most telling sign that such a transformation had taken place came when the White House outsourced the job of protecting America's most senior officials in Iraq to Blackwater beginning in 2003. As L. Paul Bremer, Bush's envoy in the first year of the occupation, hunkered down in Baghdad to implement the Bush agenda, he was protected by Blackwater, as every successive U.S. Ambassador there has been. In contrast to active-duty soldiers who are poorly paid, Blackwater's guards were given six-figure salaries. "Standard wages for PSD (personal security detail) pros [in Iraq] were previously running about $300 [per man] a day," Fortune magazine

BLACKWATER

XX

reported at the time. "Once Blackwater started recruiting for its first big job, guarding Paul Bremer, the rate shot up to $600 a day."

10

With almost no

public debate, the Bush administration has outsourced to the private sector many of the functions historically handled by the military. In turn, these pri­ vate companies are largely unaccountable to the U.S. taxpayers from whom they draw their profits. Some began comparing the mercenary market in Iraq to the Alaskan Gold Rush and the O.K. Corral. As The Times o f London put it at the time, "In Iraq, the postwar business boom is not oil. It is security."

11

As this unprecedented private force expanded in Iraq, Bremer's last act before skulking out o f Baghdad on June 2 8 , 2004, was to issue a decree known as Order 17, immunizing contractors in Iraq from prosecution.

12

It

was a significant move in a sea o f policies (and absence o f policies) gov­ erning the occupation o f Iraq, and one that emboldened private forces. While U.S. soldiers have been prosecuted for killings and torture in Iraq, the Pentagon has not held its vast private forces to the same standards. That point was driven home during one of the rare Congressional hearings on contractors in Iraq, which took place in June 2 0 0 6 . Blackwater represented the industry at the hearing, which also included several government offi­ cials. Representative Dennis Kucinich questioned Shay Assad, the Pen­ tagon's director o f defense procurement and acquisition, the department in the DoD responsible for contractors. Kucinich pointed out that U.S. troops are subjected to enforceable rules o f engagement and have been prosecuted for violations in Iraq, while contractors were* not. He said that as o f the date of the hearing, "no security contractor has been prosecuted" for crimes in Iraq.

13

He then directly asked Assad, "Would the Department o f Defense be

prepared to see a prosecution proffered against any private contractor who is demonstrated to have unlawfully killed a civilian?" "Sir, I can't answer that question," Assad replied. "Wow," Kucinich shot back. "Think about what that means. These private contractors can get away with murder." Contractors, Kucinich said, "do not appear to be subject to any laws at all and so therefore they have more of a license to be able to take the law into their own hands."

JEREMY SCAHILL

xxi

Blackwater has openly declared its forces above the law. While resisting attempts to subject its private soldiers to the Pentagon's Uniform Code o f Military Justice (UCMJ)—insisting they are civilians—Blackwater has simultaneously claimed immunity from civilian litigation in the United States, saying its forces are a part o f the U.S. Total Force. Blackwater has argued in legal briefs that if U.S. courts allow the company to be sued for wrongful death o f its workers, that could threaten the nation's war-fighting capacity: "In order for responsible federal contractors to accompany the U.S. Armed Forces on the battlefield, it is essential that their immunity from liability for casualties be federally protected and uniformly upheld by fed­ eral courts. Nothing could be more destructive o f the all-volunteer. Total Force concept underlying U.S. military manpower doctrine than to expose the private components to the tort liability systems o f fifty states, trans­ ported overseas to foreign battlefields. . . . How the President oversees and commands these military operations, including his decisions through the chain o f command concerning the training, deployment, armament, mis­ sions, composition, planning, analysis, management and supervision o f private military contractors and their missions, falls outside the role o f [the courts]."

14

Instead, Blackwater claims that its forces operate under the

legally impotent and unenforceable code o f conduct written by its own trade association, ironically named the International Peace Operations Association. Erik Prince says his forces are "accountable to our country,"

15

as though declarations o f loyalty to the flag are evidence of just motives or activities or somehow a substitute for an independent legal framework. This logic is encouraged not only by the virtual immunity already extended to contractors but also by the Pentagon's failure to oversee this massive private force that is now officially recognized as part of the U.S. war machine. Private contractors largely operate in a legal gray zone that leaves the door for abuses wide open. In late 2006, a one-line amendment was quietly slipped into Congress's massive 2007 defense-spending bill, signed by President Bush, that could subject contractors in war zones to the Pen­ tagon's UCMJ, also known as the court martial system.

16

But the military

xxii

BLACKWATER

has enough trouble policing its own massive force and could scarcely be expected to effectively monitor an additional 100,000 private personnel. While the five-word insert hardly establishes a system o f independent over­ sight, experts still predict it will be fiercely resisted by the private war industry. Despite the unprecedented reliance on contractors deployed in Iraq, Afghanistan, and elsewhere, the government has failed to even count them, let alone police them. A Government Accountability Office report released in December 2 0 0 6 found that the military had no effective system o f oversight and that "officials were unable to determine how many con­ tractors were deployed to bases in Iraq."

17

The Army and Air Force were

unable to provide the GAO investigators "the number of contractors they were using at deployed locations or the services those contractors were pro­ viding to U.S. forces." The GAO concluded "problems with management and oversight o f contractors have negatively impacted military operations and unit morale and hindered DOD's ability to obtain reasonable assur­ ance that contractors are effectively meeting their contract requirements in the most cost-efficient manner." A week after Donald Rumsfeld's rule at the Pentagon ended, U.S. forces had been stretched so thin by the war on terror that former Secretary o f State Gen. Colin Powell declared "the active Army is about broken."

18

Rather than rethinking such aggressive policies and wars o f conquest, the Bush administration and the Pentagon talked of the need to expand the size of the military. Prince had already offered up a proposal o f his own: the cre­ ation o f what he called a "contractor brigade" to supplement the conven­ tional U.S. military. "There's consternation in the DoD about increasing the permanent size o f the Army," he said. "We want to add 30,000 people, and they talked about costs o f anywhere from $3.6 billion to $4 billion to do that. Well, by my math, that comes out to about $135,000 per soldier. . . . 19

We could do it certainly cheaper." It was an extraordinary declaration that could only come from a man in control o f his own army. Prince likes to position Blackwater as a patriotic extension o f the U.S. military, and in September 2005 he issued a company-wide memorandum requiring all

JEREMY SCAHILL

xxiii

company employees and contractors to swear the same oath o f loyalty to the U.S. Constitution as Blackwater's "National Security-related clients (i.e. Pentagon, State Department and intelligence agencies)" to "support and defend the Constitution o f the United States against all enemies, foreign and domestic. . . . So help me God."

20

But despite the portrayal o f Blackwater as an all-American operation seeking to defend the defenseless, some o f its most ambitious and secretive projects reveal a very different and frightening reality. In May 2004, Blackwater quietly registered a new division, Greystone Limited, in the U.S. gov­ ernment's Central Contracting office. But instead o f incorporating the company in North Carolina or Virginia or Delaware, like Blackwater's other divisions, Greystone was registered offshore in the Caribbean island-nation of Barbados. It was duly classified by the U.S. government as a "tax-exempt" 21

"corporate entity." Greystone's promotional literature offered prospective clients "Proactive Engagement Teams" that could be hired "to meet emer­ gent or existing security requirements for client needs overseas. Our teams are ready to conduct stabilization efforts, asset protection and recovery, and emergency personnel withdrawal." It also offered a wide range o f training services, including in "defensive and offensive small group operations." Greystone boasted that it "maintains and trains a workforce drawn from a diverse base of former special operations, defense, intelligence, and law enforcement professionals ready on a moment's notice for global deploy­ ment." The countries from which Greystone claimed to draw recruits were: the Philippines, Chile, Nepal, Colombia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Honduras, Panama, and Peru, many o f whose forces have human rights records that are questionable at best. It asked applicants to check off their qualifications in weapons: AK-47 rifle, Glock 19, M-16 series rifle, M-4 carbine rifle, machine gun, mortar, and shoulder-fired weapons (RPG, LAAW). Among the qualifications the application sought: sniper, marksman, door gunner, explosive ordnance, counter-assault team. In Iraq, Blackwater has deployed scores of Chilean mercenaries, some of whom trained and served under the brutal regime of Augusto Pinochet. "We scour the ends o f the earth to find

BLACKWATER

xxiv

professionals," said Blackwater president Gary Jackson. "The Chilean com­ mandos are very, very professional and they fit within the Blackwater system."

22

With domestic armed forces stretched to the limit—and a draft off the table for political reasons— the U.S. government is left to struggle to find nation-state allies willing to staff the occupations of its "global war on terror." If the national armies o f other states will not join a "coalition of the willing," Blackwater and its allies offer a different sort o f solution: an alter­ native internationalization o f the force achieved by recruiting private sol­ diers from across the globe. If foreign governments are not on board, foreign soldiers—many o f whose home countries oppose the U.S. wars— can still be enlisted, at a price. This process, critics allege, is nothing short of a subversion o f the very existence o f the nation-state and o f principles of sovereignty and self-determination. "The increasing use o f contractors, pri­ vate forces or as some would say 'mercenaries' makes wars easier to begin and to fight—it just takes money and not the citizenry," says Michael Ratner, president o f the Center for Constitutional Rights, whose organiza­ tion has sued private contractors for alleged human rights violations in Iraq.

23

"To the extent a population is called upon to go to war, there is

resistance, a necessary resistance to prevent wars o f self-aggrandizement, foolish wars and in the case o f the United States, hegemonic imperialist wars. Private forces are almost a necessity for a United States bent on retaining its declining empire. Think about Rome and its increasing need for mercenaries. Likewise, here at home in the United States. Controlling an angry, abused population with a police force bound to obey the Constitu­ tion can be difficult—private forces can solve this 'problem.'" As with Halliburton, the Pentagon's largest contractor, Blackwater is set apart from simple war profiteers by the defining characteristic of its execu­ tives' very long view. They have not just seized a profitable moment along with many o f their competitors but have set out to carve a permanent niche for themselves for decades to come. Blackwater's aspirations are not limited to international wars, however. Its forces beat most federal agencies to New

JEREMY SCAHILL

XXV

Orleans after Hurricane Katrina hit in 2005, as hundreds o f heavily armed Blackwater mercenaries—some fresh from deployment in Iraq—fanned out into the disaster zone. Within a week, they were officially hired by the Department o f Homeland Security to operate in the U.S. Gulf, billing the 24

federal government $950 a day per Blackwater soldier. In less than a year, the company had raked in more than $70 million in federal hurricanerelated contracts—about $243,000 a day.

25

The company saw Katrina as

another moment of great opportunity and soon began applying for permits to contract its forces out to local governments in all fifty states. Blackwater executives have met with California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger about deploying there in the aftermath o f an earthquake or another dis­ aster. "Look, none of us loves the idea that devastation became a business opportunity," said the Blackwater official heading up its new domestic operations division formed after Katrina.

26

"It's a distasteful fact, but it is

what it is. Doctors, lawyers, funeral directors, even newspapers—they all make a living off of bad things happening. So do we, because somebody's got to handle it." But critics see the deployment o f Blackwater's forces domestically as a dangerous precedent that could undermine U.S. democ­ racy. "Their actions may not be subject to constitutional limitations that apply to both federal and state officials and employees—including First Amendment and Fourth Amendment rights to be free from illegal searches and seizures. Unlike police officers, they are not trained in protecting con­ stitutional rights," says CCR's Michael Ratner. "These kind o f paramilitary groups bring to mind Nazi Party brownshirts, functioning as an extrajudi­ cial enforcement mechanism that can and does operate outside the law. The use o f these paramilitary groups is an extremely dangerous threat to our rights." What is particularly scary about Blackwater's role in a war that President Bush labeled a "crusade" is that the company's leading executives are dedi­ cated to a Christian-supremacist agenda. Erik Prince and his family have provided generous funding to the religious right's war against secularism and for expanding the presence o f Christianity in the public sphere.

27

BLACKWATER

xxvi

Prince is a close friend and benefactor to some o f the country's most mili­ tant Christian extremists, such as former Watergate conspirator Chuck Colson, who went on to become an adviser to President Bush and a pioneer o f "faith-based prisons," and Christian conservative leader Gary Bauer, an original signer o f the Project for a New American Century's "Statement of Principles," whom Prince has worked alongside since his youth and who was a close friend o f Prince's father. Some Blackwater executives even boast 28

o f their membership in the Sovereign Military Order o f Malta, a Christian militia formed in the eleventh century, before the first Crusades, with the mission o f defending "territories that the Crusaders had conquered from 29

the Moslems." The Order today boasts o f being "a sovereign subject of international law, with its own constitution, passports, stamps, and public institutions" and "diplomatic relations with 94 countries."

30

The out­

sourcing o f U.S. military operations in Muslim countries and in secular societies to such neo-crusaders reinforces the greatest fears o f many in the Arab world and other opponents o f the administration's wars. Most o f the world first heard of "private military companies" after the infamous March 31, 2004, ambush o f four Blackwater soldiers in Fallujah, Iraq—a gruesome mob murder that marked the moment the war turned and the Iraqi resistance exploded. Many o f the media reports at the time (and today) refer to these shadowy forces as "civilian contractors" or "for­ eign reconstruction workers" as though they were engineers, construction workers, humanitarians, or water specialists. The term "mercenary" was almost never used to describe them. That is no accident. Indeed, it is part of a very sophisticated rebranding campaign organized by the mercenary industry itself and increasingly embraced by policy-makers, bureaucrats, and other powerful decision makers in Washington and other Western cap­ itals. Those men who died at Fallujah were members o f Washington's largest partner in the coalition o f the willing in Iraq—bigger than Britain's total deployment—and yet most o f the world had not a clue they were there. The ambush resulted in Blackwater being positioned in a key role to affect the regulations that would oversee (or not) the rapidly expanding

JEREMY SCAHILL

xxvii

industry, of which Blackwater was the new leader. Three months later, the company was handed one o f the U.S. government's most valuable interna­ tional security contracts: to protect diplomats and U.S. facilities. The highly publicized deaths of four of its private soldiers would prove to be the spark that set Blackwater on a path to success for years to come. The story of Blackwater's rise is an epic one in the history o f the militaryindustrial complex. The company is the living embodiment of the changes wrought by the revolution in military affairs and the privatization agenda radically expanded by the Bush administration under the guise o f the war on terror. But more fundamentally, it is a story about the future o f war, democracy, and governance. This story goes from the company's beginnings in 1996, with visionary Blackwater executives opening a private military training camp in order "to fulfill the anticipated demand for government outsourcing of firearms and related security training," to its contract b o o m following 9/11, to the blood-soaked streets o f Fallujah, where the corpses of its mercenaries were left to dangle from a bridge. It includes a rooftop firefight in Muqtada al-Sadr's stronghold o f Najaf; an expedition to the oil-rich Caspian Sea, where the administration sent Blackwater to set up a military base just miles from the Iranian border; a foray into New Orleans's hurri­ cane-ravaged streets; and many hours in the chambers o f power in Wash­ ington, D.C., where Blackwater executives are welcomed as new heroes in the war on terror. But the rise of the world's most powerful mercenary army began far away from the current battlefields, in the sleepy town o f Holland, Michigan, where Erik Prince was born into a right-wing Christian dynasty. It was the Prince family that laid the groundwork, spending millions o f dol­ lars over many decades to bring to power the very forces that would enable Blackwater's meteoric ascent.

CHAPTER

ONE

THE LITTLE P R I N C E

THE

STATELY mansion at 1057

South Shore Drive in Holland, Michigan, is

about as far from Fallujah as one could imagine. The home where young Erik Prince, founder of Blackwater USA,

grew up sits along the sleepy banks o f

Lake Macatawa, an inlet of Lake Michigan in the American Midwest. Trees shimmer along the edges o f the driveway on a summer day; the sun glints peacefully off the lake. Occasionally, a car clips by or a boat motor starts, but otherwise the neighborhood is calm and quiet, the embodiment o f affluent, postcard American society. Two middle-aged women power-walk past a man lazily riding his lawnmower. Other than that, the street is deserted. As they trot by, one o f the women glances over to her companion, their sun visors almost colliding, and asks whether the Prince family still owns the mansion.

2

B LA C KW ATE R

The estate is well-known, the family more so. In Holland, Michigan, the Princes were indeed royalty, and Erik's father, Edgar Prince, was the king. Much like Blackwater's compound in Moyock, North Carolina—a seventhousand-acre peat bog with a constant rattle of machine-gun fire—is Erik Prince's personal fiefdom, the idyllic Dutch hamlet of Holland was his father's. A self-made industrialist, Edgar Prince employed nearly a quarter of the city. He shaped its institutions, planned and funded its downtown, and was among the biggest benefactors to its two colleges. A decade after Edgar's sudden death in 1995, his presence and legacy still permeate the town. On the corner o f two of the busiest streets in Holland's soccer-mom-chic down­ town, there is a monument to Ed Prince: seven bronze footsteps embedded in the ground lead to a raised platform upon which stand life-sized bronze statues o f a trio of musicians—a tuxedoed cello player, a mustached violinist, and a young woman wearing a skirt who is blowing into her flute. Another statue depicts a little girl standing with her arms wrapped around a small boy, holding a book of music notes, their mouths frozen in song. On the pedestal below the group is a small plaque memorializing Edgar D. Prince: "We will always hear your footsteps," it reads. "The People of Downtown Holland honor your extraordinary vision and generosity." If there was one lesson Edgar Prince was poised to impart to his children, it was how to build and maintain an empire based on strict Christian values, right-wing politics, and free-market economics. But while the land­ scape o f Holland today is dotted with memorials to the Prince family legacy, Edgar was not the town's original emperor. Dating back to the com­ munity's founding, Holland had long been run by Christian patriarchs. In 1846, with a sea-weary clan o f fifty-seven fellow Dutch refugees, Albertus Van Raalte came ashore in western Michigan. Prince's predecessor had fled his home country because he had "undergone all manner of humiliation and persecution through his defiance of the religious restrictions imposed by the State church," according to the city.

1

Van Raalte was a member o f a sect o f the Dutch Reform Church opposed by the Dutch monarchy at the time. After arriving in the United States

JEREMY SCAHILL

aboard his vessel, the Southerner, Van Raalte led the clan to the shores o f Lake Michigan, where he envisioned a community free to live and worship within the tenets o f his brand o f Dutch Reform, and without any outside influence. After some scouting he came upon a perfect spot, next to a lake that ran into Lake Michigan. On February 9, 1847, Van Raalte's community was founded, on the site where Erik Prince would later spend his youth, perhaps some o f it on the creaking dock that sneaks out into the Lake Michigan inlet. But Van Raalte's perfect vision would not be realized quite as he expected, according to a biography produced by Hope College, which he founded and which has seen millions of dollars in donations from the Prince family: "[Van Raalte's] goal o f developing a Christian community governed by Christian principles was visionary but was shattered in 1850. Holland Township became the basic unit o f government. Van Raalte's ideal 2

of Christian control was lost." But Van Raalte sought alternative means o f establishing his Shangri-La in Holland. "His influence was felt because he became active in politics and he continued to own large tracts o f land," according to the biography. "Although many o f the means to achieve a Christian community broke down, Van Raalte was still the pastor o f the only church, member of the district school board, guiding light o f the Academy, principal landowner, and a businessman with major property 3

holdings." Virtually the same description could be applied to Edgar Prince and, eventually, to Erik, born nearly a century after Van Raalte's death. The conservative Dutch Reform Church that provided the religious guid­ ance for Van Raalte, and eventually the Prince family, based its beliefs on the teachings o f a seventeenth-century minister, John Calvin. One o f the main tenets o f Calvinism is that o f predestination—the belief that God has predestined some people for salvation and others for damnation. Calvinists believe that people have no business meddling or vainly trying to divine God's decisions. The religion also teaches strict obedience and hard work, acting on the belief that God will steer followers but that they are responsible for the work. Calvinists have long taken pride in their work ethic. The town o f Holland boasts that its villagers dug the canal to Lake Michigan—that would

3

BLACKWATER

4

prove valuable for trade—with their own hands, and then set down their shovels and immediately constructed the bridge over their new channel.

4

It was this famed work ethic that found Erik Prince's grandfather Peter Prince, owner o f the Tulip City Produce Company, on a truck heading to Grand Rapids, thirty miles away, for a business meeting in the early morning hours o f May 21, 1943. Shortly into the trip, Prince complained of heartburn to his fellow wholesale produce dealer, and they pulled over for a few minutes. Soon, they continued on, and near Hudsonville, halfway through the trip. Prince slumped over against his colleague, who was driving. A doctor in the town pronounced him dead on arrival at the age of 5

thirty-six. Peter's son, Edgar, was eleven years old. A decade later, Edgar Prince graduated from the University of Michigan with an engineering degree and met Eisa Zwiep, whose parents owned Zwiep's Seed Store in Holland and who had just completed her studies in 6

education and sociology at nearby Calvin College. The two married, and Edgar followed family tradition and joined the military, serving in the U.S. Air Force. The couple moved east and then west as Edgar was stationed at bases in South Carolina and Colorado. Though it's unclear whether Peter Prince was a veteran—he came o f age for the draft during the window between World War I and World War II—four o f Peter's five brothers were in 7

the Army at the time o f his death. Though Edgar Prince had traveled far and wide during college and the Air Force, his hometown of Holland beckoned him and Eisa back to Lake Michigan and to the strict religious and cultural traditions embraced by the Prince family. "We find Holland a very comfort­ able place to live," Edgar Prince said in a book written about Holland's downtown, which included three chapters on the family. "We have family here. We enjoy the recreational opportunities. We like the community's her­ itage, which is based on the Dutch reputation for being neat, clean, orderly, and hard working. Their standard has always been excellence."

8

Upon returning to the town, Edgar rolled up his sleeves and started working in die-casting, rising to the position of chief engineer at Holland's Buss Machine 9

Works. But Edgar had much bigger ambitions and soon quit. In 1965, Prince

JEREMY SCAHILL

5

and two fellow employees founded their own company that made die-cast machines for the auto industry.

10

In 1969, he shipped a sixteen-hundred-ton

machine capable of creating aluminum transmission cases every two minutes.

11

By 1973, Prince Corporation was a great success, with hundreds of people 12

working for the company's various Holland divisions. That year, the company began production of what would become its signature product, an invention that would end up in virtually every car in the world and put Edgar Prince on his way to becoming a billionaire: the ubiquitous lighted sun visor.

13

But while wealth and success were in abundance in the Prince family, the sixteen-to-eighteen-hour days had been taking their toll on Edgar, and in the early 1970s, he nearly fell to the same fate as his father when he suffered a 14

serious heart attack. "It was then, while he lay in a hospital bed reflecting on what all his labor had won for him, that he committed himself anew to his faith in Jesus Christ," recalled Prince's friend Gary Bauer, one of the early leaders of the religious right and founder of the conservative Christian lobby group the Family Research Council. "Ed turned his future and the future of his business over to God. From that point forward, the Prince Corporation was 15

blessed with unprecedented growth and financial success." Edgar Prince recovered from the heart attack and steered his company toward amazing pros­ perity. Prince Corporation soon expanded into map lamps, visors that could open garage doors, consoles with ashtrays, and cup and change holders, 16

among many other products. By 1980, the Prince empire boasted numerous 17

plants and more than 550 employees. As Erik Prince later recalled, "My dad was a very successful entrepreneur. From scratch he started a company that first produced high-pressure die-cast machines and grew into a world-class auto­ motive parts supplier in west Michigan. They developed and patented the first lighted car sun visor, developed the car digital compass/thermometer and the programmable garage door opener."

18

But, Prince said, "Not all their ideas

were winners. Things like a sock-drawer light, an automated ham de-boning machine and a propeller-driven snowmobile didn't work out so well for the company. My dad used them as examples o f the need for perseverance and determination."

19

B LA C KW ATE R

6

In that respect, it wasn't the only way in which the product itself seemed of secondary importance to Prince. "People make the difference," read the copy from an old Prince Corporation brochure. "It isn't magic that brings excellence to a company; excellence is the result o f commitment and hard work by dedicated people. Whether we're talking about products or processes, no wizardry or easy formulas will solve the challenges of tomorrow. People will."

20

Edgar Prince was fond of initiatives like one

where executives stuck to a strict exercise regimen. Three days a week from 4:15 to 5:15 p.m. the executives met at the Holland Tennis Club, which Prince also owned.

21

In 1987, Prince opened a sprawling 550,000-square-

foot facility spread over thirty-five acres, its fourth manufacturing center 22

and home to many o f its now fifteen hundred employees. The Prince "campus" centerpiece featured nearly five thousand feet of skylights and 23

amenities like a basketball and volleyball court. He never made employees work on Sundays and flew executives home from business trips promptly so they could be with their families on the Lord's Day.

24

Detroit's auto industry may have been suffering in the 1980s, "but you'd never know it from the Prince Corporation," read the lead of a story in the 25

Holland Sentinel.

"My family's business was automotive supply—the most

viciously competitive business in the world," Erik Prince told author Robert Young Pelton. "My father was focused on quality, volume, and customer satisfaction. That's what we talked around the dinner table."

26

But Edgar

Prince had more than the success o f his business and his employees on his mind, and with the money flowing into Prince Corporation, he finally had the means to achieve the higher goals to which he aspired. That meant pouring serious money into conservative Christian causes. "Ed Prince was not an empire builder. He was a Kingdom builder," recalled Gary Bauer. "For him, personal success took a back seat to spreading the Gospel and fighting for the moral restoration o f our society."

27

In the 1980s, the Prince family merged with one of the most venerable conservative families in the United States when Erik Prince's sister Betsy mar­ ried Dick DeVos, whose father, Richard, founded the multilevel marketing

JEREMY SCAHILL

7

firm Amway and went on to own the Orlando Magic basketball t e a m .

28

Amway was a powerhouse distributor o f home products and was regularly plagued by accusations that it was run like a cult and was nothing more 29

than a sophisticated pyramid scheme. The company would rise to become one of the greatest corporate contributors in the U.S. electoral process in the 1990s, mostly to Republican candidates and causes, and used its business infrastructure as a massive political organizing network.

30

"Amway relies

heavily on the nearly fanatical—some say cultlike—devotion o f its more than 500,000 U.S. 'independent distributors.' As they sell the company's soaps, vitamins, detergents, and other household products, the distributors push the Amway philosophy," reported Mother Jones magazine in a 1996 exposé on the company.

31

"They tell you to always vote conservative no

matter what. They say liberals support the homosexuals and let women get out o f their place," Karen Jones, a former Amway distributor, told the mag­ azine. "They say we need to get things back to the way it's supposed to b e . "

32

Amway leaders also reportedly used "voice-mail messages, along with com­ pany rallies and motivational tapes, to mobilize distributors into a potent domestic political force."

33

Betsy and Dick's union was the kind o f alliance common among the families o f monarchs in Europe. The DeVos family was one o f the few in Michigan whose power and influence exceeded that o f the Princes. They were one o f the greatest bankrollers o f far-right causes in U.S. history, and with their money they propelled extremist Christian politicians and activists to positions o f prominence. For a time, Betsy and Dick lived down the street from the Prince family, including Erik, who is nine years younger than his sister.

34

In 1988, Gary Bauer and Focus on the Family founder James Dobson began building what would become the Family Research Council (FRC), the crusading, influential, and staunchly conservative evangelical organiza­ tion that has since taken the lead on issues ranging from banning gay mar­ riage to promoting school vouchers for Christian schools to outlawing abortion and stem-cell research. To get it off the ground, though, they

BLACKWATER

8

needed funding, and they turned to Edgar Prince. "[W]hen Jim Dobson and I decided that the financial resources weren't available to launch FRC, Ed and his family stepped into the breach," wrote Bauer. "I can say without hesitation that without Ed and Eisa and their wonderful children, there 35

simply would not be a Family Research Council." Young Erik would go on to become one o f Bauer's earliest interns at the FRC.

36

It was one of

many right-wing causes that the Princes would join the DeVoses in bankrolling, leading to what would be known as the Republican Revolu­ tion in 1994, which brought Newt Gingrich and a radical right-wing agenda known as the Contract with America to power in Congress, wrestling control from the Democrats for the first time in forty years. To support the "revolution," DeVos's Amway gave some $2.5 million to the Republican Party in what was the single largest soft-money donation on record to any political party in history.

37

In 1996, Amway also donated

$1.3 million to the San Diego Convention and Visitors Bureau to pay for Republican "infomercials" broadcast on Pat Robertson's Family Channel during the RNC convention.

38

Erik's sister Betsy DeVos would go on to chair Michigan's Republican Party from 1996 to 2 0 0 0 and from 2003 to 2005; at times she flirted with running for the U.S. Senate.

39

She was also a George W. Bush "Pioneer"

fundraiser, bringing in more than $100,000 for his campaign.

40

Her hus­

band, Dick, was the GOP candidate for governor in 2006, a race that he ulti­ mately lost.

41

Seasoned observers o f Michigan politics say it would be hard

to overestimate the influence the DeVos family has on politics in the state. "Anyone who runs for a significant Republican office in Michigan has to check with the DeVos family," said Calvin College political science pro­ fessor Doug Koopman. "They are perceived within that community as being not only a source o f funds but a judge o f [a candidate's] fitness."

42

The Prince and DeVos clans were also a major driving force behind the Michigan Family Forum (MFF), the state's chapter o f Jim Dobson's Focus on the Family.

43

Besides the tens of thousands o f dollars that the Prince

family poured into the MFF, another o f Erik Prince's sisters, Emilie Wierda,

JEREMY SCAHILL

9

44

has served as its treasurer. The MFF has mobilized voters in conservative churches to support legislators who have backed the Christian right's agenda. Beginning in 1990, the MFF ran what was essentially a backdoor lobbying system, through the establishment o f more than one thousand church-based Community Impact Committees (CICs), which operated 45

under the radar, away from public scrutiny. "The CICs offer advantages to political organizing that other Christian Right organizing doesn't have," Russ Bellant wrote in his 1996 book The Religious Right in Michigan Politics. "Because they are based in churches, their meetings are not visible in the world of politics. Since laypersons rather than pastors may run these groups, they may not have a high profile even in the church community outside the Family Forum network."

46

The MFF also established the

Michigan Prayer Network, which consisted o f "prayer warriors" assigned to 47

nearly every legislator in the state. While the groups were prohibited from expressly lobbying, the effect o f asking legislators to "pray" for issues like school choice and against gay rights made it, as one Michigan legislator put it, "just another lobbying gimmick."

48

While opening his wallet to the Christian right, Edgar Prince also became a patron to the entire community o f Holland, investing millions o f dollars into Hope College, founded by Albert Van Raalte, and its equally devout 49

rival Calvin College, Edgar's wife's alma mater. He and Eisa almost singlehandedly reengineered and brought a boom to Holland's downtown, saving it from the fate hundreds o f other small towns had suffered throughout the Midwest as they gradually slipped into economic oblivion due to poor urban planning coupled with outsourcing, downsizing, layoffs, and the overall decline of U.S. manufacturing. The Princes helped establish the Evergreen Commons, a popular senior center downtown, and lobbied hard for the preservation and restoration o f historic landmarks in town.

50

They fought for a well-planned city that would exist and thrive for genera­ tions while maintaining what they saw as a necessary connection to its Dutch roots. They personally took on causes like saving an 1892 stone clock tower that had once been a cornerstone o f downtown before falling into

BLACKWATER

10

disrepair.

51

Some o f Edgar Prince's ideas for maintaining a vibrant down­

town seemed utterly insane. He envisioned and campaigned hard in the late 1980s for an underground system of heated pipes that would melt snow and ice throughout the downtown business district, ensuring that strollers could be pushed along the sidewalks even during western Michigan's harsh winters.

52

When the city balked at the $ 1.1 million plan,

Prince ponied up a quarter o f the funding himself.

53

All the while, Edgar Prince continued to balance his business and religious obligations, both to his local Dutch Reform Church and the Prince Corpora­ tion. "Ed was at his best and was most valuable to [the Family Research Council] during the dark and difficult times—during the confirmation battle over Clarence Thomas, following the bitter disappointment of the Supreme Court's unexpected pro-abortion ruling in Planned Parenthood v. Casey, through the anti-family shift in the Congress in 1992, and in recent months with the wave o f efforts by some to redefine the traditional family and under­ mine marriage," Gary Bauer wrote of Prince in 1 9 9 5 .

54

Prince Corporation 55

continued to flourish, a "boom built on Biblical principles," Bauer wrote. In 56

1992, the company roster had grown to 2,250 employees. By early 1995, it had ballooned to more than 4,000 employees and $400 million in annual sales.

57

Prince had also married his business acumen with his desire to see

Holland thrive and had founded Lumir Corporation, which became Hol­ land's foremost downtown developer, responsible for projects like the $2.5 58

million Evergreen Commons Senior Center. But tragedy would soon strike the Prince empire. At about 1:00 p.m. on March 2, 1995, Edgar Prince had one of his usual 59

chats with Prince Corporation president John Spoelhof, a longtime friend 60

with whom he had just gone skiing in Colorado a week earlier. They said good-bye, and the sixty-three-year-old Prince stepped into the elevator at his company's headquarters. Inside, he suffered a massive heart attack and 61

was found on the floor fifteen minutes later. Despite CPR attempts by two Prince employees, Edgar was pronounced dead within the hour.

62

"I saw

him probably two minutes before he passed away," Spoelhof said. "I looked

JEREMY SCAHILL

11

at the expression o f his face and the color o f his face and Ed was Ed. I knew him so well all these years; if he would have been a little ashen, I would have noticed."

63

As happens with the deaths o f kings, patriarchs, and heads o f state, the town of Holland entered a period o f intense mourning. The flag flew at 64

half-staff. Every newspaper in the region ran front-page stories eulogizing Prince, accompanied with sidebars and pictures and timelines. More than one thousand people gathered at the Christ Memorial Reformed Church to hear evangelical leaders James Dobson and Gary Bauer, who referred to 65

Edgar as his "mentor," eulogize Prince. Bauer remembered how Prince was adamant that the Family Research Council's new headquarters in Wash­ ington, D.C., should have a cross atop it, to remind the President, members of the Supreme Court, and Congress "that this is one nation under God's judgment."

66

In the Grand Rapids Press Lakeshore supplement, the banner

headline read "A Christian Man," and the Rev. Ren Broekhuizen said, "Ed Prince was a gifted and developed individual who never took his eyes off the goal of honoring Jesus Christ in his life."

67

That pastor, a friend o f

Prince's for two decades, would marry Edgar's widow Eisa five years later.

68

At the time o f his father's death, Erik Prince was a Navy SEAL serving a 69

string of deployments in Bosnia, Haiti, and the Middle East. Even still, he had happened to visit his father just a week before his death, when Edgar made the sign of the cross on Erik's daughter's forehead during her bap­ tism.

70

Erik remembered that his father had taught him never to say, "I 71

can't." At the time of his death, Edgar had been married to Eisa for fortyone years, and they had raised three daughters in addition to Erik. "Dad was definitely the shepherd of his family, and he would bring the whole family together every chance he could. He'd make all the arrangements and take care of all the details," Erik told the Holland Sentinel after Edgar's death.

72

Erik seemed elated that his father had been able to meet and baptize his first-born daughter, Sophia, but that elation was tinged with regret: "He loved her. That was the last time I saw him. My regret is my kids will never know him. I wanted them to be able to talk to him, to learn from h i m . "

73

12

BLACKWATER

Erik Prince adored his father and strived to follow in his footsteps from the time he was a child. Erik was an active youth, playing soccer, track, and basketball at the Holland Christian schools he attended as a primary and high schooler, and for which his family also provided financial support. Prince's deeply religious high school featured pages upon pages of Bible quotations and incantations throughout its yearbooks. One year, the third page o f his yearbook intoned: "In God's Kingdom all of life is living out the meaning o f the New Humanity in Christ. This takes all the inventiveness, creativity and discovering that we can do." Gary Bauer recognized the spe­ cial bond between Edgar and Erik: "Erik Prince, Ed and Elsa's only son, and 74

one o f FRC's first college interns, certainly did know him well." In addi­ tion to his work with the Family Research Council, Erik spent his college years increasingly taking up his father's mantle. He entered the Naval Academy after high school intending to be a Navy pilot but resigned after three semesters to attend Hillsdale College, a Michigan Christian liberal arts school that preaches libertarian economics. The campus was rated the most conservative in the country in a 2 0 0 6 Princeton Review poll. "He was a smart guy, and pleasant to be around, and he's well spoken," said Erik's professor Gary Wolfram. "What's good about him, he under­ stands the interrelationship between markets and the political system."

75

Prince also had a thirst for adrenaline-pumping action and initially satiated it by becoming the first college student to join the Hillsdale Volunteer Fire Department. "When you've been on a fire an hour and a half and the crowd's gone, some o f the guys want to sit on bumpers and have a soft drink," recalled firefighter Kevin Pauken. "Other guys will be rolling hoses and picking up equipment so you can get out of there. That was Erik."

76

As he grew older, Erik became increasingly active in right-wing politics, landing a six-month internship at George H. W. Bush's White House. It was during this internship that the nineteen-year-old Prince made his first polit­ ical contribution, giving $ 1 5 , 0 0 0 to the National Republican Congressional Committee. Since then. Prince and his late wife, Joan, and current wife, Joanna, have given $ 2 4 4 , 8 0 0 in contributions to federal campaigns, not a

JEREMY SCAHILL

77

dime of it to Democrats. He has supported Jesse Helms, Ollie North, Richard Pombo, Spencer Abraham, Dick Chrysler, Rick Santorum, Tom Coburn, Tom DeLay, Jim DeMint, Mike Pence, Duncan Hunter, and others.

78

Prince also worked for a stint in the office o f Republican Con­

gressman Dana Rohrabacher.

79

In 1992, he became enthralled with the

renegade presidential campaign o f Pat Buchanan, who challenged President Bush for the GOP nomination, running on an extreme anti-immigrant, antiabortion, antigay platform. Erik Prince's backing o f Buchanan led the then twenty-two-year-old into a feud o f his own with his sister Betsy, who was working for Bush's reelection as chairwoman o f a local Republican dis­ trict.

80

Erik and Edgar, however, didn't seem to care for Bush. "I interned

with the Bush administration for six months," Erik told the Grand Rapids Press in 1992. "I saw a lot o f things I didn't agree with—homosexual groups being invited in, the budget agreement, the Clean Air Act, those kind o f bills. I think the administration has been indifferent to a lot o f conservative concerns."

81

Erik began coordinating Buchanan's campaign at Hillsdale, and Edgar contributed to it. But Erik's foray into public politics would be short-lived. The next year, he went back into the military, joining SEAL Team 8 through Officer Candidate School i n l 9 9 2

8 2

and starting down the path that would

bring him to Moyock, North Carolina. It was during his four years with SEAL Team 8 in Norfolk, Virginia, that he met many o f the people who would 83

found Blackwater. Erik seemed happy as a SEAL, and his family seemed proud to have him be one. "[Edgar] always wanted his children to do what they wanted to do, not just what he experienced," Eisa Prince said months after her husband's death. "He wanted them to go where their preferences and talents took them."

84

But during the months after Edgar Prince's death, the future o f the Prince Corporation was anything but clear. More than four thousand employees depended on what had largely been the vision o f Edgar Prince. The com­ pany and many in the family felt that only the Prince family itself could ensure that the reputation o f Prince Corporation outlived its founder. Eisa

13

BLACKWATER

14

became chairman o f the company's board, and Erik came home to help get the company's affairs in order, and to help his family. His wife, Joan Nicole, had just been diagnosed with terminal cancer. Being a full-time SEAL was no longer an option. But the young Prince would not become the king o f Prince Corporation. On July 22, 1996, little more than a year after Edgar's death, the family, after much deliberation and many suitors, agreed to sell the corporation to Johnson Controls for $1.35 billion in cash. They sold under the condition that the Prince name would remain, as would the employees and the com­ munity atmosphere they had long fostered. The bevy of stories in the local press took on that same enthusiasm, liberally quoting Eisa Prince gushing over the deal: "The Lord opened the right doors at the right time in an 85

answer to our prayer. His timing is always perfect." Beyond that, Eisa said the buyout would enable her husband's company to have "an influence 86

well beyond the United States." A few years later, that influence could really be felt in Holland, as hundreds o f jobs started migrating to Mexico.

87

Johnson Controls eventually stripped the name off the company and shut­ tered some o f the local factories.

88

Though the influence o f industrialist Edgar Prince has steadily receded in Holland, the religious beliefs and politics he promoted, as well as the downtown he created, continue to grow. When Edgar was alive, the Prince family largely shied away from overt political involvement, preferring to let its money do the talking. In the years after her husband's death, Eisa Prince became notably outspoken on behalf o f a number o f right-wing political causes, including those favored by her late husband. In 2004 she was the single largest donor to the successful campaign to ban same-sex marriage in Michigan, kicking in $75,000 o f her own money.

89

She served on the

boards o f the Family Research Council and Focus on the Family and was active in the Council for National Policy and a host o f other right-wing reli­ gious organizations.

90

"My main thrust is to do things that Jesus would

want you to do to further your knowledge o f him and his ways," she told the Holland Sentinel in 2 0 0 3 .

91

Edgar, Eisa, and her new husband, Ren,

JEREMY SCAHILL

15

cumulatively donated nearly $556,000 to Republican candidates and polit­ 92

ical action committees, along with untold millions to right-wing causes. Along with the DeVos family, the Princes remain major players in the con­ servative Christian movement in Michigan and nationally. One o f their recent hard-fought but unsuccessful battles was to implement school vouchers in Michigan. The DeVos family itself spent upwards o f $3 million in 2000 pushing the perennial conservative education ideal.

93

Erik Prince adopted his father's behind-the-scenes demeanor, as well as his passion for right-wing religious causes, but with a twist. "Erik is a Roman Catholic," said author Robert Young Pelton, who has had rare access to Prince. "A lot o f people brand him in his father's religion, but he converted 94

to Roman Catholicism." Indeed, many o f the executives who would later form the core o f Prince's Blackwater empire are also Catholics, and when Prince's first wife, Joan, died. Catholic Mass was celebrated for her both near her hometown outside Schenectady, New York, and near where the family 95

lived in McLean, Virginia. In 1997, Lt. Erik Prince, U.S. Navy SEAL, blurbed a book called Christian Fatherhood:

The Eight Commitments

of St. Joseph's

Covenant Keepers, saying that it "provides men with the basic training they 96

need to complete (their) mission." At the time. Prince himself had two young children. The book's author, Stephen Wood, is the founder o f Family Life Center International, a Catholic apologist organization specializing in providing "moral media . . . geared toward deepening a family's love and knowledge o f their faith and thus hopes to impart today's society. We place a special focus on fatherhood and providing resources which aid fathers in fulfilling their vocation. " The "moral media" include books with titles like A Parent's Guide to Preventing Homosexuality

and Breast Cancer and the Pill,

among many others. Taking a cue from his father's funding of right-wing evangelical Protestant causes. Prince became a major funder of extremist, fringe Catholic organiza­ tions. In 1 9 9 9 he contributed $ 2 5 , 0 0 0 to Catholic Answers, a San Diego-based Catholic evangelical organization founded by the Catholic fundamentalist Karl Keating. Keating dedicated his life to apologetics and

BLACKWATER

16

defending Catholicism at all costs. During the 2004 and 2006 elections, the group promoted a "Voters Guide for Serious Catholics," which listed five "non-negotiable" issues that it said are never morally acceptable under Catholic teaching: abortion, homosexual marriage, embryonic stem-cell research, euthanasia, and human cloning.

97

Issues that were identified as

"Not Non-Negotiable" included "the questions o f when to go to war and 98

when to apply the death penalty." When Prince's wife was dying of cancer, he e-mailed Keating, who in turn asked his followers to pray for the Princes.

99

The following year, Prince provided funding to the right-wing Catholic 100

monthly magazine Crisis.

He also gave generously to several Michigan

churches, including $50,000 to Holy Family Oratory, a Kalamazoo Catholic Church, and $100,000 to St. Isidore Catholic Church and school in Grand Rapids, as well as Catholic churches in Virginia.

101

But Erik Prince's philanthropy has certainly not been limited to Catholic causes. The Prince family was deeply involved in the secretive Council for National Policy, described by the New York Times as "a little-known club of a few hundred o f the most powerful conservatives in the country [which has] met behind closed doors at undisclosed locations for a confidential conference" three times a year "to strategize about how to turn the country to the right."

102

The Council was started in 1981 by the Rev. Tim LaHaye,

one o f the founders o f the modern right-wing Christian movement in the United States and author o f the apocalyptic Left Behind novels.

103

The idea

was to build a Christian conservative alternative to the Council on Foreign Relations, which LaHaye considered too liberal. CNP membership is kept secret, and members are instructed that "The media should not know when or where we meet or who takes part in our programs, before or after a meeting."

104

While membership lists are not public, CNP meetings have

been attended by a host o f conservative luminaries like Jerry Falwell, Phyllis Schlafly, Pat Robertson, Tony Perkins, James Dobson, Gary Bauer, and Ralph Reed. Holland H. Coors o f the beer dynasty and Wayne LaPierre of the National Rifle Association, Richard and Dick DeVos, and the likes of Oliver North, Grover Norquist, and Frank Gaffney are also affiliated with

JEREMY SCAHILL

CNP.

105

17

Guests are allowed to attend "only with the unanimous approval o f

the executive committee."

106

George W. Bush addressed the group in 1999,

seeking support for his bid for the presidency.

107

The group also has played host to powerful players in the Bush adminis­ tration. Shortly after the Iraq invasion, Vice President Dick Cheney and Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld attended CNP meetings; in 2 0 0 4 John Bolton briefed the group on U.S. plans for Iran; John Ashcroft has attended meetings; as did Dan Senor, the top aide to Paul Bremer, the original head o f the Iraq occupation.

108

Former House majority leader Tom DeLay and sev­

eral other prominent Republican politicians have also attended meetings.

109

Then-Senate majority leader Bill Frist was given the CNP's Thomas Jefferson Award. In his acceptance speech, he told the gathering, "The destiny o f our nation is on the shoulders o f the conservative movement."

110

Edgar Prince

served a stint as vice president o f the CNP from 1988 to 1989 and was CNP vice president at the time o f his death.

111

Eisa Prince was also a member o f

the organization. The DeVos family has donated at least $100,000 to the CNP, and the Princes gave at least $20,000 over a two-year period in the 1 9 9 0 s .

112

While the lack of public records on the group makes it impossible to con­ firm that Erik Prince is a member, as his father was, the younger Prince has donated money to the C N P

113

and has close relationships with many o f its

key players. Erik Prince's philanthropy and politics have also put him in bed with some of the most controversial political figures in recent U.S. history. Prince's Freiheit Foundation, which is German for "liberty," gave $ 5 0 0 , 0 0 0 to the Prison Fellowship in 2 0 0 0 .

1 1 4

The Fellowship is a so-called prison

reform organization that, among other things, advocates for "faith-based prisons."

115

It is the brainchild of Richard Nixon's "hatchet man," Watergate

conspirator Charles Colson.

116

In 1969, Colson was appointed Nixon's Spe­

cial Counsel; he was seen by many as the "evil genius" in the administra­ tion.

117

In 1971, Colson wrote what later became known as Nixon's

Enemies List, a catalogue o f the President's political opponents, who would be targeted by the White House.

118

Colson was the first person sentenced in

BLACKWATER

IB

the Watergate scandal, after pleading guilty to obstruction of justice in the investigation o f the break-in to the psychiatrist's office o f Daniel Ellsberg, the whistleblower who leaked the Pentagon Papers during the Vietnam War.

119

Colson also allegedly tried to hire Teamsters thugs to beat up

antiwar demonstrators and plotted to raid or firebomb the Brookings Insti­ tution.

120

Colson became a born-again Christian before going to prison and

after leaving wrote the bestseller Born Again about his conversion, the pro­ ceeds from which he used to found the Prison Fellowship. As o f late 2006, some 22,308 Fellowship volunteers operated in more than eighteen hundred U.S. prison facilities, while upwards of 120,000 pris­ oners participated in its monthly Bible study and seminar programs. boasted o f "ministries" in more than one hundred countries.

122

121

It

Colson's

Fellowship has become so widespread that it actually runs the daily lives of some prisoners, including two hundred in a Texas prison, courtesy of one George W. Bush. "I'll never forget this," Bush said at the First White House National Conference on Faith-Based and Community Initiatives. "When I was the Governor o f Texas, one o f the early initiatives in my governorship, one o f the faith-based initiatives, was to turn over a part of the prison unit to a faith program, Chuck Colson's program. He convinced me that this would be a great opportunity to change lives. And it would be—it would be better than stamping license plates."

123

Bush, whose administration held

Colson's work up numerous times as evidence o f successful "faith-based initiatives," went on to tell the story of a prisoner "whose life was changed and saved because o f faith."

124

From the first week that Bush took office in

2001, Colson has been a regular adviser to the President. The Texas prison 125

Colson ran was in Sugar Land —the district represented by then-majority leader Tom DeLay. In 2002, Colson gave a speech at Calvin College about his Texas prison: "My friend Erik Prince, who is here tonight, traveled with me recently to a prison in Texas that has been under Prison Fellowship administration for the past eighteen months. This is an extraordinary program because it is not just that men are coming to Christ and being redeemed, as wonderful as

19

JEREMY SCAHILL

that is. They are creating an entire culture! "

1 2 6

A similar program at an Iowa

prison was found unconstitutional in June 2 0 0 6 because it used state funding, a judge said, for the indoctrination o f "inmates into the Evangel­ ical Christian belief system." Colson has vowed to appeal the ruling all the way to the Supreme Court. He has suggested that his faith-based prison pro­ gram is "the one really successful antidote" to what he termed "the largely unimpeded spread of radical Islam through our prisons."

127

Colson pre­

dicted, "If, God forbid, an attack by home-grown Islamist radicals occurs on American soil, many, if not most, o f the perpetrators will have converted to Islam while in prison."

128

He suggested that opponents o f his Prison Fel­

lowship program are abetting terrorism and said the efforts to declare his program unconstitutional "leaves jihadists and other radical groups as the only game in town."

129

In October 2006, Colson was given the Faith &

Freedom Award by the Acton Institute for the Study o f Religion and Lib­ erty,

130

an organization to which Prince has donated at least $ 2 0 0 , 0 0 0 .

131

The Grand Rapids-based organization has Prince's stepfather, Ren Broekhuizen, on its board of directors, and its president and founder is the Rev. Robert Sirico, who presided over the funeral o f Erik Prince's first wife.

132

"Islam has a monolithic worldview, which sees just one thing: the

destruction o f infidels and the recovery o f territories they've lost," Colson declared at the Acton dinner. "We're in a hundred-year war and it's time to sober up, and Christians understand it because we understand our history, and we understand what makes the religious mind tick, and secular America doesn't get it." Colson said when Mohammed wrote the Koran, "I think he'd had too many tamales the night before."

133

A few years earlier, in the 2002 speech in which Colson praised Erik Prince, the former Watergate conspirator talked extensively about the his­ torical foundation and current necessity o f a political and religious alliance of Catholics and evangelicals. Colson talked about his work, beginning in the mid-1980s, with famed conservative evangelical Protestant minister turned Catholic priest Richard Neuhaus and others to build a unified move­ ment. That work ultimately led in 1994 to the controversial document

BLACKWATER

20

"Evangelicals and Catholics Together: The Christian Mission in the Third Millennium."

134

The ECT document articulated the vision that would ani­

mate Blackwater's corporate strategy and the politics practiced by Erik Prince—a marriage o f the historical authority o f the Catholic Church with the grassroots appeal o f the modern conservative U.S. evangelical move­ ment, bolstered by the cooperation o f largely secular and Jewish neoconservatives. Author Damon Linker, who once edited Neuhaus's journal, First Things, termed this phenomenon the rise o f the "Theocons."

135

The ECT document became the manifesto o f the movement that Erik Prince would soon serve and bankroll. It declared that "The century now drawing to a close has been the greatest century o f missionary expansion in Christian history. We pray and we believe that this expansion has prepared the way for yet greater missionary endeavor in the first century o f the Third Millennium. The two communities in world Christianity that are most evangelistically assertive and most rapidly growing are Evangelicals and Catholics."

136

The signatories called for a unification o f these religions in a

common missionary cause, that "all people will come to faith in Jesus Christ as Lord and Savior."

137

The document recognized the separation o f

church and state but "just as strongly protest[ed] the distortion of that prin­ ciple to mean the separation o f religion from public l i f e . . . . The argument, increasingly voiced in sectors o f our political culture, that religion should be excluded from the public square must be recognized as an assault upon the most elementary principles o f democratic governance."

138

But the ECT

was not merely a philosophical document. Rather, it envisioned an agenda that would almost identically mirror that o f the Bush administration a few years later, when Neuhaus would serve as a close adviser to Bush, beginning with the 2 0 0 0 campaign.

139

The signers o f the ECT document asserted that religion is "privileged and foundational in our legal order" and spelled out the need to defend "the moral truths o f our constitutional order."

140

The document was most pas­

sionate in its opposition to abortion, calling abortion on demand "a massive attack on the dignity, rights, and needs o f women. Abortion is the leading

JEREMY SCAHILL

21

edge of an encroaching culture of death." It also called for "moral educa­ tion" in schools, advocating for educational institutions "that transmit to coming generations our cultural heritage, which is inseparable from the formative influence of religion, especially Judaism and Christianity."

141

The

document forcefully defended neoliberal economic policies. "We contend for a free society, including a vibrant market economy," the signers asserted. "We affirm the importance o f a free economy not only because it is more efficient but because it accords with a Christian understanding o f human freedom. Economic freedom, while subject to grave abuse, makes possible the patterns o f creativity, cooperation, and accountability that contribute to the common g o o d . "

142

It called for a "renewed appreciation o f Western

culture," saying, "We are keenly aware of, and grateful for, the role o f Chris­ tianity in shaping and sustaining the Western culture o f which we are part." "Multiculturalism," the signers declared, has most commonly come to mean "affirming all cultures but our own." Therefore, the ECT signers claimed Western culture as their "legacy" and set for themselves the task o f transmit­ ting it "as a gift to future generations."

143

"Nearly two thousand years after it began, and nearly five hundred years after the divisions o f the Reformation era, the Christian mission to the world is vibrantly alive and assertive. We do not know, we cannot know, what the Lord of history has in store for the Third Millennium. It may be the springtime of world missions and great Christian expansion," the lengthy document concluded. "We do know that this is a time o f opportunity—and, if o f opportunity, then o f responsibility—for Evangelicals and Catholics to be Christians together in a way that helps prepare the world for the coming of him to whom belongs the kingdom, the power, and the glory forever. Amen."

144

In addition to Neuhaus and Colson, the document was endorsed

by one o f the most powerful mainstream Catholic leaders in the United States, John Cardinal O'Connor o f New York, as well as the Rev. Pat Robertson and Michael Novak o f the conservative American Enterprise Institute.

145

The manifesto was years in the making and would greatly assist

the unifying o f the conservative movement that made George W. Bush's

22

BLACKWATER

rise to power possible. The ECT signers, according to Damon Linker—who worked for Neuhaus for years—"had not only forged a historic theological and political alliance. They had also provided a vision o f America's reli­ gious and political future. It would be a religious future in which upholding theological orthodoxy and moral traditionalism overrode doc­ trinal disagreements. And it would be a political future in which the most orthodox and traditionalist Christians set the public tone and policy agenda for the n a t i o n . "

146

Six years later, with Bush—the theocons' President—in the White House, Chuck Colson was in Michigan with his buddy Erik Prince at Calvin College talking about his faith-based prisons. During the lecture, Colson played to the largely Protestant crowd's heritage as he advocated his theoconservative movement based on Catholic/Evangelical unity. Colson quoted a nineteenthcentury Calvinist scholar who said, "Rome is not an antagonist but stands on our side, inasmuch as she also recognizes and then maintains the Trinity, the Deity o f Christ, the Cross as an atoning sacrifice, the Scriptures of the Word of God, and the Ten Commandments as a divinely imposed rule of life. Therefore, let me ask, if Roman Catholic theologians take up the sword to do valiant and skillful battle against the same tendency that we ourselves mean to fight to the death, is it not part of wisdom to accept their valuable help?"

147

Erik Prince has been in the thick o f this right-wing effort to unite

conservative Catholics, evangelicals, and neoconservatives in a common theoconservative holy war—with Blackwater serving as a sort of armed wing of the movement. As Prince himself once envisioned the role of his merce­ naries, "Everybody carries guns, just like Jeremiah rebuilding the temple in Israel—a sword in one hand and a trowel in the other."

148

In addition to his support for extremist Catholic organizations, Prince has continued to contribute heavily to the evangelical Christian causes that his parents supported, including large donations to a slew of Protestant schools and colleges. Prince has also donated at least $200,000 to the Haggai Institute in Atlanta, Georgia (to go along with the hundreds of thousands more from the broader Prince family).

149

Haggai, one of the leading Christian

JEREMY SCAHILL

23

missionary organizations in the world, boasts that it has "trained" more than sixty thousand evangelical "leaders" around the globe, with a concentration on poor or developing countries.

150

Prince has also served on the board of

directors of and donated to Christian Freedom International, formerly Christian Solidarity International, a crusading missionary group active operating everywhere from Somalia to Sudan to Afghanistan and Iraq. Its mission statement reads: "More Christians have been martyred in the past 100 years than in all prior 1900 years combined. And the persecution o f Christians is growing. Today more Christians are oppressed for their faith than ever. In many nations—right now—Christians are harassed, tortured, imprisoned, and even martyred for their faith in Jesus Christ."

151

Jim

Jacobson, a former aide to Gary Bauer in Ronald Reagan's White House, runs the group, which has taken public positions against the work of the United Nations, calling some of its agencies "merchants o f misery," protested that Iraqi self-determination could harm Christians.

152

153

and has In calling

for the United States to attack Afghanistan after 9/11, Jacobson declared, "Only unequivocal military strikes will express our commitment to world peace and the rule of law."

154

The board of directors includes Blackwater lob­

byist Paul Behrends, former Republican Senator Don Nickles, and former Voice of America director Robert Reilly, who began his career as a Reagan White House propagandist for the Nicaraguan Contras and worked briefly for war contractor SAIC on its ill-fated attempt to create a new Iraqi informa­ tion ministry.

155

In 2000 Erik Prince was on hand for a Michigan benefit to raise money for one of his family's (and the theoconservative movement's) pet causes— school vouchers. At the event, Prince spoke to the Wall Street Journal, saying both his family and the DeVos clan believe in conservative, Christian, freemarket ideals, and that his beloved father's business—the one responsible for building up Focus on the Family and the Family Research Council— "was an engine that generated cash that he could use to do good things." He said his sister Betsy was using those "same energies."

157

156

By that time, the

thirty-year-old Prince had his own small cash-generating engine, on the

24

B LA C KW ATE R

brink o f becoming much, much bigger. While Erik continued the Prince family tradition o f supporting the right-wing Christian movement, his Blackwater empire was steadily growing in the Great Dismal Swamp of North Carolina. How fast it would grow wouldn't become clear until two planes smashed into the World Trade Center a year later, in a horrible tragedy that would fuel Erik Prince's meteoric rise to become head of one of the most powerful private armies in the world. Prince would soon draw on his father's ideals and money to build up an army of soldiers who would serve on the front lines o f a global battle, waged largely on Muslim lands, that an evangelical President Prince helped put in the White House would boldly define as a "crusade."

158

CHAPTER

TWO

BLACKWATER B E G I N S

ARMY. NAVY. Air Force. Marines. Blackwater. Erik Prince might now see his empire as the fifth branch of the U.S.

mil­

itary, but his designs for Blackwater started off much more modestly, and they weren't really his own designs. While he served as the hands-on ATM for the creation o f Blackwater, the location, plans, and virtually every detail of the new company came not from Prince but rather from one o f his men­ tors in the Navy SEALs: Al Clark, who spent eleven years as one of the elite unit's top firearms trainers. In an interview, Clark said that in 1993,

when

Prince was just beginning his military career, Clark had already "started 1

drawing the sketches for Blackwater." The concept grew out o f Clark's expe­ riences as a Navy firearms trainer, when he recognized firsthand what he

26

B LA C K W ATE R

saw as an inadequate training infrastructure for what was one o f the most vaunted forces in the U.S. military machine. "There were no facilities. We didn't have anything. The Navy never owned ranges, they always had to borrow from the Marine Corps or the Army," he said. "[Private] facilities were out there that had different pieces o f the programs we needed, but no one had one-stop shopping."

2

But one essential element was missing from Clark's plan: money. Little did Clark know that within a few years, one o f the wealthiest men ever to serve in the U.S. military would be one o f his pupils. In 1996, Clark was transferred to SEAL Team 8 to run its tactical training program. Lt. Erik Prince was in the first platoon that Clark trained there, but "I didn't know 3

he had a gazillion dollars," Clark recalled. Prince went through Clark's training, though the two never discussed any sort o f business partnership. 4

Eventually, Prince set off on a deployment with SEAL Team 8. Seven months later, Al Clark had learned not only that his former pupil was loaded with cash but that the two shared a common interest in the bur­ geoning world o f privatized training. When Prince returned to the States after his SEAL deployment, "I hooked it up with him through the request of somebody else," Clark recalled. "Basically, we just kind o f started the dia­ logue from there."

5

F