Roberta sadly passed away on July 6 2024 and is survived by her husband Peter and her son.

Here’s what we know about Peter Guinness, the actor who appeared in iconic films and TV shows.

Who is Roberta Taylor's husband Peter Guinness?

Peter Guinness was born in Whitstable, Kent in 1950.

He showed his creative streak from a young age and wanted to become an art teacher.

However, while working in South London, he became interested in theatre.

This led him to apply to drama schools such as the Central School of Speech and Drama.

He graduated from the drama school in 1976, where he quickly became a huge presence in the UK drama scene.

Fans often mistake Peter for being related to Alec Guinness, but there is in fact no relation between the two men.

How did Roberta Taylor and Peter Guinness meet?

Both Peter and his wife applied to the Central School of Speech and Drama in 1973. However, they met properly some years later.

Roberta was born in East London and, by the time she met Peter, had given birth to her son and divorced her husband Victor Taylor.

Roberta and Peter ran into one another at the Glasgow Citizens Theatre, where they began dating.

When did Roberta Taylor and Peter Guinness get married?

The couple dated for years before deciding to get married.

Eventually, they tied the knot in 1996, in a private ceremony.

Soon after the couple got married, their star power began to rise.

In 1997, Roberta landed a role in Eastenders and Peter appeared in a Hollywood thriller called The Saint.

Did Roberta Taylor and Peter Guinness have children?

Although Robert and Peter did not have children together, they raised Roberta’s son, Elliot, from her first marriage.

Roberta had Elliott with her first husband, Victor Taylor. Victor was a rope-maker and married Roberta in 1966.

The couple later divorced in 1975 and Roberta then went on to marry Peter.

What has Peter Guinness starred in?

Peter Guinness has starred in a range of TV shows and films, both in the UK and in America.

He had his film breakthrough with 1992’s Alien 3, where he played Gregor, and 1999’s Sleepy Hollow, where he played Lord Crane.

In 2023, he appeared in The Boys in the Boat which followed the American rowing team as they prepared for the 1936 Berlin Olympics.

Peter also starred in ITV's beloved crime drama The Bill, alongside his wife.

He played the lover of Roberta’s character, Gina Gold.

On stage, he has appeared in adaptations of Arthur Miller’s The Crucible and Władysław Szpilman’s The Pianist.