Okaloosa County, Florida

Okaloosa County is a county located in the northwestern portion of the U.S. state of Florida, extending from the Gulf of Mexico to the Alabama state line.

Crestview, Florida

Crestview is a city in Okaloosa County, Florida. The population was 20,978 at the 2010 census.

Duke Field

Duke Field (IATA: EGI, ICAO: KEGI, FAA LID: EGI), also known as Eglin AFB Auxiliary Field #3, is a military airport located three miles (5 km) south of the central business district of Crestview, in Okaloosa County, Florida, United States

…

Camp Rudder

Camp James E. Rudder (Camp Rudder) is host to the third and final phase of a nine week training course, dubbed the "swamp phase", of the U.S. Army Ranger School.

Laurel Hill, Florida

Laurel Hill is a city in Okaloosa County, Florida, United States. The population was 549 at the 2000 census. As of 2004, the population recorded by the U.S. Census Bureau is 576 [1].

Bob Sikes Airport

Bob Sikes Airport (IATA: CEW, ICAO: KCEW, FAA LID: CEW), named for Robert L. F. Sikes, is a public-use airport located 3 miles (4.8 km) northeast of the central business district of the city of Crestview in Okaloosa County, Florida, United States. T…

Choctawhatchee National Forest

Choctawhatchee National Forest is a United States National Forest established by President Theodore Roosevelt on November 27, 1908. The supervisory headquarters was established at DeFuniak Springs and moved to Pensacola in September 1910. It remaine…

WAAZ-FM

WAAZ-FM (104.7 FM) is a radio station broadcasting a country music format. Licensed to Crestview, Florida, USA, the station serves the Ft. Walton Beach area. The station is currently owned by Crestview Broadcasting Company, Inc.

WJSB

WJSB (1050 AM) is a radio station broadcasting a Country music format, simulcasting WAAZ-FM/104.7. Licensed to Crestview, Florida, USA, the station serves the Ft. Walton Beach area. The station is currently owned by Crestview Broadcasting Co., Inc.

Crestview High School (Florida)

Crestview High School (also known as CHS) is the only high school in the city of Crestview, Florida. It is the largest in Okaloosa County. The mascot of the school is the bulldog. In January 2007, Ed Coleman replaced Andy Johnson as principal after …

Crestview (Amtrak station)

Amtrak's Crestview Station is an unstaffed train station in Crestview, Florida. Despite the quaint and non-modern appearance similar to the Bill Lee Station in Chipley, the station was built in 1993 when the Sunset Limited was extended to Orlando, F…

WXEI-LP

WXEI-LP (95.3 FM) is a radio station broadcasting a News/Talk radio format. Licensed to Crestview, Florida, USA, the station serves the Crestview/Fort Walton Beach area. The station is currently owned by X-Static Enterprises Inc. The station is home…