UPC 5999552130394

MADE IN HUNGARY

REGION 2 PAL DVD

AUDIO: Swedish 2.0

SUBTITLES: Hungarian

TOTAL RUNTIME: 110 MINUTES

English Summary:

The Adventures of Picasso (Swedish: Picassos äventyr) is a 1978 Swedish comedy film directed by Tage Danielsson, starring Gösta Ekman, as the famous painter. The film had the tag-line Tusen kärleksfulla lögner av Hans Alfredson och Tage Danielsson (A thousand loving lies by Hans Alfredson and Tage Danielsson). At the 14th Guldbagge Awards the film won the award for Best Film.

The film uses ten languages: Spanish, French, Swedish, German, Finnish, Italian, English, Russian, Norwegian and Latin. Most of these words are very simple (agua, water), sometimes meaning something different from what they seem (Don Jose's military rank, Hauptbahnhof, which means "central rail station" in German) and other times just being complete nonsense.

The film is very loosely based on Pablo Picasso's life, narrated by Toivo Pawlo, who introduces himself as Elsa Beskow. It opens with a quote by Picasso himself: "Art is a lie that leads us closer to the truth."

The story starts with Picasso's birth in Málaga, Spain. His father, Don Jose (Hans Alfredson), is an artist and discovers early his son's talent when the young boy makes a sculpture of Don Jose with his food. When Pablo is old enough (and now portrayed by Gösta Ekman) his father takes him to Madrid, so that Pablo can study art. On their way, they encounter two robbers who try to hurt a beautiful girl named Dolores (Lena Olin). After a slapstick number in which Picasso defeats the two attackers, she gives him a bottle of paint, containing a djinn. With the paint from that bottle he signs all his paintings. At the academy of art Pablo's talent is praised and awarded. When he returns home with a portrait of his mother Dona Maria (Margaretha Krook), he is equally praised there. Unfortunately, their happiness is ruined when Don Jose suddenly dies - or so it seems. At the funeral it turns out he's actually still alive. Despite this, Dona Maria keeps ignoring him with the words: "Idioto, tú es muerta" (= "You are dead, fool").

Hungarian Summary:

Zseniális, mint maga Pablo! Picasso életének mérföldkövei adják e kultuszfilm gerincét: Pablo már gyermekkorában grande tehetségnek tűnt, szülei Madridba küldik, hogy tanulja az el arté-t. Párizsban szegényes körülmények között élő festő lesz, majd egy napon felfedezi őt egy amerikai milliomos, így Picasso is egyre többet keres. Megismerkedik az 1920-as évek művészeivel és hírességeivel, olyanokkal, mint Gertrude Stein, Ingrid Svensson-Guggenheim-mal, Appolinaire, Hitler vagy Churchill, akik hozzá hasonlóan teljesen mások...

Swedish Summary:

Picassos äventyr är en svensk komedifilm från 1978 i regi av Tage Danielsson. I huvudrollerna ses Gösta Ekman, Hans Alfredson, Margaretha Krook, Lena Olin Birgitta Andersson och Lena Nyman. Filmen är en av titlarna i boken Tusen svenska klassiker (2009).

Picassos äventyr är en surrealistisk komedi av AB Svenska Ord där man får följa Pablo Picassos liv från vaggan till graven. Underrubrik till filmen är "Tusen kärleksfulla lögner".

Pablo Picasso växer upp i Spanien under fattiga förhållanden, men han är extremt konstnärligt begåvad och kommer att skickas fram och tillbaka mellan Madrid och Paris för att utveckla sin talang. Det är en lång väg till rikedom och berömmelse, men när Picasso väl nått dit vill han bara bort från eländet.