Kelly Carlin remembers being in the driveway of her Pacific Palisades home with her dad one evening in 1972. Across the street, a neighbor was hosting a cocktail party when George Carlin says loud enough for everyone to hear, “Hey, Kell, look at all the (expletive) over there!”

The 9-year-old was horrified.

“I wanted to just crawl under a rock somewhere,” says Carlin, who shares stories about growing up with the comedian who combined ’60s counterculture with disdain for hypocrisy in her one-woman show “A Carlin Home Companion,” opening Feb. 6 at the Falcon Theatre in Burbank.

In putting together the show, Carlin pulled from essays.

She’s been sharing bits and pieces of her life with Los Angeles audiences for the last 15 years. Her perspective on events in her father’s 2010 memoir, “Last Words,” also informs “A Carlin Home Companion.” She’s also written a memoir by the same name that’s due out from St. Martin’s Press in September.

The catalyst for her show was a 75-minute performance she put together at the request of her friend, the hilariously apoplectic comedian Lewis Black. He had organized a fan-based comedy cruise a few years ago.

Each night, a stand-up would entertain fans in the lounge but he needed some day events for when the ship was out at sea. So he asked Carlin if she would fill a slot by telling family stories and playing videos of her dad.

“I put together a list of videos and I literally threw the event together that day,” she says. “People were over-the-top about it. They laughed and they cried and it was an amazing thing. Everyone was saying to me, ‘You should go on the road with this.’ ”

She wasn’t sure.

But Paul Provenza of Showtime’s stand-up comedy talk show “The Green Room with Paul Provenza” offered to help develop the show and direct it. Within nine months, Carlin was testing the waters at comedy festivals in Montreal, Chicago and at South by Southwest, as well as some one-off performances.

The Falcon Theatre production will be her first run of the 90-minute show that chronicles her relationship with her father, in particular.

An only child, Carlin grew up very quickly and enmeshed in the lives of her parents. Her mother was Brenda Hosbrook, who met George Carlin in 1960. By the time Carlin entered the picture, her parents were using drugs and alcohol, which led to a lot of family insanity and codependency.

Being swept up in her parents’ lives also made it difficult for Carlin to find her own place in the world. Her parents helped her along as she struggled for decades with abusive relationships, drug addiction and agoraphobia.

“When you are such an enmeshed family from day one, it’s a real dance,” Carlin says. “It’s always two steps forward, one step back, and that’s the way it felt for me. There would be a little bit of independence and autonomy and then it would feel too scary.”

After a history of heart problems, George Carlin died of heart failure in the summer of 2008.

“In the last five years before, I knew my dad’s health was not good and I was preparing myself on some level for him to die,” Carlin says. “So there was that too: trying to be OK with who I am and know that maybe we don’t always agree on everything but we unconditionally love each other forever.

“What I tell people is it’s really the story of any American family that started in the ’60s and moved through,” she says. “It’s a dysfunctional family. It’s a family with deep love and loyalty to each other. There’s humor, there’s trials and tribulations, there’s health scares, there’s death. It really is quite a universal story.”