George Carlin was a funny human whose work cut across various aspects of American society. He was a comedian, actor, writer and social critic. He has earned a reputation for frequent digging into crucial topics that other social commentators may avoid. His comedy routines were generally light reflexes on sociocultural and political issues in the United States.

One of the popular “seven dirty words” comedy routines influenced a landmark U.S. Supreme Court decision that upheld the government’s powers to regulate indecent material in broadcasting. He hosted the first episode of Saturday Night Live in 1975 and was a frequent guest during The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson ‘s three decades .

Biography of George Carlin

He was born George Denis Patrick Carlin on May 12, 1937. He was born and raised in New York. Her mother was Irish-American while her father was an Irish immigrant. He was raised primarily by his mother when his parents’ marriage ended at the age of 2 months. He got his start at the parochial school of the Church of Corpus Christi in Morningside Heights, New York. For high school, he attended up to 3 different schools and eventually graduated from Salesian High School in Goshen, New York.

During his teenage years, Carlin spent most of his summers at Camp Notre Dame on Spofford Lake in Spofford, New Hampshire, New York, and was the serial recipient of the Drama Award. He served in the United States Air Force, but his brief time there was marred by several acts of rebellion. He began working as a DJ for a local radio station in Shreveport, Louisana while still in the Air Force, and immersed himself in comedy after his discharge in 1957.

Showbiz Career

George Carlin moved to Fort Worth, Texas in the late 1950s where he met another DJ, Jack Burns, with whom he formed a team of comedians. The duo performed successfully in Fort Worth and in February 1960 moved to California to pursue their career. Carlin and Burns created a comedy show The Wright Brothers KDAY in Hollywood as they continued to perform at local clubs. After 2 years together, they separated amicably and decided to pursue their careers separately.

Carlin began appearing on television in the early 1960s and in 1966 he recorded his first solo comedy album. Take-offs and Put-Ons. He was a regular guest on The Tonight Show, particularly during Johnny Carson’s 30 successful years as the show’s host. He released another highly successful comedy album FM and AM in 1972 and it marked his shift from mainstream comedy to radical social commentary comedy.

In 1972, George Carlin recorded one of his finest famous and controversial comedies of comedy “Seven Words You Can Never Say on Television”, characterized by an uncontrolled use of foul language. A New York-based radio station was sued after rebroadcasting the routine and the lawsuit ultimately resulted in a landmark Supreme Court ruling upholding the Federal Communications Commission’s powers to regulate over-the-air broadcasting public. Interestingly, the transcript of Carlin’s original routine was included in the court documents.

George Carlin became even more famous after the legal action and the resulting court ruling and he took the opportunity to further boost his career. On October 11, 1975, he hosted the very first episode of Saturday Night Live. He also recorded 14 comedy specials on the HBO network, starting in 1977. He released up to 20 comedy albums and 4 compilation albums during his lifetime. The talented comedian headlined a self-titled sitcom The George Carlin Show on the Fox network between 1994 and 1995 but eventually returned to stand-up comedy after the show was canceled. He has also acted in several comedy films, including Bill & Ted’s Excellent Adventure (1989), Scary Movie 3 (2003),Tarzan II (2005) and Cars (2006).

Carlin has won 5 Grammy Awards (1973, 1994, 2001,2002, 2009) for Best Comedy Album for over 50 years of comedy. He was inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1987. He was also honored at the 1997 Aspen Comedy Festival, and in 2001 he received a Lifetime Achievement Award at the 15th Annual American Comedy Awards.

Net value

George Carlin had a net worth of $10 million. Most of his fortune has been made up of his illustrious career as a comedian and actor. Carlin also excelled as a writer and up to a million copies of his books have been sold worldwide.

How and when did he die?

On June 22, 2008, George Carlin died at St. John’s Health Center in Santa Monica, California. He was 71 years old and his death was due to cardiac arrest. The beloved comedian had suffered from a series of heart problems for most of his seven-year existence.

Carlin had played his last show at the Orleans Hotel and Casino in Las Vegas just a week before his death. In accordance with his wishes, his remains were cremated and the ashes spread to various locations where he performed in New York City as well as Spofford Lake in southwestern New Hampshire, where he attended camp. summer during his adolescence.