LOS ANGELES — Comedian George Carlin died nearly 16 years ago, but a new lawsuit accuses a media company of using artificial intelligence to imitate his voice and style in a new online video.

“George Carlin: I’m Glad I’m Dead,” used AI to analyze Carlin’s work and to imitate his voice.

The video, posted early in January, had more than 500,000 views as of Friday, Jan. 26.

The video clearly states it is not the late comedian, but his estate contends in a lawsuit filed Thursday in federal court that it is “an unlawful appropriation of Carlin’s identity, which also damages the value of Carlin’s real work and his legacy.”

Carlin died in June 2008.

In a statement announcing the lawsuit, Carlin’s daughter, Kelly, blasted the creators of the video as “unscrupulous” and their work as “poorly executed.”

“My father was a legendary comedian and a once-in-a-lifetime talent whose legacy is the body of work that he left behind — his actual performances, albums and books. I understand and share the desire for more George Carlin. I, too, want more time with my father,” Kelly Carlin said in the statement, cited by Variety.

“It is ridiculous to proclaim he has been ‘resurrected’ with AI,” she said. “The ‘George Carlin’ in that video is not the beautiful human who defined his generation and raised me with love. It is a poorly executed facsimile cobbled together by unscrupulous individuals to capitalize on the extraordinary goodwill my father established with his adoring fanbase.”

Carlin’s estate and executor Jerold Hamza (his former manager) are named as plaintiffs in the suit. The named defendants are Dudesy and podcast hosts Will Sasso and Chad Kultgen.

The case is one of the first instances of a performer or their estate seeking legal action against the creators of an AI-generated recreation — a growing concern across the entertainment industry, Variety said.

The Associated Press noted that the AI issue was a major sticking point in strikes last year by Hollywood writers and actors strikes.

The lawsuit specifically cites a conversation between Sasso and Kultgen on one of their Dudesy podcasts promoting the video.

“Was that passable to you as George Carlin?” Klutgen asks. “Yeah, that sounded exactly like George Carlin,” Sasso replies.

The exchange closes with Klutgen confirming the video can be found on YouTube -- “A full hour of this. Which I have to watch as soon as we’re done today.”

In the intro to the video, a character Dudesy, named for the podcast outlet that created the video, compares itself to Andy Kaufman imitating Elvis or Will Ferrill’s impersonations of former President George W. Bush.

“Before we get started, I just wanted to let you know very clearly that what you’re about to hear is not George Carlin,” the video says. “I’ll be doing my best George Carlin impersonation just like a human being would. I tried to capture his iconic style to tackle the topics I think the comedy legend would be talking about today.”

The lawsuit asks that a federal judge order the podcast be taken down from the internet.

The defendants have not filed a response to the lawsuit and it was not clear whether they have retained an attorney, The Associated Press said.