Town was just hoppin’ with people this past Easter weekend. Everywhere we went, it was packed. In true Island spirit, we ran into a wedding party from my husband’s hometown, including people he grew up with, in Edgartown Friday night. It’s getting to be that time of year.

While many of our friends were out of town for school vacation, there was no lack of people to talk to downtown. I made the acquaintance of Mark and Karen Leavitt, a nice couple visiting from Plymouth, who have come to the Island several times before and always enjoy return trips.

Saturday, May 7, from 2 to 4, Featherstone will host its second annual Garden Tea Party and Fashion Show. The tea party will feature tea sandwiches prepared by Featherstone board members and friends and tea cake desserts prepared by Cakes by Liz. Floral artist Peggy Zablotny offers her botanical collage for a raffle to benefit Featherstone programs. Judy Cunniffe, chair of the event, will award prizes for special hats. Minor Knight will serve as fashion moderator while community celebrities including Traeger di Pietro, Denys and Marilyn Wortman, Anne Gallagher, and Shelley Christiansen will walk the runway under the Summer Tent at Featherstone. The tea party is held in conjunction with The Art of Flowers Show curated by Holly Alaimo, well-known art connoisseur. The afternoon event on Featherstone’s pastoral campus is the perfect way to welcome spring, mingle with friends, and get a sneak preview of Holly’s Art of Flowers Show. The opening reception for the show will be Sunday, May 8, from 4 to 6 pm. For more information, please call Featherstone at 508-693-1850.

The First Congregational Church of West Tisbury will sponsor a workshop, entitled “Planning for a Graceful Exit” on Saturday, May 7, from 10 am to 2 pm in the Parish Hall. Through this event, you will learn the importance of having a will, health proxy, and power of attorney; the options available in using financial planning to benefit those you love; what end-of-life issues and decisions you may face; what Hospice can do for you or a loved one; about spiritual considerations; and more. This is a community service program open to all. Call Meg at 508-693-2842 to reserve your space.

If your travel budget for this spring doesn’t cover a weekend in Paris, here’s a deal: The Edgartown Library’s film series, called Paris in the Spring, opens on April 26, presenting four films on Tuesday evenings at 7 pm through May 17. Opening the series is a stylish thriller from director Jean-Jacques Beineix that has become a cult classic since its release in 1981. The film will be shown on the big screen downstairs, with tasty French desserts to set the mood. Stop by the library desk or check the web site at www.edgartownlibrary.org for more information.

With all the joys of this time of year, I hate to be the one to remind you to look out for our less-welcome seasonal visitors, but alas, it is time to once again start checking for ticks. For helpful hints on tick-borne illness prevention, and for an identification chart, visit www.mass.gov/dph/tick.

I cannot believe the number of birthday boys and girls this week! Dan Vaughan, Donna Goodale Cavallo, and Paulo DeOliveira all share their day today. Happy Birthday to Lark Guerin, April 29; to Brian Ditchfield, Matthew Cutter, and Shelly O’Neil on April 30; to Dave Alton, May 1; and last but most assuredly not least, Kara Shemeth, May 4. I’m sure there are a ton I’m missing. For example, I can never remember if Coo Cavallo celebrates his day before or after his lovely bride, so you’ll have to ask him. Or just declare it Coo Cavallo week. Whichever you choose. Anyway, I hope you all have a grand ol’ time!