On Sunday, August 11th of 2019, Andrew James Featherstone passed away at his home, at 48 years of age. Andrew was born in Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, Canada, on November 7th, 1970, to parents Rev. Edwin Featherstone and Twilla Featherstone. He was the first of five children: Leah, Aaron, Jonathan, and Joel. He was married to Anita Morris in South Bend, IN on July 1, 1989. They had three children: Stephanie, Matthew, and Michael. Andrew had a very successful career in sales. In 1993, he moved to Texas. With his father, he was employed by Worldbook Educational Products. Within a few months their branch had moved into the top ten branches in the country. He successfully became a member of the Flying Circus, which is the highest honor in Worldbook given to a district manager. Later, he became involved in selling insurance, specializing in health and life insurance. He started as an independent agent and soon developed his own agency, Universal Benefit Plans. He employed several thousand agents across the United States. He also enjoyed playing softball, and served as a playing coach on the Smoking Guns softball team in San Antonio. In 2015 the team won the Battle of the Rings State Championship. Andrew is survived in death by wife, Anita Featherstone (Morris) of Schertz, TX, his children, Stephanie Stanley and husband, Brett of Groves, TX, Matthew Featherstone of Live Oak, TX, and Michael Featherstone of Schertz, TX, and grandson James Stanley of Groves, TX. He's also survived by his father, Rev. Edwin Featherstone of Schertz, TX, sister Leah Castro and husband Gabe, of Cibolo, TX, and brothers Aaron Featherstone, and wife Kim, of Baytown, TX, Rev. Jonathan Featherstone, and wife Dawn, of Houston, TX, and Rev. Joel Featherstone, and wife Crystal of Cibolo, TX, and many nieces and nephews. Andrew is preceded in death by his mother, Twilla Featherstone. A Visitation will be held on Thursday, August 15, 2019 from 5:00PM-9:00PM at the Schertz Funeral Home Chapel. The Funeral Service will be held on Friday, August 16, 2019 at 10:00AM at the Schertz Funeral Home Chapel with interment to follow at Hill Country Memorial Gardens located in New Braunfels, TX. The arrangements are provided by Schertz Funeral Home. The family appreciates all the support and kindness shown to them in this time of loss.

.