Movies like these are my favorites in the series. Fake mediums, real ghosts, scary houses and The Beaudine! Come on, look at Slip's face on the poster! You know this is going to be great.

Bowery Boys busting up the séance scene with a ghost sent from above, in a better than usual comedy from them. You still got to enjoy the Bowery Boys stupidity to enjoy it. Thankfully for me, I do. And scary spoofs are usually up my alley. Lloyd Corrigan's angel-like character is what sets it apart and help give it a little more comic substance than usual. Especially whenever exchanging "wits" with Huntz Hall.

More watchable than I'd expected from the Bowery Boys, but if I'm being honest, I think that's mostly this riding on the coattails of my initial enjoyment of the premise of busting fake psychics and some Houdini vibes, and throwing in an actual ghost early on to help out. It still doesn't seem to live up to that, but it did make this easier going than many of their things. Also has the common theme where movies carried significantly by someone outside of the Bowery Boys seem to be better.

“Routine Five, boys!” One of the best Bowery Boys comedies, GHOST CHASERS is packed with gags that roar by at a rapid clip, and the script by series regulars Charles R. Marion and Bert Lawrence delegate a few jokes to other actors besides stars Leo Gorcey and Huntz Hall. Director William Beaudine shines here too, as Slip (Gorcey), Sach (Hall), Whitey (William Benedict), Chuck (David Gorcey), and Butch (Buddy Gorman) go after a phony medium, played by Lela Bliss (THE SNAKE PIT), who swindles the neighbor of Slip’s mother. Gorcey delivers gentle drama in a one-on-one with the neighbor (Argentina Brunetti), and the film veers into fantasy with the clever appearance of a 400-year-old ghost (Lloyd Corrigan) who breaks the…

The Bowery Boys films are worth a watch mostly due to the presence of Huntz Hall. There’s never a dull moment with him around. This film in particular was a good showcase for him.

Near the end of Billy Benedict and the character of “Whitey” in the Bowery Boys films. He’ll be sorely missed but he gets a lot to do in this entry about the gang battling seance con artists. Lloyd Corrigan is charming as always playing Edgar the Friendly Ghost.

The Bowery Boys are determined to expose a phony medium who is bilking money from those who wish to communicate with deceased loved ones. They are doing this with the assistance of a real ghost, which would seem to undercut the film's message somewhat, but, hey, it's the Bowery Boys.

Solid series entry.

The Bowery Boys and Beaudine back at it again! I'm not allowed to die until I've seen em all. Made me laugh a handful of times, enjoyed spending times with the gang. Leo Gorcey's dad adds a lot. Incredible that the AFI decided this was the Bowery Boys movie worthy of nominating for their comedy list lol.