The App Store on Apple Vision Pro expands to new markets

Apple Vision Pro will launch in China mainland, Hong Kong, Japan, and Singapore on June 28 and in Australia, Canada, France, Germany, and the United Kingdom on July 12. Your apps and games will be automatically available on the App Store in regions you’ve selected in App Store Connect.

If you’d like, you can:

Manage the availability of your visionOS apps and compatible iPhone or iPad apps at any time.

Request to have your app evaluated directly on Apple Vision Pro.

Localize your product page metadata for local audiences.

You can also learn how to build native apps to fully take advantage of exciting visionOS features.

Upcoming regional age ratings in Australia and South Korea

Apple is committed to making sure that the App Store is a safe place for everyone — especially kids. Within the next few months, you’ll need to indicate in App Store Connect if your app includes loot boxes available for purchase. In addition, a regional age rating based on local laws will automatically appear on the product page of the apps listed below on the App Store in Australia and South Korea. No other action is needed. Regional age ratings appear in addition to Apple global age ratings.

Australia

A regional age rating is shown if Games is selected as the primary or secondary category in App Store Connect.

15+ regional age rating: Games with loot boxes available for purchase.

18+ regional age rating: Games with Frequent/Intense instances of Simulated Gambling indicated in App Store Connect.

South Korea

A regional age rating is shown if either Games or Entertainment is selected as the primary or secondary category in App Store Connect, or if the app has Frequent/Intense instances of Simulated Gambling in any category.

KR-All regional age rating: Apps and games with an Apple global age rating of 4+ or 9+.

KR-12 regional age rating: Apps and games with an Apple global age rating of 12+. Certain apps and games in this group may receive a KR-15 regional age rating from the South Korean Games Ratings and Administration Committee (GRAC). If this happens, App Review will reach out to impacted developers.

Certain apps and games may receive a KR-18 regional age rating from the GRAC. Instead of a pictogram, text will indicate this rating.

WWDC24 resources and survey

Thank you to everyone who joined us for an amazing week. We hope you found value, connection, and fun. You can continue to:

Watch sessions at any time.

Check out session highlights.

Read about newly announced technologies.

Get sample code from sessions.

Dive into new and updated documentation.

We’d love to know what you thought of this year’s conference. If you’d like to tell us about your experience, please complete the WWDC24 survey.

Take the survey

WWDC24 sessions schedule, lab requests, guides, and documentation now available

WWDC24 is here! Here’s how to make the most of your week:

Watch daily sessions.

Request one-on-one online lab appointments with Apple experts.

Check out curated guides to the week’s biggest announcements.

Dive into new and updated documentation.

Learn more

Updated agreements and guidelines now available

The App Review Guidelines, Apple Developer Program License Agreement, and Apple Developer Agreement have been updated to support updated policies and upcoming features, and to provide clarification. Please review the changes below and accept the updated terms as needed.

App Review Guidelines

2.1(a): Added to Notarization.

2.1(b): Added requirement to explain why configured in-app items cannot be found or reviewed in your app to your review notes.

2.5.8: We will no longer reject apps that simulate multi-app widget experiences.

4.6: This guideline has been removed.

Apple Developer Agreement

Sections 1, 6(B): Updated “Apple ID” to “Apple Account.”

Section 16(A): Clarified export compliance requirements.

Section 18: Updated terminology for government end users.

Developer Program License Agreement

Definitions, Section 2.1, 3.3.6(C), 3.3.10(A), 14.2(C), Attachment 9, Schedules 1-3: Updated “Apple ID” to “Apple Account.”

Definitions: Clarified definition of Apple Maps Service.

Definitions, Section 3.3.6(F): Specified requirements for using the Apple Music Feed API.

Definitions, Section 3.3.8(F): Added terms for use of the Now Playing API.

Section 3.2(h): Added terms for use of Apple Software and Services.

Section 6.5: Added terms for use of TestFlight.

Section 7.7: Added terms on customization of icons.

Section 11.2(f), 14.8(A): Clarified export compliance requirements.

Section 14.9: Updated terminology for government end users.

Attachment 5, Section 3.1: Added terms for use of Wallet pass templates.

Please sign in to your account to review and accept the updated terms.

View all agreements and guidelines

Translations of the terms will be available on the Apple Developer website within one month.

Price and tax updates for apps, In-App Purchases, and subscriptions

The App Store is designed to make it easy to sell your digital goods and services globally, with support for 44 currencies across 175 storefronts.

From time to time, we may need to adjust prices or your proceeds due to changes in tax regulations or foreign exchange rates. These adjustments are made using publicly available exchange rate information from financial data providers to help make sure prices for apps and In-App Purchases stay consistent across all storefronts.

Price updates

On June 21, pricing for apps and In-App Purchases¹ will be updated for the Egypt, Ivory Coast, Nepal, Nigeria, Suriname, and Zambia storefronts if you haven’t selected one of these as the base for your app or In‑App Purchase.¹ These updates also consider the following value‑added tax (VAT) changes:

Ivory Coast: VAT introduction of 18%

Nepal: VAT introduction of 13% and digital services tax of 2%

Suriname: VAT introduction of 10%

Zambia: VAT introduction of 16%

Prices won’t change on the Egypt, Ivory Coast, Nepal, Nigeria, Suriname, or Zambia storefront if you’ve selected that storefront as the base for your app or In-App Purchase.¹ Prices on other storefronts will be updated to maintain equalization with your chosen base price.

Prices won’t change in any region if your In‑App Purchase is an auto‑renewable subscription and won’t change on the storefronts where you manually manage prices instead of using the automated equalized prices.

The Pricing and Availability section of Apps has been updated in App Store Connect to display these upcoming price changes. As always, you can change the prices of your apps, In‑App Purchases, and auto‑renewable subscriptions at any time.

Learn more about managing your prices

View or edit upcoming price changes

Edit your app’s base country or region

Pricing and availability start times by region

Set a price for an In-App Purchase

Tax updates

Your proceeds for sales of apps and In-App Purchases will change to reflect the new tax rates and updated prices. Exhibit B of the Paid Applications Agreement has been updated to indicate that Apple collects and remits applicable taxes in Ivory Coast, Nepal, Suriname, and Zambia.

As of today, June 6, your proceeds from the sale of eligible apps and In‑App Purchases have been modified in the following countries to reflect introductions of or changes in tax rates.

France: Digital services tax no longer applicable

Ivory Coast: VAT introduction of 18%

Malaysia: Sales and Service Tax (SST) increased to 8% from 6%

Nepal: VAT introduction of 13% and digital services tax introduction of 2%

Norway: VAT increased to 20% from 0% for certain Norwegian news publications

Suriname: VAT introduction of 10%

Uganda: Digital services tax introduction of 5%

Zambia: VAT introduction of 16%

Learn more about your proceeds

View payments and proceeds

Download financial reports

Tax categories

The Fitness and Health category has a new attribute: “Content is primarily accessed through streaming”. If this is relevant to your apps or In-App Purchases that offer fitness video streaming, review and update your selections in the Pricing and Availability section of Apps in App Store Connect.

Learn about setting tax categories

1: Excludes auto-renewable subscriptions.

What’s new for apps distributed in the European Union

Core Technology Fee (CTF)

The CTF is an element of the alternative business terms in the EU that reflects the value Apple provides developers through tools, technologies, and services that enable them to build and share innovative apps. We believe anyone with a good idea and the ingenuity to bring it to life should have the opportunity to offer their app to the world. Only developers who reach significant scale (more than one million first annual installs per year in the EU) pay the CTF. Nonprofit organizations, government entities, and educational institutions approved for a fee waiver don’t pay the CTF. Today, we’re introducing two additional conditions in which the CTF is not required:

First, no CTF is required if a developer has no revenue whatsoever. This includes creating a free app without monetization that is not related to revenue of any kind (physical, digital, advertising, or otherwise). This condition is intended to give students, hobbyists, and other non-commercial developers an opportunity to create a popular app without paying the CTF.

Second, small developers (less than €10 million in global annual business revenue*) that adopt the alternative business terms receive a 3-year free on-ramp to the CTF to help them create innovative apps and rapidly grow their business. Within this 3-year period, if a small developer that hasn’t previously exceeded one million first annual installs crosses the threshold for the first time, they won’t pay the CTF, even if they continue to exceed one million first annual installs during that time. If a small developer grows to earn global revenue between €10 million and €50 million within the 3-year on-ramp period, they’ll start to pay the CTF after one million first annual installs up to a cap of €1 million per year.

iPadOS

This week, the European Commission designated iPadOS a gatekeeper platform under the Digital Markets Act. Apple will bring our recent iOS changes for apps in the European Union (EU) to iPadOS later this fall, as required. Developers can choose to adopt the Alternative Terms Addendum for Apps in the EU that will include these additional capabilities and options on iPadOS, or stay on Apple’s existing terms.

Once these changes are publicly available to users in the EU, the CTF will also apply to iPadOS apps downloaded through the App Store, Web Distribution, and/or alternative marketplaces. Users who install the same app on both iOS and iPadOS within a 12-month period will only generate one first annual install for that app. To help developers estimate any potential impact on their app businesses under the Alternative Terms Addendum for Apps in the EU, we’ve updated the App Install reports in App Store Connect that can be used with our fee calculator.

For more details, visit Understanding the Core Technology Fee for iOS apps in the European Union. If you’ve already entered into the Alternative Terms Addendum for Apps in the EU, be sure to sign the updated terms.

Global business revenue takes into account revenue across all commercial activity, including from associated corporate entities. For additional details, read the Alternative Terms Addendum for Apps in the EU.

Reminder: Privacy requirement for app submissions starts May 1

The App Store was created to be a safe place for users to discover and get millions of apps all around the world. Over the years, we‘ve built many critical privacy and security features that help protect users and give them transparency and control — from Privacy Nutrition Labels to app tracking transparency, and so many more.

An essential requirement of maintaining user trust is that developers are responsible for all of the code in their apps, including code frameworks and libraries from other sources. That‘s why we’ve created privacy manifests and signature requirements for the most popular third-party SDKs, as well as required reasons for covered APIs.

Starting May 1, 2024, new or updated apps that have a newly added third-party SDK that‘s on the list of commonly used third-party SDKs will need all of the following to be submitted in App Store Connect:

Required reasons for each listed API

Privacy manifests

Valid signatures when the SDK is added as a binary dependency

Apps won’t be accepted if they fail to meet the manifest and signature requirements. Apps also won’t be accepted if all of the following apply:

They’re missing a reason for a listed API

The code is part of a dynamic framework embedded via the Embed Frameworks build phase

The framework is a newly added third-party SDK that’s on the list of commonly used third-party SDKs

In the future, these required reason requirements will expand to include the entire app binary. If you’re not using an API for an approved reason, please find an alternative. These changes are designed to help you better understand how third-party SDKs use data, secure software dependencies, and provide additional privacy protection for users.

This is a step forward for all apps and we encourage all SDKs to adopt this functionality to better support the apps that depend on them.

Apple Search Ads now available in Brazil and more Latin American markets

Drive discovery and downloads on the App Store with Apple Search Ads in 70 countries and regions, now including Brazil, Bolivia, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Panama, and Paraguay.

Visit the Apple Search Ads site and Q&A.

And explore best practices to improve your campaign performance with the free Apple Search Ads Certification course.

Check out our newest developer activities

Join us around the world to learn about growing your business, elevating your app design, and preparing for the App Review process. Here’s a sample of our new activities — and you can always browse the full schedule to find more.

Expand your app to new markets: Learn how to bring your apps and games to Southeast Asia, Hong Kong, and Taiwan in new online sessions with App Store experts.

Request a one-on-one App Review consultation: Meet online to discuss the App Review Guidelines and explore best practices for a smooth review process.

Visit the Apple Vision Pro developer labs: Test, refine, and optimize your apps and games for the infinite canvas — with in-person help from Apple.

Request a design or technology consultation: In this 30-minute online consultation, you’ll get expert advice tailored to your app or game.

Browse the full schedule

Updated App Review Guidelines now available

The App Review Guidelines have been revised to support updated policies, upcoming features, and to provide clarification. The following guidelines have been updated:

3.1.1(a): Updated to include Music Streaming Services Entitlements.

4.7: Added games from retro game console emulator apps to the list of permitted software, and clarifies that mini apps and mini games must be HTML5.

View guidelines

More options for apps distributed in the European Union

We’re providing more flexibility for developers who distribute apps in the European Union (EU), including introducing a new way to distribute apps directly from a developer’s website.

More flexibility

Developers who’ve agreed to the Alternative Terms Addendum for Apps in the EU have new options for their apps in the EU:

Alternative app marketplaces. Marketplaces can choose to offer a catalog of apps solely from the developer of the marketplace.

Linking out to purchase. When directing users to complete a transaction for digital goods or services on an external webpage, developers can choose how to design promotions, discounts, and other deals. The Apple-provided design templates, which are optimized for key purchase and promotional use cases, are now optional.

Distributing directly from your website

Web Distribution, available with a software update later this spring, will let authorized developers distribute their iOS apps to EU users directly from a website owned by the developer. Apple will provide authorized developers access to APIs that facilitate the distribution of their apps from the web, integrate with system functionality, back up and restore users’ apps, and more. For details, visit Getting ready for Web Distribution in the EU.

New App Store and iOS data analytics now available

We’re expanding the analytics available for your apps to help you get even more insight into your business and apps’ performance.

Over 50 new reports are now available through the App Store Connect API to help you analyze your apps’ App Store and iOS performance. These reports include hundreds of new metrics that can enable you to evaluate your performance and find opportunities for improvement. Reports are organized into the following categories:

App Store Engagement — the number of users on the App Store interacting with a developer’s app or sharing it with others

App Store Commerce — downloads, sales, pre-orders, and transactions made with the secure App Store In-App Purchase system

App Usage — active devices, installs, app deletions, and more

Frameworks Usage — an app’s interaction with OS capabilities, such as PhotoPicker and Widgets

Performance — how your apps perform and how users interact with specific features

Additionally, new reports are also available through the CloudKit console with data about Apple Push Notifications and File Provider.

Apple Push Notifications — notification states as they pass through the Apple Push Notification service (APNs)

File Provider — usage, consistency, and error data

Updates to app distribution in the European Union

Over the past several weeks, we’ve communicated with thousands of developers to discuss DMA-related changes to iOS, Safari, and the App Store impacting apps in the European Union. As a result of the valuable feedback received, we’ve revised the Alternative Terms Addendum for Apps in the EU to update the following policies and provide developers more flexibility:

Decisioning by membership: To make it easier for more developers to sign up for the new terms, we’ve removed the corporate entity requirement that the Addendum must be signed by each membership that controls, is controlled by, or is under control with another membership. This means an entity can now choose to sign up for the new terms at the developer account level.

Switching back: To help reduce the risk of unexpected business changes under the new terms, such as reaching massive scale more quickly than anticipated, or if you simply change your mind, we’ve created a one-time option to terminate the Addendum under certain circumstances and switch back to Apple’s standard business terms for your EU apps. For details, view the Addendum.

Alternative app marketplace requirements: To make it easier for developers who want to create alternative app marketplaces, we’ve added a new eligibility criteria that lets developers qualify without a stand-by letter of credit. For details, view the marketplace support page.

If you’ve already entered into the Addendum, you can sign the updated version here.

Updated App Review Guidelines now available

The App Store Review Guidelines have been revised to support updated policies, upcoming features, and to provide clarification.

The title of the document has been changed to App Review Guidelines.

The Introduction section explains that in the European Union, developers can also distribute notarized iOS apps from alternative app marketplaces. This section provides links to further information about alternative app marketplaces and Notarization for iOS apps.

The following guidelines have been updated:

2.3.1: Added that a violation of this rule is grounds for an app being blocked from installing via alternative distribution.

2.3.10: Added that developers cannot include names, icons, or imagery of other mobile platforms or alternative app marketplaces in their apps or metadata, unless there is specific, approved interactive functionality.

3.1.3(b): Added a link to 3.1.1 to make clear that 3.1.1(a) applies, and multiplatform services apps can use the 3.1.1(a) entitlement.

4.8 Login Services: Updated to make clear that the login service cannot collect interactions with your app for advertising purposes without consent. It also adds that another login service is not required if your app is an alternative app marketplace, or an app distributed from an alternative app marketplace, that uses a marketplace-specific login for account, download, and commerce features.

5.1.1(viii): Added that apps that compile personal information from any source that is not directly from the user or without the user’s explicit consent, even public databases, are not permitted on alternative app marketplaces.

5.4 and 5.5: Updated to state that apps that do not comply with these guidelines will be blocked from installing via alternative distribution.

Bug Fix Submissions: Added that bug fixes will not be delayed for apps that are already on alternative app marketplaces, except for those related to legal or safety issues.

View the App Review Guidelines

Translations of the guidelines will be available on the Apple Developer website within one month.

App submissions now open for the latest OS releases

Submit in App Store Connect

iOS 17.4, iPadOS 17.4, macOS 14.4, tvOS 17.4, visionOS 1.1, and watchOS 10.4 will soon be available to customers worldwide. Build your apps and games using the Xcode 15.3 Release Candidate and latest SDKs, then test them using TestFlight. You can submit your iPhone and iPad apps today.

Apps in the European Union

Developers who’ve agreed to the Alternative Terms Addendum for Apps in the EU can set up marketplace distribution in the EU. Eligible developers can also submit marketplace apps and offer apps with alternative browser engines.

Once these platform versions are publicly available:

First annual installs for the Core Technology Fee begin accruing and the new commission rates take effect for these developers.

Apps offering alternative payment options in the EU will be accepted in App Store Connect. In the meantime, you can test in the sandbox environment.

If you’d like to discuss changes to iOS, Safari, and the App Store impacting apps in the EU to comply with the Digital Markets Act, request a 30-minute online consultation to meet with an Apple team member. In addition, if you’re interested in getting started with operating an alternative app marketplace on iOS in the EU, you can request to attend an in-person lab in Cork, Ireland.

Sign in to App Store Connect

Developer activities you’ll love

Apple developer activities are in full swing. Here’s a look at what’s happening:

Join an online session to learn to minimize churn and win back subscribers hosted by App Store experts.

Celebrate International Women’s Day with special in-person activities in Bengaluru, Cupertino, Shanghai, Singapore, Sydney, and Tokyo.

Visit an Apple Vision Pro developer lab in Cupertino, London, Munich, Singapore, Sydney, or Tokyo to test and refine your apps for the infinite canvas.

Meet with an Apple team member to discuss changes to iOS, Safari, and the App Store impacting apps in the European Union to comply with the Digital Markets Act.

And we’ll have lots more activities in store — online, in person, and in multiple languages — all year long.

Browse the schedule

Updates to support app distribution changes in the European Union

We recently announced changes to iOS, Safari, and the App Store impacting developers’ apps in the European Union (EU) to comply with the Digital Markets Act (DMA), supported by more than 600 new APIs, a wide range of developer tools, and related documentation.

And we’re continuing to provide new ways for developers to understand and utilize these changes, including:

Online consultations to discuss alternative distribution on iOS, alternative payments on the App Store, linking out to purchase on their webpage, new business terms, and more.

Labs to help develop alternative app marketplaces on iOS.

Developers who have agreed to the new business terms can now use new features in App Store Connect and the App Store Connect API to set up marketplace distribution and marketplace apps, and use TestFlight to beta test these features. TestFlight also supports apps using alternative browser engines, and alternative payments through payment service providers and linking out to a webpage.

And soon, you’ll be able to view expanded app analytics reports for the App Store and iOS.

Apple introduces new options worldwide for streaming game services and apps that provide access to mini apps and games

New analytics reports coming in March for developers everywhere

Developers can also enable new sign-in options for their apps

Today, Apple is introducing new options for how apps globally can deliver in-app experiences to users, including streaming games and mini-programs. Developers can now submit a single app with the capability to stream all of the games offered in their catalog.

Apps will also be able to provide enhanced discovery opportunities for streaming games, mini-apps, mini-games, chatbots, and plug-ins that are found within their apps.

Additionally, mini-apps, mini-games, chatbots, and plug-ins will be able to incorporate Apple’s In-App Purchase system to offer their users paid digital content or services for the first time, such as a subscription for an individual chatbot.

Each experience made available in an app on the App Store will be required to adhere to all App Store Review Guidelines and its host app will need to maintain an age rating of the highest age-rated content included in the app.

The changes Apple is announcing reflect feedback from Apple’s developer community and is consistent with the App Store’s mission to provide a trusted place for users to find apps they love and developers everywhere with new capabilities to grow their businesses. Apps that host this content are responsible for ensuring all the software included in their app meets Apple’s high standards for user experience and safety.

New app analytics

Apple provides developers with powerful dashboards and reports to help them measure their apps’ performance through App Analytics, Sales and Trends, and Payments and Financial Reports. Today, Apple is introducing new analytics for developers everywhere to help them get even more insight into their businesses and their apps’ performance, while maintaining Apple’s long-held commitment to ensure users are not identifiable at an individual level.

Over 50 new reports will be available through the App Store Connect API to help developers analyze their app performance and find opportunities for improvement with more metrics in areas like:

Engagement — with additional information on the number of users on the App Store interacting with a developer’s app or sharing it with others;

Commerce — with additional information on downloads, sales and proceeds, pre-orders, and transactions made with the App Store’s secure In-App Purchase system;

App usage — with additional information on crashes, active devices, installs, app deletions, and more.

Frameworks usage — with additional information on an app’s interaction with OS functionality such as PhotoPicker, Widgets, and CarPlay.

Additional information about report details and access will be available for developers in March.

Developers will have the ability to grant third-party access to their reports conveniently through the API.

More flexibility for sign in options in apps

In line with Apple’s mission to protect user privacy, Apple is updating its App Store Review Guideline for using Sign in with Apple. Sign in with Apple makes it easy for users to sign in to apps and websites using their Apple ID and was built from the ground up with privacy and security in mind. Starting today, developers that offer third-party or social login services within their app will have the option to offer Sign in with Apple, or they will now be able to offer an equivalent privacy-focused login service instead.

StoreKit and review guideline update

Starting today, because of a recent United States Court decision, App Store Review Guideline 3.1.1 has been updated to introduce the StoreKit Purchase Link Entitlement (US), which allows apps that offer in-app purchases in the iOS or iPadOS App Store on the United States storefront the ability to include a link to the developer’s website that informs users of other ways to purchase digital goods or services.

We believe Apple’s in-app purchase system is the most convenient, safe, and secure way for users to purchase digital goods and services. If you’re considering using this entitlement along with in‑app purchase, which continues to be required for the purchase of digital goods and services within your app — it’s important to understand that some App Store features, such as Ask to Buy or Family Sharing, won’t be available to your customers when they make purchases on your website. Apple also won’t be able to assist customers with refunds, purchase history, subscription management, and other issues encountered when purchasing digital goods and services. You will be responsible for addressing such issues with customers.

A commission will apply to digital purchases facilitated through the StoreKit Purchase Link Entitlement (US). For additional details on commissions, requesting the entitlement, usage guidelines, and implementation details, view our support page.

Over 30 new developer activities now available

Ready to level up your app or game? Join us around the world for a new set of developer labs, consultations, sessions, and workshops, hosted in person and online throughout November and December.

You can explore:

App Store activities: Learn about discovery, engagement, in-app events, custom product pages, subscription best practices, and much more.

Apple Vision Pro developer labs: Apply to attend a lab in Cupertino, London, Munich, New York City, Shanghai, Singapore, Sydney, or Tokyo.

Apple Vision Pro activities: Learn to design and build an entirely new universe of apps and games for visionOS.

Design and technology consultations: Sign up for one-on-one guidance on app design, technology implementation, and more.

Discover activities in multiple time zones and languages.

Browse the full schedule

Tax updates for apps, in-app purchases, and subscriptions

The App Store’s commerce and payments system was built to enable you to conveniently set up and sell your products and services on a global scale in 44 currencies across 175 storefronts. Apple administers tax on behalf of developers in over 70 countries and regions and provides you with the ability to assign tax categories to your apps and in‑app purchases.

Periodically, we make updates to rates, categories, and agreements to accommodate new regulations and rate changes in certain regions. As of today, the following updates have been made in App Store Connect.

Tax rates

Your proceeds from the sale of eligible apps and in‑app purchases (including auto‑renewable subscriptions) have been increased to reflect the following reduced value-added tax (VAT) rates. Prices on the App Store haven’t changed.

Austria: Reduced VAT rates for certain apps in the Video tax category

Cyprus: Reduced VAT rate of 3% for certain apps in the following tax categories: Books, News Publications, Audiobooks, Magazines and other periodicals

Vietnam: Eliminated VAT for certain apps in the following tax categories: Books, News Publications, Magazines, and other periodicals

Tax categories

New Boosting category: Apps and/or in-app purchases that offer resources to provide exposure, visibility, or engagement to enhance the prominence and reach of specific content that’s experienced or consumed in app (such as videos, sales of “boosts” in social media apps, listings, and/or other forms of user-generated content).

New attribute for books: Textbook or other educational publication used for teaching and studying between ages 5 to 18

New attributes for videos: Exclusively features live TV broadcasting and/or linear programming. Public TV broadcasting, excluding shopping or infomercial channels.

If any of these categories or attributes are relevant to your apps or in-app purchases, you can review and update your selections in the Pricing and Availability section of My Apps.

Learn about setting tax categories

Paid Applications Agreement

Exhibit C Section 1.2.2: Updated language to clarify the goods and services tax (GST) requirements for developers on the Australia storefront.

Get ready with the latest beta releases

The beta versions of iOS 17.2, iPadOS 17.2, macOS 14.2, tvOS 17.2, and watchOS 10.2 are now available. Get your apps ready by confirming they work as expected on these releases. And to take advantage of the advancements in the latest SDKs, make sure to build and test with Xcode 15.1 beta.

To check if a known issue from a previous beta release has been resolved or if there’s a workaround, review the latest release notes. Please let us know if you encounter an issue or have other comments. We value your feedback, as it helps us address issues, refine features, and update documentation.

View downloads and release notes

Learn about testing a beta OS

Learn about sending feedback

Get ready with the latest beta releases

The beta versions of iOS 17.1, iPadOS 17.1, macOS 14.1, tvOS 17.1, and watchOS 10.1 are now available. Get your apps ready by confirming they work as expected on these releases. And to take advantage of the advancements in the latest SDKs, make sure to build and test with Xcode 15.

To check if a known issue from a previous beta release has been resolved or if there’s a workaround, review the latest release notes. Please let us know if you encounter an issue or have other feedback. We value your feedback, as it helps us address issues, refine features, and update documentation.

View downloads and release notes

Learn about testing a beta OS

Learn about sending feedback

Meet with App Store experts

Join us for online sessions August 1 through 24 to learn about the latest App Store features and get your questions answered. Live presentations with Q&A are being held in multiple time zones and languages.

Explore App Store pricing upgrades, including enhanced global pricing, tools to manage pricing by storefront, and additional price points.

Find out how to measure user acquisition with App Analytics and grow your subscription business using App Store features.

Discover how product page optimization lets you test different elements of your product page to find out which resonate with people most.

Understand how custom product pages let you create additional product page versions to highlight specific features or content.

Learn how to boost discovery and engagement with Game Center and how to configure in-app events.

Learn more

View schedule

Upcoming price and tax changes for apps, in-app purchases, and subscriptions

The App Store’s commerce and payments system was built to empower you to conveniently set up and sell your products and services on a global scale in 44 currencies across 175 storefronts. When tax regulations or foreign exchange rates change, we sometimes need to update prices on the App Store in certain regions and/or adjust your proceeds. These updates are done using publicly available exchange rate information from financial data providers to help ensure prices for apps and in‑app purchases stay equalized across all storefronts.

On July 25, pricing for apps and in‑app purchases (excluding auto‑renewable subscriptions) will be updated for the Egypt, Nigeria, Tanzania, and Türkiye storefronts. These updates also consider the following tax changes:

Egypt: introduction of a value‑added tax (VAT) of 14%

Tanzania: introduction of a VAT of 18% and a digital service tax of 2%

Türkiye: increase of the VAT rate from 18% to 20%

How this impacts pricing

If you’ve selected Egypt, Nigeria, Tanzania, or Türkiye as the base storefront for your app or in‑app purchase (excluding auto‑renewable subscriptions), the price won’t change on that storefront. Prices on other storefronts will be updated to maintain equalization with your chosen base price.

If the base storefront for your app or in‑app purchase (excluding auto‑renewable subscriptions) isn’t Egypt, Nigeria, Tanzania, or Türkiye, prices will increase on the Egypt, Nigeria, Tanzania, and Türkiye storefronts.

If your in‑app purchase is an auto‑renewable subscription or if you manually manage prices on storefronts instead of using the automated equalized prices, your prices won’t change.

The Pricing and Availability section of My Apps has been updated in App Store Connect to display these upcoming price changes. As always, you can change the prices of your apps, in‑app purchases, and auto‑renewable subscriptions at any time.

How this impacts proceeds and tax administration

Your proceeds for sales of apps and in-app purchases (including auto‑renewable subscriptions) will change to reflect the new tax rates and updated prices. Exhibit B of the Paid Applications Agreement has been updated to indicate that Apple collects and remits applicable taxes in Egypt and Tanzania.

Learn more about managing your prices

Viewing new pricing

Selecting a base country or region

Pricing and availability start times by region

Setting in‑app purchase pricing

New design resources now available

Now it’s even easier to design your apps quickly and accurately with new and updated design resources for creating apps on Apple platforms.

visionOS design library and templates for Figma and Sketch.

iOS 17 and iPadOS 17 design kits for Figma and Sketch.

macOS Sonoma design kits for Figma and Sketch.

watchOS 10 design kit for Sketch.

SF Symbols 5 beta, with over 700 new symbols.

Updated Human Interface Guidelines, now in Chinese and Japanese.

SF script extensions, now with Armenian, Georgian, and Hebrew.

WWDC23 resources and survey

Thank you to everyone who joined us for an amazing week. We hope you found value, connection, and fun. You can continue to:

Watch sessions at any time.

Check out session highlights.

Read about newly announced technologies.

Get sample code from sessions.

We’d love to know what you thought of this year’s conference. If you’d like to tell us about your experience, please complete the WWDC23 survey.

Take the survey

Sign up for WWDC23 labs and activities

Online labs and activities are a great way to connect with Apple engineers, designers, and experts all week long.

One-on-one labs

Get personalized guidance about development basics, complex concepts, and everything in between. Learn how to implement new Apple technologies, explore UI design principles, improve your App Store presence, and much more.

Activities

There are plenty of exciting activities happening daily on Slack.

Ask engineering and design questions in Q&As.

Join or follow real-time conversations while watching session videos together, and stay for a Q&A with the presenter.

Get to know other developers and teams from Apple in community icebreakers.

Test your trivia expertise starting on June 6.

Labs and activities are open to all members of the Apple Developer Program and Apple Developer Enterprise Program, as well as 2023 Swift Student Challenge applicants.

Register for labs

Register for activities

Learn about WWDC23

Find out what’s new for Apple developers

Discover the latest advancements on all Apple platforms. With an incredible new opportunity in spatial computing in visionOS, new features in iOS, iPadOS, macOS, tvOS, and watchOS, and major enhancements across languages, frameworks, tools and services, you can create even more unique experiences for users worldwide.

Learn what’s new

Updated agreements and guidelines now available

The App Store Review Guidelines, the Apple Developer Program License Agreement, and the Apple Developer Agreement have been updated to support updated policies and upcoming features, and to provide clarification. Please review the changes below and accept the updated terms as needed.

Read more

What’s new in privacy on the App Store

At Apple, we believe privacy is a fundamental human right. That is why we’ve built a number of features to help users understand developers’ privacy and data collection and sharing practices, and put users in the driver’s seat when it comes to their data. App Tracking Transparency (ATT) empowers users to choose whether an app has permission to track their activity across other companies’ apps and websites for the purposes of advertising or sharing with data brokers. With Privacy Nutrition Labels and App Privacy Report, users can see what data an app collects and how it’s used.

Many apps leverage third-party software development kits (SDKs), which can offer great functionality but may have implications on how the apps handle user data. To make it even easier for developers to create great apps while informing users and respecting their choices about how their data is used, we’re introducing two new features.

First, to help developers understand how third-party SDKs use data, we’re introducing new privacy manifests — files that outline the privacy practices of the third-party code in an app, in a single standard format. When developers prepare to distribute their app, Xcode will combine the privacy manifests across all the third-party SDKs that a developer is using into a single, easy-to-use report. With one comprehensive report that summarizes all the third-party SDKs found in an app, it will be even easier for developers to create more accurate Privacy Nutrition Labels.

Additionally, to offer additional privacy protection for users, apps referencing APIs that could potentially be used for fingerprinting — a practice that is prohibited on the App Store — will now be required to select an allowed reason for usage of the API and declare that usage in the privacy manifest. As part of this process, apps must accurately describe their usage of these APIs, and may only use the APIs for the reasons described in their privacy manifest.

Second, we want to help developers improve the integrity of their software supply chain. When using third-party SDKs, it can be hard for developers to know the code that they downloaded was written by the developer that they expect. To address that, we’re introducing signatures for SDKs so that when a developer adopts a new version of a third-party SDK in their app, Xcode will validate that it was signed by the same developer. Developers and users alike will benefit from this feature.

We’ll publish additional information later this year, including:

A list of privacy-impacting SDKs (third-party SDKs that have particularly high impact on user privacy)

A list of “required reason” APIs for which an allowed reason must be declared

A developer feedback form to suggest new reasons for calling covered APIs

Additional documentation on the benefits of and details about signatures, privacy manifests, and when they will be required

Upcoming tax changes for apps, in-app purchases, and subscriptions

The App Store’s commerce and payments system was built to empower you to conveniently set up and sell your products and services at a global scale in 44 currencies across 175 storefronts. Apple administers tax on behalf of developers in over 70 countries and regions and provides you with the ability to assign tax categories to your apps and in‑app purchases. Periodically, we update your proceeds in certain regions based on changes in tax regulations.

On May 31, your proceeds from the sale of apps and in‑app purchases (including auto‑renewable subscriptions) will be adjusted to reflect the tax changes listed below. Prices will not change.

Ghana: Increase of the VAT rate from 12.5% to 15%.

Lithuania: Reduction of the VAT rate from 21% to 9% for eligible e‑books and audiobooks.

Moldova: Reduction of the VAT rate from 20% to 0% for eligible e‑books and periodicals.

Spain: Digital services tax of 3%.

Due to changes to tax regulations in Brazil, Apple now withholds taxes for all App Store sales in Brazil. We’ll administer the collection and remittance of taxes to the appropriate tax authority on a monthly basis. You can view the amount of tax deducted from your proceeds starting in June 2023 with your May earnings. Developers based in Brazil aren’t impacted by this change.

Once these changes go into effect, the Pricing and Availability section of My Apps will be updated in App Store Connect. As always, you can change the prices of your apps and in‑app purchases (including auto‑renewable subscriptions) at any time. And now you can change them for any storefront with 900 price points to choose from.

Upcoming changes to the App Store receipt signing intermediate certificate

As part of ongoing efforts to improve security and privacy on Apple platforms, the App Store receipt signing intermediate certificate that’s used to verify the sale of apps and associated in‑app purchases is being updated to use the SHA‑256 cryptographic algorithm. This update will be completed in multiple phases and new apps and app updates may be impacted, depending on how they verify receipts.

What to expect

If your app verifies App Store transactions using the AppTransaction and Transaction APIs, or the verifyReceipt web service endpoint, no action is required.

If your app validates App Store receipts on device, make sure your app will support the SHA-256 version of this certificate. New apps and app updates that don’t support the SHA-256 version of this certificate will no longer be accepted by the App Store starting August 14, 2023.

Important dates

June 20, 2023. Receipts in the sandbox environment will be signed with the SHA‑256 version of this certificate for devices running a minimum of iOS 16.6, iPadOS 16.6, tvOS 16.6, watchOS 9.6, or macOS Ventura 13.5.

August 14, 2023. Receipts in new apps and app updates submitted to the App Store, as well as all apps in sandbox, will be signed with the SHA‑256 intermediate certificate.

For more details, view TN3138: Handling App Store receipt signing certificate change.

App Store pricing upgrades have expanded to all purchase types

In December, we announced the most comprehensive upgrade to pricing capabilities since the App Store first launched, including additional price points and new tools to manage pricing by storefront. Starting today, these upgrades and new prices are now available for all app and in‑app purchase types, including paid apps and one‑time in‑app purchases.

More flexible price points. Choose from 900 price points — nearly 10 times the number of price points previously available for paid apps and one‑time in‑app purchases. These options also offer more flexibility, increasing incrementally across price ranges (for example, every $0.10 up to $10, every $0.50 between $10 and $50, etc.).

Enhanced global pricing. Use globally equalized prices that follow the most common pricing conventions in each country or region, so you can provide pricing that’s more relevant to customers.

Worldwide options for base price. Specify a country or region you’re familiar with as the basis for globally equalized prices across the other 174 storefronts and 43 currencies for paid apps and one‑time in‑app purchases. Prices you set for this base storefront won’t be adjusted by Apple to account for taxes or foreign currency changes, and you’ll be able to set prices for each storefront if you prefer.

Regional options for availability. Define the availability of in‑app purchases (including subscriptions) by storefront, so you can deliver content and services customized for each market.

Get ready for enhanced global pricing updates in May

The App Store’s global equalization tools provide a simple and convenient way to manage pricing across international markets. On May 9, 2023, pricing for existing apps and one‑time in‑app purchases will be updated across all 175 App Store storefronts to take advantage of new enhanced global pricing. The updated prices will be globally equalized to your selected base country or region using publicly available exchange rate information from financial data providers. These price points will also follow the most common conventions in each country or region so that prices are more relevant to customers.

You can now update your current pricing to take advantage of the enhanced global pricing using App Store Connect or the App Store Connect API. If you haven’t made price updates for your existing apps and one‑time in‑app purchases by May 9, Apple will update them for you using your current price in the United States as the basis. If you’d like a different price to be used as the basis, update the base country or region for your apps or in‑app purchases to your preferred storefront. You can also choose to manually manage prices on storefronts of your choice instead of using the equalized price.

Learn how to select a base storefront

Learn how to set in-app purchase availability

Learn how to view the new pricing

Upcoming tax and price changes for apps and in‑app purchases

The App Store’s commerce and payments system was built to empower you to conveniently set up and sell your products and services at a global scale with 44 currencies across 175 storefronts. Periodically, we update prices on the App Store in certain regions based on changes in taxes and foreign exchange rates. This is done using publicly available exchange rate information from financial data providers to help ensure prices for apps and in‑app purchases stay equalized across all storefronts.

On February 13, 2023, prices of apps and in-app purchases (excluding auto-renewable subscriptions) on the App Store will increase in Colombia, Egypt, Hungary, Nigeria, Norway, South Africa, and the United Kingdom. Prices in Uzbekistan will decrease to reflect a reduction of the value-added tax rate from 15% to 12%. Your proceeds will be adjusted accordingly and will be calculated based on the tax-exclusive price.

While prices on the App Store in Ireland, Luxembourg, Singapore, and Zimbabwe won't change, your proceeds will be adjusted to reflect the following tax changes:

Ireland: Reduction of value-added tax rate on electronic newspapers and periodicals from 9% to 0%

Luxembourg: Reduction of value-added tax rate from 17% to 16%

Singapore: Increase of goods and services tax rate from 7% to 8%

Zimbabwe: Increase of value-added tax rate from 14.5% to 15%

Additionally, by the end of January proceeds will increase for local developers selling in Cambodia, Kyrgyzstan, Indonesia, Singapore, South Korea, Tajikistan, Thailand, and Uzbekistan.

Apple will estimate and remove taxes based on the tax category information you have provided before calculating commission. Exhibit B of the Paid Applications Agreement will be updated to reflect this change.

Once these changes go into effect, the Pricing and Availability section of My Apps will be updated. As always, you can change the price of your apps and in-app purchases (including auto-renewable subscriptions) at any time in App Store Connect. If you offer subscriptions, you can choose to preserve prices for existing subscribers.

And as previously announced, in spring 2023, upgraded pricing capabilities for apps and in-app purchases will provide you 700 additional price points and more flexibility to set prices per storefront, so you can manage foreign exchange rate changes independent of globally equalized prices.

View the updated price tier charts.