Everything appears to be in place for the start of the long-awaited project to tear down several abandoned IBM buildings at the company's former Endicott manufacturing hub.

Officials say the only thing delaying the multimillion-dollar demolition job now is a final review by the State Historic Preservation Office.

Ironically, New York state in December 2022 announced it would provide $6 million to the village of Endicott for the project.

At that time, Huron Campus site manager Chris Pelto hoped the demolition could get underway in a few months.

Logistical problems, including underground utility lines and equipment, delayed the start of the project. But those issues have been addressed.

Broome County Executive Jason Garnar said while the money has been secured to do the work, "we're waiting for SHPO (the state agency) to give us the green light."

Garnar told WNBF News that after the Huron Campus owners advised the agency that they planned to demolish five unused dilapidated buildings, the agency asked whether there were any ways the structures could be repurposed.

The county executive said the owners advised the state that "the buildings are too far gone, they've been condemned, they've been sitting there empty for 20 years." The agency was informed it would take "an infinite amount of money" to make the structures usable.

Garnar said he expects the historic preservation office to provide a response within "the next week or two." He anticipates the agency will allow the demolition to proceed.

The county executive said Governor Kathy Hochul is "incredibly supportive of this project." He said he's discussed the importance of the site with Hochul.

Garnar said "the quicker these buildings can come down, the quicker that the owners can work to develop the site."

Even as the officials go-ahead is awaited, workers from Gorick Construction are continuing to prepare the property for the planned demolition.

Knocking down the buildings with 550,000-square-feet of unused space will clear the way for creation of a 10-acre shovel-ready site for redevelopment.

WNBF NEWS VIDEO: A visit to North Street between McKinley and Hayes avenues in Endicott on July 3, 2024.