Endicott residents may continue to boast that they live in the "Birthplace of IBM" but soon the company will have no physical presence in the village.

According to pressconnects.com/Press & Sun-Bulletin, the company now based in Westchester County does not intend to continue leasing space in Endicott.

The news report states IBM's Endicott lease is set to expire at the end of October.

Mary O'Malley-Trumble, the senior location executive, noted companies have changed the way they operate over the past few years. She said "IBM is no exception - we will be ending our lease of physical offices in Endicott."

It's not known how many people actually are working in the local office space. IBM has declined to provide numbers in recent years. Many of those "attached" to the Endicott office were doing much of their work remotely even before the Covid-19 pandemic.

IBM has been engaged in a slow-motion exit strategy from Broome County for more than two decades.

The company sold the town of Union property that was home to a country club for employees and their families. It then sold its sprawling manufacturing site in Endicott and Endwell to a group of local businessmen in a state-backed deal in 2002. The sale of what now is known as the Huron Campus came as IBM spun off its microelectronics unit in Endicott.

Endicott Mayor Linda Jackson said she had heard of IBM's plan not to renew its lease in the village. She said "it does make sense" given what's been happening in the business world in recent years.

While the decision may not have come as a shock, Jackson said "it would have been nice if they had told us" that they were leaving Endicott.

Milwaukee-based Phoenix Investors acquired the 4 million-square-foot Huron Campus in 2021. Chris Pelto, who oversees the site for Phoenix, could not be reached for comment on Tuesday.

Five former IBM buildings east of McKinley Avenue are expected to be demolished this summer.

Contact WNBF News reporter Bob Joseph: bob@wnbf.com or (607) 545-2250. For breaking news and updates on developing stories, follow @BinghamtonNowon Twitter.