Exact position of the planets of the solar system (Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune) seen from Riola, in addition to the planets, the Sun, the Moon, Pluto, Ceres and three have been included in the viewer. large asteroids (Pallas, Juno and Vesta).

With the astronomical viewer, you can know the position of the stars in the sky for any date and time and from the year 1900 to the year 2500.

These data have been calculated for the sky seen from: Riola

Latitude: 39.1969145803

Longitude: -0.3335325864

Altitude: ≅ 14 m

Time zone: Europe/Madrid

Province: Valencia

Country: Spain

Link with date and place

If you want to share a link to the view and time that is showing in the viewer now and for the selected location, you can copy the address of the following link:

Position of the planets in the Solar System

If you want to see the position of the planets in the solar system, you can use our solar system viewer.

Position of the planets in the Solar System

How to use

When the page is loaded, the position of the planets and stars that are currently visible from Riola is shown in the viewer.

Date and Time: Our system is based on the internal time of your device, it is the date that appears larger next to (System). In addition, the date and time in universal format (UTC) is included, and if available, the local date and time for the place from which the sky is viewed. It is possible that the local time is not correct, under the viewer the name of the time zone that is being used is included, check that it is correct.

Quick change of date/time: Just above the display there are buttons ( - | 1 minute | + ) that allow you to move the time forward or backward in steps of 1 minute, 1 hour, 1 day, 1 month or 1 year. To select the period, open the dropdown and select it from the list. With the buttons ( - | + ) you go back or forward in time.

Zoom: This option allows you to enlarge the star map so that you can better distinguish the objects drawn on it. Once Zoom is activated, they work both on mobile devices, expanding with your fingers, and with the mouse wheel. You can also double click.

Names: This button allows you to display all the names of the objects visible at that moment, also, if it is turned on and you download the image, it will be downloaded with the names placed next to the planet face or astronomical object.

Download image: With this button located under the viewer, you can download the image that is being displayed with the position of the planets and other astronomical objects. If you want, you can share the image, but you must cite tutiempo.net as a source.

Rising and Setting: The hours in which the planets and other objects appear and disappear from the viewer may vary with respect to reality in a few minutes, because the center of the object is taken as a reference, the diameter is not taken into account. The difference is ridiculous, but we discuss it just in case.

You can see the exact hours in which the Sun and the Moon will appear and disappear here: Solar and lunar calendar for Riola.

Available objects

These are the astronomical objects or celestial bodies that we place in the astronomical sky viewer and about which we give information on this page. The main stars visible from Earth and that are visible at that time and from the selected location are also drawn in the viewfinder.

This application places each object in its place, but it does not take into account the possible shadows of other planets, for example, the moon always seems to be full, although it is not the case, if you want to know the lunar phase for any date, you can do it in our Moon Phases Calendar. Nor does it take into account the visible size of the objects, for example in some total solar eclipses the sun continues to look larger than the moon, this is because the moon has not been resized with respect to its distance from the earth. Think that it is an application to locate the stars.

Planets in the sky today

See the position of the planets that can be seen in the sky today from anywhere on Earth, planets visible right now and planets visible for any date.

Here are answers to these and other questions:

At what time will I be able to see Venus in the sky?

Is Mars visible in the sky now?

Where is Jupiter in the sky?

Astronomical viewer on your website

If you have a website or a blog, you can insert our astronomical viewer for free.

Astronomy viewer widget

Other places

This page is exclusively for Riola and has been configured to show the data of this town. We have a version that admits any position in the world and you can select it using an interactive map.

Astronomical view of the sky from anywhere on earth