Riola Xhemaili is a Swiss footballer who plays as a midfielder for VfL Wolfsburg and the Switzerland national team.

Riola Xhemaili was born on March 5, 2003, in Solothurn, Solothurn, Switzerland. Her birth geographical coordinates are 47° 12’ 28” North latitude and 7° 32’ 14” East longitude. Riola Xhemaili is currently 21 years old.

Astrologically, Riola Xhemaili falls under the Sun sign of Pisces, with Cancer as her Ascendant, Aries as her Moon sign, and Taurus as her Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Pisces Moon Aries Mercury Pisces Venus Aquarius Mars Capricorn Jupiter Leo Saturn Gemini Uranus Aquarius Neptune Aquarius Pluto Sagittarius Ceres Aries Chiron Capricorn Eros Taurus Hygiea Taurus Juno Scorpio Pallas Pisces Vesta Libra Ascendant Cancer Black Moon Lilith Taurus Midheaven Pisces North Node Gemini South Node Sagittarius Part of Fortune Cancer Vertex Scorpio

Sunin Pisces14° 27’ 30”

The Sun in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you a sensitive and mystical healer. You are aligned with your subconscious wisdom and can be […] Read more »

Moonin Aries10° 54’ 37”

The Moon in Aries in a Natal Chart makes you determined and focused. You are intense and can be passionate and optimistic. Your moods drive […] Read more »

Mercuryin Pisces0° 38’ 6”

Mercury in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you spiritually focused. You think about your higher mission and can be idealistic. You are subtle and […] Read more »

Venusin Aquarius3° 27’ 35”

Aquarius Venus in the Natal Chart makes you unusual and brilliant. You value people who inspire breakthroughs. You love epiphanies that help you understand the […] Read more »

Marsin Capricorn0° 22’ 6”

Capricorn Mars in the Natal Chart makes you eager to thrive. You are intense and can be persistent. You are patient and willing to face […] Read more »

Jupiterin Leo9° 25’ 44”

Leo Jupiter in the Natal Chart makes you open about your ideals. You pursue your desires and can be creative and expressive. You are charming, […] Read more »

Saturnin Gemini22° 15’ 12”

Gemini Saturn in the Natal Chart makes you part of a group born within the same three years who share a collective responsibility. You are […] Read more »

Uranusin Aquarius29° 42’ 18”

Aquarius Uranus in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation born to bring technological breakthroughs and social change. You are part of […] Read more »

Neptunein Aquarius11° 53’ 16”

Is Neptune in Aquarius rare? Neptune spends fourteen years in each sign. Neptune in Aquarius occurs every one hundred and sixty-eight years. Aquarius Neptune in […] Read more »

Plutoin Sagittarius19° 51’ 55”

Pluto in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart makes you part of a generation ready to delve deeper to discover new beliefs. Your generation is fascinated […] Read more »

Ceresin Aries27° 2’ 21”

Ceres in Aries in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a generation obsessed with comforting and helping others. You are motivated and can […] Read more »

Chironin Capricorn16° 23’ 47”

Chiron in Capricorn in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for healing from subconscious wounds related to work, money, and security. You are productive […] Read more »

Erosin Taurus19° 44’ 14”

Eros in Taurus in the Natal Chart indicates you are passionate about your desire for luxury and physical pleasure. You are compassionate and can be […] Read more »

Hygieain Taurus17° 15’ 59”

Hygiea in Taurus in the Natal Chart indicates a desire to pursue beauty and strength. You are helpful and use your nurturing gifts to encourage […] Read more »

Junoin Scorpio20° 27’ 7”

Juno in Scorpio in the Natal Chart indicates a desire for love and intimacy. You are passionate about sharing your insights and can be persuasive […] Read more »

Pallasin Pisces15° 27’ 13”

Pallas in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you a generous and compassionate leader. You mentor others and can help create a path to success. […] Read more »

Vestain Libra10° 43’ 19”

Vesta in Libra in the Natal Chart makes you caring and sentimental. You are motivated to help others and can be dedicated to your loved […] Read more »

Ascendantin Cancer2° 56’ 4”

Cancer Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you emotional and expressive. You can’t hide your feelings and are transparent about your vulnerable nature. You have […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Taurus2° 33’ 49”

Taurus Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you daring and sincere. You are authentic and can be true to yourself, even when your […] Read more »

Midheavenin Pisces3° 23’ 38”

Pisces Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you emotional and intuitive in your career path. You are emotional and can be sensitive to other people’s […] Read more »

North Nodein Gemini3° 40’ 10”

The North Node in Gemini in the Natal Chart makes you expressive. You can be creative, and your destiny involves opening your mind and pursuing […] Read more »

South Nodein Sagittarius3° 40’ 10”

The Sagittarius South Node in the Natal Chart makes you eager to broaden your perspective. From your past incarnations, you were born with charm and […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon Eleventh House Mercury Ninth House Venus Eighth House Mars Sixth House Jupiter Second House Saturn Twelfth House Uranus Ninth House Neptune Ninth House Pluto Sixth House Ceres Eleventh House Chiron Seventh House Eros Eleventh House Hygiea Eleventh House Juno Fifth House Pallas Tenth House Vesta Fifth House Black Moon Lilith Eleventh House North Node Twelfth House South Node Sixth House Part of Fortune Second House Vertex Fifth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 10 major aspects, alongside 12 minor aspects, as well as 12 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Mercury Sextile Mars Moon Trine Jupiter Moon Sextile Neptune Mercury Conjunct Uranus Mars Sextile Uranus Jupiter Opposite Neptune Saturn Opposite Pluto Sun Square Pluto Venus Opposite Jupiter Saturn Trine Uranus

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Riola Xhemaili’s life journey.

Mercury Sextile Marsorb: 0°

Mercury sextile Mars in a Natal Chart typically indicates that a person is confident, passionate, and outspoken. Mars’s direct and assertive nature works well with […] Read more »

Moon Trine Jupiterorb: 1°

The Moon trine Jupiter in a chart typically indicates a person is friendly, warm, and generous. They are confident and have no issue expressing their […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Neptuneorb: 1°

You are likely sensitive and intuitive if you’ve got the Moon sextile Neptune in your Natal Chart. Even if you aren’t the most loud or […] Read more »

Mercury Conjunct Uranusorb: 1°

Mercury conjunct Uranus in the Natal Chart makes you unpredictable. You are rebellious and can speak your mind. You may blurt out your ideas impulsively. […] Read more »

Mars Sextile Uranusorb: 1°

Mars sextile Uranus in a chart creates a lot of excitement! Anyone with this aspect in their chart may be adventurous and free-spirited. They are […] Read more »

Jupiter Opposite Neptuneorb: 2°

Jupiter opposite Neptune in a chart typically indicates that a person is curious and imaginative. They constantly question the world around them, but they tend […] Read more »

Saturn Opposite Plutoorb: 2°

Saturn opposite Pluto in a chart typically indicates a person has a connection to the darker side of life. Sometimes, this connection comes out of […] Read more »

Sun Square Plutoorb: 5°

The Sun square Pluto in a Natal Chart makes you fearful of change and loss. Until you accept core fears and weaknesses, you may overcompensate […] Read more »

Venus Opposite Jupiterorb: 6°

Venus opposite Jupiter in a chart typically indicates a person is charming and social. They are likely popular and have no issue meeting new people. […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Moon Opposite Vesta Venus Trine North Node Venus Sextile South Node Uranus Quincunx Part of Fortune Pluto Quincunx Eros Sun Conjunct Pallas Mercury Quincunx Part of Fortune Venus Quincunx Ascendant Venus Square Black Moon Lilith Mars Quincunx Part of Fortune Jupiter Sextile Vesta Neptune Trine Vesta

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Riola Xhemaili’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Moon Opposite Vestaorb: 0°

The Moon opposite Vesta in a chart creates conflict between emotional well-being and higher callings. Fueling the sacred flame and fulfilling emotional needs may be […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Pallasorb: 1°

The Sun conjunct Pallas in the Natal Chart can make you an artistic and creative visionary. You are open-minded and help others come together around […] Read more »

Mercury Quincunx Part of Fortuneorb: 1°

Mercury quincunx the Part of Fortune in a chart typically indicates that a person has a strong desire to use their intelligence and mental capabilities […] Read more »

Venus Quincunx Ascendantorb: 1°

Venus quincunx the Ascendant in a chart can create difficulties with people-pleasing and an overreliance on outside validation. People with this quincunx in their charts […] Read more »

Mars Quincunx Part of Fortuneorb: 1°

Mars quincunx the Part of Fortune in a chart can cause a disconnect between Mars’ confidence, assertive, and driven side and the Part of Fortune’s […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Juno Conjunct Vertex Ascendant Sextile Black Moon Lilith Ascendant Trine Midheaven Midheaven Square North Node Midheaven Square South Node Chiron Trine Hygiea Chiron Sextile Pallas Eros Opposite Juno Eros Opposite Vertex Ascendant Quincunx South Node Black Moon Lilith Sextile Midheaven Black Moon Lilith Quincunx South Node

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Riola Xhemaili’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Juno Conjunct Vertexorb: 0°

Juno conjunct the Vertex in a chart combines someone’s commitments and desires for partnership with their fate and destiny. When the Vertex is activated, they […] Read more »

Ascendant Sextile Black Moon Lilithorb: 0°

The Ascendant sextile Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you unique and individualistic. You have a style unlike anyone else, and your eccentric […] Read more »

Midheaven Square North Nodeorb: 0°

The Midheaven square of the North Node in the Natal Chart makes you passionate and insecure about your career. You seek success and recognition related […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilith Quincunx South Nodeorb: 1°

Black Moon Lilith quincunx the South Node in the Natal Chart makes you complacent about power and sexuality. You struggle to unleash pent-up frustrations and […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.