Donna Summer "I Feel Love" Casablanca label "gold" 45 single award. This hit from Donna Summer's fifth studio album I Remember Yesterday was released on July 2, 1977. While this is not a RIAA award, the single was in fact certified Gold by the RIAA on Nov. 9, 1977 for 500,000 copies sold. Remember Donna Summer (1948-2012) with this award.

The track went to #1 in many countries including Australia, Austria, Belgium, Netherlands and the UK, while hitting #3 in Germany and #6 on the US Billboard Hot 100. The album on which the track appeared was certified Platinum by the RIAA.

Mouse Over to Zoom/Click to Enlarge Photos

Item Highlights:

Casablanca Records label "gold" single award

In VG to Excellent condition

Award dates from 1977

Presented to radio industry executive

Award measures approx. 12" x 15"

Great collector's item for Donna Summer fan

FREE insured shipping to continental U.S.

International shipping available

Detailed Item Description: This is a label award that would have been manufactured in 1977 making it 47 years old. It is a first presentation award that is presented to "Johnny Kay" (real name Jhani Kaye) who at that time was at radio station KINT.

The award is in VG to Excellent condition with all original components including its original Dejay Products manufacturer sticker. It has some typical mars and scratches on the frame but is generally in VG condition otherwise. This is a heavy award for its' size with real glass and a wood back.

Interested in knowing more about RIAA and other record awards and what makes them great to add to your collection? Subscribe to our free bi-weekly newsletter and get our 55-page MusicGoldmine RIAA and Record Award Guide free plus a 15% discount code here.

Notes on the condition of all vintage RIAA awards like this one: Please do not buy this item if you want a brand new piece of memorabilia. These are historical artifacts from the year they were produced. As a result they may show signs of wear. Frankly, if you see a 20 to 50-year-old award purported to be in 100% perfect condition, it might be too good to be true. After all, an antique should have "good' wear. If not, you might want to question the piece.

As to where they came from, they could have been displayed in record label offices, recording studios, artist manager's offices, radio stations, private collector's homes and yes, of course, possibly the artist's or songwriter's home. Typically, we don't know all the places they may have been over the years other than what we've stated in the description.

Finally, a word on photos: Our photos are zoomable so you can get a very good look. Do let us know if you want photos of any other details on our pieces and we'll be happy to provide.

*RIAA sales data source: RIAA.com