Francisco Franco Bahamonde was born on December 4, 1892 in Galicia, Spain. Franco’s father was a naval officer who reached the rank of vice admiral. When Franco was fourteen, he tried to join the Navy, but it was not taking new entrants, so he entered the Army Infantry Academy in Toledo, and graduating in 1910 as a second lieutenant.

Franco was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant in June 1912 at age 19. Two years later, he obtained a commission to Morocco, where he quickly gained a reputation as an effective officer.

In 1913, Franco transferred into the newly formed regulares: Moroccan colonial troops with Spanish officers, who acted as elite shock troops. In 1916, aged 23 with the rank of captain, Franco was shot in the abdomen, the only time he was wounded in ten years of battle. The wound was serious, and he was not expected to live. His recovery was seen by his Moroccan troops as a spiritual event – they believed Franco to be protected by God. He was recommended for promotion to major and to receive Spain’s highest honor for gallantry. Both proposals were denied, with the 23-year-old Franco’s young age being given as the reason for denial. Franco appealed the decision to the king, who reversed it. Franco also received the Cross of Maria Cristina, First Class.

With that he was promoted to major at the end of February 1917 at age 24. This made him the youngest major in the Spanish army. From 1917 to 1920, he served in Spain. In 1920, the Spanish Foreign Legion was founded. Franco became the Legion’s second-in-command and returned to Africa. In 1923, now a lieutenant colonel, he was made commander of the Legion.

Franco continued to be promoted, achieving the rank of brigadier general in 1926, making him the youngest general in Europe at age 33. In 1928 Franco was appointed director of the newly created General Military Academy of Zaragoza, a new college for all Spanish army cadets.

When the Spanish Civil War began in 1936, the colonels, majors, and captains of the Spanish Army who had attended the academy when he was its director displayed unconditional loyalty to him as a military and political leader, or “caudillo.”

Following the deaths of much of the rebel leadership, Franco became his faction’s only leader, being appointed Generalissimo and head of state in 1936. He consolidated all nationalist parties into a one-party state. Three years later the Nationalists declared victory, which extended Franco’s dictatorship over Spain through a period of repression of political opponents. His dictatorship based on a cult of personality, which lasted 36 years, used brainwashing, forced labor, concentration camps and executions to consolidate power.

In the 1950s, Franco enacted technocratic and economically liberal policies, presiding over a period of accelerated growth known as the “Spanish miracle”. At the same time, his regime transitioned from a totalitarian state to an authoritarian one with limited pluralism. He became a leader in the anti-Communist movement, garnering support from the West, particularly the United States. As the dictatorship relaxed its hard-line policies, Luis Carrero Blanco became Franco’s éminence grise, whose role expanded after Franco began struggling with Parkinson’s disease in the 1960s. In 1973, Franco resigned as prime minister—separated from the office of head of state since 1967—due to his advanced age and illness. Nevertheless, he remained in power as the head of state and as commander-in-chief. Franco died on this day in 1975, aged 82. He restored the monarchy in his final years, being succeeded by Juan Carlos, King of Spain, who led the Spanish transition to democracy.

Under King Juan Carlos, opponents and moderate elements in the regime came together and negotiated a transition to democracy, sealed in the 1978 Constitution.

Unearthing Franco’s Legacy: Mass Graves and the Recovery of Historical Memory in Spain published in 2010 by the University of Notre Dame Press, reports that during Franco’s dictatorship, he and his supporters had thousands of political dissidents or suspects and their families systematically killed and buried in anonymous mass graves. Although Spaniards living near the burial sites realized what was happening, the conspiracy of silence imposed by the Franco regime continued for many years after his death in 1975 and after the establishment of a democratic government. An excellent online history of Franco’s legacy in “The World” notes that after Franco’s death, political parties devised a ‘pact of forgetting, which essentially erased the dictator’s legacy from the national record — including bans on teaching civil war history and the investigation of murders and disappearances under his watch. Spaniards have only recently begun to confront Franco’s legacy publicly.

In 2022, Spain passed a new “Law on Democratic Memory,” which mandates the teaching of the civil war and dictatorship in schools, which up until now have been marginalized subjects, if taught at all. It also outlaws the Franco regime, rather than just condemning it, and pardons anyone convicted of political crimes by Francoist tribunals.

In addition, the new law makes the state responsible for recovering the remains of an estimated 100,000 victims of Francoism who were killed by nationalist troops and thrown in unmarked graves. It will also create a national DNA database to help identify excavated bodies.