Sarah Kennedy is a Montreal-based jazz vocalist and songwriter who brings a fresh perspective to the genre. Her smooth and light vocal tone, emotional depth, and sense of humor set her apart as a performer. While her music is rooted in jazz, she infuses it with her own unique style and original compositions.

Kennedy's path to becoming a musician was unconventional. Despite her love of music and singing, she pursued a career outside of the industry before realizing her true passion. This journey has given her a unique perspective on music and the power it holds.

Onstage, Kennedy is a dynamic and engaging performer who shares personal stories and thought-provoking insights while delivering her music with passion and precision.

Looking to the future, Kennedy is excited to continue performing and sharing her music with the world. With her trending fresh take on jazz and her captivating stage presence, she is a rising star to watch in the music industry.

Sarah Kennedy has established herself as a remarkably transparent performer who shares how music has helped her overcome personal challenges. Her ability to touch the deepest emotions of the audience while elevating their spirits to new heights is truly magical. Sarah's diverse repertoire reveals a tender and rambunctious musical personality, and she engages her audience by encouraging participation and sharing thought-provoking therapeutic insights, all while cracking jokes.

Despite her current success, Sarah Kennedy was not born into a family of musicians. Although she adored classical piano lessons and singing in the school choir, she did not initially consider herself to have talent worthy of a stage. Instead, she pursued a career in healthcare, which, while rewarding in its own way, left her with a sense of unfulfilled potential. It was only after being tricked into performing at an open mic night with a few too many martinis that she discovered her passion for performing. Thus, Sarah Kennedy's days of moonlighting as a jazz singer began.

In the world of jazz, there are many tragic love songs, and Sarah may have delved too deeply into the music of heartbreak. She went beyond the American Songbook to include bossa novas, the music of Joni Mitchell, and the humorous catalogue of Blossom Dearie, but always including songs about love's disappointments. Derailed from her own happiness by repeated failed attempts at love, Sarah Kennedy was also the perfect fit for "The Colorifics," a quirky and satirical original band which often flaunted a boisterous dismissal of romance altogether. Eventually, Sarah found herself exhausted and bored with the ironic and painful parallels of the music and her life. She decided to make yet another metamorphosis.

Sarah Kennedy chose to pursue music as a source of healing instead of continuing to perpetuate old patterns. It took many hours of practicing to audition on voice, guitar, and piano for the Concordia University post-graduate music therapy program. Despite the challenges of providing mental health support to those in bereavement and living with cancer during a global pandemic, Sarah successfully completed a masters. Her deep dive into the psychological implications of music changed her understanding and delivery of music forever.

Despite her current success, Sarah Kennedy was not born into a family of musicians. Although she adored classical piano lessons and singing in the school choir, she did not initially consider herself to have talent worthy of a stage. Instead, she pursued a career in healthcare, which, while rewarding in its own way, left her with a sense of unfulfilled potential. It was only after being tricked into performing at an open mic night with a few too many martinis that she discovered her passion for performing. Thus, Sarah Kennedy's days of moonlighting as a jazz singer began.

In the world of jazz, there are many tragic love songs, and Sarah may have delved too deeply into the world of the torch singer. However, she went beyond the American Songbook to include bossa novas, the music of Joni Mitchell, and the humorous catalogue of Blossom Dearie, always including songs of heartbreak. Derailed from happiness by repeated failed attempts at love, Sarah Kennedy was the perfect fit for "The Colorifics," a quirky and satirical original band which often flaunted a boisterous dismissal of romance altogether. However, Sarah found herself exhausted and bored with the ironic and painful parallels of the music and her life. She decided to make yet another metamorphosis.

Sarah Kennedy chose to pursue music as a source of healing instead of continuing to perpetuate old patterns. It took many hours of practicing to audition on voice, guitar, and piano for the Concordia University post-graduate music therapy program. Despite the challenges of providing mental health support to those in bereavement and living with cancer during a global pandemic, Sarah successfully completed a masters. Her deep dive into the psychological implications of music changed her understanding and delivery of music forever.