Table of Biography

Sarah Kennedy is an actress who appeared in several successful television shows in the 1970s and early 1980s, including Rowan & Martin’s Laugh-In. Sarah Kennedy also appeared in films such as The Telephone Book and The Working Girls and was a regular guest on Match Game and The Tonight Show.

Early Life and Education

Sarah Kennedy was born on January 27, 1948, in Coquille, Oregon, in the United States of America.

As of now, she is 74 years old and she holds citizenship in America. Moreover, she is a Christian by her religion.

She is the daughter of Rick Dufay (father) and Robin Swicord (mother). Talking about her siblings, she has a brother Carrie Kemper. Aside from them, there is no more information regarding her ethnicity or zodiac.

She attended the University of Oregon State and the State University of San Francisco after graduating from Coquille High School.

Relationship Status

Sarah Kennedy has a charming personality and is a fascinating actor. There is no concrete evidence of her being in a relationship, despite her attentive nature.

Moreover, she is possibly single at the moment, as she has not openly dated anyone. Furthermore, she wants to live a private life and has not revealed any details about her personal life.

Talking about her controversy and rumors, Sarah has not a part of them till now. Moreover, she loves to focus on her professional life career and gain more success and fame.

Body Measurements

She is 5 feet 2 inches tall and has blonde hair and she has blue eyes in color. Besides that, there is no more information regarding Sarah Kennedy’s weight and other body measurements.

Career and Professional Life

She began her acting career when she was just 23 years old. Sarah’s first job was as a receptionist at a New York City talent agency, leading to several businesses and performing positions.

During the 1970s and early 1980s, she appeared in several famous television series such as Laverne & Shirley’ (1981), and Barney Miller as Spec. Alice Grant (1981).

She also appeared in Willow B: Women in Prison as Sabrina Reynolds (1980), Nobody’s Perfect as Marlene (1980), Future Cop as Marge (1977), Rowan & Martin’s Laugh-In as Various characters (1972–73), and others.

She has worked in big-screen movies as an actress. Sammy as Somebody (1976), The Working Girls as Honey ( 1974), and The Telephone Book as Alice (1971) are some of her movie credits.

Awards

As an actor and working in the entertainment industry for a long time, she has not won any awards or gotten recognition. Moreover, we can assume that Sarah will receive some of them in the upcoming years.

Sarah Kennedy – Social Media

Sarah Kennedy is not active on social media platforms such as Instagram, Twitter, and Facebook. Moreover, she likes to live a private life and enjoy her life rather than spend time on social media platforms.

Sarah Kennedy – Net Worth 2023

The actress has earned a decent sum of money from her acting. But, the actress has not disclosed her net worth to the public.

According to some sources, Sarah Kennedy’s net worth is estimated at around $1 million to $5 million as an actress.

More Actress

Sarah Kennedy Fans Also Viewed

ncG1vNJzZmieoprAqbHRqaasrF6YvK570pqpmqBdoLKvusSdsGg%3D