Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson (1832–1910)

was a Norwegian writer who won the Nobel Prize of Literature in 1903. He is best known for his nationalist political beliefs and Romantic literary style. In this spirit, he glorified the life of Norwegian peasants in many short stories. The most famous of these is the barely thousand-word long novella The Father.

Read The Father by Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson

THE man whose story is here to be told was the wealthiest and most influential person in his parish; his name was Thord Overaas. He appeared in the priest’s study one day, tall and earnest. “I have gotten a son,” said he, “and I wish to present him for baptism.”

“What shall his name be?”

“Finn, — after my father.”

“And the sponsors?”

They were mentioned, and proved to be the best men and women of Thord’s relations in the parish.

“Is there anything else?” inquired the priest, and looked up.

The peasant hesitated a little.

“I should like very much to have him baptized by himself,” said he, finally.

“That is to say on a week-day?”

“Next Saturday, at twelve o’clock noon.”

“Is there anything else?” inquired the priest.

“There is nothing else;” and the peasant twirled his cap, as though he were about to go.

Then the priest rose. “There is yet this, however,” said he, and walking toward Thord, he took him by the hand and looked gravely into his eyes: “God grant that the child may become a blessing to you!”

— — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — —

“Really, you carry your age astonishingly well, Thord,” said the priest; for he saw no change whatever in the man.

“That is because I have no troubles,” replied Thord.

To this the priest said nothing, but after a while he asked: “What is your pleasure this evening?”

“I have come this evening about that son of mine who is to be confirmed to-morrow.”

“He is a bright boy.”

“I did not wish to pay the priest until I heard what number the boy would have when he takes his place in church to-morrow.”

“He will stand number one.’

“So I have heard; and here are ten dollars for the priest.”

“Is there anything else I can do for you?” inquired the priest, fixing his eyes on Thord.

“There is nothing else.”

Thord went out.

Eight years more rolled by, and then one day a noise was heard outside of the priest’s study, for many men were approaching, and at their head was Thord, who entered first.

The priest looked up and recognized him.

“You come well attended this evening, Thord,”

“I am here to request that the banns may be published for my son; he is about to marry Karen Storliden, daughter of Gudmund, who stands here beside me.”

“Why, that is the richest girl in the parish.”

“So they say,” replied the peasant, stroking back his hair with one hand.

The priest sat a while as if in deep thought, then entered the names in his book, without making any comments, and the men wrote their signatures underneath. Thord laid three dollars on the table.

“One is all I am to have,” said the priest.

“I know that very well; but he is my only child, I want to do it handsomely.”

The priest took the money.

“This is now the third time, Thord, that you have come here on your son’s account.”

“But now I am through with him,” said Thord, and folding up his pocket-book he said farewell and walked away.

The men slowly followed him.

A fortnight later, the father and son were rowing across the lake, one calm, still day, to Storliden to make arrangements for the wedding.

“This thwart is not secure,” said the son, and stood up to straighten the seat on which he was sitting.

“Take hold of the oar!” shouted the father, springing to his feet and holding out the oar.

But when the son had made a couple of efforts he grew stiff.

“Wait a moment!” cried the father, and began to row toward his son.

Then the son rolled over on his back, gave his father one long look, and sank.

Thord could scarcely believe it; he held the boat still, and stared at the spot where his son had gone down, as though he must surely come to the surface again. There rose some bubbles, then some more, and finally one large one that burst; and the lake lay there as smooth and bright as a mirror again.

For three days and three nights people saw the father rowing round and round the spot, without taking either food or sleep; he was dragging the lake for the body of his son. And toward morning of the third day he found it, and carried it in his arms up over the hills to his gard.[1]

It might have been about a year from that day, when the priest, late one autumn evening, heard some one in the passage outside of the door, carefully trying to find the latch. The priest opened the door, and in walked a tall, thin man, with bowed form and white hair. The priest looked long at him before he recognized him. It was Thord.

“Are you out walking so late?” said the priest, and stood still in front of him.

The priest sat down also, as though waiting. A long, long silence followed. At last Thord said:

“I have something with me that I should like to give to the poor; I want it to be invested as a legacy in my son’s name.”

He rose, laid some money on the table, and sat down again. The priest counted it.

“It is a great deal of money,” said he.

“It is half the price of my gard. I sold it today.”

The priest sat long in silence. At last he asked, but gently:

“What do you propose to do now, Thord?”

“Something better.”

They sat there for a while, Thord with downcast eyes, the priest with his eyes fixed on Thord. Presently the priest said, slowly and softly:

“I think your son has at last brought you a true blessing.”

“Yes, I think so myself,” said Thord, looking up, while two big tears coursed slowly down his cheeks.

(English translation taken from: https://americanliterature.com/author/bjrnstjerne-bjrnson/short-story/the-father)

Christian Themes in The Father

The four visits Thord makes to the priest all have Biblical parallels:

When Thords son is baptized, the baptism is a clear and theological reference to death and resurrection in Christ. This theological aspect of baptism was described in the apostolic letters in the New Testament, and hence belong amongst the oldest theological ideas of the Ancient Church. Waters symbolized a purifying and deadly element that our souls must be submerged in, to arise clean and purified to eternal life.

Next, Thord`s son goes through confirmation, when he repeats baptism with a personal wow This ceremony strengthens the mercy of baptism, by having it repeated through adult free will. By openly professing faith in Jesus, the son of Thord repeats the actions of Zaccheus and the Roman military officer, who professed faith in Jesus when meeting him in person.

“But Zacchaeus stood up and said to the Lord, “Look, Lord! Here and now I give half of my possessions to the poor, and if I have cheated anybody out of anything, I will pay back four times the amount.” Jesus said to him, “Today salvation has come to this house, because this man, too, is a son of Abraham. For the Son of Man came to seek and to save the lost.” (Luk 19:8–10)

“He was not far from the house when the centurion sent friends to say to him: “Lord, don’t trouble yourself, for I do not deserve to have you come under my roof. That is why I did not even consider myself worthy to come to you. But say the word, and my servant will be healed. For I myself am a man under authority, with soldiers under me. I tell this one, ‘Go,’ and he goes; and that one, ‘Come,’ and he comes. I say to my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.” When Jesus heard this, he was amazed at him, and turning to the crowd following him, he said, “I tell you, I have not found such great faith even in Israel.” Then the men who had been sent returned to the house and found the servant well.” (Luk 7: 6–10)

In the third stage of his life, Thord`s son gets married. Marriage is a recurring symbolical motif in the parables of Jesus, where Jesus presents Himself as the Bridegroom and the soul as the wedding guest. Marriage in a Biblical context is a union between Heaven and Earth, between soul and God, between mortal and immortal, between High and Low. But to Thord his son`s marriage only represents status and materialistic wealth. This is indicative of Thord`s spiritual blindness.

When Thord`s son suffers death by drowning, his end represents another repetition of baptism, the spiritual act of death and resurrection in Christ. The water symbolizes a spiritual cleansing, as the water in the baptismal font. It is indicated that Thord`s son is welcomed by Christ in Heaven. But Thord had used his son as a means to an end, to secure wealth and social climbing for his family, instead of loving his son spiritually. He was ready to be finished with his son as soon as the boy was married. Jesus calls children a blessing from God, and says that whomever welcomes a child, welcomes Jesus in person:

“At that time the disciples came to Jesus and asked, “Who, then, is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?” He called a little child to him and placed the child among them. And he said: “Truly I tell you, unless you change and become like little children, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven. Therefore, whoever takes the lowly position of this child is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. And whoever welcomes one such child in my name welcomes me.” (Matt. 18: 1–5)

Perhaps it is not only Thord`s son who is cleansed and resurrected in the baptismal waters of death, but Thord himself, as we shall see in the next scene. Thord`s entire view of life is challenged by his son`s death, and he suffers a personal crisis. His act of boating for three days in search of his son can be seen as a sign of repenting and contrition. He seeks out the priest again in his despair, and the priest tells him: “I think your son has at last brought you a true blessing.” («Nå tenker jeg, at sønnen din endelig er blitt deg til velsignelse.») Thord`s soul finally begins to heal when he sells the family farm, which symbolically means that he is asked to sacrifice his son, the way Moses was asked to sacrifice his son Isaac, before God saves the boy. And in the way Jesus, the sacrificed Son of God, became a spiritual blessing. Thord also repeats Zaccheus’ wows by giving half of his wealth to the poor. By giving up material wealth and social status, Thord can finally begin his own spiritual journey.

[1] Gard = Norwegian word for a family farm standing isolated in the landscape.