Most viewed

How to use local security settings to force NTLM2 / NTLMv2 on Microsoft Windows platform?

To use the local security settings to force Windows Server 2008, Windows Server 2003, Windows 7, Windows Vista, Windows XP and 2000 to use NTLMv2: Open the Local Security Policy console, using one of the following methods: The Local Security Policy consol...

Views: 374,453

How to mount/unmount an NFS StoreSafe virtual storage on Mac OS X using command line tool?

To mount an NFS StoreSafe virtual storage on Mac OS X using command line tool, execute the following in console mount -t nfs <storesafe hostname>:/<virtual storage> <mount point> To unmount, umount <mount point>

Views: 13,634

What does Bloombase Security Infrastructure do?

A majority of large corporations have suffered from confidential data theft, phishing, data tampering by insiders (or outsiders), and application hacking. To add to that, they are often not aware of these breaches, until after the damage has been done. The same way physical, conf...

Views: 11,408

Bloombase StoreSafe Storage Security Server 3 Update Release Notes

Current Version Changes in 3.0.9.0 Bug Fixes Bug ID Category Description ...

Views: 10,377

What encryption standards does Bloombase StoreSafe adopt?

Bloombase StoreSafe supports the following encryption standards which are safe and strong NIST FIPS-197 AES encryption and decryption NTT/Mitsubishi Camellia encryption and decryption NIST FIPS-46-3 3DES encryption and decryption CAST5, RC2 encryption ...

Views: 9,734

Performance tuning for concurrent file access through NFS-mounted Bloombase StoreSafe virtual storage

Summary Multi-threaded applications having file access on Bloombase StoreSafe NFS virtual storages experience slow response during file read and write. More Information Highly multi-threaded applications with intense file read/write access experiences slow response and fi...

Views: 8,853

Why XML?

Extensible Markup Language (XML) is the de-facto industry standard for carrying business data. It is simple, and very flexible text format. Originally designed to meet the challenges of large-scale electronic publishing. XML is playing increasingly important role in exchange of a...

Views: 8,172

Bloombase KeyCastle Security Server 2 Update Release Notes

Current Version Changes in 2.2.0.0 Bug Fixes Bug ID Category Description ...

Views: 7,857

How do I get rid of the Certificate Error in Microsoft IE7?

Click 'Continue to this website (not recommended)' on alert message 'There is a problem with this website's security certificate' You should now be at a page on the system with IE7 indicating a certificate error. Click on the box that states a 'Certif...

Views: 7,395

How well Bloombase Security Servers are prepared for disasters?

Selected models of Bloombase appliances are fault-tolerant by design. Other Bloombase appliances can be configured to run in high-availability mode such that when the active appliance fails, backup takes over and act as active node. Bloombase system settings and security configu...

Views: 6,550

Recent articles

What are the list of certifications achieved by Bloombase Cryptographic Module?

The Bloombase Cryptographic Module has achieved Cryptographic Algorithm Validation Program (CAVP) issued by NIST. For more, check out https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/Cryptographic-Algorithm-Validation-Program/details?product=2701.

Not rated Views: 246

Is Bloombase a member of Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF)?

Bloombase is a member of Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF). For more, check out https://landscape.cncf.io/?selected=bloombase.

Not rated Views: 205

Is Bloombase a member of Non-Volatile Memory Express (NVMe)?

Bloombase is a member of Non-Volatile Memory Express (NVMe). For more, check out https://nvmexpress.org/about/membership-list.

Not rated Views: 222

Is Bloombase a member of OpenPOWER Foundation?

Bloombase is a member of OpenPOWER Foundation. For more, check out https://openpowerfoundation.org/members.

Not rated Views: 201

Is Bloombase a member of Linux Foundation (LF)?

Bloombase is a member of Linux Foundation (LF). For more, check out https://www.linuxfoundation.org/about/members.

Not rated Views: 195

Is Bloombase a member of Open Compute Project (OCP)?

Bloombase is a member of Open Compute Project (OCP). For more, check out https://www.openstack.org/community/supporting-organizations.

Not rated Views: 203

Is Bloombase a member of Open Networking Foundation (ONF) Programming Protocol-independent Packet Processors (P4)?

Bloombase is a member of Open Networking Foundation (ONF) Programming Protocol-independent Packet Processors (P4)? For more, check out https://p4.org/ecosystem/?_organization=bloombase.

Not rated Views: 220

Is Bloombase a member of OpenStack?

Bloombase is a member of OpenStack. For more, check out https://www.openstack.org/community/supporting-organizations.

Not rated Views: 192

Is Bloombase a member of OpenInfra?

Bloombase is a member of OpenInfra. For more, check out https://openinfra.dev/members.

Not rated Views: 239

Is Bloombase a member of Compute Express Link (CXL)?

Is Bloombase a member of Compute Express Link (CXL). For more, check out https://www.computeexpresslink.org/members.

Not rated Views: 204