1. Bloombase StoreSafe Get App by Bloombase, Inc. Bloombase StoreSafe delivers turnkey, agentless, non-disruptive, application-transparent encryption security. It protects both on-premises and off-premises data-at-rest in complex heterogeneous storage infrastructures, including disk array, network storage, object store, and cloud storage services. APP BY BLOOMBASE, INC. The risk of data breach and leakage increases with the paradigm shift of enterprise data from traditional data center to virtualization, Big Data and the Cloud. Bloombase stands out as an independent, versatile, transparent and powerful standards-based encryption platform for organizations to protect their complex heterogeneous storage systems and services, from traditional-IT to next-generation cloud infrastructure. Bloombase StoreSafe delivers turnkey, agentless, non-disruptive, platform agnostic, application- transparent storage encryption security to lock down business sensitive information. Bloombase StoreSafe protects on-premise storage infrastructures, including SAN, NAS, DAS, tape library, virtual tape library (VTL), content addressable storage (CAS), object store, virtual data store, hyper- converged storage, as well as off-premise cloud storage service end-point. The solution enables organizational customers to mitigate data leakage threats and achieve data privacy regulatory compliance, easily and cost effectively. App Details

2. Data Sheets Bloombase StoreSafe Technical Speciﬁcations (https://www.bloombase.com/content/8936QA88) Bloombase StoreSafe Compatibility Matrix (https://www.bloombase.com/content/8396639C) White Papers Bloombase StoreSafe End-to-end Storage Security Solution (https://www.bloombase.com/content/mN1255eQ) Bloombase SupPortal (https://supportal.bloombase.com) Bloombase StoreSafe provides a unique software-appliance approach to power standards-based encryption protection of heterogeneous storage infrastructure over multiple protocols, including but not limited to FCP, FCoE, iSCSI, NFS, CIFS, HTTP, REST. Bloombase StoreSafe enables mission- critical software applications to secure structured and unstructured data contents seamlessly with standard cryptographic technologies at zero operational change for day-to-day storage and long- term archival. Bloombase data-at-rest security software appliance (NIST FIPS 140-2 validated), eliminates vendor lock-in, achieves wide coverage in storage protection, and fulﬁlls compliance with stringent data security regulations immediately. The solution enables transformative data privacy and operational efﬁciency over and above what was previously achievable only with signiﬁcant application change which is costly and risky. Bloombase StoreSafe can flexibly be deployed on commodity-off-the-shelf (COTS) servers as hardware appliances, as virtual appliances on virtual hypervisors, and compute instances on the Cloud. Bloombase StoreSafe is ready to deploy as compute instance on Oracle Cloud delivering encryption services for any application workloads on any operating systems. Bloombase StoreSafe provides encryption of Oracle proprietary Object Storage and Block Volumes, as well as standards-based storage services including OpenStack Swift and Cinder. Bloombase StoreSafe safeguards business sensitive data-at-rest with industry-standard IEEE 1619 cryptography, PKCS#11 hardware security modules (HSM), and NIST FIPS 140-2 certiﬁed OASIS KMIP-compliant key managers for full life-cycle key management. This application has been designated as ready to run on the Oracle Cloud Platform based on the application's support of the Oracle Cloud compatible technology products and operating systems. RELATED DOCUMENTS SUPPORT