Do you know about Anchor Ayesha Faridi? Searching for the queries like How to contact her? What is the phone number or email id of Ayesha Faridi? What is the office or residence address of Ayesha Faridi? Is Ayesha Faridi available on Facebook, Twitter or Instagram? Check out this article for the available answers.

Ayesha Faridi works in ET Now as an Anchor of this business news channel. Faridi has done her graduation from Delhi University in Journalism. Earlier she has worked with BBC World Service and MTV India as a news anchor and producer. After this, she joined CNBC TV 18 and worked as a Research Analyst and now she works with ET Now as a Markets Anchor. For CNBC TV18 she used to host shows like Power Breakfast, Your Stocks, Bull’s Eye, Bazaar, India Market Wrap, Midcap Radar, and Movers Shakers. Also, she has hosted many lifestyle shows for the channel like Get A Life, Business With Pleasure, Showtime India, Storyboard. Ayesha has also been a part of many award shows like Mutual Fund Award, CFO Awards, Trade Awards and CNBC FE Best Banks Awards. And now as she works for ET Now, she hosts many shows like The Market and First Trades, Markets @ Lunch, Riding The Bull, and the F&Q Show. From 2003 Faridi began her career as a Reporter with BBC World Service and now she hosts full-fledged shows. She has been seen hosting two more show for ET Now, that are Your Trades - The Week Ahead and India Economic Conclave. Ayesha Faridi is married to Nakul Vengsarkar.

Ayesha Faridi Contact Details

As Ayesha is a famous News Anchor, her personal contact number, WhatsApp Number etc. can’t be shared here due to security reasons. Ayesha Faridi Office Address: N/A Ayesha Faridi Residence Address: N/A Ayesha Faridi Phone Number: N/A Ayesha Faridi Fax Number: N/A Ayesha Faridi Email ID: N/A

Ayesha Faridi Official Website: N/A

Social Profiles Ayesha Faridi is not a very social person but she likes to keep her audience up to date about her life. So you can follow her on the listed social media handles:- Facebook Profile: facebook.com/AyeshaFaridiVengsarkar Twitter Handle: twitter.com/ayeshafaridi1 Google Plus Profile: N/A LinkedIn Profile: N/A YouTube Channel: N/A Instagram Handle: instagram.com/ayeshafaridi

0 Comments