Description

Opoponax Essential Oil

Opoponax Essential Oil is an important aromatherapy oil for our emotional health. It is an ideal oil to use during stressful periods in our lives.

Opoponax Essential Oil is also known as Opopanax Essential Oil. But, more importantly, it is also known as Sweet Myrrh Essential Oil.

This is because Opoponax Essential Oil and Myrrh Essential Oil are both made from resin collected from Commiphora trees However, whilst they both offer a lot of similar benefits and their aroma is similar, there are differences between the two.

Aromatically, Opoponax Essential Oil is lighter and sweeter than Myrrh Essential Oil.

The reason there are some differences between the two oils is because Opoponax Essential Oil and Myrrh Essential Oil are made from the resin of two different varieties of tree within the same species.

Opoponax Essential Oil INCI: Commiphora Erythraea

Myrrh Essential Oil INCI: Commiphora myrrha oil

One of the unfortunate ways in which the two oils differ is that Opoponax Essential Oil is phototoxic and poses a moderate risk of skin sensitisation according to Robert Tisserand and Rodney Young

Myrrh Essential Oil does not have these drawbacks.

Opoponax Essential Oil Health Benefits

Opoponax Essential Oil health benefits may include: Anti-anxiety + antibacterial + anti-inflammatory + antimicrobial + antiseptic + antispasmodic + expectorant

Please consult the Glossary Of Terms for more information.

Opoponax Essential Oil Traditional Uses

Respiratory support

Asthma

Muscular & joint pain

Grounding & balancing

Emotional health

Perfumery

Meditation support

Wild As The Wind Opoponax Essential Oil

Wild As The Wind Opoponax Essential Oil is a premium quality aromatherapy oil, suitable for therapeutic purposes.

INCI: Commiphora erythraea Oil

Plant Family: Burseraceae

Parts Used: Resin

Method of Extraction: Steam distilled

Perfumery Note: Base

Chemical Family: Monoterpenes, Sesquiterpenes

Origin: UK

Shelf Life: 5 – 6 Years

Wild As The Wind Essential Oils

Wild As The Wind offer one of the most extensive ranges of premium quality, therapeutic grade UK essential oils available online.

Professional therapists use Wild As The Wind Essential Oils, including Osteopaths and Massage Therapists.

Wild As The Wind Essential Oils are also used domestically, for home remedies as well as in green cleaning products etc.

Wild As The Wind Essential Oils Are Suitable For:

Diffusing & nebulising

Diluting to make body & bath oils (1% dilution)

Using in your household first aid kit (average 2% dilution)

Adding to your shampoos, conditioners & liquid soaps (5 drops per 100ml)

Diluting to make face oils (2% dilution)

Formulating effective household cleaners & sanitisers (average 5% dilution)

Please consult How To Use Essential Oils for more information on how to use aromatherapy oils, and how to blend them.

However, not all essential oils are suitable for all applications. For this reason you must read the specific safety advice, including cautions and contraindications, for the specific essential oils you intend to use.

Wild As The Wind Customer Ratings:

Etsy: 5 stars Facebook: 5 stars Google: 4.9 stars

Wild As The Wind Essential Oil Availability

Wild As The Wind Essential Oils are available in the UK.

Wild As The Wind Customer Guarantees

Wild As The Wind essential oils are cruelty-free & vegan friendly. They are also some of the purest, most bio-active essential oils in the world.