1. Introduction

Apiaceae family members are significant plants that have economic importance all over the world. They are used as a vegetable food and as animal feed. Some Apiaceae species are also used as ornamental plants in parks and gardens. Because of the alkaloids and resins they contain, these plants are widely used in the medicine and cosmetics industries as well [1].

Opopanax is a genus within the Apiaceae family that is represented in Flora Iranica by O. persicus Boiss & Held and O. hispidus Griseb. The only species in Siberian flora is O. armeniacum Bordz., whereas Flora Europaea includes O. hispidus and O. chironium W.D.J. Koch [2,3]. The three species identified in Turkey are members of the genus Opopanax, which is spread in the Mediterranean region, Western Asia, and southern Europe. The uncommon monotypic Turkish genus Crenosciadium was recently classified as a synonym for Opopanax. The genus Opopanax is also represented by three species in Turkey [4]. As a result of recent studies, Crenosciadium Boiss. & Heldr. is a genus that has been combined with Opopanax and is represented by four species [5,6]. Bentham & Hooker [7] showed that Crenosciadium is closely related to Opopanax, while Menemen reported that C. siifolium (Boiss et. Heldr) [5] Menemen is a synonym for Opopanax siifolius (Boiss. & Heldr.); however, it differs from Opopanax in that it has a dorsal flat fruit. Özcan et al. studied the molecular characterizations of the nrDNA ITS, cpDNA matK, and trnL-F regions of C. siifolium and Opopanax species and determined that these two genera, although very similar, are different from each other [8]. The mericarp morphology is particularly helpful for separating the genera Opopanax and Crenosciadium, and the mericarp ribs are very significant for separating the two genera [9].

Members of the Opopanax genus have been used as medicine since antiquity and have also been consumed as a perfume for a long period in the past, for thousands of years. Humans may consume it in a variety of ways, such as by combining it with warm water or consuming it as resin [10]. Opopanax hispidus has a wider geographical distribution than other Opopanax members. This species is distributed from Western Europe to the Balkans and western parts of Asia. The stem and leaves of O. hispidus are used as antiseptics in Iranian ethnobotany, while the stem is used to treat infertility in Turkish folk medicine [11]. The root and aerial parts of O. chironium were extensively studied and found to contain various phthalides and C-17 acetylenes. In addition, it has been reported that this species has high antimicrobial and antioxidant activity against Escherichia coli and Listeria monocytogenes because of the phenols and flavonoids it contains [12]. Previous bioactivity and phytochemical studies showed that the genus Opopanax generally produces phenolics, diterpenes, coumarins, phthalides and has diverse biological properties. These compounds provide it with some pharmacological properties such as antioxidant, antimicrobial, and anticancer activities [12,13].

Studies have been conducted on the phytochemistry, conventional use, and pharmacological properties of the Opopanax genus. Additionally, data and chemical indicators that the species of this genus could be used therapeutically have been published. The genus Opopanax primarily produces phenolics, coumarins, phthalides, and diterpenes and possesses a variety of biological and pharmacological characteristics, including antioxidant, anticancer, and antibacterial activities, according to previous phytochemical and bioactivity investigations [14,15].

In phytochemistry and taxonomic studies, applications based on chemotaxonomy, especially predictions to determine the phytochemical content of plants, have gained great importance in recent years. Investigating the phytochemical components of Opopanax species naturally grown in Turkey was the goal of this study. We also aimed to determine the chemotaxonomic relationships between inter and infrageneric means. The results provide important clues on the taxonomic position of the genus members.

3. Discussion

The composition of the essential oil of Opopanax species in Turkey was compared with those reported in other studies and described in terms of constituents content. The essential oil of hydrodistilled O. chironium aerial parts was reported to contain cembrene (14.6%), angelicin (coumarins) (4.5%), β-caryophyllene (3.2%), E-β-Ionone (3.7%), (E)-β-damascenone (3.7%), and (E)-geranyl-acetone (3.3%) as main compounds (59). The only diterpenes detected in the extracts of O. chironium and O. persicum were coumarins. These species are also endemic to Iran, Turkey, Iraq, and Transcaucasia [57,58,59]. The presence of coumarins, such as columbianadin, eucedanin, diterpene, and gaudichaudin, called peucelinenoxide acetate, was determined in the extract obtained from O. chironium [13,60,61]. In the oil of O. chironium (L.) Koch, E-farnesyl acetate (20.2%) was determined as a major component [62]. In our study, trans-β-farnesene was found at a minor level (0.3%).

In the essential oil from the fruits of O. hispidus, 79 compounds were identified, and geranyl acetate (17.9%), tyrosol (48.8%), incensole acetate (4.3%), and germacrene D (4.0%) were the main components [63]. The content of geranyl acetate was 1.0% and that of germacrene D was 0.5% on the essential oil, and they appeared as minor components in this study. The content of γ-elemene was determined to be 20.5% in our study, and thus, it was found to be a significant chemical. γ-elemene from O. hispidus has shown strong insecticidal activity against the agricultural pest Spodoptera litura and may be beneficial as an environmentally benign biopesticide [64]. O. hispidus, used for the treatment of sclerosis, can also be used as a biopesticide [65]. The other major component of the essential oil from the Opopanax genus determined in this study was cyclopropane, found in the essential oils of O. chironium, O. hispidus, O. persicus in quantities corresponding to 5.5, 24.0, and 17.6%, respectively.

The oils of O. hispidus, O. chironium, and O. persicus were found to contain butanoic acide-octyl ester (content of 11.5%, 12.0%, and 13.5%, respectively. A fatty acid found naturally in plants is butanoic acid octyl ester. It can be found as a fatty acid and a glycol ether. Candida glabrata, a fungus that can infect the skin, has been demonstrated to be resistant to butanoic acid octyl ester. Butanoic acid octyl ester has been used as a dietary supplement to increase the absorption of lipophilic nutrients, such as vitamins A, D, E, and K. There are no documented side effects or toxicity for this substance [66].

In this study, the lowest amount of n hexadecanoic acid (33.3%) was found in the essential oil of O. siifolius. Due to the harmful side effects of synthetic compounds used for chemical protection, the use of substances obtained from plant sources, showing antimicrobial activity, is increasing. Palmitic acid, also known as n-hexadecanoic acid, is a type of saturated fatty acid [67]. It is well known that several fatty acids have antibacterial and antifungal effects [68]. By directly interacting with T cells, fatty acids can influence the immunological responses [69]. By reducing the generation of inflammatory mediators, dietary conjugated linoleic acid has an anti-inflammatory impact [70].

The essential oil analysis performed here showed that all Opopanax species are rich in sesquiterpenes and low in monoterpenes. Especially, O. siifolius contains more common saturated and unsaturated fatty acids. The results demonstrated the occurrence of major compounds in the genus patterns, i.e., the hexynyl n-valerate chemotype in O. chironium, the cyclopropane chemotype in O. hispidus, the γ-element chemotype in O. persicus, the palmitic acid chemotype in O. siifolius, in the eastern Anatolian region of Turkey. The chemical analysis results of O. siifolius showed that this species may be a different group and could be transferred to a genus different from Crenosciadium. As in our previous studies, the chemical analysis results supported the morphological data [71,72].

As shown in , the essential oil analysis conducted for this study indicated some chemical differences and similarities among the members of the Opopanax genus. The result of the clustering analysis was based on 10 main components in the essential oils of the Opopanax spp. examined, ( ) and revealed that the Opopanax species were chemically as well as morphologically similar. The cluster analysis showed that O. siifolius belongs to the outermost clade according to the main essential oil compounds. Considering the groupings, it was observed that O. chironium, O. hispidus, O. persicus species were connected to each other (big group), and it is said that, chemically, they are closely related species. However, O. siifolius was far from these three species and appeared as a single species. It was concluded that the results are compatible with the morphological appearance of the taxa. The dendrogram showed that O. chironium and O. hispidus are closely related species, and O. persicus is connected with this small cluster and has a high similarity. O. siifolius was found in a different single cluster that combines with this triple cluster at a high level. This chemical grouping of the Opopanax genus members confirmed that O. siifolium may belong to a different genus, as indicated by the morphological analysis [5] and the molecular characterization of the Opopanax and Crenasciadum genera.

The results and the chemical data provided some information and clues on the chemotaxonomy of the genus Opopanax. In this study, γ-elemene, butanoic acid-octyl ester, cylopropane were the main components determined in O. chironium, O. hispidus, O. persicus whereas palmitic acid was the dominant component in O. siifolius. Hexynyl n-valerate (O. chironium), cyclopropane (O. hispidus), γ-elemene (O. persicus), and palmitic acid (O. siifolius) were the most abundant components in the essential oils of the analyzed taxa. Myristicin was detected only in O. chironium, and spatulenol was detected only in O. hispidus. Hexyl n-valerate, γ-elemene, butanoic acid-octyl ester and cyclopropane were among the major components in O. chironium, O. hispidus, and O. persicus oils. On the other hand, the major compounds detected in O. siifolius were different from those identified in the other Opopanax species studied (palmitic, stearic, oleic, linoleic acids and ethillinoleolate) ( ).

Based on previously published investigations, multivariate analysis was applied [29]. Both principal component analysis (PCA) and cluster analysis (CA) were used to determine the chemicals in the various samples. Then, using the matrix correlation setup, PCA was carried out using Varimax rotation. PC1 (50.96%) and PC2 (16.76%) were the two primary components of the principal component analysis, respectively. PC1 and PC2 carried a combined load of 67.72%. To investigate the correlation between the variables, the Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin (KMO) approach was used. The KMO value was 0.728, which is a respectable value. For the data set, Barlett’s test of sphericity likewise demonstrated a statistically significant difference at alpha of 0.04. The link between the four Opopanax species and their essential oil concentration was highlighted using PCA analysis, which was carried out using two different groups (PC1 and PC2). , and show the results.

A biplot graph was created in this work to establish the multivariate relationships of the chemicals in the essential oils of the four Opopanax species investigated ( ). If the angle between the vectors was less than 90°, the content of that species was better than the average; if the angle was larger than 90°, the content of that species was lower than the average; if the angle was equal to 90°, the content was near the average. shows the values of all components in the examined species and if they properties were positively or negatively associated with one another. The statistical analyses verified the results.

Essential oils have a wide range of beneficial properties. In this work, we isolated the essential oil from species of the Opopanax genus. It is possible to say that it is useful to compare the composition of essential oils and to provide basic data for taxonomic and essential oil evaluations in studies on plant genera. The study of essential oils is important to obtain chemotaxonomical relationships and promote scientific agriculture and product diversity. It is thought that the information on these essential oils will be useful for many industries working with natural products, such as the medical, cosmetics, landscaping, flavor, and food industries.