This is a brief introduction of Opoponax, or Sweet Myrrh which will be expanding as more information and interviews take place.

Commonly known as: Opoponax, Sweet Myrrh

Plant family: Burseraceae

Genus: Commiphora

Species: Commiphora Erythraea

Uses: incense, perfume,flavor agent and medicine

Aroma: Balsamic

Uses: incense, perfume,flavor agent and medicine

Opoponax a Brief Introduction.

Hailing from the horn of Africa comes a relative of frankincense and myrrh called opoponax or sweet myrrh. Frankincense, Myrrh, and Sweet Myrrh are part of the plant family Burseraceae.

There are quite a few species that have been historically identified as opoponax, however, modern opopanax’s entire production is from the Commiphora erythraea tree in Somalia.

Within the family Burseraceae lies the Genus Commipohora, which is were we find both cousins myrrh (commiphora myrrha), and sweet myrrh ( commiphora erythraea).

Opoponax trees are at home in the dry climate zone of Somalia and Eritrea, where they have long played role in medicine and ritual. The properties of this resin are similar to those of Myrrh, and thus both the resin and the bark have been used in a similar way, as an antiseptic and anti-inflammatory. In particular, they have played a role in women’s initiation rites – to help heal the physical scars of female circumcision and to cleanse, disinfect and tighten the womb after birth. In high class perfumery it is used as a fixative and to add a balsamic base note to exotic, oriental fragrances.

Opoponax or sweet myrrh is a cousin of the healing Myrrh—Commiphora Myrrha. It is a natural oleo-gum-resin like myrrh and frankincense. The color of its resin is brown; however, good quality crude botanical resin is dark red. Opoponax has been a component of incense and perfumes since Biblical times.

Often burned as incense, opopanax has a warm, earthy scent. It’s scent is considered to be like myrrh with a warm-balsamic and sweet, honey-like aroma. The essential oil is used as a fixative in perfumery. In biblical times, opopanax was applied for minor wounds, but has since fallen out of disuse medicinally.

Opoponax extends the longevity of the fragrance on skin. It can also be used to bring warming, rich and balsamic tones to fragrances.

Where to Find Sweet Myrrh?

If you are interested in purchasing opoponax resin from Somalia, you may find it available at Frankincense.net. Your support is appreciated, and helps expand this ever growing endeavor. Click the link below for more information about purchasing Opoponax.

Sweet Myrrh – Opoponax resin from Somalia at Frankincense.net

Looking for more Incense resin and Frankincense enthusiasts? Visit this wonderful Facebook group below.