Resins and Balsams

My recent class on the Spice Route has me surrounded by various resins and balsams. They're a principal ingredient in Oriental perfumes and have been used as a fixative since the dawn of the spice route. I've looked up the definitions of both, as well as gum and oleoresin, and they all appear to be the same.

According to Elena Vosnaki :

"The distinction between resin and balsam is one of form, on a fundamental level: Simply put and generalizing, resinous materials come in the form of solidified, gum-like "tears" seeping from the elixir vitae circulating into the bark of big trees, such as the Boswellia Carteri (which produces frankincense). Balsams on the other hand are tricky materials, not necessarily tree secretions, often coming as they do from flower pods or bushy twigs (such as vanilla orchids or the Mediterranean rockrose). But there are exceptions to every rule: Opopanax, though resinous smelling itself, actually comes from a herb, opopanax chironium.

So the real focus when referencing balsamic and resinous terminology is how the materials actually smell and how they're different or common in scent, rather than what their origin is. Therefore, for ease, resinous & balsamic materials are classified into 3 distinct olfactory profiles according to their aromatic properties first and foremost."

Styrax from the Liquidambar orientalis tree,

smells a little like cinnamon and glue.

In my mind balsams such as benzoin, peru balsam, tolu balsam and labdanum are sweeter and softer. They're gentler and enveloping and add a fixative quality to florals. Resins like frankincense, myrrh, oppoponax and styrax are widely used in incense and have a more defined characteristic. They're usually antiseptic so have a medicinal quality to them.

These materials are the basis for Oriental and Amber perfumes, some of the first perfumes, created since antiquity. In ancient Egypt, Greece, Cyprus, Mesopotamia and classical Rome resins and balsams were combined with sweet and pungent spices and exotic flowers to create perfume for the gods.

I'll be hosting and Oriental/Amber perfume workshop in July in my home studio. Email me for more information or to register.

Amber resin

Elderflower Liqueur

I posted during the summer about my forays into making elderflower liqueur. Since then the macerated vodka has been sitting on a shelf waiting for me to pay some attention to it and turn it into a liqueur. I had nearly a wine bottle full of elderflower vodka and a small bottle of St.-Germain to compare and contrast with my creation.

At the onset the macerated elderflower vodka that I made has a dankness to it, a very green note, one that would lock with clary sage, or lavender absolute. At first I thought it was a honeyed note that was missing so I sweetened a small batch with Lancaster County, PA, honey. The dankness in the honey locked with that of the elderflower so that experiment was set aside.

The second experiment I sweetened with white sugar. In the past I've used raw cane crystals instead of sugar but they add a slight mollasses flavor to the brew, as well as an unpleasant dark colored slimy layer that floats to the top of the bottle as it clarifies. I'm hoping for a better result with white sugar.

After doing a bit more research in elderflower liqueur I noticed that most of the recipes call for lemons or lemon rinds during maceration, often recommending meyer lemons. Last winter I made meyer lemon vodka so I did a little tweaking with it. I also took a look at my collection of perfume oils and decided on four notes to be added; yuzu, wild sweet orange, neroli and peru balsam. I made 10% solutions of each oil and added them one or two drops at a time.

Also in my research I learned that most people make an elderflower syrup and then add alcohol to produce a liqueur. I confirmed this yesterday with a Swiss friend who explained to me how this was done in her country. Some of the recipes I read also called for fresh lemon balm.

Many trials later I've come up with something I think is truly worth sipping. I even "fixed" the first and second versions and bottled them separately. The recipe is a little rough but I think I have a much firmer idea of how to proceed next season. In the meantime I think a cocktail of elderflower liqueur and champagne would be perfect for the holidays.

Elderflower Liqueur

2 3/4 cups elderflower vodka

1/8 cup meyer lemon vodka

scant 3/4 cup sugar

5/8 cups water

13 drops yuzu dilution, 10%

15 drops peru balsam dilution, 10%

4 drops neroli bigarade dilution, 10%

6 drops wild sweet orange dilution, !0%