"1922" is a slow, methodical look at guilt and the consequences of moral compromise. Adapted from Stephen King’s novella "1922" is a film that will divide certain audiences. After a summer of successful, suspenseful King adaptations (IT, Gerald’s Game) this acts almost as an anti-king film. It’s a film that basks in its atmosphere, it's also a film that's solely focused on its characters rather than plot. Thomas Jane stars as Wilfred James a dedicated ranch owner who conspires with his son Henry (Dylan Schmid) to murder his wife Arlette (Molly Parker) when she starts the process of selling the family ranch.

"1922" is written and directed by Zak Hilditch. Hilditch and his cinematographer Ben Richardson do a wonderful job…

Frustrating to no end.

This has King written all over it and believe me when I say that I consider that a good thing. 1922 is a pretty good novella, basically an elaborate re-imagining of Poe's Tell-tale Heart. It's short and sweet.

The operative word there being short.

The film gets the looks and the feel right and holds some excellent performances, but it takes so bloody long to tell a story that could be told in half the time.

Missed opportunities like that frustrate me to no end. The source material is solid, the talent involved well above average and yet they still want it to be something it isn't. I'm not saying all short stories should only be…

Stephen’s King’dom Marathon: Film #87

“In 1922, a man's pride was a man's land... and so was his son”

We all know about the importance of fathers spending time with their sons. The relationship a boy has with his father greatly shapes the man he will become in the future. Here are some awesomely manly activities that you can do with your son to strengthen that paternal bond.

✅ Go Fishing

✅ Play Catch

✅ Fill in a Well

✅ Eradicate the local rat population

✅ Have a conversation about how he should be keeping his Johnny Mac out of the home place

✅ Maybe take the time to create a perfect alibi in case some nosey fella comes inquiring…