Grammy Award-winning Riders in the Sky formed in 1977 when guitarist, composer and singer Douglas Green and upright bassist and singer Fred LaBour joined forces to play and preserve their love of classic American Western Music.

Now, 46 years later, the musicians, known by their respective stage names Ranger Doug and Too Slim, along with bandmates Woody Paul (Paul Woodrow Chrisman) and Joey Misculin, have yet to think about riding off into the sunset.

“It is a marvelous thing, because we’ve done movies, network television, cable television, public radio and Sirius XM radio,” Green said. “We’ve made 7,846 appearances and played at the Grand Ole Opry 2,250 times, and we’re at the point where we just want to keep going as long as it’s fun. As long as people buy tickets, I don’t see any reason to quit.”

Riders in the Sky will kick off the new year with a four-night residency, starting Jan. 4, at the Egyptian Theatre, and Green is looking forward to it.

“We haven’t been to Park City in many years,” he said. “Too Slim will be out there vacationing and skiing in advance of the dates. So I think it will be great.”

Not only will the band perform classic songs such as “Clear Water” and “Tumbling Tumbleweeds.” It will also play songs from the new record “Throw a Saddle on a Star.”

Released in June, “Throw a Saddle on a Star” is Riders in the Sky’s 29th studio album, and 43rd release overall.

“It debuted at No. 1 on the Western Music Charts,” Green said. “Yes. There is still such a thing.”

The album is also the first Riders album since Green’s pre-pandemic 2018 solo album “Songs of the Frontier,” which included the moniker “Ranger Doug with a lot of help from Riders in the Sky.”

“We thought we might be through making albums, because after 40 (releases) you don’t feel like you need to grind out any more,” Green said. “But we continued to write songs, and thought, ‘Why not?’ We needed something fresh, and it seemed the time was right.”

The album is a mix of new originals and classic Western tunes, such as the title track, according to Green.

“We had some new songs and some old tunes that we rediscovered, like ‘Throw a Saddle on a Star,’ which is from the 1940s. So we went and did the job, and I’m very proud of the album,” he said.

Green enjoyed making the 14-track album.

“It’s just a delight to be able to create and still be creating while we are in our 70s,” he said. “Music, I’ve heard, keeps you young, and I’m a full believer. I feel as creative with whatever little talent I have that’s still there. And when I take the stage, I feel like I’m 30 again.”

Green, who has an extensive collection of Western songs he dips into for his Sirius XM radio program “Ranger Doug’s Classic Cowboy Corral,” fell in love with the genre when he was a child.

“I grew up in the 1950s when cowboys were all over TV,” he said. “There was Gene Autry and Roy Rogers, and I had two uncles who were Finnish-Americans that used to listen to the National Barn Dance radio show. They both played guitar, and one of them yodeled and sang the old songs. So, I grew up listening to that, and developed a fascination for the cowboy culture.”

Green tried a bunch of different styles of music while in college and high school, but always returned to the Western style.

“It isn’t about broken hearts, feeling sorry for yourself and cheating on your wife,” he said. “It’s about the wide-open spaces and the beauty of the West. And when I heard it again, I fell back in love with it.”

Green tried to start a Western band a couple of times, but nothing came into fruition until LaBour came along.

“Too Slim was a part of the folk- and acoustic-music scene and the two of us shared the same love,” he said. “So, we started playing together, and, by golly, 46 years later, we’re still out there and coming back to Utah.”

One of the secrets of Riders in the Sky’s longevity is a stable of younger fans who have been exposed to the music through children’s TV shows like “Barney” or Disney films like “Toy Story 2,” Green said.

“Often someone will come up to us and say their dad is sitting on one side and their kid is on the other side and we’re the favorite band for both,” he said.

With that type of fandom, Green feels the responsibility to perform for both and older listeners.

“That’s been the dynamic from the start,” he said. “The older audience remembers the artists of the classic songs we do, and the kids appreciate the rhythms and feel of the music that is so different from what they are listening to today. Kids can relate to riding out into the wide-open spaces more than drinking at a bar or picking up a woman in a pick-up truck.”

In addition to performing as a quartet, Riders in the Sky also perform with orchestras. The band has performed numerous concerts with the Utah Symphony, and in 2009, it released an album titled “Lassoed Live,” which was recorded at the Schermerhorn Symphony Center with the Nashville Symphony.

“It’s amazing to hear some little ditty that I turned out one afternoon played by an 80-piece orchestra,” Green said. “The real professional symphonies catch on quickly. And most of the musicians enjoy what we do, especially the comedy. While these shows can be a little stressful, because we want to do it 100% right, it’s fun to hear our music with an orchestral background.”

The string of performances at the Egyptian Theatre will not feature a symphony, but it will include songs from the new album and favorites from the past 46 years, Green promised.

“We also take requests at the end, so if someone wants to hear something they didn’t hear earlier, we’ll play it,” he said. “From the start, we wanted to preserve this beautiful music and entertain. Riders in the Sky is an entertainment experience as well as a historical preservation of a wonderful style of American music.”

To further that mission, Bill Malone, known as the premiere scholar of Country Music, and his wife Bobbie, just finished a biography of the band, Green said.

“It will be out in 2024 and published by the University of East Texas Press,” he said. “Having that type of stature makes me feel proud of what we’ve accomplished, because it’s more than going out to play every night and have fun. It’s an important legacy that I’m proud of.”