Olga Nikolaevna Kulikovsky-Romanov (1926-2020)

It is with a deep sense of sadness for me to announce that Mrs. Olga Kulikovsky-Romanov died on1st May 2020, at the age of 94.

In 1986 she married Tikhon Nikolaevich Kulikovsky (1917-1993) – the eldest son of Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna (1882-1960) and Colonel N.A. Kulikovsky (1881-1958).

Olga Kulikovsky (née Pupynina) was born into a family of Russian immigrants on 20th September 1926, in Valjevo, Yugoslavia (Serboa). Her father, Nikolai Nikolaevich Pupynin was a hereditary nobleman of the Tambov province, a military Cossack officer of the Imperial and White armies, and participant in the famous Ice Campaign (Spring 1918).

Her mother, Nina Konradovna Kopernitskaya was an artist and sculptor, educated in Warsaw and Munich. From 1920, the family was in exile: first in Yugoslavia, after World War II in Venezuela.

Olga Kulikovsky graduated from the Mariinsky Don Institute of Noble Maidens (Smolny branch), who were evacuated from Novocherkassk during the Civil War to Bila Tserkva, Yugoslavia. During the Second World War, she was interned in Germany (Stuttgart), where she worked in a factory and survived the barbaric bombing of civilians by British and American aircraft. Subsequently, she moved to South America, received a medical, commercial, architectural education, and learned seven languages. After moving to Canada, she worked as a translator in government agencies.

PHOTO: Olga Nikolaevna Kulikovsky-Romanov praying at Monastery of the Holy Royal Martyrs at Ganina Yama in July 2018

Over the years Olga Kulikovsky participated in public activities in Russia, where she transferred to the Russian Orthodox Church some shrines preserved in the Kulikovsky family in Canada. Among these was the Icon of the Mother of God, “Of the Three Hands” belonged to Nicholas II and his family. She may, however, be best known for her tireless efforts to popularize the artistic work of Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna.

Mrs. Kulikovsky was the founder and chairman of the HIH Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna Memorial Fund since its foundation in 1991. With her passing, a new chapter begins for the charitable organization.

Undoubtedly, the Fund in the name of Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna will continue to serve Russia, whose activities will become a worthy testimony to the memory of the Grand Duchess and her daughter-in-law.

In recent years, Mrs. Kulikovsky had been working on a new book, “A Quarter Century of Russia’s Service.” This monumental work is dedicated to her 25 years of active and often difficult work of the Fund in Russia and abroad. Unfortunately, she never managed to see this publication come to fruition. [Her book is published in Russian/English, and is only available in Russia.]

It is important to add, that despite her age, she worked tirelessly to help clear the name of Russia’s much slandered Tsar and his family.

Olga Kulikovsky did not recognize the dynastic claims of the Kirillovich branch of the Romanov dynasty: the Spanish born Princess Maria Vladimirovna and her son Prince George Mikhailovich Hohenzollern.

PHOTO: the grave containing the remains of Grand Duchess Olga Kulikovsky, Nikolai and Tikhon Kulikovsky and Olga Kulikovsky, situated in the Orthodox section of York Cemetery, Toronto

She was found dead at her home in Balashikha, Moscow Region, where she lived.

Her body was returned to Canada, where her funeral was held in Toronto on 16th May 2020. According to her last will and testament, Olga Nikolaevna Kulikovsky was buried in York Cemetery in Toronto, next to her husband Tikhon Nikolayevich Kulikovsky (1917-1993)..

On the white marble cross, established by Mrs. Kulikovsky in 1993, after her husband’s death, her name was inscribed with the last date open. Olga Nikolaevna died on 1st May 2020.

The Kulikovskys are buried along with Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna (1882-1960) and her second husband Nikolai Alexandrovich Kulikovsky (1881-1958).

Memory Eternal! Вечная Память!

© Paul Gilbert. 2 May 2020