Sultan Abdul Halim Mu'adzam Shah became the oldest constitutional monarch in the south-east Asian nation's history.

Nine hereditary state rulers take five-year turns as king under a unique rotational system maintained since Malaysia's independence from Britain in 1957.

The king's role is largely ceremonial but he is highly regarded, particularly among the ethnic Malay Muslim majority, as the supreme upholder of Malay tradition and symbolic head of Islam.

Sultan Abdul Halim took his oath of office in a nationally televised ceremony attended by hundreds of dignitaries at a glittering yellow hall in Malaysia's new federal palace in Kuala Lumpur.

"The king is the umbrella to the people and the people are the pillars of the king," Sultan Abdul Halim said in comments issued through the national news agency, Bernama. "The king's greatest role is to ensure there will be no cruelty and destruction to the people and to the country."

Garbed in black and yellow regalia, Sultan Abdul Halim was sworn in after inspecting a military honour guard and receiving a 21-gun salute at parliament.

The king's roles include appointing cabinet ministers and senior judges on the advice of the prime minister. He also appoints senior Islamic clerics and is considered the highest-ranking figure in the armed forces. Public criticism of the king and state sultans is virtually illegal. Under Malaysian sedition laws, people who incite "hatred or contempt" toward royal rulers can be imprisoned for three years.

Sultan Abdul Halim, an avid golfer and sports fan, is the constitutional ruler of Malaysia's northern Kedah state, nicknamed the country's rice bowl because of its vast paddy fields. Besides being Malaysia's 14th and oldest king, Sultan Abdul Halim is the first to ascend the throne twice. He was also king between 1970 and 1975, when the father of Malaysia's current prime minister, Najib Razak, was premier.

He succeeds Sultan Mizan Zainal Abidin, 49, who was one of Malaysia's youngest kings.