..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to:

Flight Lieutenant John Philip Wilson, R.N., and Flight Sub-Lieutenant John Stanley Mills, R.N., for their services on the 7th June, 1915, when, after a long flight in the darkness over hostile territory they threw bombs on the Zeppelin shed at St. Evere, near Brussels, and destroyed a Zeppelin, which was inside. The two Officers were exposed to heavy fire from anti-aircraft guns during the attack.

29206 - 25 JUNE 1915

(for Victoria Cross) in command of one of His Majesty's Submarines while operating in the Sea of Marmora. In the face of great danger he succeeded in destroying one large Turkish gunboat, two transports, one ammunition ship and three storeships, in addition to driving one storeship ashore. When he had safely passed the most difficult part of his homeward journey he returned again to torpedo a Turkish transport.

The KING has further been graciously pleased to approve of the award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers of the same Submarine:

Lieutenant Guy D'Oyly-Hughes, Royal Navy.

Acting Lieutenant Robert Brown, Royal Naval Reserve.

29211 - 29 JUNE 1915

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

For services while attached to landing parties from H.M.S. "Doris" on the Syrian Coast:

Lieutenant H. Pirie Gordon, R.N.V.R. This Officer has been specially Mentioned for bravery under fire by the Commander-in-Chief East Indies.

The Commanding Officer of H.M.S. "Doris " reports:

"With regard to the Officers who have taken part in the landing parties, I should like particularly to bring to notice the name of Lieutenant H. Pirie Gordon, R.N.V.R., who has landed on every occasion, and whose conduct has gained my highest approval at all times."

For services in the operations off Smyrna, 8th March, 1915, when H.M. Minesweeper 285 was sunk by a mine:

Skipper James Sargent, R.N.R. Skipper Sargent was in the armoured wheel-house when the explosion occurred, and, although severely bruised by a heavy iron plate, picked his way to the after-end of the shattered and sinking vessel with the object of ordering Second Engineman F. W. Ingram to stop the engines, the engine-room telegraph being broken. He continued to encourage his men, and did not leave the vessel until she sank beneath him.

For services in connection with minesweeping operations in the Dardanelles:

Skipper Alfred Swain, R.N.R.

Skipper Alfred E. Berry, R.N.R.

For Meritorious Service in connection with the sinking of the German Cruiser "Dresden," 14th March, 1915:

Lieutenant Charles Gage Stuart, R.N.

For Meritorious Service in the North Sea:

Lieutenant Herbert James Ferguson, R.N.R.

Skipper John Cowie, R.N.R.

For services in connection with the attack on the Austrian Monitors, 21st and 22nd April, 1915:

Gunner (Acting) William Long, R.N. Mr. Long fired the torpedo which exploded against the enemy's Monitor and is believed to have sunk her.

29255 - 6 AUGUST 1915

..... in recognition of their services in the Patrol Cruisers since the outbreak of war:

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Lieutenant Samuel Bolton, R.N.R.

Lieutenant Bernard Herbert Symns, R.N.R.

Lieutenant Percy Reginald Vaughan, R.N.R.

Lieutenant (Acting) Herbert Spencer, R.N.R.

Lieutenant (Acting) Charles Walter Cartwright, R.N.R.

Lieutenant (Acting) Edwin Alexander Stuart. R.N.R.

Lieutenant (Acting) Robert Hobson, R.N.R.

Warrant Telegraphist Samuel Lemon, R.N.R.

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Lieutenant Ion Beauchamp Butler Tower, R.N. For conspicuous coolness and bravery in charge of a naval gun on shore in Belgium, when subjected to heavy and accurate fire from hostile artillery on the 28th April, 1915.

Sub-Lieutenant Arthur Henry Seymour Casswell, R.N. For conspicuous coolness and gallantry on the 28th April, 1915, when in charge of a naval gun on shore in Belgium, in removing ammunition from a burning building under heavy and well directed fire.

Lieutenant Frederick Henry Taylor, R.N.

Sub-Lieutenant (now Lieutenant) Charles Thomas Nettleingham, R.N.R.

29264 - 13 AUGUST 1915

GALLIPOLI CAMPAIGN - LANDINGS

..... (see Gallipoli Campaign - Landings, Naval Despatch dated 1 July 1915):

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Lieutenant Massy Goolden, R.N.

Boatswain John Murphy, R.N.

Midshipman Rupert Edward Maximilian Bethune, R.N.

Midshipman Eric Oloff de Wet, R.N.

Midshipman Charles Wilfred Croxford, R.N.R.

Midshipman Cecil Aubrey Lawson Mansergh, R.N.

Midshipman Alfred Martyn Williams, R.N.

Midshipman Hubert Malcolm Wilson, R.N.

Midshipman George Francis Dudley Freer, R.N.

Midshipman Richard Victor Symonds-Taylor, R.N.

Midshipman Cecil Hugh Clinton Matthey, R.N.

Midshipman John Saville Metcalf, R.N.R.

_____

The following awards have been made in recognition of services during the operations in the vicinity of the Dardanelles prior to 25th-26th April:

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Sub-Lieutenant (now Acting Lieutenant) Stephen Augustus Bayford, R.N.R., H.M.S. "Majestic."

Midshipman James Charles Woolmer Price. H.M.S. "Ocean."

These officers were both in command of picket boats on night of 13th-14th March. When "Ocean's" boat lay helpless, having been struck in the boiler-room by a shell, "Majestic's" took her in tow, under heavy fire, the conduct of these two young officers being altogether admirable, as was their handling of their boats.

Gunner (T) John William Alexander Chubb, R.N. Mr. Chubb, when a volunteer in trawler No. 488, on the night of 13th-14th March, brought his vessel out of action in a sinking condition, his commanding officer and three of the small crew being killed.

Gunner (T) William Walter Thorrowgood, R.N. Mr. Thorrowgood was in command of an armed whaler which, on night of 4th-5th March, twice went into the shore between Kum Kale and Yeni Shehr, bringing off two officers and five men, two of them wounded, exposed to rifle fire on both occasions.

Midshipman Hugh Dixon, R.N. Midshipman Dixon was in command of "Queen Elizabeth's" picket boat, and was responsible for saving several officers and men from " Irresistible " while under heavy fire, on the 18th March.

Acting Sub-Lieutenant (now Sub-Lieutenant) George Tothill Philip, R.N. Acting Sub-Lieutenant Philip, H.M.S. "Inflexible," was in charge of his picket boat on the 18th March to deal with floating mines. The picket-boat was struck by a heavy shell. Acting Sub-Lieutenant Philip got her alongside "Inflexible," ordered his crew inboard, and, though his knee was injured, got into the engine-room, shut off steam and closed scuttle to stokehold before leaving his boat.

Lieutenant Arthur Cyril Brooke-Webb, R.N.R.

Midshipman John Blaxland Woolley, R.N.

These officers took part in the picket-boat attack on the 18th April.

Lieutenant Colin George MacArthur, R.N. Lieutenant MacArthur (commanding submarine B 6) carried out two most enterprising reconnaissances of E lo(?), both under fire. During the latter reconnaissance his skilful handling saved his ship.

29292 -10 SEPTEMBER 1915

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the following Officers:

Lieutenant Colin Cantlie, R.N.

Lieutenant Irving Montgomery Palmer, R.N. For his services in command of H.M.S. “Comet'' during the advance on Amara, where he was landed with a very small force to preserve order, and at the barracks, though accompanied by only two men, he received the surrender of a battalion of Turkish officers and men.

Sub-Lieutenant Reginald Horace Lilley, R.N. For his services in charge of a 4.7" gun in a horseboat, and for the excellent manner in which he performed the difficult and dangerous task of securing a small steam tug, which had been left at Amara by the enemy with steam up, with a large lighter alongside her, and shipping in the lighter about 80 officers and 800 men who had been taken prisoners. Many of these had to be disarmed, and Sub-Lieutenant Lilley had only two men to assist him in the task.

Acting Lieutenant Alan Bennis Fennel Alcock, R.M.L.I., Portsmouth Battalion. For gallantry and good service near Gaba Tepe, between the 28th April and 1st May, 1915. Accompanied by Lieutenant Empson, of the same regiment, with two platoons, numbering in all 60 men, he defended an isolated trench against overwhelming odds. Lieutenant Empson was wounded early in the day on April 30th, and was killed on May 1st, and Lieutenant Alcock was finally compelled to withdraw, after having held this ground for four nights and three days. During this time no food or water could be conveyed to the trench, and at one time ammunition was reduced to about 15 rounds per man.

Lieutenant George Swinney, R.N.R.

Lieutenant John Thomas Randell, R.N.R.

Lieutenant Thomas Edward Price, R.N.R.

Lieutenant Francis William Lyte, R.N.R. For his services as pilot of the armed launch "Shushan," on the 9th May, 1915, when he handled the vessel with the utmost coolness under fire. Lieutenant Lyte has done good work in the Shatt-el-Arab operations on many other occasions.

Sub-Lieutenant Charles James Gibbon, R.N.R.

Sub-Lieutenant Charles Henry Hudson, R.N.R.

Acting Sub-Lieutenant Irvine Muirhead Twyman, R.N.R.

For his services in the submarine commanded by Lieutenant-Commander Cochrane in the Sea of Marmora.

Sub-Lieutenant Frederick Parslow, R.N.R. For his services in the horse-transport "Anglo-Californian," which was attacked by a German submarine on the 4th July, and subjected to heavy gun-fire for an hour and a half. Sub-Lieutenant Parslow steered the ship throughout the action, and maintained his post after his father, the Captain of the ship, had been killed by a shell, until some of our patrol boats arrived and drove the submarine off.

Engineer James Crawford, R.N.R. For his services as Chief Engineer of the same transport, in the escape of which he was largely instrumental by maintaining the vessel's maximum speed in spite of a shortage of firemen.

Skipper Jesse Jones, R.N.R.

Skipper Albert Edward Sayers, R.N.R.

Monsieur le Lieutenant de vaisseau Henri Julien Paul de 1'Escaille, de la Marine francaise. For his services in command of the French Seaplane Squadron in Egypt. During the earlier part of this year, when hostile patrols were in touch with the Allied forces holding the Suez Canal, Lieutenant de vaisseau de 1'Escaille, as pilot, made some brilliant and daring reconnaissances over long stretches of the Sinai Peninsula, where engine failure meant certain destruction to plane and to pilot. On these occasions, although under fire, by his skill and courage, he never failed to secure valuable information as to the enemy's movements.

Monsieur le Lieutenant de vaisseau Alfred Louis Marie Cintré, de la Marine francaise. For his services as a seaplane pilot in Egypt. He displayed great skill and intrepidity in a reconnaissance over Bir Saba on the 11th April, 1915, when his plane was subjected to a heavy shrapnel and musketry fire, and was hit in more than one place. With consummate coolness Lieutenant de vaisseau Cintré circled over Bir Saba again and again, until the number and position of the enemy were observed. He then turned his plane towards the ship, and, though the engine was damaged, succeeded by very skilful handling in traversing the distance of thirty-five miles to the coast-line in safety.

29358 - 5 NOVEMBER 1915

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned officers of the Royal Naval Division in recognition of their services in the Gallipoli Peninsula:

Lieutenant John Bigelow Dodge, R.N.V.R.

Surgeon John Pratt, R.N.

Lieutenant Ernest Horace Lamb, R.M.

Lieutenant Murdoch Campbell Browne, R.M.

Lieutenant Ronald Howarth Roe, R.M.

29374 - 19 NOVEMBER 1915

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers:

Lieutenant Godfrey Craik Parsons, R.N. In recognition of his consistently gallant behaviour, whilst engaged in mine-sweeping operations, and particularly on the 4th September, 1915, when, the vessel in which he was serving having struck a mine and Lieutenant Parsons himself having been crippled by severe wounds, he nevertheless crawled from the bridge to the boat-deck to obtain assistance for another Officer who was lying unconscious on The bridge.

Lieutenant Charles Edward Hamond, R.N.

Lieutenant Cuthbert Helsham Heath-Caldwell, R.N.

For services during the operations in Mesopotamia. Lieutenant Heath-Caldwell has been in command of the armed launch "Miner," and has handled his ship with skill when under fire on many occasions.

Lieutenant Fitzadam Millar, R.N. For services in command of a naval detachment on shore at Aden.

Lieutenant Hugh Fortescue Curry, R.N. For his services in command of the stern wheel steamer "Muzaffri" on the 24th July, 1915, when he landed a supply of ammunition for the troops on the right bank of the Euphrates under heavy fire from the Turkish guns.

Lieutenant William Vesey Hamilton Harris, R.N. For his services in command of the armed launch "Sumana" on the 24th July, 1915, when he behaved with great gallantry under very heavy gun and rifle fire while placing a barge across the Mejenineh creek to bridge it for the troops.

Captain George Carpenter, R.M.L.I.

Lieutenant Edward Albert Singeisen, R.N.R.

For services during landing operations in the Persian Gulf in August, 1915.

Lieutenant James Cadman, R.N.V.R. For coolness and daring in charge of armoured cars under very severe shell and shrapnel fire from May 12th to 14th, 1915

Engineer John Munro Dowie, R.N.R.

Gunner Ernest Martin Jehan, R.N.

Mr. James George Law, Gunner T., R.N.

For services in charge of the mining launch employed in the Serbian rivers.

Acting Boatswain Thomas Tierney, R.N. For services during landing operations in the Persian Gulf in August, 1915.

29405 - 17 DECEMBER 1915

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officer in recognition of his services and signal gallantry in charge of machine guns in the Gallipoli Peninsula:

Lieutenant Theodore Douglas Hallam, R.N.V.R. (now Acting Flight-Lieutenant, R.N.).

29423 - 31 DECEMBER 1915

..... grant of the Victoria Cross to Squadron-Commander Richard Bell Davies, D.S.O., R.N., and of the Distinguished Service Cross to Flight Sub-Lieutenant Gilbert Formby Smylie, R.N., in recognition of their behaviour in the following circumstances:

On the 19th November these two officers carried out an air attack on Ferrijik Junction. Flight Sub-Lieutenant Smylie's machine was received by very heavy fire and brought down. The pilot planed down over the station, releasing all his bombs except one, which failed to drop, simultaneously at the station from a very low altitude. Thence he continued his descent into the marsh. On alighting he saw the one unexploded bomb, and set fire to his machine, knowing that the bomb would ensure its destruction. He then proceeded towards Turkish territory.

At this moment he perceived Squadron-Commander Davies descending, and fearing that he would come down near the burning machine and thus risk destruction from the bomb, Flight Sub-Lieutenant Smylie ran back and from a short distance exploded the bomb by means of a pistol bullet. Squadron-Commander Davies descended at a safe distance from the burning machine, took up Sub-Lieutenant Smylie, in spite of the near approach of a party of the enemy, and returned to the aerodrome, a feat of airmanship that can seldom have been equalled for skill and gallantry.

_____

..... in recognition of their bravery and devotion to duty during minesweeping and mine-laying operations:

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Lieutenant Humphrey John Lancaster, R.N.

Lieutenant Robert Jardine Carruthers, R.N.V.R.

Sub-Lieutenant Alexander Daniells, R.N.R.

Sub-Lieutenant George Grimshaw Rose, R.N.R.

Sub -Lieutenant William Quinn McKeown, R.N.R.

Sub-Lieutenant Harry Beedle, R.N.R.

Gunner (T) Arthur Samuel Edmund Roberts, R.N.

Artificer-Engineer Arthur Lewis Shaw, R.N.

Skipper Frederick Wink, R.N.R.

Skipper Francis McPherson, R.N.R.

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers:

Lieutenant Ralph Daniel Blyth Haddon, R.N. For his services during operations in the Cameroons. Lieutenant Haddon behaved with great gallantry when in command of H.M.S. "Cumberland's" picket-boat during the attacks on Jabassi on the 8th and 14th October, 1914, when he was frequently under fire of the enemy's maxims at close range. On the 27th November, 1914, during a reconnaissance with two motor-launches near Jabassi, the native crews left their posts on coming under a heavy fire, whereupon Lieutenant Haddon, with Midshipman H. Beckett Anderson, R.N., and Richard R. Beauchamp, R.N., continued to manoeuvre the launches and engage the enemy with maxims for fifty minutes, finally silencing them.

Lieutenant Arthur William Lancelot Brewill, R.N. For his services in command of a naval gun on shore in Flanders.

Captain (now Major) George Leonard Raikes, R.M.A. For services with the Royal Marine Artillery Heavy Howitzer Brigade in France.

Captain William Noel Stokes, R.M.A. For services with the Army Ordnance Department in France.

Captain George Pinckard Lathbury, R.M.L.I. For services with the Royal Naval Division in Gallipoli, where he performed exceptionally good services with the machine-guns of the Royal Marine Brigade, and showed coolness and resource on critical occasions.

Temporary Captain Frank Summers, R.M. For services with the Royal Naval Division Motor Transport Company in France.

Acting Lieutenant Harold Roger Lambert, R.M. For services with the Royal Marine Artillery Anti-Aircraft Brigade in France.

Temporary Lieutenant Thomas Cuming, R.M. For services with the Royal Marine Artillery Heavy Howitzer Brigade in France.

Acting Lieutenant Francis Cecil Law, R.M. For his services with the Royal Naval Division in Gallipoli, where by his behaviour at a critical moment he stopped a retirement.

Midshipman Hugh Beckett Anderson, R.N. For his services during operations in the Cameroons. On the 9th December, 1914, during a reconnaissance in a motor launch towards Jabassi Midshipman Anderson's maxim jambed (sic) while he was returning the fire of the enemy, who were engaging him from both banks. Mr. Anderson not only handled his boat well, but personally cleared his maxim under a continuous heavy fire, and then swept both banks with it, the enemy suffering heavily.

1916

All Admiralty, SW

29436 - 11 JANUARY 1916

BELGIAN COAST OPERATIONS

..... (see Belgian Coast Operations, Naval Despatch dated 3 December 1915):

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Lieutenant Lionel Frederick Robinson, R.N.

Skipper Laurence Scarlett, R.N.R.

29446 - 21 JANUARY 1916

Admiralty, 2lst January, 1916.

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers in recognition of their services during the advance on Kut-el-Amara on the 27th and 28th September, 1915:

Flight-Lieutenant Vivian Gaskell Blackburn, R.N. Flight-Lieutenant Blackburn did excellent air reconnaissance work, and came under heavy fire on the afternoon of the 28th September whilst carrying despatches between the General Officer Commanding and the "Comet."

Surgeon Dermot Loughlin, M.B., R.N. Surgeon Loughlin attended the wounded on board the "Comet" under a heavy fire at close quarters on the night of the 28th September.

Engineer Thomas Kerr, R.I.M. Engineer Kerr not only kept the Lascar engine-room complement of the ''Comet'' in excellent order during action, but assisted in carrying down the wounded under fire.

Sub-Lieutenant Lionel Charles Paul Tudway, R.N. Sub-Lieutenant Tudway was in command of the armed launch "Sumana," and showed remarkable ability and coolness in manoeuvring his vessel under heavy fire on the night of the 28th September, and on several other occasions under fire.

29487 - 24 FEBRUARY 1916

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned officers:

Surgeon Alfred Robinson MacMullin, R.N. For his services on the 23rd January, 1916, at Serengeti, in East Africa, when he showed remarkable bravery in searching for and rescuing a severely wounded officer under heavy machine-gun and rifle fire close to concealed enemy entrenchments.

Captain Dudley Leigh Aman, R.M.A. For his services with the Royal Marine Artillery Anti-Aircraft Brigade. Captain Aman has commanded two sections of antiaircraft guns in the salient of Ypres continuously since the 3rd May, 1915, with marked success, and has shown great ability and zeal, and a fine example of coolness and courage under fire.

Temporary Captain Guy Evans, R.M. For his services with the Royal Marine Artillery Anti-Aircraft Brigade. Captain Evans has commanded a section of anti-aircraft guns in the salient of Ypres continuously since the 12th May, 1915, and has shown an example of conspicuous coolness and courage on every occasion under the continual conditions of fire to which the section has been exposed.

Flight Sub-Lieutenant Arthur Strachan Ince, R.N. For his services as observer and gunner on the 14th December, 1915, when with Flight Sub-Lieutenant Graham he attacked and destroyed a German seaplane off the Belgian coast.

29499 - 7 MARCH 1916

The KING has further been graciously pleased to approve of the award of the Distinguished Service Cross to:

Acting Lieutenant Francis Tweedie, R.N.R.

29507 - 14 MARCH 1916

GALLIPOLI CAMPAIGN - NAVAL MENTIONS

Admiralty, March 14th, 1916.

Honours awarded in recognition of services rendered by Officers of the Eastern Mediterranean Squadron between the time of the landing in the Gallipoli Peninsula in April, 1915, and the evacuation in December, 1915- January, 1916 (see Gallipoli Campaign - Naval Mentions).

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers:

Lieutenant Eric Ritchie Bent, R.N. Has performed consistent good work as Naval Observation Officer on shore from the first days of the landing.

Lieutenant John Gould Nicolas, R.N. In command of H.M.S. "Chelmer." Was twice wounded during the landing operations of 6th and 7th August, but refused to give up his duty of directing gunfire until no longer able to stand.

Lieutenant Leonard George Addington, R.N. In command of H.M.S. "Usk" on 4th May, 1915, at Gaba Tepe. Volunteered twice to go in to bring off wounded men, the beach and boat being at the time exposed to rifle and machine gun fire at close range.

Flight Commander Charles Henry Butler, R.N.A.S.

Flight Lieutenant Gordon Lindsay Thomson, R.N.A.S.

These two pilots have carried out photographic work, on many occasions flying at low altitudes over the enemy's lines to get good results.

Flight Lieutenant Edwin Harris Dunning, R.N.A.S. Has performed exceptionally good work as a seaplane flyer, making many long flights both for spotting and photographing.

Engineer Lieutenant Norman Seaton, R.N. Was in charge of the machinery of the motor-lighters. Displayed most untiring energy and zeal in this extremely important service, often under fire.

Lieutenant Ernest Edward Madge, R.N.R. Performed good service during the landing on 25th April, under heavy fire, and on subsequent days.

Lieutenant L. H. Strain, R.N.V.R. Has performed consistent good work as Observer since February, 1915.

Lieutenant William Park, R.N.V.R. Has proved one of the most valuable spotting Officers and has frequently performed most useful service.

Lieutenant Francis Hastings Thomas, R.M.L.I., H.M.S. "Talbot." Has on many occasions performed good service in keeping close touch from the shore between the military and his ship whilst the latter was supporting the Army.

Acting Lieutenant David Laidlaw Cowan, R.N.R. Was in charge of a Whaler on the 6th June at Porta Jano, and rescued crew of H.M.S. "Euryalus's" picket boat under heavy fire.

Acting Sub-Lieutenant John Edmund Sissmore, R.N.

Acting Sub-Lieutenant John Dyson Chapple, R.N.

Midshipman Erskine Knollys Heveningham St. Aubyn, R.N.

Have been continuously employed as Observation Officers in aircraft since April, and performed most valuable services.

Midshipman Haydon Marriott Sutherland Forbes, R.N.

Midshipman Maurice Charles Humphrey Lloyd, R.N.

While under heavy fire on the 25th April, assisted to secure the lighters which formed a pier between the ''River Clyde'' and the shore.

Midshipman William Henry Monier-Williams, R.N. On 25th April, though seriously wounded, brought his boat off the beach under fire, becoming unconscious after getting his boat clear.

Midshipman Eric Wheler Bush, R.N.

Midshipman Charles Douglas Horsfall Herbert Dixon, R.N.

Midshipman Frederick Ernest Garner, R.N.

Midshipman Raymond de Dibon Richardson, R.N.

Probationary Midshipman Reginald Allen, R.N.R.

All recommended for services performed under shell fire on the beaches and in steamboats off the beaches.

Midshipman Henry Dunsmore Johnston, R.N. Assistant to Commander Swabey, Naval Observation Officer, Cape Helles, since July, 1915. Has shown great ability and resource in his most important duties.

Gunner James Holden, R.N. Performed good Service on "W" Beach, and always set a fine example.

Signal Boatswain William James Scutt, R.N. In charge of Signal Station at Anzac since the 25th April.

Acting Warrant Telegraphist John A. Britten, R.N. Displayed great ability and resource in erecting Wireless Station at Cape Helles under fire. Served continuously there since 25th April.

Skipper Frederick William Barnes, R.N.R. While off Anzac gallantly took in tow a tug under heavy fire.

Skipper Robert W. Butler, R.N.R.

Skipper George Mellership, R.N.R.

Skipper Donald McBain Craig, R.N.R.

In command of trawlers. Have performed long, arduous, and dangerous duties, and are specially selected from over a hundred names.

_____

Honours awarded in recognition of services rendered by Officers of the Eastern Mediterranean Squadron in connection with the evacuation of the Gallipoli Peninsula in December, 1915-January, 1916.

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers:

Lieutenant Lionel Stanley Ormsby-Johnson, R.N. Flag Lieutenant to Vice-Admiral de Robeck. Did very good work in connection with Signal arrangements for the evacuation of Anzac and Suvla.

Lieutenant Herbert Julian Carnduff, R.N. Did good service during the evacuation of Suvla and Helles, being specially selected for the latter.

29530 - 31 MARCH 1916

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers, in recognition of their services in the Patrol Cruisers, under the command of Rear-Admiral Sir Dudley R. S. De Chair, K.C.B., M.V.O., during the period ending the 31st December, 1915:

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Lieutenant Marshal Llewelyn Clarke, R.N.

Acting Lieutenant Percy Palfrey Crawford, R.N.R.

Probationary Midshipman Cyril Assafrey Bamford, R.N.R.

29558 - 25 APRIL 1916

Admiralty, 24th April, 1916.

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to:

Acting Lieutenant William Beswick, R.N.R.

29562 - 28 APRIL 1916

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to:

Eng. Lieut. Leonard S. Loveless, R.N.R.

29603 - 30 MAY 1916

Admiralty, S.W., 31st May, 1916.

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers in recognition of their services whilst employed on Transport duties at the Dardanelles:

Lieut. Matthew Boggan, R.N.R., Troop Carrier "Ermine." Has carried out the arduous duties of ferry service between Mudros and the peninsula, carrying troops and military stores, entailing constant moving and going alongside other ships, in a zealous and most satisfactory manner, the service being frequently carried out under fire.

Lieut. Edward Davey, R.N.R., Cargo Carrier "Wheatberry." Whilst unloading alongside under the lee of the outer hulk, Helles beach, during a gale on 17th November, 1915, the wind rose so suddenly that it was not considered safe for the ship to leave, and he was ordered to secure with extra hawsers. At the height of the gale one of the sternfasts parted, and it became evident that the ship would break adrift. Lieutenant Davey, with great judgment, eased off his lines, turned his ship in a very confined space, and successfully got her to sea.

Lieut. Archibald Lamont, R.N.R., Cargo Carrier "Asteria." In command of "Asteria," has done excellent work in carrying supplies to Cape Helles and other beaches. Always anxious to load quickly and proceed as often as possible, regardless of weather. Has frequently experienced heavy shell fire alongside the pier at Cape Helles, during which he has coolly superintended the unloading of his ship.

Act. Lieut. Percival John Pycraft, R.N.R., H.M.S. "Europa." Whilst in command of a motor lighter this officer handled his craft in a most seamanlike manner, and on many occasions unloaded troops in bad weather, under the enemy's fire, at Anzac, showing skill and ability.

Sub-Lieut. John Stewart, R.N.R., H.M. Tug "Flying Witch." When H.M. Transport "East Point," containing hay and forage, caught fire at Suvla, due to shell fire, this officer volunteered and offered his help; he worked for three hours under very trying conditions, and thereby greatly assisted in getting the fire under.

Mid. George Tombeur Creft, R.N.R., H.M.S. "Europa." In command of a motor lighter. Has done excellent work off the Gallipoli Peninsula, landing troops and stores, often under shell fire, and especially during the evacuation of Cape Helles, when he handled his craft extremely well.

Charles B. Andersson, Captain of H.M.T. "Roman Prince." Has carried out many trips between Mudros and. the peninsula with valuable cargoes, the ship being generally used for conveyance of special material, such as guns, &c. Owing to this officer's zeal and energy the work has been carried out with invariable success. His ship has frequently been under fire, and he is a thorough seaman and handles his ship admirably.

David P. McDonald, Captain of H.M.T. "Queen Louise." Has displayed great energy, determination and keenness in the working of his ship and for the special purposes for which she has been used, viz., taking guns and valuable cargo to the peninsula. His ship has been frequently under fire.

Frederick Uren, Captain of H.M.T. "Trewellard." Has been frequently under fire off the peninsula. Has displayed much energy, determination and good seamanship.

Lawrence V. James, Captain of H.M.T. "Huntsgreen." Took the place of H.M.S. "Hannibal " for the evacuation of Helles, and showed courageous and skilful handling of his ship.

Robert Gumming, Captain of H.M.T. "Ajax." Performed good work off the peninsula, where his ship was twice damaged by shell fire. Was attacked by enemy submarine on voyage from Alexandria to Mudros on 10th October, 1915, and brought his ship safely into port.

Horace J. Young, Captain of H.M.T. "East Point." Performed good work off the peninsula, where his ship was set on fire by enemy shell fire, whilst unloading supplies.

Alfred R. Murley, Chief Officer of H.M.T. "Cardiganshire." Responded to the call for volunteers to man S.S. "Jessie" on 22nd April, 1915, and for a few weeks during the first landing operations did invaluable work in keeping up an unfailing supply of ammunition to the beach.

Harold G. E. Wightman, Officer Commanding cable ship "Levant." Rendered good services in connection with the laying of the cable from Imbros to Suvla on the night of the Suvla landing, and in laying and repairing cables off the peninsula frequently under heavy fire.

_____

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned officers:

Lieut. George Arthur Coxall Sharp, R.N. In recognition of his services in a British submarine operating in the Baltic Sea.

Lieutenant Alfred Edward Wainwright, R.N.V.R. In recognition of his services in command of a motor-boat on Lake Tanganyika on the occasion of the destruction of the German gunboat "Hedwig von Wissmann " on the 9th February, 1916.

Acting Lieutenant Joseph McLoughlin, R.N.R.

Flight Sub-Lieut. Henry Karslake Thorold, R.N.A.S.

Sub-Lieut. Reginald Henry Portal, R.N.

For conspicuous gallantry during a combat with an enemy aeroplane in the Dardanelles. At the outset Flight Sub-Lieut. Thorold, the Pilot, was severely wounded in the back, and Sub-Lieut. Portal, the Observer, in the thigh and arm. The Pilot momentarily lost control and the machine nose dived, but he soon regained control and the Observer succeeded in firing another two magazines, whereupon the enemy aeroplane sheered off and disappeared. The Pilot took his machine safely back to the aerodrome, a distance of about twenty-five miles, and, after making a perfect landing, lost consciousness.

Skipper Walter Samuel Wharton, R.N.R.

Skipper Alfred Robert Thompson, R.N.R.

29635 - 20 JUNE 1916

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers:

Lieutenant Frank George Fowle, R.N. In recognition of his services on the 18th January, 1916, when he landed in charge of a demolition party from one of H.M. ships and blew up a railway bridge near Porto Lagos.

Lieutenant Quentin Hunter Paterson, R.N.

Lieutenant Alexander Boyd Greig, R.N. In recognition of his services in one of H.M. submarines operating in the Baltic Sea.

Flight Commander (Acting Squadron Commander) Francis Knox Haskins, R.N. In recognition of his services as a pilot at Dunkirk since February, 1915. He has taken part in air raids on Ostend and Zeebrugge, and has been continually employed in coastal reconnaissances.

Lieutenant Douglas Claude Strathern Evill, R.N., Flight Commander, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his services as a pilot at Dunkirk since February, 1915. In addition to his work as a pilot, Flight Commander Evill has shown great zeal and ability in carrying out experiments connected with signalling and spotting.

Lieutenant Desmond Neville Cooper Tufnell, R.N. Lieutenant Tufnell has commanded a naval gun in an advanced position in Flanders since September, 1915, and has frequently kept the gun in action under heavy and well-directed fire. He has been mainly responsible for the mounting of some of the naval guns, in which he has shown great technical skill and energy.

Flight Lieutenant John Joseph Petre, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his services as a pilot at Dunkirk since February, 1915. He has taken part in air raids on Ostend and Zeebrugge, during one of which he successfully engaged a hostile aeroplane of the Fokker type, and has carried out many coastal reconnaissances under shell fire.

Flight Lieutenant Vincent Nicholl, R.N.A.S.

Flight Lieutenant Frederick George Darby Hards, R.N.A.S.

In recognition of their services on the morning of the 25th April, 1916, when they pursued a Zeppelin 65 miles out to sea, dived to within a few hundred feet of it, and attacked it with bombs and darts.

Flight Lieutenant Charles Henry Chichester Smith, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his services on the morning of the 25th April, 1916, when be pursued a Zeppelin 50 miles out to sea, and on his return journey sighted the enemy fleet accompanied by submarines, which latter he attacked and compelled to submerge.

Flight Lieutenant (Acting Flight Commander) George Henry Beard, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his services as a pilot at Dunkirk since May, 1915. He has carried, out frequent reconnaissances of the coast, and has continually been employed in aircraft and submarine patrols. He has twice attacked German submarines.

Lieutenant Walter Leonard Scott, R.N.R.

Flight Sub-Lieutenant Herbert Glynn Hall, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his services on the morning of the 25th April, 1916, when he carried out an air patrol with an observer during the attack by a raiding squadron of enemy ships on Yarmouth. Although severely wounded in the shoulder by shrapnel and weak from loss of blood, Flight Sub-Lieutenant Hall succeeded in piloting the machine back to his station and landed safely.

Acting Lieutenant John Howell-Price, R.N.R. In recognition of his services on the 29th February, 1916, during the action between H.M.S. "Alcantara" and S.M.S. "Greif."

Lieutenant Charles William R.N.V.R.

Lieutenant Edward Raymond Peal R.N.V.R.

Sub-Lieutenant Horace William Furnival, R.N.R.

In recognition of their services as aeroplane observers and continuous good work whilst attached to a Wing of the Royal Naval Air Service at Dunkirk.

Engineer Sub-Lieutenant James William Grant, R.N.R.

Temporary Lieutenant Gerald Fenwick Haszard, R.M. In recognition of his services with the Royal Marine Artillery Anti-Aircraft Brigade in France. Lieutenant Haszard has on many occasions shown great coolness and resource under heavy fire, and has for several months controlled his section in an advanced position with marked ability.

Chief Carpenter Thomas Francis Barry, R.N.

Carpenter Francis Rundell Hill, R.N.

In recognition of their services during the action between our cruisers and the enemy squadron which bombarded Lowestoft on the 25th April, 1916.

Skipper Thomas Charles Wylie, R.N.R.

29668 - 14 JULY 1916

The Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty have received with much satisfaction from the officers in charge of the Auxiliary Patrol areas at home and abroad reports on the services performed by the officers and men serving under their orders during the period 1st January, 1915, to 31st January, 1916. These reports show that the officers and men serving in Armed Yachts, Trawlers and Drifters of the Auxiliary Patrol during the period in question have carried out their duties under extremely arduous and hazardous conditions of weather and exposure to enemy attack and mines with marked zeal, gallantry and success.

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross

Lieut. George Metcalfe Mercer, R.N.R.

Lieut. Albert James Coles, R.N.R.

Lieut. Horace Bowyer Smith, R.N.R.

Lieut. Vernon Lamonnarie Delves Broughton, R.N.R.

Lieut. George Worley, R.N.R.

Lieut. Henry James Bray, R.N.R.

Lieut. Hugh Holmes, R.N.R.

Lieut. Frederick Henry Peterson, R.N.R.

Lieut. William Rodger Mackintosh, R.N.R.

Lieut. Albert Charles Allman, R.N.R.

Lieut. Allan Lansley, R.N.R.

Sub-Lieut. (now Act. Lieut.-Cdr.) Wybrants Olphert, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Walter George Morgan, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Robert Linaker, R.N.R.

Sub-Lieut. Thomas Francis Lanktree, R.N.R.

Chief Gunner (now Lieut.) Michael Carey, R.N.

Skipper Jabez George King, R.N.R., 1436 W.S.A.

Skipper Alexander Watt, R.N.R., 702 W.S.A.

Skipper Albert Waters, R.N.R., 512 W.S.A.

Skipper William Bruce, R.N.R., 1386 W.S.A.

Skipper Andrew Noble Duthie, R.N.R., 1216 W.S.A.

Skipper Leonard Morley, R.N.R., 4148.A.

Skipper Alfred Alexander, R.N.R., 152 W.S.A.

Skipper James Edwin Mitchell Duncan, R.N.R., 1337 W.S.A.

_____

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned officers in recognition of their services in connection with the evacuation of the Serbian Army and Italian troops from Durazzo in December, 1915, and January and February, 1916:

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Act. Lt. Arnaud Adams, R.N.R.

Act. Lt. Edward Maitland Rae, R.N.R.

Act. Lt. Harry Cuthbertson Campbell Fry, R.N.R.

Skipper Robert Aaron George, R.N.R., 973W.S.A.

Skipper John Hughes, R.N.R., 1138W.S.A.

Skipper Frederick James Andrews, R.N.R., 937W.S.A.

Skipper William James Dow, R.N.R.., 1257W.S.A.

Skipper William Cowie, R.N.R., 1488W.S.A.

Skipper Walter Charles Alfred Scrivener, R.N.R., 1924W.S.A.

Skipper Hugh Mortimer Nesling, R.N.R., 2107S.A.

_____

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Lieut. Howard Canute Davis, R.D., R.N.R. Lieut. Davis was in command of the whaler which led the way into Tanga Harbour on the 19th August, 1915.

Lieut. Herbert Keer Case, R.N.R. Lieut. Case was in command of one of the whalers which proceeded into Sudi Harbour on the 11th April, 1916, and handled his vessel under fire in the confined waters of the harbour with great skill and gallantry. His quiet and calm behaviour set a perfect example to those under him.

Bosn. John Park Mortimore, R.N. Mr. Mortimer was in one of the whalers which entered Sudi Harbour on the 11th April, 1916, and gave every assistance to his Captain, encouraging the guns' crews, making good spotting corrections, and rendering first aid readily and efficiently to the wounded.

29680 - 25 JULY 1916

DOVER PATROL OPERATIONS

..... (see Dover Patrol Operations, Naval Despatch dated 29 May 1916):

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Lieutenant Henry Forrester, R.N.

Acting Lieutenant James Towrie Muir, R.N.R.

Skipper Robert George Hurren, R.N.R.

Chief Artificer Engineer Thomas Robson Hall, R.N.

29736 - 5 SEPTEMBER 1916

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers:

Lieut. Frederick Septimus Kelly, R.N.V.R.

Capt. Bernard George Weller, R.M.L.I.

Temp. Lieut. Thomas Nixon Riley, R.M.

In recognition of their services with the Royal Naval Division in the Gallipoli Peninsula.

Flight Sub-Lieut. Roderic Stanley Dallas, R.N.A.S. Flight Sub-Lieut. Dallas, in addition to performing consistently good work in reconnaissances and fighting patrols since December, 1915, has been brought to notice by the Vice-Admiral, Dover Patrol, for the specially gallant manner in which he has carried out his duties. Amongst other exploits is the following: On the 21st May, 1916, he sighted at least 12 hostile machines, which had been bombing Dunkerque. He attacked one at 7,000 feet, and then attacked a second machine close to him. After reloading, he climbed to 10,000 feet, and attacked a large hostile two-seater machine off Westende. The machine took fire and nose-dived seawards. Another enemy machine then appeared, which he engaged and chased to the shore, but had to abandon owing to having used all his ammunition.

Sub-Lieut. (now Act. Lieut.) Christopher Bernard Oxley, R.N. Sub-Lieut. Oxley was acting as Observer with Flight-Lieut. Edward H. Dunning, D.S.C., as Pilot, on escort and reconnaissance patrol for a flight of bombing machines on the Bulgarian coast, on the 20th June, 1916. Two enemy machines were engaged at close, range and forced to retire, and as our machine withdrew Flight-Lieut. Dunning was hit in the left leg and the machine itself was badly damaged. Sub-Lieut. Oxley, having first improvised a tourniquet, which he gave to Flight Lieut. Dunning, took control of the machine, whilst the latter put on the tourniquet. The pilot was obliged to keep his thumb over a hole in the lower part of the petrol tank in order to keep enough fuel to return to the aerodrome, where he made an exceedingly good landing.

Flight Sub-Lieut. Donald Ernest Harkness, R.N.A.S.

Flight Sub-Lieut. Ralph Harold Collett, R.N.A.S.

In recognition of their services on the morning of the 9th August, 1916, when they dropped bombs on the airship sheds at Evere and Berchem St. Agathe. Flight Sub-Lieut. Collett dropped all his bombs on the shed at Evere from a height of between 300 and 500 feet, under very heavy rifle, machine-gun and shrapnel fire from all directions. Flight Sub-Lieut. Harkness could not descend so low owing to the very heavy antiaircraft fire which had by this time been opened on the machines, but he dropped some of his bombs on the shed, and then proceeded to Berchem St. Agathe, which he also bombed.

Act. Lieut. Frank Stewart Lofthouse, R.N.R. Lieut. Lofthouse showed admirable presence of mind on the occasion of the attack by an Austrian cruiser on a group of drifters in the Adriatic on the 9th July, 1916. When the cruiser opened fire on his drifter at point-blank range, this officer ordered the crew to put on lifebelts, and immediately went to the wireless apparatus himself and twice sent out a message as to the presence of the cruiser. Whilst he was sending this message three shots hit the ship. He then came on deck and, finding his ship was sinking, he got his crew overboard and by his example and behaviour kept them together until they were picked up six hours later.

Skipper Harold John Goldspink, R.N.R., 1937 W.S.A.

Skipper James Ritchie, R.N.R., 1271 W.S.A. Skipper Ritchie behaved in an admirable manner and displayed great coolness under fire on the occasion of the attack by an Austrian cruiser on a. group of drifters in the Adriatic, on the 9th July, 1916. He was instrumental in saving many lives by taking his drifter alongside damaged drifters and by picking up men who were in the water.

Skipper Frederick George Harris, R.N.R., 1147 W.S.A. Skipper Harris showed most seamanlike qualities on the occasion of the attack by an Austrian cruiser on a group of drifters in the Adriatic on the 9th July, 1916. He went to the assistance of the damaged drifters, took them in tow, and brought them safely into harbour.

29751 - 15 SEPTEMBER 1916

BATTLE OF JUTLAND - AWARDS TO OFFICERS

..... (see Battle of Jutland - Commendations and Awards to Officers, Naval Despatch dated 23 August 1916)

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Lieutenant Arthur Malcolm Peters, R.N.

Lieutenant Cuthbert Coppinger, R.N.

Lieutenant John Hinton Carrow, R.N.

Lieutenant .Stewart Magee Walker, R.N.

Flight Lieutenant Frederick Joseph Rutland, R.N. (Lieutenant, R.N.).

Lieutenant John Gordon Cliff-McCulloch, R.N.R.

Lieutenant Percy Harrison, R.N.V.R.

Carpenter Lieutenant John Norman Matheson, R.N.

The Rev. Anthony Pollen (Roman Catholic Chaplain).

Sub-Lieutenant Newton James Wallop William-Powlett, R.N.

Surgeon Probationer Douglas George Patrick Bell, R.N.V.R.

Chief Artificer Engineer Alexander Noble, R.N.

Artificer Engineer Joseph House, R.N.

29799 - 24 OCTOBER 1916

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers:

Lieutenant Stephen Clive Lyttelton, R.N.

Lieutenant Rodolph Henry Fane De Salis, R.N.

Lieutenant Anthony Bevis Lockhart, R.N. In recognition of his services in submarines in enemy waters.

Lieutenant George Samuel Brown, R.N.

Lieutenant James Lawrence Boyd, R.N.

Lieutenant Douglas Carteret Sealy, R.N.

Lieutenant Adrian Henry James Stokes. R.N.

In recognition of their services in submarines in enemy waters.

Flight Commander Tom Harry England, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his services on the 26th August, 1916, when, accompanied by a Military Officer as Observer, he flew a seaplane 43 miles inland from the Syrian Coast, crossed a range of hills 2,000 feet high, with clouds at 1,500 feet, and after dropping bombs on the station of Horns returned safely to his ship. The machine was exposed to rifle fire at extremely low altitudes for long periods, and Flight Commander England showed remarkable pluck, determination and skill in carrying out the flight under adverse conditions.

Flight Lieutenant Charles Teverill Freeman, R.N.A.S. In recognition of the gallantry and skill displayed by him on the night of the 2nd August, 1916, when he made a determined attack on a Zeppelin at sea, only abandoning the attack when he had exhausted all his ammunition. As darkness was approaching at the time, and his chances of being picked up were problematical, his courage and devotion in returning to the attack a second and third time were exemplary.

Flight Sub-Lieutenant Stanley James Goble, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his services on the 24th September, 1916, when he attacked two hostile machines in the vicinity of Ghistelles at close range, and brought one of them down on fire in a spiral nose-dive.

Flight Sub-Lieutenant Ronald Grahame, R.N.A.S. For exceptional gallantry in attacking and beating off four enemy seaplanes whilst on escort duty off the Belgian coast on the 22nd September, 1916.

Flight Sub-Lieutenant Daniel Murray Boyne Galbraith, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his services in attacking a large enemy two-seater seaplane on the 28th September, 1916. Flight Sub-Lieutenant Galbraith's machine was severely damaged by gun-fire from the enemy machine, which finally blew up in the air.

Sub-Lieutenant (now Act. Lieut.) John Gwyndd Wood, R.N.R. Sub-Lieutenant Wood was sent down the river Tigris from Umm-al-Tubal Camp in a motor-boat about 2.0 a.m., on the 1st December, 1915, with an important message. He displayed great bravery under heavy fire, and was wounded.

Lieutenant Benjamin Rowley George Kent, R.N.R.

Acting Lieutenant Hugh Donald Wynne, R.N.R.

Sub-Lieutenant Frederick Henry Good, R.N.R.

Chief Gunner Robert John Thomas, R.N.

In recognition of their services in the Patrol Cruisers during the period January to June, 1916.

Acting Lieutenant Denis A. Casey, R.N.R.

Acting Lieutenant Arthur George Madan, R.N.R.

In recognition of their services in submarines in enemy waters.

Gunner (T) Reuben James McVittie, R.N.

Skipper Charles Angus, R.N.R., 390 W.S.A. In recognition of his conduct in an engagement with enemy submarines on the 11th July, 1916, and of the skilful and seamanlike manner in which he manoeuvred his vessel when she was disabled by gunfire, thereby saving practically the whole of his ship's company.

_____

..... award of a Bar to the Distinguished Service Cross of the undermentioned Warrant Officer for a subsequent act of gallantry:

Skipper Alfred Robert Thompson, D.S.C., R.N.R. (The award of the Distinguished Service Cross was notified in Gazette dated 31st May, 1916, page 5418.)

29848 - 5 DECEMBER 1916

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers:

Flight Lieut. Egbert Cadbury, R.N.A.S.

Flight Sub-Lieut. Gerrard William Reginald Fane, R.N.A.S.

In recognition of the skill and gallantry, which they displayed on the morning of the 28th November, 1916, in pursuing out to sea and attacking at close range a Zeppelin, which had been engaged in a raid on England. Both officers were exposed to machine-gun fire throughout their attacks.

29877 - 22 DECEMBER 1916

..... award of Decorations and Medals to the following officers and men of the British Mercantile Marine in recognition of zeal and devotion to duty shown in carrying on the trade of the country during the war:

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Captain Charles John Walker.

Captain Henry Vaughan Rigby.

Captain James Trickey.

Captain Alban Chittenden.

Captain George Wallace Cockman, R.D. (Commander R.N.R., retired).

Captain Frederick Hubert Robinson.

Captain Frederick Edward Beeching.

Chief Officer Frank Aubrey McGowan Richardson.

Captain James Ernest Churchill (Lieut. R.N.R., retired).

Captain Edward Borrowdale Johnson.

Captain George Richard Thompson.

29886 - 29 DECEMBER 1916

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers in recognition of their services in the Battle of Jutland:

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Mr. Francis William Potter, Gunner, R.N. For very important duties during the action, carried out with great coolness and accuracy.

Mr. Thomas Bazley, Gunner (T), R.N. Was of great assistance during action on night of 31st May-lst June. In charge of torpedo armament of ship, and fired at enemy's Battle Fleet during the night with effect.

_____

Mine-Sweeping Operations.

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Lieut. Peter Alexander Crawford Sturrock, R.N.

Lieut. Arthur Edgar Buckland, R.N.

Tempy. Lieut. James Collis Bird, R.N. (Lieut., R.I.M., retd.).

Lieut. William G. Wood, R.N.R.

Lieut. Geoffrey Unsworth, R.N.R.

Lieut. Rudolph Lancelot Wikner, R.N.R.

Lieut. William St. Clair Fleming, R.N.R.

Lieut. John Percival Tugwood, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. William George Duggan, R.N.R.

Skipper Frederick Alfred Sibley, R.N.R., 20 W.S.A.

Skipper Benjamin Robert Joyce, R.N.R., 60 W.S.A.

Skipper George Ferguson, R.N.R., 233 W.S.A.

Skipper Alexander McLeod, R.N.R., 303 W.S.A.

Skipper Alexander McKay, R.N.R., 356 W.S.A.

Skipper Donald McMillan, R.N.R., 2010 W.S.A.

Skipper Samson Herbert Hayes, R.N.R., 2118 W.S.A.

_____

Miscellaneous Services.

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Flight Lieut. Ernest William Norton, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his skill and gallantry in destroying a German kite balloon on the 20th October, 1916, under severe anti-aircraft fire.

Surgeon Hother McCormack Hanschell, R.N. In recognition of his services with the Tanganyika Flotilla. The comparative immunity from sickness enjoyed by the members of the expedition was due to the unremitting care bestowed by Surgeon Hanschell on the health of the personnel and on the sanitary state of the camps and vessels.

Lieutenant Arthur Darville Dudley. R.N.V.R. In recognition of his services with the Tanganyika Flotilla. He showed great coolness and skill in handling his ship in all circumstances.

Sub-Lieut. Guy Trevarton Sholl, R.N.V.R. In recognition of his services in charge of a squadron of Royal Naval Armoured Cars in Armenia and Persia. By his presence of mind he saved the cars when they were ambushed by the Turks at Marnik on the 1st September, 1916, and by his devotion to duty, courage and hard work he effected the capture of the village of Norsehen on the 9th September, and secured the explosion of a Turkish magazine, with great loss to the enemy. His consistent cheerfulness and unselfishness were a material factor in the success of the work accomplished by the cars.

Gunner (T) James Albert Graham, R.N. In recognition of his services in a submarine, which carried out a successful .attack on an enemy Battle Squadron on the 5th November, 1916.

Captain John Couch, Master of the Transport "Trevorian." In recognition of the great coolness, judgment and resource which he displayed under very trying circumstances during the evacuation of Constantza on the 22nd October, 1916. The "Trevorian" was the last ship to leave the harbour, which was already being shelled, was exposed to shell fire for an hour after putting to sea, and successfully avoided a submarine attack during the voyage. During the whole of this time Captain Couch remained on the bridge.

1917

All Admiralty, SW

29947 – 16 FEBRUARY 1917

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the following Officers:

Lieut. John Lawrie, R.N.R.

Lieut. Cedric Naylor, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Philip James Hogg, R.N.R.

Ch. Gnr. (T.) Richard Hawkes, R.N.

Flight Cdr. William Geoffrey Moore, R.N.A.S. In recognition of the excellent work which he has done in East Africa, and especially on the 10th January, 1917, when he flew a distance of 300 miles from Ubena to Mahenje. He obtained important results in bombing flights.

Flight Lieut. Lionel Conrad Shoppee, R.N.A.S. For conspicuous gallantry and enterprise during a bomb attack by aircraft on an important enemy railway bridge. A subsequent reconnaissance showed that the whole of the centre section of the bridge had collapsed into the river, thereby interrupting important enemy railway communications.

Flight Lieut. Edward Rochfort Grange, R.N.A.S. For conspicuous gallantry and skill on several occasions in successfully attacking and bringing down hostile machines, particularly on the 4th January, 1917, when during one flight he had three separate engagements with hostile machines, all of which were driven down out of control. On the 5th January, 1917, he attacked three hostile machines, one of which was driven down in a nose-dive. On the 7th January, 1917, after having driven down one hostile machine, he observed two other enemy aircraft attacking one of our scouts. He was on the way to its assistance when he was attacked by a third hostile scout. He was hit in the shoulder by a bullet from this machine, but landed his aeroplane safely in an aerodrome on our side of the lines.

Flight Sub-Lieut. Robert Alexander Little, R.N.A.S. For conspicuous bravery in successfully attacking and bringing down hostile machines on several occasions. On 11th November, 1916, he attacked and brought down a hostile machine in flames. On 12th .December, 1916, he attacked a German machine at a range of 50 yards; this machine was brought down in a nose-dive. On 20th December, 1916, he dived at a hostile machine, and opened fire at 25 yards range; the observer was seen to fall down inside the machine, which went down in a spinning nose-dive. On 1st January, 1917, he attacked an enemy scout, which turned over on its back and came down completely out of control.

_____

..... award to the undermentioned officer of a Bar to his Distinguished Service Cross:

Flight Lieut. Daniel Murray Boyne Galbraith, D.S.C., R.N.A.S. For conspicuous gallantry. On 23rd November, 1916, he attacked single-handed a formation of six hostile aircraft, no other allied machines being in the vicinity. One hostile machine was shot down, a second was driven down under control, and the remaining four machines then gave up the fight and landed. In several other combats in the air Flight Lieutenant Galbraith has displayed exceptional gallantry, particularly on 10th and 16th November, 1916, on each of which days he successfully engaged and shot down an enemy machine. (The award of the Distinguished Service Cross was announced in the Gazette of the 25th October, 1916.)

29997 - 23 MARCH 1917

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers:

Capt. John Maurice Palmer, R.M.L.I.

Lieut. Edward Overend Priestley, R.N.

Lieut. Arthur Francis Eric Palliser, R.N,

Lieut. Leon Stopford Acheson, R.N.R.

Lieut. William Arthur Hanna, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Francis Cecil Pretty, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. James Sinclair Campbell, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Edgar William Bowack, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Stephen Philip Robey White, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Magnus Leo Musson, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Francis Robert Hereford, R.N.R.

Asst. Payr. William Richard Ashton, R.N.R,

Sub-Lieut. Leonard Clifton Warder, R.N.R.

Sub-Lieut. Richard Percy Nisbet, R.N.R.

Asst. Payr. Reginald Arthur Nunn, R.N.R.

Gnr. (T.) Harry Morgan, R.N.

Gnr. Morris Roseman Cole, R.N.

Skipper George Albert Novo, R.N.R., 1338 W.S.A.

Skipper David Wallace, R.N.R., 1443 W.S.A.

Skipper Philip William Page, R.N.R., 559 W.S.A.

Skipper Thomas Crisp, R.N.R., 10055 D.A.

_____

..... award to the undermentioned Officer of a Bar to the Distinguished Service Cross for a subsequent act of gallantry:

Skipper Walter Samuel Wharton, D.S.C., R.N.R. (The award of the Distinguished Service Cross was announced in London Gazette dated 31st May, 1916.)

30015 - 10 APRIL 1917

In addition to the honours notified in the Supplements to the London Gazette dated 14th March, 15th May (3rd Supplement), and 31st May, 1916 (3rd Supplement), The KING (is) pleased to give orders for the following appointment to the Distinguished Service Order and for the award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned officers, in recognition of their services in the Eastern Mediterranean up to the 30th June, 1916:

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Lieutenant Kenneth Edwards, R.N. Performed good service at the landing and at the evacuation of Helles. Set a fine example to his men whilst assisting at salvage operations on Monitor M.30 under fire from enemy's guns.

Lieutenant Charles Leonard Fawell, R.N.V.R. For consistent good service, often under heavy fire, whilst in command of motor gunboat in the Smyrna inner patrol.

30029 - 20 APRIL 1917

Honours for Service in the Patrol Cruisers.

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers in recognition of their services in the Patrol Cruisers, under the command of Vice-Admiral Reginald G. O. Tupper, C.B., C.V.O., during the period 1st July-31st December, 1916:

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Asst. Payr. (now Payr.) Frank Lankester Horsey, R.N.

Lieut. Howard Uncles, R.N.R.

Mid. Thomas Edwin Hunter Grove, R.N.R.

_____

Honours for Royal Naval Air Service.

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers:

Flt.-Lieut. (now act. Flt.-Cdr.) Charles Cyril Rogers Edwards, R.N.A.S.

Sub-Lieut. Charles Keith Chase, R.N.V.R.

In recognition of their services on the 1st March, 1917, when they were attacked by two hostile machines whilst on a reconnaissance flight and brought them both down out of control. Flt.-Lieut. Edwards was hit by a bullet which passed through the left shoulder, fracturing the collar-bone, and at the same time was slightly wounded in both feet. Although suffering considerably, he brought his machine home safely, in spite of being again attacked by two hostile aircraft. By his determination and pluck he probably saved his own life and that of his observer.

Flt.-Cdr. Alfred William Clemson, R.N.A.S.

Sub-Lieut. James Leslie Kerry, R.N.V.R.

In recognition of their conspicuous gallantry on the 28th February, 1917, when they carried out a reconnaissance of Rayak and Damascus in a seaplane. During this flight they crossed two mountain ranges whose lowest ridges are 4,000 feet high, and brought back valuable information.

Lieut. (now Lieut.-Cdr.) Erskine Childers, R.N.V.R. In recognition of his services with the R.N.A.S. for the period January-May, 1916. During this time he acted as observer in many important air reconnaissances, showing remarkable aptitude for observing and for collating the results of his observation.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Horace Ernest Philip Wigglesworth, R.N.A.S. For conspicuous gallantry and enterprise on the 23rd January, 1917, during a bomb attack by aircraft when considerable damage was done to enemy blast furnaces at Burbach. During this flight he fought five engagements with enemy aircraft in formations of three, four and five at a time.

Sub-Lieut. (now Lieut.) Eric Bourne Coulter Betts, R.N.V.R. In recognition of his services on the 1st February, 1917, when he carried out a long reconnaissance and returned with extremely important information, shooting down an enemy scout machine which attacked him on his way back.

_____

Honours for Miscellaneous Services.

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers:

Act. Lieut. John Herman Ritchie Elfert, R.N.R.

Eng. Sub-Lieut. John Smith, R.N.R.

Gnr. William John Hubbard, R.N.

Art.-Eng. Ernest Thaxter, R.N.

30061 - 8 MAY 1917

DOVER STRAITS ACTION

Honours for Service in the Action Between H.M. Ships "Swift" and "Broke" and German Destroyers on the night of the 20th to 21st April, 1917.

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers for their services during this action:

Lieut. Geoffrey Victor Hickman, R.N. Navigator and second in command of H.M.S. "Broke." He assisted with great coolness in handling the ship in action. His proper appreciation of the situation when one enemy destroyer was torpedoed, which his commanding officer had made ready to ram, enabled course to be altered in time to ram the next astern.

Lieut. Robert Douglas King-Harman, R.N. Navigating Officer of H.M.S. "Swift." He was of the utmost assistance to his commanding officer throughout.

Lieut. Maximilian Garden Despard, R.N. First and Gunnery Lieut of H.M.S. "Broke." He controlled gun fire and gave the orders which resulted in an enemy destroyer being torpedoed.

Lieut. Henry Antony Simpson, R.N. Executive Officer and Gunnery Lieut. of H.M.S. "Swift." He displayed great coolness and method in the control of fire which he had very ably organised and zealously drilled, and greatly assisted his commanding officer throughout the action.

Surg. Prob. Christopher Thomas Helsham, R.N.V.R. ("Broke").

Surg. Prob. John Sinclair Westwater, R.N.V.R. ("Swift").

Worked with great energy and ability in attending to the wounded.

Gnr. (T.) Henry Turner, R.N. ("Swift.") Obtained a hit with a torpedo on one of the enemy destroyers.

Gnr. (T.) Frederick Grinney, R.N. ("Broke.") Gave orders for the firing of the torpedo which struck one of the enemy destroyers.

Mid. Donald Allen Gyles, R.N.R. ("Broke.") He took charge on the forecastle, and, although wounded in the eye, organised a gun's crew from the survivors of the crews which had suffered heavy casualties and kept the guns on the forecastle going. He repelled the German sailors who swarmed on board from the destroyer which was rammed, and remained at his post until after the action was finished.

30066 - 11 MAY 1917

Honours for Royal Naval Air Service.

.... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers:

Flt.-Cdr. Bertram Lawrence Huskisson, R.N.A.S. For conspicuous skill and gallantry during the past eighteen months. This officer led his flight with great courage and determination during the three months he was attached to the Royal Flying Corps, and has destroyed or driven down several hostile machines.

Flt.-Lieut. (now Flt.-Cdr.) Arthur Dennis Wigram Allen, R.N.A.S. This officer has done a very large amount of flying during the past nine months on fast scouts on fighter patrol work. In addition, he has done a great deal of testing work at the aircraft depot. He is a brilliant pilot.

Flt.-Lieut. (now Flt.-Cdr.) Bertram Charles Bell, D.S.O., R.N.A.S. For conspicuous skill and gallantry during the last fifteen months. This officer has had charge of a flight during this period, and has continuously carried out most valuable work as a pilot both of reconnaissance and photographic and of fighter escort machines. His machine has been constantly under heavy anti-aircraft fire for long periods while carrying out his work.

Flt.-Lieut. (now actg. Flt.-Cdr.) Frank Fowler, R.N.A.S. For conspicuous skill and gallantry during the last nine months, in reconnaissance, photographic and spotting machines. On the majority of occasions he has acted as pilot to Lieut. Gow, R.N.V.R., his machine being constantly hit by anti-aircraft fire.

Flt.-Lieut. Frank Thomas Digby, R.N.A.S. For conspicuously good work as a pilot of bombing machines. He has taken part in numerous bomb raids with successful results.

Flt.-Lieut. Herbert George Brackley, R.N.A.S. For conspicuously good work as pilot of a bombing machine. Has carried out twelve raids since the 1st June, 1916, mostly by night. On one occasion he returned with forty holes in his machine.

Flt.-Lieut. Noel Keeble, R.N.A.S. For conspicuous gallantry on the 23rd October, 1916, when he attacked four German seaplanes and brought one of them down in a vertical nose-dive into the sea.

Flt.-Lieut. Thomas Frederick Le Mesurier, R.N.A.S. For conspicuous work as a pilot of a bombing machine. Has taken part in fourteen raids and numerous fighter patrols.

Flt. Lieut. Irwin Napier Colin Clarke, R.N.A.S. For conspicuously good work as a pilot of bombing machines. He has taken part in seventeen attacks with good results, in addition to carrying out numerous fighter patrols.

Flt. Lieut. Robert John Orton Compston, R.N.A.S. For conspicuous skill and gallantry during the past nine months, in particular when attached to the Royal Flying Corps, when he had numerous engagements with enemy aircraft, and certainly destroyed one.

Flt. Lieut. William Edward Gardner, R.N.A.S. For conspicuously good work as a pilot of a bombing machine. He has taken part in seventeen raids and numerous fighter patrols.

Lieut. Russell William Gow, R.N.V.R. For consistently good work when acting as observer, being responsible for many valuable photographs; also for his good work in connection with artillery spotting. His machine has been hit on many occasions by anti-aircraft fire.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Philip Sidney Fisher, R.N.A.S. For conspicuous skill as a seaplane pilot during the last nine months. Has carried out many valuable reconnaissance patrols and several bomb attacks with good results

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Douglas Alexander Hardy Nelles, R.N.A.S. For conspicuously good work as a pilot of a bombing machine. He has taken part in seventeen raids, and has also done a large amount of fighter patrol work.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Ernest John Cuckney, R.N.A.S. For conspicuous gallantry and ability when taking part in a raid on the seaplane station at Zeebrugge.

Flight Sub-Lieut. John Edward Sharman, R.N.A.S. For devotion to duty during long distance air raids. On one occasion, after leading a flight in the morning and returning safely he volunteered and flew a bombing machine with a second flight in the afternoon, again acting as leader.

Flight Sub-Lieut. Walter Ernest Flett, R.N.A.S. For conspicuous gallantry during an air raid. Shortly after leaving the objective he was engaged with three enemy machines - two single-seater and one two-seater. His gunlayer, Air-Mechanic, 1st Grade, R. G. Kimberley, was slightly wounded in the wrist, which numbed his hand. Notwithstanding this he succeeded in bringing down two of the enemy machines, being again wounded by an explosive bullet in the ankle. The machine was riddled with bullets, and owing to the damage navigation was most difficult, and the return journey was very slow. Consequently he was again attacked, but although the gunlayer was twice wounded, the enemy machine was driven off.

..... award to the undermentioned officer of a Bar to the Distinguished Service Cross:

Flt. Lieut. Ronald Grahame, D.S.C.. R.N.A.S. For conspicuous gallantry during raids on the seaplane station at Zeebrugge. On one occasion he descended to 600 feet, and on another occasion to 300 feet, before releasing his bombs. (The award of the Distinguished Service Cross was announced in London Gazette dated 25th October, 1916.)

_____

Honours for Miscellaneous Services.

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers:

Lieut. Walter Napier Thomason Beckett, R.N.

Engr. Lt. Alexander Hargreaves Boyle, R.N.

Lieut. Frank Tomkinson Brade, R.N.R.

Lieut. Alfred Swann, R.N.V.R.

Act. Lieut. James Alexander Pollard Blackburn, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. William Murdoch McLeod, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Arnold George Morgan, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Harold William Green, R.N.R.

Asst. Payr. John Weston Sells, R.N.R.

Sub-Lieut. Harold Drew, R.N.

Act. Sub-Lieut. (actg.) Edmund George Smithard, R.N.R.

Ch. Art. Engr. Edward Ethelbert Rose, R.N.

Gnr. Percy John Joseph Cullum, R.N.

Skipper Joseph Powley, R.N.R., 240 S.A.

Skipper William Wood, R.N.R., 648 S.A.

Skipper James Thompson.

..... award to the undermentioned Officer of a Bar to the Distinguished Service Cross for a subsequent act of gallantry:

Lieut. Walter Leonard Scott, D.S.C., R.N.R. (since drowned – 29 March 1917, HM Q-ship Bayard). (The award of the Distinguished Service Cross was announced in the London Gazette dated 22nd June, 1916.)

_____

Honours to the Mercantile Marine.

..... in recognition of zeal and devotion to duty shown in carrying on the trade of the country during the war:

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Capt. Frederick John Lane.

Capt. John Harris Howard Scudamore.

Ch. Off. James Black Ruhe.

Ch. Eng. Thomas Dix Lowthian.

2nd Off. William Foster.

Ch. Eng. Alexander Graham Stewart.

Capt. Andrew McIntosh McKend.

Capt. Patterson Kirkaldy.

Ch. Off. Harry Rawcliffe.

Ch. Eng. Alexander Rose Arthur.

30088 - 22 MAY 1917

Honours for Service in Destroyer Patrol Flotillas, Armed Boarding Steamers, &c.

..... in recognition of their services in the Destroyer Patrol Flotillas, Armed Boarding Steamers, &c., during the period which ended on the 30th September, 1916:

To be awarded the Distinguished Service Cross.

Lieut. (now Lieut.-Cdr.) Henry Radcliffe James, R.N.

Lieut. Cecil Rudolph Ernest Wilbraham Ferryman, R.N.

Lieut. Keith Richard Farquharson, R.N.

Lieut. Herbert Owen, R.N.

Lieut. Ernest Kirkbank Irving, R.N.R.

Lieut. William Murray, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Thomas Henry Coughtrey, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Albert Ernest Trivett Morris, R.N.R.

Asst. Payr. Hugh James Leleu, R.N.R.

Ch. Gnr. Reginald Cardwell Ide, R.N.

Ch. Art. Engr. Herbert Edward Pope, R.N.

Ch. Art. Engr. John William Farrow, R.N.

Gnr. Thomas Henry Keyes, R.N.

Art. Engr. William Thomas Hall, R.N.

To receive a Bar to the Distinguished Service Cross

Lieut. Henry Antony Simpson, D.S.C., R.N.

_____

Honours for Service in the Dover Patrol.

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned officers in recognition of their services in vessels of the Dover Patrol, under the command of Vice-Admiral Sir Reginald H. S. Bacon, K.C.B., K.C.V.O., D.S.O., during the period from 1st July-31st December, 1916:

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Lieut. John Brooke, R.N.

Lieut. Sir John Meynell Alleyne, Bart., R.N.

Lieut. Wyndham Charles Johnson, R.N.

Lieut. Charles Herbert Lightoller, R.N.R.

Sub-Lieut. John Douglas Gibbon Chater, R.N.R.

Ch. Art.-Eng. Henry Taylor, R.N.

Gnr. George Gates, R.N.

_____

Honours for Miscellaneous Services.

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned officers:

Lieut. Francis William Crowther, R.N.

Lieut. William Strickland Harrison, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Charles Bruce Long Filmer, R.N.R.

Sub-Lieut. Charles O'Callaghan, R.N.

Sub-Lieut. Laurence James Meade, R.N.R.

..... awarded a Bar to the Distinguished Service Cross for subsequent acts of gallantry:

Lieut. Cedric Naylor, D.S.C., R.N.R. (The award of the Distinguished Service Cross was announced in the London Gazette dated 16th February, 1917.)

Act. Lieut. Stephen Philip Robey White, D.S.C., R.N.R. (The award of the Distinguished Service Cross was announced in the London Gazette dated 23rd March, 1917.)

Asst. Payr. William Richard Ashton, D.S.C., R.N.R. (The award of the Distinguished Service Cross was announced in the London Gazette dated 23rd March, 1917.)

_____

Honours for Royal Naval Air Service.

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers:

Flt.-Lieut. Lloyd Samuel Breadner, R.N.A.S. For conspicuous gallantry and skill in leading his patrol against hostile formations. He has himself brought down three hostile machines and forced several others to land. On the 6th April, 1917, he drove down a hostile machine which was wrecked while attempting to land in a ploughed field. On the morning of the 11th April, 1917, he destroyed a hostile machine, which fell in flames, brought down another in a spinning nose dive with one wing folded up, and forced a third to land.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Joseph Stewart Fall, R.N.A.S. For conspicuous bravery and skill in attacking hostile aircraft. On the morning of the 11th April, 1917, while escorting our bombing machines, he brought down three hostile aircraft. The first he attacked and brought down completely out of control. He was then attacked by three hostile scouts who forced him down to within about two hundred feet of the ground. By skilful piloting he manoeuvred his machine close behind one of them, which was driven down and wrecked. Shortly afterwards this Officer was again attacked by a hostile scout, which he eventually brought down a short time before recrossing the lines. He then landed at one of the aerodromes, his machine having been riddled with bullets from the hostile machines, and also by rifle fire from the ground.

30111 - 1 JUNE 1917

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned officer:

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Asst. Payr. Lawrence William Williams, R.N.R.

30133 - 15 JUNE 1917

EAST AFRICAN CAMPAIGN

..... (see East African Campaign, Naval Despatch dated 28 January 1917):

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Lieutenant Eldred Stuart Brooksmith., R.N. Was in sole command of the defences of the southern part of the defence lines at Bagamoyo, when he showed conspicuous ability; also contributed largely to the successful firing by the monitors.

Flight Lieutenant James Edward Baker Maclean, R.N.A.S. Since April, 1916, has carried out constant flights over the enemy's coast, including reconnaissances, bomb-dropping and spotting; was wounded when flying over Bagamoyo.

Mr. John Mackay, Chief Gunner, R.N. Was in command of whaler "Salamander," and did excellent work under fire; organised mine-sweeping with great efficiency.

_____

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers in recognition of their services with the East African Military Forces:

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Squadron Commander Eric Roper Curzon Nanson, R.N.A.S. Organised his unit with great efficiency and zeal, and carried out reconnaissance work under great climatic difficulties.

Lieutenant Vincent Holland Pryor Molteno, R.N. Organised the naval gun detachment which he commanded during part of the Kibata operations.

Flight Sub-Lieutenant Leslie O. Brown. For bravery, zeal and ability shown in many long flights over enemy territory on reconnaissance work and bomb-dropping expeditions; was repeatedly under fire.

Flight Lieutenant Norman Gordon Stewart-Dawson. Carried out reconnaissance over difficult country on 30th May, 1916, when he was obliged to land in the bush.

Lieutenant William John King, R.N.V.R For continuous good service in the operations of the Umba Valley Field Force; also served as Assistant Transport Officer and as Port Captain, Tanga.

Captain Ernest William O'Connor, Master of Transport "Barjora." Showed exceptional ability in the coast operations, the success of the landings being largely due to his professional capacity and zeal.

30147 - 22 JUNE 1917

Honours for Miscellaneous Services.

.... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers:

Lieut. Hugh Evelyn Raymond, R.N.

Lieut. Reginald Nash, R.N.

Lieut. Edward Arthur Aylmer, R.N.

Lieut. Colin John Lawrence Bittleston, R.N.

Lieut. Leonard Ernest Pearson, R.N.

Act. Lieut. Edward Lyon Berthon, R.N.

Lieut. William Stanley Nelson, R.N.R.

Lieut. Hugh Ross Mackay, R.N.R.

Lieut. John Joseph Fulton, R.N.R.

Lieut. Nelson Cooper, R.N.R.

Lieut. Richard James Turnbull, R.N.R.

Eng.-Lieut. Alexander Kenny, R.N.R.

Lieut. Robert Alexander Paterson, R.N.V.R.

Sub-Lieut. James Henry Arnold, R.N.R.

Sub-Lieut. Clarence Aubrey King, R.N.V.R.

Skipper Thomas Edward Cain. R.N.R., 2061 W.S.A.

Skipper William Henry Brewer, R.N.R., 2440 S.A.

Skipper William Arthur Mead, R.N.R., 1518 S.A.

Skipper Adam Forbes, R.N.R., 66 W.S.A.

..... awarded a Bar to the Distinguished Service Cross for a subsequent act of gallantry:

Lieut. Frederick Henry Peterson, D.S.O., D.S.C., R.N.R. (The award of the Distinguished Service Cross was announced in London Gazette dated 14th July, 1916.)

_____

Honours for the Royal Naval Air Service.

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers:

Flt. Cdr. Philip Leslie Holmes, R.N.A.S.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. (now act. Flt. Cdr.) Herbert Gardner Travers, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his services with the Army in France. This Officer has himself brought down three hostile aeroplanes completely out of control, and has taken part in two other combats in which enemy machines were forced to land in our lines. He has always shown the greatest determination in leading his flight on offensive patrols, and has on many occasions driven down superior numbers of hostile machines.

Flt. Lieut. Edward J. Cooper, R.N.A.S.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Charles Reginald Morrish, R.N.A.S.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Henry George Boswell, R.N.A.S.

Flt. Lieut. Charles Langston Scott, R.N.A.S.

Flt. Lieut. Walter Travers Swire Williams, R.N.A.S.

Flt. Lieut. Thomas Grey Culling, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his services on the 23rd April, 1917, when with two other machines he engaged a formation of nine hostile scouts and two-seater machines. Two two-seater machines were shot down, one of them by Flt. Lieut. Culling unassisted.

Flt. Lieut. Francis Dominic Casey, R.N.A.S. For conspicuous bravery and skill in attacking hostile aircraft on numerous occasions. On April 21st, 1917, he attacked a hostile two-seater machine at a range varying from 40 to 100 yards, and brought it down completely out of control. On April 23rd, 1917, on four different occasions during one flight, he attacked hostile machines, one of which was driven down in a spinning nose dive and another turning over on its side went down completely out of control. This Officer has driven down four machines completely out of control, and forced many others down.

Flt. Lieut. Charles Adrian Maitland-Heriot, R.N.A.S.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. John Roland Secretan Devlin, R.N.A.S.

Sub-Lieut. Rupert Forbes-Bentley, R.N.V.R.

In recognition of their services in a bombing attack on the Kuleli Burgas Bridge on 4th January, 1917, when several direct hits were scored and considerable damage done. The machines were exposed to anti-aircraft, rifle and machine gun fire during the attack, and also on the return journey.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Leo Philip Paine, R.N.A.S.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Robert Leckie, R.N.A.S.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Basil Deacon Hobbs, R.N.A.S.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Charles McNicoll, R.N.A.S.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Valentine Edgar Sieveking, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his services on the night of 3rd to 4th May, 1917, when he dropped bombs on Ostend seaplane base with good results, making two trips.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Harold Thomas Mellings, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his services on the 19th March, 1917, when he attacked a hostile aeroplane with great gallantry at heights varying from 12,000 to 2,000 feet.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Frederick Earle Fraser, R.N.A.S.

Flt. Lieut. (act. Flt. Cdr.) Charles Dawson Booker. For special gallantry in the field on numerous occasions, especially the following: On 26th April, 1917, he went to the assistance of some of our photographic machines, which were about to be attacked by twelve Albatross scouts. One of these he fired on at close range, and brought it down out of control. On 24th May, 1917, whilst on patrol, he went to the assistance of a formation of our machines, which was being attacked by nine hostile scouts. He attacked one of the latter, which was driven down in flames and crashed. Later in the same day he attacked and drove down out of control another hostile machine. On numerous other occasions he has attacked enemy machines and driven them down out of control.

Flt.-Lieut. George Goodman Simpson. For gallantry and able leadership in aerial fighting, notably on the following occasions: On 3rd May, 1917, he drove down a hostile aeroplane out of control. On 11th May, 1917, while on offensive patrol with five other machines, he attacked six hostile aircraft. One of these he brought down out of control, and a few minutes later he attacked another at close range and brought it down in flames. On 23rd May, 1917, he led a formation of five machines to attack at least twice that number of hostile aeroplanes. Both formations became split up, and a general fight ensued. Five times during the combat he drove off hostile aeroplanes from another of our machines, and one of those which he attacked was seen to go down in a spin.

____

....awarded a Bar to the Distinguished Service Cross for subsequent acts of gallantry:

Flt.-Cdr. Theodore Douglas Hallam, D.S.C., R.N.A.S. (The award of the Distinguished Service Cross was announced in the London Gazette of 15th December, 1915.)

Flt.-Cdr. Roderic Stanley Dallas, D.S.C., R.N.A.S. In recognition of his services on the 23rd April, 1917, when with two other machines he engaged a formation of nine hostile scouts and two-seater machines. Two two-seater machines were shot down, one of them by Flt.-Cdr. Dallas unassisted. (The award of the Distinguished Service Cross was announced in the London Gazette of 6th September, 1916.)

Flt.-Lieut. Charles Langston Scott, D.S.C., R.N.A.S.

Flt.-Lieut. Robert Alexander Little, D.S.C., R.N.A.S. For exceptional daring and skill in aerial fighting on many occasions, of which the following are examples: On the 28th April, 1917, he destroyed an Aviatik; on the 29th April he shot down a hostile scout, which crashed. On the 30th April, with three other machines he went up after hostile machines and saw a big fight going on between fighter escorts and hostile aircraft. Flt.-Lieut. Little attacked one at fifty yards range, and brought it down out of control. A few minutes later he attacked a red scout with a larger machine than the rest. This machine was handled with great skill, but by clever manoeuvring Flt.-Lieut. Little got into a good position and shot it down out of control. (The award of the Distinguished Service Cross was announced in the London Gazette of 16th February, 1917.)

_____

Honours to the Mercantile Marine.

..... in recognition of zeal and devotion to duty shown in carrying on the trade of the country during the war:

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Capt. William Frodsom.

Capt. Stanley Cooper.

30153 - 26 JUNE 1917

Honours for Service in the Auxiliary Patrol.

..... in recognition of their services in vessels of the Auxiliary Patrol between the 1st February and 31st December, 1916:

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Lieut. Walter Stafford, R.N.R.

Lieut. Ronald James Mortimer, R.N.R.

Lieut. Norman Baker, R.N.R.

Lieut. John Henry Holman, R.N.R.

Lieut. David Jefferson, R.N.R.

Lieut. George Walker, R.N.R.

Lieut. Ernest Victor Hugo, R.N.R.

Lieut. Alfred Henry Barnes, R.N.R.

Lieut. Alfred Sand Holmes, R.N.R.

Lieut. William Henry Askew Bee, R.N.R.

Lieut. Geoffrey Messenger, R.N.R.

Lieut. Edward Lewis Owen, R.N.R.

Lieut. Edward Wilkinson, R.N.R.

Lieut. John Trewhella Rowe, R.N.R.

Lieut. Tom Turnbull Laurenson. R.N.R.

Lieut. Alfred George Dodman, R.N.R.

Lieut. Gordon William Hatchard Lyndon, R.N.R.

Lieut. John Williams le Boutillier, R.N.R.

Lieut. Henry Jones, R.N.R.

Lieut. Richard Stephens Durham, R.N.R.

Lieut. Gordon Murray Croal Thomson, R.N.R.

Lieut. James Hogg Reid, R.N.R.

Lieut. Henry Brodie Conby, R.N.R.

Lieut. John Noble Day, R.N.R.

Lieut. Lawrence Peel Massy, R.N.R.

Lieut. Edward Horrabin Clements, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Robert Henry Baunton, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Ben. Chaplin R.N.R.

Lieut. Norman Graham Croall, R.N.V.R.

Lieut. Lionel Sheard Chappell, R.N.V.R.

Ch. Skipper Frederick Ernest Willis, R.N.R., 1615W.S.A.

Ch. Skipper William Alfred Capps, R.N.R., 1796W.S.A.

Skipper Alexander Bruce Summers, R.N.R., 1048W.S.A.

Skipper John Bruce, R.N.R., 1331W.S.A.

Skipper James Cutter, R.N.R., 833D.A.

Skipper William Bramwell Jenner, R.N.R., 1848W.S.A.

Skipper John Samuel Macey, R.N.R., 497 W.S.A.

Skipper Thomas Turner, R.N.R., 664W.S.A.

Skipper William Henry Sweet, R.N.R., 2134 W.S.A.

30159 - 29 JUNE 1917

Honours for Service in Mine-Sweeping Operations.

..... in recognition of their services in Mine-sweeping operations between the 1st July, 1916, and the 31st March, 1917:

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Lieut. William Victor Rice. D.S.O., R.N.

Lieut. Claude Preston Hermon-Hodge, R.N.

Lieut. Arthur Perfect Meredith Lewes, R.N.

Lieut. William Dene Keith Dowding, R.N.

Lieut. Archibald Henry L. S. Ruddell, R.N.

Lieut. Ebenezer Gordon, R.N.R.

Lieut. Edward L. Dobson, R.N.R.

Lieut. John H. Pitts, R.N.R.

Lieut. Alfred Havercroft Chafer, R.N.R.

Lieut. Howard McGlashan, R.N.R.

Lieut. Percy Noble Taylor, R.N.R.

Lieut. George B. Musson, R.N.R.

Lieut. Eric Rees, R.N.R.

Lieut. Charles Sidney Mence, R.N.R.

Lieut. Arthur Sandison, R.N.R.

Lieut. Wilfrid Walter Storey, R.N.R.

Lieut. Benjamin Swinhoe Stothard, R.N.R.

Lieut. Fred Collins, R.N.R.

Lieut. Thomas Elliott Hodge, R.N.R.

Lieut. Francis Joseph Woods, R.N.R.

Lieut. Roxburghe Tulloch, R.N.R.

Lieut. Alexander Duff Thomson, R.N.R.

Lieut. lann Mackenzie Adie, R.N.R.

Eng. Lieut. Joseph Hall, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. John Williams Powell, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Alexander Finlayson, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Charles Frederick Le Patourel, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Bernard Lawson Parker, R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Percy Ridley, R.N.R.

Skipper Alexander McLeod, R.N.R., 759S.A.

Skipper George Mair, R.N.R., 770S.A.

Skipper Francis Thompson. R.N.R., 54S.A.

Skipper John Yolland, R.N.R., 58W.S.A.

Skipper Horace Edward Nutten, R.N.R., 60 S.A.

Skipper Thomas Reid, R.N.R., 490W.S.A.

Skipper James Edward Calvert, R.N.R., 767 W.S.A.

Skipper Robert Barker, R.N.R., 843W.S.A.

Skipper Samuel Beach Ward, R.N.R., 1369 W.S.A.

Skipper George Gill. R.N.R., 1979W.S.A.

30182 - 13 JULY 1917

EAST AFRICAN CAMPAIGN

..... (see East African Campaign, Army Despatch dated 10 March 1917):

Distinguished Service Cross.

Lieutenant A. E. Wainwright, R.N.V.R.

Lieutenant Arthur Dudley, R.N.V.R.

Surgeon H. McC. Hanschell, R.N.

30194 - 20 JULY 1917

Honours for Miscellaneous Services.

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers:

Lieut. (now Lieut.-Cdr.) Edward Bernard Cornish Dicken, R.N.

Asst. Payr. (Act. Payr.) Victor Cecil Gould Eason, R.N. For services on the Staff of the Vice-Admiral commanding the Eastern Mediterranean Squadron, between June, 1916 and June, 1917.

Lieut. John Jenkins, R.N.R. For services in command of a seaplane-carrying vessel, on the East Indies and Egypt Station during the period 1st April, 1916-31st March, 1917.

Lieut. John Kerr, R.N.R. For services in command of a seaplane-carrying vessel on the East Indies and Egypt Station during the period 1st April, 1916-31st March, 1917.

Sub.-Lieut. (Act. Lieut.) Henry Beattie Bell-Irving, R.N.V.R. In recognition of his services in command of H.M. Drifter "I.F.S." in an engagement with five enemy seaplanes on the 11th June, 1917. Two of the enemy machines were brought down by gun-fire and destroyed.

_____

Honours for Services in Action with Enemy Submarines.

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Flt. Lieut. John Edward Alfred Hoare, R.N.A.S.

Lieut. Peter Shaw, R.N.R.

Lieut. Charles William Walters, R.N.R.

Lieut. Herbert Lionel Upton, R.N.R.

Lieut. Peter Nicholson, R.N.R.

Lieut. Charles George Bonner, R.N.R.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. William Louis Anderson, R.N.A.S.

Sub-Lieut. Keith Morris, R.N.R.

Skipper John Kime, R.N.R., 670 WSA.

Skipper George Hubert Cecil Gray, R.N.R., 1558 WSA.

Skipper Harry Gower, R.N.R., 1845 WSA.

Skipper John Watson, R.N.R., 920 SA.

To receive a Bar to the Distinguished Service Cross.

Lieut. William Geoffrey Messenger, D.S.C., R.N.R.

Act. Lieut. Richard Percy Nisbet, D.S.C., R.N.R.

Asst. Payr. Reginald Arthur Nunn, D.S.C. R.N.R.

_____

Honours for the Royal Naval Air Service.

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned Officers:

Flt. Cdr. John Callaghan Brooke, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his services in the East Indies and Egypt Seaplane Squadron during the period 1st April 1916-31st March 1917. During this time he took part in several valuable reconnaissances and bombing flights, obtaining important information, and doing considerable damage to enemy organisations.

Flt. Cdr. Thomas Francis Netterville Gerrard, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his services during an air fight on the 4th June, 1917. This officer led his flight against 15-20 hostile aeroplanes, and alone had ten engagements with these machines. He attacked one, and fired sixty rounds into its cockpit at point-blank range, the enemy machine rolling over and over for 3,000 feet, and then falling vertically out of control. He then attacked another enemy machine which had dived on to one of our machines from behind, and with the help of a Scout he shot it down, the enemy being seen to crash to the ground. Another hostile scout was then attacked by pilot, end-on, and received a long burst at very close range, the enemy going down in a spin, but apparently righting himself lower down. During this last encounter Flt. Cdr. Gerrard's machine was riddled with bullets, but, by fine piloting, he landed safely, although all but his lateral controls were shot away and his machine damaged to such an extent as to require return to Depot for complete rebuilding. This officer has now destroyed at least seven hostile aircraft. He was on active service in France and Belgium from April to September, 1916, and during that period performed much valuable work.

Flt. Cdr. Reginald Frederick Stuart Leslie, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his gallantry in pursuing hostile raiding aeroplanes out to sea in a land machine on the 25th May, 1917. He attacked one hostile aeroplane, and caused it to descend in a steep nose dive, emitting smoke and steam. He was unable to observe its fate, as he was himself immediately attacked from behind by two other hostile machines and temporarily lost control. When he regained control, the machine which he had first attacked had disappeared, and two others were proceeding eastwards at a considerable height above him. He then returned safely to his aerodrome.

Flt. Lieut. Guy Duncan Smith, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his services in the East Indies and Egypt Seaplane Squadron during the period 1st April, 1916-31st March, 1917. During this time he took part in several valuable reconnaissances and bombing flights, obtaining important information and doing considerable damage to enemy organisations.

Flt.-Lieut. Raymond Collishaw, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his services on various occasions, especially the following: On June 1st, 1917, this officer shot down an Albatross Scout in flames. On 3rd June, 1917, he shot down an Albatross Scout in flames. On 5th June, 1917, he shot down a two-seater Albatross in flames. On the 6th June, 1917, he shot down two Albatross scouts in flames and killed the pilot in a third. He has displayed great gallantry and skill in all his combats.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Norman Richard Cook, R.N.A.S. For his services in an air-raid on Zeebrugge Mole and hostile shipping, on the 27th of May, 1917.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Robert Frederick Lea Dickey, R.N.A.S.

Warrt. Offr. (2nd Gr.) Frank Henry Whitmore, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his services in the East Indies and Egypt Seaplane Squadron during the period 1st April, 1916, to 31st March, 1917.

_____

Honours to the Mercantile Marine.

..... in recognition of zeal and devotion to duty shown in carrying on the trade of the country during, the war:

To Receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Capt. Arthur Matravers King.

Capt. Ernest Stanley Hutchinson.

Capt. John McClelland.

Capt. John Prideaux.

Ch. Engr. Robert Bay.

To Receive a Bar to the Distinguished Service Cross.

Capt. David Philip McDonald.

30227 - 10 AUGUST 1917

Honours for Miscellaneous Services.

To receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Lieut. William Edward Senior, R.N.R. In recognition of his services in mine sweeping operations between the 1st July 1916, and the 31st March, 1917.

Sub-Lieut. Alistair Gordon Cameron, R.N.R. For his services in oversea submarines in enemy waters during 1915-16.

Lieut; Wright Charles Walter Ingle, R.N.V.R For services with a Naval Armoured Car Squadron in France, Belgium. Turkey and Roumania. On the 2nd December, 1916. he showed conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty when his car was bogged and his leg was shattered by a bullet whilst he was for the second time starting up the engine. He took refuge in a shell hole and crawled back to the Russian trenches on his back during the night, taking twelve hours to accomplish the distance.

Lieut. Edwin Follett. R.N.V.R.

Lieut. Edward Corfrae Ruft D'Eye. R.N.V.R.

Sub-Lieut. (now Lieut.) Robert Cowley R.N.V.R.

Sub-Lieut. Stanley Webber. R.N.V.R.

Engr. (now Eng. Lieut.-Cdr.) George Harold Hindman, R.I.M.

Lieut. Henry Philip Hughes-Hallett, R.I.M

Lieut. Albane Rabere Castleton Poyntz. R.I.M.

Lieut. Cecil Gwydyr Hallett, R.I.M.

Lieut. Harold Townshend Boulthee. R.I.M.

Lieut. Charles Jacomb Nicoll, R.I.M.

Lieut. Isaac John Duncart, R.I.M.

Lieut. Thomas Joseph Farrell, R.I.M (now Capt., R.E.).

Lieut. Joseph Noel Metcalfe, R.I.M. (now Capt., R.E.).

Sub-Lieut. Arcel Price Llewellyn, R.I.M.

In recognition of zeal, devotion to duty and gallantry whilst serving in River Steamers for long periods during the operations in Mesopotamia.

Capt. Samuel Davison, Mercantile Marine. For the conspicuous zeal and gallantry which he displayed on discovering an enemy mine. Capt. Davison took steps to warn shipping of the possible presence of a minefield, and towed the mine for several miles out of the route of traffic. He then remained secured to the moorings of the mine until one of H.M. ships arrived on the scene, when he actively assisted in the recovery of the mine.

_____

Honours for Services in Action with Enemy Submarines.

..... award of the following honours, decorations and medals to Officers and Men for services in action with enemy submarines:

To Receive the Distinguished Service Cross.

Flt. Lieut. Warren Rawson Mackenzie, R.N.A.S.

Lieut. Reginald Charles Butler, R.N.R.

Lieut. Henry Johnson, R.N.R.

Lieut. John Pollok, R.N.R.

Lieut. George Leslie, R.N.R.

Lieut. John Kerr, R.N.R.

Lieut. Thomas Hughes, R.N.R.

Engr. Lieut. James Burns, R.N.R.

Lieut. John Charles Jones, R.N.V.R

To Receive a Bar to the Distinguished Service Cross.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Richard Frederick Lea Dickey, D.S.C., R.N.A.S.

_____

Honours for the Royal Naval Air Service.

..... award of the Distinguished Service Cross to the undermentioned officers:

Flt. Cdr. Alexander Macdonald Shook, R.N.A.S.

Flt. Lieut. Arnold Jaques Chadwick, R.N.A.S. (since reported drowned).

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Albert James Enstone, R.N.A.S.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Langley Frank Willard Smith, R.N.A.S. (since missing). For exceptional gallantry and remarkable skill and courage whilst serving with the R.N.A.S. at Dunkirk during May and June, 1917, in repeatedly attacking and destroying hostile aircraft.

Flt. Lieut. Cecil Hill Darley, R.N.A.S. For conspicuous skill and gallantry on the night of the 2nd July, 1917. One of his engines having seized whilst he was over Bruges, he dropped his bombs on the objective and managed to fly his machine home on one engine and effected a safe landing on the aerodrome.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. (now Flt. Lieut.) John Edward Scott, R.N.A.S. For the skill and gallantry with which he engaged a hostile machine returning from an air raid on England. Descending to 8,000 feet, he fired continuously until the enemy machine lost control, descended in a spinning nose dive, and crashed into the sea.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Ellis Vair Reid, R.N.A.S. (since missing). In recognition of his services on the following occasions: On the 6th June, 1917, he attacked and drove down one of four hostile scouts. This machine dived nose first into the ground and was destroyed. On the afternoon of the 15th June, 1917, he was leading a patrol of three scouts and encountered a formation of ten enemy machines. During the combat which ensued he forced one machine down completely out of control. Next he attacked at a range of about 30 yards another hostile scout. The pilot of this machine was killed, and it went down completely out of control. This officer has at all times shown the greatest bravery and determination.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Edward Robert Barker, R.N.A.S. In recognition of his services on the occasion of an air raid on the Solway works at Zeebrugge on the night of the 15th-16th July, 1917, when bombs were dropped on the objective with good results.

Flt. Sub-Lieut. Rowan Heywood Daly, R.N.A.S. For skill and gallantry in attacking enemy aircraft returning from a raid on England. After a long chase he engaged and brought down one machine in flames. Afterwards he engaged a second machine, but his gun jambed, and though he continued the pursuit to the enemy coast, he failed to clear the jamb, and was obliged to return to his aerodrome.

Flt. Lieut. Reginald Rhys Soar, R.N.A.S. For courage and skill as a scout pilot. On 23rd May, 1917, he attacked a two-seater artillery machine, and as the result of a well thought out attack brought the machine down out of control. On 12th June, 1917, he brought down two enemy machines out of control. On 29th June, 1917, in company with Flt. Lieut. Little, he attacked and brought down an Albatross scout. On 3rd July, 1917, whilst leading an offensive patrol, a formation of seven Albatross Scouts was engaged, and he brought down one, out of control. On 13th July, 1917, in company with Flt. Lieut. Little, he attacked and drove down out of control one two-seater machine, following it down to within 1,000 feet of the ground.

To receive a Bar to the Distinguished Service Cross.

Flt. Cdr. Robert John Orton Compston, D.S.C., R.N.A.