William Christopher Davis, also affectionately known as Chris, Willie, Senior Chief Davis, or Dizzle, age 38, passed peacefully surrounded by family after a courageous battle with cancer on September 10, 2023.

Born on January 26, 1985, Chris was a beloved son, brother, husband, father, and friend. His life was a testament to strength, kindness, and unwavering love.

Throughout his life, Chris was known for his dedication and service to our nation. He proudly served as a Senior Chief in the United States Navy for 20 years, demonstrating exceptional leadership and unwavering commitment to his fellow sailors and country.

Chris was a family man through and through. He cherished every moment spent with his loved ones, and his greatest joy was being a husband and father. He will be remembered for his infectious smile, music turned up loud, and being a family man. Chris loved to be outdoors and could be found either in his garage or by the grill cooking up something delicious. Most importantly he will be remembered for the unconditional love he showed to all.

He is survived by his loving wife, Jessica; his children, Zane, Rebecca, and Caitlyn; along with his parents, Randy and Selma; his brother, Rick (Ashleigh); and nephew Royce. He was preceded in death by numerous grandparents, cousins, and uncles.

The family invites you to join them for a Celebration of Chris’ life on Saturday, September 23, 2023, at 11 a.m. at First Baptist Church Ashland located at 800 Thompson Street, Ashland, VA 23005. A reception will be held after the service in the Fellowship Hall at First Baptist Church of Ashland.

The family wishes to thank Bristol Hospice Richmond (Jen Nix and Kristal Oppert) for giving Chris the opportunity to live his final months the way he wanted to (because we all know he preferred things to be done his way). Thank you, Jen and Kristal, for showing love, commitment, and dedication to Chris and his family.

Chris touched the lives of many, leaving behind a legacy of love, compassion, and strength. His memory will forever be cherished in our hearts.