The vice commander of the 157th Air Refueling Wing was promoted to colonel during a ceremony here Dec. 3.

Col. William Davis, a native of Warwick, Rhode Island, has held a myriad of roles while a member of the New Hampshire Air National Guard, most recently as the deputy commander of the 157th Mission Support Group.

"My path to colonel was really a random, accidental walk," said Davis. "It's been a great walk, but I didn't really plan any of it."

Among those on hand to congratulate Davis was Col. James Ryan, commander of the 157 ARW, who officiated the promotion ceremony attended by friends, family and Airmen throughout the wing. During the ceremony, Ryan presented Davis with the Meritorious Service Medal and certificate.

"Today is a special day, a momentous day in the history of the wing as we look to the birds and the eagles on the next generation of leadership," said Ryan. "This man has proven himself time-and-time again."

In his new role, Davis will manage wing staff and fill in as commander when Ryan is on temporary duty or on leave.

Davis began his military career in 1989 as an enlisted infantryman in the Rhode Island Army National Guard after graduation from the Boston University School of Management. He commissioned in the Army National Guard in 1996.

In November 1998, Davis transferred to the N.H. Air National Guard as a 157 ARW public affairs officer, a position he held for six years.

Among the many other roles the new vice commander has held include wing executive officer, wing comptroller and others.

Davis replaces Col. Peter Sullivan, who retired in September.

On hand to pin his new rank on his uniform was his mother Barbara Davis, brother John Davis, nephew Connor Davis, Civil Air Patrol Cadet Airman 1st Class Nicholas Denton, and Tyler Denton.

During his comments to those attending the ceremony in Building 254, Davis credited his success to family members whom he has followed in military service.

"I learned a lot about values and the military from them," he said.