Chief Warrant Officer 5 (CW5) William Davis currently serves as the Command Chief Warrant Officer of the Military Intelligence Readiness Command. A native of Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, he began his military career as an enlisted All Source Intelligence Analyst with the 28th Aviation Brigade in 1995. Additional assignments include All-Source Intelligence Sergeant with the 28th Division Support Command, NCOIC for the 28th Division (Mechanized) Secretary of General Staff, and NCOIC of the plans section, Multi-National Division North in Tuzla, Bosnia. He instructed the Basic Noncommissioned Officer’s Course at the 166th Training Regiment, supported their Officer Candidate School as cadre, and served as a Range Inspector at Fort Indiantown Gap, Pennsylvania. He served for nine years as a noncommissioned officer. CW5 Davis graduated the Warrant Officer Candidate Course in 2004. Upon completion of Military Intelligence Warrant Officer Basic Course in 2005 he was assigned as the AGR Training Officer for the 556 Military Intelligence Company. He subsequently served as the Senior All-Source Instructor/Writer for the 5th Battalion, 104th Regiment; Officer In Charge for the 1st Brigade (Forward), 100th Division; subject matter expert and project manager for the United States Africa Command Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance Division; Targeting Officer for Detachment 2, European Command, Army Reserve Element; and most recently as an All Source Intelligence Technician and the Senior Warrant Officer Advisor for the 505th Military Intelligence Brigade (Theater). CW5 Davis holds a Master of Science in Intelligence Management from National American University and a Bachelor of Art in Intelligence Studies with a concentration in analysis from American Military University. He is additionally qualified as Teach Assess Council (TAC) Officer and Army Instructor. CW5 Davis’ military awards and decorations include the Defense Meritorious Service Medal, Army Commendation Medals (4th award), Joint Service Achievement Medal, Army Achievement Medals (3rd award), Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal, Humanitarian Service Medal, and the NATO Medal. CW5 Davis specializes in requirements management for Army intelligence systems. He has experience as a Senior Intelligence Analyst, project manager, technical writer, and Director of Electronic Surveillance for a privately owned aviation company. In addition to his Army Reserve duties, he serves the Department of the Army as the Division Chief of Advanced Sensors, Unmanned Aerial Systems within the Army Capability Manager, Intelligence Sensors.

CW5 Davis is married to Lisa Davis. She is an Army veteran in her own right and serves the community as the Executive Director for an in-home health company in Arizona. They live in Sierra Vista, Arizona by Fort Huachuca; the Home of Military Intelligence. They have two amazing children, Micka and Cash.