Bio

Mr. William S. Davis is currently the Executive Director of Emerging Technologies in the Air Traffic Organization (ATO) of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). He was asked to take this special assignment to lead a cross-organizational team that focuses on integrating unmanned aircraft systems (UAS), commercial space and other emerging technologies into the National Airspace System.

Mr. Davis has extensive experience across a wide variety of aviation management and operational positions. Prior to his current role, he served as the Deputy Vice President of Mission Support Services for the ATO. As the Deputy Vice President, Mr. Davis was responsible for directing various FAA activities supporting air traffic operations including the rules, policies, and standards for airspace structure; environmental policy; air traffic procedures; aeronautical information; air traffic concepts and requirements; and the FAA Service Centers.

Previously he served as the aeronautics representative to the National Science and Technology Council. This cabinet-level council within the Executive Branch coordinates science and technology policy across Federal research and development entities. Other experiences include service as the FAA’s Vice President of Safety Services for the ATO; Director of Runway Safety; and the Deputy Associate Administrator for Civil Aviation Security. He also flew as an aircrew member with FedEx conducting air cargo operations. Additionally, Mr. Davis served as a career officer and aviator in the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) in a number of positions including: Chief of Aviation Safety; Commanding Officer of Air Station Washington, DC; and an Operations Officer at Air Station Miami, FL. He gained extensive experience in law enforcement, search and rescue, and environmental protection missions during his career. Mr. Davis holds airline transport ratings in multiengine jet, turboprop, and helicopter aircraft and has broad domestic and international flight experience.

He received his bachelor’s degree from Florida State University and a master’s degree from the United States Naval Postgraduate School.