Hall of Fame

Back To Hall of Fame Back To Hall of Fame

Choose a Hall Of Fame Member:

William Davis

Class

1972

Induction

2009

Sport(s)

Football

During his athletic career and his distinguished military career, Colonel William Davis came to epitomize Millersville football with his courage, dedication and service to the United States.

Davis was a three-year member of the Marauder football program from 1969-71, playing defensive back, wingback and special teams. Davis was honored with the Millersville State College Athletic “M” Award for earning “Majoring Honors in the Sport of Football” during his three years. He was a member of Dr. Gene Carpenter’s first team in 1970, and the pair forged a lasting admiration and friendship.

In 1993, he was recognized with the Millersville University Football Award for his superb undergraduate career as a student-athlete and his continuing commitment to excellence.

After graduating with a degree in secondary education, Davis enlisted in the Army in 1971. He quickly climbed the ranks, being commissioned as a second lieutenant in 1973 and graduating from the Armed Forces Staff College and the Army War College. In the following years, he served in large scale military operations that included humanitarian assistance in Asia, Central America, Europe, Africa and the Middle East.

During Desert Shield and Desert Storm, Colonel Davis’ battalion coordinated and executed the combat actions of three and one-half coalition divisions from four separate nations across a 70 mile front against an enemy numbering over eight divisions. His battalion achieved all its operational objectives without a loss of an American life while securing over 8,700 enemy prisoners and rescuing an American pilot from behind enemy lines. From a historical standpoint, no unit of this size in U.S. Army history has ever replicated the magnitude of tasks and missions as executed by the men of the 2nd Battalion, 5th Special Forces.

Davis’ service in the Gulf War rendered him disabled, but since his return to the states, he has been involved in research for Gulf War Illness and for this, The Colonel Bill Davis Fund for Research on Gulf War Illness at a key medical center in Dallas, Texas was named in his honor.

Davis retired from active duty in 2005 after 34 years of service. Davis also earned a master’s degree in international relations from Salve Regina University as well as the title of “Master Faculty” from the National Defense University. In September of 1996, he was inducted into the United States Army Officer Candidate School Hall of Fame. Currently, he and his wife Susan live in reside in Virginia Beach, Va., and he continues to serve as an adjunct faculty at the Joint Forces Staff College and as an editorial consultant for the Journal of Special Operations Medicine.

Back To Hall of Fame