Jim Morrison and Keith Moon are a few that come to mind... I've read many times how Jim would do daring things at school, climbing on top of buildings, railways, anything to get attention... Keith Moon is rumored to have either driven a car or jumped into a pool at a Holiday Inn in Michigan on his 21st birthday, to be banned from EVERY Holiday Inn.

Please include stories, because some might not know details outside of their music, and some stories could be debunked by others.. I'll need to go back and make sure my details are correct before posting more.

GG Allin? its a stretch to call him a rock star. sad thing is I forgot his name and googled "80's 90's rock performer naked on stage" and he came right up

GG Allin

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigationJump to search

GG Allin

GG Allin, c. 1990s

Background information

Birth name Jesus Christ Allin[1]

Also known as GG

Born August 29, 1956

Lancaster, New Hampshire, U.S.

Died June 28, 1993 (aged 36)

Manhattan, New York City

Genres Punk rock,[2] shock rock,[3] hardcore punk, outlaw country

Occupation(s)

Singer

songwriter

record producer

Instruments

Vocals

drums

guitar

Website www.ggallin.com

Kevin Michael "GG" Allin (born Jesus Christ Allin; August 29, 1956 – June 28, 1993) was an American punk rock singer-songwriter who performed and recorded with many groups during his career.[4] Allin was best known for his controversial live performances, which often featured transgressive acts, including self-mutilation and assaulting audience members, for which he was arrested and imprisoned on multiple occasions.[5] AllMusic and G4TV's That's Tough have called him "the most spectacular degenerate in rock & roll history"[2] and the "toughest rock star in the world".

Known more for his notorious stage antics than for his music, Allin recorded prolifically, not only in the punk rock genre, but also in spoken word, country, and more traditional-style rock. His lyrics, which often expressed themes of violence and misanthropy, polarized listeners and created varied opinions of him within the highly politicized punk community.[citation needed]

Allin's music was often poorly recorded and produced, given limited distribution, and met with mostly negative reviews from critics,[6][7][8] although he maintained a cult following throughout and after his career. Allin promised for several years that he would die by suicide on stage during one of his concerts, but instead died from an accidental drug overdose on June 28, 1993, at the age of 36.[2]

Mick Shrimpton (1948-1982)

A former house drummer for the Eurovision Song Contest, he joined heavy metal band Spinal Tap in 1977 as it regrouped on the strength of "Nice ’N Stinky," its late bloomer hit from "Jap Habit." Shrimpton replaced Peter "James" Bond (who had spontaneously combusted live on stage during a Jazz-Blues Festival) and infused Spinal Tap's sound with a unique sonic potency. Embracing a wild rock 'n roll lifestyle, Shrimpton himself would be killed in a mysterious on-stage explosion five years later during Spinal Tap’s tumultuous 1982 Japanese tour—captured on film by Marty Di Bergi for "This is Spinal Tap" (1984). Spinal Tap Keyboardist Viv Savage was later killed during a swamp gas explosion while visiting Shrimpton’s Hampstead grave, the whereabouts of Viv's ashes are currently unknown. Rumours have since been circulated that Viv Savage actually faked his own death and retreated to Zürich, Switzerland where he became a high-ranking corporate executive for ABB Ltd.

"as long as I have sex and drugs, I can do without rock ’n roll." - Mick Shrimpton