GG Allin is an unprecedented cult and savage personality in rock music. The rocker is still called the most scandalous singer in the United States of America. This is despite the fact that JJ Allin died in 1993.

Only true fans or people with strong nerves could attend his concerts. Jiji could perform on stage without clothes. He tried to break a bottle on his head, he could insert a microphone into the anus or "pee the need" on stage. Another feature of the singer is masturbation right during the performance.

During her long creative career, Ji-Ji was detained by the police 52 times. The rocker spent more than three years behind bars. Allin himself said that he had been on stage since the age of 18. He tried to become a "thunderstorm" of rock, and it seems that he succeeded 100%.

Steve Huey of All Music described G.G. Allin in terms that weren't very flattering. The man said that Allin: "The most exciting degenerate in the history of rock and roll."

To understand what the work of Ji-Ji Allin is about, just listen to the tracks:

I'm Gonna Rape You;

Expose Yourself to Kids;

Bite It You Scum;

Outlaw Scumfuck;

Gypsy Motherfucker;

Suck My Ass It Smells;

Die When You Die;

Young Little Meat.

Allin's compositions encouraged pedophilia, racism and homosexuality. Not all music lovers liked the themes of GJ. The rocker had plenty of fans.

In the last years of his life, Allin said that he would commit suicide right on stage. But this did not happen. He passed away on June 28, 1993 at the age of 36. The cause of death was a drug overdose.

The childhood and youth of Jesus Christ Allin

Jesus Christ Allin (real name of the rocker) was born on August 29, 1956 in Lancaster (New Hampshire). Merl Allyn's father endowed his son with such a sonorous name. The head of the family spoke about the fact that Jesus appeared and said that Jises would become the messiah.

But for the nickname "Ji-Ji" you should thank your younger brother. He couldn't pronounce Jeses' name and instead spoke Jeje. The head of the family was a religious fanatic-hermit. His behavior was insane.

Once, my father dug graves for family members in the basement, and said that he would kill them first. And then he himself will pass away. The family lived in an old house with no electricity. After night fell, it was forbidden to speak in the house. Disobedience was severely punished.

Jiji was only 6 years old, and he learned that his parents (fortunately, son) divorced. When the boy attended high school, his mother officially changed his name to Kevin Michael Allin so that his peers would not laugh at him.

Jiji did not study very well. Specific upbringing made itself felt - he did not know how to communicate with teachers and classmates. As a result, Allin was transferred to special classes for lagging behind children.

In 10th grade, JJ started trying on women's outfits. The New York Dolls pushed him to this step. Allin and his brother succumbed to bad influences - they smoked weed, drank alcohol and dropped out of school.

Soon Ji-Ji plunged headlong into the underworld. The guy stole cars, stole, even sold drugs. His environment did not resemble an intelligent society.

The beginning of the creative career of GG Allin

GG really enjoyed music as a teenager. He, along with his brother, loved to listen to country and rock and roll. He really liked: The Beatles, The Rolling Stones, Dave Clark Five, Monkees and The Kinks.

Soon, Allin and his brother tried their hand at bands: Little Sister's Date (performed tracks by Aerosmith, Black Sabbath and Alice Cooper) and Malpractice (compositions by the Ramones and Iggy Pop).

A little later, aspiring musicians hurried to leave New Hampshire. Actually, then they recorded three tracks. We are talking about the compositions: Beat Beat Beat, One Man Army and Bored To Death.

The guys recorded these songs in the basement of their house in Vermont. The compositions were included in the single The Jabbers and the album Always Was, Is, And Always Shall Be.

In the late 1970s, Brother Merle and JJ separated for a while. Merle went to Boston and GJ moved to Manchester. There he created his own musical group The Jabbers.

In 1980, GG Allin, together with Jabbers on the Orange Records label, recorded the debut album, which has already been mentioned above. At an early stage in his creative career, GJ worked in such styles as hardcore punk and power pop. The lyrics were filled with misogyny.

A year later, JJ presented the powerful track Gimme Some Head (featuring Motor City Badboys). Public Animal #1 and No Rules were recorded by Orange Records in 1982 and 1983. The Jabbers broke up exactly one year after the release of No Rules. The musicians could no longer tolerate Allin's antics.

JJ had no choice but to move to Boston. He joined his brother and became part of the Cedar Street Sluts. Soon he created another group Scumfucs.

Founding of GG Allin's own label

In the same year, Ji-Ji became the owner of his own label Blood Records. He later released the album Eat My Fuc on the label. Other companies refused the musician to record the record due to censorship. Therefore, he had no choice but to work for himself.

Following the release of the aforementioned album, the musician recorded mini-LPs. We are talking about: Hard Candy Cock, I Wanna Fuck Your Brains Out, Live Fast, Die Fast.

The following years toughened up G.G. Allin's behavior on stage. The musician behaved simply immorally, because of which he was banned from performing by most of the clubs in the country. In 1986, Allin "relieved himself" right on stage. The public was shocked, and the next day there was even an article about this case.

JJ Allin collaboration with ANTiSEEN

In the late 1980s, JJ began to collaborate with ANTiSEEN. Allin's behavior on stage has become even more radical and completely unpredictable.

After the performance, he "pumped" himself with a significant amount of alcohol and drugs, which ended up in the hospital. Doctors said that one day he would come to an end.

In the late 1980s, the singer had another trick - he used laxatives. His behavior on stage caused a state of shock. Already 10 minutes after the start of the concert, the singer appeared before the audience with a broken head. He performed naked, emptied himself and threw excrement at the audience.

JJ Allin's jail time

In the late 1980s, JJ Allin was arrested for the attempted murder of a girl he knew. While making love to a fan, Allin cut the woman's body and began to drink her blood. Later, he burned her body with hot metal, and then attempted to set the victim on fire.

The judge dropped the charges against Allin because the woman was confused in her testimony. But the singer was nevertheless found guilty and imprisoned on December 25, 1989.

To feel what Jiji felt while in prison, it is enough to read his book. During his imprisonment, Allin wrote the book The GG Allin Manifesto.

Early 1990s

In 1991, JJ Allin left prison early for good behavior. Together with his brother, he created a new band, The Murder Junkies.

Fans noted that Allin has become even more aggressive over the years in prison. He again shocked the audience with his antics. Now JJ looked like a maniac at all. A year after his release, Allin was again detained by the police.

In 1993, the rocker was released. Almost immediately, he got to work. Soon the discography of The Murder Junkies was replenished with a new collection. The record was called Brutality and Bloodshed for All. In the same year, the collection was released by Alive Records.

The texts of the tracks of the presented collection touched upon the theme of political revolution. In support of the album, the musicians went on tour. We went with the videographer who published I Was a Murder Junkie: The Last Days of GG Allin.

In 1991, the musician went to the Jane Whitney show. Allin made a serious, and even shocking statement. He said that he would soon commit suicide on stage. And also force everyone who will be present at his concert to die.

On the show, JJ talked about sleeping with teenagers and animals for 36 years. He raped women and men at his concerts. He does not consider such behavior unnatural.

GG Allin's personal life

Allin married in 1978. The wife of a celebrity was a girl named Sandy. This marriage soon broke up. Sandy reported that she could no longer tolerate her husband's antics. She filed for divorce.

Then Jiji was seen in a relationship with a 13-year-old girl. In mid-1980, his daughter Nico was born from a relationship with Tracey Deneault.

At the time of Allin's death, his girlfriend was Lisa Mankowski. The girl was only 17 years old.

Most classify GJ as a misogynist. Once the rocker replied:

“I don't like being told that I'm a misogynist. I don't hate all of the fairer sex, I hate certain ones..."

Rocker believed in some form of life after death. He laid out his views on death in the documentary Hated: GG Allin and the Murder Junkies.

“I have a wild soul. She wants to get out of this life. My soul is very tight here. I often think about committing suicide at the very peak of my career ... I think if I die at the very top, then my soul in the next life will be much stronger ... ".

Interesting facts about JJ Allin

Almost every performance of Ji-Ji ended with the arrival of the police.

The singer's hobby was American serial killers. He even personally visited the maniac John Wayne Gacy in prison.

GJ Allin is called society's No. 1 cancer. It's all about immoral behaviour.

Jiji was found to have a certain kind of psychopathy, but no more severe mental disorders like schizophrenia were found.

The singer was buried in shorts and a leather jacket. On the underwear was the inscription: "Eat me."

Death of GG Allin

The body of the singer was found in the apartment of acquaintances. Shortly before his death, JJ Allin performed at a small venue called Gas Station.

After the concert, Allin walked around New York in his usual form - naked, in blood and his own excrement. He was accompanied by a crowd of angry fans.

When the singer came home, he habitually took a good dose of heroin. Actually, a drug overdose caused the death of a celebrity.

GJ Allin's friends did not immediately realize that their friend was dead. On the eve of his death, he organized a party. People took pictures with a lying star, not knowing that he was already dead. Only the next day, the owners of the dwelling suspected something was wrong and called an ambulance. Unfortunately, it was already too late.

The funeral was in the usual atmosphere for JJ Allin. Friends did not want this day to be mourning. The singer lay in a coffin half-naked in a leather jacket with a microphone in his hand and a bottle of Jim Beam whiskey. The rocker was buried on July 3 in the town of Littleton.

On every anniversary of GJ's death, his grave was vandalized by fans. All those who wished to "defecate" right on the grave, brought the corpses of animals and burned small US flags. The local priest offered to exhume the celebrity's corpse and bury it elsewhere. Information about the second burial site of Ji-Ji Allin is unknown.