Kevin Michael "GG" Allin (born Jesus Christ Allin; August 29, 1956 – June 28, 1993) was an American punk rock singer-songwriter, who performed and recorded with many groups during his career. GG Allin is best remembered for his notorious live performances, which often featured transgressive acts, including coprophagia, self-mutilation, and attacking audience members.[1] AllMusic and G4TV's That's Tough have called him "the most spectacular degenerate in rock & roll history"[2] and the "toughest rock star in the world", respectively.

Although more notorious for his stage antics than for his music, he recorded prolifically, not only in the punk rock genre, but also in spoken word, country, and more traditional-style rock. His extremely politically incorrect lyrics, which often covered subjects such as misogyny, pedophilia, blasphemy and racism, polarized listeners and created varied opinions of him within the highly politicized punk community. When questioned about his music and concerts, Allin often replied that he was trying to make rock music "dangerous" again.

Allin's music was often poorly recorded and produced, given limited distribution, and was met with mostly negative reviews from critics.[3][4][5] Despite (or perhaps because of) these factors, Allin maintained a cult following throughout his career, and a fan base that has greatly expanded since his death.[citation needed] Though Allin promised for several years before his death that he would commit suicide onstage during one of his concerts, he died June 28, 1993 of an accidental heroin overdose.

Early life[edit source | editbeta][]

Allin was born Jesus Christ Allin at Weeks Memorial Hospital in Lancaster, New Hampshire, the younger of two sons to Merle Colby Allin, Sr. and Arleta Gunther.[3] He was given this name because his father told his wife that Jesus Christ himself had visited him, and told him that his newborn son would be a great man in the vein of the Messiah.[3][6]

His older brother, Merle "Pinky" Allin, was unable to pronounce "Jesus" properly and called him "Jeje"[citation needed], which became "GG". The family lived in a log cabin with no running water or electricity in northern New Hampshire. Allin's father, who forbade all conversation in the home after dark, was an unstable and antisocial man, though Allin himself denied that this caused any of his later personal troubles.[citation needed]

In 1961, Arleta filed for divorce from Merle Sr., as his mental instability was worsening. Allin and his brother were from that time raised by their mother and stepfather, and settled in East St. Johnsbury, Vermont in 1966.[3] Arleta changed her younger son's legal name to Kevin Michael Allin on March 2, 1962 during his first year of schooling. Arleta had allowed his birth name to stand until this point, and finally changed it to give her son a chance of a mockery-free childhood.

Allin was a poor student at school, being placed in special education classes and having to repeat the third grade. According to his older brother, he experienced bullying by fellow students due to not fitting in.[7] In his sophomore year of high school, he began attending school cross-dressed, which he said was inspired by the New York Dolls.[7] When asked about his childhood, Allin said that it was "very chaotic. Full of chances and dangers. We sold drugs, stole, broke into houses, cars. Did whatever we wanted to for the most part – including all the bands we played in. People even hated us back then."[8]

Recording career[edit source | editbeta][]

Early years[edit source | editbeta][]

Allin's earliest musical influences were 1960s British Invasion bands like The Beatles, The Rolling Stones, and the The Dave Clark 5.[9] In the early 70s, Alice Cooper became a large influence on Allin.[10] Allin's earliest recorded musical endeavors were as a drummer. In his mid-teens, he and his older brother Pinky formed their first band, Little Sister's Date, which lasted a little over a year.[9] The group covered songs by Aerosmith, KISS, and other popular hard rockbands of the time period.[9]

Allin graduated from Concord High School in Concord, Vermont in 1975, and shortly after formed the band Malpractice with his older brother, local musician Jeff Penny, and Brian Demurs (a high school friend). Allin played the drums for Malpractice until the band separated in 1977. He then became the drummer for the band Stripsearch, who released one 7" single, containing the songs "Galileo" and "Jesus in New York".

From September 1977 to April 1984, Allin performed as frontman for The Jabbers, in which he played drums and performed vocals. Allin's 1980 debut album was Always Was, Is and Always Shall Be. At one point, industry veteran andThe Dead Boys producer Genya Ravan served as his manager. Tension within The Jabbers mounted as Allin grew uncontrollable, uncompromising and vicious. The Jabbers disbanded.

Allin fronted many acts during the early to mid-1980s. This includes albums from The Cedar Street Sluts, The Scumfucs in 1982 and The Texas Nazis in 1985. Allin remained in the underground hardcore scene yet was not part of theeast coast hardcore scene. His performances in Manchester, New Hampshire with the Cedar Street Sluts earned him the nickname of "the madman of Manchester."

Allin gained wider attention with the ROIR cassette-only release of Hated in the Nation (1987) containing tracks from Allin's out-of-print catalog with The Jabbers, The Scumfucs and Cedar Street Sluts. The tape also featured several in-studio and in-concert recordings with an all-star band assembled by producer Maximum RocknRoll and early Allin patron Mykel Board. This band featured J Mascis of Dinosaur Jr. on lead guitar and Bongwater record producer/musicianMark Kramer on bass.

Mid era and more extreme live performances[edit source | editbeta][]

By the mid to late 1980s, Allin was addicted to heroin and alcohol and generally abused any intoxicants provided to him. At this point, Allin also began eating laxatives before performances, as defecation was becoming a regular part of his stage act. Allin described himself as "the last true rock and roller": by this, he meant that rock and roll music itself had started as an embodiment of danger, anti-authoritarianism and rebelliousness but had become largely taken over by corporations and business concerns. Allin's music and performances were thus meant to return rock and roll to what he saw as its roots, reclaiming it from the corporate system.

Allin idolized country music legend Hank Williams and saw himself as a kindred spirit. Both were relative loners and outsiders, both were habitual users of intoxicants, both lived with few, if any, possessions and both traveled the country relentlessly. Allin's acoustic output, documented on the EP The Troubled Troubador, was heavily influenced by Williams. He recorded his own rewrites of Hank Williams, Jr.'s "Family Tradition" and David Allan Coe's "Longhaired Redneck", calling his own versions "Scumfuc Tradition" and "Outlaw Scumfuc" respectively. Later, Allin also released another country album Carnival of Excess, his most refined record.

During this period, Allin collaborated with Bulge (also known as Psycho under a different name, on the album Freaks, Faggots, Drunks and Junkies), The Aids Brigade (the 7" EP Expose Yourself To Kids) and The Holymen (You Give Love a Bad Name). Allin also began performing many spoken word pieces. Video footage of these are available but rare. Unwilling to seek steady employment, Allin supported himself by selling his own records. Allin was also fascinated with serial killers. He wrote to and visited John Wayne Gacy in prison a number of times and Gacy painted a portrait of Allin, which became the album cover to the soundtrack of the film Hated: GG Allin And The Murder Junkies.

By this point, Allin's performances, which often resulted in considerable damage to venues and sound equipment, were regularly stopped after only a few songs by police or venue owners. Allin was charged with assault and battery or indecent exposure a number of times. His constant touring was only stopped by jail time or by long hospital stays for broken bones, blood poisoning, and other physical trauma.

Another attraction to Allin performances was his continual threats of suicide. In 1989, Allin wrote to Maximum RocknRoll stating that he would commit suicide on stage on Halloween 1989. However, he was in jail when that day came. He continued his threat each following year but ended up imprisoned each following Halloween. When asked why he did not follow through with his threats, Allin stated, "With GG, you don't get what you expect—you get what you deserve."[11] He also stated that suicide should only be done when one had reached his peak, meeting the afterlife at his strongest point and not at his weakest.[12]

1989 trial and imprisonment[edit source | editbeta][]

In late 1989, Allin was arrested and charged with "assault with intent to do great bodily harm less than murder" of a female acquaintance in Ann Arbor, Michigan.

In a psychological evaluation made as part of the trial,[13] Allin was judged as having at least average intelligence, and was described as "courteous, cooperative and candid". The unnamed evaluator noted that Allin did not appear psychotic, and seemed comfortable with his unorthodox lifestyle. However, the evaluator asserted Allin was dependent on alcohol and had a mixed personality disorder with narcissistic, borderline and masochistic features.[13]

Allin initially denied the charges, claiming that the woman was a willing participant in their sexual activities.[14] Allin admitted to cutting her, burning her, and drinking her blood, but insisted she did the same thing to him. Allin also claimed that inconsistencies in the woman's statements to authorities supported his assertions. The judge in the case agreed there were substantial inconsistencies in the woman's account.[14] Ultimately, however, Allin plea bargained to the reduced charge of felonious assault,[14] and he was imprisoned from December 25, 1989 to March 26, 1991.

It was during this time in prison that Allin began feeling re-energized about his life and "mission". He wrote [15] during this period.

Hated documentary and final days[edit source | editbeta][]

Main article: Hated: GG Allin and the Murder Junkies

After his release from prison, Allin skipped parole to go on another tour, footage of which was shot for Todd Phillips' documentary Hated: GG Allin and the Murder Junkies. The film contained graphic scenes from a performance Allin gave at an East Village, New York rock club, Space at Chase. Allin stripped naked, defecated on the floor, wiped his feces on himself and threw feces into the audience. Allin broke a woman's nose and assaulted several other people in the crowd. Clips were included from other Allin appearances, as well as interviews with Allin, his band, and their fans. The film was released in 1994 and later followed on DVD in 1997.

During the 1990s GG Allin recorded his Murder Junkies album released by New Rose Records and featuring ANTiSEEN. This album contained ten musical tracks and ten spoken-word pieces. Other than Freaks, Faggots, Drunks and Junkies, Allin considered this album to be his most polished professionally recorded album that explored his persona and stated his philosophy on life. It was also during this period that Allin recorded the War In My Head – I'm Your Enemy album released on Awareness Records and featuring the band Shrinkwrap. This particular album consists of one 45-minute track that is a collage of spoken-word pieces which Shrinkwrap put to music.

Allin's growing notoriety led to appearances on various television shows: Geraldo, The Jerry Springer Show and The Jane Whitney Show. At the time of his death, Allin was making plans for a spoken-word album.[16] He also mentioned a somewhat unlikely European tour, enthusiastically talking about it in the hours before his death.[17]

Personal life[edit source | editbeta][]

Family and relationships[edit source | editbeta][]

GG Allin married Sandra Farrow on October 6, 1980.[18] They divorced in 1986.[18]

In the mid-1980s, Allin became involved with a teenage girl from Garland, Texas named Tracy Deneault.[18] She became pregnant, and their daughter, Nico Ann Deneault, was born March 13, 1986.[18] Nico chose to distance herself from her family.[19] Allin and Tracey Deneault never married.[18]

Beliefs[edit source | editbeta][]

Allin was an extreme individualist and anti-authoritarian, promoting lawlessness and violence against police officers in many of his lyrics, and his essay, The GG Allin Manifesto, was intended to summarize his personal philosophy. He stated on Geraldo that he believed that his body was a temple of rock and roll, and his flesh, blood and bodily fluids are a communion to the people. Another reason given for his onstage antics (by Dino, the drummer of his band, the Murder Junkies) was that he wanted to draw a parallel between his actions and "a society that's going crazy with violence." He has also said that if he did not do his performances he would probably be a serial killer or a mass murderer.[7]

Death[edit source | editbeta][]

[1][2]GG Allin's grave in Littleton, New Hampshire.

GG Allin's last show was on June 27, 1993 at a small club called The Gas Station, a punk venue located inside of a former gas station at 194 E 2nd Street in Manhattan. During the second song, the power went out, after which he trashed the venue, walked across the street entirely naked, and then continued on (now wearing shorts, but still covered in blood and feces) through the neighborhood, followed by a large group of fans.

After walking the streets for almost an hour, Allin eventually went to the apartment of John Handley. There, he and others continued to party and use drugs. Sometime during the evening, Allin ingested large amounts of heroin, on which he accidentally overdosed and slipped into an unconscious state. Those in the apartment posed for photos with Allin around 2 A.M., not realizing that the musician was already in the early stages of respiratory failure. Sometime in the early morning of June 28, Allin died from the effects of his accidental heroin overdose. The next morning, some noticed that Allin still lay motionless in the same place where they had left him and called for an ambulance. Allin was pronounced dead at the scene. He was 36 years old.[17]

Funeral[edit source | editbeta][]

The funeral took place on July 3, 1993 in his native New Hampshire, at the St. Rose Cemetery, Littleton.[20] At his funeral, Allin's bloated, discolored corpse was dressed in his black leather jacket and trademark jock strap. He had a bottle of Jim Beam beside him in his casket, per his wishes (openly stated in his self-penned acoustic country ballad, "When I Die"). As part of his brother's request, the mortician was instructed not to wash the corpse (which smelled strongly of feces), or apply any makeup.

Allin's funeral became a low level party. Friends posed with his corpse, placing drugs and whiskey into his mouth. As the funeral ended, his brother put a pair of headphones on Allin. The headphones were plugged into a portable cassette player, in which was loaded a copy of The Suicide Sessions. Allin was buried in his mother Arleta's plot beside his grandparents.

Legacy[edit source | editbeta][]

Video footage of the soundcheck, concert, and aftermath from Allin's final concert on the day of his death was appended to the 1997 DVD release of Hated.

GG Allin's grave is frequently vandalized with urine, cigarette butts, feces and alcohol by fans,[21] an act that is greatly discouraged by GG's mother Arleta.[19] His tombstone has since been removed because of this.[22]

In music[edit source | editbeta][]

Allin's songs have been covered by a number of acts, including Eyehategod, Grand Belial's Key, CKY, the 69 Eyes, Maryslim, Nick Oliveri, Beck, Bus Station Loonies, The Lemonheads, No Age, The Spits, Dum Dum Girls, Times New Viking, Faith No More, Ty Segall, Taake, Hank Williams III, Ben Gibbard of Death Cab for Cutie and The Postal Service, John Darnielle of The Mountain Goats, Forgotten Tomb, A Disco For Ferns, Human Garbage and Watain .

Media[edit source | editbeta][]