Overview: The New York Hat (1912) is a short silent film directed by D. W. Griffith from a screenplay by Anita Loos, and starring Mary Pickford, Lionel Barrymore, and Lillian Gish.

Release date: 5 December 1912

Genre: Short, Drama

When Mrs. Harding dies, she leaves a mysterious letter to her pastor. The note tells how her cold, miserly husband worked her to death...

Overview: The Musketeers of Pig Alley is a 1912 American short drama and a gangster film. It is directed by D. W. Griffith and written by Griffith and Anita Loos. It is also credited for its early use of follow ...

Overview: Robin Hood is a 1912 film made by Eclair Studios when it and many other early film studios in America's first motion picture industry were based in Fort Lee, New Jersey. The film's costumes feature enormous ...

Overview: Falling Leaves is a 1912 American silent short film by Alice Guy-Blaché, produced at Solax Studios. Starring Solax stock actors, the story concerns a child's earnest effort to keep her dying sister alive ...

Release date: 15 March 1912

Genre: Short, Drama

Director: Alice Guy

This autumn, Dr. Earl Headley is eagerly demonstrating what seems to be a miraculous cure for tuberculosis...

Overview: Richard III is a 55-minute film adaptation of Shakespeare's play, starring Frederick Warde as the title character. The 1912 film, a French/U.S. international co-production, was produced by Film d'Art and ...

Release date: 15 October 1912

Genre: Drama

Shakespeare's tragedy of the hump-backed Duke of Gloucester, who rises to the throne of England by chicanery...

Overview: Cleopatra is a 1912 American silent historical drama starring Helen Gardner in the title role and directed by Charles L. Gaskill. It is the first film to be produced by Gardner's production company, The ...

Release date: 13 November 1912

Genre: Drama, History

The fabled queen of Egypt's affair with Roman general Marc Antony is ulimately disastrous for both of them.

Overview: Aurora Floyd is a 1912 American silent short drama film directed by Theodore Marston based on the 1863 British novel of the same name by Mary Elizabeth Braddon. The film stars Florence La Badie in the ...