Bio

Amber Beseli is an Adjunct Assistant Professor in Agricultural and Human Sciences. Prior to joining the AHS department, Amber worked in the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences (CALS) as the Program Director of CALS Global Academy, a specialized office dedicated to designing custom technical and leadership trainings for international agricultural professionals. Through this role, Amber hosted 20 training programs with professionals from 21 different countries.

Amber has a passion for introducing NC State students to the international side of agriculture. One way she accomplished this is through the two courses she has created and teaches: “Global Issues in Agriculture,” which is designed to introduce students to international agricultural issues and development projects; and “Trends and Culture of the Agricultural Workforce,” which is designed to to introduce students to cultural diversity, the value it adds to the agricultural workplace, and how to increase, improve, and support cultural diversity in the workplace. Amber also has a strong passion for study abroad. She developed and co-directed a new program titled “Germany and Czech Republic: Food, Energy, and Society” and co-directed a new program titled “Netherlands: Agricultural Innovations, Agritourism, & Agri-food Products.”

Amber’s passion for agricultural education started to develop during her time in high school FFA and on the family farm in Western, NC. Her introduction to other cultures and international agriculture came from her experiences studying abroad at The Prague Institute, on CALS faculty-led programs, and on international horticultural field trips.

Programs and Initiatives

Germany and Czech Republic: Food, Energy, and Society study abroad program

Netherlands: Agricultural Innovations, Agritourism, & Agri-food Products study abroad program

The Agricultural Institute’s Agricultural Operations Management certificate program

Primary Teaching Responsibilities

AGI 134: Trends and Culture of the Agricultural Workforce

ALS 495: Global Issues in Agriculture

Contributing Websites

https://cals.ncsu.edu/international-programs/students/study-abroad/germany

Professional Honors/Offices/Recognitions

2020: Manuscript research highlighted in the Crop Science Society of America’s News Magazine: Volume 65, Issue 5. Page 16

2017: Completed the NC State Preparing the Professoriate Program

2015: Awarded Distinguished Manuscript at the Sothern Association Conference of the American Association for Agricultural Education

Selected Publications

Beseli, A.L., Shekoofa, A., Mujahid, A., & Sinclair, T.R. (2020) Temporal water use by two maize lines differing in leaf osmotic potential. Crop Science, 2020;1–9. https://doi.org/10.1002/csc2.20062

Beseli, A.L., Hall, A.J., Manandhar, A., & Sinclair, T.R. (2019) Root osmotic potential and length for two maize lines differing in leaf osmotic potential. Journal of Crop Improvement, 33(4). https://doi.org/10.1080/15427528.2019.1607642

Beseli, A., & Park, T. D. (2020). University professors’ content and delivery to develop an understanding of climate change. North American Colleges and Teachers of Agriculture, Las Cruces, NM. Available at https://julnet.swoogo.com/nacta2020/Orals?i=aV0DmE-5LwCUiHaDYs5plxpJdBqqQbZX

Beseli, A.L. & Park, T.D. (2019) University Professors’ Assumptions about Students Understanding of Climate Change. North American Colleges and Teachers of Agriculture.

Beseli, A.L., Warner, W.J., Kirby, B.M., & Jones, D.W.W. (2016) Motivations to Study Abroad: A Case Study of the College of Agricultural and Life Sciences Agribusiness Short-Term Study Abroad Program. Journal of International Agricultural and Extension Education, 23 (1). https://doi.org/10.5191/jiaee.2016.23104

View More Publications

Education

BS Agricultural Education with a Minor in Horticultural Sciences NC State University

MS Agricultural and Extension Education NC State University

PhD Crop Science with a Minor in Agricultural Education NC State University

Area(s) of Expertise