Australia’s premiere synth-prog outfit VOYAGER have played to their strengths and have covered the Australian Modern Classic ‘This Boy’s in Love’, originally by Electronic duo The Presets. Fusing together VOYAGER’s signature Epic Electro Progressive Power Prog Metal with a huge pop song, the VSets version is sure to be a hit. The video can be viewed HERE.

The band comments on the cover: “The Presets song is one of those songs that I heard and thought “I wish I’d written this”. At the time it came out it was so fresh in Australia, and so bizarre that it became so popular because it’s really very much Euro Style Dark Synthie EBM. Given that a lot of Voyager songs start out as electronic ideas, this semi-obscure modern Australian classic was a no brainer to cover. We hope you enjoy!”

View Voyager

Related posts

Voyager Cancel EU/UK Tour Dates

Posted on March 25, 2024

After breaking out with a Top 10 finish at Eurovision and the ARIA-topping album Fearless in Love, VOYAGER were dealt a cruel twist of fate last fall when vocalist, keytarist and founding member Daniel Estrin was diagnosed with cancer. While Danny’s chemotherapy treatment has been very effective, his cancer is the most aggressive mutation. His medical team will continue fortnightly chemotherapy for the foreseeable future, which makes touring impossible. As a result, VOYAGER has made the collective decision to cancel all shows in 2024 to ensure focus is on Danny’s recovery and continuing the positive medical progress that he’s made.

Voyager Re-Take the Spotlight in 2024 with ‘Fearless in Love’ EU/UK Dates

Posted on November 27, 2023

VOYAGER are counting on a successful comeback in 2024. The Eurovision breakouts are now announcing the rescheduled dates for their European and UK tour supporting Fearless in Love.

Voyager Reissue ‘Fearless in Love’ on Vinyl with “Promise”

Posted on August 25, 2023

VOYAGER have been everywhere since landing in the Top Ten at Eurovision. They’ve topped the AIR chart. They’ve chatted with Today and Guitar World and graced the cover of Prog magazine.

Voyager Reissue Album that Set Course for Eurovision

Posted on August 8, 2023

Voyager have come a long way. The band just released their breakthrough album ‘Fearless in Love’, but they first formed back in 1999, when Daniel Estrin was studying at the University of Western Australia.

Voyager release ‘Fearless in Love’

Posted on July 14, 2023

You’ve probably noticed, but VOYAGER are on quite a ride. The band started this year with a Top Ten finish at this year’s Eurovision Song Contest, thanks to their keytar-charged power ballad “Promise”. Back home, they were treated to a hero’s welcome with a sold-out summer tour of Australia. Earlier this week, they released “Ultraviolet”, which highlighted a darker, more introspective side to to their electro progressive metal.