Rex Harrison is a married British man in the wrong place at the wrong time, when he goes to visit his girlfriend (Patricia Wayne) and discovers that someone has knifed her. Of course we know he didn’t do it, but the landlady (Brenda de Banzie) and the police don’t know that…and they are all quick to pin the blame on him.

It doesn’t help that his photo has been found at the scene. Police suspect that he killed the lovely lass in a moment of blinding rage, because he wouldn’t leave his wife (Lilli Palmer) for her and she had started to see someone else. It’s a theory that seems to have merit, and soon Harrison is arrested, despite his protestations that he is in fact innocent of the crime.

In real life, Lilli Palmer and Rex Harrison were married at this time. It was a marriage that lasted from 1943 to 1957. They had spent the previous few years at a home they owned in Italy, because he had become persona non grata in Hollywood.

Harrison was not blackballed because of his political affiliations, but because he had been having an affair with actress Carole Landis when they both worked at 20th Century Fox. Miss Landis committed suicide in the summer of 1948, because she was heartbroken that Harrison would not leave Palmer for her.

There were also rumors that Landis was pregnant and Harrison demanded she get an abortion. Harrison already had children…a young son with Palmer, as well as an older son from a previous marriage. Interestingly, Harrison and Palmer attended Landis’ funeral. But he was shut out of Hollywood circles after her death, and as a result he and Palmer, who remained by his side, retreated to Italy.

By 1950, they were ready to return to movies and lined up a deal at British Lion to make THE LONG DARK HALL. It was based on a bestselling crime novel by Edgar Lustgarten, with a script by Nunnally Johnson. In some ways this choice of material plays as if Harrison is atoning for Landis’ sad demise, since the situation in the film mirrors his own recent situation off screen.

The key difference is that the girlfriend has not killed herself, but instead has been killed by another person. Harrison has blood on himself, because he touched the girlfriend’s lifeless body back in her flat. He burns the blood-stained clothing. When the coppers come round with questions, Harrison lies about his connection to the victim. He is arrested anyway.

There’s a good scene where Palmer reads a confession that Harrison writes at the precinct, after he has decided to come clean and admit he had an obsessive relationship with the dead girl.

However, he still maintains he did not kill her. Palmer will continue to be supportive as the case goes to trial. The couple’s real-life fondness for each other comes through in spades…and to some extent, this is an ongoing love story.

Palmer recites dialogue about why she is willing to forgive her husband and stay married to him, which seems like it comes from the heart. (Unfortunately, the Harrisons would divorce several years later but they never stopped being friends…and a portion of his ashes were scattered over her grave.)

The middle section of the film involves courtroom testimony. There are amusing asides from the judge (Henry B. Longhurst), and we look on as a parade of witnesses come forward and share their own recollections about what happened the night the murder occurred. The best courtroom scenes are probably those where Miss de Banzie is on the stand, as the landlady. She nearly perjures herself because she doesn’t want to admit she often left the front door of her home open, allowing strangers to come in at all hours.

There is an interesting subplot where the actual culprit, known only as The Man (Anthony Dawson), befriends Palmer during the trial. While he is rather evasive about his interest in the outcome, he manages to become a sympathetic ear for Palmer who at one point takes him home with her for tea. Big mistake.

The Man’s a Jack-the-Ripper type who considers it proper “justice” killing immoral girls that perform in music halls and lead men astray. He intends to take credit for the murder, but only after Harrison is convicted and hanged.

There’s a neat little twist at the end, in which our murderer miscalculates and sends his confession note too soon…just before Harrison is to be taken off to the gallows. This means Harrison is set free. And the only punishment to be served will be Palmer’s, who as the long-suffering wife, will have to deal with Harrison when he cheats again.