The Legend of Bagger Vance (2000)

It seemed so easy: two young superstars (Matt Damon, Will Smith) directed by an old superstar (Robert Redford) in a movie about a popular sport (golf). How could you not have a hit?

Well, here's your answer. Bagger Vance isn't exactly bad, just boring. It's like the filmmakers were more concerned with having the film deliver a message and forgot that it should also be interesting. As a result, the message gets lost, because most people stop paying attention.

It's the early 1930s. Damon plays Rannulph Junuh -- a young, retired, once-great golfer who has lost his swing. When he is coaxed into a comeback tournament, Junuh fears he won't rediscover his skills. Enter a mystical caddy, Bagger Vance (Smith), who helps Junuh understand that his problems go beyond his golf game.

It's a gorgeous film, as Redford has a keen eye for setting and landscape. Sadly, the story doesn't live up to those standards. The DVD includes a making-of documentary that aired on HBO.

102 Dalmatians (2000)

Someone with more time and space than I have should do a column on why, after 70 years of no sequels, Disney is suddenly churning out follow-ups to popular movies. The last few months saw Fantasia 2, Little Mermaid 2, and now rumours that Peter Pan 2 is soon to be announced. Creative bankruptcy? Brilliantly exploiting a hole in the market? We'll leave it to someone else's column.

102 Dalmatians stars Glenn Close, reprising her role as Cruella De Vil. She's been hypnotized into loving puppies, and works at a shelter for orphaned animals. Then, suddenly, the hypnotism wears of.

102 Dalmatians hits its target demographic spot-on -- what child can resist cute little doggies? However, adults will have a tough time getting involved in the paint-by-numbers plot.

The DVD is packed with extras, including director's commentary, three behind-the-scenes featurettes, outtakes and "Puppy Action Overload," a music-video montage of the dogs' auditions.

DVDs this week

Cleopatra

The grandest spectacle ever, or ego-driven disaster? Both. Filming took place all over Europe and costs rocketed to more than $42-million US -- in 1963 dollars. That's nearly $300-million today. Production was a mess -- which had "curse of the mummy" conspiracy theorists foaming at the mouth. Elizabeth Taylor (who demanded a salary of $1-million) contracted meningitis and nearly died, which delayed filming for six months. After the delay, several actors had to leave due to prior commitments and Taylor's poor health forced the production to move from rainy England to sunny Italy. That meant that the scenes with now-departed actors in left-behind sets had to be reshot. The original director quit. When the film was finally released, it was overshadowed by the affair between Taylor and co-star Richard Burton. Critics savaged the four-hour film and the public avoided it. The studio, 20th Century Fox, escaped bankruptcy by the thinnest of balance sheets. For a long time, the film symbolized out-of-control ego, greed and libido. Still, Cleopatra is a visual feast.

The three-disc DVD contains the original cut, plus a brand-new documentary, a 1963 featurette, footage from the New York and Hollywood premieres and commentary from co-stars Martin Landau, Hume Cronyn, and sons of director Joseph L. Mankiewicz.

Lawrence of Arabia

"If you were any prettier," Noel Coward remarked to star Peter O'Toole after seeing this film, "they'd have to call it 'Florence of Arabia.'" This equally famous epic, which won Best Picture in 1962, also gets deluxe treatment. The two-disc box-set contains four brand-new featurettes, an exclusive documentary, a conversation with Steven Spielberg and DVD-ROM elements.

WEBLINKS

Now that Survivorsucks.com has ironically started sucking, we need to find a replacement site. This has it all: news articles from papers across North America and rare photos and video clips of ousted contestants on various talk shows.