Home > 2000 - 2009 > The Legend of Bagger Vance

The Legend of Bagger Vance

Year - 2000

Studio - Dreamworks, Twentieth Century Fox

Stars - Will Smith, Matt Damon, Charlize Theron, Bruce McGill, Joel Gretsch, J. Michael Moncrief, Lane Smith

Director - Robert Redford

Writing Credits - Steven Pressfield (novel), Jeremy Leven (screenplay)

Music - Rachel Portman

Synopsis

As a young man, Rannulph Junuh (Matt Damon) is one of the most promising golfers in the country. He leaves his Savannah, Georgia, home and his girlfriend, Adele Invergordon (Charlize Theron), to join the World War I fighting in Europe, where he is a hero, but is traumatized by the carnage. When he returns home, he turns to the bottle, and ignores Adele and golf.

Adele's father has built a luxury Savannah golf and country club but, when the Great Depression hits, mounting debts cause him to commit suicide. Local businessmen attempt to convince Adele to sell them the property for a fraction of its value, but she impulsively announces that her country club will be sponsoring an exhibition match between golfing greats Bobby Jones and Walter Hagen.

The city elders agree to support the plan only if a local golfer is included in the contest. A young boy and golfing enthusiast, Hardy Greaves (J. Michael Moncrief) insists that he can get Junuh to participate. He goes to his house, but the reclusive Junuh adamantly refuses, saying that he has "lost his swing." Adele swallows her pride and also attempts, without success, to convince Junuh to enter. After she leaves, however, Junuh starts hitting some balls in his yard when, over the horizon, a man appears and introduces himself as Bagger Vance (Will Smith). He offers to caddy for Junuh for "five dollars guaranteed."

Junuh sees that the Savannah residents, so demoralized by the Depression, would experience great pride in seeing him take part in the exhibition, so he agrees to join. As he prepares, Bagger offers guidance with his game, not in technique but in his mental attitude about it. As Junuh struggles with his rusty skills, Bagger remains confident and serene.

Bobby Jones (Joel Gretsch) and Walter Hagen (Bruce McGill) arrive in Savannah to great fanfare, and the three-day, 54 hole match gets under way, to the considerable enthusiasm of the crowd. However, Junuh, with Bagger and Hardy caddying for him, commits many errors and, at the end of the first day of play, he is 12 strokes behind Jones and Hagen.

Show Spoilers

Trailer