Sage Journals is the natural home for leading authors, editors, and societies. Publishing more than 1,000 journals, from a wide range of disciplines, Sage is here to meet your needs.

Browse our hubs for the latest top downloaded articles, special issues and full journal portfolios from each of our disciplines:

Business & Management

Cardiology & Cardiovascular Medicine

Clinical Medicine & Surgery

Communication & Media Studies

Criminology

Education

Engineering & Materials Science

Geography

Health & Nursing

Neurology & Neuroscience

Orthopaedics & Sports Medicine

Pharmacology, Toxicology & Pathology

Politics & International Relations

Psychiatry

Psychology & Counselling

Religion

Research Methods

Sociology

Social Work & Social Policy

Urban Studies & Planning

Welcome to Advance: Sage's community to publish preprints and forum for academics to get feedback on research prior to publication.

Advance allows researchers within the fields of humanities and social sciences to post their work online and free of charge. Advance welcomes a variety of preprint types, including, but not limited to, original research, literature reviews, commentaries, and case studies. Once accepted, each preprint will be freely available online to the research community and peers and will benefit from our monitored commenting feature.

Learn more about Advance by visiting our About page and reviewing our Submission Guidelines.

Peer review is "a process where scientists (aka peers) evaluate the quality of other scientists’ work. By doing this, they aim to ensure the work is rigorous, coherent, uses past research and adds to what we already know." You can learn more in this explainer from the Social Science Space.

Peer review brings academic research to publication in the following ways:

Evaluation – Peer review is an effective form of research evaluation to help select the highest quality articles for publication.

Integrity – Peer review ensures the integrity of the publishing process and the scholarly record. Reviewers are independent of journal publications and the research being conducted.

Quality – The filtering process and revision advice improve the quality of the final research article as well as offering the author new insights into their research methods and the results that they have compiled. Peer review gives authors access to the opinions of experts in the field who can provide support and insight.

Types of Peer Review

Single-anonymized – the name of the reviewer is hidden from the author.

Double-anonymized – names are hidden from both reviewers and the authors.

Triple-anonymized – names are hidden from authors, reviewers, and the editor.

Open peer review comes in many forms. At Sage we offer a form of open peer review on four journals via our Transparent Peer Review program, whereby the reviews are published alongside the article. The names of the reviewers may also be published, depending on the reviewers’ preference.

Post publication peer review can offer useful interaction and a discussion forum for the research community. This form of peer review is not usual or appropriate in all fields.

To learn more about the different types of peer review, see page 14 of The Nuts and Bolts of Peer Review from Sense about Science.

Please double check the manuscript submission guidelines of the journal you are reviewing in order to ensure that you understand the method of peer review being used.

Sage Peer Review Support Resources

Sage Journal Reviewer Gateway

Guide to Becoming a Peer Reviewer

Video: How to Become a Peer Reviewer

Video: How to Conduct Peer Review

Video: Peer Review Ethics

Infographic: Your Paper and Peer Review