About

The original Northern Powerhouse, Newcastle upon Tyne has witnessed countless transformations over the last century or so, from its industrial heyday, when Tyneside engineering and innovation led the world, through decades of post-industrial decline, and underinvestment, to its more recent reinvention as a cultural destination for the North.

The ten short stories gathered here all feature characters in search of something, a new reality, a space, perhaps, in which to rediscover themselves: from the call-centre worker imagining herself far away from the claustrophobic realities of her day job, to the woman coming to terms with an ex-lover who’s moved on all too quickly, to the man trying to outrun his mother’s death on Town Moor. The Book of Newcastle brings together some of the city’s most renowned literary talents, along with exciting new voices, proving that while Newcastle continues to feel the effects of its lost industrial past, it is also a city striving for a future that brims with promise.

Press

One of Stylist Magazine's '10 books everyone will be reading in January 2020'.

Featuring Portico Prize winning author Jessica Andrews - read her story 'Blood Brothers' at The London Magazine

Read Julia Darling's story 'Calling from Newcastle' at The Morning Star

One of The Irish Times' 'Books to Watch Out for in 2020'

As featured in Wasafiri Magazine's 'Writing Britain Now' series.

Read an interview with editors Angela Readman and Zoe Turner at NRTH LASS

Read an interview with co-editor Angela Readman at The State of the Arts.

Read an interview with contributing author Jessica Andrews at Northern Soul.

Listen to a discussion about The Book of Newcastle on Up North Books podcast.

'A city examined from multiple angles, obliquely, without care to promote or sugar-coat. No agenda, beyond shining a light on fragments of the life it holds.' - Bookmunch

'This collection has scouted out some of the finest story-tellers of the region, and strung their prose together.' - Palatinate

'The writing is considered, poetic and descriptive, beautiful at times...' - David Whetstone, Only in Newcastle

'Newcastle sensibility sings from the pages... After reading, you may well want to hop on a train up there, pronto.' - The State of the Arts

'The result is a kaleidoscopic, jigsaw-like view of Newcastle, as much about the people who have chosen to make their home in the city as those born here.' - Durham Reads

'If you have a spare ten minutes in your day, find out a little more about a city in the north of our country that has been somewhat neglected, through engaging and easy-reading narrative.' - Number 9

'I unwittingly tore through this collection in little over a day, which is undeniable testament to its vibrancy, virtuosity and command.' - Bright Star Book Blog

'Great writing has the ability to touch the reader, and the words of these authors definitely stay with you long after you've put the book down.' - Cathy Castling

'The diverse voices, characters and subject matter in the collection strive to prove our interconnected nature... I urge everyone to buy this book, whether familair with Newcastle or not' - What Kate Read Next

'A stunning collection of writing... each story is clever, memorable and moving' - Kaggsy's Book Ramblings

'I enjoyed reading through such a diverse range of voices... The Book of Newcastle is in a word charming' - Arguably Kelly

'There are some very moving stories here, and as a collection it certainly evidences that this is a vibrant, busy and interesting city.' - Scott Hadley