A Newcastle-born writer is celebrating the publication of her debut novel which follows a feisty young Geordie woman who has travelled to Greece.

Inspired by a recurring dream, Jackie Watson's Apokeri Bay is the first part of a trilogy set in Lefkada - a quaint seaside village full of secrets. The novel is described as an uplifting and thought-provoking fiction which was born from a dream about a feisty female protagonist who unexpectedly falls in love with a quaint Greek seaside village.

And the writer, from Tyne Valley, has teamed up with a local creative agency to bring the book to a Whitley Bay book shop, as well as online.

Read more: Join ChronicleLive's Whatsapp community for breaking news and top stories

Jackie said: "As a debut author it's an amazing feeling to hold the imagined world of Apokeri in my hands. I'm very humbled that Debs, Dave and the talented team at Wigwam Studios took on my project. They have worked their magic to create a stunning book cover which has received so much positive feedback."

Wigwam Studios won the Creative StartUp Award for North East England, Yorkshire and the Humber at the National StartUp Awards last year and was approached by Jackie to design the Apokeri Bay book cover. The company is best known for its trend guides, illustration and brand development services and works with an impressive range of global clients including Hasbro, Disney, Mattel, Moonbug and Ravensburger.

Debs Southwood, Design Director at Wigwam Studios said: "We were delighted to bring our expertise to this project. It was a privilege to work with a writer at the start of what I am sure will be a very successful career. I certainly look forward to reading Apokeri Bay now that it is published."

Dave Mitcheson, director of Creative Illustration led the project, added: "A book cover must grab the buyer's attention immediately or they will simply move on. Jackie provided us with a clear brief which enabled our illustrators to capture the Greek essence of the story and bring Jackie's vision to life."

Jackie lives in the Tyne Valley with her partner and Miniature Schnauzer. If she's not working or writing she can be found striding around the countryside, pottering in their allotment, running or occasionally cycling.

Jackie weaves into her storytelling the chance to step into the world of somebody else and share in their life. But she certainly doesn't give her characters an easy life. They might discover life-changing friendships, love and hope but need to overcome family friction, dark secrets, guilt and betrayal.

Ultimately, they must learn how to embrace and overcome everything life throws at them. Apokeri Bay is available at Amazon on Kindle and in paperback. It can also be purchased from The Bound bookshop in Whitley Bay.

And Jackie is already getting to work on her second book, which will once again be produced with the support of Wigwam.

Jackie added: "Wigwam is part of our region's vibrant creative industry and I was thrilled to work with them. It was also important for me to team up with a talented North East company that has a strong company ethos. They donate 10% of their profits to good causes and have already planted 4,300 trees through TreeApp. I am delighted to be working with them again on my second book."