Mockumentary filmmakers Henry Joost and Ariel Schulman (“Catfish”) know a thing or two about misdirecting an audience, as they’ve proved again with 2011’s “Paranormal Activity 3.” Along with returning screenwriter Christopher Landon, however, this time around they seem short on new ideas, relying more on the series’ reputation for low-budget thrills to attract audiences. Regardless, by now Paramount’s franchise is a brand unto itself, and it’s unlikely that anything will stop the first few waves of fans boosting “Paranormal Activity 4” up the chart until at least through Halloween.

Quickly recapping, with flashbacks and documentary-style introductory cards, the conclusion of “Paranormal Activity 2,” the current version jumps ahead to 2011, relocating the action from California to Nevada and introducing an entirely new family.

Teenager Alex (Kathryn Newton), her 6-year-old brother, Wyatt (Aiden Lovekamp), and their parents (Stephen Dunham and Alexondra Lee) live a typical middle-class suburban life, even if they think their neighbors across the street – single mother Katie and young son Robbie (Brady Allen) – are a bit of an odd pair.

After Katie is unexpectedly and mysteriously admitted to the hospital for an unknown illness, Alex’s mom inexplicably offers to take in Robbie while his mother is recovering. Alex soon begins to notice strange events coinciding with Robbie’s arrival, while the young visitor’s actions increasingly draw Wyatt away from her. Other family members also begin to notice the strange goings-on, including mysterious sounds, shifting furniture and alarmingly animated household objects suggesting something is seriously amiss.

With the help of her boyfriend Ben (Matt Shively), Alex sets up the family’s home video cameras and laptops to record Robbie’s late-night wanderings and vaguely sinister activities around the house.

As Alex becomes more convinced that some evil presence is seeking her out, the mysterious forces behind Robbie’s visit become more assertive, squarely threatening the family’s survival.

By now the basis of the “Paranormal Activity” franchise is well-known to those who care. The fourth installment adds little new information while playing out the inevitably unpleasant outcomes that await the characters, recycling elements from other films.

Fairly mild in tone and riffing off a collection of horror classics that includes “The Shining,” “Rosemary’s Baby” and “Poltergeist,” the franchise’s premise and execution nevertheless remain rudimentary.

Although Newton and Shively are likable as sleuthing teens, the other performances remain perfunctory. Laptop webcams and camera phones are substituted for the earlier video-surveillance cams, but little has changed visually in the style of the filmmakers’ alternation of static and frantic hand-held shots, mixed with a surfeit of distracting close-ups.