ADRIANNE Curry was previously married to a well-known actor and businessman from 2006 to 2013.

After they divorced, she tied the knot with another celebrity in the movie industry in 2018.

Who is Adrianne Curry married to?

As of the time of writing, Adrianne Curry is currently married to Matthew Rhode.

Born on April 19, 1982, Matthew is a voice actor who has recorded several television commercials, movie trailers, and network promotions.

He has done voiceover work in television commercials for brands such as JCPenney and Powerade.

He has also done voiceover work on radio commercials for brands such as Chevron, Progressive Insurance, and Miller Lite.

Furthermore, Matthew's works extended into the video gaming industry where he worked on games such as the famous Grand Theft Auto 5.

Additionally, he became a premium partner of the popular live-streaming service, Twitch.TV, where he regularly created comedic broadcasts for fans.

Adrianne and Matthew got engaged on August 5, 2017.

Subsequently, they tied the knot on September 15, 2018.

Prior to this marriage, Adrianne was married to Brady Bunch star Christopher Knight from 2006 to 2013.

The two met on the VH1 reality series, The Surreal Life. They also appeared on My Fair Brady which followed their relationship.

What is Matthew Rhode's net worth?

According to Popular Net Worth, Matthew has an estimated net worth of approximately between $1million and $5million, as of February 2023.

His main source of wealth is said to be his career as a voiceover actor.

He also earns income from brand endorsements and sponsorships.

What is Adrianne Curry's net worth?

According to Celebrity Net Worth, Adrianne Curry has an estimated net worth of approximately $500thousand, as of February 2023.

Her main source of wealth is said to be her career as a model, actress, and reality television star.

Adrianne is best known for being the winner of America's Next Top Model in 2003.

She also earns income from brand endorsements and sponsorships.