Former Brady Bunch star Christopher Knight and wife Adrianne Curry split on their five year anniversary

Brady Bunch star Christopher Knight and former America's Next Top Model contestant Adrianne Curry have reportedly ended their marriage.

The news comes on the couple's five-year wedding anniversary, today.

Citing irreconcilable differences, the pair's decision is said to be a 'mutual' one.

It's over: Brady Bunch star Christopher Knight and his wife Adrianne Curry, both pictured here, have ended their marriage

Their manager Phil Viardo made the announcement via website Hollyscoop.com.

'After starting a relationship with what seemed to be irreconcilable differences, the couple has reached a period where those differences are no longer appreciated,' their manager told the website.

'The decision was mutually reached after it became clear to both that some perspective was needed in order to assess their unique union… They still love one another but need some distance to consider their future.

'Both Knight and Curry decided to release this joint announcement today in order to preempt any potential rumours and gossip and ask that their fans and the media respect their privacy during this delicate period.'

The couple met after appearing on VH1 series, The Surreal Life, a reality television series where a group of celebrities live together in a mansion.

Knight later proposed to Curry in 2005 on their own reality spin-off, My Fair Brady.

During the second season the show focused on the couple's wedding preparations, and on May 29, 2005, they tied the knot in a Gothic-style wedding in Curry's hometown of Joilet, Illinois.

The show also documented their first year of marriage.

Today was to mark the couple's five year anniversary and the oddly the last thing Adrianne wrote on her Twitter account was: 'May 29, 2006 I married Christopher Anton Knight. Enjoy your weekend! I certainly am!'

Mysterious: The last thing Adrianne wrote on her Twitter account was: 'May 29, 2006 I married Christopher Anton Knight. Enjoy your weekend! I certainly am!'

There were signs that there was perhaps trouble in paradise earlier this month, when Curry appeared on the Howard Stern show.

She told the shock jock that she took to Twitter because she liked the attention after being 'unsatisfied' at home.

She also revealed that she was using sex toys rather than getting intimate with her husband.

In the past, the self-confessed Twitter fan has not been shy about posting intimate pictures of herself.

Last year she posed mid-shower, make-up free and merely covering her modesty in foam.

The winner of the first America's Next Top Model showed off her near-naked figure in a photo posted on the social-networking site.