The winner of the first season of , Adrianne Curry is a gorgeous model and TV personality. Curry was married to Christopher Knight in the past, but their marriage couldn’t last long. Let’s find out what went wrong.

Adrianne Curry and Christopher Knight's wedding

VH1’s ’s star Curry got proposed by Christopher Knight on the season’s finale that came out in. The couple tied the knot in Curry’s hometown of Juliet, Illinois in a beautiful wedding ceremony which took place on .

Their wedding was a gothic-themed wedding which was the idea of Curry herself. She said, “I wanted to go as Gothic as I could and as traditional as I could without ruffling anyone's feathers. ... I wanted to have a black dress ... but I knew it would break my grandmother's heart.”

Adrianne Curry and Christopher Knight's relationship issues

Despite it seeming like Curry and Knight’s relationship was going perfect from the outside, they were having issues in their marriage for a long time. The couple announced their separation on 29th May 2011.

During an interview with Hollyscoop, the couple’s manager said,"After starting a relationship with what seemed to be irreconcilable differences, the couple has reached a period where those differences are no longer appreciated. The decision was mutually reached after it became clear to both that some perspective was needed in order to assess their unique union. Not unlike all marriages, work must be put in." He further added, "Obvious to both Knight and Curry was that their marriage would require more effort than a garden-variety relationship. They are taking time to see if they want to continue to put in that extraordinary effort. The couple has mutually determined that they are at a place where moving forward will require a step back. They still love one another but need some distance to consider their future."

Adrianne Curry wasn't happy with Christopher Knight's

Curry’s interview on Howard Stern’s radio show was also negative towards her then-husband. She said, “I might be a little out but he's trying to get back in…we've had a lot of distance lately. My big joke now is, 'I'm Mrs. Knight the third and probably not the last. You know, cause I always tell him, 'I understand, now, why they left you.' And I understand why we're together. Because it's very—it would be very hard for [other] people to put up with us...I frustrate him to the point where he's smashing his face into walls."

Adrianne Curry and Christopher Knight's divorce

After deciding that want to go separate ways, Curry and Knight filed for divorce on which got finalized in 2013.

Adrianne Curry is dating Matthew Rhode

Talking about her current boyfriend, Curry is dating actor Matthew Rhode. She often posts adorable pictures with him on her Instagram.

What do you guys think of her? Please leave a comment below.

ncG1vNJzZmiekaK8tr%2FSrZirnJ%2Bie6S7zGiYnaqZlruvsYycrKuqqWKxqsLOq5qenF2dsrN5x66qm5memXqktNGiqq2noJ2ys3nKp6CgoKRitq95kWloa2WRo7FusMCtnJ1lnZbBtbTEsGSroJ%2BZsg%3D%3D