Kevin Clarke

Operetta Reserch Center

7 December, 2023

It’s announced as a “rarity“ – and it certainly is. The Winterstein Theater in Annaberg-Buchholz in Saxony/Germany will present Hugo Hirsch’s three act operetta Der Fürst von Pappenheim this Saturday, with a book by Franz Arnold and Ernst Bach, lyrics by Willi Kollo. It’s a new production by Christian von Götz who made a splash there earlier with his queer reading of Benatzky’s Der reichste Mann der Welt (available on DVD).

Hugo Hirsch is not a familiar name today. He was born in Birnbaum in 1884 and is considered one of the important names of “Berlin Operetta” in the early 20th century, next to Paul Lincke, Jean Gilbert and Walter Kollo. “His works stand out because of their very rhythmic and catchy music”, the theatre’s website informs us and points out that Hirsch’s songs have a “cheeky frivolous tone”.

In 1912 his first vaudeville operettas were performed in Breslau and Düsseldorf. His song “Geh’n se bloß nicht nach Berlin“ became a hit when Otto Reutter sang it.

Also popular were songs such as “Wer wird denn weinen, wenn man auseinandergeht“, interpreted by Trude Hesterberg in 1920 as part of the operetta Die Scheidungsreise (“The Divorce Vacation“), presented at the Deutsches Künstlertheater in Berlin. It became a classic and was later interpreted by Marlene Dietrich, among others.

Hirsch followed this up in 1922 with Die tolle Lola (“Mad Lola”) and Dolly in 1923. The same year Der Fürst von Pappenheim premiered, it included the hit song “Und zum Schluss schuf der liebe Gott den Kuss“.

In 1924 his Toni made it to London’s Shaftsbury Theatre and ran there for a whole year. His exotic show Senora – with a Japanese character called Itzi Katzu – influenced Lehár’s Das Land des Lächelns and Abraham’s Die Blume von Hawaii.

In 1925 four Hirsch operettas premiered in Berlin: At the Operettenhaus am Schiffbauerdamm Komm doch endlich and Der blonde Traum (“The Blonde Dream“), at the Lessingtheater Die Abenteuer des Herrn Meiermax (“The Adventures of Mr. Meiermax”), and at the Deutsches Künstlertheater Monsieur Troulala.

At the height of his success Hirsch retired and only wrote individual melodies thereafter that he left to others to work into full songs, one of these others was the 18 year old Franz Grothe who used various Hirsch melodies for the revue Wieder Metropol.

Escape from Nazi Germany

In 1933 Hirsch emigrated to London, he later lived in Belgium and France where he survived the war with his non-Jewish wife. After WW2 he returned to Berlin.

In the 1950s bis Fürst von Pappenheim was turned into a movie with Victor de Kowa and Hannelore Schroth, Grete Weiser and Georg Thomalla.

In 1954 his Die tolle Lola was also made into a movie starring Grete Weiser and Walter Giller. Hirsch died in Berlin, mostly forgotten, in 1961.

Today, his former hits are ignored by operetta companies and researchers. Volker Klotz does not honor Hirsch with a biographical entry in his Operette: Porträt und Handbuch einer unerhörten Kunst. Fürst von Pappenheim is not listed in Klotz’ “Werk-Verweisregister“ either, i.e. the index to the latest edition of the book.

The show had been made into a silent movie in 1927 with the legendry Curt Bois in the title role.

The Fashion Salon of Camilla Pappenheim

So, what’s the piece about? The story takes place in the fashion salon of Camilla Pappenheim. Business is not going well, not even Camilla’s friend Diane – former mistress of Prince Sascha and now Baroness Katschkoff – can change that with a massive order of clothes. When Princess Stephanie, a trusted customer, decides to not depend on her uncle’s money anymore, because she refuses to marry a man she doesn’t love, things turn really sour for Camilla.

Her travelling salesman Egon Fürst comes up with an idea. He suggests hiring the princess as a mannequin and making her wear the company’s fashion at a fancy vacation spot on the Riviera. The other ladies there are supposed to see the Pappenheim collection as a “secret trend” and order clothes on a grand scale. Camilla is supposed to play the lady in waiting, and Egon intends to pose as the “Fürst von Pappenheim” in this trio. They all leave for the train, singing “Mit der Mitropa”.

The plan works. The problem is that the three imposters doesn’t just encounter rich new customers but also many old acquaintances. Baroness Diane’s suitor Hektor falls in love with Stephanie while he’s on the run from Diane’s jealous husband Katschkoff (singing “Oh, mein Herz ist hops” with her). Katschkoff, meanwhile, was ordered by Prince Sascha to find a formed flame – because he left an expensive bit of family jewelry in her bedroom. He’s not aware that this formed lover is now Katschkoff’s wife (“Diplomaten aller Staaten”).

And, to make things worse, Prince Sascha is the person Princess Stephanie is supposed to marry and is trying to get rid of, in favor of a man of her own choosing.

To bring the chaos to new heights, Stephanie’s uncle Count von Meersburg-Greiffenstein shows up and is greeted with enthusiasm by the ladies – and especially the demi-monde – of the Riviera.

Diane agrees to one last night with Prince Sascha, to personally hand over his jewelry (singing “Ich bin eine Frau vion wechselndem Reiz”). In return, her husband – who continues to be clueless about his wife’s behavior – receives a medal for “patriotic conduct” from the prince. And Count Meersburg-Greiffenstein finally consents to the engagement of his niece, Princess Stephanie, to Hektor when he realizes that Stephanie is modelling for the salon of Camilla who is a former mistress of the Count and received the salon as a parting gift from him.

All ends well with the song “Du brauchst mir ja nicht treu zu sein”, i.e. “You don’t have to be faithful to me”.

The fact that an inventive young director such as Christian von Götz will stage this who-slept-with-whom-story makes things extra promising. The cross-dressing elements of the film (see photo above) with probably find their way into the staging too.

Richard Glöckner plays Egon Fürst in Annaberg-Buchholz, Maria Rüssel is Diane, Sophia Keiler plays Princess Stephanie. Also, there are Jakob Hoffmann as Hektor, László Varga as Count Meersburg-Greiffenstein, and Christian Wincierz als Prince Sascha. Stephanie Ritter takes on the role of Camilla Pappenheim. Some of them will be familiar from the Reichste Mann der Welt production: Glöckler played Schorsch there, Varga was Thassilo, Ritter was Zenzi.

The sets are, again, by Christian von Götz himself. Leszek Kuligowski returns as choreographer.

Let’s hope a DVD of this piece will be made, too, for all those we can’t travel to Annaberg-Buchholz in the far corner of Saxony where performances run through to March 2024.