T. Maheswaran

T. Maheswaran (full name Thiyagarajah Maheswaran) (Tamil: தியாகராஜா மகேஸ்வரன்) (10 January 1966 – 1 January 2008) was an ethnic Tamil Sri Lankan Member of Parliament (MP) from Colombo.

Rajitha Senaratne

Nambukara Helambage Rajitha Harischandra Senaratne (born 29 May 1950) is a Sri Lankan dentist, politician, Member of Parliament and cabinet minister.

Ranjith Aluwihare

Ranjith Jinatissa Aluwihare (born May 5, 1958) is a Sri Lankan politician.

Ranjith Siyambalapitiya

Basnayaka Ralalage Ranjith Siyambalapitiya (born 1 May 1961) (known as Ranjith Siyambalapitiya) is a Sri Lankan politician, member of parliament for the Kegalle District and Cabinet Minister of Telecommunication and Information Technology.

Ravindra Randeniya

Ravindra Randeniya (Born Boniface Perera) (born 5 June 1945) is a Sri Lankan actor and politician.

Ravindra Samaraweera

Ravindra Samaraweera (or Ravi Samaraweera) is a Sri Lankan politician, the current state minister of Labor and Trade Union Relations member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka.

Ravi Karunanayake

Ravindra Sandresh Karunanayake, MP (born 19 February 1963) is a Sri Lankan politician.

Vino Noharathalingam

Subramanyam Noharathalingam (Tamil: சுப்பிரமணியம் நோகராதலிங்கம்; born 7 June 1963; commonly known as Vino Noharathalingam) is a Sri Lankan Tamil politician and former Member of Parliament.

W. B. Ekanayake

Wilfred Bandara Ekanayake is a Sri Lankan politician, a member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka and a government minister.

Nimalan Soundaranayagam

Ashley Nimalanayagam Soundaranayagam (6 November 1950 – 7 November 2000) was a Sri Lankan Tamil teacher, politician and Member of Parliament.

Muthu Sivalingam

Muthu Sivalingam is a Sri Lankan politician, a member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka and a government minister.

Richard Pathirana

Dr. Richard Pathirana (24 February 1938, Galle - 3 July 2008, Colombo) was a Sri Lankan politician and educationist.

R. Kuhaneswaran

Raja Kuhaneswaran (born 15 May 1960; also known as Irasa Kuganeswaran) is a Sri Lankan Tamil politician and former Member of Parliament.

Wijayapala Mendis

Thenahandi Wijayapala Hector Mendis (16 December 1928 – 1 September 2012) was a Sri Lankan politician and a member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka.

Amara Piyaseeli Ratnayake

Amara Piyaseeli Ratnayake is a Sri Lankan politician and current Governor of the North Western Province of Sri Lanka.

Athauda Seneviratne

Athauda Seneviratne is a Sri Lankan politician and a member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka.

John Amaratunga

John Anthony Emmanuel Amaratunga (born May 21, 1940) is a Sri Lankan politician and lawyer.

Johnston Fernando

Johnston Xavier Fernando (born 5 December 1964) is a Sri Lankan politician, former Cabinet Minister of Co-operatives and Internal Trade

P. P. Devaraj

Periannan Pillai Devaraj (born 21 February 1929) is a Sri Lankan politician and former minister of state.

Pavithra Wanniarachchi

Pavithra Wanniarachchi is a politician and lawyer by profession.

Mahindananda Aluthgamage

Mahindananda Aluthgamage (Sinhala:මහින්දානන්ද අලුත්ගමගේ), MP is the former Sri Lankan Sports minister.

M. K. A. D. S. Gunawardana

Munasinghe Kariyawasam Appuhamilage Don Somadasa Gunawardana (6 March 1947 – 19 January 2016) was a Sri Lankan politician, Member of Parliament and government minister.

Susantha Punchinilame

Galgamuwa Vidanalage Susantha Punchinilame is a Sri Lankan politician, originally from Ratnapura and the son of late G.

Jayarathna Herath

Jayarathna Herath is a Sri Lankan politician, a member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka and a government minister.

M. H. Mohamed

Mohamed Haniffa Mohamed (15 June 1921 – 26 April 2016) was a Sri Lankan politician.

Lakshman Senewiratne

Lakshman Pinto Jayatilaka Senewiratne (born 9 March 1957) (known as Lakshman Senewiratne) is a Sri Lankan politician, current State Minister of Science, Technology and Research and a member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka representing the Badulla District.

Nandimithra Ekanayake

Mahinda Nandimithra Ekanayake was born December 26, 1943, in Handala, Wattala.

Lakshman Yapa Abeywardena

Lakshman Yapa Abeywardena (born June 7, 1955) is a Sri Lankan politician.

P. Harrison

Pelisge Harrison (born July 24, 1964) is a Sri Lankan United National Party politician, current member of the Parliament for Anuradhapura District and Ministry of Rural Economic Affairs.

Mavai Senathirajah

Somasundaram Senathirajah (Tamil: சோமசுந்தரம் சேனாதிராஜா; born 27 October 1942; commonly known as Mavai Senathirajah) is a Sri Lankan Tamil politician and Member of Parliament.

Dharmadasa Banda

Rathnayaka Mudiyanselage Dharmadasa Banda (7 February 1938 – 23 October 2010), known as "R.

A. Vinayagamoorthy

Appathurai Vinayagamoorthy (Tamil: அப்பாத்துரை விநாயகமூர்த்தி; born 19 December 1933) is a Sri Lankan Tamil lawyer, politician and former Member of Parliament.

M. A. M. Maharoof

Mohamed Abdullah Mohamed Maharoof (born 25 April 1957; also known as Sinna Maharoof) is a Sri Lankan politician and Member of Parliament.

Imthiaz Bakeer Markar

Imthiaz Bakeer Markar (born 8 August 1953) is a Sri Lankan politician.

Chamal Rajapaksa

Chamal Jayantha Rajapaksa (Sinhala:චමල් රාජපක්ෂ|Tamil:சமல் ராஜபக்ஷ) (born 30 October 1942) is a Sri Lankan politician who was Speaker of the Parliament of Sri Lanka from 2010 to 2015.

Piyankara Jayaratne

Unnanthi Piyankara Jayaratne, MP (born September 27, 1964) is a Sri Lankan politician and a member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka.

Tissa Karalliyadde

Tissa Wijeratna Karalliyadde MP (born 10 May 1952) was Sri Lanka's former Cabinet Minister of Child Development and Women's Affairs and a Member of Parliament representing the Kalutara District.

Anura Priyadharshana Yapa

Yapa Appuhamilage Anura Priyadharshana (known as Anura Priyadharshana Yapa born 18 January 1959) MP is Sri Lanka's Cabinet Minister of Disaster Management in 15th Parliament of Sri Lanka.

V. Anandasangaree

Veerasingham Anandasangaree (Tamil: வீரசிங்கம் ஆனந்தசங்கரி) is a leading Sri Lankan Tamil politician, former Member of Parliament and leader of the Tamil United Liberation Front.

Mahinda Ratnatilaka

Ihalakkankanamalage Mahinda Ratnatilaka (also Ihalakkankanamalage Mahinda Rathnathilake ) is a Sri Lankan politician and a former member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka.

Mahinda Wijesekara

Mahinda Wijesekara is a Sri Lankan politician, former Fisheries cabinet minister and a former member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka.

Mahinda Yapa Abeywardena

Mahinda Yapa Abeywardena (born October 10, 1945) is a Sri Lankan politician and landed proprietor.

Mano Wijeyeratne

Nissanka Manodha Wijeyeratne (Sinhala:නිශ්ශංක මනෝද විජයරත්න) (28 July 1957 – 29 October 2011) (known as Mano Wijeyeratne) was Coordinating Secretary to the President, Chairman of Road Accidents Prevention Authority and Sri Lanka Freedom Party chief organiser for the Dedigama Electorate in Kegalle District he was former Member of Parliament from Kegalle District.

Milinda Moragoda

Asoka Milinda Moragoda (Sinhala:අශෝක මිලින්ද මොරගොඩ) (born 4 June 1964) is a Sri Lankan politician and businessman.

Nandana Gunathilake

M. D. Nandana Gunathilake is a Sri Lankan politician and a former member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka.

Neil Rupasinghe

Don Jayawickramage Neil Rupasinghe (Don Jayawickramage Neel Rupasinghe) is a Sri Lankan politician, a former member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka and a former government minister.

Nihal Galappaththi

Arachchige Nihal Galappaththi is a Sri Lankan politician and a former member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka.

Ronnie de Mel

Ronald Joseph Godfrey de Mel, CCS (Sinhala: රොනි ද මැල්) (known as Ronnie de Mel) is a Sri Lankan politician, civil servant and Senior Adviser to President.

Jeyaraj Fernandopulle

Jeyaraj Fernandopulle (Sinhalese: ජෙයරාජ් ප්‍රනාන්දුපුල්ලේ, Tamil: ஜெயராஜ் பெர்னான்டோபுள்ளே, January 11, 1953 – April 6, 2008) was a Sri Lankan politician who served as a cabinet Minister and a Member of Parliament in Sri Lanka.

P. Chandrasekaran

Periyasamy Chandrasekaran (Tamil: பெரியசாமி சந்திரசேகரன்; 17 April 1957 – 1 January 2010) was a Sri Lankan trade unionist, politician and government minister.

Mangala Samaraweera

Mangala Pinsiri Samaraweera (Sinhala:මංගල පින්සිරි සමරවීර Tamil:மங்கள சமரவீர; pronounced [mˈʌŋgɘlɘ pinsiri sˈʌmɘrɘviːrɘ ]; born April 21, 1956), better known as Mangala Samaraweera, is a Sri Lankan politician who has served as Minister of Foreign Affairs since 2015.

Chandrasiri Gajadeera

Chandrasiri Gajadeera is a Sri Lankan politician, a member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka and Minister of Rehabilitation and Prisons

Dilan Perera

Boddhiya Baduge Dilan Priyanjan Anslam Perera (born 19 April 1962) (known as Dilan Perera), MP is the former Sri Lankan Non-Cabinet Minister of Port Development.

Dullas Alahapperuma

Dullas Daham Kumara Alahapperuma (born May 14, 1959) is a Sri Lankan politician, former Cabinet Minister of Youth Affairs and Skills Development and a Matara District member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka.

Joseph Michael Perera

M. Joseph Michael Perera is a Sri Lankan politician and a Former Member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka.

S. B. Dissanayake

Dissanayake Mudiyanselage Sumanaweera Banda Dissanayake, MP (born 18 September 1951) (known as S. B. Dissanayake) is a Sri Lankan politician.

Sagala Ratnayaka

Sagala Gajendra Ratnayaka, MP (1968- ) is a Sri Lankan politician.

Salinda Dissanayake

Salinda Dissanayake (born May 1, 1958) is a current Member of Parliament from Kurunegala District and Sri Lankan Non-Cabinet Minister of Nation Building.

A. H. M. Fowzie

A. Abdul Hameed Mohamed Fowzie is a Sri Lankan politician, a member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka and a government minister.

A. L. M. Athaullah

Ahamed Lebbe Maraikkar Athaullah is a Sri Lankan politician.

Anuruddha Ratwatte

General Anuruddha Leuke Ratwatte (14 July 1938 – 24 November 2011), frequently referred to as Anuruddha Ratwatte, was a Sri Lankan soldier and politician.

Dayasritha Thissera

Anton Dayasritha Thissera is a Sri Lankan politician, a member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka and a government minister.

Edward Gunasekara

Edward Gunasekara is a Sri Lankan politician, a former member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka and a former government minister.

Jayatissa Ranaweera

Arachchige Jayatissa Ranaweera is a Sri Lankan politician, former member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka and a former government minister.

Jinadasa Kitulagoda

Jinadasa Kitulagoda is a Sri Lankan politician and a former member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka.