MEET THE CAPTAINS

Japan captain Ai Sugiyama is tennis royalty in her homeland after a career that saw her reach the Top 10 of the WTA Rankings and play in two Grand Slam singles quarter-finals.

Sugiyama was beaten by Jennifer Capriati in the quarter-finals of the 2000 Australian Open and then lost a tight match against Maria Sharapova in the last eight of the 2004 Wimbledon Championships.

She also won three women's doubles Grand Slam titles at the 2000 US Open, as well as at the French Open and Wimbledon in 2003. In addition, she won a mixed doubles crown at the 1999 US Open.

Kazakhstan captain Yuriy Schukin reached a career-high of No. 119 in singles, winning eight ATP Challenger titles, and also enjoyed success on what was then known as the ITF Futures Tour.

This will be Schukin's first match as team captain after he took over the role from Yaroslava Shvedova.

Dias Doskarayev, Vice President of the Kazakhstan Tennis Federation explained the decision: "We are not changing anything drastically in the women's national team, but making only minor adjustments. Previously, Yuriy was the coach of the women's national team, and Yaroslava was the captain.

"Now Schukin will lead the team, and Shvedova will help him. In other words, there has been a personnel rotation, which, I hope, will allow the national team to perform successfully this season."

TALKING POINT

Japan captain Ai Sugiyama has welcomed the return of Naomi Osaka to her team, as the four-time Grand Slam singles champion made herself available for selection after an encouraging start to her comeback after she became a mother last season.

"She said that she wants to play, so I'm really happy," said Sugiyama. "We're aiming for the very top. The players have the potential."

Osaka's star quality will ensure this match is eagerly anticipated in Tokyo, with her rapid rise up the WTA Rankings since her return to action in Australia in January adding a fresh dimension to the women's game this year.

Her appearance in this tie could also open the door for Osaka to play at the Olympic Games in Paris this summer.