Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan Shahen-Shah-e-Qawwali (The Brightest Star in Qawwali) is a title reserved for the leading voice and spirit of qawwali, the devotional music of Sufi Islam. No other term better describes the late Qawwali master.

Born on October 13, 1948 in Lyallpur in the Punjab province of Pakistan, Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan made his first recording in 1973, beginning an astonishing recording career spanning over 20 years and 50 albums. As one of the Indian subcontinent’s brightest talents, he incorporated elements of traditional classical khyal repertoire in his performance, producing his own unique style – and broadening the appeal of qawwali to listeners of all faiths.

Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan’s father was also one of the great qawwals of his time. With the best of intentions, the father attempted to persuade his son to become a doctor instead of following the family’s 500-year tradition of qawwali performance. But, even his father’s wishes could not keep the young Nusrat from the exquisite art formas a child, he eavesdropped on his father’s music classes to learn the fundamentals. It was only after his father’s death, when Nusrat was 17, that he began to perform in public, joining his uncle’s group and before long becoming one of the most popular qawwali singers in Pakistan.

Mesmerized by one of Nusrat’s live performances, Peter Gabriel invited him to perform at WOMAD during the 1980s, bringing the beauty and hypnotic intensity of the qawwali master’s gift to Western audiences for the first time. The response was overwhelming and resulted in a longstanding alliance between Nusrat and Peter Gabriel’s Real World label.

ShahenN-Shah, his first recording for Real World, marked the beginning of Nusrat’s growing influence and celebrity outside Pakistan. In attempts to make qawwali more accessible to Western ears, he recorded Mustt Mustt in collaboration with Canada’s atmospheric composer/guitarist Michael Brook, replacing traditional songs with classical vocal exercises backed by Western rhythms. A-later remix of Mustt Mustt by Massive Attack led to a surprising club hit through Great Britain and the United States.

Over the next few years, Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan became an awe-inspiring and globally powerful world music force. His music has inspired some of this century’s greatest filmmakers, including Martin Scorsese and Oliver Stone, and has been incorporated into soundtracks for such films as Dead Man Walking and The Last Temptation of Christ. Khan performed with music icons from all genres — including Peter Gabriel and Joan Osborne At the time of his death in 1997, he was due to record with Bjork and Luciano Pavarotti.

From archives in Nusrat’s hometown of Lahore, Pakistan, Real World discovered studio recordings that were released for the very first time. The first of two high-quality archival releases came out with the title Dust to Gold. It presents the great innovator and bearer of tradition at the height of his powers.

The title Dust to Gold reflects Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan’s philosophy of life, as he considered himself a pinch of dust from a holy place.

In 2002, Real World released Body and Soul, a recording made in Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan’s hometown of Lahore shortly before his untimely death. The recording was retrieved from his family archive and much work was required to recreate the power of the original performance. Mixing engineer Stuart Bruce worked on the original master tapes for many weeks at Real World Studios. The recorded masters were very inconsistent and it was difficult to assess the strenth of the material due to the random technical nature of the recordings. It was necessary to re-balance the voice and instruments and correct the anomalies and distortion. The whole album was then remixed and remastered. Through this work, Real World was able to restore the energy of the original performance to enable the listener to get as close as possible to the full effect of Nusrat’s singing.

In 2019, to mark the 30th anniversary of Real World Records, the label released Live at WOMAD 1985, the previously unheard live recording of Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan’s historic first WOMAD Festival performance in 1985.

In 2021, Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan was inducted into the Transglobal World Music Hall of Fame.

Partial Discography: