The Wings of Fire series is wildly popular and ever since I did this post about books to read if you’ve loved Harry Potter and this one about Percy Jackson read alikes, I’ve gotten a flood of DMs asking for one for the Wings of Fire books.

I asked on Instagram for suggestions and there are SO many good books like Wings of Fire to jump into once you’ve finished that series (transparently, I haven’t read the Wings of Fire series, but I know enough about it to know what books would make good readalikes).

I’m sharing the ones that our family has loved and then I’ll share the recommendations from other families that we HAVEN’T read at the bottom so you’ll have even more ideas for books similar to Wings of Fire!

books like wings of fire

Eragon Series by Christopher Paolini

5 book series

After finding out his destiny of a Dragon Rider, teenage Eragon and his loyal dragon must navigate a dangerous world of magic and power as they struggle to overthrow the evil King Galbatorix. Bart read this whole series years ago when it came out and it’s been fun to see my kids enjoy it now!

The Unwanteds by Lisa McMann

7 book series

The book starts on the day of the sorting and Alex knows he’ll be an Unwanted, because of his interest in creative endeavors. He’s already been reported for a number of infractions, including scratching images in the dirt with a stick, so it’s no surprise to him when he’s named as one who will be sent to die in the Lake of Boiling Oil. (Full review here)

Dragon Masters by Tracey West

27 book series

This fantasy adventure is perfect for any child who loves dragons, kings, wizards, and magic! My girls have listened to this series a million times over the past few years – it’s definitely on the younger side (the books are more like 100 pages), so they’re perfect for a child to read solo if they’ve been listening to Wings of Fire or for a child who wants to be like an older sibling!

Dealing with Dragons by Patricia C. Wrede

4 book series

Princess Cimerone is terribly bored. Being a princess is bad enough. Being the SEVENTH daughter in a royal family is worse. Naturally, there is nothing to do but run away from home and face a dangerous dragon. Because dangerous is better than boring. (Full review here)

Fablehaven by Brandon Mull

5 book series

This is a great series about two kids, Seth and Kendra Sorensen who go to spend a few weeks with their grandparents on their very remote property. It doesn’t take them long to figure out not everything is as it appears. The butterflies and dragonflies in the garden are actually fairies! That is only the beginning of the magical creatures that inhabit Fablehaven. These have been wildly popular in our house this year. (Full review here)

Dragonwatch by Brandon Mull

5 book series

This is the companion series to Fablehaven where the adventures of Seth and Kendra continue as they try to save the world from Dragons who want to overturn the sanctuaries and destroy the world. The two precocious teenagers really come into their own in this series and learn more about themselves and their own unique powers.

Dragon Slippers by Jessica Day George

3 book series

After being orphaned Creel’s aunt tries to sacrifice her to the local dragon, instead, Creel befriends him and unknowingly inherits an object that will either save or destroy the kingdom. My girls LOVE Jessica Day George’s books!

Land of Stories by Chris Colfer

6 book series

Alex and Conner, sister-brother twins, open up a beloved book of stories only to find themselves sucked into the book. In a mysterious land where magic runs rampant, they find themselves interacting with fairy tale characters they’ve heard about all their lives. The real question is. . . can they ever get home? This series has been especially popular with my 3rd grader who inhaled the whole series this year.

Keeper of the Lost Cities by Shannon Messenger

10 book series

Ella come home from school saying one of her friends was raving about this series. Happily, I happened to have a copy and Ella devoured this book about Sophie doesn’t fit in at school or in her family, in part because she can read minds. Then she meets a boy who has the same powers she does and it turns out there are a lot of secrets about herself and the world around her that she doesn’t know. But she’s going to find out pretty quickly!

How to Train Your Dragon by Cressida Cowl

12 book series

Ella listened to this whole series and loved every second of it. My sister has three boys and they are obsessed with it too. There are 13 books in the series and these stories of Vikings and dragons are fast paced and delightful.

Peter and the Star Catchers by Dave Barry

5 book series

This is such a fun twist on the classic story of Peter Pan. I mean, I’m already a massive fan of Dave Barry and it is just perfection! If you love fractured fairy tales check this one out and the audiobook, read by Jim Dale of Harry Potter fame, is especially fun. (Full review here)

Gregor the Overlander by Suzanne Collins

5 book series

From the beloved author of The Hunger Games – before there was Katniss there was Gregor. Bart sped through this entire middle-grade series in a few weeks on audio. I think my older girls will really enjoy it, but it can be a little intense. If you have easily scared kids, you might want to wait until they’re a bit on the older end of middle grade.

Ranger’s Apprentice by John Flanagan

11 book series

Fifteen year old Will has been chosen as a ranger’s apprentice. The Rangers practice magic that makes them invisible so they can protect the kingdom. Their enemy Morgarath is gathering power and his dark forces are soon going to need to be challenged. Bart blew through this whole series recently too!

Percy Jackson by Rick Riordin

7 book series

I grabbed my mother-in-law’s copy of this book when we were living there and I suddenly found myself without a next book to read to the girls and they are SO INTO it. Seriously, there were shrieks of despair every night when I finished for the evening. I read it back in 2008 and it’s fun to revisit – I enjoyed it MUCH more as a read aloud than I did when I read it solo! (Full review here).

Artemis Fowl by Eoin Colfer

8 book series

This book kicks off the 8 book series which follows Artemis Fowl. His billionaire father who made his fortune as a criminal has just disappeared and Artemis’ mother has a mental breakdown. Which means that it’s entirely up to Artemis to restore the family fortune. Luckily, Artemis happens to be a brilliant criminal mastermind. And he’s determined that kidnapping a fairy and holding her ransom is the best way to save his family. Except he may have underestimated the fairies.

And here are other suggestion for books like the Wings of Fire series from Everyday Reading community members!

The Warriors series by Erin Hunter

6 book series

This is an extremely popular book series and the first three books in this series about warrior cats (who knew?) are all included in a Kindle Unlimited membership.

The Land of Roar Series by Jenny McLachlan

4 book series

This one sounds like it has a feeling reminiscent of Chronicles of Narnia. Whenever twins Rose and Arthur stay at their grandfather’s house, they play their made-up game Roar. The game would always begin by them crawling into a folding bed and entering a new world. After several years pass and the twins are helping their grandfather clean out his loft, they come across the bed…what could possibly happen this time?

Trials of Apollo by Rick Riordin

5 book series

Apollo made his father, Zeus, pretty mad (whoops!). As punishment he was banished from Olympus and made mortal. He has to learn to survive as a mortal teenage boy in New York City, avoid his enemies, (including gods, monsters and mortals) and find a way to regain favor from Zeus. That won’t be easy!

Skandar Series by A.F. Steadman

3 book series

This book just came out in 2022 and looks like the perfect book for anyone who loves unicorns and heroic quests. Thirteen-year-old Skandar Smith has always wanted to be a Unicorn rider, but when the mysterious Weaver steals the most powerful unicorn in the world, Skandar must face sky battles, ancient secrets, and bloodthirsty unicorns in order to save his island.

Michael Vey Series by Richard Paul Evans

10 book series

Michael Vey, is a seemingly ordinary high schooler, but turns out he actually has special electric powers. It also happens that he isn’t the only one at his school with these strange electric powers. Taylor, a cheerleader, also has them and they come to the attention of a powerful group who wants to gain control over these electric children.

DragonKeeper Chronicles by Donita K. Paul

After finding a dragon egg, Kale is freed from her bondage as a slave and her village sends her away. But on the way, she finds seven more eggs! Dragon riders end up rescuing her and they send her on a quest to find another very powerful and very important dragon egg before it ends up in the hands of an evil wizard.

Dragonflight by Ann McCaffrey

Pern 22 book series

Anyone who loves a dragon-centered fantasy series is bound to love this YA sci-fi/fantasy series. Written in the 60s, McCaffrey was ahead of her time writing about dragonriders – before Eragon, How to Train Your Dragon, and now Fourth Wing. After Lessa bonds with a queen dragon, it’s up to her to save her world, as the queen dragon begins dying and a deadly spore gets ready to fall from space.

Dragons in Our Midst by Bryan Davis

4 book series

Fantasy, action, and a bit of good humor – this book has it all! Billy and Bonnie are a little different than the other kids at school. Bonnie has wings that she tries to hide with her backpack and Billy has terrible breath…dragon breath, you might say. But it all makes sense if one of your parents is a dragon.

Heroes in Training by Joan Holub

18 book series

Zeus the King of the Gods had to get his start somewhere right? This book tells the story of ten year old Zeus getting kidnapped by Titans, escaping, harnessing his power with thunderbolts and freeing his fellow Olympians from the evil Cronus.

The Dragon with the Chocolate Heart by Stephanie Burgis

2 book series

If this book doesn’t make you want to break cozy up with a mug of hot cocoa, I don’t know what will. After Adventurine, a dragon, gets her first taste of chocolate (which she loves) she is turned into a human girl and heads to the human village to get another taste.

Adventurers Wanted by M.L. Forman

5 book series

When 15-year-old Alex sees a cardboard sign in a store window, he wanders in and accidentally answers the “Adventurers Wanted” sign. Little did he know he would get a whole lot of dragon-slaying adventure with surprising twists around every corner.

Mysteries of Cove by J. Scott Savage

3 book series

Even though creativity and inventions are deemed “illegal” in the steam powered mountain city of Cove, Trenton and Kallista end up following a mysterious set of blueprints – creating a creature to protect them from the dragons outside their door.

The Wingfeather Saga by Andrew Peterson

4 book series

The three gifted Igiby siblings pull together their smarts, heart, and courage to defeat the evil Fangs of Dang who have crossed the dark sea to rule the land with malice.

City of Dragons by Jaimal Yogis

2 book series

In this graphic novel series, Grace ends up moving to Hong Kong after a family tragedy. And while she is there, she learns that a lot of the myths her father used to tell her, may actually hold some truth.

The Last Dragon Chronicles by Chris D’Lacey

7 book series

When David Rain, a college student, rents a room in a strange boardinghouse full of clay dragons, he doesn’t realize how instrumental they will be in helping him jumpstart his writing career.

And if you’d like a printable copy of this list of books like Wings of Fire that you can take to your library or screenshot on your phone for easy access, just pop in your email address below and it’ll come right to your inbox!

if you liked this post about books like wings of fire, you might also like these other posts: