Starflight is an adult male NightWing and the main protagonist of The Dark Secret. Along with being a former dragonet of destiny and one of the founders of Jade Mountain Academy, he was partially responsible for ending the War of SandWing Succession. After being caught in a volcanic eruption on the NightWing island, Starflight was permanently blinded, and currently resides within Jade Mountain Academy as the head librarian. He formerly had romantic feelings for Sunny.

Description[]

Starflight has midnight-black scales[1] with glints of purple and deep blue in them.[2] The silver scales on the undersides of his[3] black wings[4] spray outward like a splash of water, similar to his father, Mastermind.[5] He has a black snout and claws,[6] as well as sinewy shoulders[7] and a worried snout.[8] The space between his wings is narrow and he is not very burly.[9] He wears a bandage[10] over his very dark green eyes,[event 1] and has long burn scars[11] streaking across his scales and snout.[12]

Personality[]

Starflight is often tentative,[13] sensible,[14] a know-it-all,[15] massively annoying,[16] overly cautious,[17] lecturing,[8] anxious,[18] worried,[19] and nervous.[20] However, he is indignant and willing to fight for his students.[21] He is shown to have a humorous side.[22] Starflight also is very protective of his scrolls.[23] Moonwatcher described his thoughts as constantly busy, ticking through all the things he needed to do.[24] He frets[25] and complains often.[19] After he was temporarily kidnapped by Morrowseer, he tried to be bossy toward his friends, although he only wanted to keep them all safe by doing so.[25] He often overthinks and worries so much that he ends up not doing anything at all,[26] and can sulk when he is upset. However, he is a useful companion, as he has valuable information such as geography and flight patterns constantly on his mind.[27] Reading is his specialty,[28] and he is very smart but completely unreliable and terrified of the world, despite him wanting to be brave and helpful.[29] Glory said he "shrieks like a tiny scavenger".[30] He tries to know everything so that he may be useful, but he is not a good fighter and is not brave.[31] He is talented at memorizing things and repeating those facts over and over, even when no one seems to be listening.[32] He will easily subside when argued with.[33]

Biography[]

Pre-Series Starflight was given to the Talons of Peace as an unhatched egg by Morrowseer, the NightWing prophet who delivered the Dragonet Prophecy. Unlike most of the other dragonets, his egg was not stolen, but given to the Talons of Peace by the NightWings; hence the line in the prophecy "Wings of night shall come to you." While he was born with three full moons in the sky, Starflight received no NightWing powers due to hatching in an underground cave, where the moonlight could not reach his egg. He was hatched and raised by the guardians Kestrel, Dune, and Webs, along with the other dragonets, Clay, Tsunami, Glory, and Sunny. He loved scrolls and the stories told by their guardians, mainly Dune, thus becoming the subject of the dragonets' jokes and taunts they loved to make.

The Dragonet Prophecy[]

The Dragonet Prophecy

Starflight was in the dragonets' study cave, where Tsunami started to assign the "parts". Starflight protested against this, suggesting that he should read to them instead, before being shut down by the other dragonets. During their reenactment of the start of War of SandWing Succession, Starflight played as Princess Blaze, a role which he vehemently hated. Later when Morrowseer visited the cave to inspect the dragonets, he seemed to approve of Starflight, due to him being a fellow NightWing. Starflight also had a private meeting with Morrowseer, whom he feared would discover he had not discovered his powers yet. After the dragonets found out about the guardians' plan to kill Glory, the dragonets of destiny came up with a plan in order to escape. During this, Starflight gave Clay some lifesaving advice during his attempt to escape. He helped Tsunami escape from the chains their guardians used to stop her from preventing Glory's murder. He and Sunny contributed to their escape attempt by burning the scrolls as a smoke signal to Clay and Tsunami, which led to him and the rest of the dragonets getting captured by Scarlet and her SkyWing soldiers.

Chained to a rock spire away from his friends, Starflight despaired of ever escaping. He was often seen with his wings tented over his head, refusing to speak or interact with other dragons. Due to his poor skills in battle, Clay volunteered to fight in his place multiple times to keep Starflight from being killed. This led to Clay facing Fjord instead of him, which led to Fjord's death. He instantly became distrustful of Peril and stayed far away from her. Clay could hear Starflight singing along with all the other prisoners. After Clay's attempt to communicate with Peril through song, he was also taken to Peril's room by Scarlet and Princess Burn, who had arrived the previous day. Starflight managed to figure out how to escape using Peril, but was betrayed due to her obsession with Clay. He also was the one to confirm that Clay was immune to fire.

He was eventually pitted against Tsunami in a gladiatorial style battle, of which Scarlet was fond of. He and Tsunami refused to fight each other, however, so Scarlet released four scavengers for them to battle. After the fight in which two of the scavengers were killed, Queen Scarlet declared that they would have to face off against all eight of the IceWings. However, Morrowseer and a squadron of NightWings came to Starflight's rescue before having to fight. He protested, stating he could not leave his friends behind, but either Morrowseer did not hear him shouting, or he just did not care.

He later met up with the dragonets outside the Mud Kingdom, with the orders to convince his group to choose Princess Blister as part of Morrowseer's plot to make her the queen of the SandWings, in return for her help with the NightWings own goal.

The Lost Heir

At the beginning of the book, Starflight constantly made warnings about the SkyWings hunting for them, telling his friends they should hide under the trees. Tsunami thought he was trying to take her place as the dragonets' leader when he offered to take Sunny, and told them all to do something other than something Tsunami wanted. He was with the other dragonets when Commander Shark ordered Clay to be chained.

During their stay, he awkwardly supported Blister's side of the war, the result of an order from Morrowseer. However, he eventually went against Morrowseer's plan and told Queen Coral that Blister killed Kestrel, wanted Webs dead for her own reasons, and did not care about Tsunami, much to Blister's anger. Following this, he was imprisoned along with the other dragonets by Blister and Queen Coral. Starflight helped Tsunami escape the cell to release them, by giving the information that electric eels needed time to recharge.

The Hidden Kingdom Starflight was very helpful to Glory as she tried to unravel who was kidnapping the RainWings. Glory observed that he had probably been hopelessly in love with Sunny his whole life. He also showed a bit of humor, as he played a prank involving a melon on Clay while he was sleeping and joked that they should bring back the fruit for Tsunami. After Deathbringer's failed attempt to assassinate Blaze, he revealed that Morrowseer had told him to convince the other dragonets to pick Blister. In the end, Clay told the dragonets that Starflight had disappeared, and said he might have gone to warn the NightWings, which was later revealed to be untrue.

The Dark Secret

Starflight remembered that a NightWing knocked him out while he was guarding the tunnel and brought him to their kingdom. He woke up in a small cave. A few NightWing dragonets were watching him sleep. One of them was his half-sister Fierceteeth, who wished she was the prophesied dragonet. Morrowseer then came in and brought Starflight to see the queen. He was taken to a cave and pushed onto a pillar of rock surrounded by lava. The cave was filled with around forty council dragons, and on the wall across from him was the NightWing heir to the throne, Princess Greatness. Greatness listened to and spoke for her mother, Queen Battlewinner, who was behind the wall submerged in lava because of an IceWing's frostbreath. When the NightWings demanded information regarding the RainWings, Starflight panicked and said that Glory was planning an attack. Deathbringer was then brought in by Vengeance, who claimed that Deathbringer was a traitor and conspired with the RainWings. However, Greatness ordered Vengeance to be thrown into the lava for endangering the tribe by letting Glory in and for irritating the queen.

Morrowseer took Starflight hunting, also to get more information. After Starflight figured out why other NightWings can safely eat infected carrion, Morrowseer realized who Starflight's father is and brought Starflight to see him. When Starflight asked to meet his mother, Morrowseer told him his mother, Farsight, had been killed trying to save a SeaWing years ago, which devastated him. Fatespeaker found them and decided to tag along as she told Starflight she was the NightWing dragonet of destiny. This lead Starflight to realize he was being replaced. They found his father, Mastermind, in the lab of the palace and met him. His father took him to show them an experiment. In a small room, a RainWing is chained to the wall. When Starflight asked for her name, she said it was Orchid, prompting Starflight to tell her Mangrove was looking for her. Starflight then realized that the NightWings are planning to invade the rainforest and steal the RainWings' home.

Morrowseer came in and brought Starflight to meet the false dragonets of destiny, whom he soon assigned to kill Starflight. Starflight fled to the RainWing prison, and two of the false dragonets of destiny were caught by NightWings guarding the area. However, Fatespeaker found him and promised she would not kill him, and they both returned to the cave. During the night, Fatespeaker brought Starflight to explore the palace, and they found the old treasury, where Starflight found a dreamvisitor. He went back to his bed and attempted to use it but failed. The next morning, Morrowseer brought the false dragonets and Starflight southward to a remote outpost belonging to the SkyWings. He instructed them to make the SkyWing guards inside switch alliances to Blister. When Starflight was not able to get them to switch, a group of NightWings killed the SkyWings. Starflight suspects that this would have happened no matter what they convinced the guards. Squid stated he wanted to quit and Morrowseer tells him to leave, resulting in the SeaWing to say he was lying. However, Morrowseer forced him to fly away, alone.

The following night, after returning to the island, Fatespeaker found Starflight in the dormitory. She prompted him to wake because Flame was leaving the dormitory and she wanted to follow him. They followed Flame down to the prisons where Deathbringer was being held. Flame asked Deathbringer tips on how to be an assassin. Flame thought what Deathbringer told him was useless. When he was gone, Fatespeaker asked him where to find the queen. Deathbringer told them, and they found her in a cauldron full of lava. Starflight and Fatespeaker were both extremely shaken. Starflight tried to figure out how this was possible. The queen then explained to him that while fighting an IceWing, the IceWing shot its frostbreath into her mouth. In order to counteract the ice forming inside of her body, she was confined to a pool of lava. They explained to her Morrowseer's plan but she refused to help. After returning to the dormitory, Starflight attempted to use the dreamvisitor again. He succeeded, entering Glory's dream and explaining to her what happened, and she prepared her army.

The next day, Morrowseer ordered Flame to fight Ochre. After Ochre attempted to surrender, Morrowseer pointed out that on a battlefield, that would not happen. Fatespeaker stood up for Ochre, and Morrowseer ordered Flame to attack her instead. Viper asked to join the bout, which was approved by Morrowseer. As Viper was about to stab Fatespeaker in the neck with her tail, Starflight joined in and shoved the SandWing away from Fatespeaker. Viper accidentally scratched Flame's face with her tail and fell into the lava. Morrowseer brings Flame to the healers, and Starflight realized the false dragonets were not born on the brightest night when Ochre was unwilling to save Viper, yelling "I have no idea if my egg was blood red, and I don't plan to risk my life finding out!"

Starflight later developed a plan to escape from the Night Kingdom. Fatespeaker and Starflight took Flame and brought him out to the tunnel to the rainforest, claiming to have been ordered by the NightWing queen to take the SkyWing to the RainWings to be healed. After successfully tricking the guards, they met up with Glory, Tsunami, and Sunny. He told them about the NightWings' plan to take over the rainforest. Glory decided to attack the NightWings, leading to the NightWing Exodus. In case he did not survive the battle, Starflight decided to tell Sunny he loved her. They visited Queen Battlewinner and said that the NightWings could live in the rainforest if they made Glory their queen. Battlewinner was enraged by this, and attempted to attack them, but as she jumped out of the lava, the ice within her killed her. Greatness agreed with their plan and came with them.

Fatespeaker, Glory, and Starflight freed the RainWing prisoners, and the volcano started to erupt. They continued to free the prisoners along with Splendor and Deathbringer, and most of the NightWings declared Glory their queen after Mightyclaws started a chant. As the volcano erupted, Morrowseer told them he and Battlewinner made up the prophecy in an elaborate plot to steal the RainWings' home. The volcano erupted, most likely killing Morrowseer. When Starflight was severely injured, Clay protected him from most of the blast with his fireproof wings and brought him back to the rainforest. Though Starflight still sustained burns on his body and his eyes, he believed he felt Sunny's talons press against him, but also heard Fatespeaker's voice. Starflight was then shot with a sleeping dart and plunged into unconsciousness, described to be "as black as a NightWing’s scales."

The Brightest Night

After Starflight came out of the NightWing tunnel, he was injured with burns from the eruption. He wore a bandage over his eyes while he healed. When Sunny disappeared, Fatespeaker started taking care of him.

When Sunny returned, Starflight, the other dragonets, and Deathbringer met to discuss the Eye of Onyx and who would be the next SandWing queen. He mentioned that they did not have to be the ones who stop the war, as anyone could if they had the Eye of Onyx. Fatespeaker said that it definitely did not have to be Starflight and that he had done enough. Sunny suggested gathering all three sisters at the SandWing stronghold. Starflight stayed behind while the other dragonets sent messages to the three sisters.

He was present when the meeting was held outside the stronghold. Blister mentioned a gift sent to Burn to "mend fences" and "reunite the family." However, Burn knew that the present was a dragonbite viper and was meant to kill her, and intended to have it bite Blister. Starflight told Fatespeaker what a dragonbite viper is when Burn first mentioned it. There was a second viper in the box who leapt out and bit Burn. The dragons at the meeting panicked and took flight. Fatespeaker and Sunny tried to hold Starflight up. Clay was bitten while he sent the three of them backward in his effort to save them. Peril arrived, saving Clay's life by burning out the poison, scarring Clay's thigh in the process, and leaving him with a permanent limp.

When Blister attacked Blaze to start a fight for the throne, he said that Blister would win, but Sunny and the other dragonets followed Flower's instincts and dug up the bones of Queen Oasis. The SandWing treasure was discovered to be in her mouth, where Sunny found the Eye of Onyx. Sunny gave it to Thorn as the new SandWing queen, but Blister snatched the Eye in an attempt to be queen. The enchantment turned her to dust, and Thorn took her place as queen of the SandWings. Starflight was later seen with Sunny in the rainforest, discussing why they would not work out as a couple, and Sunny told him that Fatespeaker liked him as well and that he should like her too. Starflight was seen discussing the school for all tribes that they would build, and it was then confirmed that he was blind.

The Jade Mountain Prophecy[]

Moon Rising

Starflight is the librarian at Jade Mountain Academy and ensured that the library was built in such a way that he could get around it, and know where different scrolls were located by feeling carved nameplates and stamps. He was first introduced when Moonwatcher went to the library to borrow a scroll on animus-touched objects. Starflight gave her a library scroll. Moonwatcher senses that he initially had fears about whether he would be able to do a good job as a blind librarian, but had gotten over them for the most part. Starflight also seems to know dragons just by the sound of their footsteps. Starflight was also shown to know how to read a carved script.

When Moon asked for a scroll involving dreamvisitors, Starflight asked her if she was visited. When Moon said no and asked why, Starflight said he was worried that Ex-Queen Scarlet would try to scare the students through her dreamvisitor, though he knew that was not all she could do.

Starflight was later shown reading a carved stone tablet with his talons, and even later, was seen spending time with Fatespeaker, who was reading to him, and Sunny, who was helping sort scrolls.

Icicle tried to murder Starflight shortly after Sora tried to kill Icicle. She attacked him for Queen Scarlet, who had contacted Icicle using a dreamvisitor. Moonwatcher realized that she would attack him because his blindness and lack of fighting skill made him an easy target, so she went to the library to witness Icicle creeping up behind Starflight. Qibli and Winter helped fight her off, and she escaped, leaving Starflight alive and for the most part, unharmed, although temporarily unconscious. Icicle wanted to kill Starflight to please Queen Scarlet and to get her brother, Hailstorm, back.

Winter Turning Starflight was first mentioned when Winter remembered how Scarlet asked for the dragonets of destiny's lives in return for Hailstorm's. Winter then thought to himself that Starflight had been one of the dragons who had confirmed that the NightWings had no more powers.

Escaping Peril Starflight was heard talking when Peril and Turtle were spying on the conversation with Queen Ruby. He mentioned never being able to trust Peril and was shown to be slightly sarcastic. He was in the epilogue, talking to Anemone about the feeling of Darkstalker escaping and making an earthquake.

Talons of Power

Starflight was in the library when Tsunami and Turtle came in to learn about Darkstalker. However, before he could start teaching, Darkstalker himself poked his head in through a window, and after some discourse, asked him to get scrolls on Clearsight and Fathom. Afterwards, Turtle turned to look back through the window and saw Starflight hurrying around, slipping scrolls out of their place, putting them back, and every once in a while, marking the scroll's title on a slate and handing it to Fatespeaker.

Later, Anemone talked to Darkstalker about fixing Starflight's blindness with animus magic, and then Darkstalker said that Starflight would be reluctant to accept that.

Darkness of Dragons Starflight was talking to the IceWings about where Darkstalker went. He was shown to be scared of them and sidled up next to Sunny for comfort.

The Lost Continent Prophecy[]

The Hive Queen

Turtle mentioned him in the prologue saying, "Right before Qibli came to get us, Anemone was telling me about a spell she tried to restore Tamarin's sight. I've been thinking of trying one for Starflight's, so we were comparing notes."

Tsunami indirectly mentioned Starflight when she stated that she and her friends had solved plenty of problems without animus magic.

The Poison Jungle Starflight was mentioned by Tsunami when she was in the SapWing village.

The Dangerous Gift Snowfall thought about how Tsunami's "gang of righteous do-gooders" would have used animus magic to help if it was working. Later, Lynx talked about the War of SandWing Succession and how the dragonets ended it.

The Flames of Hope Starflight was in Tsunami's memory of the dragonets arguing over which kingdom was the biggest. He said to be careful not to tear the map, or Kestrel would be furious at them.

Legends[]

Dragonslayer Young Starflight appeared unnamed when Wren and Sky were observing him and the other dragonets of destiny. Wren noted how the brown dragonet (Clay) got along poorly with the older red dragon (Kestrel). Wren mentally noted Starflight's neediness for books or scrolls. Later, Cranberry and Rowan mentioned that they had to fight a "blue dragon and a black dragon." The black dragon was Starflight.

Winglets[]

Prisoners Fierceteeth complained to Saguaro about how she should have been the dragonet of the prophecy, not Starflight, who she described as "a walking tragedy." A scene later showed Fierceteeth arguing with her mother, Farsight, who refused to leave Starflight's egg, which she believed would be a female. Morrowseer then arrived to take Starflight's egg, which was when Fierceteeth offered him to take her instead. Morrowseer declined the offer.

Field Guides[]

A Guide to the Dragon World

Starflight's commentary was seen in the book's opening letter.

In the MudWing chapter, he wrote a note in the guide about Sepia writing in the margins of The Sluglike Qualities of MudWings but reflected on how she had showed him that the scroll contained harmful stereotypes. He sent Fatespeaker to count how many scrolls written by MudWings were in the academy library and was horrified when he learned there were only two. He wrote a note to Sepia giving her an assignment to write a scroll about MudWing sibling troops. Starflight had to correct the name of Sepia's scroll before he put it into the guide. Later in the chapter, Starflight recieved a letter from Fatespeaker about her journey to the MudWing palace to gather scrolls on MudWing culture and history.

Starflight was the recipient of Coral's opening letter in the SeaWing chapter. He later wrote a note in the chapter about how he could not fit all of Coral's scroll descriptions in the guide, only putting the first ten. He was also the recipient of Turtle's letter about his hatching day. Anemone mentioned Starflight in her letter to Tamarin about how he had invented pressed letters so that blind dragons could read scrolls.

In the beginning of the RainWing chapter, Starflight exchanged letters with Glory about the content that would be put in the RainWing chapter. He was later mentioned in Kinkajou's creative writing project and briefly in Glory's notes on the Dangers of the Rainforest scroll. Starflight wrote a letter about the history of RainWing storytelling and scrolls.

Starflight wrote a few notes to Fatespeaker about Comet's story from Tales of the NightWings following the story's inclusion in the guide. He was later the recipient of a letter from Moon about the scroll she wrote on NightWing powers. Starflight was mentioned a few times throughout Glory's interview with Mastermind. Fierceteeth sent Starflight several letters until she finally agreed to write him something about Renewal for the guide. She later invited him to come to a hatching ceremony in a year for her dragonets with Strongwings.

Sunny wrote a letter to Starflight about her and Smolder making of list of all of the things they could find or remember in Burn's Weirdling Tower. He was also the recipient of a letter from Smolder about his observations on Rose the first week he kept her as a pet.

Starflight was the recipient of Snowfall's opening letter for the IceWing chapter. He was later also the recipient of an application for Jade Mountain Academy by Mink.

Starflight was the recipient of letters from Vermilion and Ruby in the SkyWing chapter. He was also indirectly mentioned as one of the dragons Scarlet wanted dead.

Cricket wrote a letter to Starflight about the inclusion of Pantalan material in the guide and possibly Pantalan Jade Mountain Academy students in the future.

Starflight recieved a letter from Cricket about the Book of Clearsight in the HiveWing chapter of the guide.

Starflight was mentioned by Hazel in her letter about LeafWing literature. He was later the recipient of a letter from Sundew about the letters she found between Sequoia, Linden, and Belladonna.

Relationships[]

Clay[]

Starflight and Clay are good friends since they have known each other since hatching. Clay is often annoyed by Starflight's constant lectures,[34] although he sometimes appreciates them.[35] Starflight felt very annoyed when Clay called the Scorching "the Scalding,"[36] and in The Hidden Kingdom, Starflight seemed jealous of Clay when the latter called dibs on sleeping next to Sunny even though he was only joking and likely wanted to keep warm in the IceWing's territory.[37] In The Dark Secret, Clay shielded Starflight with his fireproof scales from the fire coming from the volcanic explosion.[38] The two also share a teasing relationship at times, as shown when Starflight once used Clay as a testing object by shoving fruits in front of Clay's snout while he dreamed.[39] Clay mentioned that he sees Starflight giving him lectures in his dreams.[36] In Escaping Peril Starflight mentions Peril's crush on Clay, which Clay denies.[40]

Farsight[]

When Starflight's egg was still on the NightWing island, Farsight did not care about anything but his egg.[41] She would refuse to leave the egg, insisting that they were probably her last moments with her dragonet.[42] Farsight also believed that Starflight would be female.[43] Farsight was reluctant to give Starflight to Morrowseer.[44]

Fatespeaker[]

In The Dark Secret, Fatespeaker and Starflight become close friends. When he is chased by Ochre and Flame, she is in the cave right next to his hiding spot and promised that she was not going to kill him.[45] They snuck away to talk to Queen Battlewinner[46] and figured out her secret together.[47] Starflight likes Fatespeaker better than all the other NightWings.[48] Fatespeaker has a crush on him but he currently likes her as a friend, as when Starflight is confessing to Sunny he glances at Fatespeaker to think about how his feelings for her could never be the same as his affection towards Sunny.[49] Even if Starflight's feelings are not romantic, the two are still good friends.

Fierceteeth[]

Fierceteeth is Starflight's older[50] half-sister.[51] Fierceteeth views him as sappy, tragic, and disappointing;[52] however, she believes she would show mercy towards him if she ever became queen of the NightWings.[50]

Glory[]

Glory, like the rest of the dragonets (not including Sunny), was always very annoyed by Starflight's lectures.[53] She has made blunt remarks about his tribe to his face, but nevertheless seems to care about him. They seem to trust each other since they have known each other since their hatching day. Starflight seems to admire Glory's way of remembering things easily and making plans. This is demonstrated when Starflight used the dreamvisitor to appear in her dreams, and while the other dragonets believed that Starflight was just a part of their dream, Glory immediately knew that he had found a dreamvisitor.[54] In The Dark Secret, they work together to unite the RainWings and the NightWings along with the help of the dragonets.

Kestrel[]

Starflight was afraid of Kestrel and her short temper. He would hide in the shadows if the SkyWing was nearby, and would often get burned by Kestrel just like all the other dragonets. He did, however, stand up to her by helping Sunny melt the chains Kestrel put on Tsunami.

Mastermind[]

Starflight shares many traits with his father, including scale patterns and extreme intelligence. At first, Starflight wanted to have a good relationship working with his father. But, when he learned what Mastermind was doing to the RainWings, he felt horrified. He still helped his father but was wary of him. Mastermind was very impressed with Starflight and wanted him to be his assistant. After The Dark Secret, Mastermind was put into prison and Starflight wanted little to do with him after the incident with the RainWings. It is unknown how Mastermind currently feels about this, or if he even knows how Starflight feels about him.

Morrowseer[]

Starflight seemed to be terrified of the larger NightWing, as shown when he "froze like a stalagmite"[55] when Morrowseer first visited the dragonets under the mountain. During The Dark Secret, Starflight did his best to impress Morrowseer and was very scared of Morrowseer exposing him as not a real NightWing due to his lack of powers. Morrowseer hated Starflight for being "weak" and a "spineless failure."

Peril[]

Starflight fears Peril, and refused to speak to her when tethered to his rock spire in The Dragonet Prophecy.[56] Later, though, when the dragonets were trapped by a wall of fire, Starflight addressed Peril, asking her if she was hurt by fire, but this may have been out of desperation since if they did not escape, he would be forced to battle in the SkyWing arena. When she answers, he comes up with the idea of Peril moving the black rocks in order for the dragonets to escape. During the time when she was out of earshot, he and Tsunami point out to Clay of her crush on him. Peril lost Starflight's trust when she betrayed the dragonets to Queen Scarlet. However, by the end of The Brightest Night, he feels slightly indebted to her for saving Clay's life. In Escaping Peril, that seems to have changed, as he was worried he was going to wake up on fire one day.[57] He also was thinking about finding a scroll about sociopaths,[58] which might mean that he thinks Peril is one. He also gets uncomfortable when he senses Peril near his scrolls. Regardless of his personal opinion of her, he is still aware of Peril's crush on Clay and tolerates her at Jade Mountain Academy as long as she stays out of the library.

Sunny[]

Starflight is thought to admire Sunny's joyful personality but did not interact with her much in the first book. It is thought that he did love her then, too, for when Tsunami said to Peril that Sunny was like a little sister to all of them, Starflight acted like he considered Sunny differently.[59] However, he does stand up for her against Tsunami, Glory, and even Morrowseer. In the second book, he is noticed to want to do everything in his power to protect her. In the third book, Glory is near certain he has had a crush on her for his entire life.[37] Starflight has known Sunny and the other dragonets since hatching. Sunny seems to have the most positive attitude about Starflight and his lectures. In the fourth book, he is directly stated throughout the story to be in love with Sunny, and has been his whole life.[60] He finally admits it to her, but in The Brightest Night, it is shown that Sunny is unclear and confused about how she loves Starflight.[61] At the end of The Brightest Night, Sunny ultimately decides that she loves him as a brother, which he reluctantly accepts.[62] Starflight also mentally pleads to Sunny that she does not judge him for the terrible things that the NightWings have done.[63] He is comforting and reassuring towards her,[64] and she often feels pity towards him when he is ignored by the other dragonets.[65] When he became too tired to carry her through the ocean when the dragonets visited the Kingdom of the Sea, he seemed disappointed to be deprived of her contact.[66] He worries about her safety,[67] and she believes in his ability to know everything and to be right.[68]

Tsunami[]

Tsunami and Starflight have known each other since hatching. Like the other dragonets (with the exception of Sunny), she is annoyed by Starflight's lectures and she often shushes him. Despite this, they seem to care for each other, shown when they refuse to fight each other in Scarlet's arena.[69] Tsunami once had a slight crush on Starflight, before realizing how annoying he could actually be, due to the ongoing endless lectures.[16] Starflight often wishes he had Tsunami's "crazy-brave" courage, and Tsunami believes that the reason he studies so hard and reads so much information is so he can be an asset to the group. Tsunami does not particularly like taking orders from him,[26] but when she is not annoyed with Starflight, she mainly feels sorry for him.[31]

Family tree[]

UnknownFarsightMastermind FierceteethStarflight Unnamed

= Possible timeline

Quotes[]

Trivia[]

Before escaping the underground caves, Starflight would read a scroll entitled Tales of the NightWings whenever he was stressed or upset.[70]

Starflight has a tenor singing voice.[71]

After his experiences in the SkyWing Arena, Starflight has nightmares about scavengers.[72]

Starflight becomes "hilariously twitchy" when he senses Peril near his papers.[73]

Starflight is working on scrolls blind dragons can read and afterwards may create fireproof papers for Peril.[23]

Before animus magic stopped working, Turtle was in the process of writing a spell to restore Starflight's eyesight.[74]

Starflight thinks that fish smells awful.[75]

Despite being blind, Starflight has the ability to read carved letters by running his talons over them.[24]

When Starflight is deep in thought, he will gaze into the air as if he is trying to solve a math equation.[76]

Gallery[]

References[]