Language

Official language

Spanish, Aymara, Araona, Baure, Bésiro, Canichana (extinct), Cavineño, Cayubaba (extinct), Chácobo, Chimán, Ese Ejja, Guaraní, Guarasu’we (extinct), Guarayu, Itonama, Leco, Machajuyai-Kallawaya, Machineri, Maropa, Mojeño-Ignaciano, Mojeño-Trinitario, Moré, Mosetén, Movima, Pacawara, Puquina (extinct 18th century), Quechua, Sirionó, Tacana, Tapieté, Toromona, Uru-Chipaya (not a single language; only Chipaya is still spoken), Weenhayek, Yaminawa, Yuki, Yuracaré, Zamuco.

T-index

0.047%

Other languages

German

English

High proficiency (EF) – 44 of 111 countries/regions in the world- 5/20 position in Latin America.

Demography

Capital: La Paz, Sucre

Currency: Boliviano

Population: 12,08 m

Population density: 11/km2

Economy

Imports

$6.52 billion (2020). Refined Petroleum ($510M), Cars ($233M), Pesticides ($173M), Delivery Trucks ($168M), and Raw Iron Bars ($147M), importing mostly from China ($1.26B), Brazil ($1.1B), Chile ($791M), Peru ($535M), and Argentina ($516M).

Financial inclusion factors (over 15 years of age)

• 51% have an account with a financial institution

• 7.2% have a credit card

• 7.1% have a mobile money account

• 9.0% make online purchases

Ease of doing business

Ease of conducting business is medium (rated 59 out of 100). Ranked 29th out of 32 Latin American and Caribbean countries. Ranked 150th out of 190 countries worldwide (2022, World Bank).

Media

Media language Spanish

Information channels

Many media outlets are in private hands and ownership is highly concentrated.

The government operates a TV station and community radio.

Officials use legal, political, and economic means to pressure independent media, says Freedom House.

It says self-censorship is commonplace, with many journalists fearing that they could lose their jobs if their reporting is critical of the authorities.

Media deemed to “play party politics” or “insult” the government face being denied funding from state advertising, says Reporters Without Borders. Arbitrary arrests and impunity for violence against journalists are other problems.

Newspaper readership is limited by low literacy. Radio is important, especially in rural areas. There are hundreds of stations.

The press

La Razon – La Paz daily

Los Tiempos – Cochabamba daily

El Diario – La Paz daily

El Deber – Santa Cruz daily

El Mundo – Santa Cruz daily

Correo del Sur – Sucre daily

Social statistics

Life expectancy

76.52 yrs (2020)

Gender

Generally speaking, Bolivian society is patriarchal. However, in terms of the formalized rights structure, women and men have equal rights. Over the past ten years, there have been advances not only in the visible presence of women holding important political positions but also in the kinds of demands they have presented to the state. That being said, those advances may be limited to some institutional spaces whereas women’s negative experiences with patriarchy continue to persist with respect to economic, social and sexual violence. Since this often intersects with class and ethnicity, women who are poor and considered indigenous experience the brunt of gendered violence and discrimination.

In the workplace, this context affects the kinds of positions women occupy in public and private institutions (mainly as secretaries, or lower-paid support staff) and the kinds of interactions they have with their superiors. Many women still feel pressured to dress a certain way or act a certain way in order to maintain their positions or move forward in their careers.

Religion

The most common religion in Bolivia is Catholicism. However, Protestantism and Evangelism are gaining popularity in low-income neighborhoods of main cities and in rural areas. On Sundays, it is customary for people to attend mass. There are widely observed and recurrent practices of religious holidays in Bolivia. Some Bolivians maintain their native indigenous culture by mixing Catholic religious practices with Andean religious holidays, beliefs and traditions.

Ethnicity

Bolivia is ethnically diverse, and many of the country’s citizens still continue to identify as indigenous. Indigeneity in some sectors of Bolivian society is embraced as a point of national pride and is expressed annually in parades, dances, folklore, and a large Carnival in Oruro. “Originarios” (originals) comprise descendants of the Pre-Hispanic cultures. Larger groups include the Aymaras and Quechua, many living in La Paz, Potosí, Oruro, Cochabamba, and Chuquisaca. Other important groups include the Guaraní and Moxos who reside in Santa Cruz, Beni, Tarija, and Pando. The indigenous people compose 60% of the Bolivian population.

Social Class

Class boundaries are marked by a continued physical, social and geographical division between poor and rich. Even though over the past 10 years there has been an increased presence of public officials who come from rural areas, or peasant backgrounds, people’s day-to-day experience based on ethnicity continues to demonstrate that there is still a gap between a light-skinned middle-class Bolivian professional and rural or semi-rural workers or peasants. This demarcation intersects with class, with the most dangerous and precarious jobs being occupied by recent migrant workers from rural areas, for example.

There are visible distinctions in terms of where Bolivians without economic means live and the scarcity of access to basic necessities and services compared to wealthy Bolivians and foreigners who live in other, more central, areas of cities with better access to services and resources. Differences in class are evident in the presence or lack of access to services such as healthcare, education, and social security. A cycle of poverty is prevalent with low-income families often experiencing difficulty accessing basic needs, healthcare, and education.