Hi everyone

I came here when I was made redundent in England. I came for 6 months and am still here years later.

Little is known about Bolivia in most places of the world so a few facts -

Look at Fidalgo's map above to know where it is.

It is about 4 times bigger than Great Britain with a population of about 10 million.

It was original called Alta Peru and was about twice its present size. It lost the rest in several wars with its neighbours - Peru - Chile - and Paraguay.. And some to Brazil.

Because of the "Pacific War" it lost access to the sea over 100 years ago which has slowed its development over the interceding years.

The main language is Spanish but there are over 30 other languages spoken here including Quechua, Aymara and Guarani.

PEOPLE According to the 2001 census, Bolivia’s ethnic distribution is estimated to be 55% indigenous, 15% European, and 30% mixed or mestizo (all categories are self-identified and answers vary widely depending on how questions are phrased). The largest of the approximately three dozen indigenous groups are the Quechua (29% or 2.5 million), Aymara (24% or 2 million), Chiquitano (1% or 180,000), and Guarani (1% or 125,000). No other indigenous groups represent more than 0.5% of the population. German, Croatian, Serbian, Asian, Middle Eastern, and other minorities also live in Bolivia. Many of these minorities descend from families that have lived in Bolivia for several generations.

Bolivia is one of the least developed countries in South America. Almost two-thirds of its people, many of whom are subsistence farmers, live in poverty. Population density ranges from less than one person per square kilometer in the southeastern plains to about 10 per square kilometer (25 per sq. mi.) in the central highlands. The annual population growth rate is about 1.97%.

The great majority of Bolivians are Roman Catholic, although Protestant denominations are expanding rapidly. Many indigenous communities interweave pre-Columbian and Christian symbols in their religious practices.

Soon it will celebrate its independence from Spain nearly 200 years ago.

At one point so much silver was taken from Bolivia by the Conquistadores that for every kilo mined in Europe 9 kilos were taken from Bolivia. Potosi the centre of much mining activity was once the richest city in the world. At over 4000 metres it is maybe also the highest. Only indigenous people were strong enough to work in the mines - the result was that very few slaves of African origin were ever brought to Bolivia.

Bolivia suffered a lot from corrupt governments over the years.It is a "very rich poor country".

I find it an amazing placee. The geography is very varied ranging from the high Andes mountains to the Amazon jungle. Because of its geography almost anything can be grown in Bolivia. In fact 70% of the world's flora and fauna is to be found in Bolivia.

I think the best way to get an impression of a place you have not visited is by seeing pictures. So there are some here that I have taken.

Amachuma - a typical Andean village

Lago Suarez near Trinidad (Beni)

Rio Mamoré - near Trinidad (Beni)

Me resting in Tarata (Cochabamba) on market day

Ladies day out in Copacabana (notice the tree across the the road)

Lago Titicaca ( a very special place)

Ave. Oquendo (Cochabamba - where I used to live)

Religious festival in Quillacollo (Cochabamba)

Kids in Amachuma ( the white head was the result of extremely bright sunlight in the high Andes)

Carnival in Oruro

Carnival in Oruro

Kids and a dog in a village at over 4000 Metres between Oruro and La Paz

Washing in the Rio Rocha (Cochabamba)

Cochabamba from on high

Tribute to "Las heroinas" (The women and old men fought the Conquistadores

with sticks and stones in the fight for liberation)

LLamas in the mountains near Cochabamba

Market day in Tarata

Fruit seller

Cochabamba Valley

Sucre (The original Capial city - today La Paz is also a Capital city.

I hope these pictures give you an idea of Bolivia.