The locker room had barely opened up last night when Danny Ainge walked in, spotted Gerald Wallace and wagged his finger at the forward.

Wallace followed the Celtics president of basketball operations into an office for a meeting that was congratulatory, positive. Coach Brad Stevens brought an initially confused Wallace off the bench last night for the first time, and Ainge wanted to make sure that the player was on board with the change.

Wallace’s performance — nine points (two 3-pointers), nine rebounds, three assists — in a 97-87 win over the Utah Jazz at the Garden certainly gave that indication.

“(Ainge) talked to me about my role,” Wallace said. “He came out to congratulate me and let me know the energy was good tonight, and that’s what we needed. The main thing is being comfortable with what I’m getting. I’m happy regardless of the situation I’m in because I’m playing basketball.

“I love to play basketball. If I play 48 minutes or two minutes, I’m going to play 110 mph. The main thing is me trying to get an understanding. I spent a lot of time last year in Brooklyn trying to figure out my role and my position on the team, and what was expected of me.”

Wallace hadn’t come off the bench since a handful of games for the Portland Trail Blazers during the 2011-12 season, which he finished with the Nets following a trade. But judging by last night’s performance, Wallace appears to be ready for the change.

“I’m at the point now where if I’m in my role I can accept it,” he said. “I’m older, my body isn’t as young and athletic as it used to be. I just want to know my role. I want to figure out what I should be doing and what I shouldn’t be doing.”

Cut down the Nets

Wallace’s move to a sixth-man role — “I was actually a seventh man tonight,” he said jokingly — means that every player acquired from the Nets in last summer’s trade is now either coming off the bench or not playing.

Kris Humphries played five minutes after sitting out the previous three games. He declined to speak to the media. Another player involved in the trade, MarShon Brooks, has sat out four of the first five games.

Stevens, who has pinned Humphries’ dilemma on a logjam at power forward, also talked to Brooks yesterday about being patient. The guard admits that he now has no choice.

“It’s my third year so I understand how the league works,” Brooks said. “I have to be professional and stay in shape. I have to make the most of my opportunities. That’s the only thing I can possibly look forward to right now.

“Rotations have been different every game. I’m just waiting on my opportunity. It’s frustrating at times. It’s frustrating when we lose. It’s one thing when we win, but when we lose I can’t help but think about how I can help the team. When I get my chance I have to show them what I can bring.”

Rookie exchange

Stevens swapped rookies in his starting lineup — Vitor Faverani started the game and Kelly Olynyk opened the second half.

Faverani appears to be Stevens’ kind of guy.

“I told Vitor, and he immediately put his arm around (Olynyk) and started (encouraging) him,” Stevens said. “I love that. He’s all in.” . . .

Though Rajon Rondo has increased his workouts using a new brace for his surgically repaired right knee, the point guard has not been cleared by his surgeon, Dr. James Andrews, for contact. Only then can Rondo even contemplate a timetable for his return.

Said Ainge: “Rajon isn’t ready yet, and I don’t know when (he will be). I know he has to get stronger. He’s working (on a limited basis) with the brace.” . . .

The Kevin Garnett era came to an end in another way with the C’s sellout streak ending at 289 games, though the crowd (listed at 17,130) was still relatively healthy. The streak dated back to the 2007-08 season opener, the first game with Garnett and Ray Allen joining Paul Pierce — and included 51 playoff games.