SALT LAKE CITY — Age is relative, especially for a player beginning his second NBA season.

Marcus Smart lost an important teammate yesterday when Gerald Wallace was traded to Golden State for David Lee. Both players involved in the deal are 32. When Smart thinks about Wallace, he apparently also thinks about Social Security.

“Gerald’s been in the league for I’ve forgot how long,” Smart said before the Celtics’ 76-62 loss to Philadelphia last night in the Utah Jazz Summer League. “Let’s just say Gerald’s old. Gerald is a grandfather in this league, and you can see why.”

One reason is the advice Wallace shared with all of his young teammates during the past two seasons.

Smart’s locker was next to Wallace last season, and the latter was typically frank with his comments. Maybe that’s being too polite.

“He was very blunt. He didn’t beat around the bush,” Smart said. “He was going to tell you what you did wrong, what you did right. He never sugarcoated it. That’s what you want as a player who’s trying to develop your career — not someone who’s going to tell you what you want to hear, but what you need to hear.”

Nor did Wallace’s honesty rattle his rookie neighbor.

“Not at all,” Smart said. “I’ve had people in my life just like that. I’d rather have those people in my life, especially since I’m trying to get better as a player. He’s trying to do that because he’s trying to help.

“Gerald’s a great, great guy. He tried to teach you from his experience. He tried to make sure you were always in the right place. At the same time he was easy going, didn’t try to make it seem like it was just work. He wanted you to know you could have fun at the same time.”

Though Brad Stevens welcomed Wallace as more of a coach than a player last season, the latter generally scoffed at the idea of becoming a coach. By the end of the season he had changed his tone, allowing that yes, perhaps that was his new direction.

But for the young players he helped, it’s a tad difficult to envision Wallace and his crusty style in coaching.

“G just knows the game really well. I don’t see him as a coach,” James Young said. “That’s up to him. But he’s a guy to get great feedback from.

“It was just me asking him questions, and him being ready to help me at any time. There was nothing I couldn’t ask him that he didn’t know. I could ask him anything. He takes care of his body. That’s why he’s been here for so long. He knows how the game goes and can teach people the ways of the game. I learned from him.”

Young can’t find range

Young wasn’t the only culprit in last night’s 10.3 percent (3-for-29) shooting performance from 3-point range. But he might be the most frustrated. He was 2-for-11 from the floor, including 1-for-7 from downtown. After two games his shooting numbers are a respective 6-for-22 (.272) and 2-for-12 (.166).

Danny Ainge, in an attempt to console the player who, it is hoped, will someday be the Celtics’ best shooter, put an arm around Young’s shoulders and gave him a lengthy postgame pep talk.

“He said the shots are going to fall,” said Young, who after suffering from a confidence drain last season hoped to give himself a boost this month.

“I had a lot of open looks, and coach kept telling me to shoot. I just have to be more confident. I have to do a better job of staying calm. That’s supposed to be part of my game.”

Learning curve for Rozier

Smart was given the night off, putting the offense in the hands of rookie Terry Rozier, who finished with 14 points and a lot of twos (assists, rebounds, steals, turnovers).

“It’s gonna take time,” Stevens said. “We’re asking him to learn off the ball and with the ball, so that when he’s with Marcus he can lay off of it some. It won’t happen overnight. He does show signs of the burst. Defensively he has a chance. He’s still learning from a system standpoint and it will take awhile, but he’s never played pick-and-rolls the way we play them. Or at least not as often. I think he has a high ceiling.”