Wallace has been outspoken since arriving in Boston and he appears unsure of the team’s plan considering the Celtics are in a rebuilding mode. “I’m just trying to make sense of everything. I’m trying to figure out what’s really going on and go from there,” Wallace said. “I don’t have a clue. I don’t know what’s going on. My thing is, when I’m on the court, I compete to win. And when I’m not, it’s just cheer my guys on and hopefully we’ll get a win tonight.”

Celtics swingman Gerald Wallace said he is uncertain about his move to the bench after being replaced for Wednesday’s matchup against the Utah Jazz by Jordan Crawford. Wallace has been mainly a starter since his first three seasons with the Sacramento Kings, starting 590 out of his past 608 games played before Wednesday. Stevens said he wanted to add spark to the offense but Wallace appears uncertain of the team’s direction. “It’s tough for me to adjust to everything. I’m trying to just figure out my role and do the best that I can in that role,” he said. “Once I figure that out, then hopefully I’ll be more comfortable in the situation.”

Wallace said he isn’t accustomed to coming off the bench. “I don’t know. This is the first time for me. I never came off the bench, other than about three years in Sacramento, where they were garbage minutes,” he said. “I’ve always been a starter. I worked my tail off in the league to become a starter. It’s something that’s new to me. I approach the role the same way I did as a starter, and see what I can do from there.”

Gerald Wallace isn’t complaining. He isn’t offering a tale of woe. Let’s get that part straight. The NBA veteran is simply admitting the obvious in response to direct questions and looking for ways to make things better in what is now a very trying and fluid situation with a Celtics team in makeover mode. “It’s hard,” Wallace said. “It’s like starting from scratch zero with this team and trying to figure out what direction they’re headed in and what pieces they’re going to put together. For me, I’ve already been through that situation. I was on an expansion team in Charlotte. I’ve established myself. To have to start all over on a team that’s starting from scratch is very difficult.”

It’s clear that Wallace, like his team, is searching for answers and a formula that will work. “The problem is trying to figure out my role within the team and the situation that I’m called for,” he said. “Last year I had trouble with that in Brooklyn, trying to figure out what was expected of me within the team. Now I come here and pretty much everybody’s looking to see what their role is going to work out to be, what style of play we want, what kind of team we want to be. And when you’re in a situation like that, for me, it’s very difficult at this point in my career. “But it doesn’t change how I approach this. I’m here to work. At the end of the day, we’re still playing basketball and I love this game. I love to play basketball, and when I’m out on the court I’m going to give 110 percent. I just want us to do well. Guys are getting frustrated. I think the main thing I’m saying is that if guys were more zoned in on what was being expected of them, we’d be OK.”