CHILDERSBURG, Alabama -- Gerald Wallace sat in a chair on the stage of the Childersburg High School gym Tuesday night, watching intently as his old team took on rival Central Coosa.

Family members surrounded the 2010 NBA All-Star, some sitting beside him, some in front. Every few minutes, Wallace craned his neck to get a better view of the court.

For a moment, it looked as if he wanted to don his old No. 45 jersey and jump into the action.

The Tigers retired that No. 45 at halftime of their game. School officials unveiled Wallace's signed uniform, enclosed in a glass frame, on a wall of the gym as the crowd cheered for its most famous alum.

"I want to thank the community, the whole city of Childersburg, for always standing behind me," Wallace, a 2000 graduate of Childersburg, said into a microphone. "I just want you to know that every time I step out on the court, it's for the Childersburg Tigers."

Wallace's jersey is the first to be retired at Childersburg. As a senior in 2000, he was named the Naismith Prep Player of the Year, an award given to the best high school basketball player in the country. He collected numerous other honors that year, including Alabama's "Mr. Basketball," Alabama's Gatorade Player of the Year and a selection to the state all-star team.

Following high school, he played his freshman season for the University of Alabama before declaring for the 2001 NBA Draft. He was selected No. 25 in the first round by Sacramento and has since carved out a 10-year career with the Kings, the Charlotte Bobcats and, now, the Portland Trail Blazers.

"Everybody in this building knows that the last thing he has done is forget where he came from," said Chad Slaten, Wallace's former basketball coach and Childersburg's current baseball coach.

Wallace still lives in Childersburg, his native city. He has a son playing on Slaten's seventh-grade baseball team. Tuesday night, he stood in line at the concessions stand at his old school.

"It is very special that you know that somebody's thankful for you," Wallace told reporters following the halftime ceremony. "Everybody knows how much I love my hometown. To put my career in the rafters means a lot to me.

"The energy level is what I miss most from school. Every play is exciting for the crowd, so it's enjoyable for me."

From the looks of it, Wallace, a forward for the Trail Blazers, will finally be back to expending his own energy in NBA arenas around the country. NBA players and owners on Nov. 26 reached a tentative agreement to end a five-month work stoppage. The 2011-12 season is expected to commence Dec. 25.

"I want to get back out on the court," said Wallace, who has earned the nickname "Crash" for his aggressive style of play. "You always beg for a vacation, and we've had a vacation that's been too long.

"I think this past season is one of the best seasons as far as the playoffs, as far as the season. I thought that we didn't want to lose the fan base, so I thought it was important for us to try to get a deal done. At the same time we want a respectful deal for both sides. We're just happy that we were able to get it done."

One of Wallace's other former teams, Alabama, recently rose to No. 12 in the national college basketball AP rankings. While Wallace said he dislikes the pace of the college game, he added that he may soon check out the Crimson Tide.

"I was actually thinking about riding down and watching them play Thursday when they play Georgetown," he said. "I want to meet (Alabama coach Anthony Grant) also."