Netscape Communications said Wednesday it will acquire AtWeb -- a publisher of software tools that streamlines Web site management tasks -- for about 3.36 million shares of Netscape stock. Netscape's closing stock price of US$28.31 gave the deal a value of about $95 million.

Netscape (NSCP) said AtWeb's products and services will tie the Web sites of small companies closer to its Netcenter Internet directory.

AtWeb offers direct marketing and site-building tools. Its Web Site Post Office, for example, helps sites create mailing lists of visitors. Web Site Garage runs diagnostics that help webmasters fine-tune their sites. AtWeb also runs the Web Site Journal publication.

The acquisition will integrate 600,000 Web sites into Netcenter, the companies said. Web sites that sign up with AtWeb's Register service -– which registers Web sites with search engines and directories -- will now be enrolled automatically into Netcenter.

The deal is similar to Microsoft's recent purchase of LinkExchange, a company that runs an ad banner exchange and offers similar Web site tools. Netscape said it also plans to offer an ad banner exchange program through AtWeb by the end of the year.

The deal is expected to close in the first quarter of 1999. AtWeb will operate as a wholly owned subsidiary of Netscape.

- - -

Oracle to acquire Concentra: Database publisher Oracle said Tuesday it has agreed to acquire Concentra, a sales-management software publisher, for about US$43 million, to beef up its e-commerce offerings.

Oracle (ORCL) will pay about $7 a share for Concentra. The transaction is expected to close near the end of the year, Oracle said.

Oracle plans to offer Concentra's (CTRA) products as part of its applications line-up. Increasingly, Oracle, the world's biggest database software publisher, is relying on high-end business software to bring in additional revenue.

Concentra, based in Burlington, Massachusetts, makes computer programs that help companies build sophisticated product catalogs and proposals. Concentra's customers include Fujitsu, General Signal, HBO & Co., Nokia, and US Steel. For the quarter ending 30 September, Concentra had net income of $170,000 on revenues of $6 million, compared to a net loss of $404,000 on revenues of $5 million a year ago.

Concentra's stock surged $3.31, or 93 percent, to $6.88 on Wednesday. Oracle closed up $2 at $33.50.

Donald Trump and Silicon Valley's Billionaire Elegy

Venture capitalists Ben Horowitz and Marc Andreessen claim the tech industry, California, and the country are doomed if we don’t embrace the former president.

RealPage Says Rental Pricing Tech Is Misunderstood, but Landlords Aren’t So Sure

The software company has pushed back hard against claims that its algorithms helped make rent in the US too damn high. Property owners and managers aren't entirely convinced.

Apple, Nvidia, Anthropic Used Thousands of Swiped YouTube Videos to Train AI

Creators claim their videos were used without their knowledge.

OpenAI Slashes the Cost of Using Its AI With a ‘Mini’ Model

With competing models—including many free ones—flooding the market, OpenAI is announcing a cheaper way to use its AI.

How to Get Rich From Peeping Inside People’s Fridges

Forget the S&P 500. Look at the ice cream. This investor visits homes around the world to see where diets—and economies—will go next.