JOHN MARVIN HOLFORD OBITUARY

John Marvin Holford, age 90, of 3902 State St., died on Sunday, April 6, 2008 in his home. He was born on May 30, 1917 in Quincy, the son of Roy Jackson and Irma (Barth) Holford. He married Frances Bohne on July 23, 1937 in Keokuk, IA. She preceded him in death on January 29, 1989. Mr. Holford graduated from Webster School and Quincy Senior High. Mr. Holford started working at the Weems Laundry as a teenager and later became co-owner and manager of Quincy Weems Laundry. Mr. Holford was in the laundry business for more than 46 years, retiring in 1980. Marvin was a member of Luther Memorial Church,

Mr. Holford was a member of 4-H in his youth, was a member of the Adams County Farm Bureau and a long-time member of the United States Trotting Association and the Illinois Harness Horse Association. Marvin enjoyed watching birds and loved caring for all animals. His most avid interest in life was harness horses. His interest developed as a young boy watching the races at Baldwin Park. His life was devoted to breeding and training Standard Bred Race Horses at Holford Stables. Marvin mentored many young race horse enthusiasts. He loved following the county fair circuit to watch his beloved harness racing.

He is survived by:

FIVE CHILDREN: Harriette Vacek of Willowbrook, IL; James E. Holford and his wife Dolores of Quincy; J. Douglas Holford and his wife Sandi also of Quincy; Thomas G. Holford and his wife Mary of San Jose California, and Dianne Deters and her husband Jim of Quincy.

20 GRANDCHILDREN and 24 GREAT-GRANDCHILDREN

A BROTHER: Eugene Holford and his wife Irma

2 SISTERS: Mary Ann Baxter and her husband Raymond and Lois Lepper and her husband Art.

Numerous nieces, nephews and other relatives also survive.

In addition to his wife, Mr. Holford was preceded in death by a daughter: Sharon Holford and son-in-law Frank Vacek, granddaughters: Leslie and Erin Deters and a brother Loren Holford.

Funeral services will be held on Thursday, April 10, 2008 at 10:00 in Luther Memorial Church by Rev. Lee Uden. Interment in Quincy Memorial Park. Visitation will be held on Wednesday evening from 4:00 – 7:00 PM in the Duker & Haugh Funeral Home. Memorials may be made to Luther Memorial Church, Transitions, or to Quincy Notre Dame.