Synopsis

Eileen Ryan, the actor and mother of famous Penn actors Sean, Christopher and Michael has passed away at the age of 94, confirmed her representative Mara Buxbaum on Monday.

Sean Penn’s mother Eileen Ryan passed away at her Malibu home just a week before her 95th birthday which is on October 16.

Eileen Ryan has done several popular TV shows like Grey's Anatomy. Eileen Ryan has appeared in many classic TV movies, including "Parenthood", "The Eight-Legged Miracle" and "Holiday".

In New York, Eileen Ryan met Leo Penn at a rehearsal for Eugene O'Neill's The Iceman Comes at the Circle Theater Square. The couple lived together and got married a week after they met. Their three sons are actors Sean Penn and Christopher Penn and musician Michael Penn. They were married for forty-one years until Penn's death in 1998. The marriage is said to be a delightful and fulfilling one.

Sean Penn, her son, described his mother as a lioness in his 2006 New Yorker profile. She was able to dress down authority figures with ease. Unintimidated, she stood her ground. Ryan once told the New Yorker that all her passion for acting went into being a mother and that she and her husband had a wonderful marriage. She added how they were never bored with each other and grew together. And now again, the couple will be together again in peace in heaven.

FAQ

What movies was Eileen Ryaan on?

"Parenthood," "Eight Legged Freaks," and "Feast" were among her film credits.

Who are the kids of Eileen Ryan?

Actors Sean Penn and Christopher Penn and musician Michael Penn.

Where did Eileen Ryan and Leo Penn meet?

They met at a rehearsal of Eugene O'Neill.

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

Disclaimer Statement: This content is authored by an external agency. The views expressed here are that of the respective authors/ entities and do not represent the views of Economic Times (ET). ET does not guarantee, vouch for or endorse any of its contents nor is responsible for them in any manner whatsoever. Please take all steps necessary to ascertain that any information and content provided is correct, updated, and verified. ET hereby disclaims any and all warranties, express or implied, relating to the report and any content therein.

(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.

...moreless

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.

...moreless

15 Atmanirbhar stocks to include in your portfolio this Independence Day

The Ola Electric story: What makes Bhavish Aggarwal India's most impatient man?

Why Akasa’s losses are mounting when IndiGo is posting record profits

Your EV is 40% Chinese, and will remain so if this jigsaw is not solved

Why success of Blackstone’s repeat IT bet depends on these ifs and buts

Three reasons why Tata Motors has taken a contrarian view on hybrids

1

2

3