Oscar-nominated actress Michelle Williams seems as regardless that she's the least most probably person to generate controversy. An indie darling, she is famed for her roles in an eclectic collection of films, from low-budget arthouse flick Wendy and Lucy to tearjerker Manchester via the Sea, for which she used to be nominated for the Best Supporting Actress Oscar in 2017.

Related: How Close Were Joseph Gordon-Levitt And Heath Ledger?The Dawson's Creek alum used to be famously engaged to the late Heath Ledger, with whom she has a daughter, and enthusiasts marveled at the grace and poise that she exhibited following his premature death in 2008. But since then, lovers have begun to activate her, noting some discrepancies in her relationship timeline. This is the truth about Michelle Williams' messy relationship history.

10 Was Heath Ledger Her One True Love?

When Heath Ledger passed away at the smooth age of 28, fans have been understandably devastated. But the people with reference to him had been affected in a much more profound way. His ex and child mama, Michelle Williams, struggled to speak to the press about Heath without breaking down into tears. Williams and Ledger met on the set of 2005's Brokeback Mountain, wherein they play husband and spouse, and fell in love. Soon, Williams was pregnant and gave start to the couple's only kid, Matilda, in the fall of 2005.

Since Ledger's dying, Michelle Williams has hooked up with a few guys, but none of the relationships appear to have the depth that she shared with Ledger. Among the A-list males she reportedly dated are Jason Segel and acclaimed novelist Jonathan Safran Foer, who separated from his wife shortly before dating Williams. All those relationships appear to have lasted a yr at maximum.

8 And She Got Engaged More Than Once

In early 2018, Williams was once reportedly engaged to financier Andrew Youmans. The couple were noticed on a seaside holiday together, as well as on outings with the actress' daughter, Matilda. However, their marriage never materialized as a result of Williams would get engaged for the 2nd time only some months later...

7 Her First Marriage Shocked Everyone

Mere months after her engagement to Andrew Youmans, Michelle Williams surprised the international by way of marrying indie musician Phil Elverum in July 2018. An not likely pair, they had been deemed the healthy version of Grimes and Elon Musk.

Related: Are Busy Philipps And Michelle Williams Still Close?The explanation why the marriage of Williams and Elverum resonated with fanatics lies in their shared tragic histories. Much like Williams lost Ledger, Elverum lost his wife of 13 years, Geneviève Castrée, who died of pancreatic cancer in 2016. She was once just 35 and left in the back of the couple's one-year-old daughter, Agathe.

6 But Her Divorce Was Even More Shocking

It gave the impression as though Michelle Williams had in any case found real love with Phil Elverum, however that used to be no longer the case. Yet once more, she stunned the world when it was once announced that the couple had been in the midst of a divorce, after lower than a 12 months of marriage. According to Cinema Blend, they had if truth be told been romantically involved for just 6 months ahead of calling it quits.

5 She Began Dating Her Colleague

The same yr she divorced from Elverum, Williams began relationship theater director Thomas Kail. He had produced the FX collection Fosse/Verdon, which starred Williams. Moreover, Kail divorced his spouse of greater than a decade, Angela Christian, in 2019, making his and Williams' respective divorces virtually simultaneous.

4 Soon She Was Pregnant For The Second Time

Not simplest was it reported in late 2019 that Williams and Kail have been engaged, but they had been additionally anticipating a baby. Williams gave delivery to her 2d kid in June 2020, which means that she will have to have conceived in September 2019. Confused yet? It gets extra baffling...

3 The Timeline Didn't Add Up

Michelle Williams and Phil Elverum broke up in April 2019. Since she got pregnant through Thomas Kail in September 2019, there is no overlap with her marriage to Elverum. However, what does not add up is the timeline of her romance with Kail; they reportedly met on the set of Fosse/Verdon, however filming started for the series in November 2018 and wrapped up in March 2019.

Related: Millie Bobby Brown And Jake Bongiovi's Rumored Relationship TimelineThis is all beginning to glance extremely shady, since Williams was once married to Elverum that entire time. In truth, Williams and Kail met just four months into her marriage to Elverum.

2 Two Marriages In Two Years

In March 2020, Michelle Williams and Thomas Kail wed. This makes the courtship her 2nd marriage in just 2 years. However, the couple appears to be smitten and very a lot in love, so in all probability Williams has in the end discovered Mr. Right after years of looking.

1 Fans Think Something Shady Is Going On

Many lovers have taken intention at the apparently messy timeline of Williams' relationship history. "Sure totally believable that two people have a professional relationship. Just happen to get divorced at the same time and then figure 'Hey... let’s get pregnant and married'," wrote one fan on the comments segment of Dlisted. Meanwhile, others have questioned whether she regarded as her ex-husband Phil Elverum's emotions in all this: "Her estranged hubby has a very young daughter. Did she at least try to make the relationship work? These two make [sic] some huge changes to their lives to be with her."

Of course, no one truly is aware of what went down rather then Williams, Kail, and their respective ex-spouses. If Williams has after all discovered true love, then that is all that in reality matters.

Next: Fans Accuse Nick Cannon Of Normalizing Cheating

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7tbTErZ%2Bippeoe6S7zGhkmpukp7K0v4ymoJyglaG5pnnWoqOloZGiwG65xKyqsmWimrmiwMiopaygmaV6qbXSraarsV8%3D