For more than 30 years, ArbiterSports has been the leader in athletic event management, helping athletic departments and sports leagues simplify the process of managing athletic events, assigning officials, paying event workers, and informing participants. State athletic associations, commissioners, athletic directors, assigners and officials use ArbiterSports for unprecedented control and visibility over the entire athletic event process.

Kyle brings to ArbiterSports a passion for athletics combined with a deep understanding of the transformative benefits of software. He is a seasoned technology executive with a deep range of experience across many industries including finance, technology, media, financial services, industrials, publishing, government and retail. Prior to joining ArbiterSports, he led several national/global software companies including Cardinal Mark, Telestream and Interactive Data. Ford began his career as a U.S. Naval Officer following graduation from Stanford University with a bachelor’s degree in Economics. After leaving the Navy, he earned an MBA from the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University. He currently lives in Park City, UT with his wife and two children.

As a member of the ArbiterSports executive team, John leads the finance, accounting, treasury and planning functions at the company. He has 20+ years of functional experience covering FP&A, mergers and acquisitions, accounting oversight/policy, treasury management and compliance. John’s background also includes seven years of hands-on operational experience and five years of experience as a board member and audit committee chairman at a publicly traded insurance agency and brokerage. His broad industry expertise covers software, financial services, aerospace/manufacturing and retail with a range of companies including Citrix Systems, Zions Bancorporation, Bank of America (NationsBank), Coltec Industries, Quotesmith and McDonalds. John holds an MBA in Finance from the University of Chicago and a BS in Finance from the University of Utah.

Karen is a seasoned product manager, software engineer and business analyst with two decades of experience overseeing the development of new products. Before joining ArbiterSports, Mogridge served in several positions at financial services giant CoreLogic including Senior Professional Product Manager, Director of Quality Assurance, Director of Special Projects and Senior Business Analyst. She also worked as a software engineer with F-22 Lockheed Martin and combined her love of cycling and non-profits to make key contributions to several organizations including the GOAL Foundation, Mercury Cycling, Safe Routes to School National Partnership and Bike Walk Mississippi. Mogridge holds a BS in Computer Information Systems from Valdosta State University.

As a member of the ArbiterSports executive team, Kristen leads all of the people, culture and talent functions. She is a human resource professional with 17 years of human resource management experience, mostly concentrated in the Technology and SaaS business sectors. Kristen is focused on expanding ArbiterSports’ reputation as one of the most desirable career destinations and by providing a collaborative work environment where employees can grow their careers. She has notable experience in strategic human resource planning, performance management, culture transformations, diversity and inclusion, employment contract negotiations, employee benefits, compensation and payroll, training and development and management coaching. Kristen is a certified professional holding her Sr. Professional, Global Professional and SHRM certifications. Kristen lives in Lehi, Utah with her husband and loves her granddaughter the most.

Chad serves as the Chief Technology Officer at ArbiterSports. During his 15+ year career, Chad has solved a variety of challenging business problems through the creative use of new technology. His background working for Thomson Reuters, the Manley Gropu and The Schwan Food Company allowed him opportunities to lead hands-on high-profile implementation projects that streamlined how information was exchanged with customers. Chad has most recently held executive positions at Explore, AudaExplore and Verisys where he built high-performing teams that developed cutting-edge data applications, and predictive web services and created and executed a solid strategic vision. Chad received his Bachelor of Science degree in Business Computer Information Services at St. Cloud University in St. Cloud, MN. He now resides in Riverton, Utah with his wife and two children.

Brett Balwdin, Vice President of Sales, is a seasoned professional with a profound commitment to our mission of providing technology solutions to support educational institutions, athletic organizations, and non-profits. He brings over 15 years of successful experience in selling to state, local, and educational customers. With a career at Tek-Hut, a technology provider serving education and government sectors, and Lightspeed Systems, a leader in online safety and education solutions, he demonstrated tremendous success in driving expansion and revenue growth. His mission-driven approach to team building and customer satisfaction aligns perfectly with ArbiterSports' commitment to facilitating seamless processes for our core customer base.

Clark is well-versed in all things ArbiterSports, having managed its sales team, customer service team and ArbiterPay sales and operations. Starting with ArbiterSports from its earliest beginnings, Clark prides himself on knowing thousands of clients and most industry leaders personally and is now focused on developing new business opportunities with national governing bodies and associations. Many of his closest friends are among the company’s clients and partners. Clark holds BAs in Finance and Mandarin from the University of Utah and an MBA from Brigham Young University. He lives in Mill Creek, Utah with his wife and four children.