COLLECTION FINDING AID

GERALD R. FORD VICE PRESIDENTIAL PAPERS, 1973-74

View digitized copies of Gerald Ford's Schedules, folders in the series "Vice President's Foreign and Diplomatic Meetings" and Vice President Ford's speeches in the series "Paul Miltich File of Ford Speeches"

SUMMARY DESCRIPTION

The collection includes material on Ford's congressional career and Vice Presidential confirmation; miscellaneous domestic and foreign policy issues; scheduling, travel and speeches; office organization; and constituent casework and public opinion mail. However, material on the Watergate affair and relations with the Nixon White House is scattered, and material on the Presidential transition is very limited.

QUANTITY

105.2 linear feet (ca. 210,400 pages)

DONOR

Gerald R. Ford (accession numbers 77-42, 77-45, 77-55, 77-63, 77-107, 77-127, 77-134, 78-16, 78-73)

ACCESS

Open. Some items are temporarily restricted under terms of the donor's deed of gift, a copy of which is available on request, or under National Archives and Records Administration general restrictions (36 CFR 1256).

COPYRIGHT

Gerald R. Ford donated to the United States of America his copyrights in all of his unpublished writings in National Archives collections. The copyrights to materials written by other individuals or organizations are presumed to remain with them. Works prepared by U.S. Government employees as part of their official duties are in the public domain.

Prepared by William McNitt, October 1980 (Revised February 1995)

INTRODUCTION

The Ford Vice Presidential Papers include materials created and received by Gerald R. Ford and his staff between October 13, 1973 and August 9, 1974. During the first two months Ford was still House Minority Leader, but his staff decided to begin the Vice Presidential file upon nomination rather than waiting until he was sworn in. Therefore the collection documents the last few weeks of Ford's Congressional career and his eight months as Vice President.

This description of the Vice Presidential Papers consists of sections on the Ford Vice Presidency, the organization and duties of his staff, the arrangement and content of the papers, and related materials held by the Library.

The Ford Vice Presidency

Upon the resignation of Vice President Spiro T. Agnew on October 10, 1973, President Richard Nixon began soliciting suggestions for a new Vice President. After only two days, he announced the nomination of Congressman Gerald R. Ford. Under the 25th Amendment to the Constitution this nomination required confirmation by both houses of Congress.

Eight days later President Nixon fired Watergate Special Prosecutor Archibald Cox in the "Saturday Night Massacre." Attorney General Elliot Richardson and his deputy William Ruckelshaus resigned over the Cox firing. Because of the outrage over the dismissal of Archibald Cox, many members of Congress became convinced that the new Vice President would soon succeed to the Presidency. The Federal Bureau of Investigation conducted a detailed investigation of Ford's background and turned the results over to Congress. Members of Congress questioned Ford carefully and examined his record more closely than they might normally have done for one of their colleagues. The final votes in support of the Ford nomination were 92‑3 in the Senate and 387‑35 in the House. On December 6, 1973, before a joint session of Congress, Gerald Ford took the oath of office as the 40th Vice President of the United States.

The only Vice Presidential duty provided in the Constitution is serving as President of the Senate, but President Nixon soon assigned additional duties to Mr. Ford. He attended meetings of the Cabinet and National Security Council and served as Vice Chairman of the Domestic Council, Chairman of the Committee on the Right of Privacy, and Chairman of the Energy Action Group. Ford's participation in most of these organizations consisted merely of attending meetings, but under his leadership the Domestic Council Committee on the Right of Privacy began operations, hired a staff, prepared several studies, and presented proposals. The Vice President chose his former law partner from Grand Rapids, Philip Buchen, to head the Privacy Committee staff.

During the 1974 congressional and gubernatorial campaigns, Vice President Ford served as principal party spokesman making numerous trips to assist Republican candidates for office. While Vice President, Gerald Ford represented the administration by making over 200 formal speeches and traveling approximately 110,000 miles.

The Vice President also added to his knowledge of foreign policy and intelligence matters through daily briefings from the C.I.A., regular meetings with Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger, and weekly briefings from National Security advisor Henry Kissinger or his deputy.

While Ford was learning his new job, President Nixon's situation continued to deteriorate. In a special election on February 18, 1974, Richard Vander Veen won Ford's old House seat -- the first Democratic victory in Michigan's Fifth Congressional District in 64 years. The results of this and other special Congressional elections in the spring of 1974 weakened the President's political position.

On May 9, 1974 the House Judiciary Committee began impeachment hearings against President Nixon. Philip Buchen, unknown to Ford, soon began the planning for a Presidential transition. In late July the Judiciary Committee voted three articles of impeachment against the President. Faced with a rapidly deteriorating situation, the President resigned on August 9, 1974 and Vice President Gerald R. Ford became the 38th President of the United States.

The Ford Vice Presidential Staff

Until Gerald Ford's confirmation as Vice President on December 6, 1973, his staff consisted of the dozen or so individuals who had served him for many years as a Congressman. During the confirmation hearings several old friends and associates volunteered their assistance and President Nixon also made available the White House speechwriters and advance staff to assist Ford on trips.

After December 6, Vice President Ford's staff grew rapidly. Three key people from his Congressional staff, Robert Hartmann, Mildred Leonard, and Paul Miltich, became Chief of Staff, Personal Assistant and Press Secretary, respectively. Later that month Ford hired William Casselman as Legal Counsel, Warren Rustand to handle scheduling and advance work, Kenneth BeLieu for legislative affairs, and Bill Roberts as Deputy Press Secretary. The military aides, several clerical and administrative people, and Walter Mote as Assistant to the President of the Senate were holdovers from the Agnew staff.

Vice President Ford continued to make use of the White House speechwriters and advance staff during the first two months of his Vice Presidency, but that arrangement ended after he delivered a controversial speech supporting the President to the American Farm Bureau Federation on January 15, 1974. Ford received much criticism for that speech from the media and from some of his old friends and supporters. He then created his own speechwriting staff, hiring Milton Friedman to handle the initial drafting of speeches.

By February 1974, Ford had a staff of over sixty persons and was no longer dependent on White House assistance. Richard Burress had replaced Kenneth BeLieu in handling legislative affairs and he had hired John Marsh and Gwen Anderson to handle defense matters and political liaison respectively.

The sudden growth of Ford's staff led to administrative tangles owing partly to Chief of Staff Robert Hartmann's lack of administrative experience. The Vice President decided to hire L. William Seidman of Grand Rapids to study the organization of the Vice Presidential staff and recommend improvement. Seidman's study led to the implementation of a new staff organization in the spring of 1974.

Under the new organization, the Chief of Staff handled liaison with the senior White House staff, Cabinet officers, agency heads, state governors, Congressional leadership, and the Chairman of the Republican National Committee. Hartmann also supervised personnel matters and the Vice President's personal staff, and had editorial oversight of all speeches, remarks and formal statements.

The reorganization plan divided the operational staff into three areas, each headed by an Assistant to the Vice President. Richard Burress was in charge of legislative and domestic affairs and had responsibility for liaison with the executive branch, members of Congress, and state and local government. John Marsh handled defense and international affairs, including liaison with the State Department, the Defense Department, and National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Veterans Administration, and foreign embassies. He also supervised the work of the military assistants and had responsibility for Vice Presidential travel and logistic support. Bill Seidman assumed responsibility for administration and services. He supervised five Deputy Assistants who handled scheduling and appointments, liaison with the Republican party and other non‑governmental organizations, administration, media affairs, and research.

The Ford Vice Presidential Papers

Because Ford remained a Congressman until December 6, the organization of the Ford papers did not immediately change. His secretaries continued to file most correspondence and other documents in the General and Case File and the Issues File. As had always been the case, Robert Hartmann and Paul Miltich maintained separate files relating to their areas of responsibility.

After January 1, 1974, the staff divided the General and Case File into the General File and the Case/Individual File and seven other staff members established separate files. The General File, the Issues File and the Case/Individual File served as a "central files" for much of the routine correspondence. The staff files contain working papers and correspondence relating to the specific responsibilities of each staff member. In addition, the Vice Presidential papers originally included approximately 53 linear feet of public opinion mail including correspondence answered by form and letters never answered. The Ford Library has retained a small sample of this public opinion mail and disposed of the rest.

The Vice Presidential papers document in detail the work of Gerald Ford and his staff in answering mail, handling constituent casework, scheduling and advancing trips, speechwriting, handling administrative and personnel matters, relating with Republican party organizations, campaigning for Republican candidates, meeting with foreign and diplomatic officials, and liaison with the Congress. There is little here to document the less public aspects of the Vice Presidency such as the many briefings received by Ford, his meetings with President Nixon, or the meetings of the Domestic Council, the Cabinet, the National Security Council or other bodies on which Ford served. Little material on the Watergate investigations and impeachment appears, with the exception of public opinion in correspondence, references in speeches, and occasional items in the staff files.

The Michigan Historical Collections of the University of Michigan received five cubic feet of Vice Presidential Papers from Gerald Ford in 1974, as part of a large shipment of Congressional Papers. The University transferred these materials to the Ford Library under terms of the Ford letter of gift to the U.S. Government in 1977. The Library received the rest of the Vice Presidential Papers directly from President Ford.

Related Materials (February 1995)

The Ford Scrapbook Collection includes three volumes of newspaper clippings, programs and occasional documents concerning his activities during the Vice Presidency. John Marsh's White House files contain a small file of Ford's schedules and telephone logs from late July and early August 1974. The Robert Hartmann Papers contain 4.4 linear feet of additional materials from the Vice Presidency. Barry Roth's unprocessed White House files contain his chronological file for the Vice Presidency and Executive Protective Service appointment records for the Vice President's office.

The Betty Ford Papers include her correspondence and other papers relating to her activities in 1973 and 1974 while her husband served as Vice President. Only selected portions of that collection are open to research yet, however.

Significant quantities of audiovisual materials and gifts and memorabilia from the Vice Presidency can be found in the appropriate units of the Ford Library and Museum. The Ford Library book collection has The New York Times, Newsweek, Time, U.S. News and World Report, Fortune, and the National Journal on microfilm for all or part of the Ford Vice Presidency. A vertical file of clippings, pamphlets, magazine articles and other material on Ford's career is also available.

SERIES DESCRIPTIONS

Correspondence Control (Index) File, 1973-74. (Boxes 1-9, 3.6 linear feet)

The Control File consists of carbon copies of all outgoing letters arranged alphabetically by name of the correspondent. The file location of the complete correspondence is written in the upper right-hand corner.

This file indexes all mail individually answered by Vice President Ford or his staff, but does not index mail answered with a form letter or unanswered mail. In addition, it does not index letters of congratulations received by Ford upon his nomination and confirmation (some are in the General File and others in the Public Opinion Mail).

Before January 1974, the staff filed constituent casework in the General File. They did not change any of the control sheets when they removed the case files and made them into a separate series. When the Ford Library received the Vice Presidential Papers, there were separate control files for 1973 and 1974. Archivists combined these two sequences during processing.

The Ford Library staff has not reviewed this file. For that reason researchers should consult with an archivist to arrange for the review of those sections they wish to use.

Compiled by William McNitt, December 1979

Issues File, 1973‑74. (Boxes 10-22, 5.2 linear feet)

The Issues File contains correspondence between Ford and his staff, the general public, and government officials on a variety of topics concerning the Federal government. Among the larger files are defense, the economy, health, labor, social security, and taxes. The Multiple Issues segment contains correspondence on more than one subject. The Presidential file consists entirely of correspondence in support of or against President Nixon. The Vice Presidential Endorsement file contains letters to Congressman Peter Rodino and Senator Howard Cannon from other Congressmen and labor and religious leaders endorsing Ford for Vice President.

Staff members drafted acknowledgments to the correspondence for the Vice President's signature. On occasions when Ford was out of town, various staff members signed the responses. The staff referred many letters to other Federal departments and agencies to draft a response for the Vice President's signature. The series is arranged alphabetically by subject.

Compiled by Kenneth G. Hafeli, December 1979

Case/Individual File, 1973‑74. (Boxes 23-36, 5.6 linear feet)

The bulk of this file consists of routine requests by constituents for assistance in dealing with government agencies, along with the responses from the Ford office and the agencies. The requestors asked the Vice President to intervene in cases involving missing or incorrect pension or social security checks, attempts to qualify for medical and education benefits, personnel matters (especially in the armed services), and other problems.

Also included in this file are occasional unanswered letters concerning matters other than casework. Apparently the staff filed such letters in this series when no appropriate category could be found in the General File or the Issues File.

This file is arranged alphabetically by the name of the person needing assistance or, in the case of the unanswered letters, by the name of the correspondent. The Ford Library has not reviewed this file. For that reason researchers should consult with an archivist to arrange for the review of those segments they wish to use.

Compiled by William McNitt, November 1979

General File, 1973‑74. (Boxes 37-58, 8.8 linear feet)

The General File served as a central file for correspondence between Ford (or his staff), the public, and government officials on topics of a routine nature. While the staff handled much of the material, the Vice President or his personal assistant Mildred Leonard dealt with correspondence from personal acquaintances. This series also contains correspondence and reports concerning organizations to which the Vice President belonged by statute, among them the Domestic Council Committee on the Right of Privacy, the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution, and the U.S. Capitol Historical Society.

Among the larger files in the series are those concerning Vice Presidential appearances, congratulatory messages to and from the Vice President, greetings, staff positions, recommendations, Republican campaigns, requests for autographs and photographs, and thank you letters. The General File is an amalgam of a smaller subject file, the Ford Personal File, and the Vice Presidential Official File. It is arranged alphabetically by subject.

Compiled by Kenneth G. Hafeli, December 1979

Office of the Assistant for Defense and International Affairs: John O. Marsh Files, 1973‑74. (Boxes 59-71 & 206, 5.2 linear feet)

The Assistant for Defense and International Affairs was John O. Marsh, a former Congressman from Virginia and Assistant Secretary of Defense. He joined the Ford staff on January 29, 1974, and remained until moving to the White House staff in August.

Marsh's duties included collecting and evaluating information concerning national security, maintaining classified materials, supervising travel and logistics, and monitoring defense and foreign affairs legislation in Congress. In addition, his office served as liaison to the Departments of Defense and State, the National Security Council, the intelligence community, the Veterans Administration, international organizations, foreign missions resident in Washington, and foreign visitors. The Vice President's military aides also worked out of this office, handling much of the routine work such as drafting replies to correspondence.

The materials consist of correspondence, speeches, personnel files, briefing materials concerning foreign affairs and diplomatic visits, schedules, programs, flight manifests and itineraries, and billing records. They are organized in six subseries: Subject File, Chronological File, Meetings with Foreign and Diplomatic Officials, Vice Presidential Events, Thank You Letters for Vice Presidential Trips, and Trip File.

Compiled by Kenneth G. Hafeli, September 1979

John Marsh Subject File, 1973‑74. (Boxes 59‑64, 2.2 linear feet)

Correspondence, memoranda, speeches and resumes, relating to defense issues and military and foreign affairs, including the Central Intelligence Agency, National Guard and Reserve Affairs, Korea, MIA‑POW, Vice Presidential Correspondence and Vice Presidential Remarks.

Arranged alphabetically by subject.

John Marsh Chronological File, 1973‑74. (Box 64, 0.2 linear feet)

Carbon copies of outgoing correspondence and memoranda, written by Marsh or his military aides, with an occasional incoming letter or background item attached.

Arranged chronologically.

John Marsh File of Vice Presidential Meetings with Foreign and Diplomatic Officials, 1973‑74. (Box 65, 0.4 linear feet)

Memorandums of conversations, memos, and briefing materials related to meetings between Ford and foreign heads of state, diplomats, and ambassadors. Most of the material deals with foreign affairs, with only a small amount concerning domestic affairs appearing.

Arranged chronologically.

View container list for this series

John Marsh File of Vice Presidential Events, 1973‑74. (Boxes 66‑67, 0.6 linear feet)

Briefing memos, schedules, and occasional correspondence relating to requests for and preparations involving appearances made by the Vice President.

Arranged chronologically.

John Marsh File of Thank You Letters for Vice Presidential Trips, 1973‑74. (Boxes 67‑68, 0.6 linear feet)

Lists of persons to be thanked for their assistance on Vice Presidential trips, carbon copies of letters sent, and an occasional program from a particular event.

Arranged chronologically by date of trip.

John Marsh Trip File, 1973‑74. (Boxes 69‑71, 1.2 linear feet)

Schedules, passenger lists, flight manifests, flight itineraries, briefing notes, news media billings, in flight expense forms, seating chart from trips made by the Vice President, and correspondence to media organizations requesting reimbursement for passage aboard Air Force II.

Arranged chronologically by date of trip.

Office of the Assistant for Legislative and Domestic Affairs: Richard T. Burress Files, 1974. (Boxes 72-73, 0.8 Feet)

Richard T. Burress joined the Vice President's staff to handle legislative and domestic affairs in February 1974, replacing Kenneth E. BeLieu. After Ford became President, Burress served as an assistant to Vice President designate Rockefeller until November 1, 1974, when he returned to the Hoover Institution as associate director and senior Fellow.

Burress' primary duties were collecting and independently evaluating information on domestic issues from Congress, the Executive Branch, state and local governments, and boards, committees, and commissions with which the Vice President was associated. He appears to have assembled much of the material to help Ford respond to questions or expressions of opinion from members of the public.

Materials include correspondence, copies of letters sent by the Vice President, internal memoranda, proposals, pamphlets, statements of purpose, briefing papers, and printed materials on such topics as health care, the role of minorities, energy, the economy, and administrative matters. The papers are arranged alphabetically by subject.

The files of assistant to the President of the Senate, Walter Mote, and the legal counsel for the Vice President, William Casselman, contain related materials.

Compiled by Christine Ferretti, May 1979

Office of the Legal Counsel: William E. Casselman Files, 1973‑74. (Boxes 74-99, 10 linear feet)

William E. Casselman joined the Vice Presidential staff in December 1973 after serving as general counsel for the General Services Administration since 1971. Casselman served as legal adviser throughout Ford's tenure as Vice President. He then became Counsel to the President in the Ford White House. His staff during the Vice Presidency consisted of legal assistant Barry Roth and staff assistant Brenda Wilson. This office advised Ford on questions of administrative and fiscal law, including personnel regulations, security, archival procedures, appropriations authority, standards of conduct, litigation, and recommendations on appointments to the federal judiciary.

Casselman also shared responsibility with Richard Burress, Assistant for Legislative and Domestic Affairs, for domestic policy analysis and provided support to Ford in his role as vice chairman of the Domestic Council. Casselman coordinated issue development within the Domestic Council, helped resolve policy differences between federal agencies and the Council and assisted the Vice President in developing and addressing issues of interest. The office acted as liaison between departments and agencies and the Vice President on domestic policy, providing a source of information and analysis independent of the Domestic Council.

These files reflect Casselman's responsibilities for providing the Vice President with legal services and advice on domestic policy issues. A subject file documents his work on privacy legislation, employee standards of conduct, energy problems, American Indian rights and similar issues that the Vice President addressed. The official correspondence file contains copies of outgoing correspondence and information on the daily operations of the office, personnel changes and other matters of secondary importance. There is considerable overlap and duplication in the two series. A third series contains photocopies from General Services Administration office files concerning purchases of office furniture in certain GSA regions.

Other papers on domestic policy issues during the Vice Presidential period may be found in the files of the Assistant to the Vice President for Legislative and Domestic Affairs and in the various Domestic Council collections of the Presidential period. The files of Chief of Staff Robert Hartmann contain extensive information on Ford's confirmation hearings.

Compiled by Paul Conway, September 1979

William Casselman Subject File, 1973‑74. (Boxes 74‑88, 5.8 linear feet)

Correspondence and memoranda to and from Vice Presidential staff, federal officials and the public; draft speeches and reports, studies, court cases and other papers reflecting Casselman's responsibilities for providing legal advice on administrative policy matters. Also included are materials on Casselman's activities concerning domestic policy, including drafting legislation on health, energy and personal privacy. Carbon copies of some outgoing memoranda and correspondence also appear in the official correspondence series.

Arranged alphabetically by subject.

William Casselman Official Correspondence, 1973‑74. (Boxes 88‑93, 2.0 linear feet)

Copies of outgoing correspondence and memoranda with attached reports and draft replies; printed materials, notes and other papers exchanged between Casselman and Ford, federal officials, assistants and the public concerning routine administrative matters, scheduling and domestic policy issues such as energy, American Indians and sports. Also included is information on personnel changes, Vice Presidential archives, standards of conduct, privacy and other legal matters. Much of the material is unique to this series, but duplicate correspondence, memoranda and reports are also in the subject file. Cross-reference headings typed in the upper right corner of covering letters are supposed to indicate subject file locations for the full correspondence, but the system is generally unreliable.

Arranged chronologically.

William Casselman GSA Furniture Purchases File, 1970-73. (Boxes 93‑98, 2.2 linear feet)

Copies of correspondence, supply, requisition and bidding forms, contracts and other papers retained in Casselman's files after Ford's confirmation hearings. The material primarily relates to purchases of Steelcase, Inc. furniture and office supplies for placement in various General Services Administration regional facilities and in Ford's congressional l district offices. Also included is some general correspondence with GSA on furniture purchases and supply requisition.

Arranged alphabetically by subject.

Office of the Assistant to the President of the Senate: Walter L. Mote Files, 1973‑74. (Boxes 100-107, 3.2 linear feet)

Walter L. Mote, Assistant to the President of the Senate, was a carry‑over from the staff of Vice President Spiro T. Agnew. He remained on the Vice Presidential staff until January 1975, when he retired from government service. His staff consisted of H. Spofford Canfield, Josephine Wilson, and several secretaries.

This office handled legislative mail, compiled twice daily briefing sheets on Congressional activity, maintained records for Vice Presidential scheduling, fulfilled autograph and photograph requests, and arranged White House tours. They also kept the Speaker of the House, Architect of the Capitol, and other Congressional officials informed of Ford's activities in his role as President of the Senate and notified Senators and Congressmen of Vice Presidential visits to their home districts.

Mote's subject file contains correspondence from Senators and Congressmen, morning and evening reports on the activities of the Senate, and referrals on correspondence sent to the Vice President concerning other departments and agencies. His case file contains constituent correspondence dealing with a variety of subjects.

Vice Presidential schedules are also located in the files of L. William Seidman and Warren S. Rustand. The files of the Assistant for Legislative and Domestic Affairs concern contacts with Congress on specific issues. Later material on activities related to the Congress can be found in the White House files of Max Friedersdorf.

Compiled by Kenneth G. Hafeli, September 1979

Walter Mote Subject File, 1973‑74. (Boxes 100‑103, 1.6 linear feet)

Correspondence, invitations, requests for endorsements, appointments, autographs, and photographs; referrals from various departments and agencies, drafts of correspondence, daily reports on House proceedings, morning and evening reports, and the Vice President's daily schedule. The material covers a variety of subjects, including condolences, congratulations, education, energy, housing, social security, and veterans affairs.

Arranged alphabetically.

Walter Mote Case File, 1973‑74. (Boxes 104‑107, 1.6 linear feet)

Correspondence relating to requests for assistance in dealing with government agencies or requests for information. Mote's staff did much of the case work rather than referring it to government agencies for a response.

Arranged alphabetically.

Office of the Assistant for Administration and Services: L. William Seidman Files, 1973‑74. (Boxes 108-116, 3.6 linear feet)

L. William Seidman joined the Vice President's staff in February 1974 as a management and budget consultant. In this capacity he studied the organization of the Vice President's staff and proposed changes to improve operating procedures. He later became the Assistant for Administration and Services. Seidman served for the remainder of the Vice Presidency and then became Assistant for Economic Affairs to President Ford.

Under Seidman's supervision, five deputy assistants and their staffs organized both the daily operations of the Vice President's office and contacts between the Vice President and the public. The office provided all administrative services for Ford, from drafting responses to maintaining the active "follow‑up" file of correspondence and projects to be completed. Frank Pagnotta organized these activities and oversaw staff personnel actions. James Brown and Frank Townsend maintained the gift files. Warren Rustand handled scheduling, appointments and advance work for Ford's travels. Gwen Anderson organized the Vice President's contacts with political and other non‑government organizations. Seidman also supervised Paul Miltich's media relations work and Milton Friedman's research activities.

These files contain correspondence, memoranda, speech drafts, gift lists, charts and other papers exchanged between Seidman and the Vice President, other federal officials and the public relating both to his supervision of administrative services, scheduling policy, personnel, and gift accessioning and to his personal interests in the nation's economy and speechwriting. Included are the chronological file of staff assistant Ruth Kilmer and materials compiled by Pagnotta, Brown and Townsend, some of which pre‑date Seidman's government service. The series is arranged alphabetically by subject.

The separate files of the various deputy assistants contain related materials, as do Seidman's White House files.

Compiled by Paul Conway, September 1979

Office of the Deputy Assistant for Non‑Governmental Organizations: Gwen Anderson Files, 1974. (Boxes 117-126, 4.0 linear feet)

Gwen O. Anderson, a former Republican National Committeewoman from the state of Washington, joined the Vice President's staff as consultant for public affairs in January 1974. In July she became deputy assistant for non‑governmental organizations, but there was no change in her duties.

Anderson's major function was to coordinate the Vice President's appearances at political events and fundraisers. All requests for political appearances were forwarded to Anderson by the scheduling office for her recommendation. She took part in the weekly scheduling meetings and coordinated with Warren Rustand's office the arrangements for events of a political nature. Anderson also served as liaison with Republican group, city, state and county officials, and other political organizations and handled requests for messages, autographs, photographs, and fundraising auction items. When Ford became President, she continued to perform these duties, first as an assistant to Dean Burch and later to Robert Hartmann.

The papers contain correspondence with Republican groups and candidates concerning invitations, schedules, thank yous, evaluations of events, requests for messages, endorsements, or items to auction. Documents on fundraising affairs include information on contributions to the party, the success of events, and arrangements for ensuring the Republican National Committee a share of the proceeds.

Other materials include copies of speeches, messages and political tributes, background information on organizations, minutes of scheduling meetings, intra‑office administrative memoranda, and an analysis of the special election held in the Fifth District of Michigan to fill Ford's congressional seat. The papers are divided into four series: subject file, chronological file, speech file, and state events file.

The Vice Presidential files of Warren Rustand, Paul Miltich, and William Seidman contain related materials.

Compiled by Christine Ferretti, May 1979

Gwen Anderson Subject File, 1974. (Boxes 117‑121, 1.9 linear feet)

Correspondence, memoranda, telegrams, meeting minutes, newsletters, reports, press releases, schedules, briefing papers, and printed materials concerning political groups, Republican fundraising activities, events such as the Bicentennial or Honor America Day, and the mechanics of scheduling Vice Presidential appearances. The file reflects her liaison work with political organizations through background information on organizations, reports on the progress of fundraising, or responses to requests for messages, photographs, or items to auction. The scheduling files largely concern invitations regretted and the process of creating the schedule. Information on events that the Vice President attended is found in the State Events File.

Arranged alphabetically by subject.

Gwen Anderson Chronological File, 1974. (Boxes 121‑122, 0.2 linear feet)

Copies of outgoing correspondence signed by Anderson or the Vice President including messages to organizations, thank you letters, acknowledgment of comments on issues, and regrets of invitations. The file is interspersed with occasional internal memoranda.

Arranged chronologically.

Gwen Anderson File of Ford Speeches, 1974. (Box 122, 0.3 linear feet)

Copies of Ford speeches. Most are in press release form, but a few are copies of reading copies. Occasional ones bear annotations showing changes made during delivery. This is not a complete file of all speeches and most were given to non‑political rather than political organizations.

Arranged chronologically.

Gwen Anderson State Events File, 1974. (Boxes 123‑126, 1.5 linear feet)

Correspondence, memoranda, notes, schedules, newspaper clippings and other material related to political events attended by the Vice President. Topics include arrangements for Ford appearances, the Republican National Committee share of fundraising proceeds, evaluations and comments on Ford speeches and activities, the political situation in the state visited, pending or actual political appointments, and other similar topics. The series contains some files on trips canceled or rearranged after Ford became President.

Arranged alphabetically by state and thereunder chronologically.

Office of the Deputy Assistant for Media Affairs: Paul A. Miltich Files, 1973‑74. (Boxes 127-173, 18.8 linear feet)

Formerly a Washington correspondent for Booth Newspapers, a Michigan newspaper chain, Miltich joined the Ford Congressional staff as press secretary in 1966, succeeding James M. Mudge. Miltich continued to serve as Ford's press secretary throughout the Vice Presidency and then became an Assistant Press Secretary in the Ford White House.

Miltich and his assistant, John W. "Bill" Roberts, were responsible for compiling background material, preparing speech drafts, releasing information to the press, answering inquiries and requests from the public, and mailing copies of Vice Presidential speeches to those who requested them.

The office coordinated efforts with Chief of Staff Robert Hartmann's speechwriters and Warren Rustand's scheduling office. The latter provided long and short range schedules of the Vice President's upcoming activities and assured that Miltich's office provided suitable remarks and statements when necessary. Miltich also participated in weekly scheduling meetings.

The materials consist of speeches and remarks made by the Vice President, correspondence, background material, articles written for or about Ford or his staff, press releases, drafts, printed materials, and requests for invitations to the Vice President to attend various functions. They are divided into four series: speech file, subject file, speech materials file, and publication file.

Related materials may be found in the files of the Deputy Assistant for Scheduling and Advance (Rustand) and the Chief of Staff (Hartmann) in the Vice Presidential files. Miltich's files in the Congressional papers and the files of Ron Nessen and his staff in the Presidential papers also contain related material.

Compiled by Kenneth G. Hafeli, December 1979

Paul Miltich File of Ford Speeches, 1973‑74. (Boxes 127‑135, 3.6 linear feet)

Speech drafts, reading copies, and printed copies of speeches made by Ford, including his remarks upon becoming Vice President and later President, plus miscellaneous brochures and press releases. The collection of speeches is quite extensive although comparison with the Rustand speech file shows that it is not complete.

Arranged chronologically.

View container list for this series

Paul Miltich Subject File, 1973‑74. (Boxes 136‑169, 13.6 linear feet)

Correspondence, articles written for or about the Vice President or his staff, drafts of letters and form letters used both by Ford and Spiro Agnew, Nixon press releases, White House News Summaries, invitations and responses, some public opinion mail, and requests for Vice Presidential items, such as autographs and photographs. Major topics include appearances, budget, congratulations, defense, form letter drafts, economy, elections, energy, labor, regrets, requests, White House news summaries and press releases.

Arranged alphabetically by subject.

Paul Miltich Speech Materials File, 1973‑74. (Boxes 170‑172, 1.2 linear feet)

Copies of speeches by various speakers, newspaper clippings, magazine articles, programs and books, dating from the mid‑60's, that Ford's speechwriters used as source material for speeches. Topics include business, commerce, humor, Abraham Lincoln and Republican Party.

Arranged alphabetically by subject.

Paul Miltich Publications File, 1971-74. (Box 173, 0.4 linear feet)

Newsletters, newspapers, periodicals, brochures, clippings, and press releases sent either to Ford or to Paul Miltich by the public or acquaintances.

Arranged chronologically.

Office of the Deputy Assistant for Scheduling and Appointments: Warren S. Rustand Files, 1973‑74. (Boxes 174-205, 12.8 linear feet)

Before Mr. Ford's confirmation as Vice President, Mildred Leonard handled his schedule. Dewey Clower served briefly in this role after the confirmation, but Lt. Col. Americo Sardo replaced him. Warren Rustand joined the Ford staff on December 18, 1973, as an assistant to Sardo, and became Deputy Assistant for Scheduling and Appointments on February 1, 1974. In August 1974, Rustand moved to the White House as Appointments Secretary to the President.

The scheduling office formulated both long-range and short-range schedules for all events and appointments. They handled, on the average, 75 written requests and 150 phone calls per day. By April 8, 1974, the Vice President had met over 1,000 office appointments, delivered 60 speeches, convened 35 press conferences and traveled over 35,000 miles.

Rustand coordinated some requests with other Vice Presidential staff, including political requests with Gwen Anderson, personal friend and family requests with Mildred Leonard, VIP Congressional and Cabinet requests with Dorothy Downton, and media requests with Paul Miltich. Those taking part in weekly scheduling meetings were Robert Hartmann, Bill Seidman, Walter Motes, and Jack Marsh, along with Leonard, Miltich, Anderson, and Rustand.

After an event gained a spot on the schedule, the advance team took over. This team consisted of the scheduling director, advancemen, White House Communications Agency, Secret Service, military aide, transportation, and local contacts. Their job was to move an event from conception to execution, including the preparation of a detailed final schedule. In the early months, before this office was fully organized, the White House Advance Office handled preparations for trips.

The files generally cover the period of Rustand's Vice Presidential service, with occasional earlier items. They reflect the work of the scheduling and advance operation and contain memoranda, correspondence, schedules, forms, invitations, regret letters, and other materials.

Related materials include the Vice Presidential files of L. William Seidman, Gwen Anderson, Robert Hartmann, and the White House Advance Office.

Compiled by Dennis M. Lakomy, October 1979

Warren Rustand Subject Series, 1973‑74. (Boxes 174‑179, 2.5 linear feet)

Memoranda, correspondence, schedules, forms, agendas, handwritten notes, lists and miscellany. These materials illustrate the day to day operations of the scheduling and advance office, including the formulation of schedules, logistical planning for events, and administrative operations. The Scheduling Operation and Personnel folder contains documents describing the operation in detail.

Arranged alphabetically.

Warren Rustand Regrets ‑ Chronological File, 1973-75. (Boxes 180‑190, 4.6 linear feet)

Invitations, many having a carbon copy of a regret letter signed by Rustand, or occasionally signed by Ford, Mildred Leonard, Gwen Anderson, or other staff. Occasional memoranda, birth announcements, and other related materials.

Arranged chronologically by date of the event.

Warren Rustand Regrets ‑ Group/Occasion File, 1973‑74. (Boxes 191‑192, 0.8 linear feet)

Carbon copies of Vice Presidential regret letters, and very occasionally acceptance and pending letters. The actual letter of invitation appears in Regrets ‑ Chronological.

Arranged alphabetically by name of group or occasion.

Warren Rustand Events File, 1973-75. (Boxes 193‑205, 5.4 linear feet)

Invitations, endorsements, letters of acceptance and thanks, other correspondence, memoranda, schedules, handwritten notes, programs, background material, and related items concerning scheduling and advance work for Ford's appearances at events. Included are materials for acceptances made for events canceled or reevaluated when Ford became President.

Arranged chronologically by date of the event; some events are in individual folders.

Public Opinion Mail Files, 1973‑74. (Boxes 207-212, 2.4 linear feet)

The Ford Library originally received approximately 53 linear feet of public opinion mail. This form response mail and unanswered mail included letters, telegrams, post cards, clippings, annual reports, brochures and other types of printed material. Because of the large amount of material involved and its lack of research value, the Ford Library staff surveyed these files for disposal, retaining only a sample of 2.4 linear feet for research. Detailed records of the Library's survey of the public opinion mail are available.

The sample files retained are from the form response mail category. The staff acknowledged the earliest mail, congratulating Ford on his nomination and commenting on other issues, on minority leader stationery. Transition mail, which followed Ford's confirmation as Vice President, contained more congratulatory messages and correspondence related to other issues. In January 1974, the Vice President's staff instituted a third system, the "F‑Number Handling System". Ranging from F‑0 to F‑31, the forms responded to correspondence on such topics as service academy nominations, energy, President Nixon, and eagle scout awards.

The unanswered mail consisted of material similar in nature to the form response mail. However, it remained unacknowledged due to insufficient or illegible address, or the writer's anonymity. Because of its similarity with form response mail, the Ford Library disposed of the unacknowledged mail in its entirety.

Compiled by Kenneth G. Hafeli, May 1980

Newspaper Clippings, 1973. (Boxes 213-217, 2.0 linear feet)

This file of newspaper clippings mainly concerns Gerald Ford's nomination as Vice President on October 12, 1973 and the confirmation hearings conducted by the Congress. A clipping service supplied most of the clippings, but Ford's staff apparently added others. When the Ford Library received this series, the containers bore the words "Duplicate Newspaper Clippings," so presumably most or all appear in the Ford scrapbooks.

Compiled by William McNitt, May 1980

Office of the Chief of Staff: Robert T. Hartmann Files, 1973‑74. (Boxes 218-258, 16.4 linear feet)

Long‑time congressional aide Robert Hartmann coordinated Gerald R. Ford's preparations for the vice presidential confirmation hearings in the fall of 1973 and subsequently became Chief of Staff to Vice President Ford. As Chief of Staff, Hartmann's duties consisted mainly of the following:

Liaison with the White House Senior Staff, Cabinet Officers, agency heads, State Governors, the Leadership of Congress, and the Chairmen of the Republican National Committee and the Republican Senatorial and Congressional Campaign Committees.

Overall supervision of the staff with respect to duty and space requirements; review and approval of all cases of employment, separation or change in pay; security and conflict of interest clearances; grievances and complaints against staff members or voiced by them; approval of arrangements for persons detailed to the staff or volunteering assistance; and direct supervision of the Vice President's personal staff.

Editorial oversight of the preparation of drafts of speeches, remarks, and formal statements by the Vice President.

The files document his Hartmann's work as Vice Presidential Chief of Staff and his work on the Vice Presidential confirmation hearings. The file of staff memoranda details many of his interactions with members of the staff. Included in the subject file are letters he drafted for Ford, briefing materials for meetings, and materials on specific issues, politics, Ford speeches, and the organization and operation of the Vice President's staff. There is little documentation on Watergate or on Ford's transition to the presidency.

Ford Confirmation Hearings Files

On October 10, 1973, Vice President Spiro T. Agnew resigned from office. Under investigation for multiple charges of alleged conspiracy, extortion and bribery, Agnew agreed to resign, pleading nolo contendere to a single charge of federal income tax evasion. Two days later, President Richard M. Nixon nominated Gerald Ford to become the 40th vice president of the United States.

Ford was the first vice president selected under the provisions of the Twenty‑fifth Amendment to the Constitution, ratified in 1967. The Amendment governs presidential and vice presidential succession and stipulates that whenever the office of vice president becomes vacant through death, succession to the presidency or resignation, the president shall nominate a vice president to be confirmed by a majority vote of both houses of Congress.

Procedural questions arose concerning which committee would handle the nomination in each chamber. The House decided that the Committee on the Judiciary, chaired by Peter Rodino (D‑N.J.), would have jurisdiction; the Senate chose the Committee on Rules and Administration, chaired by Howard Cannon (D‑Nevada). They held separate hearings. Senate proceedings began on November 1, continued for two weeks and ended with a vote to confirm on November 27. The hearings in the House opened on November 15, and that chamber voted to approve the nomination on December 6, 1973.

Hartmann helped Ford to prepare for the committee hearings. The Ford staff pulled together facts, figures and explanatory documents relating to anticipated questions in the hearings. In addition, they responded to queries from committee investigators and provided them with information from office files. As indicated in his book Palace Politics, however, Hartmann felt his most important duty was drafting Ford's opening statements to the committees.

On what Ford and Hartmann informally called the "confirmation team," only two individuals, Hartmann and Paul Miltich, Ford's press secretary, were paid staff members. The volunteer members of the team were old friends and people who had worked with Ford previously -- Benton Becker, Philip Buchen, Kenneth BeLieu, Richard Burress, William Cramer, Richard Haber, and Robert Hynes.

The "confirmation team" thoroughly searched Ford's congressional office files and removed items that might be needed for reference in the hearings. They arranged the material into a general reference subject file and a campaign finance file and used those files to compile a briefing book for Ford's use at the witness table. This briefing book evolved into a loose‑leaf binder indexed by questions that committee members might ask with suggestions for appropriate replies. Ford's personal copy of the book, with his annotations, and the general subject and campaign finance files became a part of Hartmann's files. The confirmation series also include materials created during the confirmation hearings. These include correspondence with the House and Senate committee chairmen and members, working drafts of anticipated questions and recommended answers, and reference material and working drafts used in writing Ford's opening statements.

The House Judiciary Committee requested a compilation of all communications, written and oral, received by executive departments and independent agencies form 1970 to 1973, from Congressman Ford, his staff, or his representatives. A duplicate set of this correspondence appears in the Hartmann files.

Hartmann personally created only a small amount of material within this file in the course of the confirmation hearings. Most of it consists of material removed from Ford's congressional office files and drawn together for reference use by the confirmation team.

Hartmann kept these files in his office until the end of the Ford presidency. He then relinquished this material, along with his congressional and White House files, to the Ford Library under the Ford deed of gift. Hartmann also donated a collection of personal papers to the Hoover Institution at Stanford University, his alma mater. In 1992, the Hoover Institution transferred that collection to the Ford Library. It contains 4.4 linear feet of material concerning the Ford Vice Presidency. Some additional information on the Ford confirmation hearings as Vice President is available in the papers of Congressman Edward Hutchinson, ranking Republican on the House Judiciary Committee at the time of the hearings.

Compiled by Leesa Tobin, April 1982

Robert Hartmann Personnel File, 1973‑74. (Boxes 218‑221, 1.5 linear feet)

Primarily routine memoranda from the Nixon White House Personnel Office to Ford for his information or comment on proposed Presidential appointments to various executive branch positions. Also included are: Executive Level Vacancy Reports, appointment announcements, payroll information for the Office of the Vice President, security clearance forms, resumes, and miscellaneous other items relating to Presidential appointments and to personnel matters within the Vice President's office.

Arranged alphabetically by subject.

Robert Hartmann Staff Memoranda, 1973‑74. (Boxes 222‑223, 0.8 linear feet)

Memoranda from vice presidential staff to the Vice President, Hartmann, and others; with supporting correspondence and other items. Accumulated by Hartmann as the Vice President's chief of staff, they concern such diverse matters as: office housekeeping, scheduling, trips, legal questions, the press, and political affairs.

Arranged by name of staff member originating the memoranda and subdivided thereunder into memoranda to Hartmann and memoranda to others.

Robert Hartmann Subject File, 1973‑74. (Boxes 224‑234, 5.0 linear feet)

Hartmann's copies of staff memoranda to the Vice President and others; correspondence with congressmen, government and party officials, constituents, and others; form letters and odd newsletters received; background material for meetings, trips and social functions; White House press releases; speech texts; weekly Domestic Council issue summaries from Cole; and miscellaneous printed and other matter. Much of it was sent to Hartmann for his information and not for action. Subjects reflect, in greater breadth than depth, concerns on political, housekeeping, scheduling, policy, courtesy, and personnel matters. Many files contain only a single item.

Arranged alphabetically by subject.

Robert Hartmann File of Summaries of Congressional Proceedings, 1973‑74. (Boxes 235‑236, 0.8 linear feet)

Memoranda from Legislative Assistant Josephine Wilson summarizing daily proceedings in the House of Representatives. Selected speeches, new legislation, conference reports, status of bills pending, and House Speaker Carl Albert's press conferences are all briefly summarized. Also included is one folder of similar information on floor action in the Senate, compiled by Spofford Canfield.

Arranged chronologically.

Ford Confirmation Hearings Briefing Book File, 1973. (Box 237, 0.4 linear feet)

Materials compiled by Philip Buchen and Benton Becker, arranged in a loose‑leaf notebook format and indexed to help Ford in answering committee members' questions. For preservation reasons, archivists removed the documents from their plastic covers. The arrangement has been maintained, however, with the table of contents located in the first folder of the series. The format for each of the subsequent subject designations is the same: the anticipated question or allegation is presented, a factual analysis provided and the position Ford was to take outlined.

Included are supportive exhibits that Ford could provide to the committee. Mr. Ford annotated much of this material. Also included in this briefing book is a quantity of loose material Ford used during the hearings. The last two folders of the series contain these loose items.

Ford Confirmation Hearings Proceedings Transcripts File, 1973. (Boxes 238‑240, 1.2 linear feet)

An unedited and complete set of committee hearing transcripts. These include the transcripts of proceedings from the hearings conducted by the Committee on Rules and Administration and the House Committee on the Judiciary. There is some underlining and annotation by William Cramer, a volunteer assisting Ford during the confirmation hearings. Also included are the final prints of the respective committee reports.

Arranged chronologically.

Ford Confirmation Hearings File, 1973. (Boxes 241‑243, 1.2 linear feet)

Primarily material created during the confirmation hearings. Included is a correspondence control file, correspondence with the House and Senate committee chairmen, and letters of thanks to congressmen who supported Ford; material concerning Ford's opening statements, including experts' views on the role of the vice president; questions submitted in advance by committee members and the draft and final responses prepared by Ford and his staff; copies of the "Congressional Record"; the Library of Congress report on Ford's voting record; and hearings memoranda and rules of procedure. Also included are Hartmann's handwritten notes from the committee hearings.

Arranged alphabetically.

Ford Confirmation Hearings General Subject File, 1948-73. (Boxes 244‑248, 2.0 linear feet)

Primarily materials from Ford's congressional office files brought together to form a reference file for use during the hearings. The confirmation team compiled reference materials for each topic on which they anticipated questions.

Subjects include but are not limited to: constituents in Ford's congressional district and corporations represented in the area; Nixon's 1972 Committee for the Re‑Election of the President; Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas; government agencies such as the General Services Administration, Civil Aeronautics Board, and the Interstate Commerce Commission; private bills sponsored by Ford; Robert Winter‑Berger and his book, The Washington Payoff; and various special interest groups who contributed to Ford's congressional campaigns. Also included here are files concerning Ford's voting record in the House, his various business involvements, background information concerning the Twenty‑fifth Amendment, and statements by the Republican Policy Committee.

Arranged alphabetically by subject.

Ford Confirmation Hearings Campaign Finance File, 1948-73. (Boxes 249‑253, 2.4 linear feet)

Detailed financial information related to each of Ford's congressional campaigns and his campaign committees. Included are letters of thanks for contributions; receipts for expenditures; federal, state and local filing forms, and beginning in 1968, material concerning Ford's involvement in the distribution of funds to Republican candidates through the National Republican Congressional Committee Booster Fund. The "confirmation team" removed this material from Ford's office files (what is now Series G of the Ford Congressional Papers) for easier reference during the confirmation hearings.

Arranged chronologically by election year.

Ford Confirmation Hearings Agency Correspondence File, 1970-73. (Boxes 254‑258, 2.0 linear feet)

Photostatic copies of all communications, written and oral, received by many departments and agencies of the Federal government from Congressman Ford, his staff, or his representatives between January 1970 and October 1973. This includes letters, internal working memoranda, memoranda for the file and any other memoranda or letters written to Ford (or to others, if they resulted from contacts with the Ford office. Peter Rodino, chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, requested this compilation. The Ford "confirmation team" received a duplicate set.

Arranged alphabetically by department or agency and thereunder chronologically.

White House Advance Office Files, 1973‑74. (Boxes 259-262, 1.8 linear feet)

Byron M. ("Red") Cavaney joined the White House staff as a staff assistant to President Nixon in early 1973. He served with the White House Advance Office and became its director in December 1974. This office made preparations for all presidential travel, both within the country and abroad, and presidential appearances in Washington, D.C. Several weeks before an event, advance teams would visit the site of a presidential speech or appearance to arrange for hotel accommodations, equipment rental, security, publicity, and the like. They also sent letters of appreciation to local contacts after completing the event.

From the time of Gerald Ford's nomination as Vice President until March 1974, the Nixon White House Advance Office handled advance operations for him. By the end of January 1974, however, Warren Rustand of the vice president's own staff handled advance work in preparation for Washington appearances and Michigan trips. Beginning in March, the Ford staff handled all vice presidential advance work. Cavaney's files include correspondence, memoranda, notes, schedules, guest lists, programs, and other related material for some of Ford's appearances October 18, 1973 to March 8, 1974. These files include material addressed to both Cavaney and William Henkel, Jr., then director of the Advance Office.

Additional materials on scheduling and advance work done for Ford's appearances after December 1973 is found in the files of vice presidential aide Warren Rustand. Other series in the vice presidential papers include related information on scheduling arrangements and Ford speeches, including the Robert Hartmann files.

Compiled by Sandra Raub, December 1981

White House Editorial Staff Files, 1973‑74. (Box 263, 0.4 linear feet)

Draft vice presidential speeches and background materials prepared by President Nixon's Office of Editorial Staff before the Vice President began using his own speechwriters in early 1974. When President Nixon left office, the Office of Editorial Staff retained these files and turned them over to the Ford Library under President Ford's deed of gift.

Arranged chronologically in case files.

Compiled by Leesa Tobin, July 1983

Container List

Box 1 - Correspondence Control (Index) File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

A‑Bt

Box 2 - Correspondence Control (Index) File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

Bu‑Dh

Box 3 - Correspondence Control (Index) File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

Di‑Grh

Box 4 - Correspondence Control (Index) File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

Gri‑J

Box 5 - Correspondence Control (Index) File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

K‑Mb

Box 6 - Correspondence Control (Index) File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

Mc‑Pd

Box 7 - Correspondence Control (Index) File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

Pe‑Sg

Box 8 - Correspondence Control (Index) File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

Sh‑T

Box 9 - Correspondence Control (Index) File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

U‑Z

Box 10 - Issues File

Abortion

Aged

Agriculture

Alcohol

Amnesty

Animals/Birds/Fish

Arts/Humanities

Athletics/Sports

Banking

Calendar

Captive Nations

China

Civil Rights

Civil Service

Coins

Commerce

Commissions/Regulatory Agencies

Box 11 - Issues File

Communications

Congress

Communism

Conservation

Consumer Affairs

Courts/Judiciary

Crime

Defense (1)‑(3)

Demonstrations

District of Columbia

Drugs

Economic ‑ Budget

Economic ‑ General, 1973

Box 12 - Issues File

Economic ‑ General, 1974 (1)‑(2)

Economic ‑ Mercy Hospital

Education

Elections (1)‑(2)

Elections ‑ Reform

Electoral College

Box 13 - Issues File

Energy, Oct.‑Nov. 1973

Box 14 - Issues File

Energy, Nov. 1973‑July 1974

Box 15 - Issues File

Environment

Executive Departments

Firearms

Food

Foreign Affairs (1)‑(2)

Forests/Parks

Grants

Health (1)‑(5)

Box 16 - Issues File

Health (6)

Highways

Housing

Impeachment

Indian Affairs

Insufficient Address

Insurance

Jurisdiction

Labor ‑ General (1)‑(2)

Labor ‑ Management

Labor ‑ Minimum Wage

Labor ‑ Unemployed

Lands

Libraries

Maritime

Medicare

Box 17 - Issues File

Metals/Minerals

Miscellaneous Legislation

Middle East

Monuments/Memorials/Sites

Multiple Issues, Oct. ‑ Nov. 1973 (1)‑(6)

Box 18 - Issues File

Multiple Issues, Dec. 1973 ‑ July 1974 (1)‑(4)

Obscenity

Panama

Patriotism

Pensions

Population

Postal Service (1)‑(2)

Presidential, Oct. 1973

Box 19 - Issues File

Presidential, Nov. 1973 ‑ Aug. 1974 (1)‑(5)

Railroads

Religion (1)‑(2)

Box 20 - Issues File

Reserves

Revenue

Rivers/Harbors

Rural

Safety

Science

Security

Selective Service

Social Security (1)‑(3)

Southeast Asia

Taxes (1)‑(3)

Box 21 - Issues File

Taxes ‑ Against Reuss/Vanik Amendment (1)‑(4)

Time

Trade/Tariff

Transportation (1)‑(2)

Urban Affairs

Veterans

Box 22 - Issues File

Vice Presidential (1)‑(5)

Vice Presidential ‑ Endorsements

Vietnam

Vietnam ‑ MIA/POW

Voting

Water

Weather

Women

Welfare

Youth

Box 23 - Case/Individual File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

A‑Bn

Box 24 - Case/Individual File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

Bo‑Cn

Box 25 - Case/Individual File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

Co‑D

Box 26 - Case/Individual File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

E‑F

Box 27 - Case/Individual File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

G‑Hd

Box 28 - Case/Individual File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

He‑I

Box 29 - Case/Individual File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

J‑Ld

Box 30 - Case/Individual File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

Le‑Mam

Box 31 - Case/Individual File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

Man‑Nn

Box 32 - Case/Individual File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

No‑Pes

Box 33 - Case/Individual File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

Pet‑Rosl

Box 34 - Case/Individual File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

Rosm‑So

Box 35 - Case/Individual File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

Sp‑T

Box 36 - Case/Individual File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

U‑Z

Box 37 - General File

A ‑ General

Accounts (Empty)

Aids ‑ Community

Aids ‑ State

Anonymous Mail

Appearances, Oct. 1973 ‑ June 1974

Box 38 - General File

Appearances, July ‑ Aug. 1974

Awards

B ‑ General

Bicentennial

Bouquets

C ‑ General

Children

Clubs

Condolences

Congratulations From (To Ford From Others), A‑Be

Box 39 - General File

Congratulations From (To Ford From Others), Bi‑F

Box 40 - General File

Congratulations From (To Ford From Others), G‑L

Box 41 - General File

Congratulations From (To Ford From Others), M‑Sd

Box 42 - General File

Congratulations From (To Ford From Others), Se‑Z

Box 43 - General File

Congratulations From (To Ford From Others) ‑ Answered with a Card, A‑Z

Box 44 - General File

Congratulations To (From Ford to Others) ‑ General (1)‑(4)

Congratulations To (From Ford to Others) ‑ Anniversary (1)‑(3)

Box 45 - General File

Congratulations To (From Ford to Others) ‑ Birthday (1)‑(4)

Congratulations To (From Ford to Others) ‑ Birth Announcements

Congratulations To (From Ford to Others) ‑ Scouts

Congratulations To (From Ford to Others) ‑ Tribute

Congressional Staff Club

Congressmen: House

Congressmen: Senate

Contributions

Convalescence

Box 46 - General File

Courtesies

D ‑ General

Directories

Domestic Council Committee on the Right of Privacy

Donations

E ‑ General

Education Assistance

Employment

Endorsements

Events

F ‑ General

Felicitations

Ford, John G.

Ford Schedule

G ‑ General

Box 47 - General File

Gifts From (To Ford From Others), (1)‑(8)

Box 48 - General File

Gifts To (From Ford to Others)

Greetings (1)‑(2)

Greetings ‑ Easter

H ‑ General

Homes

Box 49 - General File

I ‑ General

Inauguration Requests

Invitation Regrets (1)‑(2)

J ‑ General

Jurisdiction

K ‑ General

L ‑ General

M ‑ General (1)‑(2)

Material Sent: No Cover Letter

Memberships

Miscellaneous

Box 50 - General File

N ‑ General

O ‑ General

Organizations

P ‑ General

Passports

Personal ‑ Caberfae (Empty)

Positions ‑ Administration

Positions ‑ Advisors

Positions ‑ General

Positions ‑ Staff

Positions ‑ Summer

Q ‑ General

Questions

R ‑ General

Recommendations ‑ Appointments

Recommendations ‑ Awards

Recommendations ‑ Diplomatic Posts

Recommendations ‑ Membership

Recommendations ‑ Positions

Recommendations ‑ Schools/Scholarships

Recommendations ‑ Speaker (Empty)

Referrals

Regrets ‑ Appointments/Interviews

Relatives

Republican Campaign

General

Alaska

Arkansas

California

Florida

Box 51 - General File

Republican Campaign

Indiana

Kansas

Kentucky

Massachusetts

Michigan

Minnesota

Missouri

New Jersey

New York

Ohio

Pennsylvania

Rhode Island

Republican Cause

Republican Congressional Committee

Republican House Members ‑ Miscellaneous Correspondence

Republican ‑ Ionia County

Republican ‑ Kent County

Republican ‑ Michigan

Republican ‑ National Committee

Republican ‑ Women

Requests ‑ Autograph and Photograph (1)‑(4)

Box 52 - General File

Requests ‑ Autograph and Photograph (5)‑(15)

Box 53 - General File

Requests ‑ Calendars

Requests ‑ Endorsements

Requests ‑ GRF Personal Items

Requests ‑ Introductions/Commendations

Requests ‑ Miscellaneous (1)‑(4)

Requests ‑ Recipes

Requests ‑ Students (1)‑(3)

Requests ‑ Vice President, Information On

Box 54 - General File

S ‑ General (1)‑(2)

Scholarships

Skiing

Small Business

Smithsonian Institution ‑ General

Smithsonian Institution ‑ Meeting of the Board of Regents, 5/14/74

Smithsonian Institution ‑ Survey of Buildings and Other Facilities, 4/74

Solicitations

Speakers

Subscriptions

Surveys/Polls

Box 55 - General File

T ‑ General

Thank From (From Others to Ford), (1)‑(5)

Thanks To (From Ford to Others), (1)

Box 56 - General File

Thanks To (From Ford to Others), (2)‑(6)

Box 57 - General File

Thanks To (From Ford to Others), (7)‑(11)

Box 58 - General File

Thanks To (From Ford to Others), (12)‑(13)

U ‑ General (Empty)

U.S. Capitol Historical Society

V ‑ General

Vail

Vice President ‑ Hold

Visitors

W ‑ General

XYZ ‑ General

Zeoli (Billy) Mailings

Box 59 - John Marsh Subject File

Abshire, David

Ambassadors, U.S.

American Legion

Anderson, Gwen

Army Installations

Aspin Amendments

Beckett Aviation

Camp Hoover

Central Intelligence Agency

Coins

Commission on the Organization of the Government for the Conduct of Foreign Policy

Congressional Invitees (for Diplomatic Receptions)

Congressional Medal of Honor Presentation

Contacts

Defense

Defense and International Affairs Office ‑ Organization and Functions

Disarmament and Arms Control Bill

Energy Legislation and Problems

Eximbank ‑ USSR

Feldman, George

Ford, Mrs. Gerald R. ‑ Events

Ford, Mike ‑ Prayer

Foreign Affairs

Foreign Disaster Assistance Act of 1974

Box 60 - John Marsh Subject File

Gordon, Britt

Grevers, Theodore

Griffin, Robert P. (Senator)

Guard and Reserve Affairs

Highlights of Congressional Activities, Feb.‑Apr. 1974

House Budget Committee

House Judiciary Committee

Introductions/Commendations

Israel

Jonas, Charles Raper

Kennedy Amendment

Korea

Ludlam, William

Marsh Correspondence, A‑Z (1)‑(4)

Memos, Inter‑Office

Memos, Intra‑Office

Box 61 - John Marsh Subject File

Memos, Outgoing

Memos Sent to the Vice President and Chief of Staff and Returned

Memos to the Staff

MIA ‑ POW (1)‑(2)

Military Master Control File (Index to Military Case Work) ‑ See Box 206

Mott, Charlie

National Aviation Executive Institute

National Guard

North Korea

O'Brian, Hugh ‑ Youth Foundation

Osborne Article ‑ James Schlesinger

Panama

Box 62 - John Marsh Subject File

Pharr, Jones

Pinter, Rabbi Leib

Privacy

Regan, Tom

Republican Conference, 3/26/74

Republican National Finance Committee

Requests/Endorsements

Restructuring of the House of Representatives (Bolling)

Resumes

Science Advisor Meeting, April 1974

Secretary of Defense ‑ Allocation of Servants

Slaybecker, Bob

Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr

Southeast Asia ‑ POW/MIA

South Vietnam Veterans Day

Speeches ‑ Miscellaneous

Studebaker, Jack

Thompson, Sir Robert

Trilateral Commission

United States/USSR Parliamentary Exchange

Veterans Affairs

Vice President

Correspondence, A‑D

Box 63 - John Marsh Subject File

Vice President

Correspondence, E‑Z (1)‑(3)

House Committee Report

Invitations Acceptance

Invitation Regrets

Meeting with Don Johnson (Veterans Administration), 2/27/74 (1)‑(2)

Meeting with Bipartisan Leaders, 4/24/74

Memorial Day Address, 5/27/74

Press Releases

Remarks, Jan. ‑ Apr. 1974 (1)‑(2)

Box 64 - John Marsh Subject File

Vice President

Remarks, May ‑ Aug. 1974 (1)‑(2)

Residence

‑ Responses to Congratulatory Messages

VIP Letters to the Vice President

Vote Tally Sheets

Voters Analysis on Defense Issues ‑ House

Voters Analysis on Defense Issues ‑ Senate

Chronological File

Jan. ‑ Aug. 1974 (1)‑(7)

Box 65 - John Marsh File of Vice Presidential Meetings with Foreign and Diplomatic Officials

Lists of Ford Meetings with Foreign Dignitaries

December 5, 1973 - Vice President and Romanian President Ceausescu (Background material only)

December 8, 1973 - Vice President and General Moshe Dayan

December 11, 1973 - Vice President and Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin

December 12, 1973 - Vice President and Ahmad Zaki Yamani, Minister of Petroleum and Mineral Wealth of Saudi Arabia, and Belaid Abdesselam, Minister of Industry and Energy of Algeria

December 22, 1973 - West German Chancellor Willy Brandt (Letter only, no meeting)

January 10, 1974 - Vice President and Deputy Prime Minister Takeo Miki of Japan

January 11, 1974 - Vice President and Australian Deputy Prime Minister Lance Barnard

January 14, 1974 - Vice President and Lord Cromer, Ambassador from Great Britain

January 14, 1974 - Dinner with Ambassador and Mrs. Dobrynin of the Soviet Union (Background material only)

January 16, 1974 - Vice President and U.S. Ambassador to France John Irwin

January 16, 1974 - Vice President and U.S. Ambassador to Argentina Robert C. Hill

January 18, 1974 - Vice President and Jacques Kosciusko-Morizet, French Ambassador

January 22, 1974 - Vice President and Connie Mulder, Minister of Information and the Interior for South Africa

January 22, 1974 - Vice President and U.S. Ambassador to the Vatican Henry Cabot Lodge

January 23, 1974 - Vice President and U.S. Ambassador to Finland John Krehbiel

February 11, 1974 - Vice President and Walter Stoessel, U.S. Ambassador to the Soviet Union

February 13, 1974 - Vice President and West German Opposition Leader Helmut Kohl

February 20, 1974 - John Marsh and Milan Svec, Third Secretary of the Czechoslovakian Embassy

February 28, 1974 - Vice President and Robert E. Fritts, Ambassador-designate to Rwanda (Background material only)

March 7, 1974 - White House Dinner Honoring the Governors (Background material only)

March 7, 1974 - Vice President and Indian Ambassador Triloki Nath Kaul

March 13, 1974 - Vice President and King Hussein of Jordan (includes material on the state dinner hosted by the Vice President the previous night)

March 13, 1974 - Vice President and James F. Oates of the Jobs for Veterans Committee

March 13, 1974 - Vice President and Robert Crane Concerning the Crow Indians of Montana

March 14, 1974 - Vice President and U.S. Ambassador-designate to Panama William J. Jorden

March 14, 1974 - Vice President and Pakistani Ambassador Yaqub (Background material only)

March 20, 1974 - Vice President and Assistant Secretary of State Linwood Holton

March 20, 1974 - Vice President and Deputy Prime Minister Tran Van Don of South Vietnam

March 21, 1974 - Vice President and U.S. Ambassador at Large Ellsworth Bunker

March 26, 1974 - Vice President and Henry Tasca, U.S. Ambassador to Greece

March 26, 1974 - John Marsh and Rowland Evans

March 28, 1974 - Vice President and Robert Neumann, U.S. Ambassador to Morocco

March 28, 1974 - Vietnam Veterans Reception at the South Vietnam Embassy (Background material only)

March 29, 1974 - Dinner Dance at the Argentine Embassy (Background material only)

April 3, 1974 - Visit to the U.S. Naval Academy (Background material only)

April 8, 1974 - Vice President and Eight Members of the West German Bundestag

April 9, 1974 - Vice President and Ambassador Sjarif Thajeb of Indonesia

April 10, 1974 - Reception Hosted by OAS Ambassador William Mailliard for U.S. and OAS Ambassadors (Background material only)

April 11, 1974 - Vice President and Philip Manhard, U.S. Ambassador to Mauritius

April 15, 1974 - Vice President and Panama Minister of Foreign Affairs Juan Antonio Tack

April 18, 1974 - John Marsh and Milan Svec, Third Secretary of the Czechoslovakian Embassy

April 25, 1974 - Vice President and Nicolas Gonzalez-Revilla, Panamanian Ambassador

April 29, 1974 - Vice President and Israeli Chief Rabbi Ovadiah Yosef (Background material only)

April 30, 1974 - Vice President and British Ambassador Peter Ramsbotham (Background material only)

May 15, 1974 - Dinner at the Embassy of Mexico (Background material only)

May 21, 1974 - Vice President and Soviet "Parliamentary" Delegation

May 23, 1974 - Vice President and Jordan's Crown Prince Hassan (Background material only)

May 24, 1974 - Vice President and U.S. Ambassador to Thailand William Kintner

May 28, 1974 - John Marsh and Romanian Ambassador Corneliu Bogdan

May 30, 1974 - Vice President and West German Defense Minister Georg Leber

June 6, 1974 - Vice President and Representatives of the Imperial Iranian National Defense University

June 27, 1974 - Vice President and Max V. Krebs, U.S. Ambassador-designate to Guyana (Background material only)

July 8, 1974 - J.W. Roberts and Soviet Second Secretary Yermishkin

July 15, 1974 - Vice President and Indonesian Vice President the Sultan of Jogjakarta (Background material only)

July 31, 1974 - Robert Neumann, U.S. Ambassador to Morocco (Letter only, no meeting)

August 6, 1974 - Vice President and Japanese Ambassador Takeshi Yasukawa with Visiting Japanese Politicians

Proposed Meetings That Did Not Take Place

Box 66 - John Marsh File of Vice Presidential Events

12/73 ‑ Miscellaneous

12/20‑21/73 ‑ Spain

1/74 ‑ Miscellaneous

1/12/74 ‑ Little Rock, Arkansas

2/74 ‑ Miscellaneous

2/3/74 ‑ DOD Input for Vice President's "Face the Nation" Broadcast

2/12, 21 and 25/74 ‑ Diplomatic Reception at Blair House

3/74 ‑ Miscellaneous

4/74 ‑ Miscellaneous

5/74 ‑ Miscellaneous

5/21/74 ‑ Former Members of Congress

6/74 ‑ Miscellaneous

Box 67 - John Marsh File of Vice Presidential Events

7/74 ‑ Miscellaneous

8/74 ‑ Miscellaneous

8/5/74 ‑ Disabled American Veterans

Box 67 (Continued) - John Marsh File of Thank You Letters for Vice Presidential Trips

2/13‑15/74 ‑ Kentucky, Illinois, Nebraska

2/24‑25/74 ‑ New York and New Jersey

3/1‑4/74 ‑ Arizona, Colorado, New York

3/8‑9/74 ‑ Florida and New York

3/11/74 ‑ Pennsylvania and Massachusetts

3/15‑18/74 ‑ South Carolina

3/23/74 ‑ New Jersey

3/30/74 ‑ Illinois and Florida

4/4/74 ‑ Ohio

4/5/74 ‑ Colorado

4/9‑10/74 ‑ Michigan

4/13‑22/74 ‑ Kansas and California

Box 68 - John Marsh File of Thank You Letters for Vice Presidential Trips

4/22‑23/74 ‑ Pennsylvania and New York

4/27/74 ‑ Texas and Oklahoma

5/1/74 ‑ Charlotte, NC

5/3‑4/74 ‑ South Carolina and Michigan

5/6/74 ‑ New York

5/7/74 ‑ New York

5/9/74 ‑ Illinois

5/10‑11/74 ‑ New York and Texas

5/13/74 ‑ Louisiana and Florida

5/16‑20/74 ‑ Hawaii and Washington

5/22/74 ‑ New York and Delaware

5/23/74 ‑ New York

5/24/74 ‑ Lansing, MI

5/25/74 ‑ Boston, MA

5/26/74 ‑ Danbury, CT

5/28‑29/74 ‑ North Carolina and Alabama

6/4/74 ‑ New York

6/5/74 ‑ Colorado and Ohio

6/6/74 ‑ Pennsylvania

6/7‑9/74 ‑ Georgia, North Carolina, and Utah

6/10/74 ‑ New York

6/15/74 ‑ New York

6/17/74 ‑ White Sulphur Springs, WV

6/20‑25/74 ‑ California, Minnesota, and Illinois

7/3/74 ‑ Maine

7/6‑7/74 ‑ Dallas, TX

7/12‑13/74 ‑ California and New Mexico

7/18/74 ‑ Grand Rapids, MI

7/19‑21/74 ‑ Hot Springs and Roanoke, VA

7/25/74 ‑ Illinois, Indiana and Ohio

7/29‑30/74 ‑ California and Nevada

7/31/74 ‑ Worcester, MA

Miscellaneous

Box 69 - John Marsh Trip File

12/13/73 ‑ New York

12/15‑16/73 ‑ Williamsburg, VA

12/21/73‑1/5/74 ‑ Denver, CO

1/12/74 ‑ Little Rock, AR

1/15/74 ‑ Atlantic City, NJ

1/16‑17/74 ‑ Grand Rapids, MI

1/26/74 ‑ Johnstown, PA and Columbus, OH

1/26/74 ‑ West Palm Beach, FL

1/27/74 ‑ Providence, RI

2/9/74 ‑ Kalamazoo, Saginaw, and Detroit, MI

2/13‑15/74 ‑ London, KY; Chicago, IL; Omaha, NE

2/18/74 ‑ Chattanooga, TN

2/20/74 ‑ Cincinnati, OH

2/24‑25/74 ‑ New York and Atlantic City, NJ

3/1‑4/74 ‑ Phoenix, AZ; Denver, CO; New York

3/8/74 ‑ Miami and Tampa, FL

3/9/74 ‑ New York

3/11/74 ‑ Philadelphia, PA and Boston, MA

3/12/74 ‑ San Diego, CA (Canceled)

3/15‑18/74 ‑ Charleston and Beaufort, SC

3/23/74 ‑ Morristown and Atlantic City, NJ

3/30/74 ‑ Chicago, IL and Clearwater, FL

4/3/74 ‑ Annapolis, MD

4/4/74 ‑ Cincinnati, OH

4/4‑5/74 ‑ Denver, CO

4/9‑10/74 ‑ Pontiac, MI

4/13‑21/74 ‑ Kansas City, MO; Palm Springs, Monterey, and San Jose, CA

4/22‑23/74 ‑ New York and Philadelphia, PA

4/26/74 ‑ White Sulphur Springs, WV

4/27/74 ‑ Wichita Falls, TX and Tulsa, OK

5/1/74 ‑ Charlotte, NC

5/2/74 ‑ Bethlehem, PA (Canceled)

5/3‑4/74 ‑ Columbia and Myrtle Beach, SC and Detroit, MI

5/6/74 ‑ New York

5/7/74 ‑ New York

5/9/74 ‑ Chicago and Charleston, IL

5/10/74 ‑ Buffalo, NY and College Station, Houston, and Dallas, TX

Box 70 - John Marsh Trip File

5/13/74 ‑ New Orleans, LA and Pensacola, FL

5/16‑20/74 ‑ Honolulu and Hilo, HI and Tacoma, WA

5/22/74 ‑ New York

5/23/74 ‑ New York

5/24/74 ‑ Lansing, MI

5/25/74 ‑ Boston, MA

5/26/74 ‑ New York; Danbury and Waterbury, CT

5/28‑29/74 ‑ Charlotte, NC and Birmingham, AL

5/31/74 ‑ Concord and Manchester, NH

6/3‑4/74 ‑ New York

6/4‑5/74 ‑ Colorado Springs, CO and Columbus, OH

6/6/74 ‑ Roystown, PA

6/7‑9‑74 ‑ Savannah, GA; Raleigh, NC; Ogden, UT; and Cleveland, OH

6/10/74 ‑ New York

6/13‑14/74 ‑ Dallas, TX and Chicago, IL

6/15/74 ‑ Oneida, Newburgh, and White Plains, NY

6/17/74 ‑ White Sulphur Springs, WV

6/20‑25/74 ‑ San Francisco, Los Angeles, and Monterey, CA; Minneapolis, MN; Chicago, IL

6/29/74 ‑ Annapolis, MD

7/3/74 ‑ Loring AFB, ME

7/6‑7/74 ‑ Dallas, TX

7/12‑14/74 ‑ Albuquerque, Los Alamos, and Santa Fe, NM; El Toro and Ontario, CA

7/18‑19/74 ‑ Grand Rapids, MI

Box 71 - John Marsh Trip File

7/19‑21/74 ‑ Hot Springs, VA

7/25‑27/74 ‑ Muncie, IN; Chicago, IL; Canton, OH

7/29‑30/74 ‑ San Francisco, CA; Las Vegas and Reno, NV; San Diego, CA

7/31/74 ‑ Worcester, MA

8/3‑4/74 ‑ Columbus, Jackson, and Hattiesburg, MS; and New Orleans, LA

8/8‑19/74 ‑ West Coast; Hawaii; Chicago, IL (Canceled)

News Media Billing

News Media Payments (1)‑(2)

Republican National Committee Payments

Routine Follow‑Up Correspondence

Box 72 - Richard Burress Subject File

Abortion

Agriculture

Baroody, William J.

Bicentennial Commission

Biographical Material ‑ Richard T. Burress

Breakfast Briefings

Brookings Institution

Commission on Critical Choices for Americans ‑ Nelson A. Rockefeller

Community Development Bank

Construction Industry Stabilization

Domestic Council

Drugs/Narcotics

Economy

Energy

Federal Design Improvement Program

House of Representatives

Indians

Insurance

Labor Department

Legal Services Corporation

Legislation

Legislation, Messages, Tributes, Letters, Remarks, etc. by Vice President

Miscellaneous Correspondence

Box 73 - Richard Burress Subject File

National Health Insurance System ‑ HEW Proposal

National Urban Coalition ‑ Agenda, March 29, 1974

Nixon, Richard M. ‑ Response to the House Judiciary

Committee Concerning Watergate

Office of Management and Budget ‑ Update on Natural

Resources, Energy and Science

President's Executive Interchange Program (Publication)

Publications/News Clippings

Rockefeller, Nelson A. (Aug.-Oct. 1974)

Scheduling

Transportation Department

Water (Safe Drinking Act)

White House Authorization

Box 74 - William Casselman Subject File

Action Memos ‑ Chron Copies, Jan. ‑ Apr. 1974

Advancemen (Name Checks)

Amateur Sports Legislation

Appearance by Vice President ‑ General

Appearance by Vice President ‑ "Face of the Nation", Feb. 1974

Appearance by Vice President ‑ "Meet the Press, " Jan. 6, 1974

Appearance by Vice President ‑ Network Executives, Jan. 10, 1974

Appointments

Appropriations ‑ Office of the Vice President

Authorization ‑ Office of the Vice President

Budget ‑ Fiscal Year 1975 ‑ Office of the Vice President

Campaign Reform

Box 75 - William Casselman Subject File

Citizens Conference on State Legislatures (1)‑(2)

Correspondence ‑ Procedures, Office of the Vice‑President

Correspondence ‑ Buchen, Philip

Correspondence ‑ Hartmann, Robert T.

Correspondence ‑ Marsh, John O.

Correspondence ‑ Miltich, Paul A.

Correspondence ‑ Pagnotta, Frank

Correspondence ‑ Rustand, Warren

Correspondence ‑ Sardo, Lt. Col. Americo A.

Correspondence ‑ Seidman, L. William

Correspondence ‑ Vice President Ford

Courts ‑ Judiciary

Crime

Departments and Agencies ‑ FCC

Departments and Agencies ‑ GPO

Box 76 - William Casselman Subject File

Departments and Agencies ‑ GSA

Departments and Agencies ‑ Justice

Departments and Agencies ‑ SBA

Departments and Agencies ‑ Smithsonian Institution

Departments and Agencies ‑ State Department

Departments and Agencies ‑ USIA

Domestic Council ‑ General

Domestic Council ‑ Organization

Domestic Council ‑ Tornado Disaster

Domestic Council ‑ Weekly Briefing Papers (1)‑(2)

Drug Abuse Committee

Duties of the Vice President

Box 77 - William Casselman Subject File

Education

Endorsements

Energy

Federal Energy Office: Petroleum Situation Report

Federal Energy Office: Petroleum Statistics Report

Federal Energy Office: Gasoline Allocation

General

Legislation (1)‑(2)

Petrochemicals

Schleede, Glenn: Memos From

Box 78 - William Casselman Subject File

Energy

Vice President's Energy Trip (1)‑(3)

Environmental Research Institute of Michigan (Lefty Hatch)

Ethics, Code of

Executive Order 11709 ‑ Farmers' Tax Returns

Financial Disclosure ‑ Vice President

Fleming, Arthur S. ‑ Awards Program

Ford Papers ‑ University of Michigan

Franking Privilege, Use of

Friends of Jerry Ford Committee

Fundraising and Reimbursement of Related Expenses, Procedures for (Political)

Box 79 - William Casselman Subject File

Gifts

Gifts to the Vice President

Handicapped

Hatch Act

Health

Health ‑ National Council of Health Care Services

Hispanic Americans

Housing

Impeachment

Box 80 - William Casselman Subject File

Indian Affairs

Indian Opportunity, National Council on (1)‑(7)

Interior Department ‑ Personnel Problem

Justice

Libraries

Library of Congress

Literary Rights, Request for (TV Guide)

Litigation ‑ Cherrytree v. Nixon

Box 81 - William Casselman Subject File

Litigation ‑ Dulles v. Secretary of the Treasury

Litigation ‑ Kelley v. Nixon

Litigation ‑ McDonald v. McLucas

Litigation ‑ Miscellaneous

Litigation ‑ Pritchett v. FBI, et.al

Litigation ‑ Wiesberg v. GSA

Meeting with the Secretary of the Interior and the Vice President, March 21, 1974

Meeting with the Attorney General, Feb. 26, 1974

Membership ‑ General

Membership ‑ Resignation of the Vice President from the National Athletic Health Institute

Michigan Claims Against HEW

Miscellaneous

National Governors Conferences

Box 82 - William Casselman Subject File

National Growth Policy (1)‑(2)

National Growth Policy ‑ Meeting with President, Sept. 20, 1974 (Transferred to Ford Presidential Papers)

News Articles on Vice President's Staff

No Fault Insurance (1)‑(3)

Oath of Office

Office of Management and Budget ‑ Organization

Office Space and Staff Support for Former Vice President, Authority for

Organization ‑ Office of Legal Counsel to Vice President

Pardons

Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation

Personnel ‑ General

Personnel ‑ Attorney Applications for Future Consideration

Box 83 - William Casselman Subject File

Personnel ‑ Secretarial Applications

Personnel ‑ Volunteers

Physical Fitness and Sports, President's Council on

Privacy ‑ Criticism

Privacy

Domestic Council Committee (1)‑(4)

Box 84 - William Casselman Subject File

Privacy

Domestic Council Committee (5)

Domestic Council Committee Reports and Recommendations

Establishment of

General

Initial Department and Agency Recommendations

Legislation

Meeting with Vice President, Feb. 26, 1974

Organization

President's Speech and Fact Sheet

Sperling Breakfast Meeting, March 12, 1974

Protection of the President at Key Biscayne and San Clemente

Public Correspondence with Legal Counsel to the Vice President

Box 85 - William Casselman Subject File

Public Correspondence with the Vice President

Public Correspondence ‑ Minos, Ernst

Public Correspondence ‑ Walker, Harry

Republican National Committee

Republican National Finance Committee

Republican Party ‑ General

Requests for Appearances of Vice President at Public Functions

Requests for Autographed Pictures from the Vice President

Requests for Interviews with the Vice President

Requests for Messages to Individuals from the Vice President

Requests for Vice President to Speak

Rockefeller, Nelson (Entire Folder Transferred to the Ford Presidential Papers)

Rule 29 Committee (Republican Party)

Selection of Vice Presidential Candidates (1)‑(3)

Selection of Vice Presidential Candidates: Transcript of Subcommittee

Meeting, April 27, 1974 (1)‑(2)

Box 86 - William Casselman Subject File

Scheduling ‑ Daily Scheduling Meeting

Scheduling ‑ General

Scheduling ‑ Procedures to be Followed by Staff

Scheduling ‑ Speechwriting Schedules

Scheduling ‑ Weekly Long‑Range Scheduling Meetings

Science and Technology in the White House

Seal ‑ Vice Presidential

Security Clearances

Speeches by the Vice President

Jan. 1974: USDA Speeches

March 6, 1974: National Governors Conference

May 3, 1974: Law Day, University of South Carolina (1)‑(2)

May 13, 1974: Louisiana State Legislature

May 24, 1974: Michigan State Legislature

August 2, 1974: American Bar Association

Standards of Conduct ‑ Christmas Gifts

Standards of Conduct ‑ Correspondence

Box 87 - William Casselman Subject File

Standards of Conduct ‑ General (1)‑(4)

Tax Evasion

Telephone Calls From the Public to the Legal Counsel

Telephone Calls From the Public to the Vice President

Transportation

Veterans Outreach Program

Vice President ‑ Memos from Casselman to Ford

Vice Presidential

Archives

General

Office in House Wing of Capitol

Official Residence ‑ Furniture and Furnishings

Official Residence ‑ General

Box 88 - William Casselman Subject File

Vice Presidential

Official Residence ‑ Legislative Hearings

Personal and Legal Affairs (Chronological)

Personal and Legal Affairs (Parents Divorce Case)

Residence (Alexandria Home)

Waivers of Compensation

Watch List ‑ Office of the Vice President

Watergate Clippings

Women ‑ Equality

Working Hours ‑ Office of the Vice President

Box 88 (Continued) - William Casselman Official Correspondence

Dec. 1973 ‑ Feb. 7, 1974

Box 89 - William Casselman Official Correspondence

Feb. 8 ‑ Apr. 3, 1974

Box 90 - William Casselman Official Correspondence

Apr. 4‑30, 1974

Box 91 - William Casselman Official Correspondence

May 1 ‑ June 17, 1974

Box 92 - William Casselman Official Correspondence

June 18 ‑ July 31, 1974

Box 93 - William Casselman Official Correspondence

Aug. 1974

Box 93 - William Casselman GSA Furniture Purchases File

Correspondence ‑ Ford and GSA, Feb. 1970 ‑ Mar. 1973

Box 94 - William Casselman GSA Furniture Purchases File

Correspondence ‑ Ford and GSA, June ‑ Oct. 1973

Correspondence ‑ Office of Procurement, 1971‑1973

Correspondence ‑ Office of Standards and Quality, 1971‑1973

Furniture Purchase Contracts (1)‑(4)

Box 95 - William Casselman GSA Furniture Purchases File

Furniture Purchase Contracts (5)‑(11)

Box 96 - William Casselman GSA Furniture Purchases File

Purchase Orders ‑ Ford Grand Rapids Office

Region 1, 2, 3 ‑ Purchase Orders

Region 5 ‑ Office of Procurement

Region 5 ‑ Office of Standards and Quality Control (1)‑(7)

Box 97 - William Casselman GSA Furniture Purchases File

Region 5 ‑ Office of Standards and Quality Control (8)‑(11)

Region 5 ‑ Contracts (1)‑(2)

Region 5 ‑ Purchase Orders

Box 98 - William Casselman GSA Furniture Purchases File

Region 5 ‑ Miscellaneous

Region 6 ‑ General

Region 7 ‑ Purchase Orders

Region 8 ‑ Purchase Orders

Region 9 ‑ Contracts

Region 9 ‑ General and Purchase Orders

Region 10 ‑ General

Box 99 - [Box Empty Due to Reorganization of Collection]

Box 100 - Walter Mote Subject File

Appointments ‑ Requests for Appointments with the Vice President

Birthday List ‑ U.S. Senate

Condolences

Coal

Congratulations to the Public

Correspondence with Congressmen and Senators

State Delegations

Alabama

Alaska

Arizona

Arkansas

California

Colorado

Connecticut

Delaware

District of Columbia

Florida

Georgia

Idaho

Illinois

Indiana

Iowa

Kansas

Kentucky

Louisiana

Maryland

Massachusetts

Michigan

Minnesota

Mississippi

Missouri

Montana

Nebraska

Nevada

New Hampshire

New Jersey

New Mexico

New York

North Carolina

Box 101 - Walter Mote Subject File

Correspondence with Congressmen and Senators

North Dakota

Ohio

Oklahoma

Oregon

Pennsylvania

South Carolina

South Dakota

Tennessee

Texas

Utah

Vermont

Virginia

Washington

West Virginia

Wisconsin

Wyoming

Education

Energy

Flags

Food Stamps

Fundraising

Great Lakes

Health

Health Insurance

Housing

Illegible

Inter‑Office Memos

Invitations

Invitations ‑ Daily Log of Endorsements (By State)

Invitations ‑ Endorsements

Miscellaneous

Multiple Issues

Pension

Personnel ‑ Leave

Procedures ‑ Scheduling

Referrals

Referrals ‑ American Revolution Bicentennial Administration

Referrals ‑ Cost of Living Council

Referrals ‑ Department of Agriculture

Referrals ‑ Department of Defense

Referrals ‑ Department of Health, Education and Welfare

Referrals ‑ Department of Housing and Urban Development

Referrals ‑ Department of Interior

Referrals ‑ Department of Justice

Box 102 - Walter Mote Subject File

Referrals ‑ Department of Labor

Referrals ‑ Department of State

Referrals ‑ Department of Transportation

Referrals ‑ Department of Treasury

Referrals ‑ Environmental Protection Agency

Referrals ‑ Federal Communications Commission

Referrals ‑ Federal Energy Administration

Referrals ‑ National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Referrals ‑ Pending

Referrals ‑ Small Business Administration

Referrals ‑ United States Postal Services

Referrals ‑ Veterans Administration

Reports ‑ House Proceedings, May‑Aug. 1974 (1)‑(3)

Reports ‑ Morning and Evening on the Senate, Jan.‑April 1974

Box 103 - Walter Mote Subject File

Reports ‑ Morning and Evening on the Senate, May‑Aug. 1974 (1)‑(2)

Republican Senate Committee

Schedule, Daily, of the Vice President (1)‑(3)

Scheduling Meetings, Daily

Social Security

Thank You Letters to Constituents

Veterans Affairs

Visa

Visa ‑ James Munro

White, Charles E.

Box 104 - Walter Mote Case File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

A‑B

Bourke, Mrs. Edward R. (1)‑(6)

Box 105 - Walter Mote Case File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

C‑K

Box 106 - Walter Mote Case File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

L‑N

Nair, James R.

O‑Q

Box 107 - Walter Mote Case File

(Note: Folders with the titles struck through are not yet open to research, but can be added to the Library’s review queue.)

R‑Z

Box 108 - William Seidman Subject File

Action Group Memos

Administration and Services Division

Advance Files

Budget/Management Report on the Office of the Vice President

Budget/Organization ‑ Office of the Vice President

Correspondence ‑ Daily Mail and Correspondence Report

Correspondence ‑ Form Letter Manual

Correspondence ‑ Form Letters

Correspondence ‑ Procedures

Box 109 - William Seidman Subject File

Economy, Jan.‑July 1974 (1)‑(7)

Box 110 - William Seidman Subject File

Economy, August 1974

Economy ‑ Airlines

Economy ‑ Utilities

Economy ‑ Employee Stock Option Plans

File Directory

File Manual (1)‑(3)

Box 111 - William Seidman Subject File

Gift Card File

Gift Lists (1)‑(4)

Gifts Miscellaneous

Gifts Received ‑ Artwork

Gifts Received ‑ Awards

Gifts Received ‑ Books (1)‑(5)

Gifts Received ‑ Clothing

Gifts Received ‑ Currency

Gifts Received ‑ Documents

Gifts Received ‑ Drugs

Gifts Received ‑ Elephants

Gifts Received ‑ Films and Tapes

Gifts Received ‑ Food

Gifts Received ‑ Hobbies

Gifts Received ‑ Household

Box 112 - William Seidman Subject File

Gifts Received ‑ Jewelry

Gifts Received ‑ Memberships

Gifts Received ‑ Miscellaneous

Gifts Received ‑ Music

Gifts Received ‑ Office Supplies

Gifts Received ‑ Personal

Gifts Received ‑ Photographs

Gifts Received ‑ Poems

Gifts Received ‑ Religious

Gifts Received ‑ Smoking

Gifts Received ‑ Stamps

Gifts Received ‑ Weapons

Gifts to (Gifts Given by Ford)

Grand Rapids Office

Kilmer, Ruth ‑ Chronological File (1)‑(4)

Memos ‑ Chief of Staff and Vice President

Memos ‑ Deputy Assistant for Administration

Memos ‑ Deputy Assistant for Media Affairs

Memos ‑ Deputy Assistant for Research

Memos ‑ Deputy Assistant for Scheduling and Appointments

Memos ‑ Staff (1)‑(2)

Box 113 - William Seidman Subject File

Miscellaneous (1)‑(2)

National Association of Manufacturers ‑ Trade Bill Materials

Personnel ‑ Applications (1)‑(3)

Personnel ‑ Background Advisers (1)

Box 114 - William Seidman Subject File

Personnel ‑ Background Advisers (2)‑(4)

Personnel ‑ General

Personnel ‑ Interns (1)‑(2)

Personnel ‑ Speechwriters

Personnel ‑ Staff Lists

Procedures ‑ Miscellaneous

Procedures ‑ Scheduling

Recommendations ‑ Employment

Box 115 - William Seidman Subject File

Sample Stationary

Scheduling ‑ Advance Schedules (Long‑Range)

Scheduling ‑ Daily Schedules

Scheduling ‑ Minutes of Daily Meetings (1)‑(3)

Scheduling ‑ Minutes of Long‑Range Meetings

Scheduling ‑ Miscellaneous

Scheduling ‑ Speechwriting Schedules

Scheduling ‑ World Tour

Seidman ‑ Speaking Engagements

Box 116 - William Seidman Subject File

Speeches

4/26/