Tag: Akira Tohei

Interview with Rockland Aikido Founder Glen Matsuda: Fumio Toyoda and the Early Days

Glen Matsuda began training aikido in 1970 at the Illinois Aikido Club. In four years, he would follow his local teacher in the transition to Ki Society and it was there that he found Fumio Toyoda. Today, Matsuda talks about his journey with Toyoda, the forming of the Aikido Association of America, Toyoda’s teaching methodology, … Continue reading Interview with Rockland Aikido Founder Glen Matsuda: Fumio Toyoda and the Early Days

Interview with University of Chicago Ki-Aikido Club Instructor Kağan Arık: The Similarities and Differences, Part II

Kagan Arik began learning Ki-Aikido while attending the University of Pennsylvania almost by accident. There, he trained under Hal Abramson Sensei, from whom he learned fundamentals. When he moved to Seattle, Washington, Arik started training with Koichi Kashiwaya Sensei and was exposed to different approaches that opened him to the different possibilities of Ki-Aikido. Arik … Continue reading Interview with University of Chicago Ki-Aikido Club Instructor Kağan Arık: The Similarities and Differences, Part II

Interview with Chicago Aikikai Chief Instructor Marsha Turner: Reminiscing About Aikido

Marsha Turner began aikido in 1986 under Kevin Choate after experiencing ballet, gymnastics, and foil fencing. Her reasons for trying and for her continued stay changed and evolved over the course of her tenure in aikido. She currently heads Chicago Aikikai and took some time today to discuss her early years of training, the late … Continue reading Interview with Chicago Aikikai Chief Instructor Marsha Turner: Reminiscing About Aikido

Interview with Aikido of Hilo Cofounder Robert Klein: Starting From Scratch and Friendship

Robert Klein began aikido while at Stonybrook University, after some of his friends brought him to one of the classes. Immediately, he was hooked, even meeting his wife, Barbara, during training. He soon started travelling to Long Island Aikikai, studying under Eddie Hagihara. In 1980, he and Barbara moved to Hilo, Hawaii. There, the couple … Continue reading Interview with Aikido of Hilo Cofounder Robert Klein: Starting From Scratch and Friendship

Interview with Aikido of Raritan Valley Founder Paul Manogue: From Japan and Back Again

One could say that the martial arts called out to Paul Manogue, as he experienced everything from fencing, kendo, aikido, judo, and kenjutsu. He first found aikido when he was going to university in Japan and began training under Gozo Shioda. When he returned home, Manogue began studying under Yukio Utada in Philadelphia. Soon, he … Continue reading Interview with Aikido of Raritan Valley Founder Paul Manogue: From Japan and Back Again

Interview with Longtime Aikidoka John Bieszk: Fumio Toyoda in the Midwest, Part II

John Bieszk first started judo after going through not the nicest part of Chicago. After finding some time between schooling, he arrived at the Illinois Aikido Club under Akira Tohei. After taking a leave of absence due to college work, he found Fumio Toyoda in 1980 and he never stopped. Once he earned his shodan … Continue reading Interview with Longtime Aikidoka John Bieszk: Fumio Toyoda in the Midwest, Part II

Interview with Longtime Aikidoka John Bieszk: Fumio Toyoda in the Midwest, Part I

John Bieszk first started judo after going through not the nicest part of Chicago. After finding some time between schooling, he arrived at the Illinois Aikido Club under Akira Tohei. After taking a leave of absence due to college work, he found Fumio Toyoda in 1980 and he never stopped. Once he earned his shodan … Continue reading Interview with Longtime Aikidoka John Bieszk: Fumio Toyoda in the Midwest, Part I

Interview with San Diego Aikikai Chief Instructor Deena Drake: Kazuo Chiba’s Legacy

Deena Drake discovered aikido while driving to and from work, happening to stop in one day. Immediately, she was hooked. She trained under Michael Flynn for a number of years until moving to San Diego to train under Kazuo Chiba. As Chiba’s health declined, he approached Drake in 2007 to assume operations of San Diego … Continue reading Interview with San Diego Aikikai Chief Instructor Deena Drake: Kazuo Chiba’s Legacy

Interview with Aikido of Madison Cofounders Robin Cooper and John Stone: Their Journey Through Aikido and Beyond, Part III

Both Robin Cooper and John Stone started aikido at the same time, beginning their study in a dojo affiliated with Akira Tohei. After moving to California in the late 1970s, both of them trained with a variety of aikidoka and schools, ranging from Frank Doran, Bob Bryner, Bob Nadeau, and Bill Witt, to LA Aikikai … Continue reading Interview with Aikido of Madison Cofounders Robin Cooper and John Stone: Their Journey Through Aikido and Beyond, Part III