The manufacturing town of Langenthal in canton Bern has little in common with the jet set resorts of Gstaad and St Moritz, attracting few tourists.

But like them Langenthal is one of the stops on a new “Luxury and Design” tour of Switzerland.

The tour is one of a series of theme routes launched by Switzerland Tourism, and it’s the first time the Bernese town has been promoted in such a way abroad.

The “Luxury and Design” booklet is a glossy 70-page affair, listing the places to see and be seen during a cross-country tour.

The places to see are the boutiques, designer ateliers and swanky hotels and spas between Geneva and Zurich, with stops at the fashionable resorts of Montreux, Gstaad, Lucerne and St Moritz.

Admittedly, only one page in the guide is devoted to Langenthal, compared with five or six for the others.

Top ten

But being in the guide still puts Langenthal in the top ten Swiss locations – ahead of Interlaken, Davos and the southern towns of Locarno and Lugano. The latter three are not even mentioned.

Lacking luxury, Langenthal makes up for this deficiency with a reputation it has gained over the years for high quality design. It is this design that has put it on the map – and the new tour.

The accent in the Bernese town is on fabrics, furniture, porcelain and carpets.

The booklet recommends visits to the Design Center Langenthal, factory floors and trendy restaurants.

“Langenthal factories are small- to medium-size enterprises but they have a presence in many different countries abroad,” says Sergio Cavero, director of the Design Center, which is a platform for events, exhibitions and exchanges.

“They have developed innovative strategies to be able to export their products from a small country like Switzerland.” (See interview with Cavero under ‘related items’.)

Niche products

“They are all manufacturers who have discovered a niche for their products,” Cavero adds.

Ruckstuhl Carpet Company is a good example, specialising in natural fibre carpets, produced in small quantities.

More than two-thirds of the coir, sisal, wool and other natural fibre carpets produced in Langenthal are sold abroad.

Its carpets cover the floors at the Helsinki International Airport and the Rijksmuseum in the Dutch town of Leiden, and have been chosen for the interiors of buildings designed by leading architects such as Norman Foster and Herzog and de Meuron.

Not “Swiss made”

But unlike Swiss army knives, chocolate or watches, the Langenthal goods are not marketed as Swiss-made products.

“I think it’s quality that counts the most,” says Peter Ruckstuhl, owner and director of the company.

“If someone wants to know where a carpet is made then we explain, but I think it would be wrong to put a label on the back saying that it has been manufactured in Switzerland.”

This attitude does not necessarily lend Langenthal the profile its mayor thinks it deserves.

“We are different from Montreux or Gstaad,” says Hansjürg Käser. “Langenthal is one of the few places on the tour where design is actually produced. All the others benefit from the items that are made here.”

Designers’ Saturday