European Jews' exposure to modernity in the 19 th century led to major changes in the structure of the community's organizational and the balancing of the foci of power, in its patterns of behavior and religious practices, as well as in its aesthetic sensibilities. These transformations included also changes in the synagogue and in the liturgy during the first half of the 19 th century. In the wake of the Reform Movement in Western Europe such processes reached a high point. The aesthetization of liturgical music in Germany's principalities and in the Austro-Hungarian Empire consequently positioned the nature and role of synagogue music at the center of the deliberations of the leaders of the Eastern European Haskalah regarding religious rituals. The growing influence and expansion of the Haskalah in Eastern Europe during the second half of the 19 th century faced Jews in the Russian Empire with momentous questions concerning their identity, nationality, and the role and status of religious tradition in view of the new vogues the spread to all aspects of Jewish life. Cantor Pinkhas Minkowsky (1859-1924), the subject of this dissertation, held a prominent position in the attempts to redefine the soundscape of the synagogue during these tumultuous times in the annals of Eastern Europe's Jewish community. Pinkhas Minkowsky served as cantor and composer in the synagogue of the former residents of Brody in the city of Odessa for approximately thirty years (1892-1922). He was one of the promoters of the Haskalah in the realm of synagogue musicand implemented those new ideas in his musical works and in his performance style. A review of his philosophy and work as they evolved in the modern cultural milieu of Odessa at the turn of the 20 th century offers a glimpse into the world views of the representatives and promoters of the Haskalah in the Russian Empire and how they coped with the challenges of the modern era. This dissertation focuses on how Minkowsky crafted his musical concepts in the Brody Synagogue , an organization whose patrons, influenced by the synagogues of large cities such as Berlin and Vienna, tried to create a progressive religious institution in the spirit of the Haskalah. Such a search led to the appointmen" of a knowledgeable prayer leader and a choir of m'shorerim [singers]." At the same time that it promoted innovations, the leaders of this congregation also sought to preserve aspects of the musical repertoire of the Eastern European tradition on which they were brought up and with which they were familiar from their parents' homes. Apart from being a cantor and composer, Minkowsky was also a member of a group of He-brew-language authors active in Odessa. His circle of acquaintances included Hayim Nahman Bialik, Shaul Tchernichovsky, Sholem Aleichem (Solomon Naumovich Rabinovich), Mendele Mocher Sforim (Sholem Yankev Abramovich), Ahad Ha'am (Asher Zvi Hirsch Ginsberg), and others, with whom he maintained a close friendship and in whose various cultural enterprises he took part. Min-kowsky was a unique figure in the world of Jewish music of his times, a prolific composer, and one of the main pillars of the movement that sought to advance musical transformations in the synagogue. His influence on the Eastern European cantorial community was significant. In addition, he was a theoretician and researcher of Jewish music, a philosopher, and a publicist. Dozens of his articles

European Jews' exposure to modernity in the nineteenth century led to major changes in the structure of the community's organization and the balancing of the foci of power, in its patterns of behavior and religious practices, as well as in its aesthetic sensibilities. Cantor Pinkhas Minkowsky (1859–1924) held a prominent position in the attempts to redefine the soundscape of the synagogue during these tumultuous times in the annals of Eastern Europe's Jewish community. Minkowsky's overall work and thought are the products of a formative moment in the highly charged and complicated encounter between Jewishness and modernity in Odessa of the late nineteenth century and early twentieth centuries. His work and thought are an expression of his dealing with the discomfort and ambivalence that the encounter with modernity presented. Minkowky's thought concentrated on the roots of the national idea and the search for primordial authenticity, which constitute one of the most patent manifestations of modern nationalism. His musical works shed light on his musical acumen and expertise, but most importantly, they illuminate the dialectics between old and new, "emotion" and "order," and innovation and conservatism. Based on Philip Bohlmanʻs model, Minkowsky's role as "mediator" or "ambassador" in the encounter between tradition and modernity, as well as his role as a "music expert," rather than a "religious expert," are discussed.

" In the heavenly assembly, and in an earthly assembly, by the consent of God, and by consent of this congregation, we permit praying with transgressors. " 1 Thus do Jewish cantors all over the world intone as the sun sets on the eve of Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement. Thus do these cantors set the tone for the day to come. Usually, about eighteen hours later, these cantors again ascend to the bimah, the pulpit, and confess before God that they too are among the transgressors. And though, as they admit, they are unworthy of His mercy, they plead with God to accept their prayers on behalf of all the People of Israel whom they represent. This past year, as in years past, I found myself among the transgressors going before God on the eve of Yom Kippur. I intoned the declaration three times, as is customary, and then, as the liturgy calls for, I launched into one of the oldest and best known prayers, the fabled declaration Kol Nidrei. This is my own translation of the original Hebrew announcement made by cantors. The Hebrew for this 1 purposes is based on the version of the announcement found in the Machzor, the High Holiday Prayer Book, produced by Paltiel Birnbaum in the early 20th Century in London. This edition of the prayer book is still today one of the standard books of liturgy used in the United States. In many Israeli Machzorim, the wording is slightly different. Since many academic works and studies of Jewish liturgy, literature, and tradition rely on mistranslations-often quite sloppy ones-of the original texts, and since such mistranslations and misinterpretations result in the misunderstanding of many a paper's subject matter, I have chosen most often here to render the translations and transliterations of the texts I use in this paper myself, rather than add to the misunderstanding of my already much misrepresented subject.