Film: On the Waterfront

Directed by Elia Kazan

Starring Marlon Brando (Terry Malloy) and Rod Steiger (Charley Malloy)

When I get a script, like many actors, stick to what is written therefore, limiting performance possibilities and chances of discovery. The taxi scene in “On the Waterfront”, between the two brothers, Terry and Charley, express honesty and realness making us forget that we’re watching a gangster film. It reminds us actors to dive into the emotional and physical preparation for a scene.

In 1950s New Jersey, Terry must choose to decide whether to testify about the mobsters corrupting the waterfront or continue to be known as a bum and let it all poison his conscience. Charley, a mob lawyer and right hand man of mobster Friendly, has no choice but to convince his little brother to not testify. The small taxicab forces the men to get closer physically but also figuratively in their relationship.

Charlie impels the scene forward as his actions to reach his objective increase in intensity. He begins to persuade his brother in casual conversation, which turns into pleading. The agitation increases forcing Charley to threat and pull his gun on Terry. Terry resists Charley’s action by confessing his emotional truth.

Terry gently pushes the gun away in disappointment, shaking his head no. Terry’s decision has been made. His voice trembles, “Charley, Charley, Charley”. He is saddened, broken, by Charley’s actions. Brando handles the scene femininely, but not losing the toughness that is Terry. He places his hand on his cheek, and says “Wow”. Charlie bows his head in shame and guilt.

Scripts give actors fixed clues to play a scene, however, Brando goes beyond and just lives as the character. The original script called for Terry to be frightened of Charley’s gun. Brando insisted Terry would not be afraid but deeply disturbed by Charley’s submission to the mob. Brando doesn’t let fixed lines limit potential of his performance, creating space for emotional and physical discovery.

Charley doesn’t give up his pursuit, bringing up Terry’s boxing days, forcing Terry expose more of himself. We see the weight and pain that has been suppressed, poured out by Terry, expressing his anger to his brother for not watching out for him and using him as a pawn. This scene could have easily been done “angrily” however, Brando, is gentle in his approach. The subtext is pain and regret that Terry feels towards his brother for robbing him of success.

The main action in the scene is persuasion, but the overall event is a confession. Terry’s line “I coulda been a contender. I coulda been somebody instead of a bum”, is the first time he ever expresses this thought to Charley, but more significantly the first time Terry has come to the realization that he wants more for himself. This scene is active and reactive. The men are in a new situation and are coming to grips with their troubled past. In this moment, they found clarity in confusion.

Being an actor is a hard task that requires concentration and emotional commitment to allow moments of interpretation, discovery, however, we too like Brando can find possibilities beyond given lines.