Date of Birth: 5 December, 1927

Place of Birth: Cambridge, Massachusetts, U.S.

Date of Death: 13 October, 2016

Place of Death: Siriraj Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand

Ethnicity: Thai, some Chinese, some Mon

Bhumibol Adulyadej, also known as Rama IX, was the King of Thailand, from 9 June, 1946 to 13 October, 2016, his death.

He was the son of Srinagarindra and Mahidol Adulyadej, who is regarded as the father of modern medicine and public health in Thailand. His father founded the House of Mahidol, the present Royal Family of Thailand. Bhumibol was born in Cambridge, Massachusetts, U.S., while his father was enrolled at Harvard University, and moved to Thailand shortly after his birth. He was married to Sirikit, with whom he had four children. His son, Vajiralongkorn, became King upon his death. Among his grandchildren are Bajrakitiyabha and Dipangkorn Rasmijoti.

Bhumibol’s paternal grandfather was Chulalongkorn (also known as Rama V, the son of Mongkut, also known as Rama IV, and of Debsirindra). Chulalongkorn was born in Grand Palace, Bangkok, Siam, and was King of Siam, from 1 October, 1868 to 23 October, 1910. Mongkut was King of Siam, from 2 April, 1851 to 1 October, 1868. He was the son of Phra Phutthaloetla, also known as Rama II, who was Viceroy of Siam, from 1808 to 7 September, 1809, and King of Siam, from 7 September, 1809 to 21 July, 1824; and of Sri Suriyendra. Debsirindra was of Mon descent, and was the daughter of Sririwongse, the Prince Matayaphithak, and of Mom Noi Siriwongse Na Ayudhaya. Mom is a title, which means “a commoner married to a prince.”

Bhumibol’s paternal grandmother was Savang Vadhana (the daughter of Mongkut and Piam Sucharitakul). Savang was born in Grand Palace, Bangkok, Siam. Through Mongkut, Chulalongkorn and Savang Vadhana were half-siblings. Piam Sucharitakul was the daughter of Luang Asasamdaeng, also known as Taeng Sucharitakul, and of Thao Sucharitthamrong, also known as Nak Sucharitakul. Luang and Thao are titles, which mean “Lord” and “Dame,” respectively.

Bhumibol’s maternal grandfather was named Chu Chukramol (the son of Chum).

Bhumibol’s maternal grandmother was named Kham Chukramol (the daughter of an unknown father, and of Pha).