Thailand

Looking back at the coronation of King Vajiralongkorn and Queen Suthida

Although King Bhumibol Adulyadej of Thailand died on 13 October 2016, his son and the next King did not have his coronation until 4 May 2019. In a shocking move, King Vajiralongkorn married Suthida Tidjai shortly before his coronation. During a ceremony on 1 May 2019, Suthida prostrated herself in front of the King and [read more]

Royal Wedding Recollections – King Vajiralongkorn of Thailand and Suthida Tidjai

On 1 May 2019, there was a surprise announcement from the Thai royal court – Suthida Tidjai was officially announced as King Vajiralongkorn’s wife. King Vajiralongkorn of Thailand had been married and divorced three times before. In 1977, when he was still the Crown Prince, he married his first cousin, Princess Soamsawali Kitiyakara, and they [read more]

King Chulalongkorn and his half-sister consorts

King Chulalongkorn of Siam (Thailand) was born on 20 September 1853 as the son of King Mongkut and Queen Debsirindra – his parents were great-uncle and great-niece and were 30 years apart in age. His mother died on 9 September 1862, and her sister continued to act as his father’s consort. Prince Chulalongkorn received a [read more]

Queen Sirikit of Thailand – The creation of an image (Part two)

To ease the panic about the succession, a marriage was arranged for Prince Vajiralongkorn. The chosen bride was his first cousin, SoamsawaliKitiyakara. However, Prince Vajiralongkorn didn’t like her, and he considered her plain and dull. Nevertheless, they married on 3 January 1977 and began touring the country. Soamsawali gave birth to a daughter named Bajrakitiyabha, [read more]

Queen Sirikit of Thailand – The creation of an image (Part one)

The future Queen Sirikit was born on 12 August 1932 as the daughter of Prince Nakkhatra Mangkala Kitiyakara and Mom Luang Bua Snidvongs at the home of her maternal grandfather. She had two elder brothers, Mom Rajawongse Kalyanakit Kitiyakara (1929-1987) and Mom Rajawongse Adulakit Kitiyakara (1930-2004) and a younger sister, Mom Rajawongse Busba Kitiyakara (1934). [read more]

Princess Srinagarindra – Mother first, Princess second

The late Princess Srinagarindra of Thailand – the grandmother to the current King Maha Vajiralongkorn – was known as the “Royal Grandmother”, “The Heavenly Royal Mother” and “Royal Mother from the Sky”. Born Sangwan Chukramol on 21 October 1900, she would go on to marry into the Thai Royal Family and have three children – two of whom would [read more]

To provide the best experiences, we and our partners use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us and our partners to process personal data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site and show (non-) personalized ads. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions.

Click below to consent to the above or make granular choices. Your choices will be applied to this site only. You can change your settings at any time, including withdrawing your consent, by using the toggles on the Cookie Policy, or by clicking on the manage consent button at the bottom of the screen.