King Phutthayotfa Chulalok (Rama I)

HM Queen Amarindra (1737-1826)

The queen was formerly known as Nak, as there were no surnames back then. She was a daughter of a wealthy businessman, and of a mother who later took to something similar to a nun in the Western world. She and the king were married sometime between 1758-1761, when the king was not yet king but was known as Luang Yokrabat, a high ranking official in Rajburi. She was the mother of King Rama II.

King Phutthaloetla Naphalai (Rama II)

HM Queen Sri Suriyendra (1767-1836)

Formerly HRH Princess Boonrod, daughter of HRH Princess Sri Sudaraksa, elder sister of King Rama I, and Tan Krua Ngern, a wealthy Chinese businessman of a Chiness noble family that came from mainland China. The Queen was born 5 months after Ayutthaya, Siam's old capital, was destroyed by the Burmese Army. She was the mother of King Mongkut (Rama IV) and Second King Pin Klao of Siam.

King Mongkut (Rama IV)

HM Queen Somanas Wattanavadi (1834-1851)

Formerly HSH Princess Somanas, daughter of King Rama III. She became queen in 1851, just 9 months before her death, at just 17 years old. She also gave birth to a son that same year, who did not lived beyond a day. The king built a temple, Wat Somanas, in honour of his first queen.

King Mongkut (Rama IV)

HM Queen Debsirindra (1834-1861)

Formerly HSH Princess Rampeuy, daughter of HRH Prince Sirivongse, son of King Rama III. Prince Sirivongse died at 28 years, and his 8 children came into the care of King Rama III. King Monkut (Rama IV) made her his queen in 1852, at the age of 18. She bored him four children, the eldest being King Chulalongkorn (Rama V). The Queen was not very healthy, and died at just 24 years old.

King Mongkut (Rama IV)

HRH Somdetch Pra Piyamavadi Sri Bajarindra Mata (1839-1904)

Formerly Royal Mother (Chao Khun Chom Manda) Piam, daughter of Luang Asa Sumdang of the Sucharitkul family.

The Royal Mother Piam was given a new name and title equivalent of a high-ranking princess during the reign of King Rama VI, as she was the mother of 3 queens of Rama V, namely Queen Sri Bajarindra (The Regent Queen), Queen Sri Savarindira, and Queen Sunanda. Her new name and title actually means "Mother-of-Queens." Her youngest son was HRH Prince Svasti Sophon (founder of the Svasti Royal House), the grandfather of Queen Rambai Barni, Rama VII's queen.

King Chulalongkorn (Rama V)

HM Queen Sri Bajarindra, The Regent Queen (1864-1919)

Formerly HRH Princess Saovabha Phongsri, the youngest daughter of King Mongkut (Rama IV) and Somdetch Pra Piyamavadi Sri Bajarindra Mata, sister of Queen Sri Savarindira and Queen Sunanda, half-sister of King Rama V.

The Queen was King Rama V's principle queen, and became Regent of Siam twice when the King was on his European tour. The Queen was the mother of two Kings; King Vajiravuth (Rama VI) and King Prajadhipok (Rama VII)

King Chulalongkorn (Rama V)

HM Queen Sri Savarindira (1862-1955)

Formerly HRH Princess Savang Vadhana, the middle daughter of King Mongkut (Rama IV) and Somdetch Pra Piyamavadi Sri Bajarindra Mata, elder sister of Queen Sri Bajarindra, and younger sister of Queen Sunanda, half-sister of King Rama V.

The Queen was the mother of the first Crown Prince Maha Vajirunhis, and grandmother of King Ananda Mahidol (Rama VIII) and the present King Bhumibol Adulyadej (Rama IX).

King Chulalongkorn (Rama V)

HM Queen Sunanda Kumariratana (1860-1880)

Formerly HRH Princess Sunanda Kumariratana, eldest daughter of King Mongkut (Rama IV) and Somdetch Pra Piyamavadi Sri Bajarindra Mata, and the eldest sister of Queen Sri Savarindira and Queen Sri Bajarindra.

The Queen was a much loved wife and first queen of King Rama V. Unfortunately, she died at just 19 years of age, while pregnant, from drowning. The Queen was on her way to Bang Pa-in Summer Palace, on the Chao Praya River, when her boat sank. The old Siamese customs prevented anyone from touching the queen except for the king, making it quite impossible to save the young queen. Her only daughter, Princess Karnabhorn Bejraratana (nearly 2 years old), died with her.

King Chulalongkorn (Rama V)

HM Queen Sukhumala Marasri (1861-1927)

Formerly HRH Princess Sukhumala Marasri, daughter of King Mongkut (Rama IV) and Chao Khun Chom Manda Samli, and half-sister to the previous three queens on the list, and King Rama V.

She was the mother of HRH Prince Paribatra, the famous owner of the beautiful Bang Khun Prom Palace, and HRH Princess Suddhadibya.

King Vajiravudh (Rama VI)

HRH Pra Sucharit Suda (1895-1982)

Formerly Miss Prueng Sucharitkul, daughter of Chao Praya Sudharm Montri.

The first consort of King Rama VI, she was in fact a cousin from his mother's side. Chao Praya Sudharm Montri was Somdetch Pra Piyamavadi's younger brother. She fell out of favour, and was replaced by her younger sister, who finally became a queen - Queen Indrasakdi Sachi. (see below)

King Vajiravudh (Rama VI)

HM Queen Indrasakdi Sachi (1902-1975)

Formerly Miss Prabai Sucharitkul, daughter of Chao Praya Sudharm Montri, younger sister of Pra Sucharit Suda.

She became queen because of her pregnancy, making the King extremely happy with a much anticipated heir. It was never to be, as the queen miscarried 3 times during her queenship. She was later demoted to a rank of Princess Consort.

King Prajadhipok (Rama VII)

HM Queen Rambai Barni (1904-1984)

Formerly HSH Princess Rambai Barni, daughter of HRH Prince Svasti Sobhon, brother of HM Queen Sri Bajarindra, King Prajadhipok's mother. The Queen was the King's first cousin.

The Queen went to live in England with the King after his abdication in 1935. She only returned to Thailand after the King's death in 1941.

King Maha Vajiralongkorn (Rama X)

HM Queen Suthida Bajrasudhabimalalakshana (2019-present)

Formerly Miss Suthida Tidjai, born a commoner in a family of Thai-Chinese heritage. She studied in Thailand and graduated from the Assumption University. Afterwards, she became air-stewardess at Japan Airlines and Thai Airways respectively. She then entered the Royal Thai Army in The King's Guard Unit. At the Coronation of His Majesty King Maha Vajiralongkorn held between 4-6 May 2019, she was made the Queen Consort of the newly crowned King Rama X of the Chakri Dynasty.