‘Mulligan's Stew’ and ‘James at 15’ Offered by NBC ‐ABC Examines Teen‐Agers’ Drinking and Drugs

Television's renewed Infatuation with adolescence‐as subject matter and potential ratings booster‐accelerates this week with still two more familysituation series. Both are on NBC: “Mulligan's Stew” on Tuesdays and “James at 15” on Thursdays. Curiously enough, both also begin at 9 P.M., bypassing the 8 o'clock slot normally reserved for “family viewing.” Presumably, even family situations are not immune to material that might be considered inappropriate for family viewing.

Like the blue‐collar Fitzpatricks, who got off to a disastrous ratings start on CBS several weeks ago, the middleclass Mulligans are close, loving, goodlooking and admirably disciplined. A press release refers to the children as “small fry.” It's that kind of show. When household chores interfere with one son's school project to make short documentary, he says, “I bet Fellini's mother never treated him like this.” It's that kind of show.

But tonight's episode spikes the usual fun and games with an unexpected dose of nastiness. A new schoolmate, Duane, turns out to be a victim of child abuse. Swaggering and confident in front of his friends, Duane is pathetically trying to cope with an alcoholic father at home.

•

The Mulligan parents (Lawrence Pressman and Elinor Donahue) suspect the truth about Duane and, of course, all is neatly resolved by hour's end. I still wouldn't be able to tell the Mulligans from the Fitzpatricks if I met them on some never‐never street, but the character of Duane, very ably played by Mathew Laborteaux, gives the series a nicely distinctive start.

“James at 15” began electronic life as a made‐for‐TV movie at the start of this season and promptly went to the top of the week's rating list. So NBC is understandably wasting no time bringing back James (Lance Kerwin) for a regular series. James, whose father is a college professor, is moved, reluctantly, from a small town in the Middle. West to the sprawling urban mix of Boston. Thursday's premiere has him trying to settle in to his new school and find new friends.

James avoids students pushing pills of assorted uppers and downers, but he becomes fascinated with Sly (David Hubbard), a jiving black student who is selling smoke that he calls “Massachusetts purple.” The plain Marlene (Susan Myers), from a lower‐middleclass Irish family (her brother is a policeman) is a budding sociologist who decides to pursue James with “scientific” questions. But James is more interested in the beautiful Paisely (Lisa Peliken), snooty daughter of very wealthy “old Boston” parents.

•

The cultural mix is carefully calculated, but Dan Wakefield's script and Joseph Hardy's direction cleverly managed to keep the characters from hardening into stereotypes. The super‐hit Sly has solidly middle‐class parents deeply involved in classical music (“My parents move to a different beat—a pre‐plantation beat”). Paisely is neglected and lonely but loyal (“I won't’ have Daddy and Mummy referred to as common drunks just because they lush it up a bit”). And Marlene discovers that her plumber‐father earns more money than James's teacherfather.

Needless to say, Sly's “Massachusetts purple” turns out to be a harmless mixture of eggplant and oregano. Television is hardly ready for a pothead hero. And Mr. Hubbard transforms Sly into one of the more attractive characters of the new season. On the whole, “James at 15” is unusually appealing. It can be remarkably sensitive or goofily funny. With Mr. Kerwin smartly heading a solid cast, the series should have a good chance for survival:

•

Also this Thursday, as It happens, the ABC “News Closeup” documentary series is examining in some depth problem that the weekly series might refer to, but only superficially. “Teenage Turn‐on: Drinking and Drugs,” produced, written and directed by Tom Bywaters, will be shown at 10 P.M. In this disturbing portrait, the teenagers are hooked not on “Massachusetts purple” but on alcohol, used increasingly with other drugs, such as marijuana, cocaine, various pills or substance called “angel dust.”

With a telling nod to the contemporary practices, Including television commercials that glamorize the drinking of such alcoholic beverages as beer and wine, with society refusing to view alcohol as a drug, the program includes a visit to addiction facilities in Minneapolis. Individual cases, some involving patients as young as 13, are displayed in 04ainful close‐up before the cameras. The problem is bound to cut across all social and economic lines.