THIS POST MAY CONTAIN AFFILIATE LINKS. PLEASE SEE MY FULL DISCLOSURE POLICY FOR DETAILS. AS AN AMAZON ASSOCIATE I EARN FROM QUALIFYING PURCHASES.

Mulligan stew is a family-friendly, easy stew made with tender stew meat, potatoes, corn, carrots, peas, green beans, and a perfect blend of Italian spices. This delectable stew is easily made in a Dutch oven but can be adapted for a slow cooker. With the use of frozen vegetables and precut stew meat prep work on this recipe is a breeze. I love to serve it with Best Cornbread Recipe or Cheddar Biscuits.

Fall is here and it is time for comfort food recipes like stew, chili and soup. This Mulligan Stew is perfect for the season bringing warm tender beef together with wholesome vegetables in a savory beef gravy.

How do you make Mulligan Stew?

First add the flour, onion powder, garlic powder and freshly ground black pepper to a large zipper seal bag and shake to combine. Now add the beef stew meat and shake to coat. Heat a little vegetable oil in a Dutch oven over medium heat. Using a pair of tongs remove the beef one piece at a time and add to the pan reserving any flour mixture left in the bag. Brown the beef on all sides removing to a plate when complete.

Now add a little more vegetable oil to the Dutch oven over medium heat. Add the chopped onion and cook until slightly translucent and lightly browned on the edges. Sprinkle in remaining flour and cook for about two minutes stirring constantly. Add the oregano, basil and marjoram and cook for about one half minute stirring continuously. Now stir in the beef broth and cook for a couple of minutes to smooth and thicken the gravy. Add the browned beef back to the pan, cover and place in the oven for about one hour.

Then add the potatoes, corn, carrots, peas and green beans. Now place the pot back in the oven and cook for around 30 minutes or until stew and vegetables are tender.

Recipe notes and helpful tips

Buy good quality beef stew that has been cut from Chuck Roast, Chuck Shoulder, Top Chuck, Bottom Round Roast or Rump Roast.

If you do not have a Dutch oven prepare all the steps up to placing in the oven in a large skillet. Then transfer to a large deep casserole dish for baking.

Not every potato is equal. For stews and soups red potatoes or gold potatoes are best. They hold their shape and do not break down as easily. Do not use russet potatoes as they will break down and quickly disappear in the gravy.

Other varieties of mixed vegetables will work with this recipe including lima beans, baby peas, brussels sprouts and sweet potatoes.

Other stew and soup recipes you will love!

Beef Bourguignon Recipe

Taco Stew

The Best Chicken and Dumplings

Brunswick Stew

Easy Hamburger Stew

Chicken Stew

On the hunt for more delicious recipes? Follow Small Town Woman on Facebook, Pinterest, and Instagram.

Mulligan Stew

An easy beef stew made with potatoes, corn, carrots, beans and peas in a savory gravy lightly seasoned with Italian spices.

4.90 from 19 votes

Print Pin

Course: main meal beef

Cuisine: American

Prep Time: 10 minutes minutes

Cook Time: 1 hour hour 40 minutes minutes

Total Time: 1 hour hour 50 minutes minutes

Servings: 4 servings

Calories: 433kcal

Author: Beth Pierce

Ingredients

⅓ cup all purpose flour

½ teaspoon onion powder

½ teaspoon garlic powder

¼ teaspoon fresh ground pepper

1 lb beef stew meat

2 tablespoons vegetable oil

1 medium onion chopped

2 cups low sodium beef broth

½ teaspoon dried oregano

¼ teaspoon dried basil

¼ teaspoon dried marjoram

2 medium gold potatoes cubed

1 bag 19 ounce frozen mixed vegetables (corn, carrots, peas and green beans)

Instructions

Preheat oven to 350 degrees.

Add flour, onion powder, garlic powder and freshly ground black pepper to a large zipper seal bag and shake to combine. Add beef stew meat and shake to coat. Heat 1 tablespoon vegetable oil in a Dutch oven over medium heat. Using tongs remove the beef and add to the pan. Reserve any flour mixture left in the bag. Brown beef on all sides; removing to plate when complete.

Add 1 tablespoon vegetable oil to the Dutch oven over medium heat. Add chopped onion and cook 3-4 minutes. Sprinkle in remaining flour (1 1/2 tablespoons) and cook for 2 minutes; stirring constantly. Add oregano, basil and marjoram; cook for 30 seconds stirring continuously. Stir in beef broth; cook for 2 minutes stirring several times. Add the browned beef back to the pan. Cover and place in the oven for 1 hour.

Add potatoes, corn, carrots, peas and green beans to the pot. Place back in the oven and cook for an additional 30 minutes or until stew and vegetables are tender.

Notes

You should end up with about 1 1/2 tablespoons of flour after coating the stew meat. If not adjust by only taking 1 1/2 tablespoons or adding more flour.

Buy good quality beef stew that has been cut from Chuck Roast, Chuck Shoulder, Top Chuck, Bottom Round Roast or Rump Roast.

If you do not have a Dutch oven prepare all the steps up to placing in the oven in a large skillet. Then transfer to a large deep casserole dish for baking.

Not every potato is equal. For stews and soups red potatoes or gold potatoes are best. They hold their shape and do not break down as easily. Do not use russet potatoes as they will break down and quickly disappear in the gravy.

Other varieties of mixed vegetables will work with this recipe including lima beans, baby peas, brussels sprouts and sweet potatoes.

Nutrition

Calories: 433kcal | Carbohydrates: 44g | Protein: 34g | Fat: 13g | Saturated Fat: 3g | Polyunsaturated Fat: 4g | Monounsaturated Fat: 4g | Trans Fat: 0.04g | Cholesterol: 70mg | Sodium: 432mg | Potassium: 1166mg | Fiber: 4g | Sugar: 2g | Vitamin A: 9IU | Vitamin C: 23mg | Calcium: 54mg | Iron: 4mg

Did You Make This Recipe?Mention @smalltownwomanfoodnut or tag #smalltownwomanfoodnut!

On the hunt for more delicious recipes? Follow Small Town Woman on Facebook, Pinterest, and Instagram.

https://www.smalltownwoman.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Beth-1.pdf

Reader Interactions