South African writer J M Coetzee won the 2003 Nobel Literature Prize, 12 years after fellow South African Nadine Gordimer took home the prestigious award.

Coetzee, "who in innumerable guises portrays the surprising involvement of the outsider", will take home the prize sum of 10 million kronor ($US1.11 million euro ($A1.62 million), the jury said.

He is the sixth South African to win a Nobel Prize. A fundamental theme in Coetzee's novels is his country's former apartheid system, which in his view "could arise anywhere", the jury said.

His breakthrough came in 1980 with the novel "Waiting for the Barbarians".

His international heavyweight status was confirmed three years later when he was awarded Britain's Booker Prize for "Life and Times of Michael K".

He became the first author to be awarded the Booker Prize a second time, for "Disgrace", in 1999.

His novels are characterised by well-crafted composition and analytical brilliance, the jury said.

But it also called 63-year-old Coetzee "ruthless in his criticism of the cruel rationalism and cosmetic morality of western civilisation."

While Coetzee makes the distinction between right and wrong crystal-clear, he also portrays it as being ultimately pointless.

"It is in exploring weakness and defeat that Coetzee captures the divine spark in man."

The Swedish Academy applauded the variety in Coetzee's writing. "No two books ever follow the same recipe."

His latest work, "Elizabeth Costello: Eight Lessons", published this year, is a mixture of essay and fiction.

The Nobel Committee praised him for the "great wealth of variety" in his works. "No two books ever follow the same recipe," the citation read.

"Extensive reading reveals a recurring pattern, the downward spiralling journeys he considers necessary for the salvation of his characters. His protagonists are overwhelmed by the urge to sink but paradoxically derive strength from being stripped of all external dignity."

His most recent novel, "Elizabeth Costello", is a collection of stories about a fictitious Australian writer who is a public intellectual.