2003 Nobel Laureate in Literature

who in innumerable guises portrays the surprising involvement of the outsider

Background

Born: February 9, 1940

Place of birth: Cape Town, South Africa

Lastest Residence: Australia

Biographical highlights:

1956 - Entered the University of Cape Town (UCT).

1969 - Awarded PhD at the University of Texas.

1983 - Awarded the Booker-McConnell prize (UK) and CNA prize for Life and Times of Michael K

1984 - Appointed Professor of General Literature at UCT.

1990 - Winner of the Sunday Express Book of the Year Award (UK) for Age of Iron

1999 - Awarded the Booker-McConnell prize (UK) for Disgrace

2002 - Moved to Adelaide, Australia where he is affiliated with the University of Adelaide

2003 - Awarded Nobel Prize in Literature

Book Store

Dusklands

by J.M. Coetzee

Elizabeth Costello : Eight Lessons Coetzee's latest work

In the Heart of the Country

Waiting for the Barbarians

Life and Times of Michael K

The Master of Petersburg

Disgrace

Boyhood: Scenes from Provincial Life Autobiography

Youth Sequel to Boyhood

Age of Iron

Other Books by John Maxwell Coetzee

Featured Internet Links

The Swedish Academy press release

Bio and bibliography

Search WWW Search The Nobel Prize Internet Archive

Links added by Nobel Internet Archive visitors

Giving Offense: Coetzee's essays on censorship (submitted by Danny Yee)

Landscape with Rowers (submitted by Emily Kline)

The Lives of Animals (submitted by Emily Kline)

J. M. Coetzee Biographie (submitted by Inga Schnekenburger)

JOHN MAXWELL COETZEE (submitted by Andrey)

J.M. Coetzee (submitted by Sam)

Ganadores del Premio Nobel de Literatura 1960-2003 (submitted by Ande)

John Maxwell Coetzee (submitted by Exebent)

John Maxwell Coetzee, Premio Nobel de Literatura 2003 (submitted by Sadov)

John M. Coetzee – Biography in english (submitted by roman)

John M. Coetzee Biography from Encyclopedia Britannica (submitted by www.britannica.com)

Disgrace by J.M.Coetzee (submitted by George)

J.M. Coetzee South Africa’s reclusive Nobel Laureate. (submitted by Jamie)