J.M. Coetzee is a South African novelist and Nobel Prize winner. He is perhaps best known for his books, Life & Times of Michael K and Disgrace. Both of them won the Booker Prize, making him the first author to be awarded the Booker Prize twice.

Coetzee was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 2003. He was the fourth African writer to be honored and the second South African to be honored after Nadine Gordimer. Coetzee was awarded the Order of Mapungubwe by the South African government for his “exceptional contribution in the field of literature and for putting South Africa on the world stage.” In addition to that, he holds numerous honorary doctorates and is considered one of the most celebrated authors of his time.

Publication Order of Jesus Trilogy Books

Publication Order of Scenes from Provincial Life Books

Publication Order of Standalone Novels

Publication Order of Short Story Collections

Publication Order of Non-Fiction Books

Publication Order of Anthologies

If You Like J.M. Coetzee Books, You’ll Love…

Toni Morrison

Margaret Atwood

William Faulkner

Disgrace focuses on Professor David Lurie at the age of 52. He is divorced and looking for passion in his life. When he has an affair with a student he ends up jobless, shunned by his friends, and ridiculed by his ex-wife. He ends up heading off to his daughter Lucy’s place to visit. His visit becomes a stay as he tries to salvage this one relationship that he has left. Their strained relationship is put to the ultimate test when an incident of unimaginable terror and violence forces them to confront things about themselves and South Africa.

Another good book by Coetzee is The Childhood of Jesus. The book focuses on a young man named David who is separated from him mother on a boat bound for the new land. He’s adrift in the world, but a passenger named Simon vows to look after him. The two end up strangers in a strange land, not knowing the language or customs, on the search for Simon’s mother that he has no memory of.