Platinum Equity Advisors, LLC is a large advisory firm based in Beverly Hills. It manages $11.55 billion of regulatory assets for 94 client accounts. It has been registered with the SEC as an adviser since 2012 and has operated in the jurisdictions of California, Connecticut, and Massachusetts.

Platinum Equity Advisors provides portfolio management for pooled investment vehicles. It doesn't provide financial planning services to its clients. On top of advisory services, the firm doesn't engage in other business activities.

Platinum Equity Advisors: assets under management

The assets under management (AUM) of Platinum Equity Advisors, LLC is $11.55 billion, all of which is managed in discretionary accounts. The firm's AUM has grown by 215% since the beginning of its operation, and $207.27 million of the total AUM is attributable to clients outside of the United States.

The amount of regulatory assets under management is $11.55 billion for 94 clients. 18% of the firm’s clients are foreign persons or businesses.

Platinum Equity Advisors also advises several private funds. Namely, ninety four private equity funds. The minimum investment commitment required of non-related persons ranges from $0 to $10,000,000.

Careers at Platinum Equity Advisors, LLC

The company employs 199 people that are either part- or full-time employees. 80 percent of the employees work as investment advisers or researchers. No employees are registered as investment adviser representatives with the state securities authorities.

There isn’t anyone with the role of looking for and bringing in new clients on behalf of the firm. The firm doesn’t compensate employees in addition to the salary for bringing in new clients. Employees don’t receive compensation from other entities for client referrals.

T. Tom Gores has been acting as President since 1 Oct 2003. Suneet Krishna Agarwal joined the executive team most recently as the General Counsel And Secretary.

Based in Beverly Hills

The principal office where Platinum Equity Advisors, LLC performs its advisory services is located at 360 North Crescent Drive, Beverly Hills, CA 90210 2529, which is also the mailing address of the firm. An additional office of the firm is in Dedham, MA. It doesn’t run an office outside of the United States.

You can reach the main office by calling the phone number 310-712-1850 or by fax 310-712-1863. The normal business hours are 9 am - 5 pm on Monday - Friday. You can find more information about the New York firm at platinumequity.com.