Former STRATOVARIUS mastermind Timo Tolkki, who who drew up and signed an official waiver on May 20, 2008 giving up all rights to the STRATOVARIUS name, has issued the following statement in response to the announcement by the group's remaining members that they have "decided to carry the legacy of STRATOVARIUS into the future" without him:

"I, like everybody, read today that Kotipelto, Michael and Johansson are continuing their new band as STRATOVARIUS. I have really nothing else to say except to comment the quote of Jens Johansson, 'After Tolkki gave his blessing for us to go on without him.'

"I have never gave them any 'blessing' to continue as STRATOVARIUS. As I have said many times, I think it is wrong and I would never have continued STRATOVARIUS without Timo Kotipelto, Jörg Michael or Jens Johansson. What Johansson calls a 'blessing' was that I gave them the rights to the name I owned and the rights to something like 14 STRATOVARIUS albums. But not as a gift, but as to cut all the ties to them because I was told then that they will continue as STRATOVARIUS which I though was totally wrong towards the fans and of course to me.

"They write that they continue the legacy of STRATOVARIUS, but it cannot be continued. Even I cannot really continue it because it existed only when we were together. It's a shame to see that they cannot start from the clean table like me, but are just using the name. Without that name, they know that they would have it much harder. They took a long time in deciding if they will use the name or not and some of them were totally against using that name. Now that has apparently changed. It is timed very well also to the release of the website of my new band REVOLUTION RENAISSANCE.

"It is a sad day for me, because I believe that STRATOVARIUS as a band died to the publicity stunt the whole band, management and record company organized in 2004 when nothing that was happening was true. After that nothing was the same and the truth could not be told before I told it some days ago in an interview with Ontrackmagazine.com.

"Finally to sum it up: I do not think that the band that now calls itself 'STRATOVARIUS' is the band that its fans came to know as 'STRATOVARIUS.' I think it is a sad way to make a financial use of the name and shows lack of courage to stand on their own feet and music and instead going on as a new band with a new name that I believe would have been the right way.

"STRATOVARIUS is dead. Long live STRATOVARIUS!"

Uh, Timo, when you sign away your rights, it means that you no longer get to be a big baby. If you didn't want them to use the name, then DON'T SIGN THE WAIVER!

-Metal

TT is an idiot, saying Stratovarius is dead, but the RR cd was demoed first with Strato members, so why didn't he do all new material if he was starting a new band instead of using material written for the members of Strato. The Stratovarius now is the Stratovarius I have always known and will always know, just with a better guitarist breathing some new life into the music, plus TT was the only member that didn't stand out to me, he is good, but I always listened more to Jorg, Jens, Jari, and of course Kotipelto. To me, Strato without Kotipelto would be a Strato the fans don't want or know. Also, from what I understand, didn't the Strato name entail some debt with it, so how can them using the name be a financial use right now. Also, if Kotipelto is singing on something, whether it be named Stratovarius or Shitstorm, fuckhead, dick alley, or anything, I would still most likely buy it, then throw in Jorg and Jens, sold. TT is just scared that Strato is just going to be better off without him and that they will go to the next level and do something better than they have since visions and episode.