Each fall, most of the broadcast and cable networks debut a ton of new shows in the span of a few months, making it difficult to sort out which ones to make time for and which to skip. So we’re starting the WIRED Pilot Program, where we highlight what you should continue watching, and what you can just let sit on your DVR until it automatically deletes. Today's entry: Eyewitness.

The Show: Eyewitness (Sundays, USA)

The Premise: A hush-hush late-night tryst between two teenage boys in rural New York is interrupted by a brutal triple-homicide—leaving a killer on the loose, and convincing the two young eyewitnesses that, more than ever, they need to keep their relationship a secret. But if they want to keep a low profile, they'll have to outwit Helen Torrance (Julianne Nicholson), a local sheriff who's eager for a shot at redemption, and who just happens to be the foster mom of one of the kids.

The Pilot Program Take: Based on the hit Norwegian series Øyevitne, this stark bit of rural noir—are we pronouncing that right?—is trying to accomplish a lot in its first episode, shifting from family drama to detective thriller to high-school soap and back again. Director Catherine Hardwicke (Thirteen, Twilight) moves briskly through each new set-up, but even she can't distract from Eyewitness' quicksand-like exposition, which overwhelms the story and overburdens the actors, who are forced to constantly drop small bits of backstory into even the most casual conversation. Slow your roll, Eyewitness! We're in the boonies! Isn't it supposed to be more mellow up here?

Still, when Eyewitness finds time to relax, small rewards abound: The tortured dalliance between Lukas (James Paxton) and Philip (Tyler Young)—one's comfortable with his sexuality, while the other fears what his father will think—is portrayed with the appropriate mix of teen-romance awkwardness and small-town paranoia. And *Boardwalk Empire'*s Nicholson plays her dedicated but clearly ready-for-some-excitement sheriff with a calibrated, flint-eyed coolness that makes her briefly glimpsed flashes of doubt all the more revealing. Alas, Helen spends a good portion of the pilot playing catch-up to a murderer whose identity we already know; if Eyewitness can move past its procedural aspects, and go deeper on the ripple effects of the crimes at hand, it could be something to behold.

The Verdict: The Eyewitness pilot has strong performances and a suitably mysterious small-town setting, but it's often weighed down by unnaturally hand-holdy dialogue and an unwieldy amount of competing story-lines.

TL;DR: Eyewitness is worth a trip upstate–but we're not quite sure we want to move in just yet.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9M2HnBgehQE

Deadpool & Wolverine Scales New Heights of Cinematic Self-Awareness

Deadpool’s first foray into the Marvel Cinematic Universe is all about giving fans more Easter eggs and references than they can catch. Will it also score Disney a hit?

Thousands of People Are Playing Valve’s Secret New Shooter Right Now

No official details exist yet for Deadlock, the rumored 6v6 team shooter from Valve. That hasn’t stopped people from playing it on Steam.

NBC’s Olympics Broadcast Isn’t Just Addictive. It’s a New Era of Streaming

With a big assist from Peacock, the 2024 Summer Olympics broadcast is fragmented in all the right ways.

Twitch’s New DJ Program Has Flaws, But It’s the Best There Is

Twitch is finally giving DJs a place to get paid for streaming their sets—and compensate the artists they spin. Its limited catalog of songs and opaque earnings plan may leave some streamers cold.

Eminem’s New Album Prompted Gen X to Declare a TikTok ‘War’ on Gen Z

The release of Eminem’s new album The Death of Slim Shady has led to a series of viral shitposts from Gen X. Their targets, Gen Z, remain unbothered.

The 30 Best Movies on Max (aka HBO Max) Right Now

Love Lies Bleeding, Dune: Part Two, and Beetlejuice are just a few of the movies you should be watching on Max this month.

The 29 Best Shows on Apple TV+ Right Now

Sunny, Constellation, and Presumed Innocent are among the best shows on Apple TV+ this month.

How World of Warcraft Devs Launched One of the Biggest Unions in Video Games

Microsoft’s acquisition of Activision Blizzard created an environment that helped workers. Amid layoffs and worries about AI, their efforts could be an indicator of the future of the industry.