View Promo Here

View Photos Here

June 14, 2024 – Firsthand accounts and compelling eyewitness footage of dangers close calls from inside epic natural disasters are revealed in the new series, In the Eye of the Storm, premiering Sunday, July 14 at 10PM ET/PT on Discovery Channel. Megastorms like 2021’s Hurricane Ida and the 2023 Maui Wildfires were captured by onlookers who found themselves in the wrong place at the right time and boldly held up their camera phones to document their experiences.

"In the Eye of the Storm will premiere out of Shark Week – our biggest annual programming event – keeping audiences engaged with incredible accounts of near-death experiences caused by nature's greatest forces,” said Howard Lee, President of Discovery Networks. “We’ll witness how people respond in real life-or-death scenarios right as they are unfolding, and we’ll experience the raw intensity of never-before-seen personal recordings. It’s an awe-inspiring look at the power of Mother Nature and humanity’s courage and resilience.”

Stories this season include ordinary people filming: their brushes with death as a monstrous system unleashes destructive tornadoes in Lewistown, IL; their frightening attempts to escape when a rare derecho superstorm blasts through Nebraska and Iowa; and their taking to the sea for any chance of survival when a hurricane turned a small wildfire into an inferno in Hawaii.

Audiences can follow the conversation on social media with #InTheEyeOfTheStorm and follow Discovery on Facebook, X, Instagram, and TikTok for more updates.

In the Eye of the Storm is produced by Arrow Media for Discovery. The series will also be available to stream on Max.

About Discovery Channel

Discovery Channel is dedicated to creating the highest quality non-fiction content that informs and entertains its consumers about the world in all its wonder, diversity and amazement. The network, which is distributed to 88.3 million U.S. homes, can be seen in 224 countries and territories, offering a signature mix of compelling, high-end production values and vivid cinematography across genres including, science and technology, exploration, adventure, history and in-depth, behind-the-scenes glimpses at the people, places and organizations that shape and share our world. For more information, please visit www.discovery.com.

About Warner Bros. Discovery