Much hype surrounds the upcoming mini-series The Pursuit of Love.

The comedy-drama stars British actress Lily James as a wild-at-heart aristocrat who is on a quest to find true love.

The show will be released this month but interest was piqued last year when James was seen looking cosy with her co-star, Dominic West, who plays her uncle in series.

Here is everything we know about the cast, the plot and that PDA scandal between James and West...

What isThe pursuit of Loveabout?

The Pursuit of Love is an upcoming BBC One three-part mini-series directed by award-winning actress Emily Mortimer.

The program is set in the interwar period and follows the love life of Linda Radlett (played by James), an aristocratic heroine on a quest to find true love.

Narrated by her cousin Fanny Logan (Emily Beecham), viewers are taken through a journey as both girls explore love, sex, life and freedom.

"Their friendship is put to the test as Fanny settles for a steady life and Linda decides to follow her heart, to increasingly wild and outrageous places," the program's synopsis reads.

"As social and political divisions split the nation, their diverging choices raise personal questions that remain intensely relevant today."

Who stars inThe Pursuit of Love?

The Pursuit of Love boasts an impressive cast.

Lily James, of Downton Abbey, Cinderella and Mamma Mia! fame, plays the lead female, Linda. Her sidekick will be played by Emily Beecham, who has starred on Daphne and Berlin, I Love You. Beecham plays narrator Fanny Logan, who is somewhat opposite to Linda, yet they are the best of friends.

Fleabag star Andrew Scott — he played The Hot Priest on the award-winning drama — also joins the cast as Linda and Fanny's eccentric neighbour, Lord Merlin. Golden Globe nominee Dominic West will play Uncle Matthew, who is like a father figure to James' character Linda.

Emily Mortimer — star of Hugo, Mary Poppins Returns and Relic — wrote the script and directed the series and also stars as Fanny's mother, The Bolter. She was given that nickname thanks to her endless romances with one suitor after another.

Assaad Bouab, who plays one of Linda's suitors Fabrice de Sauveterre, also stars in the comedy-drama, as do Shazad Latif, Dolly Wells and Freddie Fox.

IsThe Pursuit of Lovebased on a book?

The mini-series is based on Nancy Mitford's classic 1945 novel, The Pursuit of Love. The TV adaptation will run for three 60-minute episodes and will remain true to the book.

Like the novel, the series will follow Linda as she leaves her family home in Oxfordshire to find romance. The novel is part of a trilogy of books but there's no word yet if the three-part series will evolve into more.

"We hope to bring the books to life in future seasons, so The Pursuit Of Love Season Two would be called Love In A Cold Climate based on a brilliant book by Nancy," Charles Collie, the show's executive producer, told Deadline. "The third book would become our third season, Don't Tell Alfred."

Is there a trailer forThe Pursuit of Love?

The official trailer was released on April 23 and it didn't disappoint.

It opens with James in character as Linda, wearing a green dress that could rival Keira Knightley's famous green gown she wore in the 2007 drama Atonement.

"It's not sexual, it's a meeting of minds," Linda says in the trailer, vowing to "aspire to true love".

Andrew Scott could then be heard saying, "Love is for grown-ups, as you will discover one day."

And on that note, Linda begins her quest to find true romance.

When willThe Pursuit of Lovebe released in Australia?

All three episodes of The Pursuit of Love will be released this May in Australia on Amazon Prime Video.

What was the PDA scandal between Lily James and co-star Dominic West?

The Pursuit of Love co-stars made headlines in October when they were seen looking cosy in Italy. The pair were photographed touring Rome together on an electric scooter before they seemingly exchanged a kiss while having lunch at a local restaurant.

West — who has been married to designer Catherine FitzGerald since 2010 — was not wearing his wedding ring at the time. The outing made headline news and forced the actor and his wife to release a statement.

"Our marriage is strong and we're very much still together. Thank you," read a handwritten note up left outside their UK home days after the event.

Prior to leaving the note, West and FitzGerald were also seen kissing outside their estate in full view of photographers.

READ MORE: Who is Catherine FitzGerald, wife of The Affair actor Dominic West?

While James maintained her silence throughout the scandal, she briefly addressed it on May 2 with an interview with The Guardian. "I'm not really willing to talk about that," she told the UK paper. "There is a lot to say, but not now, I'm afraid."

For a daily dose of 9Honey, sign up here to receive our top stories straight to your inbox