Home » Jazz Articles » Album Review » Red Mitchell: A Declaration of Interdependence

Red Mitchell: A Declaration of Interdependence

An out–of–the–ordinary 1988 session by the “Red Mitchell Trio,” which, courtesy of modern technology, is composed of Red Mitchell on bass, Red Mitchell on piano and Red Mitchell on vocals. The “leader,” of course, was known primarily as a bassist (the past tense is used because he passed away in November ’92), but his “sidemen” are respectable enough, especially pianist Mitchell who has an uncluttered, easygoing style and sensitive touch that lend themselves well to the trio format. On the other hand, vocalist Mitchell, who is heard on nine of the eleven selections, is rough–hewn, to say the least. He does sing, but it’s clear that’s not his primary means of employment, as his sincerity and charm far outpace his aptitude. He delves into songs on the order of a Mose Allison or Jimmy Rowles but is a shade less convincing, which is understandable, as they devoted more time to vocalizing than he. Donning yet another hat, Mitchell emerges as a more than respectable songwriter. His melodies (six of which are included here) are appealing, the lyrics caustic and hip (in spite of some dated references to current events on “Poles Apart”). Mitchell’s other vocals are on Wayne Shorter’s “Tell It Like It Is” (to which he added the lyrics) and the standards “Come Rain or Come Shine” and “I’m Glad There Is You.” He lays out on “But Beautiful” and “My Romance.” While bassist Mitchell performs as reliably as expected, the real surprise is pianist Mitchell who could perhaps have enhanced many a group in that capacity if his metronomic alter ego hadn’t been so earnestly sought–after. For Red Mitchell’s many admirers, a splendid souvenir of his memorable talents.

Track Listing

Come Rain or Come Shine; But Beautiful; I Do Love Love; I

Personnel

Red Mitchell, vocals, piano and bass.

Contact: FLC Distribution, P.O. Box 1231, S

Album information

Title: A Declaration of Interdependence | Year Released: 1999 | Record Label: Four Leaf Clover Records

Comments

Tags

Support All About Jazz

All About Jazz has been a pillar of jazz since 1995, championing it as an art form and, more importantly, supporting the musicians who create it. Our enduring commitment has made "AAJ" one of the most culturally important websites of its kind, read by hundreds of thousands of fans, musicians and industry figures every month.

How You Can Help

To expand our coverage even further and develop new means to foster jazz discovery and connectivity we need your help. You can become a sustaining member for a modest $20 and in return, we'll immediately hide those pesky ads plus provide access to future articles for a full year. This winning combination will vastly improve your AAJ experience and allow us to vigorously build on the pioneering work we first started in 1995. So enjoy an ad-free AAJ experience and help us remain a positive beacon for jazz by making a donation today.

A former newspaper writer / editor who has been writing about jazz for more than twenty-five years.

Senior Contributor

Since 1997

Albuquerque, NM

MY ARTICLES | ALBUM REVIEWS | PROFILE PAGE

Contact Me

Musical Preferences

Big Band

Straight-ahead (Bop, Hard bop, Cool)