PICTURES of Red Mitchell 30 years ago, when he was playing bass in Woody Herman's band, in Red Norvo's trio and in Gerry Mulligan's quartet, show a very lean young man with a long, prominent nose dominating a thin face. Now, at 55, Mr. Mitchell has filled out, his nose has settled back into a rounded face, the flame of his red hair has subsided and is noticeable primarily in the soft wisps of a modest beard. Peering out over the half-moons of his unframed glasses, he might be part of a Norman Rockwell painting of a gathering around a pot-bellied stove in a New England country store. His gentle, homey, philosophical manner of talking is in keeping with that portrait.

Mr. Mitchell is now an expatriate, who commutes between the United States and Sweden. He settled in Stockholm 15 years ago and began coming back for extended visits in the last five years because, he says, ''New York City is the action center whence all the ripples move.'' Although he has been a professional musician for 36 years, he is making a debut tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 11 P.M. and Sunday at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. at Village West, Hudson at Bank Street, (691-2791), appearing not as a bassist but, for the first time, as a pianist and singer performing his own compositions, with John Goldsby as his bassist (music charge, $7, with a minimum of $7 at tables; $10 covers admission and two drinks at bar).

Piano was his first instrument, and he has played piano occasionally as a side man, notably with Chubby Jackson's big band at Bop City in 1949. He has been writing songs and singing them since he went to Stockholm. The Jazz Bob Dylan

''This engagement at Village West is perfect timing,'' he said the other day. ''I think the world needs a jazz Bob Dylan, and I'm going to be the only one trying for it.''

The world, he believes, has been taken over by ''isms'' - all kinds of isms, from left to right. ''What jazz is all about,'' he said, ''is the breakdown of isms. I put it in a poem I wrote: Every ism Makes a schism. I'm for anti-ismism. (Sometimes).''

Mr. Mitchell's conversation is studded with brief poems pointing up his outlook. He has a heritage of personal involvement in music and poetry. His mother has always written poetry, and his father has played music, and they still have gatherings at home in which his mother reads her verses and his father plays on a pipe organ that he built himself.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.