Over the last few decades, the influence of politics and state ideology on art history has been the subject of numerous studies in those European countries ruled in the 20th century by totalitarian systems. In Slovenia, some steps have been taken in this direction, especially with regards to research into the influence of politics on art; almost nothing has been done, however, in the field of researching the history of art history itself and the figures within it who, in the second half of 20th century, shaped the discipline and generated society’s attitude towards art. The surviving Communist party archival documents and other material reveal that the building of the new state and the new man after 1945 amounted to much more than just the restraining of creative freedom. Politics not only controlled the situation, they reestablished it, in the artistic field as well as in art history and art criticism. Obliteration, denial and ignorance of the (socio-political) contexts, which had (co-)shaped art history, are still overwhelmingly present in Slovenia, but a critical analysis of the history of the discipline would make a significant contribution to its methodological progress. Keywords: cultural policy after 1945, art history and politics, art and politics, Stane Kregar, France Stele, Boris Ziherl

During the late 1950s and early 1960s in Slovenia echoes of various movements within figuralics were limited to individual artists; however, in the second half of the decade, “new figuralics” established itself mostly among the younger generation. Pop became an umbrella term for an artistic portmanteau encompassing newer forms of figuralics painting. Slovene pop art could not hope to go head to head with already established groups of authors who had ensconced themselves in the key positions of the art world and therefore had almost no possibilities to get shown internationally. This is why in Slovenia interesting new authors and opuses are still discovered today.

"Winner of the Croatian Architects' Association's 2012 Neven Šegvić Award in the category of architectural publication, criticism, and theory. Unfinished Modernisations is a collaborative, long-term research platform on architecture and urban planning. It brought together partners from both institutional and non-institutional sectors from South-Eastern Europe: Museum of Architecture and Design, Ljubljana (Slovenia), Maribor Art Gallery (Slovenia), the Croatian Architects’ Association (project coordinator) and Oris House of Architecture, Zagreb (Croatia), the Belgrade Architects Society, Belgrade (Serbia) and the Coalition for Sustainable Development, Skopje (Macedonia). The project was aimed at fostering interdisciplinary research on the production of built environment in its social, political and cultural contexts. It encompassed the countries that succeeded former Yugoslavia, spanning the period from the inception of the socialist state until today. The topic of the researches was the way in which divergent concepts of modernization conditioned architecture, territorial transformations, and urban phenomena in socialist Yugoslavia and its successor states. Special attention is paid to critical re-reading of modernization processes and contextualization of local architectural and urban planning concepts within the framework of international evolution of architectural discourse. Unfinished Modernisations were carried out through a variety of activities: researches, 5 conferences (Zagreb, Skopje, Beograd, Split, Ljubljana), exhibitions, publications, and web-site/blog www.unfinishedmodernisations.net. The keynote speakers at the conferences included David Harvey, Vedran Mimica, Hilde Heynen, Ljiljana Blagojević, Tom Avermaete, Dietmar Steiner, Hans Ibelings, and many others. All these efforts culminated in the final exhibition in Maribor (Slovenia), the 2012 Cultural Capital of Europe. The exhibition was also shown in Belgrade (Serbia), Zadar (Croatia), and Ljubljana (Slovenia), and will travel to various international destinations."

Matej Sternen (1870–1949) is better known as an impressionist painter rather than for his restoration work, even though in his impressive career he discovered and restored a considerable number of works, especially frescos in Slovenia and Dalmatia (Croatia). His strong interest in restoration can be seen in the numerous notes he wrote about painting technologies, restoration and conservation techniques. This enriched his entire opus, as it stimulated him to try numerous painting techniques and genres, such as frescoes. Sternen was a painter who constructed his paintings very carefully, and a master in the preparation of the painting’s surface, or “the ground,” and always considered the laws of colours and their relationships and proportions to the white painted surface. In his restoration practice, working together with his close colleagues the art historians France Stele (1886–1972) and Ljubo Karaman (1886–1971), Matej Sternen actualized the principle “conserve instead of restore” that was the rule in his day. This paper is based on fieldwork data and archive sources, kept in Ljubljana, Celje, Split and Zagreb, and focuses on two important monuments — the painted ceiling in the Old Manor House in Celje (Slovenia), and a wall painting in the church of St Michael in Ston (Croatia). These two cases, which are different from both technical and methodological approaches to monument protection, clearly show Sternen’s professional expertise and practical realization of “conserve instead of restore,” which speaks in favour of preserving the original work as opposed to aggressive restoration interventions.