The Academy of Fine Arts and Design (ALUO) is the oldest Slovenian tertiary institution for painting, sculpture, restoration, design, video, photography, graphic arts and illustration, and in 2015 it is celebrating its 70th anniversary. It operates within the University of Ljubljana (UL). It was established immediately after the end of the Second World War, on 8 October 1945. With this act, the efforts over many decades of Slovenian artists then studying abroad (Vienna, Munich, Prague, and Zagreb) to establish our own academy were finally realised. During the times of post-war reconstruction and many dynamic changes in the second half of the 20th century, the Academy decisively marked the history of Slovenian art, as a large majority of the painters, sculptors, designers and restorers working in Slovenia, as well as the lecturers teaching today at the Academy were educated here. It was actively involved in all the crucial events in the history of Slovenian art. Its lecturers contributed to a rapid break with socialist realism, participated in the establishment of the Ljubljana Biennial of Graphic Arts in 1955 and made important contributions towards the development of the Ljubljana Graphic Arts School. The successes of Slovenian graphic arts in the 1960s resulted in the Ljubljana Academy becoming the study centre for Yugoslav graphic arts. The conceptualism and the OHO Group, followed by retro-avant-garde represented by the Irwin Group, were started by the Academy’s students. An important step in the efforts to professionalise and develop Slovenian design was taken in 1984 with the establishment of the Department for Design, today including the Department for Industrial Design and Applied Arts and the Department for Visual Communications Design. Since 1996, there has also been an independent Department for Restoration. The idea to organise the tertiary arts programmes of the UL in a single new building was first conceived by the rectors of three different academies at the beginning of 1946. With renewed efforts, the academies again brought forward this idea after 2004. Details as to what would be the best solution for the spatial organisation of the arts programmes at the UL are still unresolved; however, we hope to find a solution that will soon improve our working conditions and, in this way, facilitate an easier involvement in the current trends in the area of artistic practices.