If you are a longtime football fan, you certainly cannot ignore the name Ilkay Gündoğan. He is one of the best players in German football and is considered one of the legends of Borussia Dortmund and Manchester City. With his talent and successful career, Gündoğan has become a symbol for young German players. Let’s find out with Cwin through this article.

Gündoğan: From promising young star to leader of the blue half of Manchester

Ilkay Gündoğan was born in the city of Gelsenkirchen, Germany on October 24, 1990. He started his career at lower division club SV Gelsenkirchen-Hessler 06 when he was just 4 years old. However, he quickly caught the attention of big teams and joined Schalke 04’s training facility at the age of 9.

At Schalke 04, Gündoğan experienced a perfect training career. He was trained in a professional environment and had the opportunity to compete with other talented young players. Now, looking back, Ilkay Gündoğan says this was an important time that helped him grow and develop his talent.

In 2009, Gündoğan moved to VfL Bochum’s II club. Here, he was given the opportunity to play regularly and attracted the attention of Borussia Dortmund. In the summer of 2011, Gündoğan officially joined Borussia Dortmund for 4 million euros.

At Dortmund, Gündoğan quickly asserted his talent and became one of the team’s bright spots. He contributed greatly to helping Dortmund achieve the treble (winning the national cup, Bundesliga, and National Cup) in 2012. In particular, Gündoğan showed impressive performance in the 2013 Champions League final when Dortmund lost to Bayern Munich with a score of 2-1.

Besides, Gündoğan was also considered the leader of Dortmund in the following years. He made 105 appearances and scored 15 goals for Dortmund before leaving the club in 2016.

After leaving Dortmund, Gündoğan went to Manchester City for 27 million euros. Here, he continued to show impressive performance and became one of the important players in coach Pep Guardiola’s squad. Gündoğan helped Manchester City win many important titles such as the Premier League, FA Cup, and Carabao Cup.

With remarkable talent and achievements, Gündoğan was honored as the Best German Player of 2020, along with being voted into the Premier League’s outstanding squad of the 2019/20 season. Currently, he continues to play for Manchester City and is one of the indispensable pillars of this team.

Gündoğan: A shining example of perseverance, effort and enthusiasm

There is no denying that Ilkay Gündoğan is one of Germany’s most talented players. However, to become a legend, it is not simply about having talent but also about perseverance, effort and enthusiasm.

To better understand that, let’s look back at the difficulties and challenges that Gündoğan has faced during his career.

Serious injury and successful return

During a match against Armenia in 2013, Gündoğan suffered a serious back injury. After surgery and treatment, he had to take a year off from competition to recover. This caused Gündoğan to miss the opportunity to participate in the 2014 World Cup in Brazil.

The amazing thing is that Gündoğan not only returned exactly as he did before his injury, but also performed much better. He scored 15 goals in the 2015/16 season, 10 goals higher than the season before his injury.

The competition is fierce with Toni Kroos and Mesut Özil

Ilkay Gündoğan is not the lone star in the midfield play of the German national team. With the presence of two other talented players, Toni Kroos and Mesut Özil, Gündoğan had to compete fiercely for a starting spot in the German national team.

See more: Thể thao cwin

Conclude

Above are important highlights in the career of football legend Ilkay Gündoğan. From a promising young player, he became a leader for Dortmund and Manchester City, as well as a symbol for young German players.