She recently spoke out about what a huge animal lover she is.

And Salma Hayek was talking a walk on the wild side once again on Monday on the red carpet at the premiere of Septembers Of Shiraz.

The 49-year-old actress put on a busty display in a strappy tiger print dress for the event at the Museum of Tolerance in Los Angeles.

She showed off her toned arms and sexy curves in the spaghetti-strapped slip, which she teamed with simple gold sandals .

The Oscar nominee upped the glamour in a glossy plum lipstick which highlighted her dazzling white smile.

The 5ft 2in beauty wore her brunette waves loose in a centre parting.

Salma and Oscar-winner Adrien Brody, 43, star in the drama thriller based on the 2007 critically acclaimed novel The Septembers Of Shiraz by Iranian American author Dalia Sofer.

The debut novel chronicled a prosperous Iranian family during and after the 1979 Iranian Revolution that ousted the Shah of Iran and lead to the formation of an Islamic republic.

Septembers Of Shiraz premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival in September 2015 and is scheduled for release in the US on Friday.

The Mexican-American star regaled the audience of Friday's The Graham Norton Show with a story about rescuing one of the 50-odd pets residing on her Washington State ranch.

'At the time I had 10 dogs, five parrots, I had alpacas, horses, cats - and by the way, one without a tail, the other one without a leg. And they always find me, they come to me, these animals,' Hayek - born Jiménez - explained.

'We were up to 30 animals. I swore no more. And I was [filming in Bulgaria], and a little puppy who was abandoned and was gonna die...He came to me, and I couldn't help it, I picked him up.'

The Hillary Clinton supporter was forced to quickly come up with a scheme to convince her husband, Kering CEO François-Henri Pinault, to let her keep 'Ochoa.'

'So I came up with this brilliant idea to pretend that I was having an affair. And at the end I would say, "No, it's not an affair. I picked up a dog." And then he would feel better,' Salma continued.

About a minute into Hayek's rambling ruse, the 54-year-old Frenchman was on to her: 'He said to me, "Oh, please don't tell me you picked up another dog."'

The Daytime Emmy-winning director and her billionaire beau - who wed twice in 2009 - are parents to eight-year-old daughter Valentina.

The star plays the jealous Queen of Longtrellis in the 17th century fantasy horror film Tale Of Tales, which finally hits UK theaters on June 17.