Looking to stream The Gambler online? Here are your answers. The Gambler is a 2014 crime-thriller drama movie directed by Rupert Wyatt from a screenplay written by William Monahan. The film’s screenplay by Monahan is reportedly based on James Toback’s 1974 film “The Gambler” which in turn is based on Fyodor Dostoevsky’s book series of the same name.

Here’s how you can watch and stream The Gambler via streaming services such as Amazon Prime Video and Paramount Plus.

Is The Gambler available to watch via streaming?

Yes, The Gambler is available to watch via streaming on Amazon Prime Video and Paramount Plus.

The story of The Gambler revolves around Jim Bennett, a literature professor who leads a double life as a high-stakes gambler known for taking risks. However, when he catches the attention of a dangerous loan shark and owner of a gambling ring, both of whom he borrows money from and also develops a very close relationship with one of his students, Bennett is put in a situation where he must risk everything for a second chance.

The Gambler’s cast includes Mark Wahlberg as Jim Bennett, John Goodman as Frank, Brie Larson as Amy Phillips, Michael Kenneth Williams as Neville Baraka, George Kennedy as Ed, Jessica Lange as Roberta, Richard Schiff as Jeweler, Andre Braugher as Dean Fuller, and Emory Cohen as Dexter.

Watch The Gambler streaming via Amazon Prime Video

The Gambler is available to watch on Amazon Prime Video. Amazon Prime Video is an OTT subscription video-on-demand platform run by Amazon. It includes both its original content such as hits like The Boys and Invincible as well as content borrowed from other networks or studios like AMC, Universal, and Sony.

You can watch via Amazon Prime Video by following these steps:

Go to Amazon Prime Video

Select ‘Sign in’ and ‘Create your Amazon account’

Sign up for a Prime Video membership:

$8.99 per month for a standalone Prime Video membership

Watch The Gambler streaming via Paramount Plus

The Gambler is available to watch on Paramount Plus. Paramount Plus is a streaming platform owned and operated by Paramount Global. It features content drawn from Paramount-owned networks and platforms like CBS Studios, CBS Media Ventures, and Paramount Pictures. Like many streaming platforms, Paramount Plus also has its own original programming.

You can watch via the show Paramount Plus by following these steps:

Go to ParamountPlus.com

Select ‘Try It Free’

Choose your plan:

$5.99 per month or $59.99 per year (Essential)

$11.99 per month or $199.99 per year (with SHOWTIME)

Enter your personal information and create your account

The Paramount Plus Essential plan includes tens of thousands of episodes and movies, the NFL on CBS, the UEFA Champions League, 24/7 news coverage with CBS News, and limited ads.

Furthermore, the Paramount Plus with SHOWTIME plan includes all of the above, removes the ads except in limited circumstances, and also includes SHOWTIME originals, movies, and sports along with CBS live TV and college football. Nonetheless, you’re able to download shows to your mobile device.

The Gambler’s synopsis is as follows:

“Literature professor Jim Bennett leads a secret life as a high-stakes gambler. Always a risk-taker, Bennett bets it all when he borrows from a gangster and offers his own life as collateral. Staying one step ahead, he pits his creditor against the operator of an illicit gambling ring while garnering the attention of Frank, a paternalistic loan shark. As his relationship with a student deepens, Bennett must risk everything for a second chance.”

NOTE: The streaming services listed above are subject to change. The information provided was correct at the time of writing.