The Gambler came out on Christmas day of 2014 and has a run time of 111 minutes, including credits. Last November I went to go see Mockingjay Part 1 with my mother. In typical fashion, before showing the film, the theater played trailers for upcoming movies. One of those trailers was for The Gambler.

I happen to be a huge fan of Ocean’s 11. It is easily one of my favorite movies and one of the only movies, if not the only movie, I have seen at least 10 times. I could watch that film in its entirety and then immediately watch it again, that is how much I love Ocean’s 11. So when I was sitting there next to my mom last November and this trailer came up, I was interested. It seemed like this movie would be a lot of fun. A guy looses a lot of money and using the help of a love interest he gets it all back through some strategic gambling. Oh, and he’s a nice college professor.

Sadly, I was never able to see this film while it was still showing in theaters. By the time I had the chance to, after the holidays had ended, my position as a movie reviewer began and I made sure to stick with more recent releases. Now that the film has become available again, I made to sure to take the time to see it. *Insert that thing I do where I open my mouth as if I have something to say, but nothing comes out because I’m not quite sure what to say*

Let me put it this way. On IMDB there are exactly 280 reviews from both critics and the public, with the average rating being 6/10. This is the highest it is rated on any site. Metacritic has it listed as a 4/10 and Rotten Tomatoes is a bit more generous with the average rating being a 5.6/10. And honestly, after seeing this film, I would have to agree. This is the most well made bad film I seen in recent times.

The directing, the acting, even the music choice is all fantastic. In the opening gambling scene, as Mark Wahlberg as it at the table constantly doubling his money, suspenseful music is building and it really adds tension to the scene. On the occasion they also do what I love, which is when the music we are hearing is music currently playing in the movie’s universe. (For example one of the characters is listening to their ipod and when they pull the headphones out the music stops). Mark Wahlberg, Brie Larson, Jessica Lange, George Kennedy, Anthony Kelley, absolutely everybody put on an amazing performance! So what went wrong if all this was so good? Pretty much everything else.

The plot…well there really isn’t one actually. Yes, there is a story that takes place and the overall arc is easy to follow, but the movie fails (tremendously) at getting the smaller details in there. The movie starts with Wahlberg in a casino playing Blackjack. (Despite the majority of the trailer being made up of a similar scene, it’s actually not this one. Yes, that means there are two blackjack scenes which play out exactly the same way) Wahlberg starts by betting 10,000, wins, and doubles to 20,000. He wins again, doubles again, wins again, doubles again. He goes and bets everything on the roulette table and loses it all.

Ok. When seeing a movie, you expect to get something out of it. For comedies you want to laugh, for horror films you want to be scared, and for films like this you want to learn what the lesson being told is. Typically, in the first few minutes of the film it’ll become very obvious what that lesson will be. So in this film, after seeing this opening scene, I’m expecting Wahlberg to end the film having been able to control his gambling addiction. There’s just one tiny problem. That doesn’t happen. At all. I mean at all, there’s not even a hint at it. In fact Walhberg’s character doesn’t learn anything. He starts the film not knowing when to stop, and ends it the same way.

So what happens next? We see Walhberg talking to a Korean man who is upset that Walhberg didn’t bring him his money. Oh, really quick, I would call Wahlberg by his character’s name, but it was only said one time in the film and I actually forget what it was. His name is Jim, but all I saw was Mark Wahlberg. Anyways, the Korean guy is upset because Wahlberg had the money he owed and instead lost it all gambling. But what does Wahlberg say? “I’m not a gambler.”

I’m sorry, but yes, yes you are. 1. We just spent 5 minutes watching you gamble and then lose. 2. It’s the name of the movie. You are the gambler.

If the filmmakers wanted to have him say that, which he repeats about 5 times throughout the film by the way, they should have named the film something else. Especially since the actually gambling in this film takes up about 20 minutes at most. We see him play blackjack twice, then when he’s with the girl and then at the end. Three of those end the same exact way, with him losing.

Ok, ok. Here’s the basic plot. Walberg owes the Korean man money. A black guy named Neville sees how he gambled, and gives him a few tens of thousands of dollars – which is immediately lost. So now Wahlberg is in debt to the Korean man and Neville. Along with this, he is a college professor teaching in the English department. He is an a-hole. I will explain why later. In his class, one of his students, Brie Larson, clearly likes him and another, Anthony Kelley, is a star basketball player. The Korean man gives Wahlberg 7 days to get the money back, and as the days pass, Neville starts threatening him. He makes Wahlberg tell Anthony Kelley to not win the next basketball game by more than 8 points because otherwise Neville will kill Brie Larson. In the end he ends up getting the money paid back.

If you are confused, don’t worry, so was I. The film had a problem of not showing thins. It seemed they would always cut right before the important part of the scene happened. For instance, immediately after being told he has 7 days to get the money, Wahlberg goes and sees George Kennedy. Kennedy offers him the money as long as Wahlberg says, “I am not a man.” But then the film cuts away to the character later. Not only that, but with zero indication as to if he took the money or not. If I remember correctly, it cuts to him in the bathtub (which is also trying to set up something for later, that also doesn’t work) Only about 5 minutes later do we finally found out that he didn’t take the money.

I thought it was obvious since we weren’t that far into the film. Then, Wahlberg’s mom gets involved, and the opening sequence of the trailer happens. She goes to the bank with him and gets him the money he owes. This is literally halfway through the film. He’s also with Brie Larson at this point, kinda, and what does he do? He doesn’t give it to the person he owes it to, I mean, why would he do that? That would mean being reasonable and responsible. No! He goes and gambles and of course, after doubling a few times, he loses it all.

Ugh. Ok. The trailer also made it seem like there would be an actual relationship between Wahlberg and Larson. For that matter, it’s the one line she actually says in the trailer, “If I have to drag you into an illegal relationship…” But nope. In his class, he singes her out saying she is a genius. Not just pointing at her and going, “This woman is brilliant!” No, he does it in a bit of a creepy way. He constantly emphasizes how much smarter she is than everyone, and even demands her to sit in the front row “Where she belongs” whenever she comes to class. Another student disagrees and says they all have something to offer, in which Wahlberg just says that is stupid.

Hold on tough, isn’t he a teacher. Can teachers even say that? That’s exactly what the other student asked, but it was just ignored. After the classroom scene the principal of the school asks to talk with him, but it’s about something entirely unrelated. His outright rudeness in the classroom comes with no consequences. It’s not just what he said the Larson, it’s the way he acted. He straight up said none of what he is teaching matters. He told the students they don’t even care and that he and they are just wasting their time. He told them that if they are not the best, don’t even bother showing up. He actually says that. In the trailer, the switch the line.

“If you take nothing else from my class, desiring a thing cannot make you have it.” That’s not what is said though. “If you take nothing else from my class, if you are not a genius, don’t even bother trying.” (Something similar to that) The ‘Desiring a thing cannot make you have it’ quote was said to a student constantly on his phone. Which by the way, Wahlberg grabbed, smacked shut and threw down in a rude manner. Yeah, phones should be off, but still, the movie really made it seem like this guy was a terrible person.

In the middle of the movie, Wahlberg and Larson talk in his classroom and he says something I can relate to very much. After hearing this short speech, and after seeing the movie, I can’t help think the movie was made for that speech. It has almost nothing to do with anything else in the film, but it makes sense and it helps develop the character. It’s also one of the most realistic perceptions on life I’ve ever seen in a movie and I wouldn’t be surprised if that is what the writer really wanted to get across.

Here is the quote, slightly edited because of profanity –

“There was a student… just the other day… who said that my problem, if one’s nature is a problem, rather than just problematic, is that I see things in terms of victory or death, and not just victory but total victory. And it’s true: I always have. It’s either victory, or don’t bother. The only thing worth doing is the impossible. Everything else is gray. You’re born… as a man… with the nerves of a soldier, the apprehension of an angel, to lift a phrase, but there is no use for it. Here? Where’s the use for it? You’re set up to be a philosopher or a king or Shakespeare, and this is all they give you? This? Twenty- odd years of school which is all instruction in how to be ordinary… or they’ll freaking kill you, they freakin will, and then it’s a career, which is not the same thing as existence… I want unlimited things. I want everything. A real love. A real house. A real thing to do… every day. I’d rather die if I don’t get it.”

In now movie have I ever seen a more real person. I want to see the film about what he just said. You might be looking at screen confused right now, because that sounds like a depressing film, and yeah, it probably would be. I still want to see it though. It would be one of the most realistic films ever made. The story of a man living a life where he has things many would envy to have – a nice apartment, a nice car, and a stable job – yet he’s find his existence so miserable, it’s not even existing. He would rather die.

He starts the quote be talking about his conversation with Anthony Kelley who told him what his problem was. He immediately then makes point that this is his nature, so it might not be a problem, just problematic. He claims it is his nature to see the two extremes of everything, victory or death. But not just victory, total victory. It has to be the absolute best possible, because otherwise it’s not worth it. It has to be the impossible. Coming to think about it, this might be why he always goes all in on his money. With this as his philosophy, why bet only part of it? Sadly this quote takes about 10 seconds of screen time and even though the idea is repeated throughout, only now did I get it.

I find it interesting how in talking about the two extremes, he then says ‘Everything is grey’ as if they’re mixing together. The quote continues by saying how ‘you’re’ born, and how pointless it is. He talks about how you could be something great, and even then, it’s a waste. “Twenty-odd years of school which is an instruction in how to be ordinary” (no wonder I never did well) And then he says what I agree with the most, “Then it’s a career, which is not the same as existence.”

Exactly. He has amazing things, and yet he is not happy because he doesn’t have what he wants. So what does he want? “I want unlimited things. I want everything. A real love. A real house. A real thing to do… every day. I’d rather die if I don’t get it.” He realizes the waste of a life he was living. Yes, he was going out and teaching every day, but it was to students who didn’t care. And when he went home, he’d be alone. He realized he wasn’t living, and he’d rather just die, but him dying would only complicate things for those close to him, so he continues pushing on his miserable existence to live another day.

Ok, this is a lot longer than I thought it would be. I’m gonna try to finish it up tomorrow because there is a little bit more to talk about.