Maks Chmerkovskiy is a Ukrainian-born dance champion, choreographer, Broadway performer and actor widely known as one of the former professional dancers on the popular television series “Dancing with the Stars.” He has appeared on the show for 14 seasons and made it to the final round four times with two runner-up and two third place finishes. In 2014, he was paired with Olympics ice dancer Meryl Davis and won his first “Dancing with the Stars” title.

Jenna Johnson Chmerkovskiy is a 5-time U.S. National Latin Champion, U.S. National Youth 10 Dance Champion as well as a 3-time Best Dancer Winner at various Break The Floor Nationals. In 2012 she represented the United States of America at the World Latin Championships held in Beijing, China. At the age of 18 she appeared as a finalist on Season 10 of So You Think You Can Dance where she placed in the Top 4 girls. After the season, she was made Dance Captain of the 44 city SYTYCD tour. Once she returned from tour she was made an All-Star and Mentor! Jenna then appeared on ABC's hit reality television show Dancing With the Stars from seasons 18-32, winning her first mirrorball Season 26 with Adam Rippon. During Season 30 she made history with her partner, JoJo Siwa, becoming the first ever same sex pairing on the show! Through DWTS she has appeared on the Oscar stage, Live with Kelly and Michael, The Ellen Show, Late Night with James Cordon, Good Morning America, and performed numerous times at the iconic Radio City Music Hall. She has been on 7 DWTS Live Tours and was made Dance Captain for 5 of them.

Daniella Karagach is an EMMY Nominated Choreographer & Dancing with the Stars Winner.

Pasha Pashkov is a Dancing with the Stars Finalist.

Celebrating their 10 year wedding anniversary this July and had danced together for the past 15 years, accomplishing the following accolades:

United States National Professional Latin ShowDance Champions

Multiple times US National 10-Dance Champions

World Masters Professional Latin Champions

Winners of multiple prestigious International Dance Championships

Together have also choreographed for So You Think You Can Dance.