Maksim Chmerkovskiy knows Kirstie Alley.

In 2011, he was her partner on “Dancing with the Stars.”

Chmerkovskiy, a professional Latin-ballroom dancer and TV host who has dance studios in New Jersey, is in his native Ukraine, where he’s been sharing updates on the Russian invasion and conditions in the country over the last few troubled days of the conflict.

So when Alley tweeted about Ukraine, he was ready with an answer.

“I don’t know what’s real or what is fake in this war,” Alley, 71, said Friday morning in a since-deleted tweet. “So I won’t be commenting. I’ll pray instead”

Chmerkovskiy posted a reply to Alley on Instagram, where he has been sharing videos of explosions, the destruction of buildings and homes, people fleeing the country and taking up arms and other results of Russia’s military actions in recent days with his one million followers. He has also addressed the subject of Russian propaganda, which he said was “history repeating itself.”

“Dear Kirstie, We haven’t spoken in a while, but I clearly remember being right next to you while you were organizing trucks of aid during Hurricane Sandy and I remember all that you were saying to me about situations where innocent are suffering,” he wrote. “That same energy is needed right now. No one needs your prayer if you don’t know what’s real or fake.”

Chmerkovskiy, 42, was born in Odessa, Ukraine and came to New York with his family in 1994. He currently lives in Malibu, California and has also called Fort Lee home. Along with his brother, fellow “Dancing with the Stars” alum Valentin Chmerkovskiy, and their father, Aleksandr “Sasha” Chmerkovskiy, he owns the Dance with Me chain of dance studios, which has locations in Fort Lee and Glen Rock.

“To all my friends and colleagues and everyone else, let’s just be as loud as we can,” Chmerkovskiy said in one of his recent videos from Ukraine.

“I don’t want to be dramatic, but I don’t feel safe in my distant Malibu if Ukraine falls in this situation,” he said.

Chmerkovskiy previously said he had been in Ukraine for six months when Russia invaded. The celebrity dancer and “Dancing with the Stars” champion was in the country to film the Ukrainian version of the TV series “World of Dance.” He has also served as a judge on the Ukrainian version of “Dancing with the Stars,” which Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy was a contestant on in 2006.

Chmerkovskiy has been sharing updates from both outside and inside, including a Kyiv bomb shelter. He said there was a curfew from 5 p.m. to 8 a.m. during which he had to stay inside.

He has been circulating videos documenting the situation in Ukraine along with ways people can help the country and its people. He previously said he was not attempting to leave the country or head for the border because he heard it wasn’t safe.

He posted a video update Saturday from a parking deck that has become a bomb shelter.

“Kyiv is under serious attack from what I understand ... we had a crazy alarm so we all ran downstairs,” he said.

Chmerkovskiy’s next updates showed a fire at Vasylkiv Oil Depot, 25 miles south of Kyiv, which was hit by a Russian missile strike.

His wife, fellow “Dancing with the Stars” champ Peta Murgatroyd, has asked her social media followers to pray that he comes home soon. Chmerkovskiy and Murgatroyd, who married in 2017, have a 5-year-old son, Shai.

Thank you for relying on us to provide the journalism you can trust. Please consider supporting NJ.com with a subscription.