Early Years

Dorothy Dandridge was born on November 9, 1922, in Cleveland, Ohio, to Ruby Dandridge and Cyril Dandridge. Her mother was an entertainer and her father was a cabinetmaker and Baptist minister. She began her career in show business at the age of three, appearing in her mother’s act. By the age of four, she had already started performing solo and had appeared in several films.

Dorothy Dandridge was married twice, first to Harold Nicholas of the Nicholas Brothers in 1942 and then to Jack Denison in 1959. She had one daughter, Harolyn, with Harold Nicholas.

Influences

Dorothy Dandridge was heavily influenced by her mother Ruby Dandridge, who was an actress and singer in her own right. She also drew inspiration from other African American performers, including Josephine Baker, Lena Horne, and Bill Robinson.

Career

Dorothy Dandridge went on to achieve great success in her career. In 1954, she became the first African American woman to be nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actress for her role in the musical drama film, Carmen Jones. She also starred in the 1957 movie, Island in the Sun, which was the first major studio-produced film to feature an African-American in the lead role. She also became the first black woman to grace the cover of Life magazine and the first African-American to have her own television show.

Accomplishments

During her career, Dorothy Dandridge achieved many accomplishments, including becoming the first African-American woman to be nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actress, the first black woman to grace the cover of Life magazine, and the first African-American to star in a major studio-produced film. She also had her own television show, was the first black performer to be featured on the cover of The Saturday Evening Post, and was the first black woman to have her own wax museum statue.

Conclusion

Dorothy Dandridge was an African American pioneer who left an indelible mark on the entertainment industry and inspired many of today’s performers.