When Creed was still a cover band they went under the name Naked Toddler. This name came from a newspaper article that Mark Tremonti always carried in his wallet.

The name "Creed" was made up by former bass player, Brian Marshall. He named it after his previous band, Maddox Creed.

Mark Tremonti's brother, Dan Tremonti, does all the album artwork for Creed.

Before Creed signed with Windup Records they released My Own Prison under their own label called Blue Collar Records for only $6,000. Only 2,000 copies of this record were released. Some songs were a little different then the Windup versions: the song Sister had different lyrics, Illusion was called Allusion, My Own Prison has added background vocals, One has a different guitar part, Ode has added cymbals, and What's This Life For had a different intro.

Creed was the first band to have 4 number 1 singles off a debut album. They also had 3 number 1 singles off their Human Clay album, for a total of 7 consectutive #1 singles.

Creed is the first band to have 3 singles (Torn, My Own Prison, and What's This Life For) on the Billboard top 20 at the same time.

Creed has sold over 20 million copies of their 3 albums. My Own Prison has sold 5 million, Human Clay sold 10 million, and Weathered has sold 5 million.

The guy on the cover of My Own Prison is Justin Brown, a friend of the band. The picture was taken by Danial Tremonti for a photography class.

Creed's first television performance was on David Letterman. They began playing One too early and Dave made them stop so that he could finish their introduction.

Creed were the executive producers for the Scream 3 soundtrack. What If and Is This the End is featured on the CD.

There are hidden lyrics in the song Ode. No one is sure what they actually say. When fans have asked about the lyrics, Scott Stapp replied, "This is a secret we will take to the grave......sorry.....It's a band thing..."

There are three hidden images on the cover of Weathered. They are (1) a lion on the man's hand, (2) the crest in the sun, and (3) a lamb in the top of the tree. There is also an angel hidden on the back cover in the flamelike thing. Look closely to find them!