TOKYO - Nikon Corporation (Nikon) is pleased to announce that the total production of NIKKOR lenses for Nikon interchangeable lens cameras has reached 110 million* as of October, 2018.

By providing NIKKOR F lenses for SLR cameras, produced since 1959, as well as NIKKOR Z lenses for mirrorless cameras, newly introduced in 2018, Nikon continues to further enrich the NIKKOR lens lineup.

Nikon will continue to lead imaging culture by providing products that stimulate the creative intent of photographers around the world, while responding to the latest advances in imaging technologies.

*Total number of interchangeable lenses for SLR and mirrorless cameras produced by Nikon.

The NIKKOR brand

NIKKOR is Nikon's brand of photographic lenses. The NIKKOR name arose from taking "Nikko", the Romanized abbreviation for Nippon Kogaku K.K., Nikon's original name from when the company was first established, and adding "r" — a common practice in the naming of photographic lenses at the time. The NIKKOR trademark was registered in 1932, and in 1933, the large-format lens for aerial photography was introduced with the name Aero-Nikkor.

In 1959, Nikon released the Nikon F SLR camera, as well as the first NIKKOR lenses for Nikon SLR cameras, including the NIKKOR-S Auto 5cm f/2.

Currently, Nikon offers NIKKOR F lenses for digital SLR cameras, and NIKKOR Z lenses for mirrorless cameras. The total lineup currently consists of approximately 100 types of lenses that support a wide variety of applications, including fixed focal length (prime) lenses and zoom lenses that cover ultra-wide-angle to super-telephoto angles of view, fisheye lenses, and Micro lenses.

NIKKOR F lenses, since their initial introduction in 1959, have throughout their legacy of more than half a century incorporated the cutting-edge technologies of the time, for features such as aperture control, autofocus, and vibration reduction (VR). NIKKOR Z lenses are designed for Nikon mirrorless cameras for which a new, larger-diameter mount has been adopted. Further possibilities in lens design have been unlocked with the adoption of this new mount, greatly increasing capabilities in optical performance. This has allowed us to offer a variety of high-performance lenses, including the fastest lens in Nikon history*, with f/0.95.

From the initial design and development to the production and final inspection, the entire process leading to the release of a NIKKOR lens is managed in accordance with Nikon's own strict quality standards, ensuring every NIKKOR lens is of the highest quality.

*Among interchangeable lenses for Nikon cameras.

Related Links