Filmography

1993 – Last Action Hero

Last Action Hero is a 1993 American action-comedy-fantasy film directed and produced by John McTiernan. It is a satire of the action genre and its clichés, containing several parodies of action films in the form of films within the film.

The film stars Arnold Schwarzenegger as Jack Slater, a fictional Los Angeles police detective. Slater is a fictional character even within the film, the hero of the Jack Slater series of action films. Austin O'Brien costars as a boy who is magically transported into a parallel universe inhabited by Slater and the other characters in the Slater film series. Schwarzenegger also plays himself as the actor portraying Jack Slater, and Charles Dance plays an assassin who escapes from the Slater world into the real world.

The film was a financial disappointment in its theatrical release, but it has since enjoyed success on VHS and DVD. It gained a strong cult following and is generally considered one of Mctiernan and Schwarzenegger's best films.

Tina Turner makes a cameo appearance at the climax of Jack Slater III as the mayor of Los Angeles; she tries to convince Slater not to enter a hostage situation.

Director: John McTiernan

Produced by:

Robert H. Lemer

John McTiernan

Neal Nordlinger

Robert E. Relyea

Stephen J. Roth

Arnold Schwarzenegger

Running Time: 130 Minutes

Cast:

Arnold Schwarzenegger as Jack Slater / Himself

Austin O'Brien as Danny Madigan

Charles Dance as Benedict

Robert Prosky as Nick

Tom Noonan as The Ripper / Himself

Joan Plowright as Danny's teacher

Frank McRae as Lieutenant Dekker

Anthony Quinn as Tony Vivaldi

Bridgette Wilson as Whitney Slater / actress Meredith Caprice

F. Murray Abraham as John Practice

Mercedes Ruehl as Irene Madigan

Jay Nijjar as Arnold Schwarzenegger's stunt double

Art Carney, in his last film role, as Frank

Sir Ian McKellen as Death

Charles Kalani, Jr. as Tough Asian Man

Ryan Todd as Andrew Slater

Jason Smith as Danny's Friend

Sven-Ole Thorsen as Gunman at the Mob funeral who yells "Don´t shoot, he´ll drop Leo"

Danny DeVito (uncredited) as Voice of Whiskers