Bollywood superstar Shah Rukh Khan has released an action-packed teaser – described by the producers as a ‘prevue’ – for his upcoming film “Jawan” (“Soldier”).

The film has Khan playing a dual role and features him in several avatars – as a soldier, a bandaged avenger, and also in a bald persona. The teaser features Tamil-language cinema stars Nayanthara (“Annaatthe”), Vijay Sethupathi (“Vikram”) and teases a special appearance from Deepika Padukone (“Pathaan”). The cast also includes Sanya Malhotra (“Kathal: A Jackfruit Mystery”) and Priyamani (“The Family Man”).

More from Variety

Prabhas, Deepika Padukone, Kamal Haasan to Launch 'Project K' at San Diego Comic-Con (EXCLUSIVE)

Shah Rukh Khan's 'Pathaan' to Receive Bangladesh Theatrical Release (EXCLUSIVE)

Shah Rukh Khan, Salman Khan's Spy Universe Film 'Tiger vs Pathaan' to Commence in 2024, Siddharth Anand to Direct

“Jawan” is directed by Atlee, known for his three back-to-back Tamil-language blockbusters “Theri” (2016), “Mersal” (2017) and “Bigil” (2019), all starring Vijay. It is produced by Gauri Khan for Red Chillies Entertainment and features music by hitmaker Anirudh Ravichander (“Thiruchitrambalam”).

Shah Rukh Khan’s “Pathaan,” also starring Padukone and John Abraham, released in January and quickly attained blockbuster status. With a worldwide gross of $130 million, it is the biggest Indian hit of the year, fifth highest grossing Indian film of all time and the second highest Hindi-language film after “Dangal” (2016), starring Aamir Khan, which collected $311 million and is atop the all-time list. The film, a part of producer Aditya Chopra’s spy universe, also secured a historic theatrical release in Bangladesh.

Khan’s next film after “Jawan” is “3 Idiots” director Rajkumar Hirani’s “Dunki,” a co-production between billionaire Mukesh Ambani’s Jio Studios, Khan’s Red Chillies Entertainment and Hirani’s Rajkumar Hirani Films. The film is due a Christmas release.

“Jawan” is due a Sept. 7 release in the Hindi, Telugu and Tamil languages.

Watch the ‘prevue’ here:

Best of Variety

What's Coming to Disney+ in July 2023

What's Coming to Netflix in July 2023

Emmys: Reality Categories – Ryan Reynolds and Lisa Vanderpump Battle RuPaul; Will TV Academy Voters See 'Love is Blind' and Carson Daly?

Sign up for Variety’s Newsletter. For the latest news, follow us on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram.