News

Hit men

This story is from November 18, 2007

Hit men

Om Shanti Om has proved once again that nothing succeeds like Shah Rukh Khan in Bollywood. Check out the dudes who rock the box-office.

Key Highlights

Om Shanti Om has proved once again that nothing succeeds like Shah Rukh Khan in Bollywood. Check out the dudes who rock the box-office.

Om Shanti Om has proved once again that nothing succeeds like Shah Rukh Khan in Bollywood. Check out the dudes who rock the box-office.Om Shanti Om has proved once again that nothing succeeds like Shah Rukh Khan in Bollywood. Check out the dudes who rock the box-office.Om Shanti Om has proved once again that nothing succeeds like Shah Rukh Khan in Bollywood. Check out the dudes who rock the box-office.Om Shanti Om has proved once again that nothing succeeds like Shah Rukh Khan in Bollywood. Check out the dudes who rock the box-office.doweshowbellyad=0; SRK has many challengers eager to claim his crown (TOI Photo)One year. Two movies. Three, if you count a special appearance. And the crores haven’t stopped adding up. He’s never had a godfather in the industry. He has successfully stepped into the shoes of India’s biggest superstar, while the gossip mills have gone into overdrive about their rivalry. He has led a team of Indian women hockey players to such a convincing onscreen victory (Chak De! India) that the government has had to sit up and take notice.

Three months later, he won over the hottest young thing on the screen today, and set the box-office ablaze with Om Shanti Om. Somewhere in between, he also balle balled to Dil Da Mamla for buddy Sajid’s debut film. Can Shah Rukh Khan be anything but the betaaj badshah of Bollywood. “Conviction, honesty and commitment — Shah Rukh has them all,” says movie critic Indu Mirani. “Whatever role he chooses to play, he gives it his all. That’s what makes SRK so special,” she adds.

“Overseas, he’s a lottery. In the multiplexes, he’s an entertainer... Though the majority of SRK’s big banner films don’t work in the interiors, he still manages to command mass appeal,” says Delhi distributor Sanjay Mehta.

Director’s cut - “His personality and charisma can light up a room and, more often than not, he has the audience eating out of his hand. Yet, Shah Rukh is humble as well as meticulous,” says Chak De! India director Shimit Amin. “Having done theatre, TV and offbeat films, his range of roles is ever expanding. And every time he’s giving a shot, it’s evident that he’s done his homework.” No wonder he tops the class this year, every year.

Cut to June 2007. When we thought the Bollywood year belonged to eternal swinger Spider-Man, evergreen South superstar Rajinikanth in Boss or, perhaps, a singer who brought caps back into fashion (Aap ka Surroor). Hidden somewhere in that lot was a sexy funjabi boy, romancing an NRI kudi.

Whether it was singing a love ballad in a sarson ka khet (Namaste London), crooning a toddler to sleep (Heyy Babyy) or unearthing spirits (Bhool Bhulaiyaa), one man did it all and is the crown prince of Bollywood this year. Put your hands together for the original khiladi, the man who has rocked the foreign box-office and is, perhaps, Hindi cinema’s only real action hero... Akshay Kumar himself is keeping a low profile, preferring to let his movies do the talking. Currently shooting for Vipul Shah’s Singh Is King on the Gold Coast, Akki is raking it in... and how! “He’s the one actor who has been consistent for the last 10 years or so but is only getting his due now,” says Mirani. “Akshay is dependable, the masses adore him, the classes love his looks and the NRI audience identifies with the roles he selects. No wonder everything he touches turns to gold.”

“Akshay is asli hero material,” says Mehta. “Over the years his stock has grown. Today when comedy as a genre is hot, he has turned out to have the best comic timing of them all. And Akshay has achieved all his success minus big banner films. Not part of any film camp, he’s the proverbial dark horse who has raced ahead.” Coming up is Welcome, SinghIs King and Yash Raj’s next. Now that’s what you call Tashan!

Director’s cut - “Akshay Kumar is one of India’s highest paid actors today and, trust me, no director pays to make a loss,” says Namaste London director Vipul Shah. “All I can say is the more Akshay has grown, the more grounded he has become. He has the looks, the moves, the physique, the comic timing... men envy him, women want to romance him, kids love him... he is a complete actor.”

He opened the year with what was supposed to be the ultimate tribute to love. But Salaam-e-Ishq sank without a splutter, taking with it the hopes of thousands of Salman Khan fans. Then he came back opposite a lehenga-clad firang in Marigold, a zara hatke film that failed to create more than a ripple at the BO. But Sallu’s most successful pairing this year has been with Chi Chi — Partner celebrated the 10th David Dhawan-Salman Khan movie.

“Plus people always root for the bad boy and Salman’s off screen persona carries forward that idea,” says Mirani. “He’s one actor who finds acceptance across the board. His naughty boy personality off screen pulls the fans to theatres each time,” says Mehta. Also seen in Saawariya this year, Salman has spent most of 2007 being talked about for his newfound love: art. Making his mark on canvas, the actor seems to be brushstrokes ahead of all competition.

Director’s cut - “Comedy is one genre that works all the time and if you have a personal rapport with Salman, he is the ultimate with comic timing,” says Dhawan. “He is a good person with a strong human side. Trustworthy and honest, his understanding of the role is always complete. Plus, he is self-assured. Probably the only actor who is never insecure sharing screen space with others.”

Coming up! Aamir’s Taare Zameen Par... and Ajay Devgan in Halla Bol. Of the new stars, Neil Nitin Mukesh and Ranbir Kapoor deserve top honours. Will they shine on? Keep reading....

P.S.- Watch out for Shahid Kapoor, who after Vivah (’06) had another sleeper hit this year with Jab We Met. He’s got the dard-e-disco!

anubha.sawhney@timesgroup.com

End of Article

FOLLOW US ON SOCIAL MEDIA