1990

Lizzie was born on Thanksgiving, the eldest child of supercouple parents Beth Raines and Phillip Spaulding.

1991

Beth and Phillip married on Valentine’s Day and moved with Lizzie to Arizona.

1997

Phillip moved back to Springfield, determined to claim his share of Spaulding Enterprises. Beth and Lizzie remained in Arizona until late in the year, when they joined Phillip at the Spaulding mansion. There, Lizzie made friends with her grandfather Alan’s girlfriend, the dangerous Annie Dutton. Lizzie hoped for her parents to be reunited and resented Phillip’s romance with Harley Cooper.

1998

Ignoring her father’s involvement with Harley and her mother’s romance with Carl Stevens, Lizzie continued to believe her parents would reconcile. When Lizzie witnessed Carl threaten her mother with a gun, Lizzie shot Carl dead to protect Beth. At first Beth tried to hide Lizzie’s involvement in the shooting, but Beth eventually attempted to flee Springfield with her daughter. However, Rick Bauer caught Lizzie and Beth on the way out of town and called Phillip. After confessing everything to Phillip and Harley, Lizzie was sent away to a psychiatric facility.

1999

Lizzie and the other children of Springfield were abducted by Nursery Rhyme Stalker Holly Reade. Although Lizzie was saved from Holly by Annie, Phillip began to worry about the growing bond between Lizzie and Annie. Ignoring her father’s concerns, and upset by her mother’s new relationship with Jim Lemay, Lizzie ran away with Annie. Alan and India von Halkein tracked them down, and recovered Lizzie. Upon returning home to Springfield, Beth and Phillip vowed that Lizzie would never feel ignored again.

2000

Lizzie’s soon-to-be stepsister Susan Lemay noticed that Lizzie was ill, but promise to stay quiet until after Beth and Jim married. Shortly after the wedding, Lizzie was diagnosed with leukemia. Doctors identified Edmund Winslow as a bone marrow match, but Phillip was reluctant to ask for Edmund’s help. A pregnant Beth decided to induce labor so the baby could serve as a donor. After the transplant, Lizzie’s condition slowly improved. Meanwhile, Beth learned that her new baby was fathered by Phillip, not her boyfriend Jim. Jim died shortly before Christmas in a fire, but managed to rescue Lizzie and baby James from the burning house before being overcome by the flames.