Dear Friend,

Welcome to “Kansas Common Sense.” Thanks for your continued interest in receiving my weekly newsletter. Please feel free to forward it on to your family and friends if it would interest them.

Pursuing Answers for Kansas Veterans from VA Secretary Shinseki

During a Senate Veterans’ Affairs Committee this week, I questioned the Secretary of the Veterans Administration (VA) General Eric Shinseki about critical issues that matter to veterans in Kansas and across the country. Rural health care and access to care presents real challenges for veterans in Kansas, which is why I am committed to holding the VA accountable for keeping its promises to all our nation’s veterans when they return home. In particular, I highlighted with the Secretary the ongoing struggles of Kansas veterans in the communities of Liberal and Topeka.

The fact that the Liberal CBOC has had to wait for a physician for more than two years is appalling. Candidates have come and gone since 2012 and the Veterans’ Integrated Services Network (VISN) continues to recruit with no success. Additionally, the Topeka VA recently closed its emergency room services, claiming they have a lack of physicians to staff an emergency room. Veterans who show up at the VA hospital in Topeka are being told, "we have no emergency room; you need to go to another hospital." I am frustrated that the VA has yet to find the solution to the lack of physicians and other mid- level professionals within the system in rural America, and I will continue to press Secretary Shinseki on these issues until there is a solution.

One step in the right direction is a rural health program I led in the House of Representatives which was adopted to create new opportunities for those underserved by the VA health system. Project ARCH (Access Received Closer to Home), a Congressionally-authorized pilot program implemented by the Veterans Health Administration (VHA), allows veterans to access care from non-VHA community providers that are closer to where a veteran lives. Project ARCH gives veterans access to health care options and services regardless of where they live in our communities around the country.

To make certain Project ARCH endures beyond the three-year pilot that expires in September 2014, I recently introduced the Veterans Health Care Access Received Closer to Home Act of 2014. Analysis shows that more than 90 percent of veterans who received primary care services through Project ARCH were “completely satisfied” with the care, and cited significantly shortened travel times. If reauthorized, the ARCH program would continue to offer cost-effective, quality health care services for veterans who may not have sought VA health care before, as well as services closer to home for those who do not have immediate access to VA hospitals or outpatient clinics. The legislation not only extends the life of the program; it also includes enhancements to expand access among our veteran population and throughout our VISN communities.

During the hearing, I made it very clear to Secretary Shinseki that I am dedicated to working with the VA to expand the ARCH program, which is why I sought his commitment to reviewing and sharing a VA report on Project ARCH that will impact the program’s future. I plan to hold Secretary Shinseki to his word when he stated he would have the report by sunset that Wednesday and I look forward to the opportunity to discuss the findings with him and his staff so more rural veterans can benefit from this successful program. Click here to watch an excerpt from the hearing.

Seeking Obamacare Fairness for Individuals and Families

This week, I sponsored S. 2106, the Freeing Americans from Inequitable Requirements (FAIR) Act, legislation introduced by Senator Deb Fischer of Nebraska to require the administration to exercise basic fairness when implementing Obamacare. Specifically, the FAIR Act would provide relief under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) for all individuals and families by delaying enforcement of the law’s individual mandate penalty whenever the White House delays the employer mandate. While the Administration has twice moved unilaterally to provide businesses temporary relief from the ACA in an election season, President Obama continues to disregard the problems this law is causing for individuals and families. This treatment is grossly unfair for the millions of Americans facing the burden of increased health insurance costs in addition to the ACA’s new individual mandate tax. I believe the entire law should be repealed to protect individuals, families and businesses from the disasters created by Obamacare. In the meantime, the FAIR Act would make certain individuals and families are offered the same relief already granted to businesses. Click here to read more about this bill.

Insisting on Administration Accountability on Obamacare Implementation

On Thursday, I again called on U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Secretary Kathleen Sebelius to answer questions about the true costs of implementing Obamacare. As the top Republican member of the Senate Appropriations health subcommittee, which has funding jurisdiction over HHS and most of its sub-agencies, I am committed to making sure the Department is held accountable for the way it spends taxpayer dollars.

Congress asked the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) to provide details on both Obamacare funding sources and activities in its congressional justification for the agency’s 2015 budget request. In response, CMS released a less-than-transparent congressional justification that failed to include any information on how Obamacare funds are being used. CMS’ justification provided incomplete and ambiguous figures that do not illustrate the entire funding picture, while ignoring Congress’ intent under the request. It is critically important that we have a full understanding of the costs associated with the Affordable Care Act, including the cost effects of the numerous delays relating to the ACA’s implementation, as well as the costs of implementing the federal Exchange and addressing the technical ‘glitches’ that have plagued the system for months.

I first contacted Secretary Sebelius requesting a full accounting of the true costs of Obamacare implementation on October 24, 2013. I remain committed to making certain the Administration is held accountable for its use of taxpayer dollars, especially considering the systemic problems plaguing Obamacare implementation. Please click here to read my March 13, 2014, letter to Secretary Sebelius.

Discussing Polio Eradication with Bill Gates

This week, I met with Bill Gates, co-founder of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, to discuss initiatives to address poor health and extreme poverty in developing countries, including the Global Polio Eradication Initiative. The Foundation collaborates with the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and private partners such as Rotary International to eradicate polio across the globe. This collaboration has resulted in polio declining by more than 99 percent, from more than 350,000 cases annually in 1988 to fewer than 250 cases reported December 2012. As the Ranking Member on the Senate Appropriations Health Subcommittee, I have the opportunity to help shape priorities of the CDC and other health programs. I commend Bill Gates for his Foundation’s leadership in eradicating polio across the globe, and, as a Rotarian, I share his strong commitment to ridding the world of this terrible disease. Today only a handful of countries in the world still face endemic polio. With continued commitment and determination from groups like the Gates Foundation and Rotary International, together we can put an end to this cruel disease. In addition to polio eradication, I have worked with the Foundation as Co-Chair of the Senate Hunger Caucus. The Foundation supports agricultural development as a means of fighting hunger in developing countries. Click here to see a photo from our visit.

General Aviation Pilot Protection Act

On Tuesday, I joined Senators Pat Roberts and John Boozman of Arkansas in introducing the General Aviation Pilot Protection Act. This bill would require the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to reform general aviation medical standards to support capable pilots while maintaining robust safety standards.

Current law requires pilots flying certain small aircraft to have a third-class medical certificate. Unfortunately, thousands of pilots are leaving the industry each year, in part due to the costly and time-consuming process of obtaining this certificate. This legislation builds on the success of FAA’s Sport Pilot rule, adopted in 2004, allowing pilots to fly many types of small, light aircraft without a third class medical certificate, but still mandates that all pilots undergo flight reviews and physical and cognitive evaluations every two years.

General aviation is the largest industry in Kansas, generating nearly $3 billion in annual exports. By making it easier and more affordable for pilots to start flying and continue to fly, the General Aviation Pilot Protection Act will fuel the continued economic growth of this industry in Kansas. Click here to learn more.

Lions Clubs International

Communities across our state are strengthened by the Kansans who participate in civic organizations. Lions Clubs work to make Kansas communities strong, and I have been a member of Kansas Lions Clubs for 35 years. Last week, I had the pleasure of meeting with a delegation from Lions Clubs International. With 1.35 million members across 206 countries, Lions Clubs International is the world’s largest service club organization. In Kansas alone, we have more than 270 clubs. As I travel across our state, hospitality and friendship are always extended to me by Lions Club members – not because I am a Member of Congress, but because I am a fellow Lion.

During fall 2012, the President signed into law legislation I authored to permit the U.S. Treasury to mint $1 silver coins in honor of the Lions Clubs International 100th Anniversary. The law costs nothing to taxpayers, as the sale price includes the cost of designing and issuing the coins. The coins will be available for purchase starting in 2017, to celebrate Lions Clubs International's centennial.

Kansas Farm Bureau Visits D.C.

As always it was good to have Kansas Farm Bureau (KFB) in Washington this week. KFB represents grassroots agriculture and supports farm families who earn their livings in a changing industry. I often tell folks in Washington that we live a special way of life in Kansas, and I enjoyed being able to visit with so many farmers and ranchers who are committed to and actively involved in preserving agriculture in our state for the next generation. During their visit, they visited all 100 Senate Offices and educated Senators and staff about agriculture in Kansas. Their effort to engage and educate is needed and does not go unnoticed by Members of Congress from other states.

This Farm Bureau trip is bitter-sweet as I learned Steve Baccus, Kansas Farm Bureau President, will retire in December after serving the organization for 17 years. Thanks to Steve for all his service to KFB and agriculture. He has been a great leader who has been so helpful to the farmers and ranchers of KFB. Click here to see a photo.

Kansas Agriculture and Rural Leadership

This week I was able to spent time with the twelfth Kansas Agriculture and Rural Leadership (KARL) class. KARL is a nonprofit, educational organization dedicated to developing leaders for agriculture, business and rural communities. They were in Washington learning and educating Members of Congress and agencies about rural America and issues that agriculture is facing. I was inspired by this group of talented and dedicated Kansans who are sacrificing time away from work and family to help preserve rural America and agriculture for the next generation.

Questioning Secretary of Transportation About Future of FAA Control Towers and Aircraft Certification

Department of Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx testified Thursday in front of the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Transportation, Housing and Urban Development, to answer questions from myself and other members of the Subcommittee regarding President Obama’s FY 2015 budget request.

In January, Congress passed an “omnibus” spending package to set overall federal government spending levels for two years. Included in this legislation is $140 million to fully fund the FAA Contract Tower Program – one of the most successful and cost-effective programs within the FAA, and vital to aviation safety nationwide. Unfortunately, the President’s budget request made no mention of the Contract Tower Program, which enjoys widespread, bipartisan support in both houses of Congress.

Thankfully, when I questioned Secretary Foxx on this omission, he confirmed that the necessary funds are indeed included in the President’s budget. Secretary Foxx further expressed his strong interest in the program and commitment to keeping rural communities connected to a 21st century economy. Without the Contract Tower Program, which includes eight Kansas airports, many small and rural communities would not enjoy the clear safety benefits these towers provide. I will be sure to hold Secretary Foxx and the Administration to their pledge to stand by this important program.