In 2014 I founded WAVCi (Willems Anti Virus Consultancy International), a small Belgian based company, which is specialized in giving lectures, keynotes and workshops all over the world. During the past three decades I have given presentations, lectures or keynotes in over 40 countries in 5 continents around the world. You can find all the topics I talk about at the ‘My keynotes and lectures’ page. Please contact one of the speakers agencies mentioned below if you are interested to hear and watch one of my keynotes. Alternatively you can contact me as well.

The site and name ‘WAVCi’ exists since 1995. It is one of the oldest security sites on the web. www.wavci.com redirects nowadays to this site.

I’m also the owner of www.anti-virus.be , www.malware.be , www.anti-malware.be (all redirecting to this site) and my old not-updated site www.anti-malware.info (with a large amount of old interviews, articles and pictures).

Over the past four decades, I’ve collaborated extensively within the cyber security sector, engaging with a diverse array of entities—from prominent security vendors to major industry organizations, CERTs, universities, and law enforcement agencies.

Since 2010, I’ve been serving as a Security Evangelist and Global Security Officer at G DATA CyberDefense, headquartered in Bochum, Germany. G DATA made history in 1987 by developing the world’s inaugural antivirus software. Presently, G DATA defends their customers against an array of cyber threats utilizing cutting-edge software, AI technologies, and comprehensive services. Moreover, they provide online security awareness training to teach safe practices among employees.

Before joining G DATA, I held the position of Security Evangelist at Kaspersky, a leading cyber security technology firm headquartered in the UK with Russian roots. Kaspersky boasts an advanced suite of security solutions aimed at promoting ‘cyber-immunity’.

Preceding my tenure at Kaspersky, I served as a Security Technology Expert at Westcon-Comstor (NOXS, Data Alert), a renowned global security technology solution provider and IT distributor specializing in cutting-edge solutions.

Read My Lips proposes a vast choice of Belgian high quality speakers and moderators who inform their public and are a source of inspiration. Read My Lips thereby contributes to the quality of public debates. Read My Lips attaches huge importance to recruit speakers who can propose a strong and fascinating story to their public. Read My Lips is able to add value to events and take them to the next level. Their professional speakers and moderators tell fascinating stories, provide captivating presentations, and convey tailor-made messages to the audience.

My first very good Speakers Office …

A-Speakers is an award winning Bureau with a global focus. They are one of the world’s largest speakers bureaus with a focus on growth and service. A-Speakers has experienced continuous growth and now serves several thousand keynotes every year. They have been named Best Speakers Agency in local markets and have won multiple Entrepreneurial Awards. They always strive to serve speakers and clients with stellar service. They aim to secure the best and most suitable speakers for all there clients.

Being a selfstanding term now, it stood originally for European Institute for Computer Antivirus Research. However EICAR is now busy in the general IT Security field. EICAR together with the Computer Antivirus Research Organization (CARO) developed the EICAR Test File (an industry standard) to test the response of computer antivirus (security) programs. Instead of using real malware, which could cause real damage, this test file allows people to test anti-virus software without having to use a real computer virus.

I’m co-founder of the organization in 1991 and a member of the board since May 2005.

The Anti-Malware Testing Standards Organization (AMTSO™) was founded in May 2008 as an international non-profit association that focuses on addressing the global need for improvement in the objectivity, quality and relevance of anti-malware and security testing methodologies.

I was a member of the board from May 2012 until July 2019.

Since 2023 I’m on the Advisory Board of the ThreatList (formerly The WildList by Joe Wells) which is now owned by AMTSO.

In October of 2013 I published my first book in Belgium and the Netherlands, titled ‘Cyberdanger’ (Cybergevaar). It’s published by Lannoo. The book gives an overview of all online dangers and shows you how to arm yourself against them. Viruses, spam, hacktivism and even blatant cyber

wars between countries. Voting, paying bills, ordering tickets online… How safe is it really? How can you outsmart cyber criminals?

Read all there is to know about the present, past and future of cybercrime.