Rental unit in Bochum Mitte

4.87 out of 5 average rating, 183 reviews4.87 (183)

Apartment at the city park

Beautiful apartment half under the roof with a view of the park. Parking at the house. The access from the motorway is super easy. Surrounded by greenery and yet only a 10-minute walk to the city center. Planetarium, Starlight, Stadium, Bermuda Triangle, Catholic railway station (cultural site), playhouse, shopping - all within walking distance. There are a few nearby recommended restaurants. For jogging, walking, pedal boating or visiting the zoo you only have to cross the road.

Rental unit in Hattingen

4.97 out of 5 average rating, 114 reviews4.97 (114)

Quiet modern apartment in the countryside

Cozy and lovingly furnished apartment in the countryside with wallbox. The 36 sqm apartment is located in a 2 family house where we and a daughter with child live. The bathroom has a shower and toilet, as well as a washing machine and a laundry closet. The living room is connected to the sleeping area ( a double bed), visually separated by a sideboard with TV. The kitchen contains all kitchen appliances such as dishwasher, stove, microwave, coffee maker and other accessories.

Rental unit in Bochum Mitte

4.96 out of 5 average rating, 228 reviews4.96 (228)

A wonderful, modern flat in the heart of Bochum

The flat is slightly bigger than 30m2 and comes with a living-/sleeping-area, a kitchen and a bathroom. The whole furniture is quite new and you can find all you need in here. Fast Wi-Fi is included, the bed is 1,40m x 2,00m and the kitchen is fully equipped. There is a 40" TV with Netflix, which you can use for free. You can find supermarkets, restaurants, bars and public transport within walking distance, the beautiful Westpark is just around the corner!

Loft in Bochum Mitte

4.94 out of 5 average rating, 138 reviews4.94 (138)

large light-flooded loft in the heart of the city

my beautiful, light-flooded old building apartment with impressively high ceilings and very spacious rooms is located right in the center, in a small quiet side street. 700 meters from the main train station, 50 meters from the pedestrian zone. Metro and S-Bahn as well as cafes, restaurants and supermarkets are in the immediate vicinity. i live in the neighborhood house, so my address is stored as a contact.

Rental unit in Wattenscheid

4.95 out of 5 average rating, 151 reviews4.95 (151)

Gabrieles apartment in Eppendorf

We are in the heart of the Ruhr area and yet in the countryside with village character. Easy access to public transport - S-Bahn and bus lines about 5 minutes away. Bermuda 3 Corner, Century Hall, Mining Museum and downtown Bochum are practically on your doorstep and within a short time. Zeche Zollverein, the CentrO Oberhausen, the Arena auf Schalke and the BVB Stadium are easily accessible by car.

Rental unit in Wattenscheid

5 out of 5 average rating, 156 reviews5 (156)

Large apartment in Bochum-Wattenscheid

It is a renovated, newly furnished apartment, which with the size of 150sqm offers both families and friends who want to explore our Ruhr area enough space and retreats. Quiet and well-behaved pets are also welcome, please check with us when booking. Smoking and partying is not allowed. The apartment has 3 bedrooms with 6 beds, we do not accept more than 6 guests.

Rental unit in Bochum Mitte

4.96 out of 5 average rating, 49 reviews4.96 (49)

Apartment for up to 4 people

Cozy 2 room apartment(45 sqm) on the 2nd floor with balcony overlooking the Mining Museum. There are all the important points of contact (HBF, Bermuda Triangle, Schauspielhaus, etc.) – this makes planning your stay easy. I would like to politely point out that the reception of guests in the rented apartment is not allowed.

Rental unit in Bochum Süd

4.97 out of 5 average rating, 182 reviews4.97 (182)

Apartment near Ruhr-Universität 1

We offer two fully, high quality and identically furnished apartments in our attic. These have a bedroom with two single beds, a kitchen-living room and shower room with toilet. Ruhr-Universität, Deutsches Anwaltsinstitut (Vita Campus), BioMedizinPark (IFK, Aesculap Akademie) can be reached on foot in 10 to 15 minutes.

Rental unit in Bochum Süd

4.9 out of 5 average rating, 21 reviews4.9 (21)

Comfortable 1 room apartment

The newly renovated 1-room holiday apartment is a cosy and modern retreat. The living and sleeping area is cleverly combined and offers all the amenities you need for a comfortable stay. A comfortable double bed invites you to relax. A large flat screen TV offers entertainment options and is ideal for cozy evenings.

Rental unit in Bochum Mitte

4.85 out of 5 average rating, 254 reviews4.85 (254)

Cozy DG room in the heart of Bochum

The small (approx. 12 m²) mansard apartment (3rd floor) is centrally located near the German Mining Museum and is suitable for tourists as well as for all other visitors to the city (trade fair, football, university...). In addition to German, we are also speaking English.