Bochum is a blue collar city with a newfound passion for art, culture and cuisine. Once an industrial powerhouse, today Bochum is a cosmopolitan playground. Dine at chef-driven restaurants, visit engaging museums and discover a constellation of theatres and live music venues.

Things to do in Bochum

Dive into Bochum’s industrial past at the German Mining Museum. It charts the city’s past as a hub for mining and steel production. Check out the above-ground exhibits and descend into the subterranean mine, then climb the spiral staircase up the tower for sweeping views over the city and surrounding countryside.

Dress up for a night at the Starlight Express Theatre. The enormous theatre occupies a former warehouse and has been hosting performances of Andrew Lloyd Webber's hit musical since 1988. It’s one of the longest-running musicals in Europe and will dazzle you with a huge three-tiered racetrack featured in the Guinness Book of Records.

Admire modern masterpieces from the 20th and 21st centuries at Kunstmuseum Bochum. There’s a special focus on Czech Cubism, as well as artists from former Eastern Bloc countries like Lithuania and Estonia. You’ll also see works by heavyweights like Francis Bacon and Gerhard Richter.

Meet animals from Asia, Australia and beyond at Tierpark & Fossilium Bochum Zoo. The park is home to hundreds of species, including ring-tailed lemurs, Humboldt penguins, Seychelles giant tortoises and more. Time your visit to coincide with an animal feeding. The playful meerkats are always fun to watch!

Step aboard a beautifully restored parlour car that once transported Queen Elizabeth II at the Eisenbahnmuseum Bochum. The museum showcases more than 100 steam trains, many in excellent working order. On weekends, a vintage shuttle transports visitors between the museum and the city centre.

Getting around Bochum

Bochum is pedestrian-friendly and easy to get around on foot or using public transport. Buses, trams and underground trains operate across the city. Bochum is in North Rhine-Westphalia, a 30-minute drive from Dortmund and 20 minutes from Essen.