So, you want to locate your company in Bochum or enlarge your existing company, relocate or modernise, save resources, optimize processes, found a start-up, apply for funding, find networks and get comprehensive advice as well? Then you’ll be looking for a skilful partner to help you with all this. That’s where we come in.

We create opportunities and have lots of space, we open doors for you and arrange contacts, we produce ideas, develop concepts and help start-ups. We put our heart and soul into helping you and we’ll never let you down. We at the Bochum Office of Economic Development will support you with our know-how and our passion. Your success is very close to our hearts.

Location. Location. Location.

Bochum is right in the middle of it all - in the middle of Germany, in the middle of NRW and in the middle of the Ruhr Region. Bochum’s companies benefit from this in many ways: the markets are huge, the connections are fast and the networks are effective.

Companies

More than 15,000 other firms are already based here, so you are certainly in great company in Bochum. Large corporations as well as small and medium-sized companies - they all appreciate Bochum’s excellent conditions for production, services, retail and small businesses and skilled trades.

Universities

Bochum is a City of Science. The Ruhr University and six other universities make up the “UniverCity”, strengthening research and development for the companies here. Scientific know-how at the cutting edge: in Bochum of course!

Students

More than 56,000 students make use of the lecture-theatres, seminar rooms, libraries and canteens at Bochum’s universities. Your benefit: the graduates of today are the successful managers of tomorrow.

The real estate

Commercial sites and premises don’t have to cost the world. Entrepreneurs are delighted to find a large selection of attractive sites and properties in very good locations. For sale or to let. We’ve certainly got plenty of room for innovation and growth.

Lots of green

Have you heard about how green the Ruhr Region is? 40% of the City of Bochum is made up of green spaces! And that means lots of room and opportunities for recreation and leisure activities. On foot, by bike or even by boat.

Culture

From Bochum’s Schauspielhaus theatre and several independent theatres to a musical on roller skates, from Bochum’s Jahrhunderthalle to the RuhrCongress Centre: culture is everywhere in Bochum.

Venues for your events

Bochum’s central location makes it easy to get to from all points of the compass so it’s ideal for meetings, conferences and congresses. Venues like the Jahrhunderthalle Bochum or the RuhrCongress Centre have already made a name for themselves as popular places for communicating and meeting people and they attract visitors from well beyond the region’s borders.

Home

This is somewhere you and your family can call home. Bochum has affordable housing near the city centre, but with plenty of peace and quiet. There are lots of day-care centres, schools and sports clubs for the kids. Bochum’s Music School is one of the most respected in NRW. Family-friendly structures, great public transport and fantastic shopping centres – for example at the RuhrPark – all make Bochum a lovable and liveable place to live.

If you would prefer – either for the short or long term – to let rather than buy your company’s new premises, then speak to us. Because Bochum has a large stock of letting properties for a wide range of uses. Let us know what you are looking for and we will find the right solution for you!

Whether you just need a small office for a start-up, a large workshop or a production hall, we will arrange premises to meet your needs. In the Energy Efficiency Centre in Gerthe-Süd for example, we have premises ranging between 19 and 280 square metres. Or if you are looking for the complete individual solution? Then tell us exactly what you need and we will develop a suitable property on the basis of your requirements. The advantage for you is that your capital commitment can be particularly low. This is also the way the Centre for IT Security was set up, guaranteeing the highest levels of flexibility and security.

For young companies in particular, it really makes sense to share high cost facilities with other companies in the same field. In such cases we create the background conditions and the infrastructure, just like we have done in the BioMedizinZentrum at the Ruhr-University campus, where several companies share the clean room facilities.