Editor’s note: Good things happen even in the worst of times. Three years ago, the world as we knew it shifted from its axis as COVID-19 brought on a statewide stay-at-home lockdown. Thousands of North Texas businesses fell into pandemic oblivion. Other owners faced down their companies’ near-death experiences and came out in better shape today. This is one in a series of stories about five such business owners.

***

In a recent seven-day span, Fort Worth’s Pat Green played to packed audiences at renowned music venues in New York City and Nashville.

First up was Terminal 5 in Hell’s Kitchen, followed by the historic Ryman Auditorium. These big-league country gigs are part of a barnstorming tour he launched last year.

“There’s nothing more fun than singing in front of big crowds in New York City, Washington, D.C., and Boston when you come from Texas,” he said. “These are a bunch of people who you didn’t expect. It was incredible.

“And the Ryman is the mother church of country music — ground zero for most of us my age or older,” said Green, who turns 51 next month.

Nashville’s heralded performance venue was home to the Grand Ole Opry for more than 30 years before the show moved to the Opry House in 1974.

“I’m sure there are a lot of people coming up in country music right now who don’t really know about the Ryman or who Loretta Lynn, George Jones, Waylon Jennings or Johnny Cash are,” Green said with a note of disdain. “They’ve heard of them for sure, but they don’t really know them.”

The Grammy-nominated singer-songwriter is credited with being a founding member of Texas country music with a true-to-himself style.

“I’m a disciple of Willie Nelson,” Green said. “I was made to sing country music.”

By that he means performing in front of appreciative audiences. His loyal throng has bought millions of records, including albums Wave on Wave released nearly two decades ago and Home, which came out in 2015.

_________________________

Read other stories in this series

Dallas couple resuscitates Premier Transportation with a COVID-inspired tune up

A presidential visit helps Dallas’ popular Rise soufflé restaurant rise again

D-FW’s Benny Black back in the fast lane converting Mercedes vans into mini-RVs

Couple shocked Texas State Fair, found sweet success with South Dallas restaurant

_________________________

Since February, Green and I’ve had numerous exchanges over the phone and via texts. There’s no star bravado to him. Getting him talking about COVID and his band turns retrospectively somber.

Members of his band were going broke and Green sank into an impenetrable depression.

“These were the darkest days of my life, by far,” he said, while navigating a neighborhood Starbucks drive-through for an evening cappuccino with three shots of espresso. “It nearly killed me. I don’t do well sitting around. It’s not healthy for me to be sedentary. I’m better off when I’m working all the time.”

Related:Country musician Pat Green stays true to his brand on his first studio LP since 2015

‘A spiritual experience’

When COVID hit, indoor in-person concerts were outlawed. Green and his band played on an elevated stage in the parking lot at Globe Life Field with fans sitting atop trucks and cars three months after the lockdown. That was hardly the intimate venue he and his fans had come to expect.

“I have — and I’m about to have ‘had’ — a chair in my den that I sat in and wasted away,” he said after pausing for a swig of his fully leaded beverage and a bite of croissant. “That’s the only way I can put it. I sat, and I sat and I sat.”

His wife, Kori, threatened to burn the chair with him sitting in it. “I knew she wasn’t going to kill me,” he said laughing about his wife of nearly 23 years. “But at the same time, if you’d ever met her, you wouldn’t necessarily be sure.”

Green has been making music for a living since 1995.

“Twenty-seven years is a long time to be singing for your supper,” he said, this time from his home in West Fort Worth. “I was never a hit-the-gas, put-out-another-record guy. When I was working for RCA and some other record labels, I was forced to do what they asked me to. After I got off the major record labels and became more independent again, I put out a record when I wanted to.”

COVID turned the turntable on that. Going into 2020, pandemic storm clouds were gathering on the horizon.

“But I’m an eternal optimist,” Green said, this time on the phone from his home. “I just don’t think that everything is going to be as bad as everybody says it is. I’ve missed on that account many, many times, but I have gotten it right many times, too.

“Then one show after another, and another and another was canceled. I finally realized that the entire year was going to cancel out. 2020 was just not going to happen.”

The glass-half-full guy saw an empty one. That well-worn chair became his dome of silence. And Kori finally issued her edict.

“I needed to get my band some money,” he said. “They were going broke not working. I didn’t feel good about just letting them sit there.”

Green gathered his bandmates and trusted friends at his second home in Steamboat Springs, Colo., thinking they’d enjoy the snow even if they didn’t get their creative synapses jumpstarted.

“We kanoodled happily for a couple of days,” Green said. “What I know about this record is it truly was a collaboration at its best. Me and the guys wrote the songs and created the music in a way that was a cohesive, wonderful, spiritual experience,” he said.

The result was Miles and Miles of You.

Related:No midlife crisis here: As he nears 50, Texas country king Pat Green is happy with where he’s at

An ode to resiliency

While making music and writing songs were cathartic, the fruits of their collaborative labor wouldn’t come out for two more years. Concerts were few, far between and impersonal.

“Things didn’t even begin to pick up for us until more than halfway through 2021, when we started seeing people being willing to go halfway out, right?” he said. “We would do a show at some sort of venue, but you would have to stay at your table. You couldn’t move or stand up — all these rules.

“Then 2022 came, and they let the chain off the dog. It was the biggest year we’ve had in almost two decades. Coming into 2023, you’re seeing a bit of a normalization,” he said. “We’ve kinda come full circle. The pre-COVID year was just great – just like every other year of my life. This year looks like it’s going to be great. But 2021, man that was a booger. Then 2022 came and turned the release valve on.”

Bingeing on Obi-Wan Kenobi

He’s fallen back into a work/life rhythm. It’s not really a balance. His life is weighted to his wife and two kids’ side.

“Guys who’ve been doing this as long as me, just kinda work when the work comes,” he said. “We call it the weekend warrior thing. Thursday, Friday, Saturday, we usually have two or three shows.”

The next four days of the week he enjoys family and friends. He’s also part owner of The Rustic in Dallas’ Uptown district.

“It works out great for us [performers]. We get to be with our families a little bit more and experience life a little slower.”

During the Christmas ice storm, Green was contentedly ensconced at home, binge-watching Disney’s Star Wars lineup, especially enjoying the Obi-Wan Kenobi series on Disney+.

He’s got seven more gigs upcoming in the next month – but they’re mostly in Colorado.

“I’ve learned that I like getting older,” he said. “I appreciate knowing that I don’t know everything. There’s still stuff out there that I haven’t figured out. When I was 20 years old, I was pretty sure I had it all figured out.

“I’m a pretty happy cat right now.”