Hey guys!! For today’s post, I’m going to be sharing some facts with you all about my beautiful home city of Hull. While researching for this post, some of the facts really shocked me as I never even knew about them. Beyond city of culture, these facts have shown me that there’s so much to Hull. It’s also assisted me in appreciating Hull that much more and shown me how interesting the city I live in is!! Now onto the facts …

Hull’s official name is Kingston Upon Hull which it was granted by Edward I in 1299 and the citizens of Hull are known as Hullenzians.

The boiled sweet, Gaviscon, Lemsip and Bonjela were all originally born in Hull.

During the second world war, Hull became the most bombed city and endured having 90% of its buildings destroyed.

Hull’s ‘The George’ pub in ‘The Land of Green Ginger’ is home to England’s smallest window.

The civil war of 1642 apparently instigated in Hull in the Plotting Parlour above ‘Ye Olde White Harte’ Pub.

The ‘most poetic city in England’ title belongs to Hull with poets like Philip Larkin and Andrew Marvell living there in the past.

Hull Fair which visits Hull for a week every October is the largest travelling fair in Europe as well as being one of the oldest after it celebrated it’s 700th anniversary in 1993.

The Humber Ports are the UK’s biggest ports complex which trade 90 million tonnes of cargo and send off one million passengers.

Patties (battered and deep fried with a potato, onion and sage filling) and chip spice were both created in Hull.

Hull Minster is the largest parish church when measured by area in England.

The city hosts only cream coloured phone boxes due to it’s independence in being the only place in Britain to not use BT phone company.

The Humber Bridge, one of Hull’s best tourist attractions, is the eighth longest suspension bridge in the world and the longest one which you can cycle all the way across.

The only water front city in Yorkshire is Hull.

A plaque in Queen’s Gardens commemorates that Queen’s Dock of Hull was the place the fictional castaway Robinson Crusoe set sail from.

£1.5bn of regeneration investment has been poured into my home city over the course of the last 8 years.

My sources: Here and here.

Thank you for reading this post!! I hope it taught you some interesting things about Hull. What interesting facts are there about your home city? Let me know in the comments!! There’ll be another post out next week but until then bye for now!!

Amelia Grace a.k.a Amelia in Hull

Share this:

Like Loading...