In This Article

Origin, Meaning, And History Of Muhammad

Muhammad is an Arabic masculine name with a rich past. The name means ‘praised one’ or ‘praiseworthy.’ This Muslim name is derived from the Arabic word ‘hamid,’ which means praise. Al Hamid or ‘the All-Laudable’ is a trait of God or Allah that gives rise to the name Abd al-Hamid. This Arabic term itself has an intense past. It comes from the triconsonantal Semitic root H-M-D.

Muhammad is mentioned many times in the holy book of Islam, the Quran. It is almost always associated with the final prophet in Islam, Prophet Muhammad. As per Islamic belief, when Muhammad was 40 years old, he was visited by Gabriel, an archangel in the Hebrew tradition. The angel is regarded as a messenger of God. Gabriel provided Muhammad with the first verses of the Quran. The verses and revelations laid the foundation of Islam, founded by the prophet.

Muhammad was renowned for his intelligence, empathy, and leadership. As a result, people in his community and beyond respected him immensely. As a result, with the spread of Islam, the popularity of Muhammad’s name also increased.

After that, the name was borne by many Abbasid caliphs and six sultans of the Ottoman Empire. A notable name bearer is Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi, the 9th-century Persian mathematician who founded algebra.

Due to its underlying significance, the name has been shortened to Md., Mohd., Muhd., Mhd., and M. However, the name also has many variations. In Arabic, it is spelled as Mahomet, Mahometus, Mohamad, Mohamed, Mihammad, Mohammad, Muhammed, and Mohammed. In Turkish, it is Mehmet, Muhammed, and Muhammet, while in Azerbaijani, it is Məhəmməd, Mahammad, Mammad, and Məmməd.

Despite being a culturally significant name, we don’t find many mentions of this name in popular culture. Muhammad Avdol from Jojo’s Bizarre Adventure is one example. However, one of the most notable mentions is the movie ‘Muhammad: The Messenger of God,’ which was released in 2015 in Iran. It is an Islamic epic directed by the famous Iranian film director Majid Majidi and co-written with Kambuzia Partovi. The story takes place in the sixth century and focuses on the early years of the prophet Muhammad, depicting his childhood and upbringing.

How To Pronounce Muhammad?

‘Muhammad’ In QR Code

Notable People Named Muhammad

This section covers people who have made the name Muhammad famous with their contributions in various fields. It indeed is a little more inspiration for you to choose the name for your baby, don’t you think?

Muhammad Ali JinnahLawyer, politician, founder of Pakistan

Muhammad ibn AbdullahProphet, Founder of Islam

Muhammad IqbalPhilosopher, poet, and politician

Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'iPhilosopher, scholar and theorist

Sir Muhammad IqbalSouth Asian Muslim writer, known for his work Parinde ki faryad

Muhammad YunusBangladeshi economist, known for getting the Nobel Peace Prize for founding the Grameen Bank

Muhammed Abdullah al-AhariAmerican essayist, known for his anthologies like Five Classic Muslim Slave Narratives

Mohamed Bey Naguib Youssef Qutb El-QashlanEgyptian revolutionary, known for being a leader of the Egyptian Revolution of 1952

Muhammad On The Popularity Chart

Muhammad has seen a slow increase in usage since the 1980s. These graphs from the SSA will help you assess its growth over time.

Popularity Over Time

From 1989 onward, the name’s popularity has increased steadily. In 2021, 1081 babies per million got this name.

Source:

Rank Over Time

Muhammad was a popular name till 1984. After that, its rank started falling till 2007. However, from 2007 onward, the name started regaining popularity.

Source:

Popularity Within US States

If you're living in the US, you might be curious about the popularity of Muhammad in your own state, a state you're considering moving to, or one with which you have a connection. Use the drop-down menu below to select any US state and discover the name's popularity within that region.

California

Texas

Florida

Source:

Muhammad Name’s Presence On Social Media

Before you finalize your baby’s name, you would want to assess if the name is rare or popular. Digital footprint of the name - it’s presence on the internet and social media platforms - can provide you with valuable insights on it’s popularity. A name’s online presence is an important metric for new parents to evaluate their options and make an informed choice. How many people are searching the name on Google, how many profiles are there on Facebook, does the name have a Wikipedia page? Such information surely tells you if the name is ubiquitous or unique. Here is how Muhammad fares on that count.

Muhammad’s Mention In Fictional Works

Names With Similar Sound As Muhammad

If you like the sound of Muhammad, here are some more names that sound similar.

Popular Sibling Names For Muhammad

If you are looking for some matching sibling names that resonate with Muhammad, check our suggestions here.

Other Popular Names Beginning With M

Looking for more baby names starting with the letter M to resonate with your family’s naming tradition or to rhyme with the sibling names? Find a range of alternative names starting with this letter.

Names With Similar Meaning As Muhammad

Want a name that means the same as Muhammad for your younger one? Check out these suggestions.

Names Rhyming With Muhammad

The significance of rhyming names extends beyond their aesthetic appeal and a good feel. The repetition and symmetry enhance their memorability. If you want your children’s names to be easily remembered or tune with your name, try some rhyming names. Here are such names that rhyme with Muhammad.

Popular Songs On The Name Muhammad

Acrostic Poem On Muhammad

Dive into the lyrical charm of the name Muhammad with this acrostic poem. Witness how each letter paints together a story, capturing the name’s individuality, strength, vitality, and sophistication. Inspiring, is it? Why not try a similar poem that describes what you think of your baby’s personality?

Adorable Nicknames For Muhammad

Nicknames are an integral part of your communication with your baby. You tend to use several variations of your child’s name; some are meaningful, while others are simply adorable sounds. Here are a few nicknames you can begin with for the name Muhammad.

Moe

Hamid

Mo

Mad

Hammad

Muhammad’s Zodiac Sign As Per Western Astrology

Western astrology includes the construction of a horoscope based on the person’s exact time of birth and location to understand the positions of the planet, stars, and zodiac signs at that time. However, in popular culture, it is often narrowed down to the sun sign, which depends on the person’s birth date.There are 12 zodiac signs, each having dominant traits, planetary rulers, elemental connection, and more.

Zodiac sign or Sun sign

The Earth’s orbit around the sun is divided into 12 zodiac signs covering 30-degree sectors. According to Western astrology, the zodiac or sun sign depends on the sun’s position in one of these sectors at the time of your birth. Starting from the sun’s position at the March equinox, the chart goes anti-clockwise from Aries, followed by Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, and Pisces. These signs are ruled by planetary bodies - Mars, Venus, Mercury, Moon, Sun, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. Furthermore, they are categorized into triplicities or elemental signs - fire, water, air, and earth - that govern their characteristics. Each of these zodiac signs features certain personality traits that may determine how a person presents themselves.

Each zodiac sign in Western astrology is linked to a specific range of dates in the year. Unlike Vedic astrology, where names can sometimes be used to infer astrological details, Western astrology relies entirely on the birth date.

To know more about your baby’s zodiac sign, choose the period in which your baby’s date of birth falls, from the options given below. This will give you a glimpse into the world of astrology tailored for your baby.

Muhammad’s Zodiac Sign And Birth Star As Per Vedic Astrology

Muhammad Personality Traits As Per Numerology

The numerology belief system envisages a relationship between a name and numbers. The related numbers are believed to give insights into a person’s character. We have researched this area to connect the numerology-based characteristic traits to the letters of the English alphabet. And the results are fascinating.

Numerology followers believe that each letter signifies attributes that can influence a person’s attitude and approach. Among these placements, the most significant are the first letter (Cornerstone) and the last letter (Capstone) of a name. Cornerstone highlights your primary personality traits and explains how you face challenges and opportunities in life. Capstone can tell you about your approach to work and how you complete them. Often, a letter may be repeated twice or more in a name. This repetition signifies the intensification or amplification of the traits associated with the letter in an individual’s personality.

Read to know what characteristics the name Muhammad is known for in numerology. Here we have avoided repetition of letters and added them just once for a better reading experience.

Infographic: Know The Name Muhammad‘s Personality As Per Numerology

Muhammad In Different Languages

How To Communicate The Name Muhammad In Sign Languages