MediaCoder 0.8.41 is released with NVENC 6.0. Two-pass encoding can be used with NVENC in MediaCoder now. Simply set video encoder to NVENC and rate mode to Two-Pass and you are ready to go. In advanced settings, you can find new option for 3 types of NVENC’s two-pass mode.

What’s New in NVIDIA Video Codec SDK 6.0

NVIDIA Video Codec SDK 6.0 adds following new features.

Unified SDK for video encoding and decoding

Windows 10 official support

Support for H.264 Motion Estimation only mode

Support for input surfaces in RGB format

Support for SEI and VUI fields for H.265

Support for Adaptive Quantization for improved subjective visual quality with H.265 (adaptive quantization for H.264 is already supported)

GPUs supported for H.265 (HEVC) encoding

GeForce GTX 960, GTX 980. GTX Titan X

Quadro M4000, M5000, M6000

Tesla M4, M6, M60

Various quality and performance improvements in encoding

SDK samples no longer require the CUDA toolkit installed in order to build.

MediaCoder is finally able to encode with NVENC, NVIDIA’s hardware SIP core that performs H.264/AVC and H.265/HEVC video encoding. NVENC SDK 5.0.1 is used, so NVIDIA GPU driver 347.09 or above is required. The latest version of SDK has added support for HEVC (H.265) encoding on GM20x GPUs (GTX980 and future Quadro/Tesla/GRID platforms based on GM20x GPUs). Following is the description of NVENC from NVIDIA’s official website.

The NVIDIA Encoder (NVENC) API enables software developers to access the high-performance hardware H.264 and HEVC (H.265) video encoder in Kepler and Maxwell class NVIDIA GPUs (See list of supported GPUs below).NVENC provides high-quality video encoding that is faster and more power efficient in comparison to equivalent CUDA-based or CPU-based encoders. By using dedicated hardware for the video encoding task, the GPU CUDA cores and/or the CPU are available for other compute-intensive tasks. NVENC on GeForce hardware can support a maximum of 2 concurrent streams per system. NVENC for GRID, Tesla and certain Quadro GPUs (see below) can support as many streams as possible up to maximum NVENC encoder rate limit and available video memory.

To test NVENC with MediaCoder, please install the latest MediaCoder Full Edition and install the following update.

MediaCoder NVENC Update for x86 (32-bit)

MediaCoder NVENC Update for x64 (64-bit)

Once the update installed, NVENC will appear in the video encoder list. Disable video encoder auto selection and choose NVENC and MediaCoder will encode with NVENC. The supported video format is H.264 and H.265 (if you have a GeForce series 9 card). Currently the configuration tab for NVENC is not yet done as the support for NVENC is just initial and is still being worked on. To adjust its parameters, click the “Encoder” button. More parameters will be adjustable in future updates. Have fun with the cutting-edge breezing fast hardware encoding with 10-year old MediaCoder.

Read the rest of this entry >>

The splitting function finally comes back. There is no more “Split” mode. To enable splitting, simply go to Time tab for the splitting options (by time and by number of segments). The splitting operation is performed on-the-fly while transcoding is proceeding, so it’s fast.

There are still some limitations though. Splitting currently does not work with multi-pass encoding and segmental encoding (SVE). The file relocation options are not working when splitting is enabled. These will be improved soon later.