The Durban July (15:00) is considered South Africa’s most prestigious race; the one that every local owner, trainer and jockey want to win the most. A bit like the Melbourne Cup, it’s a high-quality handicap, but with a maximum field of 18 runners over 1m3f. A crowd of no less than 50,000 people will flood into Greyville racecourse this Saturday, and it will be an eclectic mix of casual punters, serious punters, racing fans, fashion connoisseurs, and those who just want to be seen at one of South Africa’s most celebrated sporting events.

Let's have a look at the runners…

1.BLESS MY STARS

Jockey: A Mgudlwa | Trainer: Sean Tarry

Placed in a Group 2 last April over 10f. This will be her acid test, but she has a lightweight and draws the inside.

2. WITHOUT QUESTION

R Fourie | Justin Snaith

One of five runners for the Justin Snaith yard. Yet to win over this trip but was placed over 10f behind the likely favourite for this, See It Again, in the Grade 1 Daily News last time, and meets his rival on 2kg better terms here. Looks shortlist material.

3. TIME FLIES

Luyolo Mxothwa | Brett Crawford

Ultra-consistent 4-year-old filly and isn’t the worst outsider. She was runner-up in the Grade 1 Woolavington over 1m2f last time and although she dives into deeper waters here, from a good draw, she’s one to consider for the exotics.

4. WINCHESTER MANSION

Kabelo Matsunyane | Brett Crawford

Always shown ability but has featured in the stewards a few times, mostly for greenness. Shown plenty of improvement since being gelded in February, winning a Grade 3 over 9f last time, and given he has won over 1m4f as a 3-year-old, he could be one to take advantage of a high-pressure 1m3f contest.

5. BILLY BOWLEGS

S Veale | Alec Laird

Run with merit in defeat in Grade 1s on his last three starts, including when runner-up in the South African Derby in April. But this represents a big step up in grade, and Gavin Lerena jumps off to ride a rival.

6. DO IT AGAIN

G Lerena | Justin Snaith

One of only five horses to win this race back-to-back (2018/19), and they will tear the grandstand down in excitement if he were to become the first three-time winner on his record-breaking sixth spin in the race, and his last ever start. On current form, he looks up against it, but he did run fourth in this race last year, and it wouldn't be the biggest shock if the now 8-year-old were to create history here.

7. SEE IT AGAIN

P Strydom | Michael Roberts

The likely favourite is a 3-year-old colt who is yet to go beyond 1m2f, but his two starts over that trip have seen him win The Cape Derby in February, and then last time out he took out the Daily News 2000 in good style, which is considered a leading trial for this. His rider Pierre Strydom is considered one of the greats of the South African Turf and, at 57 years of age, he will become the oldest rider to win the race if successful for a fifth time.

8. SILVER DARLING

J V'd Merwe | Justin Snaith

Hard to have, given she hasn’t won for over a year. However, she did run with plenty of merit from a tough draw over 1m2f in the Grade 1 Woolavington last time when placed, and she could hit the frame with a bit more luck in running.

9. SON OF RAJ

M Yeni | Weiho Marwing

A 3-year-old gelding who disappointed last time out in the Grade 1 Daily News when well held by See It Again, which was his first spin at Greyville. But he did win his previous two, including the Grade 1 South Africa Derby at Turffontein, and he would be a live chance with the lightweight if able to replicate that form here.

10. DAVE THE KING

Craig Zackey | M F De Kock

On rider bookings, looks to be the second pick of the Mike de Kock pair. Unexposed for a Durban July runner, in that he doesn’t usually go over this trip, but did run with merit in defeat when runner-up in the 1m2f Grade1 Daily News behind See It Again last time. There are no guarantees he gets the trip, but he does represent last year's winning trainer and could spring a surprise if he stays.

11. PUERTO MANZANO

K De Melo | Johan J Van Vuuren

Well beaten in this last year, but he is a multiple Grade 1 winner who lands here having won his last two. He’s a top-class performer at Turffontein but has been unplaced both times he’s ventured to Greyville.

12. PACAYA

Grant Van Niekerk | Justin Snaith

Multiple winner as a 2-year-old who went winless during his 3-year-old season, but he has bounced back to win two of his three starts as a 4-year-old, both wins coming after an operation. He’s never won at the top level or been over this trip, but he had a few of these in behind when winning a Grade 2 over 1900m, which was his first spin on the Greyvillle track last time.

13. SECOND BASE

C Maujean | Robyn Klaasen

Had been out of form for a while but turned that around when runner-up last time in the Grade 1 Champions Challenge at Turffontein, which was his first run for the yard. Hasn’t won for over a year and does look an outsider, but there were definite signs of improvement last time.

14. SAFE PASSAGE

C Soumillon | M F De Kock

Trained by last year's winning trainer Mike de Kock, with leading European rider Christophe Soumillon jetting in for the ride. Whilst he hasn’t won for over a year, he did finish third in this race last season and has been kept to shorter distances, with his best effort during that time when runner-up in the Grade 1 Summer Cup over 1m2f at Turffontein last November. Looks to have been laid out for this and although he has high-end owners, it's doubtful the rider comes all this way unless there’s plenty of confidence in the camp.

15. RASCALLION

C Orffer | Vaughan Marshall

Ran fifth in this last year as a 3-year-old. He was only one spot behind Safe Passage when unplaced over the mile last time but meets Pacaya 3kg better off here, having finished third the start prior over 1900m. Has had a few chances but looks one to keep on the safe side over this trip.

16. TRIP OF FORTUNE

A Domeyer | Candice Bass-Robinson

Brilliant miler who has won nine of his 18 starts, but he’s never been beyond a mile and this is a tough introduction to the longer trip. Plus he has to contend with what looks to be a tricky draw.

17. RAIN IN HOLLAND

S Khumalo | Sean Tarry

High-class 4-year-old filly that won South Africa’s Triple Tiara. She’s never been over this trip, but she did win the South Africa Oaks over 2450m as a 3-year-old and has been successful twice over 1m2f. She has what looks to be a tough draw, but she certainly has a touch of quality about her and holds a perfect two-from-two record at Greyville.

18. POMP AND POWER

Bernard Fayd'Herbe | Justin Snaith

Beaten seven lengths in this as a 3-year-old last year and has been turned over in all six subsequent starts. However, he did run a huge race in the MET at Cape Town in January when picking up the bronze, so can’t be totally discounted, though does have to carry 5kg more than last year and from an outside draw.