Established in 2000, the Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia (Tun Hussein Onn University of Malaysia) is a non-profit public higher education institution located in the suburban setting of the small city of Batu Pahat (population range of 50,000-249,999 inhabitants), Johor. Officially recognized by the Kementerian Pendidikan Tinggi (Ministry of Higher Education of Malaysia), Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia (UTHM) is a large-sized (uniRank enrollment range: 15,000-19,999 students) coeducational Malaysian higher education institution. Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia (UTHM) offers courses and programs leading to officially recognized higher education degrees such as pre-bachelor's degrees (i.e. certificates, diplomas, associate or foundation), bachelor's degrees and master's degrees in several areas of study. See the uniRank degree levels and areas of study table below for further details. This 24-year-old Malaysian higher-education institution has a selective admission policy based on entrance examinations. International applicants are eligible to apply for enrollment. UTHM also provides several academic and non-academic facilities and services to students including a library, housing, sports facilities, financial aids and/or scholarships, study abroad and exchange programs, online courses and distance learning opportunities, as well as administrative services.

Student Enrollment

Tun Hussein Onn University of Malaysia has an enrollment range of 15,000-19,999 students making it a large-sized institution.

Academic Staff

This institution has a range of 900-999 academic employees (Faculty).

Control Type

Tun Hussein Onn University of Malaysia is a public higher education institution.

Entity Type

Tun Hussein Onn University of Malaysia is a non-profit higher education institution.

Financial Aid

This institution offers one or more of the following financial aid for eligible students: scholarships, grants, loans, tuition waivers, emergency financial aid etc.

Study Abroad

This institution offers study abroad and exchange program opportunities for its students.

Distance Learning

This institution provides a distance learning mode for certain programs or courses.