Warm Greetings from the Faculty of Technology Management and Business, Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia!

Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia (UTHM) is a prominent public university located in Johor, Malaysia. Established in 1993, it was named after Malaysia’s third Prime Minister, Tun Hussein Onn, to honor his contributions to the country. UTHM is known for its emphasis on engineering, technology, and technical education.

We are pleased to inform you that the application for Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia Physical Academic Mobility Exchange 2023/2024 is now open for Universitas Gadjah Mada students.

PROGRAM INFORMATION

The Faculty of Technology Management and Business, Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia is now calling for Undergraduate students to participate in the Physical Academic Mobility Exchange. Students in this program will enjoy various benefits, including transferrable credits for their courses, waived tuition fees, a certificate of attendance, an academic transcript, and valuable learning experiences in new environments.

Duration: 20 Oct 2023 – 28 Feb 2024 (Semester 1 Session 2023/2024)

Mode of Program Delivery: Physical

SUBJECT OFFERED

Courses Lesson Plans

BPB 31903 Financial Management

BPA 20703 Management Information System

BPB 31103 Production and Operations Management

BPB 33803 Strategic Management

BPA 32202 Occupational Safety and Health

BPA 11603 Principle of Marketing

BPK 208802 Entrepreneurship

UPA 20102 Creativity and Innovation

ELIGIBILITY

Undergraduate students (S1)

Enrolled in Universitas Gadjah Mada during the program

Minimum GPA of 3.0 on a 4.0 scale

Be proficient in English

REQUIRED DOCUMENTS

Official Academic Transcript

English Language Proficiency

Letter of Enrollment from Faculty

Letter of Nomination from Faculty (addressed to the Head of Office of International Affairs UGM)

Letter of Recommendation from the Academic Advisor

Curriculum Vitae

Motivation Letter

Colored Copy of Passport

Confirmation Letter of Participation (download)

Passport Size Photo

APPLICATION PROCEDURE

Submit the aforementioned documents to UGM International Exposure Application Form: http://ugm.id/IntExposureApplication no later than July 9th, 2023 for internal review.

OIA staff will evaluate your application. Once you are selected as Nominated Applicants, OIA will confirm your official nomination to Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia (UTHM) and you may proceed to the online application.

The FINAL decision is fromUniversiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia (UTHM).

IMPORTANT NOTES

In the meantime, the students are required to keep the hard file of all documents until further notice by the Office of International Affairs.

In case the faculty could not provide the letter of enrollment and nomination during this period, the official nomination through email from the faculty is acceptable. The official nomination could be delivered to head-oia@ugm.ac.id (cc to scholarship@ugm.ac.id

CONSULTATION INFO

If you have any questions regarding this program, you can contact us in OIA’s office hour:

Whatsapp: +62 812-1888-7818 (WA)

Email: scholarship@ugm.ac.id