Czech Republic

Technical University of Ostrava

VSB – Technical University of Ostrava is a university in Ostrava in the Moravian-Silesian Region of the Czech Republic. It is a polytechnic university with a long history of high-quality engineering education and research. The first Fraunhofer Innovation Platform for Applied Artificial Intelligence for Materials and Manufacturing in the Czech Republic was located at VSB - Technical University of Ostrava.

Republic of Korea

Korea Advanced Institute of Science & Technology (KAIST)

The Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) is a national research university located in Daedeok Innopolis, Daejeon, South Korea. KAIST was established by the Korean government in 1971 as the nation's first public, research-oriented science and engineering institution. KAIST is considered to be one of the most prestigious universities in the nation. KAIST has been internationally accredited in business education, and hosting the Secretariat of the Association of Asia-Pacific Business Schools (AAPBS). KAIST has 10,504 full-time students and 1,342 faculty researchers (as of Fall 2019 Semester) and had a total budget of US$765 million in 2013, of which US$459 million was from research contracts.

Hungary

University of Debrecen

The University of Debrecen is a university located in Debrecen, Hungary. It is the oldest continuously operating institution of higher education in Hungary ever since its establishment in 1538. The university has a well established programme in the English language for international students, particularly in the Medical and Engineering field, which first established education in English in 1886. There are nearly 6000 international students studying at the university.

Slovak Republic

UNIVERSITY OF ŽILINA

The University of Žilina was established on 1 October 1953 as the College of Railways in Prague. In 1959, the institution changed its name to the University of Transport and moved to Žilina. As a result of the increasing role of communications within the curriculum and research orientation of the university, the name was amended to the University of Transport and Communications in 1980. It was renamed again to the University of Žilina pursuant to the law passed by the Slovak National Council on 20 November 1996.

Federal Republic of Germany

Schmalkalden University

About 3000 students in the Faculties of Business and Economics, Business Law, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering and Mechanical Engineering are currently enjoying the numerous opportunities which studying in Schmalkalden offers. Various university rankings show that our students can enjoy high-quality education and the University of Applied Sciences Schmalkalden offers ideal conditions: a campus with everything within easy walking distance, state-of-the-art laboratories and a modern library, as well as personal contacts between lecturers and students.

Russian Federation

Innopolis University

Construction of the university began on 9 June 2012; in 2013, it was estimated that the university would be open by 2015.[8] Its first bachelor program opened in 2014. By the same year, partner universities included Carnegie Mellon University and the National University of Singapore. Innopolis University would sign academic agreements with the University of Bonn, Innsbruck University, Harbour.Space University and the Sapienza University of Rome in 2016. On 26 April 2019, ownership of the university was transferred to the Ministry of Digital Development, Communications and Mass Media.

Malaysia

UNITEN

Universiti Tenaga Nasional commenced operation in 1976 as Institut Latihan Sultan Ahmad Shah (ILSAS), which served for many years as the corporate training center for Tenaga Nasional Berhad (TNB) and its predecessor, the National Electricity Board. In 1994, ILSAS was transformed into an institute of higher learning and renamed Institut Kejuruteraan Teknologi Tenaga Nasional (IKATAN). It offered academic programmes in engineering and business management at undergraduate and graduate levels through twinning links with local and foreign universities (Indiana-University, Purdue University Indianapolis, US for Engineering). In 1997, IKATAN was upgraded to Universiti Tenaga Nasional.

Republic of Poland

Adam Mickiewicz University

It traces its origins to 1611, when under the Royal Charter granted by King Sigismund III Vasa, the Jesuit College became the first university in Poznań. The Poznań Society for the Advancement of Arts and Sciences which played an important role in leading Poznań to its reputation as a chief intellectual centre during the Age of Positivism and partitions of Poland, initiated founding of the university. The inauguration ceremony of the newly founded institution took place on 7 May 1919 that is 308 years after it was formally established by the Polish king and on 400th anniversary of the foundation of the Lubrański Academy which is considered its predecessor. Its original name was Piast University (Polish: Wszechnica Piastowska), which later in 1920 was renamed to University of Poznań (Polish: Uniwersytet Poznański). During World War II staff and students of the university opened an underground Polish University of the Western Lands (Polish: Uniwersytet Ziem Zachodnich). In 1955 University of Poznań adopted a new patron, the 19th-century Polish Romantic poet Adam Mickiewicz, and changed to its current name.

Italian Republic

PISA University

The University of Pisa was officially founded in 1343, although various scholars place its origins in the 11th century. It is certain, however, that from the middle of the 12th century Pisa had a “Universitas” in the original sense of the word, that is, a group of students who gathered around masters. It was during this period that Leonardo Fibonacci was born and worked. He was one of the greatest mathematicians in history who, through his work, synthesized the spirit and processes of Greek geometry and the tools of Arabic mathematics for the first time in Europe.

Federal Republic of Germany

University of Applied Sciences and Arts

Fachhochschule Dortmund - University of Applied Sciences and Arts (German: Fachhochschule Dortmund) is a university of applied sciences (German: Fachhochschule) in Dortmund, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany with 14,057 students, and 894 staff, 255 of which are teaching staff. It is situated in the Ruhr area, the fourth largest urban area in Europe. Fachhochschule Dortmund was created by a merger of several institutions of higher education in 1971. Owing to its history as separate institutions, it consists of three campuses in different parts of Dortmund. The Faculties of Mechanical Engineering, Electrical Engineering and Information Technology are located at Sonnenstraße near the city center. The Faculty of Design has its own campus at Max-Ophüls-Platz, while the Faculties of Applied Social Studies, Business Studies, Computer Science and Architecture are housed in several buildings next to the TU Dortmund University campus in the suburb of Eichlinghofen. The university is known for its Faculty of Business Studies. Additional offices in the city center are used for administrative purposes.

Republic of Türkiye

Altinbas University

Altınbaş University is a foundation university in Istanbul, Turkey. The university was established in 2008 as Istanbul Kemerburgaz University and changed to its current name in 2017. Altınbaş University has more than 5000 international students from 89 countries, approximately 40% of the students are international. The university has 3 campuses located in Istanbul, which are in Bağcılar, Bakırköy and Şişli. Home to 9 undergraduate schools, 3 graduate schools, 2 vocational schools as of the academic year 2019-2020, Altınbaş University is currently offering 30 bachelor’s degree programmes, 34 associate’s degree programmes, 28 master’s degree programmes and 6 PhD programmes.

South Korea

Kyungdong University

Founded in 1981, Kyungdong University (KDU) has emerged as one of the leading universities nurturing professionals in demand both in Korea and abroad. Currently, over eight thousand students are enrolled at KDU’s three campuses throughout the country – Global Campus in Goseong-gun (Gangwon-do), Metropole Campus in Yangju-si (Gyeonggi-do), and Medical Campus in Wonju-si (Gangwon-do). KDU Global offers various undergraduate degree programs in English and Korean as well as language and vocational training courses for international students. All undergraduate curriculums incorporate five concurrent major-specialization tracks and liberal education courses aimed at enhancing the language, intrapersonal and interpersonal skills of students. The ultimate mission of KDU Global is to guarantee the professional and personal success of its graduates by equipping them with the competencies sought after in industries and communities of the 21st century.

Azerbaijani

ADA UNIVERSITY

ADA University was established under the decree dated January 13th, 2014, by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan. The University is a state higher education institution engaged in the delivery of undergraduate and graduate degree programs in addition to the advancement of research. The University is the legal heir of the Azerbaijan Diplomatic Academy (ADA) and Information Technologies University. They were merged in January 2014 to establish ADA University. Founded on March 6, 2006, the Azerbaijan Diplomatic Academy began offering an Advanced Foreign Service Program to diplomats of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and civil servants in the government, as of January 2007. The Academy launched its first master degree in September 2009, followed by bachelor degrees in September 2011.

Georgia

Сaucasus University

The history of Caucasus University began in 1998 when Caucasus School of Business was established. Its motto is "Studium Pretium Libertatis". CU offers students a high level of education, international programs, practice-oriented teaching. The training of highly qualified specialists is provided by lecturers with international qualifications. Caucasus University consists of schools of Business, Law, Media, Technology, Architecture and Design, Governance, Humanities and Social Sciences, Tourism, Medicine and Healthcare Management, Economics, Education. The University has the right to award academic degrees of Bachelor, Master, Doctor and Medical Doctor to the graduates in accordance with the rules established by the legislation of Georgia. The university has a training center and offers a variety of certification programs.

Turkey

Nigde Omer Halisdemir University

Our university was founded under the name of Niğde University in accordance with the Annex 22 of the Law numbered 3837 published in the Official Gazette dated July 11, 1992 and numbered 21281. The School of Education (1974) in Niğde which was affiliated with Selçuk University was turned into the Faculty of Education by incorporating Niğde Vocational School (1974), the Faculty of Economics and Administrative Sciences (1987) and Aksaray Vocational School (1986). In accordance with the same law, The Faculty of Science and Letters, the Faculty of Engineering and Architecture, the School of Physical Education and Sports, the Graduate School of Social Sciences and the Graduate School of Natural and Applied Sciences were established in Niğde, and the Faculty of Economics and Administrative Sciences, the Faculty of Engineering and Ortaköy Vocational School were established in Aksaray.