About the University of Ostrava

The University of Ostrava was established in 1991 and is a public higher educational institution. Nowadays, the university consists of 6 faculties located in the city. Currently, more than 8,000 Czech and international students study here.

The city of Ostrava is situated in the Northeastern part of the Czech Republic. It is surrounded by 4 rivers - Oder, Opava, Ostravice, and Lucina. There is no way to get bored in this city. Many sporting and cultural fests and events are held here throughout the whole year.

Courses Offered at The University of Ostrava

The medical faculty at the University of Ostrava is no different in terms of quality and the facilities used by other European medical schools. Their campus has the most modern technologies and libraries where you will be trained. Also, the university has a great library with easy-to-use software to find the book you need and if it’s loaned or not. This can save time instead of digging around the shelves the whole day.

The duration of the medical course at the University of Ostrava is 6 years. It consists of theoretical and practical classes. The first and second years mainly include theoretical lectures on the basics of medicine and the human body. In the following years, you will start practicing and attending teaching clinics and hospitals.

Bedside training is an essential part of your medical education. You will not only learn about illnesses and treatments, but you will gain the ability to communicate and console patients.

The university doesn’t offer graduate entry, but student transfers are welcome.

The university is located at Fráni Šrámka 1121/3, 709 00 Ostrava-Mariánské Hory a Hulváky, Czech Republic.

Contact Medlink Students to know more about your options to study medicine in English here.

Extracurricular and Leisure Activities

The University of Ostrava focuses its research effort on two main areas: epidemiology and haematological malignancies. The first field explores the epidemiological status of the local population, while the second deals more with genetic and molecular research of blood diseases. Naturally, the university encourages students to participate in the effort.

In addition, students can join Younie - the most popular student organisation on campus. They organise various events throughout the year, and their goals are focused on entertainment. Younie arranges many parties, and the most famous one is Majales - the annual student holiday party in Czech Republic.

University of Ostrava Tuition fees

The annual cost of the M.D. programme in English here is paid in two instalments.

University of Ostrava Admission & Entry Requirements

To apply here, you are obliged to take the entrance exam organised by the university. It covers topics from Biology, Chemistry, and Physics at the secondary school level. It contains 30 questions with a maximum achievable score of 90 points. However, the minimum score required is 37 points, but Medlink Students will supply you with materials to study and achieve the maximum result.

There are 5 dates for entrance exams between May and July.

The process of applying to the University of Ostrava can be highly competitive, and navigating it alone can feel overwhelming and challenging. The university has a comprehensive set of application requirements and legal procedures that must be met, including the submission of specific documents that require translation, notarisation, and legalisation. Failure to fulfil these criteria will result in getting your application turned down. However, you don't have to go through this daunting task alone. Our team of admissions experts, recognised as the best in Europe, specialises in managing all legal aspects of the application process. Additionally, we maintain a solid collaboration with the University of Ostrava and have comprehensive knowledge of the entire application process and entrance exam. Throughout the process, we will thoroughly handle your application, ensuring it meets the highest standards. On top of that, we will provide you with exceptional study materials that will comprehensively prepare you for the demanding entrance exam. Choosing Medlink Students means guaranteeing your acceptance to the University of Ostrava and avoiding the stress of applying on your alone. This way, you can focus on what’s important - your preparation for the entry examination.

Accreditation

Currently, the university is listed on the World Directory of Medical Schools, however the program of General Medicine in English language is still in the process of re-accreditation.

Accommodation

The University of Ostrava operates 4 dormitories. They are located in different areas close to the faculties. The buildings consist of single, double, and triple rooms plus leisure time areas and study areas.

The rooms are fully furnished with beds and private bathrooms. Around the dorms, you can use shared kitchens, gyms, laundry, and study rooms. One of the dormitories also has a piano room. The campuses have buffets that serve breakfast, lunch, and dinner. Prices for students are reduced.

The price for a room varies according to the building and room type, but on average, it is around per month for a room, including the utilities.

If you prefer your own flat or a shared flat with roommates, the rent would be between . Including utilities, food, and activities in your leisure time, you will need about per month.

Life as a Medical Student in Ostrava, Czech Republic

Ostrava is built on the confluence of four rivers: Oder, Opava, Ostavice, and Lucina. They are the source of the misty mystery enveloping the city, and there is nothing like a foggy morning and a cup of coffee.

While Ostrava is famous as an industrial city, students are more interested in its entertainment potential, and there is plenty in this regard. The city hosts music festivals such as Colours of Ostrava and Ostrava Days. These events come as the pinnacles to an already exciting local club and bar scene.

In addition, the cultural life of Ostrava has much to offer international students in terms of landmarks, theatres, galleries, and museums. The latter is of special interest because they shed light on the city's industrial past. Visitors can learn more about toy making, coal mining, beer brewing, and other crafts.

The classes for the winter semester in the medical faculty start on 07 September and finish on 18 December. A 2-week break follows it and the examination period is in January.

The summer semester begins on 8 February and ends on 21 May. The examination period is from May until July.