University Overview

The University of Ostrava serves over 8,500 students within six faculties; arts, fine arts, education, medicine, social studies and sciences. The campus also hosts 300 international students each year primarily from Europe through the Erasmus+ program.

The region containing Ostrava has the 2nd largest population in the Czech Republic and is perfectly situated near beautiful mountain ranges and natural sites, near the border of Poland and Slovakia with easy access to some of Europe’s most beautiful capital cities. Ostrava is a “university city” with over 10% of its population being students, and is famous for its vibrant nightlife. It is often described as a city with harsh industrial history but young-spirited and poetic present. It offers a rich array and some of Europe’s best cultural sights and events to suit anyone’s tastes. Thanks to its unique theatres, art galleries, clubs and cafés and well cultivated public greenery on top of being an opportunity for a lot of outdoor activities (e.g. hiking and cycling trails in the picturesque Beskydy mountain range), Ostrava is simply not something to be described—but to be experienced. Visit us and meet a green city with a black soul! (Retrieved from UO’s website)

Semester Calendar

Fall: September – December (labeled Winter Semester at Partner University)

Spring: February – May (labeled Summer Semester at Partner University)

Education Abroad Credits

Language of instruction for international students is primarily in English.

Please see the sample course offerings and view the University of Ostrava’s course catalog. More information is available in the UCA Education Abroad Office and on this link.

See sample coursework below and education abroad credits exchange students earned while abroad.

University of Ostrava (Czech Republic) Host Institution Course Title(s)UCA Course Code(s)UCA Course Titles(s) China vs. EuropeWLAN 2315Cultural Studies Czech History 1740-1918HIST 4334Topics in European History SociolinguisticsLING 3325Sociolinguistics Sociology of MigrationSOC 2395Special Topics SyntaxLING 4345Analytical Methods of Morphology and Syntax Advanced Molecular BiologyBIO 4475Advanced Cell Biology Extreme GeobiotopesBIO 4412Organisms in Extreme Environments Excursion- Landscape ProtectionGEOG 3320Environmental Policy and Regulation French 3 (A2)FREN 2310Intermediate French I Czech for Foreigners 1LING 4V80Directed Study

Program Cost

UCA students pay regular tuition, and all scholarships and financial aid apply. For more information, view the Financial Aid Guide. Students should check with Financial Aid and the Office of Education Abroad for more information regarding the cost of a semester exchange.

Application Process

See our Semester Exchange Application page for a step-by-step overview of the application process. Please be sure to turn in all documents before the published deadlines.

Helpful Links