Occasional Cinema – On The Black Hill

Date: Thursday, 24th September 2015

Time: 6:30 pm

Here’s our first film of this season. Set in mid-Wales its many subjects and themes will be very familiar to us here in North Wales: farming, horses, patriotism, feuds, English-owned estates, two World Wars, country life – there’s something for everyone. A classic.

To celebrate the start of the season, we’re offering a free film admission (you pay only for the food) to the first 25 members who book their meals before 12 noon on Wednesday 23 September.

On the Black Hill Andrew Grieve, UK, 1987, 112 minutes, Drama

A thoroughly grounded adaptation of Bruce Chatwin’s novel of life in the Welsh borders across 80 years of the twentieth century, through the experiences of a Welsh hill farmer, an English lady and their twin sons, this is a thoroughly engaging portrait that brings the place and its people to life. The filmmakers had a low budget, but plenty of time to get things right, so the locations – from just north of Brecon across to the Black Mountains, with scenes in Hay-on-Wye and Crickhowell – are perfect, and with props and furniture borrowed from people and houses in the area, there is an authentic sense of place. Director Andrew Grieve was brought up in mid Wales, so has a real feel for the area too, and has made one of the surprisingly few British films in which the landscape of Britain is filmed with an understanding of the role it plays in people’s daily lives.

Great performances from Bob Peck and Gemma Jones.

MENU Traditional Welsh lamb cawl served with soda bread and pickled red cabbage. Veggy option – vegetable and bean casserole with herb dumplings. Dessert – Stewed apple and blackberries with Dragon whipped cream, Penderyn whisky and toasted oatmeal

Please book food at least 24hrs in advance with Blue Sky on 01248 355444 and note that we may start late if it is a bright evening.

Occasional Cinema is a film society run by volunteers. Films are shown at the Caban, Brynrefail on the second Wednesday of the month and at the Blue Sky Cafe, Bangor on the fourth Thursday and unless stated otherwise start sometime after 7.30pm. We do not show films during the summer, but there are often summer films at the Caban.

Membership is available on the door for a cost of £5: the first film is free, after this film entrance is £3.00.

Food is usually available from 6.30pm and a sophisticated clientele enjoy the wholesome food, reasonable price (about £10.00 for two courses) and excellent atmosphere. Please make reservations for any meals at least 24hours in advance – Blue Sky 01248 355444. You can’t book a seat for the film only, which is on a first come first served basis. If you want a guaranteed seat you must book a meal.