Inbred

Dir: Alex Chandon – UK, 2012

Four young urban offenders and their care workers embark on a community service weekend in the strange, remote Yorkshire village of Mortlake, which prides on keeping itself to itself. Visiting the local pub, ‘The Dirty Hole’ which serves home-made (and suspiciously hairy) pork scratchings, they quickly realize they’ve made the wrong holiday choice. A minor incident with some local inbred youths rapidly escalates into a blood-soaked, deliriously warped nightmare for all involved

Director Alex Chandon got his start producing low-budget fan shorts such as Bad Karma and Drillbit, but made his feature debut with steampunk sex-comedy Pervirella in 1997. After working on some videos for notorious metal band, Cradle of Filth, Chandon directed lead singer Dani Filth in the anthology horror film, Cradle of Fear (2001). While almost a decade has passed since, Chandon worked on a number of shorts, including Neon Killer, screened here in 2010. The screenplay was written by Chandon and Paul Shrimpton in 2009, and filming took place over the following summer.

Director’s statement: “I want INBRED to create in others what I felt when I watched the likes of BAD TASTE and RE-ANIMATOR for the first time as a young teenager in the mid 80’s. I was joyously repulsed and knew I was watching something very heartfelt, albeit disgusting… I feel INBRED is refreshingly raw but also comfortingly similar as we’ve tried to tick as many boxes that today’s’ horror fans should enjoy. This is the film I would love to sneak in and see aged 14 and feel very naughty doing so. It’s very wrong but very right.”

Horror fans have had their fair share of inbred families terrorizing a group of innocents. To stand out, you’ve got to be something pretty special. In all of its twisted glory, INBRED stands loud and proud as the modern king of sick killer mutant family movies… In the gory tradition of EVIL DEAD II and RE-ANIMATOR, two films that strike a horrific chord while sloshing around in their own bloody slop, INBRED is a worthy addition to this twisted little family. I highly recommend this film for those who love gore by the truckload.

— Ain’t It Cool News