First performed (as a cover) by Sha Na Na at Woodstock in 1969, the song later appeared on the 1970 Woodstock album.

sha na na fax

Sha Na Na began as part of the Columbia University a cappella group, the Kingsmen, but changed their name when a band of the same name gained fame for Louie, Louie.

Performing 50s hit songs, accompanied by dance moves and harmonies, Sha Na Na began performing in 1969 at the height of the hippie counterculture but went on to achieve US-wide fame after opening for Jimi Hendrix at Woodstock Festival. Fame that went on to inspire similar groups throughout North America, as well as Grease, American Graffiti and the television show Happy Days.

The band then hosted the Sha Na Na variety television show from 1977 to 1981 with guests including James Brown, the Ramones, Chuck Berry, Little Richard, Bo Diddley, the Ronettes, and Chubby Checker.

Still performing today, the current line-up includes Donny York and Jocko Marcellino, two of the original 12 members, and long-time member Screamin’ Scott Simon, who joined in 1970.

In their early years, Sha Na Na band played at venues such as Fillmore East and Fillmore West, opening for the Grateful Dead, the Mothers of Invention, and the Kinks. Soon the band began headlining at such venues – one of their opening acts was Bruce Springsteen. In 1972, Sha Na Na was one of just four acts invited by John Lennon and Yoko Ono to perform with them at their One-to-One benefit concert at Madison Square Garden.

at the hop fax

At the Hop was written by Artie Singer, John Medora, and David White and originally released by Danny & the Juniors in late-1957, reaching #1 on the US charts on January 6, 1958. It peaked at #3 on the UK charts.

The song was covered by Sha Na Na at the 1969 Woodstock Festival and featured in the 1973 George Lucas movie American Graffiti.

Notable covers, other than Sha Na Na’s version, include, Elvis Presley and The Beach Boys. It also formed part of Uriah Heap’s song, Rock’n’Roll Medley.

At the Hop lyrics.

at the hop – sha na na – 1970 – video

at the hop sha na na – 1969 – woodstock video

Sometimes the YouTube links dropout – if this link doesn’t work, please go to YouTube and search for the song – it will be worth it!

follow seventiesmusic on facebook.

You’ll find out when the latest blog is posted (usually about once a week).” Click the Facebook logo to go to the seventiesmusic Facebook page and click “Like.”