Brief history of the Nobel Prize winners

David Baltimore, Howard Temin and Renato Dulbecco shared the 1975 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for the discoveries concerning the interaction between tumor viruses and the genetic material of the cell.

David Baltimore

David Baltimore was born in New York City. His interest in biology began when he was a high school student while working at Jackson Memorial Laboratory. After graduating Swarthmore College in 1960, he went to Massachusetts Institute of Technology to do a PhD in biophysics, but left MIT in 1961 to work with animal viruses with Richard Franklin. Baltimore became a research associate at the Salk Institute where he worked on poliovirus in 1965. In 1975, he received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his discoveries. David Baltimore is currently the Chairman of the Board of Directors of American Association for the Advancement of Science [5].

Howard Temin

Howard Temin was born in Philadelphia. Like David Baltimore, his interest in biology began as a high school student while working at Jackson Memorial Laboratory. He received his PhD from the California Institute of Technology, where he worked in the laboratory of virologist Renato Dulbecco. Temin studied Rous sarcoma virus (RSV), a cancer-causing virus with RNA rather than DNA as its main genetic material. In 1960, he was an assistant professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. During the next four years in his basement laboratory, Temin performed the experiments that proved his provirus theory. In 1974 he became an American Cancer Society Professor of Viral Oncology and Cell Biology. Although Temin did not smoke, he died in 1994 from lung cancer [5].

Renato Dulbecco

Renato Dulbecco was born in Cantanzaro, Italy. He received his M.D. from the University of Turin in 1936 and immigrated to the U.S. in 1947. In the 1950s he and co-researcher Marguerite Vogt gained insight into how viruses infect cells by pioneering the technique of growing viruses in culture. In 1970, Dulbecco and two of his students, Howard Temin and David Baltimore, experimentally verified Temin's hypothesis that cancer cells affect genetic material. For this discovery the three were awarded the 1975 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine [16].