As you browse the site, add accommodation, tours, events and attractions to your personalised trip by clicking the heart icon. When you’re done, click the heart icon in the menu at the top of the website to view your wishlist.

Review your list, remove any items you no longer need, then select “View your itinerary” to see your trip on a map, or send it to a friend.

Nature is pretty spectacular and those that have seen the Southern Lights can attest.

Lighting up the night in greens, pinks and purples, the Aurora Australis is a truly magical sight. Due to Tasmania’s southerly location, these impressive lights can be visible when all the right ingredients align with the key ingredient being the sun.

Auroras, northern or southern, occur when the sun releases a massive burst of solar wind and magnetic fields into space, also known as CME (coronal mass ejections). These solar winds carry particles that are drawn toward the northern and southern poles, interacting with our magnetic field to produce the colourful light display. Auroras are cyclical in strength depending on the sun’s activity.

The other ingredients you need for an Aurora display: Clear night skies, away from any light pollution from city lights, a southerly facing aspect and a digital camera.

How to see an aurora

While you may see pictures of vibrant Auroras dancing across the sky, a majority of the time we are unable to see it with the naked eye, that’s where the digital camera comes in. To the naked eye, you may see what appears to be a light white glow or mist in the sky, it’s only when you adjust the camera settings that you are able to witness the range of colours.

Be sure to be facing south for the best vantage point and away from any light pollution (such as city lights).

While Auroras can appear at any time of day and any time of year, winter is the best chance to see them thanks to the longer nights.

The Milky Way

The beautiful Milky Way is particularly incredible during the wintertime in Tasmania when the galactic core is at its most visible.

The best time to view the milky way in the southern hemisphere is between February and October. Not only are the nights a little longer during this time but the galactic core of the Milky Way rises over the east just after sunset, allowing for some amazing shots.

Towards August and September, the core has shifted further to the west but offers are large arc across the sky. During the summer months of Tasmania, the galactic core is not visible as it is blocked by the sun (i.e. it is above the horizon during daylight hours).

There are lots of great apps you can use to check where the milky way will be located in the sky – Photopills and Night Sky are great options.

As with Auroras, when capturing the Milky Way, you want nice clear, dark skies. By venturing out of the city you will find less light pollution from the city lights. We also recommend checking the moon phases as even a half-moon can wash out the night sky, aim for a new moon for the best Milky Way results.

Bioluminescence: Sea Sparkle

There’s nothing quite like seeing the sea sparkle in bright green or blue and if you haven’t seen it, add it to the bucket list. The phenomenon is called bioluminescence and it is all thanks to a natural chemical process that allows living things to produce light. We usually see it in the form of the algae bloom of plankton which, when disturbed by a wave or splash, glows in the water.

Bioluminescence appears at random times but there is a local Facebook group you can follow to see if there is some sea sparkle near you. A good indicator of some bioluminescence is a pink cloudy algae spotted in calm water.