Key posts

Latest posts

Latest posts

6.21pm on May 23, 2024

Today’s top stories

By Josefine Ganko

Thanks for reading our live national news coverage today, this is where we will wrap up the blog.

To conclude, here’s a look back at some of the top stories we covered today:

Immigration Minister Andrew Giles has sought urgent advice from his department about the AAT decision to free a man from immigration detention who has now been charged with murder.

Prime Minister Anthony Albanese announced more than half-a-billion dollars will be spent as part of a national strategy to turn Australia into a battery making superpower.

The federal opposition is set to announce the locations of up to seven proposed nuclear power sites in a matter of weeks.

In Victoria, pro-Palestine protest camps at the University of Melbourne are expected to be packed up today after the university agreed to disclose its ties to weapons companies.

Also in Victoria, authorities will destroy 400,000 chickens as they place a five-kilometre cordon around a Victorian egg farm at the heart of the latest outbreak of avian flu.

In NSW, the state government has stepped in to save Eraring, Australia’s largest coal-fired power station, extending its operating life until August 2027.

In overseas news, British Prime Minister Rishi Sunak has called a surprise summer election in a bid to galvanise a bitterly divided Conservative Party.

6.05pm on May 23, 2024

Bangkok officials block Australian patient from voicing Singapore Airlines criticism

By Zach Hope

Australian man Keith Davis, an injured passenger from the ill-fated Singapore Airlines flight 321, is stuck in Bangkok with neither answers nor a voice.

His wife has been in intensive care since the flight from London to Singapore was forced to make an emergency landing in Thailand on Tuesday, following the death of a passenger in extreme turbulence.

Davis wished to speak more openly about his concerns with the ABC’s Bill Birtles on Thursday but, for reasons that were not explained, was not allowed to by officials.

In extraordinary scenes at a public cafe inside the hospital, staff surrounded Davis when it became apparent he was about to speak.

The staff in question, who identified as being from the hospital, said they had been ordered to stop the patients from speaking to media.

Read more on this development from South-East Asia correspondent Zach Hope here.

5.51pm on May 23, 2024

University of Melbourne’s Pro-Palestinian encampment to pack up

By Lachlan Abbott

Long-running pro-Palestine protest camps at the University of Melbourne are expected to be packed up today.

On Thursday afternoon, the university publicly committed to disclosing more details how joint academic research projects are funded. On Wednesday night, the students agreed to ending their occupation of the university’s Arts West building and dismantling a camp on the campus’ south lawn following the university’s release of the public commitment.

The Age contacted protesters to confirm this will occur after the university issued an update on its website at 2.30pm, but is yet to receive a response. No response is visible on the protest group’s social media yet either.

Earlier, the University of Melbourne update said it would commit “to additional disclosure of its research grant arrangements as they relate to research projects, the parties who support that research and the quantum.”

“Currently, the university makes information related to the topic and duration of research projects available to all members of the university community and the public. Further updates will be made available on the University’s website progressively, commencing in June.”

On Wednesday, protest organiser Dana Alshaer said demonstrators expected the university to disclose all its ties to weapons companies within a month and would keep campaigning for it to end those deals altogether.

“This is a major win, but it’s also a first step.”

But on Thursday, Executive Council of Australian Jewry co-chief executive Peter Wertheim denied the agreement was a victory for protesters, instead calling it “nothing more than a sham to disguise the fact that they have shut down their camp under threats of expulsion and totally capitulated.”

“Apart from menacing and harassing students and staff over several weeks, and bringing Australian higher education into disrepute, the protesters have achieved precisely nothing,” Wertheim said.

“They should hang their heads in shame.”

Advertisement

5.43pm on May 23, 2024

PM suggests a double standard in Dutton’s attacks over ex-detainee saga

By Josefine Ganko

In a press conference in Brisbane, Prime Minister Anthony Albanese has hit back at attacks against Immigration Minister Andrew Giles over a man charged with murder in Brisbane who was freed from immigration detention in April by a decision of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.

Critics, including the opposition, have used the case to add to the public furore over the immigration saga that saw 150 detainees released in recent months, pointing to the fact that the AAT cited directions from Giles about considering the age a detainee arrived in Australis in making release decisions.

This criticism was put to Albanese, who responded by referring to the case of a man accused of a brutal attack on a Perth grandmother. The man was released from federal detention in early 2020 when Opposition Leader Peter Dutton was minister for home affairs.

“I hope you applied the same principle to Peter Dutton, who was responsible as Minister for Home Affairs for the release of one of the people who are involved in that [Western Australia] attack.”

Albanese also suggested that the questioner consider which government appointed the members of the AAT who made the decision to release the Brisbane man:

“With regard to the other incident that you raise that goes to a decision by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal I think if you go back and have a look at who appointed the people who made that decision, it wasn’t this government.”

4.59pm on May 23, 2024

Albanese mocks Dutton, Taylor over muddied migration plan

By Josefine Ganko

Prime Minister Anthony Albanese was also on the offensive in a Queensland press conference this afternoon, making fun of the Coalition’s muddied migration policy announcement.

Albanese first rattled off the different numbers that various senior members of the Coalition announced for the proposed cut to migration:

We saw the Leader of the Opposition [Peter Dutton] commit to cutting net overseas migration to 160,000 in the first year of a coalition government, then the shadow treasurer [Angus Taylor] said they would cut the number by 25% over three years to 195,000. The shadow environment minister said the number would be 140,000. And Senator Patterson said that they would reduce migration by just a little bit.”

Loading

The prime minister then turned his attacks to Opposition Leader Peter Dutton’s noted absence from the National Press Club.

“No wonder Peter Dutton has not spoken at the National Press Club in the entire time he has been Liberal Party leader, a venue where I’ve spoken nine times,” Albanese said.

“The fact is that every time they announce a policy or thought when they’re asked about the substance, you don’t get anything. You get a mess,” the prime minister continued.

Finally, Albanese took a jab at shadow treasurer Angus Taylor over his performance at the press club.

“It was shambolic, Angus Taylor’s performance at the National Press Club yesterday,” he said.

“Whether it was on migration, or a nuclear policy, we were told that we would have the details in March. Then we were told we’d have the details before the budget, then it would be in the budget reply. Now I read today it’s going to be in June.”

4.53pm on May 23, 2024

Fashion house Dion Lee enters voluntary administration

By Jessica Yun

Designer label Dion Lee has appointed voluntary administrators in the latest high-profile business to come under pressure amid difficult economic conditions.

The fashion house, which has six stores in Australia and one in the US, is now under the control of insolvency firm dVT Group administrator Antony Resnick, who will continue running the business as a going concern and looking to urgently “assess all options” relating to the US business.

“We are in the very early stages of our administration process and our focus right now is on speaking with the Australian and US-based team and getting across all the relevant operational and financial data,” Resnick said in a statement.

Resnick said the Dion Lee brand, founded in 2009 by one of Australia’s highest-profile fashion designers, had built a globally recognised and credible brand in high fashion.

“It is regularly worn by cultural icons and influencers. It is noted in the industry for its unique designs. All of which should attract both local and international investor interest,” said Resnick.

Lee attended Newtown School of Performing Arts and then TAFE NSW Fashion Design Studio. He debuted his first collection at Australian Fashion Week in 2009 at the age of 23, and has showcased at London Fashion Week and New York Fashion Week.

His pieces have been worn by Taylor Swift, Duchess of Sussex Meghan Markle, Kylie Minogue, Dua Lipa and other celebrities, and has designed Opera House uniforms.

Advertisement

4.28pm on May 23, 2024

Nine names new head of news and current affairs

By Clancy Yeates

Nine has appointed Fiona Dear, the executive producer of A Current Affair, as its new director of news and current affairs.

The network on Thursday announced that Dear would move into the job overseeing programs including Nine’s 6pm news bulletins, Today, A Current Affair and 60 Minutes. She is replacing Darren Wick, who resigned in March after 29 years at the network.

Loading

On Monday, News Corp publications reported that the departure of Wick earlier this year followed allegations of inappropriate behaviour towards a female staff member.

Nine’s director of television, Michael Healy, said: “Fiona is an outstanding news person, who has worked tirelessly here at Nine across all our broadcast news brands and perfectly understands our news culture of excellence. We are excited to see her lead the outstanding team of people in television news to bring the full range of news and current affairs to our audiences.”

4.22pm on May 23, 2024

Albanese offers fiery defence of his ICC comments

By Josefine Ganko

Prime Minister Anthony Albanese has fiercely defended his stance on the ICC decision to seek arrest warrants for Hamas and Isreali leaders, including Benjamin Netanyahu.

The prime minister implied he had been mischaracterised, claiming he was clear in his opposition to the October 7 attacks, but that those quotes “didn’t get a run in any of the quotes that were used.”

Loading

“There’s no equivalence between the terrorist organisation like that... Hamas should not be compared with any nation state,” Albanese said.

He also rebutted Opposition Leader Peter Dutton’s criticism of the ICC, saying it was up to the Howard Government, who signed Australia up to the court, “to explain those decisions at the time”.

Albanese also outlined the other stances the government has taken over the conflict:

“We also called for then for international humanitarian law to be applied as appropriate. And we also called for, since then, a humanitarian ceasefire with full humanitarian aid, and we call for the political advancement of a two-state solution, where both Israelis and Palestinians can live in peace and security, as we go forward.”

4.09pm on May 23, 2024

PM promotes battery strategy in Queensland

By Josefine Ganko

Prime Minister Anthony Albanese is in Queensland to promote the national battery strategy his government announced this morning.

Albanese said that batteries are a “critical ingredient in Australia’s clean energy mix”.

“We will meet Australia’s emission reduction targets and create a strong clean energy manufacturing industry. One that creates good value good, high wage secure jobs into the future.”

The prime minister said the strategy will focus on four areas: stationary storage, upgrading raw materials into process battery components, building safer, secure batteries connected to the grid, and building batteries for our transport manufacturing industry.

Albanese opens the floor to questions, but unsurprisingly, no one wants to ask about batteries. He asks if they can focus on the issue at hand first...

Advertisement

3.54pm on May 23, 2024

Watch: Prime minister, QLD premier press conference

Prime Minister Anthony Albanese and Queensland Premier Steven Miles held a joint press conference in the northern Brisbane suburb of Banyo.

They were joined by Minister for Industry and Science Ed Husic and local member Anika Wells.

Watch the press conference here:

Most Viewed in National

Loading