Custom Design & Manufacturing

(OEM)

Ecolink Intelligent Technology Solutions

In the world of RF design and manufacturing, theory is one thing, but experience is everything. For over 20 years, the team at Ecolink has been developing reliable, innovative products through our partnerships with marquis brands.

Turn Ecolink expertise into your company’s high performing products.

WE CREATE SIMPLE, AFFORDABLE SMART HOME SOLUTIONS

Ecolink is a leading developer of low power, highly reliable wireless solutions. The company delivers a wide range of intelligent wireless security, sensing and home automation devices. With over 20 years of wireless engineering expertise, the team at Ecolink represents the industry’s best with numerous patents issued and countless more innovations.

OEM/ODM

With design centers in California and Taiwan, Ecolink provides custom products ranging from simple private branding, to a full turn-key custom protocol wireless eco-system and everything in between. Our reputation is about delivering great products, at a low cost faster than you think is possible.

Sensing

Be it a simple magnetic reed switch, passive infrared detector or more complex technology like magneto – resistive or accelerometers. Ecolink has the know-how to detect people, pets, movement, water or fire in virtually any scenario.

Wireless Expertise

Having designed and manufactured product for the four main security panel manufactures, our Pro-Security products are 100% compatible with those panels. Whether it’s a device that works seamlessly with a control panel or transceivers that enables your product to listen to their devices, we have the capability to simply make it work.

Wireless Protocols

Ecolink provides 20+ years of wireless technology innovation experience to our OEM customers. Our expertise in Z-Wave, Zigbee, Sub 1Ghz and other wireless protocols supports the myriad of options available to manufacturers.

Wireless Technology Experience

Ecolink and UEI maintain an experienced U.S.A. based RF engineering team who possess extensive knowledge in a wide range of wireless technology protocols. The capable team, who specialize in subGHz, infrared, ZWAVE, and ZigBeeRF ranges, will effectively apply Ecolink standard principles and process to develop effective custom solutions. Ecolink Carlsbad California engineers are responsible for the development of over 500 professional wireless products for Honeywell, Vivint, 2GIG, GE/UTC, Ring, and Comcast. Ecolink and UEI hold an extensive group of adept RF science resources throughout the globe in support of the development of highly innovative and custom solutions.

Project Management Experience

Ecolink and UEI apply highly capable U.S.A. based people to the effective management of all development projects. The project management team leverages a detailed and proven six phase new product introduction process to ensure full product success at launch. As per standard process, customers will be assigned a product development PM and a factory manufacturing PM. Ecolink and UEI have developed and currently manufacture over 5,000 unique custom RF technology solutions for our marquis customer base.

Product Manufacturing Experience

Ecolink and UEI leverage five company owned plants as well as two sub-contracted plants to ensure high quality output and manufacturing cost controls. Factories are ISO and Green Standard accredited. Factories are vertically integrated and ship millions of RF products throughout the world each year.

RF Communication Protocol Specialties

custom product designs

Security Devices

Door & Window

Sensors

Garage Door Tilt

Sensors

Motion Sensors

Flood/Freeze Sensors

Life Safety Notification Sensors

Safety Chime

Home Automation

Light Switch Controls

Security Devices

Door & Window

Sensors

Zigbee Controllers

Motion Sensors

Flood/Freeze Sensors

Life Safety Notification Sensors

Interior Siren

ClearSky is a SubGHz proprietary wireless protocol designed based on more than 20 years of experience developing wireless security sensor devices. The protocol is based on the market leading 345MHz radio frequency range, making the ClearSky transceiver radio backward compatible with existing unencrypted devices in the same RF range. ClearSky encryption is based on rolling code encryption with a pre-shared key which is hardened against replay attacks and takeovers. The ClearSky serial API packet allows Ecolink to designate data within as proprietary to only specific customers systems.

ClearSky Encrypted