Sure, this one is straight crime fiction, but it’s by Robert Silverberg, so, of course, I’m going to review it.

Review: Blood on the Mink, Robert Silverberg, 2012.

You won’t be surprised at the origin Silverberg lays out for this short novel and two additional stories in his “Afterward” to Blood on the Mink. The market for science fiction magazines had collapsed in the late 1950s, so he was writing other stuff. These stories are from 1959 to 1962, and Silverberg wrote and forgot ‘em until Hard Case Crime reprinted them.

Blood on the Mink’s narrator is an undercover operative, Nick, called in to impersonate a mobster named Vic Lowney. Vic gets snatched by the Feds at the Chicago airport en route from Los Angeles to Philadelphia. Nick takes his place. His mission? Find the engraving plates for some high-quality counterfeit bills that have shown up in the City of Brotherly Love. Vic was going there to buy them for a LA gang.

But Vic’s gang isn’t the only one interested in buying the plates, and the representative of one knows Nick isn’t whom he claims.

Continue reading →

What to call this one? It’s a rare re-read for me, but I’m going through the complete Budyaeen series this time. And I’m not going to to do a review to replace my previous Raw Feed.

Let’s call this a . . .

Return Trip: When Gravity Fails, George Alec Effinger, 1987.

On reading this book again after 34 years, the motives behind the killers Bond/Khan (he murders under the influence of two moddys, personality modifications) and Hassan seemed a bit murky, and Marîd Audran’s final confrontation with the former seemed a bit anticlimactic.

But I mainly wanted to take my younger self to task for ignorantly claiming this was a homage to Raymond Chandler. Robert Silverberg’s blurb calls it “A kind of cyberpunk Raymond Chandler” and a Publisher’s Weekly blurb more accurately calls it a “riff on the time-honored themes of Raymond Chandler”.

And Effinger himself opens with a modified quote from Chandler’s “The Simple Art of Murder”:

. . . He must be the best man in his world and a good enough man for any world. . . . He is a lonely man and his pride is that you will treat him as a proud man or be very sorry you ever saw him. He talks as the man of his age talks – that is, with rude wit, a lively sense of the grotesque, a disgust for sham, and a contempt for pettiness.

That full quote is generally taken as Chandler’s description of his own series hero, Philip Marlowe.

Continue reading →

I have let you down, dear reader. I not only did no reviews of C. L. Moore’s Jirel of Joiry stories. I didn’t even make notes on all of them.

Still, this is what I have, and I’m bringing this up since it is relevant to a future post.

Raw Feed (2009): “Black God’s Kiss”, C. L. Moore, The Fantasy Hall of Fame, eds. Robert Silverberg and Martin H. Greenberg, 1983.

I had certainly heard of this tale before though my memory incorrectly tagged it as one of Moore’s Mars tales. It is the first of Moore’s Jirel of Joiry tales which, as I knew, is perhaps the first female warrior of sword-and-sorcery though I didn’t know the story took place in mediaeval France. There is, as I had heard, an air of eroticism, here largely unwanted, since Jirel’s quest to an alternate dimension, perhaps a sort of hell, is to get a weapon to avoid the sexual advances of Guillaume. (Not the least of the sexual images are the loathsome splatterings of alien ichor on her thighs.) She eventually gets that weapon – a horrible despair that infects her when she kisses the Black God and that she passes, in a kiss, to Guillaume who then dies.

Raw Feed (2012): “Black God’s Kiss”, C. L. Moore, Jirel of Joiry, 1969.

I don’t know how I missed, the first time I read this story, the whole idea that Jirel really loves Guillaume. I find it interesting that, like in “Jirel Meets Magic” and some of the Northwest Smith stories, emotions are a weapon. It is, after all, feelings “infinitely alien and infinitely sad” that kill Guillaume, a lethal burden transferred from the Black God by Jirel to Guillaume. A further element of Jirel’s unrealized love is pointed to at the end when she meets a her double who mockingly repeats her assertion that she hates Guillaume “with all your heart!”. There is, I think, a bit of H. P. Lovecraft’s “The Festival” here in “No human travelers had worn the sides of the spiral so smooth …” I think, linguistically, Moore makes a mistake in breaking the mood of a medieval story with phrases like “atomic unsteadiness” or “poly-dimensional space”. Certainly, they are in keeping with the device of interdimensional travel used in the Northwest Smith series and the two stories I ‘ve read in this series and would be known by pulp readers of the time, but I think they break the mood. It’s a mistake Clark Ashton Smith wouldn’t have done if he would have written this story – which I can see him doing given the plot and setting.

“Black God’s Shadow” — A follow up of sorts to the preceding Jirel of Joiry story, “Black God’s Kiss”. Essentially, it’s kind of a Harrowing of Hell or Orpheus and Eurydice story with Jirel feeling guilty about killing Guillaume. It’s perhaps a bit overwritten as Jirel goes to another dimension, a shadow land where, paradoxically, light is to be most feared, to save Guillaume’s soul. There is much about the union of opposites being necessary for the life and how that will defeat the stasis of the Black God. She undertakes the journey because, in tearful, lonely nights (after realizing she loved Guillaume), she hears his pleading whispers.

Low Res Scan: The Collected Stories of Robert Silverberg, Volume Nine: The Millennium Express, 1995-2009, Robert Silverberg, 2014.

Robert Silverberg and I go back a long way. The first science fiction novel I remember reading in grade school was his first novel, Revolt on Alpha C. Later, I read The Time of the Great Freeze. In junior high and high school, I would come across various anthologies he edited which had his work. I puzzled over the title story in his collection The Feast of St. Dionysius. When he returned to writing with Lord Valentine’s Castle, I read his work in Omni and various other magazines. (Not faithfully. I’m terrible about keeping current with my magazine subscriptions.)

I can’t claim to have read even all his science fiction, especially the novels, but I have read most of his shorter science fiction. (I very much doubt any human can claim to have read all of Silverberg’s work with the possible exception of his wife Karen Haber and Alvaro Zinos-Amaro.) In other words, as a science fiction reader, Silverberg has always been a presence for me and a creator of pleasures yet to be written and read.

So, reading this book brought some funereal emotions to me at times. Partly, that’s because so many of these stories have to do with age, ruin, and decay. But mostly it’s because, as he notes in the “Introduction”, this will very likely be the last installment in this series. He was 79 at the time he wrote it and says he has no need, ability, or desire to try to recapture the freakish prolificness of his younger days. And, with his body of work and awards, he has nothing to prove. These days, when a story idea occurs to him, he feels little need to actually write the story. While he has been published since 1952, he doubts he will break Jack Williamson’s record for career longevity. Also, the science fiction publishing world he knew is gone. It now puts

a premium on repetitious sequels, formulaic themes, and lengthy, overstuffed plots full of ferocious melodramatic conflict

The “quieter sort of fiction” he prefers to write is, at best, tolerated.

Continue reading →

I’ve entered the sort of territory MPorcius Fiction Log occasionally covers: disreputable and little known works by famous science fiction writers. Here it’s not Barry Malzberg but his friend Robert Silverberg.

Review: Exotic Adventures of Robert Silverberg, eds. Robert Deis and Wyatt Doyle, 2021.

Since at least the mid-1990s, Playboy’s fiction editor Alice Turner would turn down Silverberg stories set in contemporary times but foreign lands. They were “IRS stories”, she said, merely written to justify taking a vacation as a business expense.

But, in 1957, there were those who wanted that sort of thing from Silverberg.

In “Adventurous Beginnings”, editors Deis and Doyle tell us how Silverberg came to write for several different magazines when the market for Silverberg’s short story science fiction rapidy dried up when several magazines lost their national distributors. (The back story is the distributors were bought up because they owned valueable real estate they were using as warehouses, and the land was worth a lot more developed for something else.) Silverberg was a staff writer under various pseudonyms for William Hamling’s science fiction magazines. When Hamling decided to publish Exotic Adventures, he sought Silverberg out since he was already placing stuff in other men’s magazines.

In between tales of treasure hunting, man vs. nature, encounters with Nazis and Commies, and sex (lots of sex though not very explicit), the so-called men’s adventure magazines were quite popular. I myself lived in their tail end in the 1970s. (As a young lad, I bought a copy of Saga – not for the half nudes of some actress named Dyan Cannon but because it was a special Bermuda Triangle issue.)

Continue reading →

The posts on William Tenn continue while I work on new posts.

Science Fiction Ruminations gives the parallax on this.

Raw Feed (1998): Of All Possible Worlds, William Tenn, 1955.

“Introduction: On the Fiction in Science Fiction” is William Tenn’s defense of science fiction. First, he argues that, contrary to critics, sf is about people as individuals or representatives of a “collective community”. Second, popular art, which sf is, is helpful in attaining aspirations of artistic immortality. He argues that “a scientific error or two” would not mar classic sf. He explicitly mentions Robert A. Heinlein’s Beyond This Horizon, Frederik Pohl’s and Cyril Kornbluth’s The Space Merchants, Ward Moore’s Bring the Jubilee, and Isaac Asimov’s Pebble in the Sky as classics. Responding to the old charge of sf as escapism, Tenn notes that new literary genres, be they novels or Elizabethan plays are always denounced as dangerous by an intellectual elite invested in the old forms. Tenn doubts that people read any fiction to learn more about their “unfulfilled” lives or gain a moral perspective. He thinks that people read fiction for escape, believable escape. Responding to the old and still present charge that sf has produced no Shakespeare, Cervantes, or Fielding, Tenn notes that Elizabethan dramatists produced nothing equivalent to Aeschylus either though it was the standard they were aiming for. Good popular art has a certain primitive vitality and vulgarity, Tenn argues, which causes it to endure longer than boring art polished to the point of perfection.

“Down Among the Dead Men” — This story, like Alfred Bester’s “Disappearing Act” published a year earlier in 1953, is a satire about the Cold War. Essentially both stories depict a society totally mobilized for war – and the qualities of those societies being destroyed in the act of defending them. I use to regard these stories as somewhat liberal whining about fighting the Cold War, but, in learning more about the total mobilization of America in WWII (which, of course, Tenn and Bester would have known first hand) and the encroachments of the government on liberty during that war and since, I appreciate these stories now. Here a decades long war with the alien Eoti has radically changed Earth’s society. Not only are millions dead and all of Earth mobilized, but, in a satirical point derived from the recycling drives of WWII, human soldiers, dead soldiers, are revived as ever increasingly sophisticated “soldier surrogates” or, in popular parlance, zombies. Sexual mores have changed drastically since Earth’s women need to pump out as many babies as possible. The narrator, his reproductive organs wounded – and the wound one of the few that are irreparable, is excluded from these couplings. I’m unsure whether to be glad, at the end, the protagonist as found a purpose and family (albeit a surrogate one) or horrified that familial and human sensibilities have been so distorted or wonder that humans are so adaptable.

Continue reading →

My look at Stableford’s work continues.

Review: The Sociology of Science Fiction, Brian Stableford, 1987.

In Chapter IV, “The Expectations of the Science Fiction Reader”, Stableford tries to discover what sf readers get out of the genre. He looks at three questions: what sf readers say they get out of the genre, how the various definitions of sf serve as rules for composing sf works, and what writers and apologists of sf say about the genre’s function and value.

Stableford argues that the whole question of science fiction as a genre is that reading a work of sf is different than reading another sort of novel. That’s what defines the genre. He quotes Darko Suvin as defining a genre as a system of expectations, based on prior reading experience, of a particular type of material. Even innovations in the genre are just an evolution of expectations based on past experience with sf.

What are those expectations? To get an idea, Stableford turns to the letters columns of sf magazines. There are a couple of methodological problems with this acknowledges Stableford.

These are, first of all, a self-selected sample, and, of course, not all the letters received were printed though Stableford notes early sf pulps frequently had letters insulting certain stories.

Continue reading →

The Charles Sheffield series continues.

Some of the stories here I had read before, but I’ve put my notes in from my pre-1997 readings of them.

This one also has science articles.

(Just keeping things straight for the future historians who will, of course, want to know all that.)

Review (1997): Dancing with Myself, ed. Charles Sheffield, 1993.

“Out of Copyright” — This story revolves around a clever idea: that in a future where cloning is routine a person’s surviving heirs have copyrights to that person’s genome. Eventually those copyrights lapse into the public domain. This story centers around companies competing in a test-of-concept in which asteroids are launched at Io. The companies clone long dead scientific geniuses whose genomes are in the public domain. The clones provide assistance on various projects. The narrator of the story heads one combine’s teams. His talent is not scientific but in sabotage of the minor and persistent sort which accumulates and dooms a combine’s efforts. Most of the sabotage involves a keen understanding of people for it is revealed, at story’s end, that he is a cloned version of Al Capone (though Sheffield doesn’t explicitly name him). [Peter F. Hamilton also used an Al Capone resurrection in his Night’s Dawn trilogy.] The story’s concept lets Sheffield talk about some of the quirks and talents of those historical scientists who were cloned. Sheffield also points out that cloned scientific geniuses do not always turn out to be valuable. Sometimes the original’s accomplishments owed more to environment than genes. [There was something in the air in 1989, the year this story was first published. It was also the year that Robert Silverberg’s Time Gate was published. It’s historical figures were resurrected via computer simulacra.]

”Tunicate, Tunicate, Wilt Thou Be Mine” — This is Sheffield doing a sort of H.P. Lovecraft imitation. As in many a Lovecraft tale, the story is narrated in the first person by a narrator who writes desperately of awful things before some cosmic horror previously viewed closes in for the last time. Here, again as in Lovecraft – notably his “The Colour Out of Space” – the horror is an alien who has crashed on Earth. The alien is much like an earth tunicate, a strange creature combining the features of animal and plant, vertebrate, and invertebrate. Under its influence, the narrator kills his wife and friends. Continue reading →

This week’s weird fiction being discussed over at LibraryThing is Dan Simmons’ first published story.

Review: “The River Styx Runs Upstream”, Dan Simmons, 1982.

This, like Robert Silverberg’s classic “Born with the Dead”, is a resurrectionist story. Whereas that story’s returned dead stick to themselves and are oddly changed and not interested in their former lives, the dead of Simmons’ story function at a much lower level.

The story opens with a thematic statement from Ezra Pound’s “Canto LXXXI”:

What thou lovest well remains the rest is dross

What thou lovest well shall not be reft from thee

What thou lov’st well is thy true heritage”

The story is narrated by a young man looking back to his boyhood, and it starts when he is eight.

His mother has died and been brought back by the Resurrectionist movement. They are somewhat like a church. The boy’s father will be tithing 25% of his income to pay for the resurrection and the group’s activities. Continue reading →