science fiction Fantasy tales available for holiday giving

By Fred Cleaver

Science-Fiction Columnist

Nov. 22 - Long voyages, long fantasies and esoteric weirdness are all available as Christmas treats.

The special nature of interstellar travel and the unique commitment it requires has been a theme throughout the long voyage of Poul Anderson's career. It takes special people to leave on a starship where five or six years of ship time will be more than 10,000 years on Earth.

"Starfarers'' by Poul Anderson (Tor, $25.95) has speculations on the latest cutting-edge physics while managing to include a 1954 story on the breed apart of star voyagers.

Physical wonders, alien races, the shifting relationships among the crew and the return to an Earth as alien as anything encountered en route are traced in Anderson's epic manner.

"Mission Child'' by Maureen F. McHugh (Avon, $20) presents life gone very native on a colony planet. Orphaned in a harsh arctic world at war, Janna survives by masquerading as a man in this alien culture viewed from within. Moving from the frozen wastes to city streets, from Arctic to Chinese cultures, Janna searches for her identity.

"Starlight 2,'' edited by Patrick Nielsen Hayden (Tor, $24.95), is the second volume in what has easily become the most important current anthology of original stories. Robert Charles Wilson mixes science-fiction books that might have been and shifting realities.

"Legends,'' edited by Robert Silverberg (Tor, $27.95), is a large collection of new stories in 11 wildly popular fantasy series. Stephen King, Terry Pratchett, Orson Scott Card and Ursula Le Guin are a few of the contributors to this all-star crew. This is an excellent way to visit old friends or get clued in on some multivolumed epics.

Two other contributors to ""Legends'' are Raymond Feist and Robert Jordan. Feist's latest is "Krondor the Betrayal'' (Avon, $24). This novel is based on a popular computer game that was based on earlier novels by Feist. The political intrigues and deep background leave the feeling of being confused in the middle of a soap opera.

The book includes a CD-ROM with the game, which you can struggle to install when the politics become too intense.

"The Path of Daggers'' by Robert Jordan (Tor, $27.95) is the eighth thick volume of The Wheels of Time and a fine gift for those fans who are patient enough to wait that long. Or get all eight for someone taking one of Poul Anderson's multiyear voyages.

"Beyond the Pale'' by Mark Anthony (Bantam, $14.95) starts off in a Colorado mining town and a Denver hospital before the main characters are taken to a fantasy land on their quests. This is the first in a series by a talented young Denver author.

On the darker side of fantasy, "Judgment of Tears: Anno Dracula 1959'' by Kim Newman (Carroll & Graf, $22.95) combines real and fictional icons of the 1950s in a demented world with an upper class of vampires - there's a special vampire class on airplanes with live mice in-flight snacks. A serial killer is targeting vampires in a world drawn from Fellini's "La Dolce Vita'' with real and fictional characters (including a version of James Bond) popping in.

For Christmas ghost stories, an excellent choice is "Gothic Ghosts,'' edited by Wendy Webb and Charles Grant (Tor, $14.95). The collection is highlighted by the haunted library story "Dust Motes'' by Denver author P.D. Cacek, which recently won the World Fantasy Award for best short story of the year.

"The Avram Davidson Treasury,'' edited by Robert Silverberg and Grania Davis (Tor, $27.95), is a large collection of stories and appreciations of a famously idiosyncratic author. Davidson was one of the unique voices who somehow managed to sneak into the science-fiction magazines over a 40-year period. The many personal anecdotes by his friends and colleagues show his peculiarities and the career dangers for a writer with a personal vision. The word "treasury'' in the title is no exaggeration.

Much darker are the hard edged works from Cyber-Psychos AOD, an excellent Denver magazine where William S. Burroughs meets body piercing. Among their interesting book publications, "Stealing My Rules,'' by Don Webb (Jasmine Sailing, Cyber-Psychos AOD, P.O. Box 581, Denver 80201, $5) is the closest to the mainstream of science fiction. Webb is one of the best small-press writers with an original off-the-wall Texas attitude.

"The Best of Crank,'' edited by Bryan Cholfin (Tor, $23.95) is on the literary end of small-press science fiction with fine stories by Brian Aldiss, David R. Bunch, Michael Bishop and R.A. Lafferty.

Another interesting small-press offering is "Beyond the Wall of Sleep,'' by R. Andrew Heidel (Mortco, $16). These short tales and poems approach death and God with a light touch.

"Ahmed and the Oblivion Machines'' by Ray Bradbury (Avon, $14) is a slight fable of a magical journey that still shows typical Bradbury charms.

"If Wishes Were Horses'' by Anne McCaffrey (Roc, $14.95) is a small fantasy-romance stocking stuffer of twins coming of age in a fantasy kingdom.

"The Science of the X-Files'' by Jeanne Cavelos (Berkley, $12.95) is a surprisingly good account of the sources of the TV series in real and pseudo-science. Cavelos presents everything from documented biological oddities to the alien/human hybrid fears of the UFO abductees.

"The Sci-Fi Channel Encyclopedia of Science Fiction,'' edited by Roger Fulton and John Betancourt (Warner, $15.99), gives guides to all of the most popular and/or significant shows and information on a plethora of obscure ones, such as the veterinarians in "Spacevets.''