Demi Moore has opened up about her relationship with Bruce Willis in her new memoir, noting how the pair started dating, got married and she fell pregnant within four months.

According to the Daily Mail, the Ghost actor also claims that once they got hitched, Willis insisted Moore become a stay-at-home mother while he went out and did “whatever the f*** he wanted to do.”

The pair met in 1987, when Moore was 25 years old and Willis was 36.

They were married for 13 years and have three daughters together: Rumer, 31, Scout, 28, and Tallulah, 25.

Read more: Jon Cryer denies losing his virginity to Demi Moore after she reveals '80s fling

In her book Inside Out, Moore goes on to say that Willis introduced her to a jet-set lifestyle, while helping her overcome severe self-esteem issues.

“Bruce insisted that he thought everything about me was beautiful: he wrapped my fear and anxiety in his love,” notes Moore, as she recalls meeting the Moonlighting actor shortly after she broke off her engagement to Emilio Estevez.

“But if you carry a well of shame and unresolved trauma inside of you, no amount of money, no measure of success or celebrity can fill it.”

“I had a very rebellious reaction to Bruce in general,” she goes on to write, saying that the pair started to have problems as her level of fame started to ramp up.

“I just didn't buy the ‘You're the king’ kind of thing, which he thrived on. Plus, telling me, ‘I don't know if I want to be married’ is not exactly the way to my heart.

“Bruce and I were trapped in our dance. He felt locked out by my self-reliance which hurt him in ways he couldn't face and fed his ambivalence about our marriage.”

Read more: Demi Moore's memoir claims long-rumored threesomes with Ashton Kutcher

The couple ultimately split in 2000, three years before she started dating Ashton Kutcher, who is 16 years her junior.

Just a few days ago, reports emerged from early readings of Inside Out that Moore suffered a miscarriage a short while into her relationship with Kutcher, which she blamed on drinking and smoking.

“I had to lose so much before I could break down enough to rebuild,” she writes. “I was holding on to so many misconceptions about myself all my life – that I wasn't valuable - that I was unworthy and contaminated.”