Battle of Britain fighter pilot who destroyed at least six enemy aircraft and always prayed for the men he shot down

WING COMMANDER MICHAEL CONSTABLE MAXWELL, who has died aged 83, was an outstanding fighter pilot in the Second World War, destroying at least six enemy aircraft, and winning the DSO and DFC.

His enthusiasm for attacking German aircraft was combined with an acute concern, born of his Roman Catholic faith, for the souls of those he shot down. He invariably prayed before opening fire, and on landing had a mass said for those he had killed. In 1948 Constable Maxwell entered Ampleforth Abbey as a novice monk, Brother Paul, and for short periods taught in the school.

In 1952, however, before he was due to take his final vows, he returned to the RAF. Constable Maxwell had originally received his commission a few days before the outbreak of the Second World War. In January 1940 he was posted to No 56, a Hurricane squadron at North Weald, and scored his first victory over Dunkirk on May 27, when he shot down a Heinkel 111 bomber. Soon afterwards, however, he himself was shot down - by Belgian anti-aircraft fire.

"There was an almighty bang and smoke all around," he recalled. As the Hurricane fell away out of control and turned on its back, he slammed open the cockpit canopy and "popped out like a champagne cork". As he fumbled for his parachute ripcord, he cursed himself for not having rehearsed this manoeuvre.

He managed to open the parachute and landed in a circle of unshaven and hostile Belgian soldiers, whose suspicions were further aroused when he was unable to produce any evidence of his identity. Fortunately, an officer intervened to explain that the prisoner "must be English [in fact he was a Scot]. Only the English would go to war like this."

Immediately a staff car appeared to whisk him to Ostend, where he boarded a trawler for England. Skippered by a Highlander who had once been the Lovats' head forester, the trawler evaded a torpedo attack, and landed Constable Maxwell at Deal just as Belgium was capitulating. Back with 56 Squadron, Constable Maxwell was bounced by Me 109s over Le Tréport on June 8.

Although cannon shells tore into his Hurricane and splinters lodged in one of his legs, he decided to try to get the aircraft back to North Weald. As the Hurricane landed, a tyre burst. The aircraft slewed round and eventually came to rest near the maintenance hangars. Observing the blood oozing out of Constable Maxwell's flying-boot, one of the ground crew observed that it ought to have been blue.

When Constable Maxwell returned to operations on July 9 he showed himself as determined as ever to get at the enemy. "He had unbelievable courage amounting almost to foolhardiness," remembered George Smyth, a sergeant pilot. In the early stages he frequently came off worst, arriving back at base with his aircraft riddled."

Fighting through the summer heat of the Battle of Britain, Constable Maxwell destroyed an Me 109 on August 28. But his Hurricane was so badly damaged that he faced the choice of baling out over the sea or gambling on getting home with a faltering engine. He took the gamble, and the Hurricane had just cleared the beach and the last of the houses at Herne Bay when the engine glycol exploded, obliterating his forward view.

After crash-landing he discovered the engine had fallen 25 yards behind him. Shortly afterwards, Constable Maxwell shot down a Dornier 17 which was at the rear of a formation of 25 to 30 bombers, and watched it crash without anyone escaping. "Four humans were in that plane," he reflected. "I had experienced the same thing. It was beastly and unpleasant."

He had another close shave on September 30 when, after a hectic morning in which his Hurricane's tailplane had been damaged, he was scrambled again after lunch from Warmwell in Dorset to intercept 20 Heinkel 111 bombers which were heading for the Westland aircraft factory at Yeovil. The Heinkel gunners shot down three Hurricanes from 56 Squadron, including Constable Maxwell's. With his windscreen and instruments obliterated by oil, he switched off the engine and glided into a crash-landing on Chesil Beach.

Before the Battle of Britain was over, he had a brush with a fellow RAF pilot. Returning to Warmwell on October 7 he was fired upon by a Spitfire. Turning inside his attacker with the greatest of ease, he was able to get away. Having been shot down four times, he did not intend to become a victim of friendly fire.

Michael Hugh Constable Maxwell was born on June 3 1917 at Beauly in Inverness-shire. His father Bernard, fourth son of the 10th Lord Herries, had returned from an adventurous youth in the Wild West to marry Alice Fraser, second daughter of the 13th Lord Lovat. Michael was the seventh son and the youngest of 13 children.

As a boy he was inspired by the stories of his brother Gerald, who had fought with distinction as a Royal Flying Corps pilot in the Great War. Educated at Ampleforth, Michael managed to conceal from the monks a car which he had bought for £6 and drove about the Yorkshire lanes. At Hertford College, Oxford, he read History and learned to fly with the University Air Squadron.

Pupil pilots were delivered in batches of eight by a large Rolls-Royce to RAF Abingdon where they trained in Avro Tutor biplanes. Constable Maxwell was also commissioned as a Territorial into the 4th Queen's Own Cameron Highlanders.

In August 1942, teamed with Sergeant John Quinton as radar operator, Constable Maxwell was posted to instruct at No 54 Operational Training Unit. That December he moved to No 264, where he became a flight commander. He led No 264's Mosquitos to protect from Ju 88 attacks the Sunderland flying boats which were hunting German submarines in the Bay of Biscay. He also flew over occupied Europe.

In April 1943, still with Quinton, Constable Maxwell returned to No 604 Squadron as commander. Far out to sea north east of Middlesbrough he opened fire on a Ju 88. His cannon shells set the port engine on fire and its cowling hurtled back towards his Beaufighter before the bomber crashed into the sea.

Constable Maxwell's last week with No 604, in early July 1944, was particularly successful. On the night of July 2-3, defying an order not to fly because of bad weather, he addressed the crewroom: "Who's coming up with me?" Every hand went up, but he chose just one crew to accompany his aircraft. Each pair destroyed a Ju 88 over France. Six nights later, still paired with Quinton, he shot down another Ju 88 over France.

Michael Constable Maxwell ended his war in Europe on fighter staff and training duties - though he kept his hand in by flying the occasional patrol. Towards the end of 1944 be was posted to command No 84, a Mosquito squadron at Charra in Bengal. The war ended before he could tackle the Japanese, and for the next two years he commanded No 60, a Thunderbolt - later a Spitfire - squadron which flew in Malaya and Java in support of Allied ground forces.

Constable Maxwell returned to Britain in 1947, but five years later, after his time as a monk at Ampleforth, was back with the RAF. He learned to fly Meteor, Vampire and Venom jets, and commanded No 23, a Venom night-fighter squadron whose young pilots, noting his habit of clasping his hands in front of him at briefings, nicknamed him "the mad monk". In 1956 he found himself back with the Oxford University Air Squadron, this time in command.

After two years he moved on to the Central Fighter Establishment to develop future tactics. From March 1960, he spent an enjoyable six months as commander of Gan, an RAF staging post in the Indian Ocean where he plied high ranking visitors with a ferocious cocktail based on gin and coconut milk. Returning home later that year he attended a brother officer's wedding where he met Susan Davies, whom he married in 1962.