Our website (https://kickapp.io), Timer Plus, "the Apps” provide software-as-a-service functionality "the Service" to merchants who use Shopify to power their stores. This Privacy Policy describes how personal information is collected, used, and shared when you install or use the Apps in connection with your Shopify-supported store.

Personal Information the Apps Collects

When you install the Apps, we are automatically able to access certain types of information from your Shopify account:

Shopify Account Data – Personally identifiable information about your Shopify account, including your account email addresses, phone numbers, and locations.

Products – Information about products and collections.

Orders – Personally identifiable information about your customers, including names, email addresses, phone numbers, physical addresses, and geolocations.

Additionally, we collect the following types of personal information from you and/or your customers once you have installed the Apps: Information about you and others who may access the App on behalf of your store, such as your name, address, email address, phone number, and billing information; Information about individuals who visit your store, such as their IP address, web browser details, time zone, and information about the cookies installed on the particular device.

We collect personal information directly from the relevant individual, through your Shopify account, or using the following technologies: “Cookies” are data files that are placed on your device or computer and often include an anonymous unique identifier. For more information about cookies, and how to disable cookies, visit http://www.allaboutcookies.org. “Log files” track actions occurring on the Site, and collect data including your IP address, browser type, Internet service provider, referring/exit pages, and date/time stamps. “Web beacons,” “tags,” and “pixels” are electronic files used to record information about how you browse the Site. “LocalStorage” is a web browser feature for storing information across visits to a website, such as current order status, settings, and preferences.

How Do We Use Your Personal Information?

We use the personal information we collect from you and your customers in order to provide the Service and to operate the Apps. Additionally, we use this personal information to: Communicate with you; Optimize or improve the Apps; and Provide you with information or advertising relating to our products or services.

Sharing Your Personal Information

We may share your Personal Information with third-party service providers to help us provide the Service and to operate the Apps as described above. We do not share your information with anyone for any reason outside of those specifically stated in this Privacy Policy.

Finally, we may also share your Personal Information to comply with applicable laws and regulations, to respond to a subpoena, search warrant, or other lawful request for information we receive, or to otherwise protect our rights.

Europe

Your Rights If you are a European resident, you have the right to access personal information we hold about you and to ask that your personal information be corrected, updated, or deleted. If you would like to exercise this right, please contact us through the contact information below.

Additionally, if you are a European resident we note that we are processing your information in order to fulfill contracts we might have with you (for example if you make an order through the Site), or otherwise to pursue our legitimate business interests listed above. Additionally, please note that your information will be transferred outside of Europe, including to Canada and the United States.

Data Retention

We will only retain your personal information for as long as necessary to fulfill the purposes for which we collected it. To determine the appropriate retention period for personal information, we consider the amount, nature, and sensitivity of that information, the potential risk of harm from unauthorized use or disclosure, the purposes for which we process your personal information, and whether we can achieve those purposes through other means, and the applicable legal requirements.

Changes

We may update this privacy policy from time to time in order to reflect, for example, changes to our practices or for other operational, legal or regulatory reasons.