The gloves are off. The gentlemanly rules have been discarded. The bout for the Tampa Bay radio title has become a street brawl. Long-time ratings champ Q-105 is facing a serious challenge from a new pug that calls itself the "Power Pig," WFLZ-FM (93.3). The upstart Top 40 station, which switched from oldies in late September, has chosen to stand toe-to-toe and slug it out with Q-105 (WRBQ) by taking the fight to the airwaves.

Industry insiders contend that Q-105 has been slow to react and may find itself nudged out of the overall No. 1 spot when the newest quarterly Arbitron ratings are released Tuesday. Many of them think that Q-105 is a station in disarray and question why its biggest star, Cleveland Wheeler, would be on a reported two-month sabbatical during such a crucial test.

Q-105 management concedes that it expects to drop in the new ratings, but, says general manager Mike Horne, "The war is not won with one ratings book."

The Pig squeals

In its relentless onslaught, the Power Pig constantly berates Q-105's deejays for their excessive chatter; it has lampooned Q-105's program director; it has broken a cardinal rule by referring to popular Q announcer Mason Dixon by his real name, Jimmie Lee Crawford.

The Power Pig has forged an aggressive, street-level, bad-boy image. Much of the announcers' banter is tinged blue (one jock calls himself "Russell the Love Muscle"); the station freely adds a rap song like 2 Live Crew's Me So Horny to its dance-heavy music rotation.

The Power Pig will stop at nothing to get attention. Station personnel ride around the bay area in "Road Hogs," beat-up cars spray-painted pink. They hand out dollar bills and "flip the pig" to people, a station term for giving the finger.

During Thanksgiving, the station dropped a turkey out of an airplane. It gave away a '69 Impala with $10 in the glove compartment.

For several weeks, the Power Pig awarded a million dollars to a series of lucky callers - a dollar a year for a million years. "We're poking fun at everything about radio," said station program director Marc Chase.

The Pig has occasionally crossed lines of civility and taste. For instance, two of its deejays made an unauthorized foray to the parking lot of a St. Petersburg high school, where they gave away bogus hall passes. One would-be humor piece encouraged listeners to drop off bottles of cheap wine at the station's Tampa headquarters to give the homeless something they "really want" for Christmas.

All of this appears to be working. In preliminary ratings reports last month, the Power Pig had made significant gains on Q-105.

Tuesday's fall '89 Arbitron ratings book has been the most anticipated in years.

"Most people in the Tampa Bay radio community are rooting for (Q-105) to come down to earth," said Carey Curelop, former program director at area rock station WYNF-FM (95), now at KLOS in Los Angeles. "It would make the market much more competitive. If (Q-105) drops enough, four or five stations can fight for No. 1. That will give everybody a real impetus to go after it, and you'll see a more aggressive battle on all fronts."

Indeed, other skirmishes seem to be intensifying. In "album rock" radio, WYNF has long been tops in the bay area. But on New Year's eve, also-ran WKRL-FM, under new ownership by Cincinnati-based Great American Broadcasting, switched from classic rock to playing only songs by the legendary hard-rock band Led Zeppelin. WKRL's new one-artist sound is a rash move and one that most bay area radio people think will be short-lived. (The station has already broadened its play list to include solo material by ex-Zep members Robert Plant and Jimmy Page.) What first seemed like a bonehead ploy on the part of WKRL has attracted an outpouring of media attention, from CBS This Morning to MTV. And the buzz on the street has been loud, breathing new life into a rock station that had long been languishing.

When WFLZ abandoned oldies for the Power Pig in September, long-standing classical station WXCR-FM (92.5) quickly jumped to playing pop from the '50s and '60s, becoming WYUU. WUSA-FM (101), which mixes soft pop with oldies, will now have to contend with WYUU.

Even those stations seemingly out of the fray, such as light-jazz WHVE-FM (102.5) or country WQYK-FM (99), are somewhat affected by the Power Pig/Q-105 showdown. The heated climate tends to create a lot of button-pushing by listeners, says WQYK program director Jay Miller: "Audience is flying everywhere."

The radio industry nationally now has its eyes on Tampa Bay. "It's one of the most intriguing markets in the country, mostly for the Q vs. Power Pig," said Sean Ross, radio editor for Billboard, a major trade magazine. "One program director told me he wishes he could be down there with a bag of popcorn."

Mike Tyson on the ropes

For more than a decade, Q-105 has been the Mike Tyson of bay area radio. Unbeatable. The station regularly garnered an overall rating share of, say, 17, while the rest of the pack bunched in the 3-8 range. (A 17 share in Arbitron means that 17 percent of the people who listen to radio listen to your station.) The real meat of the ratings, the data used for sales calls, are the various demographic breakdowns. For instance, most album rock outlets primarily target men, ages 18-34. If a station scores good ratings in that narrow area, its sales staff approaches clients with a strong "book."

For years, Q-105 pulled off the unthinkable: a Top 40 station that enjoyed big overall ratings and fared extremely well with diverse demographic samples - teens, women 18-49, adults 50-plus, and more.

"Q in their heyday was an intimidating machine," said WQYK's Miller. "If they wanted to do something they simply cleared away every other radio station in town. And for years other stations would sit back and wait for them to sell out (all their advertising) and pick up the rest of the dollars."

Q-105 entrenched itself as the voice of Tampa Bay. In the early '80s, Scott Shannon and Cleveland Wheeler started the Q Morning Zoo, with its manic ensemble cast. Zoo formats soon sprang up around the country. Shannon left and became a major radio figure on the national scene.

Competitors all but acquiesced, and Tampa Bay was one of the few Top 20 radio markets with a single Top 40 station.

In the past few years, large broadcasting corporations have paid megabucks to acquire several Tampa Bay radio stations. CBS bought WYNF/WSUN-AM, Infinity Broadcasting acquired WQYK, Cox Broadcasting took over easy listening WWBA-FM (107.3) (now WWRM), Great American moved in at WKRL. Jacor Broadcasting grabbed up WPDS (now WFLZ) in March 1988. These companies owned ratings leaders in other cities and were less willing to let Q-105's dominance go unchallenged.

Many area radio people think that Q-105 showed the first chinks in its armor about a year ago, when the WYNF morning team of Ron Diaz and Ron Bennington ("Ron and Ron") made solid gains on the Q-Zoo. "We attacked exactly where everyone thought they were strongest - in morning drive," said WYNF general manager Shawn Portmann.

"Ron and Ron made Cleveland Wheeler unhip, and no one had been able to do that to the Q-Zoo," said former WYNF program director Curelop.

But the bay area radio community also sensed a more pervasive vulnerability at Q-105. "A couple of years ago, when they were really hot, (Q-105) got fat and lazy," Curelop said. "They got bloated, with too many commercials; their (song) play list was much too broad. The talent (deejays) was too yakky. Our research at the time showed a lot of dissatisfaction among Q-105 listeners."

Jacor, which owns the Power Pig, apparently drew the same conclusions. Before making the switch, the station went on the air and announced, tongue-in-cheek, that it was taking the Top 40 format hostage. It demanded that Q-105 pay $1-million to keep Top 40 all to itself. After several days of increasing the ransom, WFLZ rolled out the Power Pig. The new station's impact was immediate. It quickly gathered a legion of listeners.

"I felt Q-105 could be beaten," said Power Pig program director Mark Chase, who came down from Jacor's Top 40 station in Nashville. "Now Tampa Bay has a choice."

Can the Pig hog all listeners?

Instead of meeting the Power Pig's frontal attack head-on, Q-105 chose quieter tactics. "We didn't go on the air and call them names," said Q-105 general manager Horne. "We did things strategically within the station. Three weeks after they were on the air, we reduced our commercial load, tightened up the music, cut down on the chatter."

Although he recognizes the threat, Horne maintains that thus far the Power Pig has made serious inroads only with Q-105's younger listeners. Teens are one of the least attractive audiences to radio advertisers because of their limited disposable income.

Horne also likens the Power Pig to demagogue talk show host Morton Downey Jr., whose confrontational style was a flash in the pan. Indeed, there is some question about the Power Pig's staying power.

"It's going to be interesting with (the Power Pig)," said WQYK's Miller. "All along they've been saying on the air that they don't have any money. Their position with kids is, 'If more of you don't listen, we're gonna go away.' Which is nonsense, of course. But what's going to happen when they're no longer poor boys?"

Q-105 is counting on the Power Pig's tapering off, but Horne concedes that his station is in transition. (He would not comment about Wheeler's hiatus other than to call it "an extended vacation.") "We're taking a look at the areas in which we feel we can strengthen ourselves," he said. "There's no question that we have to do better at what we do to continue to be a leader in the '90s. We still think Q-105 can remain a mass appeal radio station."

Genuine mass appeal is difficult to attain in radio anymore. The industry has entered an era of specialization. "Radio stations started out as broadcasters," said WYNF general manager Portmann. "Then it went to narrow-casting. Now I call it micro-casting. No longer can you just be a rock station. Now you do album-rock, or classic rock, or Rock 40. Are you news, talk or sports?"

Some radio people feel that specialization has caught up with Q-105, that its far-reaching demographic appeal is unrealistic in today's radio climate. "Q-105 now has to decide what audience they want to protect, what they want to be," says the Power Pig's Chase.

The fight is just beginning. Billboard's Ross cautions that Q-105's demise has been greatly exaggerated. "As well as the Pig is doing, Q is not tubing out," he said. "It's going to be a dogfight, and at the very worst it will show Q to be merely mortal."