In a way, an odd way, their show is like a Cuban cigar. It's foul to some people, inflammatory to others, and if you happen to develop a taste for it, you have to go a long way to get it.

Until last month, the Ron and Ron Show was the hottest morning radio show in the Tampa Bay market (rated No. 1 among adults ages 18 to 34 and 25 to 54). But when Ron Diaz and Ron Bennington couldn't agree to a new deal with WYNF (94.9-FM), their contracts were not renewed.

So they moved to new studios a few blocks north on Fourth Street N in St. Petersburg and began The Ron & Ron Radio Network, a syndicated radio show from 6-10 a.m. that can be heard on WZTA in Miami, WVRI in Orlando, WAIA in Jacksonville and WZAT in Savannah, Ga. Everywhere, it seems, but here. They are contractually barred from broadcasting in this market for one year.

Tuesday was their second day at their new job.

"The weird thing is to go home and explain to your wife what happened on the air," said Bennington, who last week assured his place in local television infamy when he asked WTVT-Ch. 13 anchor/talk show host Kathy Fountain, during an appearance on Eye On Tampa Bay, to "let the puppies breathe." (An obviously stunned Fountain smiled weakly and quickly changed the subject.)

The new Ron & Ron Show is essentially the same as the old one _ game show parodies, bizarre callers and completely tasteless stunts. Bennington contends that humor knows no geographical boundaries, and that what worked in Tampa Bay will also work in Miami and elsewhere.

"It kills us not be be working to the Tampa Bay audience," Bennington said. "The thing that really hurts is that these people are responsible for our success."

As the show moves on, so do Ron & Ron listeners. Because their personalties are unique, it's doubtful one station will pick up the majority of the Ron & Ron listeners. Some listeners will move to hard rock on WXTB (97.9 FM), or to the softer WHPT (102.5 FM) or WYUU (92.5-FM). Some may stay with YNF.

The Rons have their own feelings about the local competition, as this game of word association points out:

Mason Dixon (deejay at Mix-96)?

"Who?"

The Power Pig (93.3 FM)?

"What?"

The R Girls (cable access stars who are campaigning for Ron & Ron's old job at YNF)?

"Why?"

YNF?

"Set us free."

Howard Stern comparisons?

"You're the only one who brings that up."

Exactly how long the Ron-out will continue in Tampa Bay, and which local station will air their show when they return, is still unclear. The Rons have a multiyear contract with Paxson Broadcasting, but say they may or may not be with Paxson when they're allowed back in Tampa Bay.

"The lawyers are looking at it," said Ross Reback, president and CEO of the Ron & Ron Radio Network, Inc.

"Hopefully," Diaz added, "it won't be a year.

"Maybe we can be a on a CB band until then."