Tom Wilkinson, best known in America for the 1997 hit The Full Monty and the Oscarbait film, Michael Clayton, passed away just before the turn of 2024. The actor started out the son of a family from a relatively modest background in Leeds; the Wilkinson family moved to Canada (possibly where young Tom developed his ear for transatlantic accents), and then returned to Cornwall. When his parents separated, Wilkinson’s mother moved the family back to Yorkshire, and after university, where he studied British and American literature, Wilkinson trained at RADA.

“I see myself as a utility player, the one who can do everything. I’ve always felt that actors should have a degree of anonymity about them.” - Tom Wilkinson

After successfully auditioning for the Nottingham Playhouse, Wilkinson made the transition from regional to national theater with a place at the Royal Shakespeare Company, which for him was a disaster. Unlike many of his contemporaries, he did very little stage work and developed his film presence relatively late in life, starting with a small role in In the Name of the Father in 1993 and then slightly bigger parts in Sense & Sensibility and Ghost and the Darkness. His breakthrough came in 1997’s The Full Monty, for which he won the BAFTA for Best Supporting Actor, a role he reprised in 2023 in the recent Disney+ sequel.

Peter Bradshaw wrote in The Guardian, "Wilkinson has long been the gold standard of acting technique on the cinema screen, all the more valuable for his unshowy reticence. For as long I’ve been writing about movies, his presence on any cast list has been enough to make you sit up and pay that little bit more attention because you knew that he was going to bring to that film a touch of class, of wit, of style, of pathos, and often a very English decency. His complexity and intelligence were unmatched."

But his range in both serious and comedic roles was astounding, and we’ll take a look at some of his best work.

The Full Monty was a surprise hit when it crossed the pond in the mid-1990s. The beloved 1997 comedy (let’s not go into the Disney+ sequel) starred Wilkinson as Gerald Arthur Cooper, a victim of Sheffield’s lost steel industry, a former manager who is desperate to find work again. He and his wife both aspire to a comfortable middle-class lifestyle, but she doesn’t know he’s out of work. When the bailiffs come to repossess their furniture, it’s a rude shock for her. But Gerald, with his ballroom dance experience, becomes the choreographer for the aspiring strippers and is by far the most accomplished dancer.

More importantly, he finds friendship and community with Baz (Robert Carlisle) and the rest of the lads. He was awarded a BAFTA for the role.

The Full Monty film is available as a streaming rental on Amazon.