RUBLE: COIN OF SOVIET UNION

1 ruble, 1924: Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) — transcontinental country that spanned much of Eurasia from 1922 to 1991. A flagship communist state, dictatorship. It was nominally a federal union of 15 national republics; in practice, both its government and its economy were highly centralized. It was a one-party state governed by the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.

ОДИН РУБЛЬ: one ruble.

ПРОЛЕТАРИИ ВСЕХ СТРАН, СОЕДИНЯЙТЕСЬ!: Workers of the world, unite! (the political slogan — one of the rallying cries from "The Communist Manifesto" by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels; the essence of the slogan is that members of the working classes throughout the world should cooperate to defeat capitalism and achieve victory in the class conflict).

СССР: USSR.

State Emblem of the Soviet Union (Sickle and a hammer on a globe depicted in the rays of the sun and framed by ears of wheat, with the inscription "Proletarians of the world, unite!" in six languages — Russian, Ukrainian, Belarusian, Georgian, Armenian, Azerbaijani. At the top of the Emblem is a five-pointed star).

A worker and a peasant on the background of the sunrise.

The inscription on the edge of the coin: "ЧИСТОГО СЕРЕБРА 18 ГРАММ (4 3. 21 Д.) - П•Л". This means: "PURE SILVER 18 GRAMS (4 Z. 21 D. or 4 zolotnik + 21 dolya)" — zolotnik = 4.26575417 g, dolya = 44.435 mg. П•Л — "P•L" (initials of Leningrad Mint master Pyotr Latyshev).

Leningrad Mint (nowadays — Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation).

Mintage: 12.998.000.

Silver (0.900): 33 mm - 19.97 g

Reference price: 55$

COIN RUBLE — WHERE & WHEN (coins catalog: by names & emitents)

RUSSIA (17th century-...) — TSARDOM OF RUSSIA + RUSSIAN EMPIRE + RUSSIAN SFSR + SOVIET UNION + RUSSIAN FEDERATION: ruble = 100 kopeck

CENTRAL ASIA AND CAUCASIA (KHOREZM PEOPLE'S SOVIET REPUBLIC, 1920-1922): ruble

RUSSIAN SPITSBERGEN (tokens, 1993): ruble = 100 kopeck

PRIDNESTROVIAN MOLDAVIAN REPUBLIC, unrecognised breakaway state Transnistria (2014-...): ruble = 100 kopeck

RUBLE as coin name.

Ruble (or rouble) — historical and modern coin, the currency of Russia. It is divided into 100 kopeck. With a rare exception, this is a purely Russian coin.

The ruble of Russia first arose as a unit of measurement of money (accounting monetary unit) and only over time — as a coin. Rubles are first mentioned in written sources of the 13th century to indicate the whole Novgorod hryvnia or its part (1/2 or 1/4: conflicting information).

Gradually, the term began to be used, indicating a certain number of small coins. For example, 200 Moscow denga coins or 100 Novgorod coins — "Novgorodok", which over time received the name kopeck (a rider with a spear is depicted: Russian "копьё" — kop'yo).

The first ruble as a coin dates back to 1654. After its use in circulation for only one year, it was withdrawn due to the low silver content.

The coinage of rubles was restored after half a century — by the monetary reform of Peter I in 1704. From that time to the present, the ruble, divided into 100 kopecks, has been the unchanged monetary unit of Russia: first of the Russian Empire, then of the RSFSR, the USSR, and finally of the Russian Federation...

There are a significant number of versions of the origin of the name "ruble", but they all boil down to one thing — the connection with the Russian word for "to cut, to chop, to hack" (Russian "рубить" — rubit).

The most widespread and plausible is the theory about the ruble as a part ("offcut") of the ancient monetary unit of Kyivan Rus' — the hryvnia (rather, its provincial varieties, for example, the Novgorod type).

Other versions are also known, which predict the connection of the appearance of the ruble with: the rupee coin, the special production technology of the Novgorod hryvnia (a seam appeared — "rubets"), the Arabic word rub (in Arabic "ربع" — a quarter, a fourth of that still hryvnia).