Action!: The Scott Brothers – How To Get Screwed By Spielberg Twice W/ Ridley Scott

Some directors, like David Fincher and Ridley Scott, are able to inject new life into well-worn and repetitive stories thanks to their unique style and approach to filmmaking.

This is a romantic thriller of the same type as thousands of others, especially those from the 80s and 90s, whose characters are highly problematic even today. All about the bodyguard reminds me of the Whitney Houston and Kevin Costner classic eponymous film. There is also this classic element of film noir with the femme fatale, this time played by Mimi Rogers, who somehow ends up leading our anti-hero Tom Berenger into turbulent waters of corruption and…

Someone to Watch Over Me follows well worn genre conventions, but rises above that thanks to good chemistry between the leads, an interesting story and ultra stylish direction from Ridley Scott. The plot sees a newly promoted police detective tasked with watching over a rich socialite murder witness. Naturally, they end up falling for each other, which puts the detective in a difficult position. Leads Tom Berenger and Mimi Rogers play well off one another. There's clear noir influence in this - the socialite character plays off the femme fatale angle, luring the working class man away from his wife and son, and into the upper echelons of society. The two worlds collide, ultimately making him realise what is really…

Ridley Scott has an eye for visuals, but not an ear for dialogue nor a brain for narratives.

Someone to Watch Over Me is as stylish as you can get. There are shots within this film that are downright exquisite. For example, Claire Gregory's lavish apartment is so beautiful that it's pretty much sensory overload, despite being highly unrealistic, considering no apartment is that big in New York City.

A bit of a digression, I swear the set used for Claire's apartment was reused for Kubrick's Eyes Wide Shut (just look at how that apartment is structured, and you'll know what I am talking about).

On top of that, there is a scene where an assassin infiltrates her apartment, attempting…

Only Ridley Scott can take a generic erotic thriller and turn it into something sensual and intoxicating. And by intoxicating I mean the photography. Other than Michael Mann nobody shoots a night scene like Sir Ridders. This film has a semi-hypnotic sensibility. The shots of New York are drenched in atmosphere. It almost felt like I was watching an Abel Ferrara film with a budget.

As for the story it's essentially a precursor to the "Bodyguard." A detective played by Tom Berenger is assigned to protect Mimi Rogers who witnessed a mob killing. Berenger's character soon finds himself torn between his wife (Lorraine Bracco) and the hot socialite he wants to bang. It's pretty standard stuff and it plays out…

Never mind the pedestrian thriller elements, this is a lovely mood piece, a love story as elusive as a billow of smoke wafting out from the sewer cleanout cap into the hazy, bluish Manhattan skyline at night. This is generally considered low-rent Ridley Scott, but his prodigious gift for worldbuilding is evident here, by way of two diametrically opposed worlds blue collar cop Tom Berenger finds himself in when he cheats on his wife Lorraine Bracco with socialite Mimi Rogers.

I love the way Ridley builds on these two worlds, working class Queens and wealthy Manhattan, more specifically the shift work in which Berenger works. It’s a wonderful indicator of intimacy Berenger has with said women, protecting while having an…