SHANNON RFC boosted their survival hopes in Division 1A of the energia All-Ireland League Division 1A after recording a precious 37-22 bonus point victory over local rivals Young Munster at Thomond Park on Easter Sunday evening.

The result has seen ninth-placed Shannon draw level on points with eighth-placed City of Armagh in the top flight table. However, the Parish side remain in the relegation play-off position as the Ulster side boast a superior points difference.

The battle to avoid the relegation play-off will come down to next Saturday's final series of regular season games in Division 1A. While Shannon make the trip to Belfield to face seventh-placed UCD, City of Armagh host second-placed Cork Constitution at the Palace Grounds.

Shannon outscored their visitors by five tries to three at Thomond Park to complete and home-and-away double over their Limerick rivals in the League this season.

The winners led 20-19 in the derby clash at the end of an entertaining opening half.

The home side got off to the perfect start when scrum half Will Reilly dotted down in the third minute with out-half Mike Cooke adding the extras for 7-0.

Visitors Munsters' were quickly on level terms, however, as winger James O'Brien struck for a try, with Tony Butler converting for 7-7.

Two successful penalties from Cooke had Shannon 13-7 in front after 25 minutes of the contest.

However, Munsters' hit back and following a terrific break from Shay McCarthy, James O'Brien crossed for his second try of the game to leave one point between the sides at 13-12.

The see-saw nature of the scoring continued coming up to half-time as hooker Jordan Prenderville crashed over for a try, following a well-executed Shannon maul. Cooke's successful conversion pushed the advantage out to eight points at 20-12.

The first half scoring wasn't over yet, however, and Munsters' were right back in the game just before the break when James Horrigan struck for their third try of the half. Butler dissected the uprights with the conversion to leave it a one-point game at the mid-way point.

Full-back Stephen Kiely then struck for a Shannon try 11 minutes into the second period to stretch their advantage to 25-19 before Munsters' replied with a penalty from Butler to reduce the gap to three points.

With 10 minutes remaining, Shannon hooker Prenderville bagged his second try of the game - claiming the bonus point for the Parish side in the process - to help them stretch their advantage to 10 points, 32-22, following Cooke's successful conversion.

There was still time for Shannon to seal their win in style when Daniel Okeke dotted down late on to secure a 15-point success.

Scorers: Shannon: Tries: Will Reilly, Stephen Kiely, Jordan Prenderville 2, Daniel Okeke; Cons: Mike Cooke 3; Pens: Mike Cooke 2. Young Munster: Tries: James O’Brien 2, James Horrigan; Cons: Tony Butler 2; Pen: Tony Butler

SHANNON RFC: Stephen Kiely; Joshua Costello, Cian O'Halloran, Harry Long, Daniel Hurley; Michael Cooke, William Reilly; Kieran Ryan, Jordan Prenderville, Luke Rigney, Angus Ryan, David Maher; Daniel Okeke, Kelvin Brown, Lee Nicholas (Capt). Replacements: Shane Carew, Darragh McSweeney, Conor Glynn, Jade Kriel, Cillian O'Connor, Evin Crowe.

YOUNG MUNSTER RFC: Aidan Shortall, James O'Brien, Fionn Gibbons, Harry Fleming, Shay McCarthy; Tony Butler, Jack Lyons, David Begley, Stephen McLoughlin, Conor Bartley, Oran O'Reilly, Alan Kennedy (Capt), Bailey Faloon, Eoin McCormack, John Foley. Replacements: Aaron Roulston, Paul Allen, James Horrigan, Conor Nesbitt, Marcus Lyons, Cian Casey.