Invitations to over 650 investment funds active in NFT collections, and tens of thousands of NFT collectors, and NFT whales, will go out the week of April 10th, to announce the exhibition and future NFT drop.

About Tangka NFT Drop:

The Tangka represents the potential of a new future. The first widely-adopted means of Tibetan currency, the first Tangka coins were minted in Tibet in 1763/4 and later in 1785, modeled on ornate prototypes previously outsourced to Nepal. These silver coins symbolize Tibet’s participation in a global commercial network, honoring the nation’s sovereignty and the diffusion of its transformative spiritual ideals of compassion and unity. While the physical Tangka was discontinued in 1941, today, these coins have been reissued as NFTs that serve the same objectives as the original currency. True to the very spirit of crypto, the Tangka NFT collection understands the profound social and political potential of decentralization, mobilizing this principle as a means of advancing Tibet’s spiritual quest toward global, compassionate interdependence.

The Tangka represents the potential of a new future. The first widely-adopted means of Tibetan currency, the first Tangka coins were minted in Tibet in 1763/4 and later in 1785, modeled on ornate prototypes previously outsourced to Nepal. These silver coins symbolize Tibet’s participation in a global commercial network, honoring the nation’s sovereignty and the diffusion of its transformative spiritual ideals of compassion and unity. While the physical Tangka was discontinued in 1941, today, these coins have been reissued as NFTs that serve the same objectives as the original currency. True to the very spirit of crypto, the Tangka NFT collection understands the profound social and political potential of decentralization, mobilizing this principle as a means of advancing Tibet’s spiritual quest toward global, compassionate interdependence.

The collection of 10,000 Tangka NFTs will be released to the public soon and feature intricate lotus-patterned artwork based on the original Tibetan coins.

Each NFT is ERC 721 Token generated on Ethereum.

For Rarity, 100,000 Generative Art is created and 10,000 are randomly selected for variations.

Rarity Attributes include:

7 Sacred Metal Types

16 Center Gems in Two Sizes

12 Petal Gems

12 Motifs Carvings

23 Backgrounds

3 Coin Weights

Each variation on the NFT includes metal types, coin weights, and artwork backgrounds. Each Tangka features a center jewel such as ruby, amethyst or diamond available in large and small sizes. Flanking the center jewel are gem petals in 12 variations.

Random1000 Tangka community members will be airdropped a surprise gift following the mint.

Understanding cryptocurrency as a unifying global marketplace, the Tangka NFT represents the transcendent possibility of equality, dissolving the borders and hierarchies that keep cultures and nations such as Tibet marginalized in our physical world. A symbol of a shared vision for a better future, the Tangka offers membership in a like-minded community: token-holders will be invited to vote and participate in a dialogue around the new currency in the project’s Discord. Prior to the mint, the Discord will offer additional details about the project launch, including participation in the Tangka whitelist. A series of AMAs with the team behind the NFT will be announced in April.

The Tangka NFT offers a new vision of humanity, made possible by the transformative, unifying power of crypto. Participation in the community fosters a network of support that mirrors the central tenets of Tibetan spiritual practice, immutably archived on the blockchain.

JOIN THE DISCORD

https://discord.com/invite/DsFHJvdsb3

LEARN MORE AND FOLLOW ONLINE

https://twitter.com/TangkaCoin

https://anaam.one/tangka.php

https://anaam.one

https://www.facebook.com/Tangka-Coin-and-NFTs-104212502244779