Farah Khan gets candid about directing Shah Rukh Khan and Deepika Padukone in Om Shanti Om as the film completes 10 years.

Om Shanti Om starring Shah Rukh Khan and debutante Deepika Padukone was a film about the film stars starring film stars. The film directed by Farah Khan was all about grandeur, romantic songs and heartbreak.

While Deepika made an impressive debut in OSO, Shah Rukh lured his female fans as he went shirtless showing off his 6 packs abs body.

Recommended Read : 10 Years of Om Shanti Om: Farah Khan shares an epic throwback photo with Shah Rukh Khan and Deepika Padukone

Om Shanti Om today turns 10 and to mark this, we got in touch with Farah Khan who was elated at how the movie was received by the audience and also spoke at length about directing Shah Rukh and Deepika and a few funny incidents that took place on the sets.

Declaring that she was pregnant while directing the last two schedules of Om Shanti Om, Farah said that though it was difficult, her dear friend Shah Rukh made sure to make her feel better.

“It was difficult but Shah Rukh Khan had bought a big lazy boy couch for me and was insistent that I sit on it. I used to be lying on that and shouting on the mike,” she said.

She then went on to narrate a funny incident when she couldn’t stop puking while Shah Rukh Khan showed off his body in Dard-e-Disco.

“During Dard-e-Disco I had morning sickness so it was very funny because every time Shah Rukh would remove his shirt, I would throw up and he was like ‘what is this’ and I was like 'No No your body looks fab but it is just that I have three bodies inside me so I was just non-stop puking’.”

When asked on how was it directing the duo especially Deepika Padukone since it was her first movie, Farah said, “Deepika was absolutely raw and you don’t really have to do much when Shah Rukh is the hero. He just took her, I mean I would, of course, sit with her and tell her what to do but he would sit in the lunch break and motivate her. I would say Shah Rukh, I just have to say look down, look up, look left or right. He [Shah Rukh] was lovely actually and very patient and a very generous actor. I mean even if his take was good, he would do it hundred more times till her take is fine.”

Was there any particular scene where Deepika took a lot of takes to get it right? To this, Farah said, “There is one scene after Main Agar Kahoon song where they are walking on the empty set. I got a very special scene between the two, probably the only romantic scene between them. In that scene, he really helped Deepika out a lot. He was telling her that how you should pretend you are in love and all and she just broke down and told him that I was just 12 years old when Dilwale [DDLJ} released and I was like, 'did you have to tell him that right now when you were doing a romantic scene?’.”

Om Shanti Om is one of the movies where we find more stars making an appearance than an award show. When asked Farah how difficult was it to co-ordinate and get all of them together, she said, “We had too many cameos in the movie. You know actually, half the film industry is in this, not only half I think 3/4th is in the movie. Either, they are in the song or doing a cameo like Akshay Kumar, Abhishek Bachchan. It was lovely to make a movie about the film industry and have the film industry in it.”

“I think that was the last of the films where we were like a big happy family and also let me tell you that they did not have managers or PRs then to make our lives difficult. I would just make one call and meet them and they would come on board. Of course, Shah Rukh Khan also had tremendous goodwill but I think it will be really difficult for someone to do it today. Then I just met people and they sweetly agreed. Salman toh I did not have to meet, he was like 'tu mereko time bol main aa jaounga’.”

But do you think the same can be recreated by the younger generation actors?

Farah promptly replies, “I don’t know. I think the younger generation is very cynical. I was telling someone that maybe they won’t have great fights and great enmities but there won’t be great friendships either. I mean they are nice and all but I don’t think they share the camaraderie which we see in Om Shanti Om.”

Talking about Deewangi song, how was it shooting for the song and having superstars like Salman Khan, Shah Rukh, Saif Ali Khan, Sanjay Dutt, all of them together?

Farah laughs, “That day no one went home after their shot was over. Normally people want to run but they all stayed back for Dharam ji’s shot. They waited for 3-4 hours and they jumped into the shot. When you see that scene and Salman dancing in that was not planned, he had jumped in from behind the camera and danced.”

She further added, “It was lovely, I was having a party for 6 days. But you know, it is the most difficult song that I have done. It looks easy but it took me almost a week to script it and who will come first and second and who should come in the final, at what point should we introduce a Dharamji or Mithun Da or a Kajol. All that took a lot of thought.”

“The challenge was more regarding the logistic thing. When they see the song they shouldn’t feel ki arey mera cut kia. You know to give them [the actors] that respect and equal screen space was a challenge.”