Om Shanti Om is a 2007 Indian romance melodramatic film which features comedy, song & dance, romance, action and thriller. The movie directed by Farah Khan, starred Shah Rukh Khan as Om and Deepika Padukone as a superstar Shanti Priya.

The movie is both a homage and parody of Bollywood, starting from the 1960s to 2000s.

Before I continue, I have to admit that I have never seen a Bollywood film. My impression of Bollywood throughout the years of growing up consists of three things. Overly dramatic acting, ‘extreme’ visual editing and song & dance.

After watching this film, I have to say that I wasn’t completely wrong eh??

The visual effects for this film were actually realistic!

The film takes on one of Hindi cinema’s most popular themes of the seventies – the reincarnation drama.

The junior artist, Om, who was set in the 1970’s Hindi film industry, is in love with the superstar actress Shantipriya. He tries hard to get noticed by her but

ultimately became friends with her after he saved her from a fire scene, where the fire had gotten out of control.

Everything seemed well until he found out that she was secretly married to a film producer Mukesh Mehra, played by Arjun Rampal. Mukesh found out that Shanti was expecting his child and decided to lure her into an abandoned studio

where he set on fire to kill her – to prevent financial loss and protect his career.

Om attempts to rescue Shanti once again, however, was unfortunate this time and died.

30 years later, the country’s biggest star who has the same face as Om,

IS actually the Om but reincarnated. When he realizes it, he decides to seek

revenge on Mukesh who was known as Mike now – his Hollywood alias.

One thing that I really liked about the film was the lavish and colorful sets, not forgetting the outfits worn by the casts. The music and dance also kept my eyes glued to the screen the whole time!!

The purpose of the film was to entertain, and I have to say that I was entertained throughout. Another thing to highlight was the cast enjoying themselves during the songs & dances. This is other side of celebrities that fans might not necessarily get to see and is not something you would see in Hollywood films.

To sum it up, this film poses as a reminder of what people like about Bollywood, which makes it so special.