This article covers logos that contain flashing images, graphic violence or gore, and nudity. Graphic violence and nudity are hidden behind spoilers.

Editors should list the timestamps, under the videos where flashing images occur.

Background

PFFR (pronounced P-F-R) is an experimental indietronica band and art collective formed in 2001 based in Brooklyn, New York, whose members are composed of Vernon Chatman, Alyson Levy, Jim Tozzi, and John Lee. As of 2019, they have produced 4 albums and one EP that is only available through download. As a TV "production company", they have produced Doggie Fizzle Televizzle, Xavier: Renegade Angel, Neon Joe: Werewolf Hunter, The Shivering Truth, The Heart, She Holler and Wonder Showzen, along with several others for the cable network Adult Swim.

1st Logo (March 11, 2005-)

Standard fullscreen

Standard widescreen

Cooperation variant

Pet Siouxicide variant

Bloodcorn variant

Going Normal variant

Visuals: Against a white background, there is a very crude drawing of an apple-headed creature with a toothy red smile and a big nose, which is wearing a top hat and a collar and also has a large, blue defecating worm with glasses, a hat and a single tooth coming out the left side of his head. The lower half of this creature has his skinny little legs in a squatting position and a face on his buttocks that appears to be spitting blood. Gray bars are shown on both sides of the screen, with "PFFFR", in red, written on them. The logo rapidly flashes in and out of view.

Trivia: This creature is the "mascot" for PFFR's 2005 EP Chrome Ghost. This logo is still used on PFFR's website (everywhere).

Variants:

On Season 1 episodes of Xavier: Renegade Angel, the flashing becomes more intense at the end.

On "Pet Siouxicide", Xavier is running against the logo.

On "Bloodcorn", the logo is red due to the end of the episode, in which the planet Earth cries blood that floods the universe after turning into a giant eyeball.

On "Haunted Tonk", the creature's mouth changes colors rapidly.

On "Going Normal", the logo is encased in an icy substance, making it look like it has a shatter effect to it.

On the Wonder Showzen episode "Cooperation", the logo appears on the bottom right corner of the screen while two low-quality bootleg versions of the show play.

Technique: A digital drawing with flashing effects.

Audio: A voice saying "PFR" (it says it in an extended tone, resulting in the voice saying "Peeeeee Efff Arrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr", although it kind of sounds like "Miii amoooor", Spanish for "My love" or "Yeah, boy") in a weird "burpy" voice. A disoriented bubbling noise is also heard.

Audio Variants:

On most episodes of Xavier: Renegade Angel, the closing bits of the episodes play throughout this logo. The last bit of the voice also rapidly stutters at the end. If an episode has guest actors, an even shorter stutter fades out as the "With Special Guests" screen is shown.

The episodes "Chief Beef Loco" and "Signs from Godrilla" replace the stutter with a different voice which sounds like a choir singer. The special guest screen plays the voice at a higher pitch.

The episode "Bloodcorn" not only has the audio muffled with the sound of liquid blood pouring but also has clicking sounds in place of the voice/choir stuttering.

On the episode "Going Normal", icy shattering sounds accompany the voice stuttering.

Availability: Can be found on several of their shows like Wonder Showzen, Xavier: Renegade Angel and Delocated. It was also seen on the pilot of The Problem Solverz called "Neon Knome", which was going to be an Adult Swim show before Cartoon Network picked it up as a children's series.

Legacy: While it has been seen as scary to those that are more sensitive for its subject matter and the flashing, this logo is considered memorable and unique to those that are fans of their shows and songs.

2nd Logo (April 4, 2016)

Visuals: There is the SMPTE color bar screen with the text "P F F R" on it with "PRESENTS" under it. Above it is a fast-forward indicator. The entire thing is in static.

Technique: Toon-Boom.

Audio: Three beeps, with each increasing in pitch, mostly because of the fast forwarding effect.