Shanna Moakler, the ex-wife of Blink 182 drummer Travis Barker has broken her silence just two days on since her former husband and his new wife Kourtney Kardashian announced they were expecting their first child together on Friday.

The 48 year old model took to social media on Sunday as she shared her thoughts on the subject, with the former Playboy star telling her followers that the news was hardly new to her as she had actually “known for weeks” before the public announcement.

The couple revealed their pregnancy news on Friday night, when Kourtney recreated an iconic scene from Blink 182's All the Small Things video, in which she held up a giant placard which read “Travis I’m pregnant” while he performed onstage with his band.

Acting dumfounded by the news, Travis appeared to be completely shocked by the exciting revelation, however his ex-wife has hit back at claims it was inauthentic as she revealed they’d known about the pregnancy for weeks.

Shanna was previously married to Travis for four years between 2004 and 2008, with the couple sharing two children together, Landon, 19, and Alabama, 17 - however despite rumours to the contrary, there was no bad blood between Shanna and Travis, when a fan asked her for her thoughts on the new baby.

The star then replied: “'Very excited for them, hope they have a great experience bringing in a new life to the world. I've known for weeks. This is not new news to me.”

Judging by Shanna’s confirmation of the news, it is likely that those in the couple’s inner circle were already aware of the exciting pregnancy joy, but it wasn’t until Friday that Kourtney publicly confirmed that she was expecting her fourth child - her first with husband Travis.

The couple, who married last summer in three stunning ceremonies, first began dating in January 2021 after being friends for several years. During the time they were together, the couple even embarked on an IVF journey to conceive, but Kourtney made the decision to stop treatment in February 2022 as it caused her to spiral into a deep depression.

Fans of the reality show The Kardashians might remember Kourtney and Travis documenting their IVF journey on the show, including going for doctor's appointments and egg retrievals as a way to increase their chances of getting pregnant.

Talking about the process on the podcast Not Skinny But Not Fat, Kourtney said: "I got to a place where I just felt exactly like how timing is everything with me and Travis. So, I feel like if it's truly meant to be, it will happen."

Alongside the new bundle of joy currently on the way, Kourtney shares three children - Mason, 13; Penelope, 10; and Reign, eight — with ex-boyfriend Scott Disick, 40.

Travis meanwhile has two children — Landon, 19, and Alabama, 17 — with his ex-wife Shanna. He is also a stepfather to Atiana De La Hoya, 24, who Shanna welcomed with Oscar De La Hoya in 1999.

READ MORE: