Publish date: 2024-06-07

Now that Travis Barker is married once more, his ex-wife Shanna Moakler is finally letting cross of her engagement ring. The former fact star has put the ring up for public sale lower than every week after Travis was celebrating his nuptials in Italy with his new spouse Kourtney Kardashian.

Speaking to Us Weekly, Shanna said that she’s unhappy to look the ring cross however is ready for it to discover a new home, explaining, “I think it is a beautiful piece and really was my dream ring.”

RELATED: Judge Won’t Dismiss Amber Heard’s $100M Countersuit Against Johnny Depp

“However, that bankruptcy of my life is over,” she continued. “And even if wearing it at one time introduced me nice joy, I am hoping it is going to find a new home and continue to carry any individual as a lot happiness because it once did to me. It’s in point of fact an iconic ring!

The auction will probably be are living from May twenty seventh to May 31st however is also prolonged if there’s a large number of pastime in the piece.

The bidding will get started at $51,000. But Shanna said she hopes to get a minimum of $120,000 for the solitaire stone, noting that it’s value $160,000. Worthy.com is webhosting the public sale.

Travis and Kourtney legally married previous this month during a courthouse ceremony in California. But it was once a essential step for his or her birthday celebration with family and friends, which happened last weekend in Portofino, Italy.

The couple were spotted with their kids aboard a $60 million yacht formerly owned through Dolce & Gabbana days earlier than the marriage ceremony. Travis stocks two youngsters – Landon, 18, and Alabama, 16 – with Shanna. Kourtney has 3 youngsters -- Mason, 12, Penelope, 9, and Reign, 7.

The gothic-inspired rite and reception were later assist at Castello Brown, a ancient citadel on the water. Kourtney wore a white Dolce & Gabana minidress for the occasion, valued at $1,900.

Although Shanna says she’s shifting on from her ex-husband, the reality superstar prior to now had hassle adjusting to his courting with Kourtney. She’s publicly said she worries the couple’s relationship might be affecting her relationship with her kids.

However, Shanna then replied to backlash on-line to deny being “obsessed” with the couple.

“I’m in a relationship and I’m really happy, and it’s just no longer one thing that’s focused in my world,” she stated in February. I wanted America to peer me for who I was, and no longer necessarily what’s pumped out to the masses and the media occasionally.”

Shanna is recently in a dating with Matthew Rondeau.

NEXT: Snoop Dogg Had Good Reason To Reject $2 Million Offer From Michael Jordan

Sources: Us Weekly, Us Weekly, ET,

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7tbTEq6CcoJWowW%2BvzqZmpa2oqr%2B6e9OrmK%2Bho2Kvor7KnqmsZZWteri1xZ5kmq2TqbawutJmnKefkZyyrrHNrWSroZ6cerO1xqGrZpmWqbKzeceeZLCdlKh6rLvUq6unnalk