SHANNA Moakler, Travis Barker's ex-wife, has slammed the Blink-182 drummer and his new wife, Kourtney Kardashian, during a new interview.

Shanna was recently a guest star on the podcast Miss Understood with Rachel Uchitel.

During the podcast, Shanna discussed her early life, career, and previous relationships.

When the topic of Travis' new relationship with Kourtney Kardashian was mentioned, Shanna said that she was "so bullied" in the media and was treated "so unfairly" when the relationship began.

"It has just put a really bad taste in my mouth," she admitted.

She also said that she "wasn't a fan" of the relationship.

"If I made any statement whatsoever I was just called bitter and jealous. I don't even know Travis Barker anymore.

"We haven't been together since almost 2010-12 and I don't even know him. I don't know what his favorite movie is, I don't know what his favorite food or color is.

"We're not together [and] I have been in my own relationships.

"We only have our 17-year-old, who will be 18 this year, and then our work is done here and we never have to see or talk to each other ever again and I look forward to that day," the model said.

When discussing Kourtney and Travis as a couple, Shanna said that the "whole thing is so f**king weird."

"I really don't have anything positive to say about it. It's not because I'm bitter and I'm definitely not jealous.

"I think things that have been said and things that have been done are absolutely disgusting.

"I wish them nothing but the best and as long as they're good to my kids, that's all I care about. But I think the whole thing is really weird."

MORE ABOUT SHANNA

Shanna is a model and actress who was married to Travis between 2004 and 2008.

She is also a former Playboy model and Miss New York USA pageant winner.

Travis and Shanna have two kids together: Alabama, 17 and Landon, 19. When they weren't together, they stayed close to help co-parent their children.

Shanna was the winner of the Miss New York USA pageant in 1995 and was Playmate of the Month for Playboy magazine in December 2001.

She starred in two seasons of USA Network TV Series Pacific Blue in 1998 and played herself in the reality television series Meet The Barkers with her then-husband Travis.

According to Hollywood Life, she was once engaged to heavyweight boxer Oscar De La Hoya in 1998 and dated Billy Idol between 1994 to 1996.

TRAV AND KOURT'S ITALY WEDDING

On Sunday, May 22, 2022, Travis and Kourtney held their third wedding in Portofino, Italy.

On May 15, 2022, Kourtney Kardashian and Travis Barker officially tied the knot in a courthouse ceremony held in Santa Barbara, California.

The nuptials were kept small, with Kourtney's grandmother and Travis' father attending.

Days later, most of the Kardashian-Jenner clan flew into Italy to celebrate the marriage of Kourtney and Travis in a third ceremony held at the Castello Brown castle in Italy.

The two held their first wedding in April post-Grammys at a chapel in Las Vegas - but declared it "practice" as no license was involved.

On May 16, 2022, Kourtney took to Instagram to share some shots from her lowkey wedding day with Travis.

She captioned the wedding picture slideshow: "Till death do us part."

The pair's new Hulu special, Til Death Do Us Part, premiered on April 13, 2023.

The special features and never-before-seen footage gave an inside look at their luxurious wedding in Italy.