In a preview for the ‘Dumb Blonde’ podcast, Travis Barker’s ex-wife Shanna Moakler addresses the drama with her ex and the current rift between her and her children.

53565

I’m sure you’ve heard the names Kourtney Kardashian and Travis Barker before, but have you ever heard the name Shanna Moakler? The 48-year-old ex-wife of the Blink-182 drummer has catapulted herself into the limelight after taking several digs at her ex and his new spouse Kourtney.

Moakler was married to Barker from 2004 until 2008, and the pair share two children, Alabama Barker and Landon Barker.

The actress, model, and reality TV star has recently opened up about their relationship while speaking on Bunnie XO’s Dumb Blonde podcast, 16 years after her divorce from the drummer.

The upcoming episode is titled Shanna Moakler: Her Side of the Story and will be released on Spotify, YouTube and Apple Podcasts today, Wednesday 10 January 2024.

In a preview clip for the new episode, Moakler is seen stating: “He did me pretty dirty.”

“His drinking is a problem. His womanising, his addiction,” she continued, adding that she believed the pair were “twin flames.” Travis Barker has spoken about his issues with addiction in the past. He said that he abused prescription drugs and smoked marijuana, but was motivated to kick his drug habit after being the sole survivor of a traumatic plane crash.

Moakler went on to critique the Kardashian-Jenner clan, stating that she doesn’t “have to like that f*cking family.”

She stated: “F*ck you, that family. You’re disgusting. I removed myself so that they couldn’t bond with my children over hating me.”

Barker and Moakler’s relationship has been plagued with custody battles and cheating accusations. In May 2021, the former Playboy model stated that the two had shared custody after fans started to note that their children were spending a lot of time at their father’s house.

Then in May 2021, Landon Barker confirmed through TikTok that the children aren’t close with their mother. “Actually, if you weren’t such a dumbass, you would realize our mom has never been in our lives and isn’t in our lives like our dad is,” he replied to a comment under a TikTok video.

In the same month, Alabama Barker made a similar statement on Instagram: “My mom has never completely been in my life. Can you guys stop painting her out to be an amazing mom? Did your moms ask to see you on Mother’s Day [because] mine didn’t? I’m done keeping it a secret, reality shows.”

Fast forward to April 2023, when Moakler bashed Kourtney for posting photos with Alabama and Landon and fans quickly noticed that Moakler and Barker’s children were not following their mother anymore.

In the preview clip of the podcast, Moakler said with respect to her children that she felt like they were “enamoured” by the Kardashians.

“I think there was a lot of glitter and fame and they watched them on TV and now their dad is dating one and they’re going to be on the show. And I think they got caught up in that, which young kids would do,” she explained.

She continued: “Go do what you guys need to do and when you’re ready, I will be here loving you unconditionally,” she said of her kids. “And I will be here as your mother, and I will wait. And that’s what I did.”

“I’m tired of people sh*tting on me. There are people that don’t like that family, don’t watch their f*cking show and don’t give a f*ck what Kim [Kardashian] is doing with her ass.”

The episode is scheduled to air at 7 pm GMT so stay tuned, as it seems like Moakler won’t be holding back…