Description

Opopanax chironium, also known as Chiron's Opopanax, is one of these superb umbellifers, somewhat in the line of the great fennel to which it resembles, however not or little used in gardens. This large perennial is truly spectacular, especially in June-July, when it emerges from the surrounding scenery by launching sturdy stems over 1.5 metres (5 feet) high carrying umbels loaded with numerous small yellow flowers. This plant, widely used in perfumery, only requires sunlight to flourish. It will be perfect in a naturalistic garden, a garden without watering, or in a large rockery among other giants.

Opopanax chironium is a large herbaceous perennial with a thick and woody stump belonging to the Apiaceae family (formerly Umbelliferae), just like celery, fennel, and carrot, which also bear inflorescences in umbels. This Opopanax is native to the Mediterranean region, but also to Syria and Lebanon. In France, it grows spontaneously on the arid hillsides of Provence, up to Castellane, but also in the departments of Hérault, Aude, and Pyrénées-Orientales.

The plant develops to form a bushy clump between 60cm (24in) and 1.5 metres (5 feet) high, sometimes more. It has a sturdy stump that produces large and long basal leaves, thickly divided into finely toothed lobes, of medium green colour with a hairy underside. In summer, between June and July, a solid stem 2cm (1in) in diameter, adorned with greatly reduced leaves, emerges from the foliage clump. It branches out and bears several compound umbels of numerous small yellow flowers. When the base of the stem is split, a fragrant sap escapes from the wound. By drying it in the sun, an oleoresin called opoponax is obtained, used in perfumery but also in aromatherapy.

Opopanax chironium is a beautiful plant that loves heat, for sunny beds or rockeries, in a rustic or naturalistic style. It pairs well with tall grasses (Stipa gigantea, Molinia caerulea subsp. arundinacea), but also with other giant and airy perennials like Ferula communis, bronze fennel, mulleins, Cephalaria gigantea, or tall thistles (Alpine blue thistle, Cardoon, Globe artichoke thistle), Pink or white Pampas grass, rose mallows, Helianthus salicifolius, and many more. It can easily be integrated into a dry garden or a large Mediterranean-style slope, accompanied by lavender, rockroses, and rosemary.

In order to encourage gardeners to interact and share their experiences, Promesse de fleurs offers various media enabling content to be uploaded onto its Site - in particular via the ‘Photo sharing’ module.

The User agrees to refrain from:

- Posting any content that is illegal, prejudicial, insulting, racist, inciteful to hatred, revisionist, contrary to public decency, that infringes on privacy or on the privacy rights of third parties, in particular the publicity rights of persons and goods, intellectual property rights, or the right to privacy.

- Submitting content on behalf of a third party;

- Impersonate the identity of a third party and/or publish any personal information about a third party;

In general, the User undertakes to refrain from any unethical behaviour.

All Content (in particular text, comments, files, images, photos, videos, creative works, etc.), which may be subject to property or intellectual property rights, image or other private rights, shall remain the property of the User, subject to the limited rights granted by the terms of the licence granted by Promesse de fleurs as stated below. Users are at liberty to publish or not to publish such Content on the Site, notably via the ‘Photo Sharing’ facility, and accept that this Content shall be made public and freely accessible, notably on the Internet.

Users further acknowledge, undertake to have ,and guarantee that they hold all necessary rights and permissions to publish such material on the Site, in particular with regard to the legislation in force pertaining to any privacy, property, intellectual property, image, or contractual rights, or rights of any other nature. By publishing such Content on the Site, Users acknowledge accepting full liability as publishers of the Content within the meaning of the law, and grant Promesse de fleurs, free of charge, an inclusive, worldwide licence for the said Content for the entire duration of its publication, including all reproduction, representation, up/downloading, displaying, performing, transmission, and storage rights.

Users also grant permission for their name to be linked to the Content and accept that this link may not always be made available.

By engaging in posting material, Users consent to their Content becoming automatically accessible on the Internet, in particular on other sites and/or blogs and/or web pages of the Promesse de fleurs site, including in particular social pages and the Promesse de fleurs catalogue.

Users may secure the removal of entrusted content free of charge by issuing a simple request via our contact form.