Tasmanian author Christopher Koch, a two-time winner of the Miles Franklin Award, has died aged 81.

Koch died in Hobart overnight with his wife by his side after a battle with cancer.

He won the Miles Franklin Award in 1985 for The Doubleman, and in 1996 for Highways to a War.

His 1978 novel, The Year of Living Dangerously, which was set in Jakarta during the fall of president Sukarno, was made into a film starring Mel Gibson and Sigourney Weaver.

Koch's agent, Margaret Connolly, says his legacy will live on.

"I think posterity kind of sorts writers out and you know the bodies of work. From my view, I just think he's left an incredibly important body of work and I think it's one that will continue to be appreciated for a very long time," she said.

Ms Connelly said he was a pleasure to work with.

"He was enormous fun and he was always the same person, he wasn't changed by success," she said.

"He was quite a humble person and for him it was always about the work, but there was a very boyish quality to him and you know, every conversation you'd have, you'd laugh."

Publisher Random House says he had been a full-time writer since 1972.

Loading...

Spokeswoman Shona Martyn describes him as one of Australia's greatest novelists.

"He was really praised around the world."

"The Year of Living Dangerously (was known) to a wider audience because it was a movie but in actual fact, his novels were published internationally for a very long period of time and they started being published internationally long before many other Australian authors were. "

During his acceptance speech for his 1996 Miles Franklin Award, Koch said a writer never stops learning and improving on their craft.

"I have been learning to write for something like 45 years. I say 'learning to write' because writers never cease to learn their craft," he said.

"And with each small extra discovery, even at my advanced age, the excitement of one's first fatal step is rekindled. And should the excitement ever die it will be time to quit writing."

Koch, who was born in Hobart in 1932, had also worked as a broadcast producer for the ABC.