MARK COLVIN: The novelist Christopher Koch has died in Hobart at the age of 81.

His best known book, The Year of Living Dangerously, was made into a film over which he fell out with the director Peter Weir.

Christopher Koch wrote nine novels and twice won Australia's most prestigious literary prize, the Miles Franklin Award.

Felicity Ogilvie looks back on the life of Christopher Koch.

FELICITY OGILVIE: The novelist Christopher Koch won many awards but they weren't as important to him as his readers.

CHRISTOPHER KOCH: I think the greatest reward you get as a writer is finding that people who are reasonably receptive and intelligent have liked your book.

FELICITY OGILVIE: Christopher Koch often lamented that the popularity of movies meant that less people were reading novels. And of the nine novels he wrote, it's the book that was made into a film that Christopher Koch is best known for.

The Year of Living Dangerously is about the relationship between an Australian journalist, his girlfriend and a dwarf cameraman set in Jakarta in the 60s during the fall of the Sukarno regime.

The film stared Mel Gibson, Sigourney Weaver and Linda Hunt, who won an Academy Award for her portrayal of the cameraman.

(excerpt from film)

GUY HAMILTON (Actor Mel Gibson): Thank you very much Mr Aidit?

BILLY KWAN (Actor Linda Hunt): Let's go Guy.

GUY HAMILTON (Actor Mel Gibson): We'll keep in touch!

BILLY KWAN (Actor Linda Hunt): Let's go.

(end excerpt)

FELICITY OGILVIE: Even though he'd already written two novels Christopher Koch took a major risk when he quit his job producing at the ABC in Sydney and moved back to his home state of Tasmania to write The Year of Living Dangerously.

It was the late 70s and Christopher Koch was living below the poverty line as he wrote his best known novel.

He gave this interview about the work in 1982 when the film was released.

CHRISTOPHER KOCH (Archival): To decide, after never earned any serious money from writing novels, at the age of 40 to cast oneself adrift and give up your career and endanger one's family security, you have to be either insane or know that writing, no matter what the financial reward, is all you care about.

Of course you hope, people always do hope, that the next book will be that sort of winner which will both satisfy you artistically and make money. That seldom happens. I've been fortunate enough in that it has happened with The Year of Living Dangerously.

FELICITY OGILVIE: Christopher Koch was adamant that his best known work wasn't his best novel.

His two prestigious Miles Franklin Awards were won for different works - The Doubleman in 1985 and Highways to a War in 1996.

The trustee of the Miles Franklin Award is Simon Lewis.

SIMON LEWIS: Christopher will be remembered as one of the country's greatest writers and leaves behind a legacy rivalled by few in his genre. Our thoughts and prayers are very much with his family and friends during this sad time.

FELICITY OGILVIE: Christopher Koch's friend and Hobart book shop owner Chris Pearce also says the novelist was one of the best.

CHRISTOPHER PEARCE: I think he rates as one of the great Australian novelists over a long period. I think his first book, Boys on the Island, came out in 1958.

FELICITY OGILVIE: His last book, Lost Voices, was published a year ago, about the same time that he was diagnosed with cancer.

The 81-year-old died last night in Hobart with his wife at his side.

The publishing director at Harper Collins, Shona Martyn, says Christopher Koch was still working.

SHONA MARTYN: As recently as, you know, 10 days or so ago he was on the phone to his editor here talking about the punctuation in one of his back list titles that he thought we could improve in a subsequent edition and that was really the measure of the man. He had immensely high standards and that really showed through in his writing.

FELICITY OGILVIE: His agent for almost 20 years, Margaret Connolly, says success never went to Christopher Koch's head.

MARGARET CONNOLLY: He was always the same person. He wasn't changed by success. You know, he was quite a humble person and for him it was always very much about the work. But there was a kind of very boyish quality to him and every conversation you'd have you'd laugh and he was such an interesting man to talk to and he had such interesting kind of ideas.

FELICITY OGILVIE: Speaking on PM in 1996 after winning the Miles Franklin for his story about a risk-taking war photographer, Christopher Koch said he was interested in people who live life on the edge.

CHRISTOPHER KOCH: Even a cup of coffee tastes so much sweeter because you've come once again out of the, literally, out of the edge of death, and that's the condition I suppose that a lot of artists and writers would like to be in.

MARK COLVIN: The novelist Christopher Koch who has died at the age of 81. The reporter was Felicity Ogilvie.