Gerald L. Greene passed away on May 12, 2021, at the Comfort Care Home, Newton, Kansas, surrounded by his loving family.

Gerald was born July 7, 1937, on the family farm East of Jewell, Kansas, to Niles & Mary Chilcott Greene. He was welcomed to the family by his brother, Norman, and sister, Marjorie Anne. He had a love for the outside and especially spending time with his horse. He was diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes at the age of 10, but that didn’t slow him down as he continued a full active life. He earned a BS degree in Ag Econ and a Master’s Degree in Entomology at Kansas State University. His PhD is from Oregon State University in Entomology and post graduate work at the University of Kentucky.

He married Phyllis A. Rutledge on June 5, 1960. They have two daughters, Geri Arline (David) Coen, Overland Park, Kansas; and Pamela Sue (Russ) Galle, Cedar Rapids, Iowa; six grandchildren; and four great-grandchildren. Gerald is also survived by his brother Norman (Doris) Greene of Jewell, Kansas. He was preceded in death by his parents and sister.

During his 35-year career as a research entomologist he took on various research projects at the University of Kentucky; University of Florida; Sanford Experiment Station; and Quincy Experiment Station. The family moved back to KSU Garden City Experiment Station where he was head of the station and later did research. He was recognized for over 20 years of dedicated service to Kansas State University. He published over 100 scientific papers related to crop and livestock pest management.

He cherished time with family and enjoyed traveling, gardening, building, and woodworking. Gerald often said “I enjoy helping people” and he demonstrated this by serving his church community, serving on a number of different committees: Mexican American Ministries, medical and social services for Southwest Kansas; Habitat for Humanity, families in need of decent/affordable housing; Board of Education special committee, Garden City Community College, agriculture committee; Newton Senior Center, and as an avid Rotary Club Member serving as District Governor and other positions, as well as four missions trip to Panama for school renovations and providing a clean water system for an orphanage.

Memorials may be made in his memory to: Trinity Heights United Methodist Church Memorial Fund; KSU Foundation, Greene Insect Zoo Excellence Fund; or Rotary Club of Newton Foundation Service Project. Contributions may be sent to Broadway Colonial Funeral Home, 120 E. Broadway, Newton, KS 67114.

A Celebration of Life Service will be held on Saturday, May 22, 2021, at 10:30 a.m. at Trinity Heights United Methodist Church, 1200 Boyd Ave., Newton, KS 67114.

Arrangements are by Broadway Colonial Funeral Home, Newton, Ks.