Friedrich Nietzsche’s stint as a professor of classical philology at the University of Basel did not last long. This was not only due to his weak constitution, but also because of his first work published in Leipzig in 1872. In his speculative treatise entitled “The Birth of Tragedy from the Spirit of Music”, the relatively young professor snubbed the conventions of his discipline. Instead of limiting himself to ancient sources, he incorporated ideas from Arthur Schopenhauer and praised the composer Richard Wagner for renewing the concept of tragedy in a total artwork (Gesamtkunstwerk). In comparing the two complementary fundamental forces of the Dionysian and Apollonian, the book exerted a lasting influence on the arts and philosophical cultural criticism. However, its reception among Nietzsche’s colleagues was underwhelming. In his meanwhile notorious review of the book, “Ton und Tendenz” (Sound and Tendency), Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff criticised the philosopher and urged him to relinquish his post as professor of philology and follow the example of the god Dionysus:

We owe Nietzsche’s literary estate to the efforts of his sister Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche, who after returning from Paraguay collected every obtainable manuscript, letter, record and document of reception produced by or related to her brother. The Nietzsche-Archiv, which she established in her mother’s home in Naumburg in 1894, moved to the Villa Silberblick in Weimar three years later. It was there that Friedrich Nietzsche passed away in August 1900. From then on, his sister devoted herself wholly to cultivating his posthumous fame. Her villa not only became the main location of Nietzsche research, but also home of the worldwide Nietzsche cult.

Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900): handwritten print manuscript of “The Birth of Tragedy from the Spirit of Music”, 1871

Cat. no.: GSA 71/3

Provenance: Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900)

Collections: Friedrich Nietzsche estate at the Goethe- und Schiller-Archiv (GSA) (manuscript), Nietzsche collection at the Herzogin Anna Amalia Bibliothek (HAAB) (first edition)