As the NBA playoffs get underway, Shaun Livingston is receiving plenty of notice.

The pride of Peoria High School, Livingston is playing a heightened role for the Golden State Warriors as they try to repeat as league champions despite difficulties.

Livingston's veteran smarts and steadiness at guard are seen as key for the Warriors, who are missing two key pieces of their backcourt (Stephen Curry and Patrick McCaw) because of injuries.

The San Jose (Calif.) Mercury News published a story last week that focused on Livingston, whose team is facing the San Antonio Spurs in a first-round series.

Livingston had two points, two assists and three rebounds Monday night in a 116-101 victory that gave Golden State a 2-0 series lead.

“He’s one of our staples,” Warriors coach Steve Kerr told the Mercury News about Livingston, “and one of the guys who gives us the backbone and stability that we need.”

Teammates quoted in the story praised Livingston for his work ethic and advice, among other things. It echoed what Nick in the Morning heard in Milwaukee from Kerr and Warriors star forward Kevin Durant for a story we wrote in January.

As Bay Area media were lauding Livingston, so was another outlet in Southern California.

The Los Angeles Times published a piece that recounted Livingston's gruesome knee injury sustained 11 years ago in a game for the Los Angeles Clippers. The story also chronicled Livingston's travels and occasional travails before he landed with the Warriors and became part of two title teams there.

The Times story revealed a couple of tidbits Nick in the Morning didn't know. Only 30 active NBA players have played more seasons than Livingston's 14, for example.

Livingston's injury leads to the last jewel in his recent national-media triple crown. Perhaps it's the most important.

The Players' Tribune posted a video that featured Livingston's meeting with Zion Spencer, a teenage basketball player from Chicago. His career ended when part of his right leg was amputated last year because of cancer.

Livingston said his injury gave him a sense of kinship with Spencer. Immediately following Livingston's injury, doctors had feared they might have to amputate his left leg.

"When I first heard the story, it was like, 'Man, this kid went through a lot,'" Livingston said. "Then I put two and two together, and it's like this is in a sense of what I had to go through."

The video is more than worth a look.