The Westchester, New York, home where Marilyn Monroe married playwright Arthur Miller is on the market for $1.675 million according to Trulia. While their marriage only lasted five very famous years, the home is just as gorgeous as it was in 1956, when it belonged to Miller’s agent, the famous Hollywood talent scout Kay Brown. The four-bedroom, five-bathroom home features tile and hardwood flooring throughout, with a spacious sunken living room full of natural light, and views of the manicured backyard through pane-less floor-to-ceiling windows.

The formal dining room can be entered through French doors, and exited straight into the backyard. Even more French doors lead to the formal living room, which is anchored by a fireplace. The master bedroom boasts an arched doorway and vaulted ceiling, with a bright master bath whose tub overlooks the lawn area. The yard, which was the exact location of Monroe and Miller’s 25-person wedding, has a pool and separate poolhouse below a raised terrace. Of course, the sweeping lawn offers plenty of space to host an event and is surrounded by tall trees, offering the perfect amount of seclusion. This probably was a reason why Monroe and Miller opted to have their reception at the home, after being married at the White Plains courthouse in a ceremony that lasted just merely four minutes. At the time, Miller was frequently accused of being a Communist sympathizer and 30-year-old Monroe was under intense press scrutiny for marrying the talented 40-year-old playwright.

Architecture + Design

Inside the Very Big World of Really Tiny Things

Miniatures are taking over the world—and reshaping how we think about it in the process

AD Pro

AD PRO’s Color Trend Report 2024

AD PRO surveyed leading designers on the colors currently drenching furniture and layouts—here’s what they said

AD Pro

Nickey Kehoe on Being Good Bosses and the Risks Worth Taking

Todd Nickey and Amy Kehoe, of AD100 design firm and furnishings mecca Nickey Kehoe, reflect on their slow-burn ride to success