Felton

Felton

Nature. History. Community.

Felton was originally the southern part of the San Lorenzo Valley Logging Flume, constructed in the 1870s. The lumber sourced here was used to construct the Santa Cruz wharf and helped to rebuild San Francisco after the 1906 earthquake. You would not guess this used to be logging town, by the lush redwood forest that remains, but even the Henry Cowell Redwoods State Park was originally used for logging before the land was donated to the state. Felton is teeming with rich history; with historic parks such as Felton’s Covered Bridge park and the Roaring Camp train depot, as well as buildings like the present-day Cremer House restaurant, that once was the Grand Central Hotel now preserved and restored. The wooden covered bridge, constructed in 1892 was once the main entry point to the town, today it is no longer part of the roadway, but now serves the pedestrians visiting Felton’s covered bridge park.

Henry Cowell Redwoods State Park

Redwoods and Rivers

Henry Cowell Redwoods State Park consists of two parts. The Fall Creek Unit, designated for day use only, is separated from the main part of the park, by Highway 9 and the town of Felton. Campgrounds can be accessed via Graham Hill Road in Scotts Valley, or via trail if you wish to leave your vehicle behind. The San Lorenzo River flows through the main part of the park, and the Fall Creek Unit contains many year-round creeks and several small seasonal waterfalls, as well as 19th-century lime kilns slowly being reclaimed by the earth. The popular San Lorenzo River swimming hole, known as Garden of Eden, is just a short walk (about 1 mile) from the parking area along Highway 9. With 30 miles of trails to explore, a map is recommended, grab one from the California State Park Website, or at the park’s entrance station. More detailed maps are sold at the Mountain Parks Foundation Nature Store.

Have questions? Lets Chat!

For more information on living in Felton fill out the form, or call 831 435 8518!

Are you thinking of making a move? Whether you are ready to sell your home or buy a new home. Our team is dedicated to helping you find your place in the world. You can’t do that without getting the most money for your home; in the shortest amount of time.

Let us know if we can help you with the value of your home, tips before it goes on the market, or have us show you a few houses that may be perfect for your family.

Call us at 831 435 8518 or email at [email protected] to start finding your place.

Thomas Mendoza

831 435 8518