Coming up…

Two shorts about love and loss by Kathryn Cramer

Short fiction 1: “Disextinction, Inc.” by Kathryn Cramer 01:00

“For his biology project, Jason decided to resurrect the passenger pigeon.”

Kathryn Cramer lives in Westport, NY. She is an editor of the Hieroglyph project, inspired by Neal Stephenson and sponsored by the Center for Science and the Imagination at Arizona State University.

Her story, “Am I Free to Go?” was published by Tor.com in December 2012.

She is a writer, critic, and anthologist who co-edited the Year’s Best Fantasy and Year’s Best SF series with David G. Hartwell. Her most recent historical anthologies include The Space Opera Renaissance and The Hard SF Renaissance, both co-edited with Hartwell. Their previous hard SF anthology was The Ascent of Wonder (1994).

She was the P. Schuyler Miller Critic Guest of Honor at Confluence 2008 in Pittsburgh, PA.

She won a World Fantasy Award for best anthology for The Architecture of Fear co-edited with Peter Pautz; she was nominated for a World Fantasy Award for her anthology, Walls of Fear. She also co-edited several anthologies of Christmas and fantasy stories with Hartwell.

She was a runner-up for the Pioneer Award for best essay on sf of the year, and is on the editorial board of The New York Review of Science Fiction, for which she has been nominated for the Hugo Award many times. John Clute has called her criticism “spiky” and “erudite.”

She is a consultant for L. W. Currey, Inc., an antiquarian bookseller and for five years, consulted for Wolfram Research, a mathematical software company. She is co-owner of an apple orchard in Westport, NY.

Fact: Looking Back at Genre History by Amy H. Sturgis 14:00

Short Fiction 2: “You, In Emulation” by Kathryn Cramer 26:00

“I checked you out of the library. You were due back in two weeks for synchronization, but I kept you out much longer, running up huge fines. The librarian was very nice and didn’t make me pay right away, but said that she had very little discretion; that the fines were set by the library system and your publisher.”

Narrators: Dennis M. Lane and Tricia Glock

Dennis M. Lane is a Rhysling Award (2013 Short poem – “Blind Obedience”, 2013 Long Poem – “Grandfather”) and Dwarf Stars Award (2013 “Replacement”) nominated poet and writer of science fiction short stories and novels.

He was born in the monochrome days of the early sixties, deep in the industrial heartland of England. Coming of age during the Thatcher Years, the conflict that he experienced during the Steel Strike and the Teacher’s Strike played a great part in his political development.

In 1986 he travelled to rural Nigeria as a volunteer teacher and this lead to a long career working in international development, which continues to this day.

He has lived in seven countries across Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific, each country making its own impact upon him. He has finally settled in South Africa where he has now lived for almost ten years.

Dennis M Lane’s writing ranges from poetry, which covers a variety of themes from the personal to the political, and are written in a range of styles and forms; through short stories; to longer forms. His first poetry collection “8 Million Stories” was published in November 2010. A collection of science fiction short stories, poetry and flash fiction, “The Poring Dark”, was published in September 2012. His first novel “Talatu”, a Young Adult Science Fiction tale, was published in March 2013.

His second novel was published in August 2013. “The King’s Jewel”, the first of The Helix Key Series, is a Young Adult novel best described as Quantum Leap meets Assassin’s Creed with a backbone of Stargate; and is populated by his own ancestors (going back as far as the time of Christ!).

Outside of his writing Dennis presents a monthly Film Review on the Hugo award winning StarShipSofa podcast, writes articles for the Limebird Writers site, cooks, plays the harmonica and spends far too much time watching football.

Tricia hides behind her writing the way a film star hides behind the camera – it should work, but it doesn’t. She has family and pets, but doesn’t think it relevant to mention them.