Instrumental post-rock quartet The Union Trade hit Slim's this Saturday, August 22nd for a headlining show in the wake of the release of their second full-length album, A Place of Long Years, earlier this year. The San Francisco-based band is made up of guitarist Don Joslin, guitarist/pianist Eric Salk, bassist Nate Munger, and drummer Eitan Anzenberg.

Their new album comes three years after the success of their debut LP, which included their breakout track "Everyday Including Holidays". They've spent that time honing their skills and focusing on how to create the textured, vivid soundscapes that define them. We had the chance to talk with the band before next week's show about what it's like to go into a sophomore album, how they see themselves in the Bay Area music scene, and what fans can look forward to next.

Win tickets to The Union Trade, Eyes on the Shore, Sunrunners, & Belle Noire at Slim's

Can you give a brief history of the band?

The Union Trade began in May of 2006 when Eric, Nate, and I [Don] met through previous bands and we all decided to start something new together. Since 2006 we have released two EPs and two LPs. It’s been a pretty explorative process since day one, mainly exploring the band members very different musical tendencies as well as the need for vocal experimentation. During a one year hiatus in 2011 and the success of the all-instrumental song “Everyday Including Holidays” from the 2008 LP release Everyday Including, the band agreed that setting out to record an all-instrumental album would be the best. Three years in the making, we released our second full length Feb 3rd 2015 on Tricycle Records as our first mostly instrumental album featuring label mates Ann Yu’s spare vocals and cello from Nate Blaz on a few tracks.

You're known for creating evocative soundscapes which leaves room for the imagination to create lots of vivid imagery to go along with it. Say you were to paint that imagery into a landscape, what would it look like?

This is a tough question because the songs could mean and feel completely different depending on the listener. Peaceful, other worldly and harsh landscapes would for sure come to mind and have been used as creative theme for our albums. Our 2008 release Everyday Including featured a booklet of eleven 70s style landscape oil paintings to set the mood of the album. We thought it was a nice concept because some of those paintings could mean happiness and fond memories for some and melancholy and hard times for others. Those paintings and that style are very subjective to how you perceive them, similar to the music we make.

Did you feel any pressure going into the oft-discussed sophomore album process?

We were actually pretty excited to dive into this album. We had been a band for six years or so prior and we were still learning what direction we wanted to go in. After taking a year break, we all came back re-energized with a new vision to create an all-instrumental album that we could all be proud of.

For your own live music enjoyment, what's better: festival or traditional venue?

For our own live music enjoyment I would have to say both combined, festivals that play in traditional venues like Noise Pop, SXSW, Iceland Airwaves etc… It’s the best of both worlds. You get to see and be introduced to a lot of bands in a span of a few days and get to see them in a more intimate venue and feel more connected to the experience.

Which music festivals would you most like to play?

Most festivals, really. We think it would be great to get in front of a wider audience that might not normally have the patience for instrumental music. Treasure Island and Outside lands locally, and Iceland Airwaves and dunk!festival in Belgium internationally would be at the top of our festival lists for sure.

What do you think about the current Bay Area music scene?

The Bay Area isn't necessarily the best place for post-rock instrumental bands in our opinion. We're in such a niche genre, we end up playing a lot of mixed bills locally. We do get support in the local scene, some of which comes from being on local label Tricycle Records. It would be great to open and support for more well-known touring artists in our genre locally to help grow our fanbase of people that are into our style of music.

If you could open for anyone who would it be?

It would be pretty cool to actually play during a photography exhibit opening. Someone like Erwin Olaf or Gregory Crewdson. We would love the idea of playing live mixed with an art exhibit, theater or performance art. We have never done that before but I think it would lend itself well to our music and be an interesting collaboration. If it were to be another band we would pick Explosions in the Sky or Mogwai.

Favorite album of the year so far?

Godspeed You! Black Emperor - Asunder, Sweet And Other Distress.

What's next for The Union Trade?

After our show at Slim’s Aug 22nd, we plan to tour the Northwest again through October. During the end of the year, we plan to finish writing some new material and possibly release a string of singles in 2016 with videos rather than albums and continue to aim to play regionally and internationally.