Albessen is a municipality in the district of Kusel, in Rhineland -Palatinate at the edge of the Saarland. It belongs to the municipality Kusel.

4.1 Structures

4.2 Regular events

5.1 Established businesses

Geography

Albessen is located on the West Rich. Neighboring municipalities are Ehweiler and Konken the east and Herchweiler and Selchenbach as border villages to the Saarland in the west.

History

The site was first documented in 1436 as " Albessen ". In 1609 there were 19 households with a total of 81 residents in the village. By the end of the 18th century Albessen belonged to the Duchy of Pfalz- Zweibrücken.

In the so-called French occupation of the city from 1798 to 1814 was assigned to the Canton Kusel in the Saar department.

From 1816 to Albessen belonged to the Kingdom of Bavaria and was part of the country 's Commissariat Kusel in the Rhine district. In 1840 the city had 17 houses and 156 inhabitants. He was designated as a Protestant village and was the parish after Konken.

Until 1971 the town was assigned administratively Albessen the mayoralty Konken and is a member since 1 January 1972 the municipality Kusel.

Policy

Parish council

The local council in Albessen consists of six council members, who were elected at the municipal election held on 7 June 2009 in a personalized majority vote, and the honorary mayor as chairman location.

Coat of arms

The blazon of the arms is: " Divided by oblique wavy line of gold and green, top left, a green oak branch with a green leaf and two green acorns, bottom right a silver ploughshare ."

Culture and sights

Structures

See list of cultural monuments in Albessen

Regular events

Every first of May, the maypole is erected. He anchored next to the village pond in a mounted bracket. At the root there are the coats of arms of some known families, businesses and associations, eg the folk choir or the volunteer fire department. Then beer and grilled food are sold and celebrated in the district of the village and the surrounding communities.

One other regular festival is the pond hard right on the pond in place. At the pond hard creating the pond is celebrated as fire water pond. Every place has its own summer festival with a different name. In Kusel example, it is the Kuseler Autumn Fair.

Economy and infrastructure

Established businesses

( Is in the adjacent room held once a month on the second Sunday, a worship of the Protestant Church ) In Albessen there is a restaurant and three full-time and one part-time farmers. A school groups and other interested parties often visited attraction is an organic farm, which is performed first in Germany as a corporation. Director and CEO of AG is Cornelius Burgdörfer - Bensel. Additionally, there is a company that produces goat cheese and even marketed.