Welcome to Herchweiler, a charming village in the district of Kusel, Germany. As a destination, it may not be as well known as other places in the region, but it is definitely worth a visit.

Outdooractive Editors Verified partner

Author of this page

Attractions in Herchweiler

Highlights

Toprecommended route Difficulty difficult closed

Distance 1,021.5 km

Duration 281:16 h

Ascent 12,526 m

Descent 12,260 m

I tried to connect different European hiking trails, Pilgrims routes, nature paths and other regional trails to find my way through Germany.

from EVA dinarica, EVAdinarica Project

Bike Riding · Pfalz

Im Kuseler Musikantenland

Toprecommended route Difficulty moderate

Distance 29.2 km

Duration 2:28 h

Ascent 385 m

Descent 385 m

Das Musikantenland ist ein Gebiet in der nördlichen Westpfalz. Benannt ist dieser Landstrich nach dem Westpfälzer Wandermusikantentum, das vor ...

1

from Alfred Kräuter, Community

Road Cycling · Regionalverband Saarbrücken

Die große Saarland-Runde

Toprecommended route Difficulty difficult

Distance 310 km

Duration 17:15 h

Ascent 3,226 m

Descent 3,226 m

An einem Tag ein ganzes Bundesland umrunden. Wo kann man das schon machen, außer im Saarland. Aber die wichtigere Frage ist: wer kann das machen?

from Frank Polotzek, Saarland

Bike Riding · Sankt Wendel County

Hankman´s Tour 23: Oberkirchen - Pfeffelbach - Bledesbach - Haupersweiler

Difficulty moderate

Distance 26.6 km

Duration 2:00 h

Ascent 312 m

Descent 322 m

Von Oberkirchen nach Pfeffelbach, Ruthweiler mit einem Blick auf die Burg Lichtenberg.Dann über Bledesbach, Ehweiler, Albessenund Herchweiler zurück.

from Ralf Hanke, Community

Mountain Biking · Pfalz

Tour 2 51,2km 618hm

Difficulty moderate

Distance 51.6 km

Duration 3:15 h

Ascent 621 m

Descent 635 m

Ohmbach - Ohmbachstausee - Glan-Blies-Weg bis Rehweiler - Sportplatz Rehweiler - Sportplatz Schellweiler - Kusel - Pfeffelbach - Flugplatz ...

from Jörg Palisse, Community

Mountain Biking · Pfalz

Tour 4 46,9km 774hm

Difficulty moderate

Distance 48.1 km

Duration 3:15 h

Ascent 716 m

Descent 701 m

Ohmbach - Herschweiler-Pettersheim - Krottelbach - Selchenbach - Herchweiler - Pfeffelbach - Bledesbach - Etschberg - Rehweiler - Glan Münchweiler ...

from Jörg Palisse, Community

Mountain Biking · Pfalz

Tour 1 28,7km 414hm

Difficulty easy

Distance 28.7 km

Duration 2:15 h

Ascent 414 m

Descent 414 m

Ohmbach - Wahnwegen - Konken - Albessen - Langenbach Flugplatz - Ohmbach

from Jörg Palisse, Community

Discover more

Geographically, Herchweiler is located on the edge of the Palatinate Forest and thus offers the perfect setting for outdoor activities such as hiking or cycling. The landscape is characterised by rolling hills and lush forests - a true paradise for nature lovers.

Tourist attractions are many and varied. Visit the local history museum to learn more about the history of the village or admire the architecture of the 18th century St. Wendelin church.

Cultural highlights are also many: In summer, concerts are held regularly on the market square and in December the village is transformed into a Christmas market with mulled wine and handicrafts.

Herchweiler also has a lot to offer in the way of culinary delights: Be sure to try the regional Saumagen (stuffed pork stomach) or enjoy a cold beer in one of the cosy pubs.

If it ever rains, you can go to the indoor swimming pool, for example, or take a trip to Lichtenberg Castle - a medieval fortress with a museum and restaurant.

And where is the nicest place to be? That depends on your interests, of course! If you like hiking, we recommend the Palatinate Forest Trail along the castles. If you prefer to explore the history of the village, visit the local history museum. No matter what you do, Herchweiler is sure to remain in your memory.

This has been our guide to Herchweiler - we hope it helps you plan your trip!

Trip planning

Weather

Getting there

Get there by train, car, bike, or on foot!

Reviews

2 Ratings and reviews

Destinations in Herchweiler

Localization

Parts of this content were machine translated using German as the source language