William F. Allen OBITUARY

LOWELL — William F. Allen, 84, a resident of the Centralville section of Lowell, a World War II veteran who served in two of the armed services, died Thursday afternoon, April 19, at his daughter’s residence in Milford, N.H.

He was the husband of the late Mary (DeSilva) Allen.

He was born in Lowell, Oct. 3, 1922, son of the late Patrick Moffett and Esther Allen. He was educated in Lowell schools. He received an associate’s degree from the University of Alaska at Anchorage.

Mr. Allen was a World War II veteran having served in the U.S. Marine Corps., the Army and attained the rank of corporal with the Company L 409th Infantry Regiment. His battles and campaigns included Algeria French Morocco, Tunisia, Sicily, Naples Foggia, Rome Arno, Southern France, Rhineland, and Central Europe.

He was a communicant of St. Michael Church in Lowell.

In his earlier years, he was employed by the Civilian Conservation Corps. Before retiring, Mr. Allen was a foreman for 30 years at Malden Mills in Lawrence.

He resided in Alaska for 12 years where he was employed by the State of Alaska Recreation Department. He was the activity director for the Pioneer Home in Anchorage.

Upon returning to Lowell, he was a board member of the Friends of The Lowell Council on Aging. In 2004, Mr. Allen implemented the senior of the month program with the Council on Aging.

He was a life member of both the Lowell Veterans of Foreign Wars Walker-Rogers Post 662, and the Tyngsboro American Legion Post 247.

Mr. Allen loved to travel especially to Alaska and China. His greatest love was spending time with family and volunteering at the Lowell Senior Center. He enjoyed gardening and was a season-ticket holder to the Golden Gloves for many years. Every year, he attended a reunion of the Company L 409th Infantry Regiment in Kentucky.

He loved to take pictures and wherever he went he always traveled with a camera to photograph family and friends.

He is survived by six daughters and three sons-in-law, Mary E. and Alan G. Miles of Milford, N.H., with whom he resided during his illness, Patricia M. and Barry Cregg of Dracut, Nancy K. Allen-Eldridge and Brian Eldridge of Lowell, Jocelyn E. McDermit of South Carolina, Carleen R. Preble of Gig Harbor, Wash., and Nadine L. Allen of Dracut; two sons and daughters-in-law, Kevin W. Allen and Ana DelRey-Allen of Skokie, Ill., and Brian R. and Sylvia Allen of Leon Valley, Texas; a sister, Mary G. “Gerry” Chaput of Dracut; 19 grandchildren; eight great-grandchildren; his former wives, Theresa (Lamarche) Dauth of South Carolina, and Morgan Galazia of Dunedin, Fla.; several nieces and nephews.

He also leaves his dear friends, Vera Miles of Milford, N.H., and Doris Kapala of Dracut.

He was also the brother of the late Walter Moffett.