APPLICATION DEVELOPMENT

PAAS

OrangeScape Platform Review

Product Snapshot

Product Profile

Contact vendor directly for pricing information.

Technology

Product is available as a SaaS solution.

Customer Focus

Vendor works with companies of all sizes and across multiple industries.

Select Customers

24/7 Customer, IIFL, UB, AstraZeneca, Sterlite

About OrangeScape Platform

OrangeScape Platform is a PaaS system designed to assist users with building applications through a visual interface in a 5GL environment. The platform enables users to create applications that can be deployed on any cloud platform, is equipped with administration and monitoring tools, and supports system portability without requiring changes to applications.

The software allows users to deploy applications on any public cloud including Google App Engine, Microsoft Azure, and Amazon EC2, as well as on-premise environments such as Java Platforms. Additionally, the platform enables users to develop applications without coding requirements, and facilitates application development through multiple perspectives and focuses including data model design, rules design, form design, process design, action design and reports design.

About the Company

OrangeScape was founded in 2003 and is headquartered in Chennai, Tamilnadu.

OrangeScape Platform Key Features

Designed to be highly scalable

Test-as-you-go functionality

Supports REST style service interfaces

Equipped with a comprehensive set of configuration elements

Single-click deploy functionality

Business-Software.com is your go-to source for business software reviews, free software comparison reports and all of your software needs. Our business software reviews cover top-rated business accounting software solutions, the top 20 ERP software and leading CRM software applications for small, midsize and enterprise companies alike. Browse our software reports for CMS solutions, top HR software and more to meet all of your business software management needs. Use our free business software product search to start your search!

© Copyright 2024 Business-Software.com. All Rights Reserved.