About Auburn Hills

Auburn Hills is a midsize city in Michigan's Oakland County that's been steadily growing since its incorporation in 1983. Here, you'll find a healthy economy, several scenic parks and the headquarters of several major corporations.

Living in Auburn Hills

You'll also have access to plenty of amenities in Auburn Hills, including everyday conveniences like grocery stores, gyms, coffee shops and a local library. Easy access to Interstate 75 makes it convenient to travel to other nearby cities if you can't find what you need at home.

There are a number of parks in Auburn Hills, providing many opportunities to enjoy the local scenery. Clinton River Trail stretches 16 miles through the middle of Oakland County, including a 2-mile portion through Auburn Hills. The segment of trail that passes through the town is gravel, making it ideal for jogging, biking and walking. Civic Center Park is another popular spot for locals, offering hiking, picnic areas, sports fields, children's playgrounds and a fishing pond. Families in the area often enjoy camping at the Hawk Woods Nature Center, a local preserve that's made up of marshland, forest and meadows.

Jobs in Auburn Hills

Located just half an hour north of Detroit, Auburn Hills enjoys a robust economy. Its position in the Rust Belt makes it a popular location for car manufacturers, which supply a large variety of local jobs. Volkswagen, Audi, Chrysler and Maserati all maintain headquarters or major operations in Auburn Hills. Other major employers in the city include BorgWarner, RGIS, Autoliv, Guardian Industries and Faurecia.

In addition to these large corporations, local commercial, business and entertainment developments provide a number of jobs as well. Great Lakes Crossing Outlets, the Palace of Auburn Hills, and the Oakland Technology Park have created tens of thousands of jobs and opened opportunities to professionals from a variety of backgrounds.

Auburn Hills Schools

A few schools districts serve Auburn Hills, including Avondale School District, Pontiac School District and Rochester Community Schools. In addition to traditional elementary, middle and high schools, there's also a public Montessori campus as well as several private schools.

Auburn Hills is also home to several institutes of higher education, including Oakland University, Baker College, Central Michigan University and Thomas M. Cooley Law School.

Resources for Moving to Auburn Hills

Here are a few handy resources for planning your move to Auburn Hills:

Utilities: DTE Energy supplies electricity to Auburn Hills homes and businesses. The city's utilities department facilitates water and sewer services.

Garbage and Recycling: You can expect weekly curbside collection of all trash and recyclables.

Transportation: A handful of SMART Bus routes provide transportation in and around Auburn Hills.

Auburn Hills Housing

Like many areas of Michigan, Auburn Hills is a very affordable place to live. Average home prices fall below the national average, despite rising steadily over recent years. You have plenty of options when it comes to style and size as well, whether you're looking for a single-family home or an apartment. Many of the city's apartment communities feature private amenities like swimming pools and fitness centers.