Kommode - Patient

Kommode’s members are Anders Waage Nilsen, Øystein Gjærder Bruvik and Eirik, founded in 2006. They've only released four songs, and it's unknown whether there will be another album.

I think this is my proudest accomplishment this month: I've figured out a way to get into the academic building of my school. New College is tiny, and none of the buildings have more than three stories here. So I sneak in before the doors automatically lock at 6 PM, and just stay inside. When I need to leave, I fold up sheets of paper to prevent the door from locking.

And it's beautiful. I can see the sun setting, people walking back and forth from the bay, and the trees, which almost makes me forget it's Florida.

But I can't stay in there forever. It doesn't matter how much work I put in or how many people I see pass by. It's worthless without experiences.

So I pack up and come down. I start walking. It's not solitude: solitude is intentional. It's loneliness, one person looking for another. Looking for intimacy.

Like the rest of us are.

introductions

Thanks a lot to Hendrik for letting me do this! Sorry about the wait (stares at Hendrik), but don't worry, I'll make sure you guys get everything I've planned for you. Apologies for the soon-to-be overload. But not really.

I think KOC is multi-faceted in that they're really quite funny guys but their music is much more lonely, which is ironic, as they're a duo. My writing is going to shift a lot because of this, to accommodate my feelings about the band themselves, their music, and everything in between.

Kings of Convenience was formed after Bøe and Øye (who met through a Pink Floyd album in school!!!*) played in a band in high school called Skog (meaning forest in Norwegian) with Anders Waage Nilsen, Øystein Gjærder Bruvik. Eventually Bøe and Øye split off to to play in festivals during the summer of 1999, which is when they were signed**.

They've been playing for more than a decade, and have released five albums***: King of Convenience (2000), Quiet is the New Loud (2001), Versus (2001), Riot on an Empty Street (2004), and Declaration of Dependence (2009). Erlend also makes his own music (two albums with another one supposedly coming), and was the main vocalist for The Whitest Boy Alive which disbanded in 2014 (also two albums). Eirik joined Kommode and they released music at an unknown time**** but have definitively been a thing since 2006.

It's hard to describe the influence of this Norwegian indie folk-pop duo (a common epithet) or their worldwide popularity, or exactly what their music sounds like (we'll get into that later), but I believe you'll understand once you listen.

But I can't stop listening to the sound // of two soft voices blended in perfection

Me neither.

*There are also stories of them meeting by creating a rap together about their teacher (possibly true), and by meeting in the Norwegian embassy of Pakistan, and a graph competition (both false).

**They've recorded under a few labels, including Éllet, Kindercore, Source, Virgin, EMI, and Astralwerks.

***We'll be focusing on Quiet is the New Loud, Riot on an Empty Street, and Declaration of Dependence as their album Kings of Convenience was absorbed into the other three, and Versus is a remix album.

****Kommode is a hard band to find. They're lightly referenced in Wikipedia, and consist of former band members from Skog, minus Erlend. They've only released 4 songs.