Carol Thrower, the daughter of the late parents Billie Dove Thrower and George Dunnigan, was born December 14, 1961 in Boston, Massachusetts. Carol was a twin of her late brother Carl Thrower and younger sister Lillie Mae Thrower. She is survived by her five siblings: Peggy, Rhonda, Shirley, George, and Darryl, along with her children: Kendall and Kendrick Woodard and her one grandchild Kendrick Nigel Woodard Jr. as well as a host of nephews, nieces, cousins, aunts, uncles, and friends.

Carol graduated from Wilde Lake High School in Columbia, Maryland in 1980. She continued her education at Howard Community College for general studies and Frederick Community College earning her certificates as an anesthesiologist technician and surgical technician.

Carol began her career in 1980 and dedicated over 20 years of her career to Howard County General Hospital. She started as an operating room data coordinator and later became an Anesthesia Technician, ultimately finishing her working career as a Surgical Technician. Her commitment and hard work made her a valued member of the medical community.

She loved being a wife and mother. She had great pride in her family. Carol's pride and joy was her twin boys. She didn’t mind making many sacrifices for them. Her dream was for her children to be a part of the church. It came true when they started miming for various churches. They are call upon for their unique interpretation of gospel music. She loved that. Carol was drawn to children in the neighborhood becoming their surrogate mother guiding them through life’s pitfalls. One of her favorite family times was getting together, sitting down, and tearing up some crabs. Her favorite entertainers were Michael Jackson, the Temptations and Prince. She enjoyed multiple music videos.

Carol and her husband, Mark Arigo, shared two years of marriage, cherishing every moment together. During their precious time together they visited Las Vegas, Niagara Falls, Myrtle Beach, the Grand Canyon, and took multiple cruises, creating lasting memories.

Carol always had a smile on her face and brought joy to those around her. She loved seafood, the Ravens and family cookouts. She was an outstanding cook. She was known for her famous quiches and a variety of other dishes. Her cheerful demeanor and kind spirit made her a motherly figure to everyone, always looking out for others.

Carol had a kind spirit. She was humble and had a sweet nature about her. She will be dearly missed by all who knew her. She was a true friend and a child of God.