Name: Carol W. Jackson

Title: Sr. Project Engineer

Hometown: Jackson, ALUH-BAMMUH (read in the voice of Forrest Gump)

Family: Married to Paul for 28 years, 3 kids – Windham, The Boy, now married and living in Montana; Callie, oldest daughter AKA “middle child syndrome”, also married and working on a PhD in Biochemistry; Shelbey, the Baby Girl, single, no prospects and fine with that, she is currently an Accounting Major at USM. One dog, Jasmine (some kind of spaniel mix that looks like an English Shepherd), she is 9 years old and the best running partner a girl could have.

Last book you read? North: Finding My Way While Running the Appalachian Trail by Scott Jurek – a journal about his fastest known record thru-hike of the Appalachian Trail and A Fire Sparkling by Julianne Maclean. I am currently working on White Trash, the 400-year Untold History of Class in America by Nancy Isenburg….I am always reading.

What’s in your coffee/tea? A little Heavy Cream in the bottom of my coffee….and, NO Half and Half will not be okay.

What made you decide to join Waggoner Engineering? Chad Edward’s sparkling personality…jk. Waggoner was an opportunity for me to try something different and shift focus to more engineering related projects rather than surveying – projects that were larger in scope than what I had been involved with recently.

What do you like most about working at Waggoner? The people that I work with! The whole transportation team in Jackson are top-notch. The view from the office in Gulfport is also hard to beat.

What project has had the most significant impact on your career? When I was just a young-un (back before the war), ALDOT (formerly known as Alabama Highway Department) made me project engineer on a couple of large bridge projects at the same time. Both projects involved replacing sizeable bridges (one was exactly a quarter-mile long) with road closure and realignment. It was trial by fire. I learned a lot of invaluable lessons about heavy civil projects and construction methods, government regulation and oversight, workplace relationships, and dealing with the traveling public. I would say that those projects probably were the foundational molding of my engineering career.

If you were not an engineer, what would you be doing? If I had it all to do over again, I would move to Cypress Gardens, FL, out of high school and water-ski for a living. Not sure they even do that anymore. Currently, I am trying to figure out how to get a job in video review for SEC Baseball.