Billie Lourd has announced that she has given birth to her second child with husband Austen Rydell and shared the distinctly British name they've chosen.

The 30-year-old daughter of Carrie Fisher took to Instagram to share the happy news with fans as she shared a sweet picture of her newborn daughter's hands.

In the snap, Billie had wrapped her baby up in a cosy blanket and dressed her in a comfy cream baby grow.

Alongside the picture, the US actress wrote: "Introducing: Kingston's sister: Jackson Joanne Lourd Rydell," adding several heart emojis.

Jackson is "primarily a male name of English origin that means Son Of Jack/John."

It is "originally a British surname which has made its way onto the popularity charts as a boy's given name," according to BabyNames.com.

Billie's famous friends offered well wishes to the proud parents, with American Horror Story star Cody Fern commenting: "Congratulations!!!" followed by a string of red heart emojis.

Comedian Jeff Hiller wrote: " How wonderful! Welcome to the world sweet Jackson!"

Leslie Grossman added: "I love her already."

Billie first became a mum in September 2020 when she surprised her fans with a snap of her son's tiny feet sticking out of a blanket.

She captioned the sweet post with: "Introducing: Kingston Fisher Lourd Rydell."

Many famous faces were among those sending congratulatory messages at the time, including Matt Bomer, Matthew Morrison and Lily Collins.

Billie chose to honour her late mum Carrie by giving the tot her surname.

Billie and Austen tied the knot in Mexico back in March.

Her American Horror Story co-star Leslie Grossman shared the special event with her Instagram followers at the time.

She wrote: "Billie and Austen’s wedding weekend is over, which is so sad ’cause it was the most fun. But I won best dressed, and I may have bribed the judges. I may have done whatever I needed to do to get this trophy. But I got it."

Follow Mirror Celebs on Snapchat , Instagram , Twitter and Facebook .