Known as the writer of more or less every top 40 single of the post-Nirvana era of music, Dr. Luke is Lukasz Gottwald, an ex-coke addict who used to be a member of the Saturday Night Live Band. He has produced every artist--from Katy Perry to Kelly Clarkson to Kesha to Avril Lavigne--but he is also being known for being one of pop's greatest dicks.

He was born in Rhode Island, and in high school he started listening to punk rock and eventually acquired a Gibson Les Paul, which he acquired from his older sister. He began working as a session musician and guitarist in New York before Hal Willner tapped him to become the guitarist for the Saturday Night Live band in the late nineties.

He wound up cowriting the track Since U Been Gone for Kelly Clarkson with frequent collaborator Max Martin, and soon after, also wrote 2 of her other big hits: My Life Would Suck Without You and Behind These Hazel Eyes.

He also went on to produce one of the most influential albums of the past 15 years, Teenage Dream by Katy Perry (which eventually bagged him a Grammy nomination for Record of the Year.)

However, a lot of the accolades are rather tragic. In 2013, Kesha famously sued Dr. Luke alleging he had harassed her and body shamed her, whilst Dr. Luke pleaded a breach of contract. (The suit was eventually dropped.)

Kelly Clarkson has also claimed that Dr. Luke has taken credit for songs he did not write.

He still continues to produce and write (namely for pop acts such as Doja Cat and Normani), but a lot of my friends say he can't be trusted and that he has an ego problem.

I just thought I would ask you guys if he is a good producer. I have followed his work for years.

My bad. The hotel name is the chateau. It used to be the maple. Then the chateau (which is where dr. Luke went to grab the notebook), then it became the sleep cheap, and recently it was bought out to become apartments. I know the old owner and the new owner. One is chinese, one is czech and the new guy is russian. All were very nice to me and offered me a lawyer to take dr. Luke to court. I jist can't afford it. The cops were always there. If you look at google maps you can see my car in the parking lot. The exact same time dr. Luke visited from L.A. in a green vehicle. I forgot the model.