Website: http://www.alexa.com/

Alexa Internet, Inc. is a California-based company that provides commercial web traffic data and analytics. It is a wholly owned subsidiary of Amazon.com.

Wikipedia

Associated sectors:

SaaS; Internet information providers; Marketing; Analytics; Competitive Intelligence / Benchmarking; Marketing > Analytics > Competitive Intelligence; Benchmarking;

Similar Companies:

Hitachi Data Systems

USA

n/a

Hitachi Data Systems (HDS) is a company that provides modular mid-range and high-end computer data storage systems, software and services. It is a wholly owned subsidiary of Hitachi Ltd. and part of the Hitachi Information Systems & Telecommunications Division.

SpyFu

Azerbaijan

n/a

Live Chat available for support;--on our site--;Monday through Friday;8:00 AM to 5:00 PM Arizona Time (Mountain Standard).

Amazon

USA

Publicly Traded

Alexa, the voice service that powers Echo, provides capabilities, or skills, that enable customers to interact with devices in a more intuitive way using voice. Examples of these skills include the ability to play music, answer general questions, set an alarm or timer and more. Alexa is built in the cloud, so it is always getting smarter. The more customers use Alexa, the more she adapts to speech patterns, vocabulary, and personal preferences. With Alexa, developers can build new voice experiences

Third Coast Bancshares, Inc.

USA

Privately Held

Third Coast Bancshares, Inc. is a Texas-based bank holding company that operates primarily through its wholly owned subsidiary, Third Coast Bank, SSB. The company focuses on commercial banking operations across the largest metropolitan areas in Texas via 16 branches. It offers services such as maintaining deposit relationships and implementing expansion strategies while managing risks associated with interest rates and market conditions. Additionally, it provides dividends on its Series A Preferred Stock to shareholders.

Cogeco Peer 1

Unknown

n/a

Cogeco Peer 1 is a wholly owned subsidiary of Cogeco Communications Inc.