Amazon.com, Inc. (NASDAQ: AMZN

AMZN (92.59-0.26%) is an e-commerce and cloud computing company headquartered in Seattle, Washington. It is known as the largest Internet retail company in the world. The company started as an online bookstore but has diversified to sell DVDs, software, video games, electronics, apparel, furniture, food, toys and jewelry. The company also builds and sells its own consumer electronics, such as the Amazon Kindle.Amazon has annual revenues of $136 billion. It has been able to achieve this success through the acquisition of leading companies.

1. IMDb.com

IMDB is one of the largest movie websites in the world and serves as an online database of information related to films, TV programs and video games. Amazon purchased the company in 1998 and has integrated services that allow users to purchase a DVD or Blu-ray of a film via Amazon.com.

2. Alexa.com

Alexa is a big data company that collects information on people's browsing habits online and provides analytics on those habits. The company is also the top way to rank the popularity of websites. Amazon acquired the company in 1999 for $250 million in stock. The acquisition allows Amazon to implement more data insight into its daily operations.

3. Audible.com

Audible sells and produces audio entertainment, information and educational programming on the Internet. The company sells audiobooks, radio and TV programs, and audio versions of magazines and newspapers. Amazon acquired the company in 2008 for $300 million in cash. Since then, Audible has acquired the rights to 5,000 titles to AudioGO, one of its main competitors.

4. DPReview

DPReview provides reviews of digital photography products. The company also has buying guides, user reviews and active forums for individual cameras as well as general photography forums. DPReview is a London-based website that Amazon acquired in 2007. The company operates as a standalone service.

5. Box Office Mojo

Box Office Mojo is a website that tracks and communicates the box office performance of movies. Amazon acquired the company in July 2008 via its IMDB subsidiary. While the company was acquired by IMDB, it continues to operate as a standalone service.

6. AbeBooks

AbeBooks is another book-related company that Amazon owns. The company is dedicated to tracking down rare, used and out-of-print books. AbeBooks works with independent bookstores to create an inventory of titles that are otherwise hard to locate.

7. Goodreads

According to Alexa rankings, Goodreads is in the top 300 most trafficked websites in the world. Goodreads is an online community with book reviews, recommendations and discussions. Goodreads was founded in 2006, and Amazon acquired it in 2013. The price of the deal was never disclosed, but given Amazon's core book products, it's a purchase that makes sense.

8. Twitch.tv

Twitch.tv is a live streaming video platform that focuses on video gaming, including playthroughs of video games, broadcasts of e-sports competitions and other gaming-related events. The company reports that it has more than 1.5 million broadcasters and 100 million monthly visitors.

Amazon acquired the platform in 2014 for $842 million. Google was also interested in Twitch.tv, but was outbid by Amazon.

9. Woot

Woot is an American online retailer that offers a single daily discount deal. The company was founded in 2004 and has grown to include deals for wine, sports and electronics. Amazon purchased Woot in the summer of 2010 and has integrated it into its e-commerce platform.

10. Whole Foods Market

On June 16, 2017, it was announced that Amazon had acquired the organic grocery chain Whole Foods Market (WFM