One of the most important hydraulic mega structures in Romania, classified as the third largest in Europe, its Stânca Costești reservoir, on Prut River. After Stânca Costești reservoir construction, hydrological parameters of Prut river (for example liquid and solid discharges) were severely modified. This study quantifies some of the geomorphic effects on the river’s active channel and plan form, in the context of the overall changes occurring in the last century (1915-2005 period ) The analysis was based on the different editions of the available topographic maps and aerial photos, which have recorded historical configurations of the Prut river channel. For each time period, several morphometric indices, such as minor riverbed width, major riverbed width, sinuosity index and meander curvature, were measured using GIS and further interpreted.. The preliminary conclusion, indicate’s that once Stânca Costești reservoir was constructed, the morphometric indices, evolved in different mode, downstream to Stânca Costești reservoir.

The article presents the dynamics of the Prut riverbed in the sector Iasi, between 1890 and 2016, studied through the changes in the floodplain of the river as a result of the modification of the channel due to erosion/sedimentation phenomena, exposed by comparing the land surface changes of the 2nd UAT order of the IAŞI county over the analyzed period. The reference land area of UAT order 2 of Iasi County was considered the one defined by the territorial administrative limits established at the last cadastral delimitation and the Prut riverbed digitization based on the directive drawing plans 1:20 000 from the year 1940. The land areas of UAT order 2 of Iasi County used for the comparative study were determined on the basis of the territorial administrative limits and the Prut river channel digitization based on the LANDSAT TM and ETM + Satellite Records of 17 August 2000, SENTINEL 2A dated 1th of April 2016, as well as on the topographic maps 1st Edition and 2nd Edition at 1: 25,0...

In the context of the increased interest on integrating the complex spatial and temporal response of fluvial systems to human impacts into the process of assessing the ecological state of the rivers and in promoting a sustainable river management European countries have developed a multi–scalar, hierarchical, process based hydro–morphological framework focused on understanding the river functioning and evolution as a basis for interpreting current conditions. In this context, the goal of this paper is to demonstrate the usefulness of systematic historic and present day geomorphic analysis along channel reaches with distinct typologies in order to generate a better image of river morphology as a background for assessing its present morphological state. The historical geomorphic analysis of Someșul Mic River’s channel dynamics during the past 250 years has shown that the main controlling factor is climate through its centennial – decadal scale variations in magnitudes and amplitudes o...

The Little Hungarian Plain is situated at the western margin of the Pannonian Basin and can be divided into two geomorphologically distinct parts: the Gyor Basin to the North and the Marcal Basin to the South. In the northwestern area of the Little Hungarian Plain the Variscan, weakly metamorphic basement is directly overlain by Miocene and Pannonian marine sediments in the northwestern area of the Little Hungarian Plain.

This study aims to analyze the hydrological regime of the Danube using data registered at the Giurgiu station and identify the spatio-temporal adjustments of the riverbed between Giurgiu and Oltenița along a 151 years interval (1864- 2015), as inferred from cartographic documents and satellite imagery. The results show major changes in the hydrological regime of the Danube, and also in the shape of the river channel.

The morphology of river channels results from the genetic and dynamic characteristics imposed by internal and external morphogenetic forcings. We studied reaches of river courses cutting across the contact area between the Romanian Plain (Carpathians foredeep) and the Curvature Subcarpathians, where active faults are located. In this area a wide monocline of tilted foredeep deposits generated a glacis-like macro-landform at the mountain front that connects the Subcarpathians with the Romanian Plain. The headwaters of studied rivers are located in the Subcarpathians (Cricovul Dulce River) and in the Carpathians (Prahova, Buzău and Milcov rivers). More in detail, we investigated river channels in plan view by morphometric and multi-temporal air-photo analysis to define the general trends of channel evolution. The results of this study indicate a spatial and temporal variability in the intensity of fluvial dynamic processes. The braided courses crossing the Subcarpathians and the piedm...