Southwest Airlines filed its annual 10-K with the SEC and it contains disclosures about the carrier’s Rapid Rewards frequent flyer program – related to how much travel is being done with miles, and what that tells us about how they’re recovering from disastrous service during the holidays.

The striking thing about Southwest’s frequent flyer program is that more passengers are traveling on points than with any other airline. In 2022,

Members redeemed 9.2 million flight awards.

This amounted to 15% of revenue passenger miles flown.

More than 1/7th of all travel on Southwest Airlines was done on points. That’s actually down slightly from 2021, though that’s just because there was less paid travel in 2021. There were 8.1 million awards in 2021, over 1 million fewer, but as a percentage of total travel that was higher (17.3%) as (1) there was almost exclusively leisure travel, and (2) people were spending accumulated balances that they didn’t burn in 2020.

In 2020, after all, travel was heavily depressed. Still, passengers claimed 4.1 million flight awards representing 15.8% of all travel (revenue passenger miles flown).

This is roughly double the percentage of travel you’ll find on American, Delta, and United using points.

In total Southwest recognized $3.03 billion in revenue for redemptions in 2022, up from $2.1 billion in 2021. They still have $5.2 billion in liability on their books for points, and indeed that liability grew by approximately $400 million during the year.

The largest source of revenue for the program, and points on their books, is sales to Chase to reward co-brand credit card customers. They re-upped their card agreement at the end of 2021.

The airline suggests that Rapid Reward redemptions are on the rise in early 2023, which they point to as an ‘encouraging’ sign about customer willingness to book after the carrier’s holiday operational meltdown.

Unfortunately, considering the importance of the program to the airline’s bottom line, they don’t disclose basic facts like how many active members they have or how many elite members they have. But the data is still useful to see that they continue delivering free travel for members – and indeed, if you find yourself on a Southwest flight you can look at the row beside you and in front of you and wink knowing that someone sitting there is probably paying for their ticket with points.