I used to be a semi-frequent flyer with Southwest Airlines. They have the only non-stop flight from Austin to Washington, D.C.’s close-in National airport (by law) and that’s my most frequent destination. I had A-List status for awhile, but I’ve lost that status.

Frequent flyer status with Southwest meant that I could board earlier, and that meant I could choose the seat that I wanted since Southwest Airlines doesn’t pre-assign seats. Sometimes I’d get their exit row window seat with unlimited legroom. Other times I’d have an aisle seat close to the front, and that gave me enough space – Southwest Airlines offers an inch or two more legroom than any other U.S. airline’s regular coach besides JetBlue.

Without that status, if I want a better ‘boarding position’ which means a license to hunt for seats earlier when there are still decent seats left, I now have (3) options.

Buying a Business Select fare which is more expensive, even, than a refundable ticket but comes with one of the first 15 boarding spots (and a free cocktail).

Checking in exactly 24 hours prior to flight You’re in a Hunger Games quest to check in as soon as you’re able to, because boarding positions are assigned in order once the check-in window open. It’s you against everyone else. There used to be services that would automate the process for you, but Southwest’s lawyers largely put those out of business. You need to set a calendar reminder and sit at your computer and then the moment check-in opens you’re ready to pounce.

Early Bird check-in often priced around $25, you are given a boarding position prior to anyone checking in on their own 24 hours out. This usually means a high A boarding number or low B boarding number (so somewhere around the first 60 or 65 to board and probably getting an aisle seat).

Sometimes Business Select isn’t that much more but it depends on the route and whether there’s low fare competition. Truth is that I’m just not able to set aside time to check in 24 hours out exactly for every flight. I get stuck in a meeting that goes over, where I can’t just say “sorry, I have to take a break to check in for my Southwest flight” or maybe I’m on another flight and the wifi doesn’t work – a decent chance flying United or… Southwest.

So I’d invest the $25 for Early Bird check-in. The problem is that, as I was first to break the news two months ago, Southwest no longer sells Early Bird check-in on every flight. They seem to think it means more people will buy up to higher fares, like Business Select?

On a recent flight search I’d decided to fly Southwest Airlines from Austin to Chicago Midway airport. They had the best flight time for me. But they weren’t offering Early Bird check-in. So instead of paying $25 more for a decent boarding position I’d need to pay around $150 more. Not going to happen. In order to fly Southwest it was going to mean risking a “C” boarding position and probably a middle seat.

Since Southwest is no longer selling Early Bird check-in on every flight, and not selling it on the flight I wanted to buy, I simply… didn’t buy the Southwest Airlines flight. And I won’t buy Southwest flights without it most of the time, and certainly not for a two and a half hour flight.

Southwest’s decision not to take extra money for Early Bird check-in is a bet on earning more money. It puts at risk not just the roughly $400 million per year in fees it generated. In my case it meant selling fewer tickets, too.