Program overview

Southwest Rapid Rewards is the frequent flyer program for Southwest Airlines. It is a revenue-based program. It has no airline partners and Southwest only flies to around 48 U.S. States (including Hawaii), Puerto Rico and to limited destinations in Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean. Therefore, you should only transfer points when you are planning to fly this airline.

Point/Miles Conversion Chart

Pros

Miles never expire

One of the easiest mileage programs to use for domestic flights

Award tickets are fully refundable. No change or cancellation fee applies.

No blackout dates. All seats are available for award space (dynamic pricing)

All Southwest fares and award flights include 2 checked bags. This is a great deal compared to other US Airlines.

Simple, easy to use website

Companion Pass

Cons

Limited only to its own route network with mostly domestic flights

Revenue-based program

No first/business cabin

Excellent for

Domestic flights within the US. (For example, a flight from Baltimore to New York costs USD $70.00 or 4,000 miles)

Insider Tip

Southwest Companion Pass is a much-coveted benefit for Southwest flyers. This pass allows you to assign and take a companion for free (taxes/airport charges not included) every time you purchase a ticket or redeem points for a flight. To qualify, you need to fly 100 qualifying one-way flights or earn 125,000 qualifying points in a calendar year. The points you get from Southwest co-branded credit cards, including sign up bonuses, count towards the 125,000 goal but Chase Ultimate Rewards transfer points do not.

Do you use this program? Share your experience and tips in the comments below. Your thoughts would be very valuable to us!

Choose where you are going from and to by selecting the respective zones. There are two ways to choose your origin and destination - you can either select the zones they fall into on the map or by clicking on the bars above the map and entering the city name or airport code into the search fields.