Joaquin Phoenix (born October 28, 1974, San Juan, Puerto Rico) is an American actor who is regarded as one of the most talented actors of his generation, known for completely immersing himself in the characters he played.

At the time of his birth, Phoenix’s parents were missionaries in a millenarian Christian religious cult called the Children of God. When he was a young child, they returned to the United States, left the cult, and changed the family name from Bottom to Phoenix. In California he and his four brothers and sisters busked and performed at talent shows. Eventually, Joaquin, who went by the name Leaf Phoenix, and his elder brother, River, began getting work in commercials. They made their acting debut in a 1982 episode of the series Seven Brides for Seven Brothers and in 1984 costarred in an ABC Afterschool Special about dyslexia. As River’s career began to take off, Leaf continued guest appearances on such TV shows as Hill Street Blues and Murder, She Wrote, and in 1986 he was a cast member of the short-lived series Morningstar/Eveningstar. That year he made his film debut in SpaceCamp, and he later played a withdrawn teenager in Ron Howard’s Parenthood (1989). He subsequently resumed the use of his original first name and took a break from acting.

Britannica Quiz

Best Picture Movie Quote Quiz

Following the accidental drug-related death of River in 1993, Joaquin returned to the screen with the critically acclaimed To Die For (1995), which starred Nicole Kidman and was directed by Gus Van Sant. Phoenix’s breakthrough role was that of the Roman emperor Commodus in Gladiator (2000), for which he received an Academy Award nomination for best supporting actor. He also earned positive notice for his performances in Quills (2000), the black comedy Buffalo Soldiers (2001), M. Night Shyamalan’s Signs (2002) and The Village (2004), and Hotel Rwanda (2004), in which he played cameraman Jack Daglish.

Phoenix channeled musician Johnny Cash in the biopic Walk the Line (2005), for which he won plaudits for his singing as well as his acting; he was again nominated for an Oscar. His performances in the crime drama We Own the Night (2007) and in Two Lovers (2008) were also well received. Shortly after that, however, Phoenix announced that he was retiring from acting to pursue a career in hip-hop. His public appearances subsequently took a turn toward the strange, and I’m Still Here (2010), directed by Casey Affleck, was billed as a documentary of Phoenix’s self-destruction. It was later revealed that the film was scripted and intended as a mockumentary, and it engendered some ill will toward Phoenix.

Phoenix, however, reestablished himself with Paul Thomas Anderson’s The Master (2012). His performance as a tormented alcoholic enthralled by a character loosely based on Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard was highly praised and won him an award for best actor at the Venice International Film Festival; he also received an Oscar nomination. In Spike Jonze’s Her (2013) he played a man who falls in love with a sentient computer operating system. Phoenix’s next movies—Anderson’s Inherent Vice (2014), Woody Allen’s Irrational Man (2015), You Were Never Really Here (2017; best actor award at the Cannes film festival), Van Sant’s Don’t Worry, He Won’t Get Far on Foot (2018), Mary Magdalene (2018), and Jacques Audiard’s Les Frères Sisters (2018; The Sisters Brothers)—were all critically well received but not widely popular. He then starred as the titular comic-book villain in the psychological thriller Joker (2019). It was a blockbuster hit, and Phoenix won the Academy Award for best actor.