Conway Twitty is a legend of country music. The singer who burned up the country charts with "It's Only Make Believe," "Hello Darlin'," You've Never Been This Far Before," and "Linda on My Mind" is known for his many iconic TV performances, his duets with Loretta Lynn and being something of a sex symbol.

Twitty was performing at the Jim Stafford Theater in Branson, Missouri on June 4, 1993 when he collapsed and was rushed to the hospital. He was rushed into surgery but died of an abdominal aortic aneurysm on June 5 in Springfield, Missouri. He was 59. Twitty died way too young, but left behind an incredible legacy.

Sure, you know Conway Twitty songs like "Slow Hand," "I'd Love to Lay You Down," "After All the Good is Gone," "Tight Fittin' Jeans," and "I've Already Loved You in My Mind." But what else do you know about this legendary country singer? Here's a few fun facts.

1. He was part of the inspiration for the titular character in the iconic Broadway musical "Bye, Bye Birdie."

Conrad Birdie, the super sexy '50s star who turned a small town on its head in the musical, was a combination of Conway Twitty and Elvis Presley. Conrad Birdie is a play on Conway Twitty's name.

2. A Lot of Millennials know who Conway Twitty is for one weird reason.

Twitty is referenced in the popular Fox cartoon "Family Guy." A lot. The show cuts away to the "That's My Job" singer frequently as a sort of non-sequitur. It's weird, but funny.

3. Conway Twitty isn't the "Don't Call Him a Cowboy" singer's real name.

His real name is Harold Lloyd Jenkins. We guess it doesn't sound as cool as his stage name, Conway Twitty. The name "Conway Twitty" actually comes from the towns Conway, Arkansas and Twitty, Texas.

4. He's a Hall of Famer Twice over.

When you're the singer of "Louisiana Woman, Mississippi Man," "To See My Angel Cry," "I Don't Know A Thing About Love," "Lonely Blue Boy," and "After the Fire is Gone," of course you're going to be in a hall of fame. Conway Twitty is in both the Country Music Hall of Fame and the Rockabilly Hall of Fame.

5. Conway Twitty was too rock and roll for country music at first.

In the '60s, disc jockeys from some country radio stations thought Conway Twitty was a rock and roll singer — not a country singer, so they refused to play his songs.

Read More: The 10 Best Conway Twitty Songs, Ranked

6. He started his recording career like The King.

The pride of Friar's Point, Mississippi formed a country band, The Phillips County Ramblers, at the age of 10. But Twitty would kickstart his recording career in Memphis, Tennessee at Sun Studios, the same place Elvis, Jerry Lee Lewis, and Johnny Cash got their start.

7. He was an awesome baseball player too.

Twitty was offered a spot on the Philadelphia Phillies out of high school, but was drafted into the United States Army before he could sign the contract. While in the Army, Twitty performed with his country band The Cimmarons. Everything worked out for the best, considering he gave us country hits like "I Love You More Today," "Lost in the Feeling," "You're The Reason Our Kids Are Ugly," "Red Neckin' Love Makin' Night," "Lead Me On" and "Next in Line."

8. He owned a massive tourist attraction called Twitty City

The country star and songwriter opened the country music entertainment complex Twitty City in the early '80s. Located in Hendersonville, Tennessee (north of Nashville), Twitty City was a beloved tourist attraction until it closed in 1994.

Now Watch: 10 Legendary Instruments of Country Music