Conway Twitty, a country-western singer who brought a rich, throaty tone to dozens of steamy ballads during four decades in the music business, died Saturday at the Cox Medical Center in Springfield, Mo. He was 59.

The cause of death was a ruptured blood vessel in his stomach, hospital officials said. Mr. Twitty collapsed Friday night on his tour bus after a performance in nearby Branson, Mo.

Mr. Twitty, whose real name was Harold Jenkins _ he was poring over a map one day and noticed the towns of Conway, Ark., and Twitty, Texas _ began as a rock 'n' roll singer in the 1950s, and his song Lonely Blue Boy went gold. His biggest hit, It's Only Make Believe, reached the top of the pop charts in 1958.

Eventually, Mr. Twitty had more than 50 No. 1 songs on the country charts. He specialized in ballads of lost love. Among his biggest hits were Tight Fittin' Jeans, Hello Darlin' and After All the Good is Gone.

In the early 1970s, Mr. Twitty _ 5-foot-10 and with his hair still slicked back '50s-style _ had a string of successful duets with Loretta Lynn, including Louisiana Woman, Mississippi Man and After the Fire is Gone, for which they won a Grammy in 1971. Since crossing over to country, he had released an album every eight months, on average.

"Conway Twitty records are immediately recognizable," Robert Palmer of the New York Times wrote in 1977. "The singer has one of the richest male voices in the country idiom, and his bluesy colorations, especially a kind of throaty purr, are distinctive."

Mr. Twitty once said, "I like a song that says things a man wants to say and doesn't know how to say it."

He was born in Friars Point, Miss., in the Delta. He played baseball well enough to draw an offer from the Philadelphia Phillies, but a draft notice in 1954 intervened. Sports remained a passion, and Mr. Twitty was a part owner of a minor league baseball team, the Nashville Sounds.

Although he had a country band and a radio show in Helena, Ark., by the time he was 10, Mr. Twitty at first did not seriously consider a career as a performer. "I never thought of myself as competing with the country singers I heard on the Grand Ole Opry broadcasts from Nashville," he said. "I thought I hadn't lived long enough to sing country music for real."

After his discharge from the Army, Mr. Twitty heard an early Elvis Presley record and changed his mind about a career in music. Presley's fusion of white and black musical styles was revolutionary, but Mr. Twitty knew the combination well. "I think I can do that," he recalled saying to himself.

Mr. Twitty is survived by his wife, Dee; his mother, Velma Jenkins; two daughters, Joni and Kathy; and two sons, Jimmy and Michael, all of whom live in Hendersonville, Tenn., a suburb of Nashville where the family has its home, Twitty City.