Conway Twitty, a former Oklahoman who started as a teen rock idol in the 1950s and crossed over to country to become a star, died Saturday at age 59.

His wife, Dee Henry, other relatives and some of his band members were with him at Cox Medical Center-South in Springfield, Mo., when he died of complications from surgery after a blood vessel ruptured in his stomach.

Twitty lived in Oklahoma for 12 years before moving his family to Nashville in 1975.

Twitty once told The Oklahoman he had just moved to Oklahoma in the mid-1960s and was playing a concert in a Seminole nightclub when he made the most important decision of his career.

It was then he decided to leave rock 'n' roll behind and switch to country music.

"Logic just wasn't a part of it," Twitty said. "I did the rock thing for 10 years, and for me there was no choice at all. It was like a wheel turning ... " Twitty was born in Mississippi on Sept. 1, 1933, as Harold Lloyd Jenkins, named after the silent movie star. He changed his name in 1957 by borrowing from Conway, Ark., and Twitty, Texas.

After spending many years as a songwriter, his performing career took off with the name change. He recorded more than 40 No. 1 hits, including "Hello Darlin'," "Tight-Fittin' Jeans" and "Linda On My Mind. " Twitty got his break as a rockabilly artist in the 1950s, writing songs for the Sun Records' stable of singers that included Elvis Presley, Jerry Lee Lewis and Johnny Cash.

His first hit was "It's Only Make Believe," which soared to No. 1 on the pop charts in 1958.

Twitty capitalized on his teen idol status by starring in the films "Sexpot Goes to College" and "College Confidential. " Despite the advice of managers, booking agents and record company people, Twitty made the switch to country and turned out a string of No. 1 hits until "Georgia Keeps Pulling On My Ring" missed in 1977.

Reaction to the star's death was immediate.

Cecil Clay, owner of Sooner Barbeque in south Oklahoma City, knew Twitty as a friend, neighbor and customer for more than 25 years.

Clay said after Twitty moved from the city he continued to frequent the restaurant every time he and his band performed in Oklahoma.

"He always contributed back to the community. For three to four years after leaving for Nashville, he continued coming back to Oklahoma City to raise money for different charities. Every year he and his band would come back to play the Oklahoma City 89ers. " While living in Oklahoma City, Twitty teamed up with former Gov. J. Howard Edmondson and singer Merle Haggard to launch a chain of "Twitty Burger" restaurants. They never realized their dream of Twitty Burger restaurants across the United States, Canada and Europe.

"The first Twitty Burger store was down the street from us," Clay said.

"He invested in Oklahoma a lot. " Besides his wife, he is survived by his mother, Velma Jenkins; and his four children, Joni, Jimmy, Kathy and Michael. A memorial service was scheduled for 2 p.m. Wednesday at the First Baptist Church in Hendersonville.

The Associated Press contributed to this report. BIOG: NAME:

Archive ID: 541913