With over 45 years experience in the music entertainment industry, Bob Bender has produced over 300 Tours, Festivals, and concerts throughout the United States, Canada, Europe, Mexico, and Japan.

Bender worked in the capacity of Tour Manager for such artists including Ringo Starr and his All-Starr Band, Billy Preston, Dwight Twilley, Lisa Lisa & the Cult Jam, Rick Derringer, Edgar Winter, A Flock of Seagulls, Mark Lindsay (of Paul Revere & The Raiders fame), New Kids on The Block, and Gene Pitney, just to name a few.

He also held the position of Manager of Artist Development for Curb Records, representing such label acts as Tim McGraw, LeAnn Rimes, Jo Dee Messina, and Hank Williams Jr. In addition, Bob oversaw the Christian retail division for the label, and helped develop it into a million-dollar division for the company, eventually becoming the Director of Sales for Curb Records.

Bender went on to manage the legendary Michael Martin Murphey’s record label “WestFest Records”. Under Bob’s direction, Murphey re-released his 1970’s hit single “Wildfire” as a new mix with the popular country group “Lonestar”, appearing on mainstream radio after an absence of over 20 years, with over 400 country stations playing his hit song, along with appearances on television, including CBS’s “Late Night with David Letterman”.

Bob has also overseen the television promotion and info-mercial marketing campaigns for various country, pop, and Christian artists. He has produced, co-produced, and marketed numerous concert DVD projects, including Tommy Cash’s “Fade to Black” concert, and Eric Durrance’s “Turn It Off” video (which climbed to #17 on GAC’s “Country Countdown” charts).

Other various television credits include: the “Celebration for Young Americans” television concert special for George H. Bush’s 1989 presidential inauguration, “Billy Preston Live in Atlanta” concert, and the USO’s “Operation Homecoming” television concert special filmed aboard the USS Ranger aircraft carrier during Desert Storm.

In 2015, Bender, entered into a new direction by beginning production on a television series titled “Songs in the Spotlight” in which season 1 was picked up by Hulu.

In addition to his television credits, Bob has produced multiple album projects including; a live-in concert CD for the Grammy award winning artist Billy Preston, Gospel recording artist Joanne Cash (Johnny Cash’s sister), Americana act Steven L. Smith Band (earning a first round Grammy nomination for Americana Album of the Year), Country music singer Whitney Wattenbarger, pop group Grant My Wishes, and heavy metal band Se7en Dead.

Other accomplishments include: Serving on the CMTA Board of Directors for the Gospel Music Association, and being a guest lecturer at Belmont University in Nashville, along with hosting panels at MTSU, speaking on the business aspects of the music industry.

Currently, Bender is producing and hosting a podcast series called “The Business Side of Music” recorded in Nashville TN, which is consistently ranked in the Top 15 of Music Interview shows on Apple Music, has over 250,000 downloads, is listened to in 120 countries around the world, and was recently ranked in the Top 20 music industry podcasts to listen to.