Designing Non-Proprietary Automation Solutions to Make Buildings Work for You

NAC has been on the cutting edge of building automation technology and a leader in automation since 1984. Customers choose to work with NAC because we understand the importance of effective controls design, efficient project management, and effective coordination with other trades to meet tight deadlines. NAC will customize an automation controls system for any project size or building type so that it is tailored to meet the unique needs of each customer. We believe your automation system should provide a return on your investment, and NAC makes that happen.

As a systems integrator, NAC has the tools and experience to optimize your building’s performance to lower your energy bills, increase comfort, improve indoor air quality and minimize your carbon footprint.

Our expertise in building automation controls includes:

24-Hour Service Online and Onsite

BACnet, Modbus, & LON Solutions

S4 Control for Legacy Integration

Building Monitoring & Alarming

Controls System Design

Custom Graphics

Customized Factory Authorized Training

Electric, Water & Gas Sub Meters

Energy Services – Conservation

Lighting System Control

Multi-Site Web Base Integration

Pneumatic Control Calibration & Integration

Authorized Dealer of the Latest Automation Technology

NAC offers a comprehensive selection of the latest in automation products and technology. We’re an authorized dealer of Alerton systems and software including IBEX, BACtalk (BACnet system), Webtalk (web-based system) and Compass Ascent (web-based HTML5); Johnson Controls Facilitator (BACnet and N2); and Tridium Niagara AX technologies.

NAC also has the expertise to service and integrate with nearly every major automation system including Johnson Controls, Honeywell, Siemens, Trane, TAC, Novar, Trend, Delta, Distech, American Auto-Matrix, Barber Colman, Andover, Invensys, KMC, Automated Logic, and Siebe. For a full list check out our distribution page. Contact NAC to learn if we can integrate with your system.

BACnet System Integration

NAC has been a leader in BACnet integration for years. We have completed over $100 million in projects that include integration into competitor systems. By unlocking their proprietary system, we save our customers time and money.

Service & Continuous Commissioning

NAC has earned the trust and respect of building and project owners through our emphasis on project satisfaction and Customer Service-First philosophy. We provide automation customers with continued service and maintenance of their automation system, 24/7.