Mini and Maxi try to track down space hijackers who are after a gold bullion, while Hairy Scarey tries to teach Casper to scare.

Casper and Hairy Scarey go to the Space Circus, where a diamond smuggler gets a pickup. With Mini and Maxi in pursuit, Casper and Hairy catch the smuggler.

Mini and Maxi have an assignment to protect Sandy Gulch from thugs disguised as ghosts. Hairy Scarey takes the liberty of scaring the phony ghosts.

Mini and Maxi are assigned to be directors at the Space Kids Camp, where Casper makes friends with animals. The camp is in danger of being destroyed when a river dam is fractured, but Casper helps save the day.

Mini, Maxi and Casper go to baseball stadium to keep an eye on Don Button who is the Space City Dodgers champion, but someone is impersonating him.

Mini and Maxi search for Captain Spacebeard, while Casper and Hairy Scarey board his ship. Together they stop Spacebeard before he can execute his plan to rob a bank.

Mini and Maxi drive a new Space Bus, but Hairy Scarey accidentally gets them stranded on a remote planet. After an encounter with the savage inhabitants, they all escape.

Nerdley and Fungo investigate a cat burglary, but Mini and Maxi take over where they fail. With Hairy Scarey's help they set a trap to catch the cat burglar.

The Angels, Casper and Hairy Scarey go to the Space Aquarium, but the seal Snowball gets held for ransom. After rescuing Snowball, Hairy proceeds to pursue the culprits.

Mini and Maxi are sent to safeguard the Smiling Lisa, but when Casper and Hairy Scarey come it is stolen. They find out it was stolen by an imposter who is after the insurance money.

Mini and Maxi search for a pickpocket called the Snatcher who steals things that he doesn't really want. When they do catch him, there is a dispute on who gets the credit.

The Angels, Casper and Hairy Scarey investigate a burglary. The refuse collectors salvage the stolen items in their scow. The Angels and ghosts track and catch them.

Fatula is a villain who was previously arrested by Maxi and Mini, and now plans his revenge on the policewomen. Fatula lures the Angels into trap, but Casper and Hairy Scarey come to the rescue.

Mini and Maxi have been awarded to star on television. At the same time Slippery Sam has escaped prison, but before he can make a fool of the Angels, Casper and Hairy Scarey scare him away.

Casper gets a dog called Sunspot. The dog however is not his to keep and a dog catcher is stealing owners' dogs. Hairy Scarey goes as a dog catch the dog catcher.

Hairy Scarey volunteers to be a private eye. The crooked detective Snoopy is after the gold bullion Mini and Maxi are guarding. Casper saves the Angels and gets Snoopy under arrest.

When "The Champ", a famous wrestler, has his cherished teddy bear stolen, he refuses to get into the ring and looks like to be sabotage. While the Angels track down the one responsible, it's up to Hairy to take the Champ's place.

When the United Space Bank is robbed by a couple of ghosts, everyone thinks that Casper and Hairy are the culprits. It is up to them to clear their names.

Notorious (and nearsighted) ruffian and master troublemaker Muscles McSnort is out causing trouble in Space City with his antics and its up to Officers Mini and Maxi to collar him, but they'll have to do it without the help of Hairy Scarey, who upon failing to frighten McSnort has lost faith in himself.

Mini and Maxi get assigned to guard a scientist's lab, and Casper, Hairy, Nerdley and Fungo follow them to keep an eye on things. When the boys arrive at the lab, all but Casper accidentally trigger a time machine and wind up in prehistoric times, and its up to the others to rescue them.