The Adirondacks is my home. I provide a business that specializes in the capture and curation of precious wedding photo galleries. I am an easy-going individual who is head-over-heels about love and all-things nuptial. I strive to create a relaxed working environment where my clients feel comfortable in front of the camera.

Jeremy and Jennifer are a husband and wife team! With 3:17 Photography you get two photographers to capture your day!! What is better than two people in love capturing your once in a lifetime moments? Your wedding means so much to us and we want to make your day perfect from beginning to end!!! When we started our company we promised that we would always charge what we could of afforded when we got married. We feel as though so many couples are being taken advantage of by other companies.

Wendy and I are happily married and live in South Burlington, Vermont! We are both native Vermonters, and we have done over 350 weddings together. Geoffrey has also done over 500 weddings solo. Weddings are not just a career for us, they are our passion. People skills and a big smile are our most important assets. We love doing what we do, and it shows in the finished images.

HEY! I'M ASHLEY! Aka, Your Professional third wheel! I am so happy you dropped by! I am a uber bubbly, warm hearted, person who loves to order 3 drinks at Dutch Bros and say its for other people but really its just for me. When I am not spending my lifes savings at Dutch Bros, I am professionally following peeps in love and photographing their stories. I am a lover of true crime and murder podcasts! (But I mean who isnt! I just cant help it!) FUN FACT: I speak switzerdütsch, aka a German slang. My mom is originally from Switzerland and my dad from Jamaica, so you know I am always hungry for adventures (and new places to binge eat at).

I’m Kristin aka Kal... I live in a beautiful but hard to identify area just north of the Catskills and south of Albany, east of Oneonta and Cooperstown. It’s close to where I grew up and where my family lives in the Catskills. I love EVERYTHING about a wedding day; the anticipation, the joy, the laughter, the happy tears, and the simple fact that everyone you know is gathered to celebrate with you. I have had the honor of celebrating with so many couples and friends and family and it gives me so much joy. I want you to have the BEST day!! So tell me about your loves, your plans, and let’s start telling your story!

Hi I'm Hannah and I'm from tiny fishing village in Cornwall, England but moved here to North Carolina in 2017. Fun fact, they actually filmed some of scenes for the Game of Thrones spin off, House of the dragon there! It's hard to pick favorites but if your wedding includes a dog in the bridal party, a dress with pockets and the cupid shuffle....COUNT ME IN! Among my never-ending list of dream sessions is of course a wedding at Disneyworld and the ultimate outdoorsy engagement session with the wild horses at Shackleford Banks. Don't be surprised when I ask you to add me to your pinterest boards so I can fangirl over your wedding plans.

I’m Artur full-time wedding photographer behind the Kandid Arts. As a wedding photographer with roots in Europe and a heart in the United States, I bring a unique blend of cultural influences and experiences to my craft. Born and raised in Eastern Europe, I developed a passion for photography that has only grown stronger during my last few years in the United States. For the past 6 years, I have dedicated myself to the art of wedding photography, capturing the love and joy of couples on their special day.

Hello!! My name is Lyn! I am a long time wedding photographer who’s also a wife, mom of three, a soldier in the US Army, and an EMT! I love my passion for photography and it’s made me a stay at home mom for quite some time now! I look forward to connecting with all of you beautiful brides planning your magical day!

Hi, I’m Bridget — but you can call me Bee, cause that’s what my friends call me! And since we’re basically already best friends, let me tell you a secret: taking pictures isn’t even the thing I love most about my job. Now, don’t get me wrong, I’m as obsessed with taking gorgeous, dripping-in-light photos that you’ll look back on for ages as much as the next photographer. But what I really love? Meeting the most kind-hearted people and getting to know them on a level much deeper than the typical client-photographer relationship.

Hello, I'm Margaret. It's so nice to have you. I love to see love & take pictures. Perfect match to be an engagement and wedding photographer. I'm a lover of fine art and candid moments. My editing style is filled with true color photography to bring your photos to life.

These moments on your forever day are to be cherished in time, my goal is to capture all of these moments timelessly with you by my side in awe! I’m very excited to start our adventure together. Your unique style. What makes you come alive. What you hope to share with the world. That's what you want in your wedding photos.

Corinne Ryan Photography is a wedding photography business based on capturing memories and what makes weddings unique to their couples. With her laidback and bubbly personality, Corinne creates an environment for her couples where they can feel comfortable being in front of a camera and enjoy their wedding day to the fullest. Corinne Ryan Photography is for the ones who love being outdoors, every dog who crosses their path, adventuring, mountains, and breweries and getting a little bit dirty and loving and laughing through life.

Hello! My name is Tatiana, and I've been a photographer for 10+ years. I went to RIT for Advertising Photography, and have been doing portraiture and commercial work full time for 5+ years. I've recently started my full time wedding photographer journey and am loving meeting couples and helping to celebrate their love! In my freetime, I enjoy hiking, traveling, reading, and hanging out with my dog, Gracie! Looking forward to connecting!

From our family to yours... Wherever God leads us, we will travel to capture your precious moments. We believe that each photoshoot is a divine appointment, and we are honored to be part of your journey. We are Robert and Justina, a husband and wife photography team with three wonderful children: a 4-year-old boy, a 14-year-old boy, and a 17-month-old girl. Often our kiddos travel with us to photoshoots (not weddings, haha ) , making it a true family affair. Family is everything to us, and our business reflects that passion. (As far as weddings, usually one of us shoot the weddings).

SERGE PROMISE CONCEPT is a Wedding Photo & Video studio that specializes in capturing and telling incredible love stories in cinematic way, with certified Photographers and Cinematographers to capture your big events. Our goal is to capture those beautiful moments and put endless smiles on our couples faces, Serge Promise Concept is happy to service your wedding ceremony and reception, starting with the pre-preparation capturing all the little toast and speeches in a beautifully blends documentary 4k style with the art of storytelling that results in incredible films.

I am a travel photographer based out of Louisville, Kentucky. I have always been the friend with the camera admiring those around me. I am truly captivated by people simply being people, always finding beauty in human connections and the REAL. My goal is to be a calming presence, help the day run smooth, and ensure everyone in front of the camera feels COMFORTABLE. I lean toward documentary style photography emphasizing what makes your love unique.

Hi, it's Jenni, I am a couples and wedding photographer based in Connecticut. I love hikes and adventures, nature is my natural habitat and my biggest dream is to travel the world. I am hopeless romantic and I will probably shed a tear at every wedding I attend or photograph, so if you see me wipe a tear at your wedding no you didn't lol. I am also a dog mom and I love animals in general, my puppy means the world to me! I am a dedicated, passionate, fun and caring person and I put love in everything I do. I can't wait to work with you!

My name is Stephanie and I am a Photographer that leads with intention. You can find me following you around on your wedding day crying at how beautiful you are and getting giddy as we get the shot. I am dying to do the HOTTOGO dance with one of my couples on the dance floor. Fireside Sparrow leaned into weddings in 2020, so you can trust me, I've been through it, seen it, and promise you that I have GOT YOU on your wedding day.

Since 2016, I have been dedicated to capturing the essence of special moments with a unique blend of artistry and professionalism. I specialize in a wide range of events, from dance festivals and performances to intimate private gatherings, corporate events, and galas. My photography style is timeless, classic, and bright, capturing the genuine emotions and vibe of each event. I blend staged and candid images to tell a complete and compelling story and guarantee the best quality possible.

Two Upper West Siders. Twenty blocks apart. How had we not crossed paths before? Or did we? Well, after finally matching on Hinge we made that happen and the rest is history! We have combined families and now as a family of 7 (three dogs, two cats) we have become an unstoppable force. We both share the same passion for photography, capturing the beauty all around us and making magic happen. Our dog Lucy, embodies love, kindness and poise. We couldn’t imagine naming our business after anyone but her. That’s how Love, Lucy Photography came to be.

Hey there, I’m Emily! From intimate to grand weddings, elopements, and all the moments in between, I’m excited to document your marriage journey. I balance the timeless style that you’ll love for years to come, with the artistic eye to capture all the moments in between. I’m there to help guide you to allow your authentic self to shine on camera. I’m based in Buffalo, NY, but so excited to adventure with you wherever your love story takes you. I can’t wait to hear your story!

I have been photographing weddings and events for 8 years, and I couldn't imagine anything more fulfilling than capturing the sweetest and most authentically beautiful moments in my couples' lives. I love making new friends in my clients and can't wait to become one of yours!

Photography should tell a story.. so let's get to writing! My goal is to capture the connection between people and convey a message through a picture. I specialize in portrait photography and work with clients to get those "must-have" moments for them to cherish for many years to come.

Hi everyone! I live in Upstate NY with my husband and I've been a photographer for 3 years. I started off with people I know but now I'm starting to expand my business to the public. I absolutely love helping people tell their story through photos and it puts a smile on my face as well.

If you are looking for someone who's editing style is true to color but dark and moody check out my work I would be honored to photograph your wedding! You will receive a private online gallery of all edited images, this will allow them to download, print and share all your images from your day! I look forward to talking to you soon! -Danielle

Hey there! Welcome to my Zola page! I am a NYS based traveling wedding photographer! I grew up in Rochester, NY and have always had a love for photography! Here at Natalie Plunkett Photography, I hold both myself and my photographers accountable for being not only being a positive influence, but also a respectful and supportive person. My studio empowers the ideal of everyone is a person, regardless of gender, race, and religion.

I am based out of Connecticut + New England but also travel for destination weddings. I am passionate about creating long lasting memories with my clients. I love to travel (15+ countries and counting!), discover new places and meet new people. Fun fact: I'm a french citizen that moved to the United States in 2016.

Jason "Snorlax" Cun is an all around photographer that currently resides in Los Angeles, California. He was raised in the heart of Los Angeles, where he found his calling in photography. He aims to capture the beauty of the world and the people in them. He has recently begun his travels around the U.S capturing the life of those within that city.

In a world filled with filters and facades, I believe in keeping it real. I strive to capture the genuine essence of your relationship and your wedding day. My photography style is all about capturing the candid, the spontaneous, and the unfiltered emotions. I want you to look back at your wedding album and relive those precious moments, feeling the love and happiness all over again.

Hi. I’m Angelica and I’m here to catch your most authentic moments through my lens when you finally take the leap! My specialties are elopements and intimate weddings, I focus on candid, wholehearted moments, while always keeping the vibe playful and light. I’m a Brooklyn native, a momma, and a Harry Potter nerd who has been into art since birth. I believe weddings are a unique and precious celebration of love, and I am committed to creating timeless images that will make you feel the special moments all over again—all the happy, emotional, romantic and quirky moments that make you and your partner who you are.

Hello there!! I'm here to give you a meaningful, stress-free, and authentic experience while capturing your love in a unique way. I want to help you throughout your entire planning process. Together, let's document your memories and create beautiful images. My hope is that your photos leave you with effortless memories. I'm based in Texas but I travel all over the world. I am a creative photographer with 5 years of shooting experience. I also just recently learned videography! I've enjoyed photography my whole life but never knew how amazing it was to actually be behind the lens and bring my vision to life.

Congratulations on your engagement! My name is JT and I am the primary photographer here at J. Santini Photography. Generally speaking, I am a journalistic or documentary style photographer. The only exception to this would be a short period of time to get formal portraits of you and the people closest to you. The goal is to provide you with pictures that accurately depict the story of your wedding, letting your own personalities set the tone of those pictures and making your album the perfect tool to relive a day that will escape you all too quickly.

Your wedding photographer, Can Burak Bizer | Wedding Photography + Wedding Video Production is New York based wedding photographer and wedding videographer. For your wedding photoshoot, we are available worldwide. Can Burak Bizer is award winning wedding photographer and internationally published wedding photographer - with 100+ international awards and 200+ international publications. Our wedding photography work is known for classic wedding photography and editorial wedding photography styles, on location. Our expertise includes destination wedding photography, such as wedding photography in Europe, Seychelles, Maldives, Bali, etc.

A New York City based photographer that documents your story as natural, organic and authentic as much as possible, whether it's a high touch wedding, a simple elegant affair, an engagement in the Tri-State area, or a portrait that shows your true self. Angelica Criscuolo Photography travels across the USA and has captured weddings and portraits in Hawaii, Barbados/Caribbean, the Philippines, and Canada. As a Creative Director, she is passionate about telling your love story, and the genuine emotions and in-between moments because photographs are what’s left to remind you of how you will feel on your special day surrounded by loved ones.

When I first started wedding photography, I made a goal of being more than just the photographer on your big day. I made it my goal to be your friend, someone you can crack inside jokes with, and someone who isn't afraid to get down + have fun at the reception (while still doing her job). I made it my goal to capture more than just photos, but an experience. Whether it’s high in the mountains, on a beach near the ocean, in a forest meadow - you deserve to get married however you want to & I want to capture it for you.

My name is Danielle Majka. Also called Danielle Love by my husband, hence the business name :) I am a wedding and portrait photographer based out of Port Saint Lucie in South Florida. I have always known that I wanted to pursue a career with some form of creativity. I graduated with a degree in graphic design in 2011 and began working as a graphic designer at a local sign shop. While I loved most of the job, I learned that I really wasn’t meant to sit behind a desk from 9-5. That’s when I started thinking about photography.

As professional Wedding Photographer & Videographer team based in the lakes region of New Hampshire, We love to be creative with our photographs as well as video and welcome your input to make your wedding day memories something you will cherish forever! Centrally located in Barnstead, we have documented Weddings all over New Hampshire, Vermont, Maine, Massachusetts, Connecticut & New York. We are also a destination wedding team and love to travel!

Hello hello! My name is Marie and I am the owner and photographer for Wild Elegance. We are a brand for adventurers, for lovers of life, and genuine people who love those little moments between the moments in life and seek out truth over perfection. Your marriage is unique because of the relationships you have with the people you choose to celebrate with. Spending my day with you and your closest family and friends brings me such joy, and creating art out of some of the best moments of your life is something I am truly honored to be a part of for so many.

I am a wedding and elopement photographer located in Wyoming county. I love to take photos of weddings and elopements. Some say I have a true passion for what I do. I have learned a lot since I started and each wedding or session I am always striving to learn more. As a business owner I am fully insured and strive to be professional at everything I do. It's my goal to be able to do this full time someday! I love being able to capture someone's day it brings me happiness. I'm a pretty laid back go with the flow type of person. I do my absolute best to provide you with photos you'll remember forever.

Hello, my name is Patrick and I am the Owner of PB and J Studios. I started photographing as a hobby about 12 years ago, while I was also a stunt man and stilt walker for the theme parks, I even got to play Indiana Jones at Disney back in the day! After teaming up with my partner Jonathan, I grew Patrick Buckley Images into PB and J Studios where we started to develop a team of highly skilled, passionate creators like myself. We have years of experience with photo/video and have been very blessed to have received "Best of Wedding Photography" awards in the last few years, with over 50 five star reviews.

​I began photography in early 2015 by offering a few free sessions. Soon my business grew and I was booking numerous family and children photography sessions each month. In the summer of 2015 I began photographing weddings by offering to photograph a wedding for free and now I have seen my business grow from a few weddings a year to being fully booked with weddings nearly every weekend! In 2019 I decided to turn something I was passionate about into my full-time job. Many of my weddings are booked through "word of mouth" from some of my amazing clients! I am located in Rotterdam, NY and I travel in NY, VT, and MA for weddings.

I am the one behind the camera. The one guiding you every step of the way, and giving you direction, but mostly I’m there to capture your love and to tell your story. Essentially it’s all about you… your style, your vision. It’s the in-betweens, the messy, the real, the bursts of laughter, the tears… that’s the stuff that I have a true love for. Photography is genuinely my passion. My goal is to tell your love story and get to know you and document your special day.

When I shoot photography, it’s not about composing the perfect pictures or getting a great shot. Yes, those things are essential. But, to me, photography is so much more. It’s about capturing a moment in time that you will forever be able to look back on and feel something magical.

I'm Sara Haines, It's lovely to meet you! I want to capture those joyous moments so you can cherish and celebrate them for years to come. Finding the right photographer can be overwhelming, especially when you are looking for classic and elegant images created to last a lifetime. I'm a photographer and educator serving joyful clients for almost a decade from my home in Brookville, PA! I love late nights, real laughs, genuine love, fresh air, and adventure. If you're into photos that feel as real as you are, you want your memories made to last, and you'd like to make a new friend in the process, keep scrolling, I can't wait to meet you.

I'm most known to produce warm and soulful images that feel timeless with capturing real emotion that is true to the world I see around me. I've spent over a decade perfecting my timeless and most noted use of vibrant color photographs. Photographing intimate weddings in the hills of Tuscany; to grand beach weddings overlooking the Riviera Maya beaches of Tulum, I'm honored to have photographed weddings of every proportion.

Hello! I’m Toni Jones, and I bring a heartfelt passion for photography to every frame I capture. My journey began as an Image Consultant and Personal Branding Specialist, where I honed my skills in showcasing the best of individuals. This experience has been invaluable as I transitioned into photography, particularly in capturing the profound moments of couples’ lives. My approach is personal and intimate. I believe in creating a connection with every client, understanding their story, and reflecting that narrative through my lens. It’s not just about the photos; it’s about the experience and the memories we create during the process.

I started my photography journey as a simple hobby where I carried my camera with me everywhere and took photos of everything. Over time, I began to develop my skills into a more sophisticated / professional style as you might expect for weddings and other formal events. I paired up with a local multi award winning wedding photographer who helped me in refining my skills and taught me the ins and outs of wedding photography and I've never looked back. Since then, I have started my own business as a photographer and take pride in my style and skill as being mostly self taught, candid, emotional and captivating.

Elopement & Wedding photographer in the beautiful Upstate NY. We love sophisticated, stylish and romantic vibes, as well as rustic and adventureful days. We travel throughout the northeast and the mountain ranges of the ADK. In addition to capturing the traditional wedding photos, luxury high-end wedding photography services often include a range of extra features, such as engagement photo shoots, bridal portraits, boudior and even aerial drone photography. These services can help to create a truly unique and personalized experience that will be treasured for a lifetime.

When choosing a photographer for your special moments, you deserve the best. That's exactly what you'll get when you hire me, Nusser Photography. I take immense pride in offering you a fun experience that will leave you with memories to cherish forever. Enjoy a Stress-Free Photography Experience From the moment we connect, I want you to feel at ease and excited about our photography session. Being in front of the camera can sometimes be daunting, but rest assured; I'm here to make it a stress-free and enjoyable experience. I will guide you through the process, ensuring your smiles are genuine, & your memories are captured authentically.

Hey there! I'm a SC-based wedding and couple photographer. I just moved from NY and am so excited to be in Charleston. Capturing memories and special moments is one of the best things to do. I love having the opportunity to explore new places and meet amazing people through my work. I typically shoot weddings, couples, and portraits. I would really love to travel in 2025, so I'm offering huge discounts and may even shoot your wedding for free if my travel/lodging is covered!! Reach out if you're interested!

We are Jenn and Ro, a husband and wife team based out of Central Jersey. An AOL chatroom brought us together in 2003 when we were high school seniors and we got married a few years later. Shortly after our wedding, we fell in love with photography and all things wedding. As a boutique studio, we love to create a relationship with our couples that lasts throughout the entire wedding process and beyond. Our goal is to make sure you are having fun and enjoying every second of your day while we are working behind the scenes to capture every moment.

My favorite thing in life is sitting out by my fire-pit with a glass of Riesling and a s’more in hand with friends and family surrounding me. I'm completely obsessed with traveling, going on adventures, and elephants, and actually foster one named Kamok in Kenya! I feel extremely lucky to have found the love of my life, Scott, when we were studying abroad in Copenhagen, and we now spend our days dreaming up our next adventure! I've been obsessed with weddings and knew I wanted this to be my career after attending my first one when I was 14, and haven't looked back since. I can't wait to hear about your day!

I started Madison Anne Studio because I have always loved to create unscripted and unposed moments. I want you to feel natural and remember these moments candid and real. Based out of Vermont, I love to travel, and I'm not afraid to get dirty to get the perfect shot. I service New York, Vermont, New Hampshire, and New England but no place is too far to go!

I am a photojournalist at heart. I capture the authentic, unique moments of your wedding day to help you remember not only how awesome you looked, but how it felt to celebrate your love with all of your favorite people.

Almost 20 years of experience and I still get as excited as I did when I first started photographing events! I got my BFA in photojournalism at Rochester Institute of Technology and my common sense from a well-lived, full life. From intimate weekday elopements to full scale destination events that require a team of photographers, I have done it all. I focus on telling the most full and vibrant story of your event, so you can look back and feel like you didn't missed a thing.

At Caitlin Miller Photography we help couples who are overwhelmed with options achieve intimate, candid photos that capture their personalities in photographic works of art, without the stress of a pushy, aggressive photographer. We offer a fun and stress-free photo experience that captures the moments that make your love one-of-a-kind. Caitlin Miller Photography is proud to support ALL couples. Specializing in Saratoga Weddings photography and Lake George Wedding Photography. Available for domestic and international travel!

Shem Roose is a professional wedding photographer based in Richmond, Vermont. He truly enjoys documenting candid moments, portraits, and details in a way that accurately represents every wedding he shoots. Shem began shooting weddings in 2004 while juggling being a Stay at Home Dad, Husband, and freelance photographer. Not only is Shem’s wife his second photographer, but she also goes the extra mile to help couples, family members, and wedding vendors in almost any situation. Oh, and she’s really good at making funny noises to help kids or grown-ups to look at the camera if they’re feeling shy.

Hi there! Thank you so much for considering me! Please be sure to check me out on Instagram for the most up to date work! You will be able to reach me via the contact form on my website! I look forward to hearing from you!

Hi! We are Vincent + Micky, a husband and wife team with 30+ years of professional experience in fine art, design, film + photography. Our easy-going personalities and personable approach will make it easy for you to feel natural in front of the camera. Using a photojournalistic candid style of photography, we will capture the laughter, joy, tears and unique moments throughout your special day with spontaneity and clarity. Will travel to NY, CT, MA, VT, ME and RI. Based out of Sherman, Connecticut

Ever since I can remember, I've been captivated by the power of a single moment to tell a whole story. As a wedding photographer, I get to capture those fleeting, special moments that make each couple's love story unique. With over 4 + years of experience, I blend artistry with technical skill to create images that are not only beautiful but deeply meaningful.

At Ja'de Imagery the focus will always be on creating the magic of your story and forever moment. Being intentional from your yes to your I do and a little of everything in between. I am here to help you capture it all. My goal for your images are to be natural with the sense of deep emotion, character evoking, and finding the best way to showcase your chemistry and personality.

Weddings celebrations are more than just events. They are the ultimate story of your love for one another. I have been photographing weddings for 10 years, and no two stories are the same. Each are unique and capture the essence of who you are as a couple. I love telling peoples wedding stories through images. Let's capture those memories together.

Erika Rene couples value connection, relationship, legacy, and covenant. For me, photography has never been about snapping a few shots; its about immortalizing the profound moments and all of the ones in between that make up the best day of your lives so far, ensuring that your love story will live far beyond the here and now and will be cherished by multiple generations to come. I know how important it is to you to work with someone who feels more like a friend than a vendor, and that's why all of my couples truly become family to me!

If you’re engaged, congratulations! It’d be my honor to photograph and/or film your wedding day. It’s my goal to tell your unique love story through artistic, emotional and documentary images of your wedding day; to create images and films that you’ll cherish for a lifetime and will become your family heirlooms. I prefer to document the many real and beautiful moments that will happen on your wedding day, rather than staging photos. I’ll customize my approach for you, to flow with your unique vision of your perfect day.

Hello, I am Alexius. I was born and raised right here in the good ole North Carolina. I live in Raleigh now, but I was raised in a small town of "Midway" (right outside of Winston-Salem). I found my passion for photography about five years ago and still amazed at the places that my little camera has taken me. I am even more amazed at the friends I have made while pursuing my passion for photography and filmmaking. I can promise that I will always be your biggest cheerleader. I will guide you throughout the whole process. I want my couples to walk away with not just great pictures, but with a wonderful client experience.

We understand that your wedding day is one of the most important days of your life. That's why we work closely with you to understand your vision for your day, and we'll be there every step of the way to make sure everything runs smoothly. We know that planning a wedding can be stressful, so we're here to make sure your photography and videography experience is fun and stress-free. Our videography is cinematic and emotional, telling the story of your wedding day in a way that will make you feel like you're reliving it all over again.

Joe Goetz Photography LLC is a wedding photography business based in Saratoga Springs New York and serving all of the surrounding Upstate New York areas such as Albany, Troy, Lake George, Queensbury, Sarycuse, I specialize in creating unique and romantic wedding photographs that capture the essence of your special day. My services include weddings, senior portraits, engagements, and events. I want to make your photo shoot experience as stress-free as possible and will work hard to meet any vision that accompanies your photo shoot.

Hi, I'm Kristen and I'm so excited you are here! I've been a wedding photographer for 17 years with hundreds of weddings under my belt. Diversity and inclusivity are very important to me both personally and professionally, so no matter who you are I want to document your love story.

You are probably assuming my about me section will have a story about how I always wanted to be a photographer, I came out of the womb holding a camera, but that couldn’t be me. I stumbled into it, literally. I had no plans to become a wedding photographer. I was either going to follow my dad’s path and go to dental school, or become a social worker. But a freshman in college decided to shoot a few photos for fun, and now over eight years and almost 200 weddings later, I could not imagine myself doing anything else. This is my dream job!

Hi! I'm Sarah. Congratulations on taking the next step in your wedding planning! Choosing to work with me earns you more than just a photographer; you get a hype-girl, a dress fluffer, a confidant and a new best friend. Since we are now future besties, here's what you should know about me: My love for portraiture stems from the joy it brings me to make others feel beautiful. Few things make me feel as giddy as photographing weddings, engagements & proposals, and I can't wait to capture the next stage of your love story. My strengths lie in natural lighting, illuminating colors, and catching the candid moments that make you, you.

Andrew and I met in the most random place, hiking in the woods 100 miles from where either of us lived. We spoke on the phone for months and saw each other when we could, while we lived hours apart. 5 Years later we're married, raising a handsome pup, and running a business together. Since inception we have won Best of Westchester 2020 for weddings and numerous other industry awards. We take a modern approach to photography. We will light you and pose you in the most flattering natural ways and place you in front of the most beautiful backgrounds, while being professional, respectful and patient with everyone on your guest list!

Hey there! Since you are trusting me to capture these special moments in your life, I figured you should probably know a bit about me, right? I am a Huntsville, Alabama native, but moved to Nashville after graduating from the University of Alabama in 2013. ROLL TIDE! Although I consider Nashville home, I am anything but a homebody. I love traveling and exploring new places (especially the food at those places!). I even studied abroad in Italy, which let me tell you, was a food lover's dream. I have always felt like an old soul trapped in a millennial’s body. I would rather listen to Frank Sinatra than anything on the radio today.

My name is Holly and I capture timeless memories in one of the most hectic days of your life. I fell in love with photography in school but really took an interest after my son was born. Wanting to make sure I documented every little thing he did so I could remember years after was important to me. That turned into what is Holly Johnston Photography today. My passion is to document all of the moments through out your day so you can remember them years after, when you look back at your photos. I want you to be transported back to that day and remember all of the emotions and love.

Based out of Boynton Beach, Florida, Genlinet Photography is a business that provides wedding and lifestyle photography services. Owner and lead photographer Genesis, also known as Gen, has a creative background that encompasses theater, modeling, and her passion for photography. This skilled professional and her team are keen to capture the moments of your wedding day as beautiful heirloom images.

Before ever shooting professionally I have always found light and people to be very interesting subjects that inspires me to no end. I am often fascinated with exploring the creative possibilities with my subjects and relish in the discovery of undiscovered possibility. I have been featured in New York Times Magazine, Cincinnati Wedding Magazine, Columbus Wedding Magazine Best of Zola 2024, America Wedding Group, Wedding Bug, Kapturly & More. OH, IN, NY, TX, GA, CA frequent traveller.

I am a professional storyteller and published destination wedding and portrait photographer based in Dallas Fort Worth, Texas. Traveling is something I love to do and I would be honored to go on an adventure with you to capture your dream destination wedding. My passport is ready to go! I am also LGBTQ+ friendly and accept all couples. Love is love y'all. Let me tell your story! Contacting me via email or contact page on my website is preferred please!

My name is Anna and I’m your Queen Bee here at Hey Honey Photography! I am a wedding photographer and love helping couples celebrate! I serve couples local to Northern California, but will hop on a plane for you in a heartbeat. Whether it's a big or small celebration, I'm your gal - basically your professional bridesmaid with camera in hand 😉. I love capturing the unique chemistry between couples and ultimately the je ne sais quoi of you. I believe that storytelling makes the world go ‘round, thus it gives me such great joy to be a part of telling yours!

📸 Hi, I'm Chelsea, a wedding photographer with a love for capturing joy! With 4 years of professional experience (many more years as a hobbyist), my style mixes classic elegance with candid moments. I believe in creating a relaxed, fun environment, ensuring your special day is beautifully immortalized. Let's capture your love story! 💌

Canyon & Pine is a wedding photography and videography service founded by married couple James and Emma. With a background in capturing weddings since 2013, they have developed a seamless synergy that allows them to deliver exceptional results. Their approach is characterized by getting to know the couples they work with, understanding their stories, and translating those narratives into authentic and timeless images and videos. They prioritize creating a comfortable and safe space for all couples, supporting love in all its forms, and ensuring that every wedding day feels uniquely personal and true to the couple's identity.

HI, I'm Maddalynn. DESTINATION ELOPEMENT AND WEDDING PHOTOGRAPHER FROM THE PACIFIC NORTHWEST. As a photographer, my passion lies in capturing the authentic and genuine moments of life. I aim to freeze time and preserve the memories that bring joy to our lives. Whether it's a couple celebrating their love, a family creating memories, or an individual embracing their true self, I am committed to capturing the raw emotion and genuine connections in all of my photos. I am honored to be a part of my clients' special moments, I am dedicated to providing them with a personalized and unforgettable photography experience.

I am a Jersey girl at heart (born and raised), but currently I am living in the middle of nowhere in Pennsylvania. Even though I am based in PA, I will travel anywhere your heart desires! I have been doing photography for years and it is a huge passion of mine. I love capturing people in their element and bringing their stories to life!

Love & Lenses Photography’s three dedicated individuals each have their personality and distinctive flair. What remains constant across the board, however, is their willingness to put clients at the heart of their every decision. Unsurprisingly, they are comfortable with a broad array of styles that allow them to produce a diverse collection of images for newlyweds. These approaches include contemporary, natural, traditional, and vintage. What’s more, owners Brianna and Rebecca are adept at incorporating photojournalism into their work. This versatility allows them to reflect a number of interesting themes and aesthetics.

Being able to look back, remember the great laughs, and reminisce a particular night is what we all look forward to. Our goal is to help everyone remember one of the best nights by telling your story through our eyes. There is no better compliment than for you to show your loved ones what happened through one of the best days of your lives.