Full text of "Motion Picture Herald (Sep-Oct 1936)"

See other formats

Rnnk .M4-4- Scanned from the collections of The Library of Congress Packard Campus for Audio Visual Conservation www.loc.gov/avconservation Motion Picture and Television Reading Room www.loc.gov/rr/mopic Recorded Sound Reference Center www.loc.gov/rr/record Jfti 30 W '}U"X Oil' f iJiiL-iSHEc MOTION PICTURE HERALD Radio Answers Exhibitor Protest Against Film Star Broadcasts by Budgeting $51,000,000 for Talent Hollywood Writes 56 Out of 112 of Nation's Song Hits. Broadway and Tin Pan Alley Sponsor But 14 BOX OFFICE CHAMPIONS for JULY VOL. 1 24, NO. 10 SEPTEMBER 5, I936 Entered as second-class matter, January 12, 1931. at the I'ost Office, at Xe:e York, V. ) , under tlic act cf March 3, 1879. Published weekly by Quigley Publishing Co.. Inc.. at 127U Sixth Avenue. Rockefeller Center, New York. Subscription. $3,110 a year. Single copies. 23 cents. ■ "ucreas Sridfv i - ^ Oeranton of «U »i'tness the — ficrantoa(s newest^ J™'* - '•*«. *tW T, ^ne Kaaden, and ° ^ ■vhereas t^people of. the city of Scranton »«* of this youn, ... ' V1 ^ranton take l^SSUe S ^TOon to tha P** 1936, shall be " PaylDS de^*ed tribute l6-0f thls-0^nlty ^lsh ; °M»veif ,, c . 1 Uy»S of, |d first I s **o have e res^eats * the an ef. ft°iasf. U \H 0U> \ ">«>!>«, <*« , ° "»* "'I »1»rS ">">« fad /•sun. - . ,, ' « So- ' M au ^ no*****!. like I**'- TOO, WILL GLORY IN ITS PROFITS! FREDRIC MARCH • WARNER tNER BAXTER • no Lionel BARRYMO )RE 1 1 I Z^l I " ^ v| ^ With JUNE LANG, GREGORY RATOFF Directed by Howard I RY Hawks Associate Producer, Normally Johnson • Screen play by Joel Sayre and William Faulkner DARRYL F. ZANUCK in Charge of Production MOTION PICTURE HERALD Vol. 124, No. 10 QP September 5, 1936 MR. DAWN ARRIVES N these days of tremendously pretentious productions achiev- ing thunderous successes, requiring millions and engaging the creative efforts of armies of genius, there is spectacular contrast in a one-man triumph, won on an idea, an ability and a shoestring. That is the story of "Tundra," and the man is Mr. Norman Dawn, cameraman. About a year ago Mr. Dawn sold Mr. Carl Laemmle of Universal the "Tundra" project and departed for Alaska. The expedition consisted of Mr. Dawn, cameraman, also director, assistant director, art director, master of effects and what- ever, and Mr. Del Cambre, who plays the role of the doctor in the piece. When the Laemmle interest in Universal was sold a few months ago, the expedition was cancelled and ordered home. Mr. Laemmle refused a two-weeks extension to finish the picture. In the rough and unfinished, the picture had no friends. Mr. Dawn, who had a share in its profits, if, when, and/or as, got permission to see if he could dispose of it. He found a patron and a customer in Burroughs-Tarzan Pic- tures, under whose auspices the picture was finished, probably on northern California locations. THE result is a success, simple, unpretentious, but nonetheless a success, communicating to the audience a part of the interest behind the eager eyes of the cameraman. "Tundra" has some of the qualities that obtained in Mr. Robert Flaherty's work before the Coffee House club discovered he was an Artist, some of the qualities of Mr. Martin Johnson's adventurous records before he became an institution and annexed Africa. So "Tundra" will be seen about, and like as not, now Holly- wood will decide that Mr. Dawn shall have a new day. AAA DRAMATIC SECTIONS THE metropolitan newspapers of today are having a perfect devil of a time keeping a stage coloration on the first page of their dramatic sections. The waning of the handmade show under the relentless march of domination of the screen has made dramatic editing a prob- lem for several years, and now with the stage "on relief" and taking a WPA propaganda job, most of its tidings appear to belong rather in the political news section than in those pages devoted to the entertainment arts. The motion picture domi- nates the amusement sections in respect of space, display and all considerations except only position. The publishers still seem to think that they have to have the relics of the old- drama of the stage to give excuse to their dramatic sections. T THEY WON'T BE TOLD T is all very well for the Central Casting Bureau to issue a warning, "Stay out of Hollywood," and point out that the chances of screen fame are one in five thousand; that of 15,275 given work, 13,463 earned under $200; and that only 533 earned more than $500 in the last half-year. The effect of such warning must be negligible. The odds against profit on Sweepstakes tickets are even heavier, but international gambling grows apace. When millions will sacrifice scant earnings, and sometimes even stint the baby's milk, to buy tickets on lotteries and numbers games, no statistics will dim the lure of Hollywood. Meanwhile, one must remember that classic but true story of the very pretty little lady who went to Hollywood to crash the golden gates and at the end of two years was still a waitress, but also owned two apartment houses. AAA DARINC MISS PONS HE ever-alert motion picture section of the Los Angeles Times one day last week unostentatiously set down in three paragraphs a remarkable screen-radio story, thus: Lily Pons' 's belief that a person is capable of do- ing well only one thing at a time cost her a cool $10,000 yesterday. Busy with the preliminary work on her new pic- ture for RKO, as yet untitled, Miss Pons was approached by a radio representative with an offer for her to sing on the air waves from Hollywood. Without hesitation the operatic star turned a cold shoulder. She is a firm believer that she cannot give her best to more than one thing at the same time, and since she is tied up with her picture work she intends sticking to it without outside interference. This will get Miss Pons a hand from that great array of anti-radio showmen, engaged in the endeavour to tear patrons away from the loudspeaker and lure them to the box office, but she can expect something less from her screen con- temporaries engaged in selling their art to vendors of soap, salad dressing and headache powders. AAA " HE drought reports are probably exaggerated. There I is a bumper crop of blue grass hay in the Garden of All I Nations on Rockefeller canyon roofs just south of the Music Hall and the editor's desk. The grass is, in fact, about 150 feet high, which would be tall even for the Kaw valley. MOTION PICTURE HERALD MARTIN QUIGLEY, Editor-in-Chief and Publisher Incorporating Exhibitor's Herald, founded 1915; Motion Picture News, founded 1913; Moving Picture World, founded 1907; Motography, founded 1909; The Film Index, founded 1906. Published every Thursday by Quigiey Publishing Company, Rockefeller Center, New York City. Telephone Circle 2-31 00. Cable address "Quigpubco, New York." Martin Quigley, Editor-in-Chief and Publisher; Colvin Brown, Vice-President and General Manager; Terry Ramsaye, Editor; Ernest A. Rovelstad, Managing Editor; Chicago Bureau, 624 South Michigan Avenue, C. B. O'Neill, manager; Hollywood Bureau, Postal Union Life Building, Boone Mancall, manager; London Bureau, 4, Golden Square, London W I, Bruce Allan, cable Quigpubco London; Berlin Bureau, Berlin-Tempelhof, Kaiserin-Augustastrasse 28, Joachim K. Rutenberg, representative; Paris Bureau, 29, Rue Marsoulan, Pans 12, France, Pierre Autre, representative, cable Autre-Lacifral-12 Paris; Rome Bureau, Viale Gorizia, Rome, Italy, Vittorio Malpassuti, representative, Italcable, Malpassuti, Rome; Melbourne Bureau, Regent Theatre, 191 Collins St., Melbourne, Australia, Cliff Holt, representative; Mexico City Bureau, Apartado 269, Mexico City, James Lockhart, representative; Prague Bureau, Uhelny trh 2, Prague I, Czechoslovakia, Harry Knopf, representative; Budapest Bureau, 3, Kaplar-u, Budapest, Hungary, Endre Hevesi, representative; Buenos Aires Bureau, Corrientes 2495, Dep. 8, Buenos Aires, Argentina, Natalio Bruski, representative; Shanghai Bureau, 142 Museum R*jjd, Shanghai, China, J. P. Koehler, representative; Tokyo Bureau, 880 Sasazuka, Ichikawa-shi, Chiba-Ken, Japan, H. Tominaga, representative; Rio de Janeiro Bureau, Caixa Postal 33S8, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, A. Weissmann, representative; Barcelona Bureau, Harry Chapin Plummer, Hotel Rita, Plaza de las Cortes, Barcelona, Spain. India Bureau- K. G. Gidwaney, Post Box 147, Bunder Road, Karachi, India; Uruguay, P.O. Box 664, Montevideo, Uruguay, Paul Bodo, representative, cable Argus Montevideo; Amsterdam Bureau, Zuider Amstellaon 5, Amsterdam, Holland, Ph. de Schaap, representative. Member Audit Bureau of Circula ions. All contents copyright 1936 by Quigley Publishing Company. Address all corres- pondence to the New York Office. Better Theatres, devoted to the construction, equipment and operation of theatres, is published eveny fourth week as section 2 of Motion Picture Herald. Other Quigley Publications: Motion Picture Daily, Teatro al Dfa, Spanish language quarterly in the theatre and equipment field, and International Motion Picture Almanac and the Box Office Check-up, both published annually. 8 MOTION PICTURE HERALD September 5, 1936 This Week 51 Million Free Theatre owners' complaints against air appearances of motion picture stars are answered by a $51,000,000 budget set by radio and national advertisers for film, vaudeville and theatrical talent in 1936-37. The budget was completed even as the or- ganized industry set out to determine what film stars' air appearances do to theatre box offices. The fight of radio versus motion pictures is described on page 13. Screen Music One hundred and twelve songs are ad- vanced by the American Society of Com- posers, Authors and Publishers as the hits of the season; 50 per cent of them came from Hollywood and its motion pictures. Thus has the stage of Broadway and Broadway's "Tin Pan Alley" been out- ranked by Hollywood as the principal source of the nation's popular music. The titles are recorded on pages 14, 15 and 16. Mayer Honored Louis B. Mayer, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer vice-president in charge of production, was honored last week by St. John, N. B., his home town, on the occasion of his first visit in twenty years. Friends of his boyhood, now leaders in civic and industrial activity of the city, tendered a luncheon in honor of their old friend and neighbor. Details of the occasion, ivith a photo- graphic record thereof, appear on page 36. Production Cain Production recovered somewhat from the slump of the preceding week with seven new features going before the camera. Prospects of further upswing were bright with 21 more scheduled to go into shooting within a fortnight. Cutting rooms are clogged with 58 pictures in the editing stage. A detailed account of the production situa- tion appears on page 37. Duals Delayed John Balaban, operating head of the Bala- ban and Katz circuit in Chicago, this week accounted for the organization's delay in starting its neighborhood theatres on a double-feature policy by citing a lack of available product, due in part to the holding over of pictures for extended first runs downtown. He reiterated that the policy will be installed when circumstances permit. A complete account of the Chicago situa- tion is furnished by William F. Crouch on page 76. Music and Melodrama Attention of the film colony has been drawn to the painstaking efforts of Pick- ford-Lasky to combine the best elements of melodrama and music, traditionally depend- able box office factors, in "The Gay Desper- ado," in process of production with Nino Martini, Leo Carrillo and Ida Lupino in the principal roles. As the picture nears com- pletion Hollywood is saying that the pro- ducers "have something there," to use the meaningless phrase of the moment, citing precedents. Gus McCarthy's pictorial preview of the production is presented on pages 32-33. Editorial Page 7 Pictorial Preview Page 32 This Week in Pictures Page 10 The Hollywood Scene Page 37 What the Picture Did for Me Page 47 Showmen's Reviews Page 41 Asides and Interludes Page 19 J. C. Jenkins — His Colyunv Page 50 Managers' Round Table Page 77 The Release Chart Page 70 Technological Page 71 Chicago Page 87 Box Office Champions Page 24 Pioneers Organize Formed at the suggestion of Commodore J. Stuart Blackton for the purpose of pro- moting cooperative companionship, with a secondary purpose the bridging of the gap between box office generations, the Associ- ated Cinema Stars gave its first annual din- ner dance last week at Hollywood's Hotel Biltmore Bowl. Hundreds of stars of yes- terday and thousands of fans of today were in attendance. This story appears on page 36. Fair Practices Exhibitor dissention over alleged monopo- listic and unfair trade practices of the large distributors threatens further court wran- gles between the large and small interests. Distributors were sued this week in New Orleans, were threatened with a new suit in Kansas City, and received protests from New York owners, while Detroit independ- ents called attention of the Department of Justice to conditions alleged to exist in their territory. The trade practice situation is viewed on page 18. Theatre Birthday Forty years ago this month the late Sen- ator John P. Harris of Pennsylvania opened a museum or Curio Hall in McKees- port in connection with which the newly publicized motion pictures were shown. Nine years later Senator Harris opened a nickelo- deon in Pittsburgh which is believed to be the first all-motion picture theatre to open in the United States. It formed the nucleus of the present Harris Amusement Company, one of the largest circuits in Pennsylvania. The company this week opened an exposi- tion and entertainment at Duquesne Gar- den, Pittsburgh, to inaugurate a month's celebration of the anniversary. The unique history of the compary is re- viewed on page 26. When in Rome When in Rome it's not a bad idea to drop into the International Cinematographic In- stitute and see what's being done about the motion picture as an art, an industry and otherwise. Founded by the. League of Na- tions in 1928, the Institute is housed in a building on the grounds of the Villa Tor- Ionia, residence of II Duce, and there is con- ducted, with cooperation of all nations, ex- tensive recording, analysis and annotation of motion picture affairs. An article on the subject by Dario Saba- tcllo appears on page 34. September 5, 1936 Capital Premiere Because "The Gorgeous Hussy" impinges on affairs of state, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer previewed the new production in Washing- ton, inviting the creme-de-c.reme of the Capital's political, diplomatic and news- paper life. Accordingly, Motion Picture Herald assigned its political correspondent, Francis L. Burt, to report on this "Holly- wood premiere" staged within the shadows of the Capitol dome. Mr. Burt's record of the event is pre- sented on page 31. Move for Managers Higher grosses have evolved from the managers sharing plan in use through the Famous Players circuit, largest in Canada. As a result, the system of rewards will con- tinue. Checks for $30,000 were distributed to managers at the circuit's convention in Toronto. Reports on the convention and a descrip- tion of the plan appear on page 35. Nationalization Efforts of the industry in France to re- organize itself in conformity with govern- mental requirements, against which is set up the definite promise of nationalization in event of failure, have accomplished little in the way of progress on account of rivalry and dissension between the two major indus- try organizations, the Chambre Syndicale and the Comite Du Film. Each has ex- pressed itself as holding the selfish motives of the other responsible for delay. Pierre Autre's story of the situation ap- pears on page 17. Odeon Target Revealed as the principal target of the Cinematograph Exhibitors' Association pol- icy aimed at prevention of over-seating, Adolph Deutsch is proceeding steadily with development of his Odeon circuit, which now includes two hundred theatres in Eng- land. Southall, Oldham and Ramsgate were towns witnessing the opening of new Odeon theatres in a single week of August. Bruce Allan's report of the industry in England appears on page 55. Champions Box office champions for July were, alpha- betically by title, "The Great Ziegfeld," "The Green Pastures," "It's Love Again," "Poor Little Rich Girl," "Poppy" and "San Fran- cisco." Stills from the pictures, together with pertinent data, are published on pages 24-25. MOTION PICTURE HERALD Venice by AIDO FORTE United Press Correspondent in Venice A German film, "Kaiser von California," won the Mussolini trophy for the best film in the International Exhibition. The Volpi trophy for the best actor was awarded to Paul Muni for his interpretation of the film' "Louis Pasteur." The Ministry of Press Propaganda awarded a cup for the best photography to Mutz Greenbaum, cameraman for the Brit- ish film, "Tudor Rose." Jury also awarded medals to three United States films : Paramount's "Trail of the Lonesome Pine"; Columbia's "Mr. Deeds Goes to Town," and RKO's "Mary of Scot- land." The Volpi trophy for the best actress was awarded to the French actress, Annabella, for the film "Les Veille d'Armes." Jacques Feyder, French director, was awarded the medal of the Ministry of Press Propaganda as the best director for the film "Kermesse Eroique." The German film "Schluasakord" was considered the best musical film and the German film "Jugend der Welt" merited the honor as the best documentary short. The best Italian film was "White Squad- ron," a picture relating to the life of Colonial soldiers in Libya. Offset Tactics British distributors are reported to have begun moves designed to counteract effects of the Loew-Twentieth Century-Fox deal with Gaumont British which has been en- veloped in complete silence. C. M. Woolf, head of General Film Distributors, Ltd., with a substantial interest in Universal, is reliably believed to be acquiring theatres in small groups with a circuit of 100 as his ultimate aim. Along different lines is a project being studied by John W. Gossage of Reunion Films to group a number of British producers in a joint distributing company. Mr. Gossage admits he is work- ing on financial details and expects to be able to report progress shortly. Both devel- opments are considered attempts to offset the move of the Schenck brothers. British Awards The British Institute of Cinematography has announced completion of plans for mak- ing annual awards similar, in a functional way, to those of the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences in the United States. The British awards, incidentally, will include a gold medal for the best non- English production of the year. Other bases of award are enumerated on page 55. 9 C-R Abroad Grand National will set up its own for- eign department in the home office in New York, Edward L. Alperson, president, said when he returned this week from Europe after arranging a two-year distribution deal in England with Associated British Film Distributors. He said his company would deliver 34 pictures a year in England for two years under terms of the contract which will guarantee his company a minimum of $2,000,000. Eight westerns are included in the 34 features. Mr. Alperson is scheduled to arrive in Hollywood shortly to confer with Carl Les^ erman, general sales manager, on the sign- ing of new producers. One of the deals to be set will be with Joseph Von Sternberg, who will probably make three for next season. Distinctive Screen Attractions, Inc., with offices in Denver and Salt Lake City, have been taken over by Grand National from Lon T. Fidler, who will remain in charge of the exchanges for the new owner. The company will open its own branch in Des Moines with Lou Levy, who has been with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer in Iowa, in charge. L. L. Wells and Bob Winnig, former MGM salesmen, have been appointed salesmen. Kuykendall Withdrawal The withdrawal of Edward Kuykendall from theatre operation may bring about his retirement from exhibitor organization work on the conclusion of his current term as president of Motion Picture Theatre Owners of America next spring. While Mr. Kuy- kendall is retaining his ownership of the Princess and Dixie theatres in Columbus, Miss., and his half interest in the Tupelo, Miss., theatre, the houses will be operated by M. A. Lightman in conjunction with the Saenger circuit on a long-term lease. Mr. Kuykendall said that he would serve out his present term as MPTOA president, but that his plans for the future in connection with the organization are "undecided." By-laws of the MPTOA do not require officers to be theatre operators, but the cus- tom has been only to elect such men to head the organization. New Film The Eastman Kodak Company at Rochester, according to the New York Herald Tribune, has perfected a new film for still cameras by which pictures can be taken in color, supplementing the color film which the company has had available for motion picture cameras for some time. As yet, however, no color prints can be made, so that the new film can be used only for colored transparencies, such as lantern slides. 10 MOTION PICTURE HERALD Se ember 936 This IV %k in Pictures BON VOYAGE. Arthur W. Kelly, United Artists vice- president, was given a testimonial luncheon by asso- ciates before departing on a six-months tour of for- eign exchanges. Present, left to right, were: Emil Jenson, Monroe W. Greenthal, Lowell Calvert, Robert Hilton, Sammy Cohen, Thomas J. Mulrooney, Manny Silverstone, Mack Liftman, Walter Liebler, Harry W. Schroeder, Paul Mooney, Charles Stern, Charles Steele, Paul Lazarus, Mr. Kelly, Harry D. Buckley, Haskell Masters, Harry Miller and Nat Thompson. PROMOTED. Arnold Albert, in charge of press books for War- ners, has been appointed exploita- tion director for the western zone, working under Jack Brower. STOP-OVER. John Monk Saunders, scenarist, stopped over in Chicago on his return from London to Hollywood to gather story material. Mrs. Saunders is Fay Wray. SWIMS, TOO. Sonja Henie, world famous figure skater, for whose screen use Twentieth Century-Fox is preparing a story suited to her talents, also swims, as witness the young lady from Norway in pool attire. Her first production will be a musical. SIGNED. Louis Hayward has signed a long term contract with Universal and will appear opposite Jane Wyatt in "The Luckiest Girl in the World." September 5, 1936 MOTION PICTURE HERALD HOME. Edward L. Alperson, president of Grand National, ar- rived in the U. S. last week from England, where he closed a deal for release in the United Kingdom. SALES MEET. Western and midwestern exchange managers of Grand National held their first sales meeting in Chicago. Seen (left to right) are, top row: Russell Borg, Carl Reese, Tom Tobin, Lou Patz, Lou Levy, Bradley H. Kish, Joe Merrick; second row: Don Woods, Earle Silverman, Lon Fidler, Sam Berkowitz, Wilson McKendrick; bottom row: Ralph Peckham, Ed- ward Finney, Carl M. Lesserman, James Winn and Mel Hillin. The sales convention was held at the Medinah Athletic Club. FEATURED. George Eldridge, of stage, screen and opera, will be featured in the C. C. Burr pro- duction of "The Lone Prairie," by James Fenimore Cooper. BETTER. Samuel Goldwyn, returning to Hollywood after recovering from a protracted illness in New York, visits the set of "Love Under Fire," his produc- tion starring Merle Oberon, who, with David Niven, supporting player, confers with the producer. ENVOY. Walter Wanger, left, and George C. Pratt, right, welcome Carlo Roncoroni of Italy to Hollywood, where his mission is to interest producers in Italy. 12 MOTION PICTU RE H ERALD S e p t e RECORD BREAKER. Warner THE WINNER. Kay Francis, Warner Brothers' "Anthony Adverse" is star, has been awarded a gold medal credited with breaking every box by the New York Fashion Academy as office record of New York Strand, the best dressed woman on the screen, Above, the opening day crowd, which is quite a title. PRIZE. Harry M. Soetz, president of Reliance pic- tures and producers of "The Last of the Mohicans" for United Artists release, obtained at private auc- tion a rare first edition of the novel by James Feni- more Cooper, paying $575 for the volume. The pic- ture opened September 2nd at the New York Rivoli. SO. The New Universal Sales Drive gets under way in Seattle with Margaret Barrows, Irene Fol- lett, Roberta Tate, Mercedes Har- vey, Dorothy Colson, Al Bloom, Ray Ackles, W. E. Heineman, L. J. McGinley, L. E. Samuelson and E. M. Briggs geared to the spirit of the occaison. NEW CAR. Cecil B. DeMille and Marsha Hunt inspect the new De- Mille car, which replaces the green roadster, formerly General Pershing's, which the producer of "The Plainsman," which Paramount will distribute, drove for many years and for which he long felt a sentimental attraction. September 5, 1936 MOTION PICTURE HERALD 13 51 MILLION FOR TALENT IS RADIO REPLY TO THEATRE Network Advertisers Authorize Biggest of All Ether Budgets for New Season; MPPDA Prob- ing Effect of Film Stars on Air Radio's answer to the scores of complaints of motion picture exhibitors over film stars' appearances on the air is a $51,000,000 talent budget to pay film, vaudeville, the- atrical and other performers who in 1936-37 will commercially entertain listeners to America's 26,000,000 loudspeakers for the benefit of national advertisers of merchan- dise ranging from tin cans to toilet goods, skin balms to soups, and hams to cheese. Radio's invasion of Hollywood for talent in the new show season, which starts on Labor Day, will be even greater than be- fore, despite the protestations of theatre owners everywhere that film stars who per- form on the air keep the public from attend- ing theatres. Determination of the extent to which stars' appearances are competition to motion picture box offices, will be made immediately by the Motion Picture Pro- ducers and Distributors of America, Will H. Hays, president. The MPPDA has such a study in the making, undertaken as a re- sult of the many recent protests made by exhibitors. Merlin Hall Ayles worth, dual radio and film executive, through his official position with National Broadcasting Company and Radio-Keith-Orpheum Corporation, in an interview in Motion Picture Herald of July 18th, called for "a working arrange- ment between radio and the motion picture to enhance the business of both." Mr. Ayles- worth called on Mr. Hays and the motion picture industry to sit "in friendly round table discussion" with radio interests to effect a tangible plan for bringing together America's two leading entertainment in- struments so that they would work for each other, and not against. At the same time the radio-film executive observed that "radio's invasion of the Hollywood talent field is a natural development," and that national advertisers are insisting more and more on using motion picture stars for their commercial air programs. He inferred that an extended use of Hollywood "big name" talent might be looked for. Mr. Aylesworth admitted this week that radio's budget for all networks for talent and programs would, as reported on Broadway, approximate $51,000,000. And now comes word from national ad- vertisers who are the biggest users of radio ballyhoo, that their plans are completed to tap the consumer pocketbook by appealing to the national ear with the mightiest and most expensive free show since radio began. These national advertisers now report, MANITOBA EXHIBITORS PROTEST AIR INVASION Added to the many resolutions passed by exhibitor organizations in protest against the appearances of motion picture stars on radio pro- grams, is a resolution passed by the Manitoba Motion Picture Exhibitors Association of Winnipeg, Manitoba, as follows: "This association, representing every motion picture exhibitor in the Prov- ince of Manitoba, is regarded as the strongest in the Dominion of Canada and our members definitely object to radio appearances of motion picture artists, inasmuch as their programs are direct opposition and, in our opin- ion, unfair. "We also contend that motion pic- ture stars are not presented over the radio with necessary studio enhance- ment and the resultant opinion of the public toward the artist is detrimen- tal, not only to the performer, but to the value of the performer at our box-offices." according to Time Magazine, the publish- ers of which produce the March of Time newsreel, that this year advertisers will pay nearly $100,000,000 to the eight United States networks, embracing 561 stations, for time rental alone. This is in addition to the $51,000,000 that will be used to pay the talent scheduled to be used. "This opulent wedding of Big Business and Show Business will thus beget a lively brood of clowns and crooners, ingenues and instrumentalists, mimes and maestros who will serve as U. S. Industry's most spectacu- lar sales crew," observed Time. Big Names Signed Principal Hollywood names set for series of appearances on the air in the new season, who will receive large slices of the talent budget, include Lanny Ross, Fred Astaire, Jack Oakie, Helen Twelvetrees, Joe E. Brown, Ginger Rogers, Brian Ahearne, Clark Gable, Joan Crawford, Franchot Tone, Myrna Loy, Jean Harlow, Marion Davies, Herbert Marshall, Gloria Swanson, Eddie Cantor, Shirley Temple, Jackie Cooper, Fred and Paula Stone, Patsy Kelly, Dolores Costello Barrymore, Hoot Gibson, Jack Holt, Elissa Landi, Anne Shirley, Lionel Barrymore, Norma Shearer and Grace Moore. These have already been signed ; there will be many more, all broadcasting regularly, not to mention the scores of Hollywood names who will make "guest" Demand for Hollywood Per- formers for Broadcasts Points to Extended Studio Invasion With Lure of Fabulous Salaries appearances from time to time, for a price. Some idea of the fabulous salaries which radio and its advertising clients will pay "big name" entertainers can be gleaned from some of the weekly salaries to be paid. Some of them, obtained from a thoroughly reliable source, are: Major Bowes, $25,000 a week; Eddie Cantor, between $8,000 and $10,000; Fred War- ing and his band, $12,000; Rudy Vallee, $10,000. Fred Astaire will contribute his talents to the marketing of Packard motor cars at the rate of $5,000 a week. Box office grosses of motion pictures star- ring film headliners who appeared concur- rently on radio programs during the run of the pictures are being gathered as the basis of the MPPDA's investigation to de- termine to what extent such film star ap- pearances detract from box office receipts. MPPDA Studying Grosses The grosses of some 30 theatres affiliated with distributor-circuit members of the Hays organization, located in a strategic spot served by some key radio station, comprise the figures being gathered. They include the theatre grosses for motion picture perform- ances before, during and after the various broadcasts in which film names were fea- tured, and total about 6,000 individual gross figures. A complete analysis of the findings, it is stated, will take at least another week to complete. The specific object of the investigation is an attempt to determine whether any defi- nite indication may be had of the effect of radio appearances of film stars on theatre business. Producers' policies in connection with the radio appearances of their stars and others under contract may be guided for the future by the results of the study. Mr. Aylesworth's plea with the motion picture business to work with radio would admittedly give radio a more friendly entry to the motion picture's great source of tal- ent. In return, radio would give the motion picture a medium, on the air, for publicizing its motion pictures in a manner "far greater than any existing exploitation channel." The hundreds of theatre owners who in recent days have been condemning film stars' air appearances disagree, however, with Mr. Aylesworth's contention that such ap- pearances aid in selling the stars to a larger public, so that eventually their motion pic- ture box office returns are greater. Mr. Aylesworth said that the national advertisers and radio would turn a golden stream into the pocketbooks of Hollywood actors who are engaged for radio. This, he {Continued on page 74) 14 MOTION PICTURE HERALD September 5, 1936 HOLLYWOOD WRITES HALF SONGS PLAYED OVER 10,000 TIMES One hundred and twelve songs ivere hits in 193 5-36, so adjusted on the basis of the popular demand which influenced orchestras to repeat them in radio broadcasts. Each ivas performed at least 10,000 times during the 193 5-36 period, embracing 12 months. More than half of the songs came from Hollywood film prodiict. The 112 hits are listed below as tabulated by the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers, according to the number of times performed over the NBC and CBS radio networks. All productions named as sources are motion pictures exclusively tmless otherwise indicated. An asterisk denotes the source, both film and stage production; a dagger indicates stage only. TIMES TITLE OF SONS SOURCE AUTHORS BROADCAST PUBLISHER 1. When 1 Grow Too Old The Night is Young Sigmund Romberg MGM- to Dream Oscar Hammerstein 29,161 Robbins 2. I'm In the Mood for Love Every Night at Jimmy McHugh Eight Dorothy Fields 28,537 Robbins 3. In a Little Gypsy Tea Joe Burke Room Edgar Leslie 25,228 Joe Morris 4. Lullaby of Broadway Gold Diggers Harry Warren M. Witmark of 1935 Al Dubin 24,864 5. Cheek to Cheek Top Hat Irving Berlin 24,134 1. Berlin 6. ^v*hat's the Reason I'm Times Square Lady Pinky Tomlin Mnt PIpA^in You Earl Hatch Coy Poe Jimmy Grier 23,944 1. Berlin 7. I'll Never Say "Never Again" Again Harry Woods 23.775 Donaldson, D. & G. 8. And Then Some Vee Lawnhurst Tot Seymour 23,698 Famous 9. 1 Won't Dance Roberta* Oscar Hammerstein Otto Harbach Jerome Kern 22,873 T. B. Harms 10. Lovely to Look At Roberta* Dorothy Fields Jimmy McHugh Jerome Kern 22,666 T. B. Harms II. 1 Couldn't Believe My Walter G. Samuel s Eyes Leonard Whitcup 21,91 1 Shapiro- Teddy Powell Bernstein 12. Chasing Shadows Abner Silver Crawford Benny Davis 21,521 13. I've Got a Feelin' Broadway Melody Nacio Herb Brown MGM- You're Foolin' of 1935 Arthur Freed 2 1 ,440 Robbins 14. You're All 1 Need Lie Like Gentlemen Bronislaw Kaper ( Escapade) Walter Jarmann Gus Kahn 21,424 Robbins 15. Red Sails in the Sunset Hugh Williams Jimmy Kennedy 21,354 Shapiro 16. Let's Swing It Earl Carroll's Chas. Tobias Sketch Bookf Chas. Newman Murray Mencher 21,033 Harms, Inc. 17. Lady in Red In Caliente Allie Wrubel Remick Mort Dixon 20,585 18. Truckin' 26th Edition, "Cot- Rube Bloom ton Club Parade"! Ted Koehler 20,227 Mills 19. Top Hat, White Tie Top Hat Irving Berlin 20,048 1. Berlin 20. Lulu's Back in Town Broadway Gondolier Harry Warren Al Dubin 19,771 M. Witmark {Tabulation continued on following page) ASCAP Figures for Amusement Season 1935-36 Show Motion Pictures Greatest Single Source of New Popular Music Hollywood today is writing the song hits for the nation Broadway's stage and it's "Tin Pan Alley," once the chief sources of popular American airs, are now contribut- ing only negligibly to the catalogue of hit tunes. One hundred and twelve songs are desig- nated popular hits of the past season ; the sources from which they emanated are as follows : NUMBER PERCENT- SOURCE OF HITS AGE Motion Pictures 56 50 Stage 14 12 Film-and-Stage Plays 4 4 Independently Compose d. 38 34 TOTALS 1 12 100% Determination of the songs as hits was made on Tuesday by the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers, on the basis of the number of times each song was played on the radio systems of America's two largest networks, National Broadcast- ing Company and Columbia Broadcasting System. Only numbers played 10,000 times or more on the air during the season were considered hits. They ranged from Sidmund Romberg's and Oscar Hammerstein's "When I Grow Too Old To Dream," from the mo- tion picture, "The Night Is Young," played 29,161 times, and in first position, down to little Shirley Temple's "On the Good Ship Lollipop," from "Bright Eyes," by Sidney Clare and R. A. Whiting, with 10,012 air performances. In second position is "I'm in the Mood for Love" from "Every Night at Eight" with 28,537 broadcasts. Further Aid from Films Thus not only does Hollywood supply radio — its chief competitor in entertain- ment— with its best and greatest number of performers, but it is also furnishing the music by which that talent and also radio's own talent perform. Radio, with its mil- lions of dollars of yearly income in time rentals to advertisers and sales of radio sets and parts to the public, thereby receives yet further support from the motion pictures of Hollywood. ASCAP'S vigilance in keeping records complete to determine air performances of songs is by no means prompted by altruism. Rather, the records afford ASCAP the ba^is for determining what royalties are due it and its composer members from radio for the use of the music. ASCAP relies sole- ly on the number of air performances to determine the success of new songs from the standpoint of popular demand which in- fluences the bands and orchestras to repeat the songs on the air. The number of times the songs are played at public dance halls, cabarets and restaurants are presumably the same, proportionately. Sheet Sale Aided Not only is Hollywood's music the most popular on the air, but that same popularity is reflected in the more tangible form of sheet music sales. Five of the six leading music-sheet sellers in 1935-36 come from motion pictures, as follows : "When I Grow Too Old to Dream." from the film. "Night Is Young," 500,000 copies sold ; "In a Little Gypsy Tea Room," inde- pendently written, 311,000 copies sold; "Cheek to Cheek," from the film, "Top Hat," 250,000 copies sold; "I'm in the Mood for Love," from the film, "Every Night at September 5, 19 3 6 MOTION PICTURE HERALD 15 OF NATION'S SONG HITS SONGS PLAYED OVER 10,000 TIMES (Continued from preceding page) TIMES TITLE OF SONG SOURCE AUTHORS BROADCAST PUBLISHER lcn' + Tl-iic a 1 cwpIv Dav I5MT lillo a lu » ci y way Top Hat 1 rvlng Berlin 1 9,558 1. Berlin 22. Isle of Capri Will Grosz P. Maurice- J. Kennedy 19,084 T. B. Harms Li. Anything ooes Anything G^oes^ Cole Porter 1 9,055 H a rms ! n c . 24. Love and a L/ime Mags at Bayy Brooks Bowman I O, /DO oa ntly 25. Footloose & Fancy Free carmen Lombardo ous i\ann io 1 0,J /o Kobbi ns 26. She's a Latin from Go Into Your Harry Warren Manhattan Dance Al Uuuin io m 1 o.iii M. Witmark 27. From the Top of Your Two for Tonight u i r> l Mack Gordon LJ J Head Harry Revel i q nop. 1 o,U7o Orawtord 28. On Treasure Island 1 D 1 Joe Burke Edgar Leslie 1 7,885 - Joe Morris 29. Without a Word ot Two for Tonight Mack Gordon Warning Harry Revel 17,612 Crawford 30. About a Quarter to Go Into Your Warren Nine Da nee Uubin 1 7, 572 \ A / ' J. 1. Witmark 31. I'm On a See-Saw Jack and Jillf Vivian Ellis Desmond Carter 1 7,209 PL II C_happell 32. You and the Night and Revenge with Arthur Schwartz the Music Music! Howard Dietz 1 7,20 1 LJ 1 Harms, Inc. 33. 1 Wished on the Moon Big Broadcast Ralph Rainger ot IVoo Uorothy rarker 1 7,200 r hamous 34. You Are My Lucky Star Broadway Melody Nacio H. Brown MGM- ot IV Jo Arthur Freed 1 7,022 D LU" Kobbms 35. I'm Livin' in a Great Big Hurrah for Love Jimmy McHugh Way Dorothy Fields 1 0,7 /O 1. Berlin 36. It's Easy to Remember Mississippi D * L J D J Kichard Kodgers Lorenz Hart 1 6,78 1 Famous 37. You're the Top Anything Goes* Cole Porter 1 6,778 Harms, Inc. 38. 1 Believe in Miracles Pete Wendling Geo. W. Meyer Sam M. Lewis 16,723 Leo Feist 39. Rose in Her Hair Broadway Gondolier Harry Warren Al Dubin 16,643 M. Witmark 40. 1 Was Lucky Folies Bergere Jack Stern Jack Meskill 16,415 Robbins 41. 1 Found a Dream Redheads on Parade Jay Gormey Wm. Hartman 16,300 Movietone 42. Love Is Just Around the Here is My Heart Lewis E. Gensler Corner Leo Kobin 15,886 Famous 43. 1 Got Rhythm Girl Crazyf George Gerchwin George Gershwin 15,700 New World 44. You're a Heavenly Thing Joe Young Little Jack Little 1 5 553 Shapiro B'way Mus. 45. Rhythm and Romance J. C. Johnson George Whiting Nat Schwartz 15,008 46. It's an Old Southern Broadway Scandals Joseph Meyer Custom of 1935 Jack Yellen 14,441 Sam Fox 47. No Strings I'm Fancy Top Hat Irving Berlin 14,253 Berlin, Inc. Free 48. No Other One Vee Lawnhurst Tot Seymour 14,240 Famous 49. Accent on Youth Accent on Youth Vee Lawnhurst Tot Seymour 14,121 Famous 50. Here Comes Cookie Love in Bloom Mack Gordon 14,007 Crawford 51. 1 Get a Kick Out of You Anything Goesf ( Tabulation continued Cole Porter on following page) 13,871 Harms, Inc. Eight," 200,000 copies sold; "What's the Reason I'm Not Pleasing You," from the film, "Times Square Lady," 160,000 copies sold; and "Lullaby of Broadway," from the film, "Gold Diggers of 1935," 125,000 copies sold. Total for the film five is 1.235,000. Gross income to the publishers on the sheet music sales of the six best sellers alone approximates $300,000, eighty per cent of which accrued from sales of sheet music on songs written by Hollywood and incorpora- ted in its motion pictures. ASCAP, however, is not satisfied with the present situation, Edwin C. Mills, its general manager, complaining that radio continues to "murder music" by overplay- ing the tunes, thus shortening their com- mercial lives and accordingly lessening sheet music sales. The top hit of this season, "When I Grow Too Old to Dream," as noted, sold only 550,000 copies, whereas, before radio, ac- cording to Mr. Mills, a song of equal popu- larity sold nearly 2,000,000 copies. The average song hit of pre-radio days sold 1,156,000 sheets. Now the average is only 229,000 sheets. Says Radio "Kills" Songs Hollywood today has on its payrolls — at admittedly more substantial salaries than were ever paid on Broadway or by Tin Pan Alley — the foremost composers of Ameri- can music. To write the songs which were incorporated in ASCAP's record of best tunes for 1935-36, Hollywood engaged such notable composers of popular airs as Irving Berlin, Jerome Kern, Sidmund Romberg and Oscar Hammerstein, Jimmy McHugh and Dorothy Fields, Al Dubin, Otto Har- bach, Abner Silver, Mack Gordon and Jack Yellen, Leo Robin, Joseph Meyer, Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart, Lewis Gensler, Cole Porter, Mack Gordon and Harry Revel, Gus Kahn, Arthur Freed, Nacio Herb Brown and Harry Warren, among others. Of the 19 hits which received in excess of 20,000 credits for the number of times played, 12 were written for and featured in motion pictures. The airing of the 112 hit tunes designated by ASCAP took up 22 per cent of all the time devoted to music by both National Broadcasting and Columbia. MGM Subsidiary Led Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer's subsidiary, the Robbins Music Company, led the publishers with the greatest number of song successes in 1935-36, publishing 17 of the 112 num- bers. Irving Berlin, Inc., and Famous Mu- sic Company, each, published 12; Harms, Inc., published 10; Crawford Music and Warner Brothers' subsidiary, M. Witmark, each published seven. T. B. Harms and Shapiro-Bernstein published five each. Meanwhile "satisfactory progress" in con- nection with the work of agreeing on stipu- lations of fact in the Government's action for the dissolution of the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers, was reported this week. The work is being con- ducted by Richard Bird, representing the Attornev General's office, and Arthur Schwartz, of counsel for the society, at the law offices of Schwartz & Frolich in Nev\ York. Indications are that the work w ill not be completed until the end of this week, or pos- sibly next week. Through the stipulations both sides hope to be able to submit the case to Federal Judge Henry W. Goddard next month without the necessity of resuming trial or taking additional testimony. If no agreement on the stipulations is reached, however, the trial of the action probably will be resumed next winter. 16 MOTION PICTURE HERALD September 5, 1936 SONGS PLAYED OVER 10,000 TIMES {Continued from preceding page) TIMES TITLE OF SONG SOURCE AUTHORS BROADCAST PUBLISHER 52. Tell Me That You Love Me C. A. Bixie Ennio Neri Al Silverman 13,747 T. B. Harms 53. Star Gazing Marty Symes A. J. Neiburg Jerry Levinson 13,336 Leo Feist 54. You're So Darn Harold Spiva Santly Charming Johnny Burke 13,232 55. Believe It Beloved J. C. Johnson George Whiting Nlr*+ ^rhw^rt7 13,217 B'way Music 56. Fare Thee Well, Anna- Sweet Music Allie Wrubel Remick belle Mort Dixon 13,152 57. Blue Moon Richard Rodgers Lorenz Hart 13,124 MGM- Robbins 58. Double Trouble Big Broadcast of 1935 Leo Robin Richard Whiting nil n • Ralph Rainger 13,062 Famous 59. My Heart Is an Open Book Love in Bloom Mack Gordon 12,995 Crawford 60. June in January Here Is My Heart Ralph Rainger Leo Robin 12,983 Famous 61. When a Gypsy Makes Emery Deutsch His Violin Cry Dick Smith Frank Winegar Jimmy Rozan 12.734 Donaldson, D. & G. 62. Little Bit Independent Joe Burke Donaldson, Edgar Leslie 1 2,652 V. & o. 63. Every Single Little Nat Simon Tingle of My Heart Jules Lowman Shapiro- Allan Roberts 12 615 Rorn CTia i n Uul 1 1 b 1 til [1 64. \A/ J A • U 1 1 i Words Are in My Heart Gold Diqgers Harry Warren of 1935 Al Dubin 1 L , O 1 L IVI , VV 1 1 111 ul K 65. 1 Wish 1 Were Aladdin Two for Tonight, Mack Gordon Harry Revel 1 9 A 1 A 1 Z 1 0 Crdwf ord 66. Broadway Rhythm Broadway Melody N. Herbert Brown MGM- of 1935 Arthur Freed i o 7 on Robbins 67. Flowers for Madame Folies Bergere Charlie Tobias Charles Newman Murray Mencher 12,272 Harms, Inc. 68. Piccolino Top Hat Irving Berlin 12,21 1 1. Berlin 69. Soon Mississippi Richard Rodgers Lorenz Hart 12,208 Famous 70. Sweet and Slow Harry Warren Al Dubin 12,184 M. Witmark 71. Speak to Me of Love i i Jean Lenoir Bruce Sievier 12,166 Harms, Inc. 72. Serenade for a Wealthy Widow Reginald Forsyth9 12,161 Robbins- Irwin Dash 73. Here's to Romance Con Conrad It 1 V A • J Herb Magidson 12,099 Movietone 74. Zing Went the Strings of My Heart Thumbs Upf J. F. Hanley 12,036 Harms, Inc. 75. That's What You Think King Solomon ot Broadway Pinky Tomlin D J 1 - Raymond Jasper Coy Poe 12.004 Berlin, Inc. 76. Little White Gardenia All the King's Horses Sam Coslow 1 1 ,959 Famous 77. When Your Heart's on Roberta* Jerome Kern Fire Smoke Gets in Your Otto Harbach 1 1,197 T. B. Harms Eyes 78. I'll Follow My Secret Conversation Noel Coward 1 1,891 Chappell Heart Peacef 79. You Fit into the Picture Jesse Greer Bud Green 1 1,860 E. B. Marks. 80. Life Is a Song No More Ladies Fred E. Ahlert Joe Young 1 1,857 Robbins 81. Object of My Affection Times Square Lady Pinky Tomlin Coy Poe Jimmie Grier 1 1,788 1. Berlin [OTHER SONGS LISTED ON PAGE 44] 2000-Foot Reel Now in Effect On 11 Releases Although ordinances in New York and Chicago have not yet been revised to allow the use of the new 2,000-foot reels, the first productions to be released on the new stand- ard spools, which go into industry-wide use this week, have been set as follows : Colum- bia, "Adventure in Manhattan" ; Metro- Goldwyn-Mayer, "The Devil Is a Sissy" ; Paramount, "Wives Never Know" ; Radio, "Big Game" ; Hal Roach, "Our Relations" ; Selznick-International, "Garden- of Allah" ; Twentieth Century-Fox, "Thank You, Jeeves" ; United Artists, "Dodsworth" ; Universal, "My Man Godfrey" ; Warners, "Bengal Tiger" and "Trailing West." All feature releases of all major companies reaching theatres on and after September 1 were to be released on the new reel. The changeover will not be instantaneous, therefore, and will not be general for sev- eral weeks. This is due primarily to the fact that some pictures designated by major companies as their first September releases to use the 2,000-foot reel are not scheduled for national release until late in the month. The International Alliance of Theatrical and Stage Employes operators in Chicago refused, on Monday, to handle longer reels and may themselves cut the reels be- fore putting them through the projectors. The Alliance is opposing the changeover, especially in Boston and Cleveland. In an effort to straighten out difficulties that threaten to impede the use of the longer reel in New York, A. L. Dickinson and J. S. McLeod, of the Motion Picture Producers and Distributors of America, Inc., are conferring with Commissioner of Li- censes Paul Moss on the new standard. Loeb Suit Against Columbia Is Dismissed A judgment dismissing the $200,000 stockholders' action brought by John L. Loeb against Columbia, was filed this week in the New York supreme court. Mr. Loeb charged in the complaint that he was in- duced to purchase warrants on April 17, 1933, to buy voting trust certificates for shares of Columbia common stock. These warrants, he said, were rendered valueless by the acts of Harry Cohn, Jack Cohn and Joe Brandt. Mr. Loeb asserts that these three, in ne- gotiating an agreement with bankers in March, 1929, did not faithfully serve Co- lumbia, but favored their own individual interests in the deal. An affidavit by Jack Cohn denied the charges set forth in the complaint, and fur- ther stated that because Mr. Loeb mis- judged the market he attempted to fix the blame on the three individuals he named as defendants. He charged the action was based on a dubious theory and he was up- held by Justice Richard P. Lydon in his contention. Katzman Signs Tyler Sam Katzman of Victory Pictures has signed Tom Tyler to star in a series of eight outdoor action pictures. September 5, 1936 MOTION PICTURE HERALD 17 FRENCH INDUSTRY EMBATTLED IN FACE OF NATIONALIZATION Efforts to Consolidate Two Leading Organizations in Response to Governmental Threat Impeded by Rivalry by PIERRE AUTRE in Paris Again the threat of nationalization men- aces the motion picture industry in France and again, or still, progress toward working out of a plan for presenting unified resist- ance is impeded by factional differences. Bluntly, the industry has been warned that unless it reorganizes itself in a man- ner satisfactory to the government it will be taken over and placed directly under governmental control. This is the gist of a report presented by M. De Carmoy to the National Economic Council and adopted by that body. There are at present two rival trade or- ganizations. One of these is the Chambre Syndicale, made up of French producers and distributors, with which are allied a small number of exhibitors, and the so-called "heavy sections," comprising manufacturers, printers and developers. The other is the Comite Du Film, presided over by Georges Loureau, head of the French branch of Tobis, which includes the main body of French and foreign distributors, the major- ity of the exhibitors and a few French pro- ducers. Consolidation Is Sought The aim of M. Loreau would be to con- solidate these two organizations in a single federation which would be empowered to represent the industry before the govern- ment. Producers and exhibitors in both or- ganizations are largely favorable to this action. Responsibility for lack of progress toward this end is credited generally to dis- tributors. In the plan of consolidation under consid- eration there would be four trade organiza- tions. One would include all producers, an- other all distributors, a third the exhibitors and a fourth the technical industry. In such an organization it would be impracticable to make a discrimination between French and foreign interests. It has been suggested, therefore, that a special section would be formed, as a sub- sidiary of the federation, which would have in direct charge the French interests and, if necessary, the protection of the French film. This suggestion has been permitted to fall by the wayside repeatedly, as discussion of it leads inevitably to differences of opin- ion as to the deserts of the French and for- eign, particularly American, interests. Those not involved with a partisan interest in one of the disputed phases of the contem- plated federation point out that, if the gov- ernment takes over control of the industry, none of these fine gradations will be recog- nized by the men placed in charge. It is the general belief that, unless the govern- NO NEW ECSTASY! Addressing Motion Picture Her- ald by cable from London, David Bader, signing as "sole manager" of Gustave de Macbaty, director, says: I greatly admire your edi- torial on "True Pages of Life," and as manager for M . Machaty, can wholeheartedly assure you that the brilliant Czechoslovakian has not the slightest intention of remaking "Extase," the picture which brought him fame, whether starring Miss Astor or any other Hollywood star. ment presently finds the industry organized in a manner satisfactory to its requirements, an inter-ministerial decree will be issued to create a Central Committee of the Cinema, members of which would have all powers that might be delegated to the proposed fed- eration and others that might not. Many of these members might be persons not familiar with the industry and many unreasonable and unnecessary hardships would result. Plans Are Known Preliminary plans for government control by means of such a committee include the daily collection, in the theatres, of percent- age payments due to distributors. These would be picked up by appointed collectors, as taxes are now, and the apportionment of payments would be arbitrary and in all prob- ability often unfair. How such an eventuality would affect the American interests has been imparted in some measure in previous articles. The plan of the Trade Unions, foreseeing a monopoly of the distribution of foreign films in France, contemplate a drastic limitation of dubbed pictures. The De Carmoy report proposes a tax of 25,000 francs on each dubbed pic- ture. One of the new measures considered by the government with a view to protecting French production would limit exhibitors to the use of a single feature for each performance. At the present time nearly all French cinemas, with the exception of the first runs, are showing two features on each program, usually a French picture and a dubbed import, most often Ameri- can. It is argued in the De Carmoy report that these dubbed pictures are booked very cheap- ly and that they serve to stop the showing of French pictures, which, under the pro- posed ruling, could be shown in a larger number of theatres. This assertion is much elaborated in the report. Assertion Is Refuted On the other side of the case, American distributors argue that the assertion is based Daily and Trade Press Loud in Protest at Delay; Old Scores in Way; Charge of Selfish Interests Hurled on a false premise. They claim that propo- nents of this view base their conclusion on the fact that receipts of French cinemas do not exceed 850,000,000,000 francs, by which they purport to show that French pictures do not recover their cost because 45 per cent of this revenue goes to payment for foreign pictures. American distributors point out that this percentage does not reflect a quantity but rather a quality basis of division. It follows, then, in their belief, that if French pictures were made better, and cleaner, they would earn, naturally, a greater share of the in- come from admission sales. And, pursuing this line of logic, they assert that at the pres- ent time only 10 per cent of the French population attends the cinema, whereas the percentage would be much greater if French films were better, and cleaner, and out of this increased revenue would come the cost of French production plus a profit. Editorials in the daily and also in the trade journals have been outspoken in cen- sure of the motion picture industry for its dilatory progress in working out the reor- ganization which the government demands as proof of its ability to conduct its own af- fairs without official supervision. Writing in Le Journal, the eminent cinema journal- ist, M. Jean Chataigner, president of the French Cinema Press Association, said: "I do not think, and my opinion never has changed on this subject, that a quota would give useful improvement to French production. At the present time there is practically no quota, which does not stop French producers from making a goodly number of French films, of which those of the necessary quality secure easy bookings. Invites Foreign Product "If we suppose that foreign films invade the French market, is there not the public, and do you not think the public has the pow- er to restrict those foreign pictures if ex- hibitors make up their programs exclusive- ly with them? "Bad foreign films have never been suc- cessful in France. Those which have stayed for long weeks in the first-run theatres and which have been liked in the district cinemas were really outstanding pictures. "Let the foreign pictures come into France without restriction." It has been charged that the leaders of the Chambre Syndicale are trying to delay the consolidation so that the government will have to create a Central Cinema Committee to which it could call whatever members it chose and that many of these would be the present leaders of the Chambre. On the other hand, the house organ of the Chambre has charged M. Raymond Lus- siez, president of the exhibitor association, with trying to eliminate Chambre leaders in the consolidation. 18 MOTION PICTURE HERALD September 5, 1936 FURTHER TROUBLE THREATENS IN DISPUTE OVER TRADE PRACTICES Independent Theatre Operators Begin or Plan Action in Various Areas Against Methods Cited as Evidence of Monopoly Signs are pointing to new and more liti- gation ahead as a result of the continued dissatisfaction of independent theatre own- ers with so-called aggressive tactics of the distributors. Resentful at the apparent procrastination of the large companies to enact the fair trade practice program advanced by the Motion Picture Theatre Owners of America, the independents are again talking of federal court action to win protection against alleged monopolistic ten- dencies, and in one territory, New Orleans, suit has been filed in what appears may be the development of a new series of legal wars. The Department of Justice is definitely known to be quietly preparing for an ex- pression of further interest in the situation. The New Orleans suit was filed by George Fuller of Florida, who charges the distributors and some affiliated circuits with conspiring against him in the matter of film service. In Kansas City, independent owners are giving serious consideration to the re-filing of the Rolsky suit against Fox Midwest and the major companies, which a federal court there found in favor of the distributors. Protest Date Extensions New York's independents are vigorously protesting the distributor and first-run cir- cuit practice of extending dates of original bookings at the circuit prior runs, a prac- tice which the distributors are defending on grounds of increased negative costs. In Michigan, independent exhibitors have forwarded a report on alleged monopolistic practices to the Department of Justice at Washington. Although the Department of Justice continues to maintain strict silence on possible action in motion pictures, it is learned that agents high in the confidence of the department have been considerably active of late in motion picture matters, pre- sumably relating to the relations between distributors and the independent owners. The suit of Mr. Fuller, Florida theatre operator, was filed August 28th in federal district court at New Orleans, asking nom- inal damages of $20,000 on the allegation that seven motion picture distributing companies had entered into a conspiracy not to furnish the plaintiff with film. His petition states that unless the court grants an injunction directing the companies to cease their alleged conspiracy that he will be forced out of business. He asks also for a writ of mandamus to force Warner Brothers to deliver 39 films he contracted for but which they allegedly failed to deliver. The distributing companies named in the suit as defendants are Paramount Pictures Distributing Corporation, Universal Film Distributors, Inc., United Artists Corpora- tion, RKO Distributing Corporation, 20th Century-Fox Distributing Corporation, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Distributing Cor- poration and Vitagraph, Inc. Two individ- uals, Harold Wilkes and Gaston Dureau, Jr., officers of the Saenger Theatres Cor- poration, are also named defendants in the suit. Mr. Fuller, a former resident of Chicago, where he published a number of farm jour- nals, has lived for the past ten years in Fairhope, Ala. His petition alleges that the film distributors refuse to sell him film for his shows at Warrington, Fla., Pensacola Beach, Fla., and Pensacola, Fla. He charges that the Saenger Theatres Corporation had closed both of their theatres in Pensacola as a protest against the theatre admission tax imposed recently by the Pensacola City Council, while he kept his Pensacola thea- tres open. J. Studebaker Lucas is attorney for Mr. Fuller in the suit. Weigh Kansas City Appeal In Kansas City, the independent theatre owners met this week to decide whether or not to appeal the case of E. Rolsky vs. Fox Midwest and major distributors, in which Judge Merrill E. Otis of the federal district court there recently found for the defend- ants. While no decision was reached, it is indicated that the appeal will be made. An- other meeting has been scheduled to settle the matter finally. The suit charged unfair clearance. Members of the Independent Theatre Owners Association of New York, meeting last week at the Hotel Lincoln, protested the alleged practice of prior runs of extend- ing dates on pictures beyond original book- ings. While no definite action was taken, the exhibitors discussed the possibility of in- sisting a clause be inserted in all contracts giving the subsequents the privilege of can- celing pictures held over in this manner. The New York sales managers are de- fending the practice by insisting that in- creased negative costs on outstanding pro- ductions are forcing the extension of book- ing dates beyond the original bookings at New York prior runs. In Detroit, a report on alleged monopoly in film bookings by Cooperative Theatres of Michigan, is understood to have been sent to the Attorney-General in Washington. Paramount May Dismiss 100 in Economy Move A total of more than 100 Paramount em- ployes may be dropped as a result of current efforts to eliminate overlapping positions and work duplication in many branches of the company's operations. The process was be- gun in the home office several weeks ago with the personnel of various departments beintr reduced wherever possible. It has been carried since to the newsreel, laboratory, electric rate department, mail rooms and sev- eral of the company's exchanges. Jersey Allied Sees Sales Tax Battle Plans by Governor Hoffman to revive a move for a sales tax in New Jersey which would include theatres, will be one of the principal topics of discussion at the Allied of New Jersey convention at the Traymore Hotel in Atlantic City next week. Theatre owners in the state are preparing to fight any new moves for a sales tax which would embrace theatres. Allied of New Jersey was recently suc- cessful in helping to ward off a sales tax which originally figured at 10 per cent on all tickets marked over 25 cents and then re- duced to four per cent on all admissions over 10 cents. Danville, Va., Kansas City, Spokane, Wash., and Dade City and Tampa, both in Florida, figured in other legislative affairs affecting theatres this week. In Spokane, exhibitors are carrying their admission tax fight to the women of the State of Washington. The proposal is one of the initiative measures to go on the bal- lot at the November election. Trailers ask this question : "Are you willing to pay an additional one-cent tax for each 20 cents or fraction thereof for admission to any motion picture theatre, or other place of amusement? This would be but one phase of another burden- some tax imposed on residents of the State. You are urged by the amusements mana- gers of the State of Washington to vote !No' on Initiative 115." In Kansas City, the one per cent sales tax in Missouri, which became effective a year ago, has produced around $11,150,- 000, according to Forrest Smith, state auditor. This is close to the million-a- month average expected from the tax, and sufficient to take care of appropriations made upon it by the legislature which passed it. The money has gone into un- employment relief, old age pensions, care of mental patients and public schools. In Dade City, Fla., a new ordinance was passed by the city council placing a license fee of $10 per day on sound trucks broad- casting music on the city streets. A clause, however, provides that sound wagons for re- ligious and political purposes are exempt from the license fee. Further south, at Tampa, public resent- ment against proposals for nuisance taxes, including a suggestion for a 10 per cent levy on theatre tickets, has resulted in a petition for a "charter election" to substi- tute a city manager for the present com- mission. As a result tax talk has subsided. A fine of $25 was imposed this week on Fleet Robinson, manager of the Virginia theatre at Danville, Va., in Magistrate C. K. Cajter's court, upon conviction of oper- ating the theatre on Sunday September 5, 1936 MOTION PICTURE HERALD 19 ASIDES and INTERLUDES by JAMES P. CUNNINGHAM One of the ladies from the nearby RCA Building departed for England on the Queen- Mary, and thereby comes the report that the morale of the ship's staff still retains the pris- tine pitch of its first crossing. Friends deluged her with flowers — she said the display gave her a pretty good idea of what her funeral would be like — and she had the bulk of them whipped off to the ship's refrigera- tor for future evenings on board. Came the night, when going over the floral stock on hand, already four days old, she de- cided on white peonies for her dinner gown. She pinned them on, a great dramatic cluster of them, and swept to the dining salon feeling quite impressed. Later, when a distinguished and elderly, be-monocled Britisher asked her to dance, she felt the honor no more than due her. During the dance, however, she had a pre- monition that all was not well. Few couples were on the floor and entirely too many eyes had somehow become focussed upon her and her partner. She pooh-poohed the fact at first, but finally her womanly intuition came to the fore and she turned to look around. White peony petals lay behind her. With every step she took, a fresh crop floated to the floor. In her stately wake, a page, aloof and smartly attired, followed. With dignity, aplomb, and patient British air, he was carefully sweeping up the petals, as she shook them off, into a long-handled copper dustpan. White-winging de luxe, first class. V Everyone knows that Samuel Goldwyn's next picture coming up is "Dodsworth," with Mary Astor. Now Mr. Goldwyn announces he will follow that with "Love Under Fire." At about the same time Universal announced it will pro- duce "Oh, Doctor." V A closer tieup between the church and the show business is all very well, but it can be carried too far, believes Harry Hirsch, ex- hibitor and showman who is opening the Express burlesque theatre in Kansas City, Mo., in a few weeks. Mr. Hirsch not long ago opened a theatre in Duluth, Minn. At the same time one of the city's best churches was acquiring a new minister, and to welcome the two, the local newspaper printed their pictures. But the nightmare of a composing-room foreman's life became a reality when the paper ap- peared, showing "The Reverend So-and-So, New Pastor of the Blank Church" in the checkered suit, bright tie, snappy straw hat and gleaming diamond jewelry of Mr. Hirsch, while the photograph above the caption, "Bringing Burlesque to the Lyric" showed a serious man in clerical garb. V All members of theatricals, and others who have variously down through the years specu- lated as to the origin of the old term, "turkey shows," may now rest on the explanation of Gus Hill, pioneer showman and vaudeville pro- ducer : "When I was a boy, some 60 years ago," writes Mr. Hill, "we used to gather talent to play holiday dates. There were few idle actors in those days, so amateurs were added. "On those holidays everybody had turkey — even the saloons held turkey raffles, and as these were the only dates most of the amateur actors worked, they were known as turkey actors and soon the shows in which they ap- peared were called 'turkey shows.' " JESSE JAMES (?) DISCOVERED! ALFRED N. SACK, Texas motion picture exchange operator, operating Sack Amusement Enterprises, is breathlessly ex- plaining, and so writes to Motion Picture Herald, that he has found an old gent down in his native Texas who, Sack swears, is actually Jesse James, notorious Missouri out- law, and who, although generally believed to be dead these 51 years, has been in hiding all the while. Mr. Sack spent eight hours with the 88- year-old veteran, who still wears a six- shooter at his side, and says that he is con- vinced that the grizzly gent's claims are genuine. Historians record that Jesse James was shot down in cold blood by his cousin, Bob Ford, on April 3, 1882, while he was supposed to have been dusting his mother's portait. But the old fellow now says that it's all a lie, explaining the myth in this fashion: Jesse and Frank James, brothers, and their cousins, Bob Ford and the Younger boys, were members of the Quantrell gang. The James boys were quarter-breed Comanche Indians. Quantrell was a half-breed Co- manche. The gang robbed banks, held up trains and stage coaches, engaged in guerilla warfare and otherwise terrorized the entire midwest. They were admittedly bad men and there was a fancy price on each. Charley Bigelow, leader of a rival bandit gang, had committed many crimes on his own and had left evidence to indicate that it was the work of the James boys. This nat- urally infuriated the James gang, who then plotted the death of Bigelow as their revenge and also because they saw in it an oppor- tunity for Jesse to escape the law and start anew. Bigelow was decoyed into the James home by Bob Ford on the pretext of planning an- other bank robbery. Bigelow had never seen the James home and did not know that Ford was a member of the James clan. At the first opportunity Bob Ford shot Bigelow in the back, killing him on the spot. Jesse James was hiding in the next room, and, as prearranged, immediately changed clothes and pistols with the dead man and made his getaway. Jesse appeared the next day at his own funeral in Kearney, Mo., disguised as a visit- ing minister. He heard his own eulogy — it was full of fine tributes to the many decent things he had done. He actually acted as the sixth pallbearer at his own funeral, claiming he even assisted in lowering the coffin supposedly containing his own body into the eight-foot grave just outside his own mother's window. Then James rode off into the night. Under the assumed name of Jim Williams, Jesse remained in hiding for 51 years. In his new disguise, he roamed the entire United States, making his living as a cowhand and horse trader. Having been a singing teacher in his early respectable days, he managed to find employment in New York as an actor and a song-and-dance man. He later be- came a theatrical producer, and for a period enjoyed the thrills of the successful and sought-after Broadway playboy. Now — ? Terry Ramsaye has been talking a lot of late about the tall grass that towers into the skies from the Gardens of the Nations on the lower roof of the RCA Building, which stands under his window in Rockefeller Center. Not all of the vegetation in the Gardens, however, is as much on the up and up. The squash is in fine fettle, true. And the peanut vines are expected to keep the whole army of Music Hall chorus girls in salted nuts through the winter. But the corn is a problem child. "Scarey-Harry," the scaresparrow, is not only keeping the birds off the corn, but he keeps the sun off, too, and a crisis impends. Mr. Rockefeller is worried. V "A real musician," observes Dave Rubinoff, "is the man who hears a coloratura soprano in a bathtub and puts his ear to the keyhole — I said his ear!" V Conditions in the drouth-stricken, grasshop- per-plagued middlewest, described in this de- partment last week, are improving. The To- peka, Kan., Daily Capital reports a peculiar rumbling was heard in the skies the other afternoon that resembled thunder, and that even the grasshopper damage is diminishing — the "hoppers" can no longer find anything green to eat and they're leaving. V George Britton, singing at Chautauqua, New York, before an audience of 7,000, in the outdoors, gaped and gasped, and gaped and gasped again when he eyed a full-grown skunk of great potentialities ambling in front of him across the stage. Mr. Britton imme- diately burst into "I Got Plenty of Nothing," and the skunk got up and walked away. V Jimmy Durante, in Tauber's "Land Without Music," in London, plays the part of a reporter. "Mr. Durante," London Era observes, "should make a mighty good reporter — with a nose like that for news." V Revealing criticism of a new cabaret by Her- bert Farjeon, in London: "There are profuse parades, with girls encircled in diaphanous veils to conceal the fact that they had something on underneath." Man-bites-dog item. V Nineteen-thirty-six version: "So you are the postmaster, storekeeper, justice of the peace, undertaker, constable and theatre owner of this town?" "Yes, sir; in fact, you might say I'm the Mussolini of Buckeye Corner." V The nezv British film, "King of Cloves." is expected to be breath-taking. V Overheard in the lobby of the Tower theatre, home of giveaways in the Bronx : "Hello, Mrs. Katz, how are you? I haven't seen you since the last soup plate." V Not one bit of rouge coloring is used on the faces of principals or extras in the all-color picture of "Romona." Too, Don Ameche and Loretta Young zvear wigs in the film. They were bought from peasants of the Tyrol, where a woman is sometimes paid as much as several hundred dollars for a fine head of hair. There used to be a heavy traffic in the hair from the heads of Oriental ladies, but lately the best comes from Central Europe. 20 MOTION PICTURE HERALD September 5, 1936 Nazi Censors Block Swiss Film Moves NEWSREEL MAN HELD IN SPAIN; AIDS EXECUTED Paramount News Cameraman Jailed Following Slaying of Three Assistants by Rebel Captors; Was Seeking Shots American newsreels have become in- volved yet more deeply in the bloody Span- ish Civil War, with the capture by rebels of John Dored, Paramount News camera- man, and the execution of his three assist- ants. The incident occurred near Naval Moral in Spain, and although Mr. Dored himself escaped execution on the spot, the outcome of his seizure by the rebel forces remained in doubt until it was finally estab- lished that he had been lodged in jail at Naval Moral. The State Department at Washington, Paramount Pictures Corporation and the American newsreels were exerting strong influences on the Spaniards to free Mr. Dored from the jeopardy of the mass executions of all prisoners who are taken by both sides in the revolt. Private advices received by Paramount in New York on Tuesday, via Madrid, Marseilles and London, indicated that the rebels were considering releasing Mr. Dored at Barcelona, but no verification could be obtained by the corporation, either from Washington officials or American representatives in Spain. The State Department was communicat- ing its protest to both sides against the air bombing of the U. S. Destroyer Kane in Spanish waters last Sunday when it was asked to rescue Cameraman Dored, who had been captured in line of duty for Para- mount News. His safety was still uncertain as news flashes continued to describe the mass executions by both sides of prisoners, sympathizers and hostages. He remained lodged in jail even as the loyal forces placed some of their prisoners, one of them a Span- ish Catholic bishop, in the public square at I run so that they might be targets for the rebels who were bombing the town. Mr. Dored's dramatic capture was re- BULLETIN John Dored, Paramount News cam- eraman, captured in Spain by rebels one week ago, and held prisoner while his three assistants were exe- cuted, is safe and is being escorted to Gibraltar, according to unofficial word received Wednesday by Par- amount News in New York. The in- formation, unconfirmed by the State Department at Washington, was tele- phoned from Paramount's London bureau. It had been received there by telephone from Bordeaux, from the pilot of one of the Paramount airplanes flying film out of Spain. ported as the August 29th issue of Motion Picture Herald appeared, carrying a signed .article cabled by him from Madrid, via Paramount News in New York, in which he described, directly from the front lines, how American newsreel cameramen and their assistants are receiving first-class training as newsreel war correspondents. Mr. Dored likewise had stated that "in some respects, the trouble in Spain is very similar to the Abyssinian mess ; from the cameraman's point of view, of course. The water is brackish and most of the food is poor. The Spaniards fight all over the place. One can never tell where they are likely to break out next. The Ethiopians and their ambuscades were as difficult to keep up with." Mr. Dored reported in his article that the censorship process for the newsreels today in Spain is hardly a problem — "it's a ca- tastrophe." He added, "There are the rebels, the leftists, the syndicalists, the anarchists and any number of smaller groups which have their various slants on life and this affair. What satisfies one fac- tion is bound to displease another, so that when a cameraman attempts to find an orderly channel in which to export his film out of the country — well, it doesn't get out \" The Paramount cameraman's seizure came, not while he was trying to smuggle film out of Spain for the screens of Ameri- can exhibitors, but while he was on the march for material. Aids Slain Pronto Mr. Dored and his three Loyalist body- guards had set out from Madrid seeking ac- tion pictures along the battlefront. They encountered a rebel outpost which sur- rounded them and executed the Loyalists on the spot, but elected to hold Mr. Dored for more extended investigation. Mr. Dored flew into Spain from his headquarters in Vienna right after the out- break of the Spanish revolt. He first went to Barcelona, and then to Madrid, where he made contact with the government Loy- alists for covering their activities, while other Paramount staff men accompanied the rebels. Mr. Dored's Spanish assignment was his first after a month's vacation which fol- lowed his return from Ethiopia, where he spent nearly a year covering the Italian East African campaign. His arrest by the Spanish Rebel leader, General Franco, is not the first time Dored has become in- volved in diplomatic, incidents resulting from his work as a newsreel cameraman. A white Russian who formerly was attached to Tzar Nicholas' personal staff, Mr. Do- red was seized by the Soviets ten years ago when he returned to Russia on assignment. At that time he was sentenced to death and was awaiting execution when the British embassy succeeded in bringing about his re- lease on his promise to leave the country never to return. Mr. Dored was awarded the National Headliner's Club medal in America this year for the most outstanding work of a foreign newsreel correspondent. Little progress is being made toward the establishment of a domestic motion picture industry in Switzerland because censorship in Germany is blocking accurate estimating of possible exportations to Germany, a re- port from the American consulate general in Zurich said this week. One of the main arguments made in sup- port of a domestic film industry is that films in the German language would have a large export market in Germany, Austria and other Teutonic countries. It is pointed out that owing to the rigorous system of censor- ship in Germany, export possibilities to that country cannot be gauged with any degree of accuracy. The exclusion of a Swiss film from the German market might mean its financial failure even though it were well re- ceived in other German-speaking countries, distributors felt. Justice Department Seeks More Funds Increased funds with which to expand its investigation activities will be asked of Con- gress by the Department of Justice in Washington next winter, it was learned this week as officials of the department initialed the development of their estimates for the new fiscal year. A small increase for this purpose was given the department in its appropriations bill for the current year and became avail- able July 1. The money is being used for the employment of additional staff men, but plans of Assistant Attorney General John Dickinson call for much greater expansion of the service. At the department . it was explained that no new anti-trust drive is contemplated, and that, with the present limited force, it is impossible to make complete investigation of all complaints. It is Mr. Dickinson's idea that every complaint received should be proved or disapproved. Associate Producers To Get Film Credits Abolishing a long established screen cus- tom which condemns assistants to labor anonymously, Samuel Goldwyn has an- nounced that he will give screen credits to Merritt Hulburd and George Haight, his two production aides, in all pictures on which they work in the future. In accord- ance with the policy Mr. Hulburd, one time associate editor of the Saturday Evening Post, and more recently story editor for Paramount, will be billed as "associate pro- ducer" on "Dodsworth." Mr. Haight, former Broadway producer-playwright, will get similar billing on the Merle Oberon pic- ture, "Love Under Fire." Smith Considering Plans for Theatres A. W. Smith, Jr., who recently resigned as eastern and Canadian sales manager for Warner Brothers, is considering several the- atre deals, one of which he expects to close within the next few weeks, he declared this week. He plans to take over a small cir- cuit and develop it. LOOK WHAT A REAL PERSONALITY CAMPAIGN CAN DO! (See next two pages . . .) SIMON E SIMON BLASTS IN "TICKET-A-SECOND" BOXOFFICE ALL ROXY RECORDS! STAMPEDE- DESPITE PRICE RAISE! Six cashiers working like mad! 3840 admissions in first hour (better than ticket-a-second)! All- time record-breaking Friday take nearly doubled on both Satur- day and Sunday (new record each day)! Three- day gross $6,000 ahead of previous high ! Audi- ences wild over Simon! N.Y. Times sounds critics' keynote: "Simone Simon has become a star of the first magnitude!" HOLD OVER SET! ■ 24 MOTION PICTURE HERALD Septembe- 5, I 9 b 6 OX OFFICE CHAMPIONS for JULY San Francisco: A W. S. Van Dyke production, produced by John Emerson and Bernard H. Hyman. Screen play by Anita Loos. From the story by Robert Hopkins. Musical direction, Herbert Stothart. Song "San Francisco" by Gus Kahn, Bronislau Kaper and Walter Jurmann. Song "Would You" by Nacio Herb Brown and Arthur Freed. Dances staged by Val Raset. Re- cording director, Douglas Shearer. Art director, Cedric Gib- bons. Associates, Arnold Gillespie, Harry McAfee, Edwin B. Willis. Gowns by Adrian. Photographed by Oliver T. Marsh. Operatic sequences staged by William von Wymetal. Mon- tage sequences by John Hoffman. Film editor, Tom Held. Assistant director, Joe Newman. Cast: Clark Gable, Jeanette MacDonald, Spencer Tracy, Jack Holt, Jessie Ralph, Ted Healy, Shirley Ross, Margaret Irving, Harold Huber, Edgar Kennedy, Al Shean, William Ricciardi, Kenneth Harlan, Roger imhof, Charles Judells, Russell Simpson, Bert Roach, Warren B. Hymer. Released June 26, 1936. Poor Little Rich Girl: Associate producer, B. G. DeSylva. Directed by Irving Cummings. Screen play by Sam Hellman, Gladys Leh- man and Harry Tugend. Suggested by the stories of Eleanor Gates and Ralph Spence. Music and lyrics by Mack Gordon and Harry Revel. Dances staged by Jack Haskell and Ralph Cooper. Photographed by John Seitz. Art director, William Darling. Associate, Rudolph Sternad. Settings by Thomas Little. Assistant director, Booth McCracken. Film editor, Jack Murray. Cos- tumes by Gwen Wakeling. Sound, S. C. Chapman, Roger Heman. Musical direction, Louis Silvers. Musical adaptation, Cyril J. Mockridge. Cast: Shirley Temple, Alice Faye, Gloria Stuart, Jack Haley, Michael Whalen, Sara Haden, Jane Darwell, Claude Gillingwater, Paul Stanton, Henry Armetta, Charles Cole- man, Arthur Hoyf, John Kelly, John Wray, Tyler Brooke, Mathilde Comont. Released July 24, 1936. The Green Pastures: A fable by Marc Connelly, suggested by Roark Bradford's Southern Sketches, "OT Man Adam an' His Chillun." Directed by Marc Connelly and William Keighley. Supervisor, Henry Blanke. Photographed by Hal Mohr. Art director, Allen Saalburg and Stanley Fleischer. Film editor, George Amy. Special photographic effects by Fred Jackman. Assistant director, Sherry Shourds. With the Hall Johnson Choir. Choral music arranged and conducted by Hall Johnson. Cast: Rex Ingram, Oscar Polk, Eddie Anderson, Frank Wilson, George Reed, Abraham Gleaves, Myrtle Anderson. Released August I, 1936. SAN FRANCISCO MGM THE GREAT ZIEGFELD MGM The Great Ziegfeld: Produced by Hunt Stromberg. Directed by Robert Z. Leonard. Story and screen play by William Anthony McGuire. Dance numbers by Seymour Felix. Special music by Walter Donaldson. Special lyrics by Harold Adamson. Ballet music by Con Conrad. Musical direction by Arthur Lange. Photographed by Oliver Marsh, Ray June, George Folsey and Merritt B. Gerstad. Cast: William Powell, Myrna Loy, Luise Rainer, Frank Morgan, Fanny Brice, Virginia Bruce, Reginald Owen, Ray Bolger and Harriet Hoctor. September 5, 1936 MOTION PICTURE HERALD 25 POOR LITTLE RICH GIRL 20th Century - Fox POPPY Paramount Poppy: Produced by William LeBaron. Associate producer, Paul Jones. Directed by A. Edward Sutherland. Assistant director, Richard Harlan. Based on a play by Dorothy Donnelly. Screen play by Waldemar Young and Virginia Van Upp. Sound, Earl S. Hay- man. Film editor, Stuart Heisler. Art directors, Hans Dreier and Bernard Herzbrun. Photographed by William Mellor. Cast: W. C. Fields, Rochelle Hudson, Richard Cromwell, Catherine Doucet, Lynn Overman, Granville Bates, Maude Eburne, Bill Wolfe, Adrian Morris. Released June 19. THE GREEN PASTURES Warner Brothers IT'S LOVE AGAIN Gaumont - British It's Love Again: Directed by Victor Saville. Scenario by Marion Dix. Screen play by Marion Dix and Lesser Samuels. Additional dialogue by Austin Melford. Edited by Al Barnes. Art director, A. Junge. Musical score by Louis Levy and Bretton Byrd. Music and lyrics by Sam Coslow and Henry Woods. Recorded by A. C. O'Donoghue. Photographed by Glen MacWilliams. Dance arrangements by Buddy Bradley. Cast: Jessie Matthews, Robert Young, Sonnie Hale, Ernest Milton, Robb Wilton, Sara Allgood, Cyril Wells, Warren Jenkins, David Home. Released May 30. 26 MOTION PICTURE HERALD September 5, 1936 Circuit Celebrates 40 Years in Exhibition Harris Amusement Co. Marks Its Beginning in 1896 The Harris Amusement Company, one of Pennsylvania's larger circuits, this month marks the 40th year since the late Senator John P. Harris, founder of the company, opened a "theatorium" in connection with the Harris Musee in McKeesport, Pa. The theatre, one of the first in the United States, marked the beginning of a long career in the motion picture industry during which the company under Senator Harris piq^ neered in the field with the opening of trie first house devoted entirely to motion pic- tures, built up a strong circuit of theatres throughout the state, sold out all but a few holdings to the large interests in 1930, and then regained a place among leading exhibi- tors by building up the present business. The anniversary was inaugurated this week with an exposition and entertainment at the Duquesne Garden, Pittsburgh. Early equipment, a replica of the first nickel- odeon, and demonstrations of modern scientific achievements in the motion pic- ture and theatre fields were featured at the exposition which opened the celebra- tion, and during the month each theatre in the circuit will stage special programs. The Harris family has remained in control of the company, and Senator Frank J. Harris is the present head. The founder had been identified with the amusement business for many years but it was not until 1896 that he finally obtained a theatre of his own. Early in that year he considered opening a motion picture and vaudeville theatre in connection with a Curio Hall, and the early files of the Kinetoscope Company contain a letter writ- ten by him on February 27, 1896, inquiring about a screen machine. In September of that year the Harris Musee theatre opened at Locust and Jerome Streets in McKeesport, a site now occupied by the Dander Hotel. On one side of the 80-foot structure, Senator Harris installed the Curio Hall, in which he exhibited freaks of nature, Belgian glass blowers and other novelties. On the other side was the thea- tre, on the stage of which vaudeville acts and motion pictures were shown. Every Friday night was devoted to amateur pro- ductions. The founder and his father also operated the World's Museum on Pittsburgh's north side, the Harris Museum on Fifth avenue, and other enterprises following the success of the parent show place in McKeesport. In 1905, Senator Harris opened the theatre which started the nickelodeon wave in a vacant store on the present site of Frank & Seder's department store in Pittsburgh. The First Nickelodeon Eugene Connolly, vice-president of the Harris Amusement Company, describes the historic theatre as "a remodeled storeroom, the remodeling being chiefly in the installa- tion of a white sheet, some chairs taken from the old Grand Opera House to give a total seating capacity of 96, a crude, squeaky phonograph, a lot of stucco, some garishly painted burlap, and a myriad of in- candescent lamps." The initial offering was a double feature program consisting in "Poor, But Honest" and "Baffled Burglar." The complete running time was 20 minutes. The house opened the day before Thanksgiving, 1905, and the first day's re- ceipts were $22.50. The box office gross the next day was $76, and after two weeks the theatre went on a daily schedule of showings from 8 A.M. to midnight, realiz- ing a reputed profit of $1,000 a week. A bronze plaque commemorating the open- ing of the theatre has been placed on the site by the Pennsylvania Historical Society. The success of the project resulted in the opening of similar "store shows" and nickelodeons throughout the country. On April 19, 1930, the Harris Amuse- ment Company disposed of most of their in- terests to Warner Brothers, retaining only a few theatres. But in 1933, members of the family started to build up a new circuit. Staff Has Many Veterans Four members of the family have guided the destinies of the company during its long career. Beside the founder, the late Sena- tor John P. Harris, who was the first presi- dent, these were the late Dennis A. Harris ; John H. Harris, son of the founder, and Senator Frank J. Harris, now the president. Numerous veterans are included among the present employes of the company. Jerry Alvin, stage manager of the Alvin theatre, has been in the service for almost 45 years, having been associated with the late John Harris, Sr., father of the late Senator John P. Harris, in operating amusement parks prior to the opening of the first museum. George S. Harrison', treasurer of the com- pany, joined the staff as a bookkeeper about 40 years ago. John O. Hooley, now man- ager of the Liberty in East Liberty, Pa., is completing his 25th year with the com- pany. Eugene Connolly, vice-president, has served the company in the capacities of publicity director, general manager, treas- urer and president for more than 35 years. James G. Balmer, district manager in charge of all theatre operations, got his start in showbusiness with Harry Davis, the Harris partner, 32 years ago. Harry Seegal, recently named manager of the Strand in Youngstown, Ohio, started with the organization as an usher at the old Harris theatre in Pittsburgh W. L. Peacock, manager of the St. Mary's, has been with the company for 12 years, and John Morin, manager of the Palace, Pittsburgh, also boasts of 12 years of service. Some of the original crew of the first nickelodeon, are still emploved in Pittsburgh theatres. They include Francis Levenson Carev, Roarer McKelvey, Abe Davis and William Mclver. Paramount Raises 1 936-3 7 Schedule To 75 Pictures The new management at Paramount under Barney Balaban, president, and Adolph Zukor, in charge of production, is extending its 1936-37 schedule to include 75 features. As the producer of the largest schedule of product in the industry, the company now announces that this season it is adopting the unit system of production and is turning to the outdoors for many of its leading pictures. To bring about the increase, it has added to the regular list a number of producers to make pictures independently for Par- amount release, included in this group are Frank Lloyd, Cecil B. DeMille, B. P. Schul- berg, Emanuel Cohen, Ernst Lubitsch, King Vidor, Richard A. Rowland, Leo McCarey and Wesley Ruggles. Major films from these will be released along with the output from Paramount's regular producers, among whom are Ben- jamin Glazer, A. M. Botsford, Lewis E. Gensler, Arthur E. Hornblow, Jr., Henry Henigson, Harold Hurley, E. Lloyd Shel- don and Harlan Thompson. Opening the season will be the Gary Cooper-Madeleine Carroll picture, "The General Died at Dawn," which Lewis Mile- stone directed from the screen play of Clif- ford Odets. Following this will be the first of the outdoor pictures, King Vidor's "The Texas Rangers," with Fred MacMurray, Jack Oakie, Jean Parker, Lloyd Nolan and others. In addition to this list of producers, Para- mount now has under contract 78 players, 14 directors and 60 writers, all of whom are currently assigned to a full year of work. Adolph Zukor, chairman of the board of Paramount, who now is in active charge of the Hollywood studio, is due to arrive in New York on private business. He will return to Hollywood within 10 days. Mr. Zukor's trip is required to settle several private affairs before returning to the coast to establish himself in Hollywood for an extended stay. Henry Herzbrun, general manager of Paramount production, arrived in New York last Friday morning, for a series of conferences with President Barney Bala- ban and other home office executives. Mel Shauer, associate producer for Para- mount, temporarily will double his duties to take charge of the reorganization of per- sonnel of the studio talent department, ac- cording to a statement which pointed out that "stress will be laid on finding, training and development of new talent and the up- building of boxoffice value of present con- tract players." Fred Schuessler will remain as casting director of the studio. Mr. Shauer, who was formerly in charge of talent before being appointed a produc- tion associate, will continue his preparations to film two pictures now in his charge, "This Way Please" and "Every Day's a Holiday." "FAST AS 'TOP HAT', MELODIOUS AS 'ROBERTA', AND FUNNIER THAN ANY OF THEIR PRECEDING FILMS".-*, y. Daily News . . . "ANOTHER HIT FOR I ASTAIRE - ROGERS"- * y. Daily Mirror ... "A JOY BOTH TO HEAR AND TO SEE".-* y. American . . . "DANCING AND SINGING AT THE VERY TOP OF THEIR SUPERLATIVE FORM".-* y. Herald Tribune . . . "THAT WAS NO RIOT OUTSIDE THE MUSIC HALL YESTERDAY, IT WAS MERELY THE POPULACE STORMING THE MUSIC HALL".-* y. Times . . . "ITS JUST PLAIN SWELL "THE TOWN'S TOP PICTURE" -n. y. Worid-Teiegram . . . "NEW YORK RE- SPONDED TO 'SWING TIME' BY CROWDING THE HUGE MUSIC HALL ". -n. y. sun . . ."ABSOLUTELY, POSITIVELY^ A SMASH ' HIT ! " -n. y. Post . . . "SURE-FIRE . . ACE PRODUCT .... "MEANS ANOTHER GOLDEN SHOWER BOX-OFFICES' •—Hollywood Reporter • • • PAR FOR ASTAIRE-ROGERS". — Daily Variety ION"... Film Daily / 'at all "sets a new "SWING TIME" IS THE MOST SENSATIONAL SUCCESS RADIO CITY MUSIC HALL EVERfPLAYED ! WITHOUT BENEFIT OF HOLIDAY PLAYING MM OR PRICES, IT IS RUNNING NECK AND NECK, IN MONEY AND ATTENDANCE, WITH THE ALL-TIME RECORD-BREAKER, "TOP HAT", WHICH PLAYED LABOR DAY WEEK LAST YEAR ! To the more than one hundred theatres that are opening this week and playing over Labor Day we say : Open your doors earlier . . . Run your shows later . . . Keep your books open for extended engagements . . . and advertise as you have never advertised before . . . You can write your own box-office ticket for this show ! FRED GINGER ASTAIRE* ROGERS VICTOR MOORE ★ HELEN BRODERICK ★ ERIC BLORE BETTY FURNESS ★ GEORGES METAXA MUSIC BY JEROME KERN • Lyrics by Dorothy Fields DIRECTED BY GEORGE STEVENS ■ A PANDRO S. BERMAN PRODUCTION RKO RADIO PICTURE September 5, I 936 MOTION PICTURE HERALD 31 WASHINGTON ELITE GOES TO SEE ANDY JACKSON'S "GORGEOUS HUSSY" Premiere of MGM's Recreation of the Career of Peggy O'Neal a Gala Show Inside and Outside Theatre [Because "The Gorgeous Hussy" impinges on affairs of state, Metro- Goldiuyn-Mayer saw fit to preview their new Samuel Hopkins Adams play in Washington, inviting figures in the Capital's political life, diplo- matic corps and newspaper writers, winning sponsorship of the White House Correspondents' Association for the event. Accordingly, Motion Pic- ture Herald assigned its Washing- ton political correspondent, Mr. Fran- cis L. Burt, to report at first hand on this "Hollywood premiere" for Wash- ington's elite, staged with all of the arc light paraphernalia and appurte- nances within the shadow of the dome of the national government.] by FRANCIS L BURT Washington Correspondent Diplomats, statesmen, society leaders, newspapermen and thousands of the unin- vited turned out en masse in Washington on August 27th to insure the gorgeousness of the world premiere and international press review of the MGM production of "The Gorgeous Hussy." Literally stopping traffice on F street in front of Loew's Palace theatre, the unin- vited resisted the earnest efforts of a detail of police to keep the way clear for the in- vited, who consisted of the cream of such society as had been able to withstand the heat of the National Capital. All the appurtenances of a premiere were furnished — spotlights, still and sound cameras, flowers, and even a radio broad- cast— to insure the success of the event, the success of which had already been in- sured when the White House Correspond- ents' Association, consisting of the news- papermen who "cover" the White House, accepted sponsorship of the affair. Not since the formal opening of the Fox Theatre (now Loew's Capitol) nearly a decade ago, by the National Press Club, has Washington been treated to a theatrical event of such magnitude as was arranged for the glamorous story of Peggy O'Neal, laid in the Washington of a century ago, vestiges of which still remain. Curious Hamper the Elect Lured bv the certainty that, even though President Roosevelt and many high Admin- istration officials were absent from the city, there would yet be a plethora of celebrities to be seen, a crowd started gathering in front of the theatre long before the first ar- rivals could be expected, and by the time the picture was started on its first showing, the street was crowded from curb to curb, practically tying up all traffic. So dense was the mass at the main en- trance of the theatre th