Duane Klueh, the first NBA player born in North Dakota, was also the first college All-American basketball player for John Wooden, who was considered the greatest college basketball coach of all time.

Not only was Klueh an outstanding basketball player, he was also one of the best tennis players in the nation and a highly successful college coach in both sports.

As a college basketball player at Indiana State Teachers College, now Indiana State University, Klueh earned All-American honors during his junior year when he finished second in the nation in scoring.

Following graduation, he played for the Denver Nuggets and Fort Wayne Pistons in the NBA. In 1954, at the age of 28, Klueh was named head coach at ISU. During the next 12 years, his team won 182 games, a school record for most wins by a coach. ISU has retired only two basketball uniforms, Klueh's No. 54 and Larry Bird's No. 33, and both uniforms now hang in ISU's Hulman Center.

Duane Myron Klueh was born in Bottineau on Jan. 6, 1926, to Joseph and Martha (Donan) Klueh. Joseph was a school teacher, and soon after Duane's birth, the family moved to Page and lived there for several years before relocating to Terre Haute, Ind., where Joseph worked as an accountant.

Klueh graduated from Terre Haute High School in 1943 and then enlisted in the U.S. Navy. Klueh was assigned to the USS Wasp, an aircraft carrier that was launched on Aug. 17, 1943.

He received his training aboard the vessel on the Caribbean Sea before departing for the Pacific Ocean in March 1944. The Wasp saw action at the Battle of Saipan and the Battle of the Philippine Sea and was then "detached to mop up fleeing Japanese forces."

Following his discharge from the Navy in 1945, Klueh played basketball at ISU on the freshman team. In 1946, ISU hired John Wooden as their head basketball coach.

In 1947, ISU, with Klueh as one of the team's star players, won the Indiana Intercollegiate Conference title and received an invitation to the National Association of Intercollegiate Basketball national tournament.

However, Wooden refused the invitation because of the NAIB's policy of barring African-American players from competing. One of Wooden's players, Clarence Walker, was African-American.

During the 1947-48 season, Klueh was second in the nation in scoring, leading the Sycamores to another conference championship. Again, NAIB invited Indiana State to the national tournament, and Wooden and his team sent them a message: "We all won the championship together. We all play together-or no one plays."

This time, tournament officials relented and allowed the entire team to attend. Klueh was awarded the most valuable player award in that tournament.

In 1948, Klueh won the Little States (Collegiate) Singles Championship in tennis.

During the 1948-49 season, Indiana State again won the conference championship under new coach John Longfellow. Klueh finished out his college career with 1,432 points, a Sycamores record.

On March 21, 1949, he was drafted by the Boston Celtics to play in the NBA.

We will conclude the story of Duane Klueh next week.