Michael Schaaf Klueh, 64, of Evansville and Grand Rapids, Michigan, passed away unexpectedly on Thursday, August 15, 2019, in Grand Rapids.

He was born on September 18, 1954, in Jasper.

Mike was passionate about his family, his work, his education and his efforts to help others.

Prior to moving to Evansville from Jasper in 1965, Mike attended Precious Blood Grade School. He graduated from Reitz Memorial High School in Evansville in 1973. He attended Indiana University where he was a member of Sigma Chi Fraternity, Lambda Chapter. He graduated with a BS in Business and Accountancy from the University of Evansville and affiliated with Tau Kappa Epsilon Fraternity, Zeta Beta Chapter at UE. He was a member of the Purple Aces football team. He earned multiple advanced and doctorate degrees culminating with a Doctor of Philosophy in Health Administration from Kennedy Western University and Executive Juris Doctor in Health Law from Kaplan University, Concord Law School. He graduated with Honors and was a Distinguished Scholar.

For the last three years, Mike served as Vice President of Compliance for Spectrum Health, a large not-for-profit health care system based in Grand Rapids. Prior to his move to Grand Rapids, Mike spent 19 years in various executive leadership roles with St. Mary’s Medical Center of Evansville, most recently as the Vice President, Chief Risk and Corporate Responsibility Officer.

As an experienced underwater diver, Mike volunteered for several local and national dive and dive rescue organizations. With a passion for health care, he was a licensed paramedic and lent his talents to various volunteer fire departments.

Mike was a Fellow of the American College of Healthcare Executives and a Fellow of the Healthcare Financial Management Association, where he earned the Folimer Bronze Merit Award for outstanding service. He held sixteen professional licenses and certifications and was a member of the Knights of Columbus. He was also a beloved member of the Camp Ondessonk community in Ozark, Illinois, where he spent many summers as a camper and counselor.

Mike is preceded in death by his parents, Robert Lee and Patricia (Schaaf) Klueh of Evansville; and grandparents, Fidelis and Mae Klueh and Albert and Dorothy Schaaf, both of Jasper.

He is survived by his loving wife, Martha Nell (Riffle) Klueh of Evansville; children Elizabeth (Jeff) Freitag of Evansville, Michael (Emily) Klueh of Ann Arbor, Michigan, and Mary (Svetoslav Saev) Klueh of Grand Rapids, Michigan; granddaughters, Evelyn Freitag, Eleanor Freitag and Adeline Klueh; brothers, Doug (Kathy) Klueh of Melbourne, Australia, and Scott (Linda Barth) Klueh of Evansville; sister, Nan (John) Byrd of The Villages, Florida; and eight nephews and three nieces.

There will be a Mass of Christian Burial at 11 a.m. CT on Saturday, August 24, 2019, at Holy Rosary Catholic Church, 1301 South Green River Road, Evansville, officiated by Fr. Bernard Etienne. Friends may visit Friday from 2 to 7 p.m. CT, with a vigil service at 7 p.m. CT at Alexander Newburgh Chapel, 5333 State Road 261, Newburgh, and Saturday from 10:30 a.m. CT until service time at the church.

In lieu of flowers, memorial contributions may be made to It Takes a Village No Kill Rescue, 1417 N. Stockwell Road, Evansville.