Throughout Germany, the Ruhr Area today is a hotspot for the IT industry, making it a suitable location for experts and aspiring specialists of tomorrow to exchange expertise. At the DevOps Gathering, developers discuss the latest developments and trends in this sector, such as Kubernetes, container ecosystems, serverless architecture, microservices and a wide range of other aspects that influence the DevOps culture. The 25 experts, who have been invited by the organiser communicode, will take centre stage. In front of an audience of about 300 guests, they will talk about their own areas of expertise and provide listeners with valuable insights into their working practice. Among the experts are personalities such as Mario Kleinsasser, Roland Huss, but also Peter Rossbach, whose company Bee42 initiated the conference in 2017.

Following the transfer of Bee42 GmbH to communicode AG in 2019, the DevOps Gathering 2020 will for the first time take place under a new flag. In a space of only two years, the conference has grown to such an extent that communicode and Peter Rossbach are even better equipped to flexibly deal with demand and organisational effort. Rossbach is fully focussed on both technical and content quality to increase them even more efficiently.

The ticket sale for the developer conference has already started. Tickets can be purchased from the conference website. A reduced price for student applies. Offered are individual day tickets or tickets covering all three days of the conference.

More detailed information on conference and programme is available under www.devops-gathering.io.

About the DevOps Gathering

Organised by communicode AG, the DevOps Gathering 2020 will take place at the G Data Campus in Bochum. The two-part conference consists of a workshop day and two days of representations. The workshop’s objective is to learn and gather practical experiences, both in joint interaction as well as from experts and speakers. It is aimed in particular at Cloud Native engineers and SREs (Site Reliability engineers). Both representation days feature international speakers, who will address container ecosystems, microservices, Clouds, serverless, Cloud Native Computing Foundation projects and the DevOps culture in itself. Apart from an expert audience, the conference is also expecting students and (future) apprentices.