Happy Easter

We wish all members and supporters a Happy Easter! - The eurobits team

eurobits e.V. is a multiplier of the Alliance for Cyber Security

Bochum, March 19, 2024 Since this month, we have been supporting the concerns and activities of the "Alliance for Cyber Security" initiative founded by the German Federal Office for Information Security (BSI) and the industry association BITKOM as a multiplier. The new membership underlines our efforts to promote security in the digital space. With [...]

ewa continuing education program launches

As part of the ewa research project, a concept for an in-service training program that prepares female career changers for a career change in the industry has been under development since October 2022. The concept is now being tested in practice in two courses.

ECSO Award Finals 2024

The ECSO STARtup Awards and ECSO CISO Choice Awards will be presented in Bochum on 21 and 22 March 2024. The finals of the European competitions are organised by Bochum Wirtschaftsentwicklung in cooperation with the Women4Cyber Foundation and eurobits e.V. Register now!

German chapter of the Women4Cyber (W4C) initiative launches

Promoting the participation of women in or also for the field of cybersecurity, networking and encouraging them to pursue a career in IT and information security - that is the goal of the "Women4Cyber" (W4C) initiative. Now there is also a chapter of the initiative in Germany.

it-sa Expo & Congress 2023 from 10th to 12th October in Nuremberg

From 10 to 12 October, it-sa will take place in Nuremberg. eurobits e.V. will also be represented again this year.

Members’ Meeting and Summer Party on 24th August

We cordially invite you to our eurobits general meeting followed by a summer party on 24 August at the G Data Campus in Bochum.

„Tür zu im Netz“ („Door closed on the net”) campaign launched!

Cyber attacks are hitting companies more and more frequently, which is why protective measures should be as much a part of companies' basic equipment as the alarm system. In practice, however, awareness is often still lacking.