This year’s edition of the ECSO Award Finals ceremony, hosted by Bochum Economic Development (Bochum Wirtschaftsentwicklung), and organised in cooperation with the Women4Cyber Foundation, and eurobits e.V., is scheduled to take place on 21 – 22 March 2024 at the GDATA Campus in Bochum, Germany.

The ECSO Award Finals ceremony is an annual event dedicated to hosting the final rounds of the ECSO Award competitions. Since 2020, this event has been organised to determine the winner of the prestigious ECSO STARtup Award. This year, ECSO is embracing innovation by extending the event to feature not only the traditional ECSO STARtup Award category but also a brand-new award category – the ECSO CISO Choice Award.

Whereas the ECSO STARtup Award aims to bring European cybersecurity start-ups and investors together and therefore provide opportunities to access finance, the ECSO CISO Choice Award will host larger European companies with established solutions and financing in an effort to facilitate their access to the market. Overall, the event aims to highlight and celebrate European cybersecurity excellence, promote European-made products, drive innovation and stimulate investments in the European cybersecurity market.

We extend a warm welcome to European cybersecurity providers, investors, end-users, and other leaders in the cybersecurity industry to attend this event!

You will be first in line and the testimony of all innovation brought on by our finalists.

Discover our Brochure

In addition to the riveting competitions, attendees will be able to enjoy expert-led panel discussions on some of the most pressing topics in European cybersecurity, such as investments, European solutions and the European cybersecurity market. The event will further present attendees with exceptional opportunities to network and create connections within the European cybersecurity community, including everyone from investors and buyers to vendors, industry leaders, entrepreneurs and enthusiasts.

Amongst our exceptional networking opportunities is a dedicated dinner on 21 March in the evening for all registered attendees. Moreover, on the next day, 22 March, you are more than welcome to also attend our networking lunch.

DISCOVER OUR BROCHURE HERE 📎

The hyperlinked brochure above includes:

An agenda for the two days (please note that this agenda is subject to changes and will be continuously updated until the event).

Essential travel information to assist you in planning your trip to Bochum.

A list of this year’s finalists for the ECSO STARtup Award and the ECSO CISO Choice Award – the true stars of the event.

Insightful information about the organising parties.

Confirmed registrants to this event will receive an e-mail with hotel recommendations and discount codes to secure favourable prices when booking your stay in Bochum.

About the ECSO STARtup Award

The ECSO STARtup Award has been awarded annually since 2020 to the most promising European cybersecurity start-ups, aiming to provide small European cybersecurity companies with opportunities to gain visibility, investments and business connections at a European level.

The finalists taking part in this year’s competition have been selected throughout 2023 by expert Judging Panels from different European cybersecurity events, including ECSO’s Cyber Investor Days and the European Cybersecurity Competence Centre’s (ECCC) Access-2-Finance Matchmaking Events. We are delighted to present our 2024 finalists, some of Europe’s top cybersecurity start-ups:

ANOZR WAY

Build38

CDeX

CyCommSec

INLYSE

Modino.io

ONEKEY

OutKept

Seculyze

Skyld

Zygon

The above-mentioned companies will take the stage for one last time to deliver their final pitches. A Judging Panel consisting of experts in the fields of investments, entrepreneurship and the European cybersecurity market will take on the responsibility of carefully evaluating the pitches and, finally, selecting one lucky and well-deserved winner.

This is the perfect opportunity for European investors and integrators to discover up-and-coming European cybersecurity companies in a curated setting.

About the ECSO CISO Choice Award

The ECSO CISO Choice Award is a new award category, being distributed for the first time ever at this year’s ceremony. It aims to recognise and celebrate the most innovative cybersecurity solution of the year. The competition features larger European cybersecurity companies with existing investments and solutions that are looking for an opportunity to access the market by presenting their innovations in front of an international audience of potential buyers.

This year’s finalists have been selected throughout 2023 by expert Judging Panels from different European cybersecurity events, including ECSO’s Cyber Solution Days and the European Cybersecurity Competence Centre’s (ECCC) Access-2-Market Matchmaking Events. Among the finalists are the following companies with incredible potential for Europe’s security:

Astran

Binalyze

CDeX

Cyber Trust Europe

Secfense

sekoia.io

At the 2024 ECSO CISO Choice Award, these finalists will present their most compelling pitches. Their presentations will be carefully evaluated by an expert Judging Panel comprised mostly of European CISOs who, at the end of the day, will select the company with the most promising and innovative cybersecurity solution as a winner.

This is the perfect opportunity for European CISO’s and end-users to meet and connect with fellow cybersecurity leaders from all over Europe, as well as to gain direct access to the hottest European solutions on the market, presented by the experts themselves.

Further information

For further information and/or questions, please do not hesitate to reach out to ECSO’s Senior Policy Manager Milda Kaklauskaitė at milda.kaklauskaite@ecs-org.eu and Communication and Events Manager Alexandra Madsen at alexandra.madsen@ecs-org.eu.

We look forward to welcoming you in Bochum!