Princess Firyal is a Jordanian princess, humanitarian, patriot and philanthropist schooled in Jordan, Lebanon, and Columbia University. Married to Prince Muhammad bin Talal, younger brother of the late HM King Hussein of Jordan for seventeen years, she is the mother of Prince Talal and Prince Ghazi. She has been a UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador since 1992, for whom she works on programs for education and protection of world heritage. HRH is a board member at the International Rescue Committee (IRC), New York Public Library, and a wide range of museums and universities such as member of the Dean's Council at Harvard Kennedy School.

Contents

H r h princess firyal message of solidarity to the people of japan

Teachers for gender equality princess firyal jordan

Early life and education

Career

Honours

References

Early life and education

Firyal Irshaid was born in Jerusalem is the daughter of the late Farid Irshaid, a political leader who served as a Minister in the Government and a Parliamentarian in the Senate in Jordan. Her mother Farida was Chair of the Red Crescent Society in The West Bank.

Princess Firyal attended Berzeit College. She studied for two years at the American College for Women in Beirut prior to her marriage; she resumed her studies and earned a bachelor's degree from Columbia University School of General Studies in 1999.

Career

The Princess was appointed a UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador in 1992. Three years later, in 1995, she was appointed Special Advisor to the Director General of UNESCO. She works primarily on programs for protection of world heritage and education.

In Jordan, Princess Firyal became active in relief work in refugee camps. She worked for the literacy programs with the nomadic Bedouin tribes. Princess Firyal also established the family planning program.

Princess Firyal launched the International Hope Foundation under the UNESCO umbrella in 1994 for the benefit of homeless and street children.

The princess's philanthropic positions and credentials include:

Board of Directors of the United Nations Association in March, 2003.

Board of Trustees of the International Rescue Committee based in New York.

Dean's Councils of Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government

International Council at Columbia University

Board of Trustees of the New York Public Library

Trustee of the Musée des Arts Décoratifs, Paris

International Council of the Tate Modern in London

Minister Plenipotentiary by the government of Jordan in May 2007 at the Jordanian Embassy as U.S. Ambassador

Museum of Modern Art Board of Chairman Council of MOMA.

Guggenheim Museum Member of the Middle Eastern Circle

Honours

Jordan : Grand Cordon of the Order of Independence

Malaysia : Honorary Grand Commander of the Order of the Defender of the Realm (24 April 1965)

Austria : Austrian Honor