Who is Princess Firyal of Jordan? Biography, gossip, facts?

Princess Firyal (born 1945) is a Jordanian princess. Married to Prince Muhammad bin Talal from 1964 to 1978 she is the mother of Prince Talal and Prince Ghazi. Princess Firyal is known as a socialite and philanthropist. She has been a UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador since 1992 for whom she works on programs for protection of world heritage medical research and children’s education. She is also a member of the International Best Dressed List since 1985.

Is Princess Firyal of Jordan still alive? Are there any death rumors?

Yes, as far as we know, Princess Firyal of Jordan is still alive. We don't have any current information about Princess Firyal of Jordan's health. However, being younger than 50, we hope that everything is ok.

Is Princess Firyal of Jordan gay or straight?

Many people enjoy sharing rumors about the sexuality and sexual orientation of celebrities. We don't know for a fact whether Princess Firyal of Jordan is gay, bisexual or straight. However, feel free to tell us what you think! Vote by clicking below.

0% of all voters think that Princess Firyal of Jordan is gay (homosexual), 75% voted for straight (heterosexual), and 25% like to think that Princess Firyal of Jordan is actually bisexual.

Advertisement

Who are similar royalties to Princess Firyal of Jordan?

Anna de Medici Archduchess of Austria, Archduke Charles Stephen of Austria, Duke Hu of Qi, Eleanor of Sicily and Elbieta Konstancja Potulicka are royalties that are similar to Princess Firyal of Jordan. Click on their names to check out their FAQs.

What is Princess Firyal of Jordan doing now?

Supposedly, 2024 has been a busy year for Princess Firyal of Jordan. However, we do not have any detailed information on what Princess Firyal of Jordan is doing these days. Maybe you know more. Feel free to add the latest news, gossip, official contact information such as mangement phone number, cell phone number or email address, and your questions below.

Is Princess Firyal of Jordan hot or not?

Well, that is up to you to decide! Click the "HOT"-Button if you think that Princess Firyal of Jordan is hot, or click "NOT" if you don't think so. 60% of all voters think that Princess Firyal of Jordan is hot, 40% voted for "Not Hot".

Does Princess Firyal of Jordan do drugs? Does Princess Firyal of Jordan smoke cigarettes or weed?

It is no secret that many celebrities have been caught with illegal drugs in the past. Some even openly admit their drug usuage. Do you think that Princess Firyal of Jordan does smoke cigarettes, weed or marijuhana? Or does Princess Firyal of Jordan do steroids, coke or even stronger drugs such as heroin? Tell us your opinion below. 67% of the voters think that Princess Firyal of Jordan does do drugs regularly, 0% assume that Princess Firyal of Jordan does take drugs recreationally and 33% are convinced that Princess Firyal of Jordan has never tried drugs before.

Are there any photos of Princess Firyal of Jordan's hairstyle or shirtless?

There might be. But unfortunately we currently cannot access them from our system. We are working hard to fill that gap though, check back in tomorrow!