HRH Prince Ghazi bin Mohammed of Jordan, a first cousin to King Abdullah II was married on September 3in Amman to HRH Princess Miriam of Bulgaria, the widow of the HRH Prince Crown Kardam of Bulgaria, Prince of Turnovo (1962-2015).

A gemologist by profession, HRH Princess Miriam was born Miriam Ungría y López on September 2 1963 in Madrid to Bernardo Ungría y Goiburu and María del Carmen López y Oleaga. She married Crown Prince Kardam on July 11, 1996 at St. Andrey and St. Dimitar Orthodox Church in Madrid. Miriam, who was raised Roman Catholic, converted to the Eastern Orthodox faith after her marriage.

Kardam and Miriam were involved in a car accident on August 15, 2008. The princess recovered from her injuries, but Crown Prince Kardam suffered major brain injuries and fell into a coma. He died on April 7, 2015.

Embed from Getty Images Embed from Getty Images

The Crown Prince and Princess had two sons: HRH Prince Boris of Bulgaria, Prince of Turnovo (1997) and HRH Prince Beltran of Bulgaria (1999).

Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad is the son of Prince Muhammad bin Talal of Jordan and his first wife, Princess Firyal. He was born in Amman on October 15, 1966. His first marriage in 1997 to Areej Zawawi was dissolved by divorce last year. They have four children: Princess Tasneem, Prince Abdullah, Princess Jennah, and Princess Salsabeel.

The prince has a BA in Comparative Literature from Princeton University and Ph.Ds from the University of Cambridge (Trinity College) and Al-Azhar University, College of Usul al-Din in Cair

The official announcement was made shortly after the wedding:

"The Royal Hashemite Court is pleased to announce the marriage of His Royal Highness Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad and Her Royal Highness Princess Miriam, Princess of Turnovo, on Saturday, 3 September 2022, in the presence of His Majesty King Abdullah II.

Their Royal Highnesses Prince El Hassan bin Talal and Prince Talal bin Muhammad attended the marriage ceremony.

The Royal Hashemite Court extends its sincere congratulations to His Majesty on this occasion, and wishes Their Royal Highnesses Prince Ghazi and Princess Miriam Ghazi a lifetime of happiness."

Earlier today, King Simeon's office issued a statement about the wedding.