Last May, Poland’s ruling Law and Justice Party, a right-wing nationalist party committed to upending Poland’s established liberal order, convened an “audit” of the previous government in the high-Modernist Parliament building in Warsaw. Since winning a decisive electoral victory in October 2015, Law and Justice had set about dismantling many of the structural checks and balances designed to prevent a return to the authoritarianism of the Soviet era. The audit, called with little advance warning, was intended to discredit Civic Platform, the centrist, pro-European party that ruled Poland from 2007 to 2015.

It was a strangely knockabout inquisition. “They didn’t even give us any documents to read or respond to,” Rafal Trzaskowski, the former minister of European affairs, who testified at the audit, told me when I visited him in his office two days later. “Each minister just got up and made accusations.” The Law and Justice prime minister, Beata Szydlo, kicked off the audit by claiming that Civic Platform had squandered 340 billion zlotys ($88 billion) through waste. Trzaskowski listened in amazement as one of Szydlo’s colleagues accused an unnamed Civic Platform minister of using a state discount to buy an iPhone for less than the retail price.

The foreign minister, Witold Waszczykowski, declared that Civic Platform had sold out Poland’s national interests to the European Union. The defense minister, Antoni Macierewicz, in a speech that lasted for more than an hour, claimed that under Civic Platform, Poland’s military-and-intelligence officials had been doing Russia’s bidding — perhaps, he conceded, unknowingly — and presented a photograph that he said showed Polish intelligence officers playfully donning Russian navy caps at a gathering in St. Petersburg. Trzaskowski was shocked. “He was saying that leading ministers and generals had betrayed Poland,” he told me. “I was dumbfounded. I had to smoke a cigarette, and I don’t even smoke.”

After she left the lectern, Szydlo stopped to receive a congratulatory embrace from a short, stocky man sitting immediately to the right of the lectern: Jaroslaw Kaczynski, the founder, guide and master of the Law and Justice Party. The grayest of eminences, Kaczynski holds no government post. Yet neither allies nor enemies doubt that Kaczynski runs Poland; he did not speak during the audit, but it was plainly his affair. To Trzaskowski, the entire spectacle appeared to have been engineered for the benefit of the supremo, who occasionally beamed with delight as the allegations unfurled.

Poland has been the great success story of the former Eastern bloc, a nation that rapidly adopted democratic norms and moved toward a free-market economy after the fall of communism in 1989. But over the last year Kaczynski and his followers have moved with astonishing speed to alter this trajectory, in hopes of deflecting Poland from the orbit of Western Europe and returning it to a past defined by family, church and home. In its first months in power, the new government moved swiftly to gain control over the country’s public media, its Civil Service and its judiciary, and it has largely neutralized the Constitutional Tribunal, the nation’s highest court. The European Union, in a rare rebuke, accused Law and Justice of undermining the rule of law; Kaczynski told the E.U. to mind its own business.

Law and Justice’s particular resentments, above all its virulent anti-Communism in the absence of actual Communists, may be distinctly Polish. But in its revolt against European liberalism, the party stands at the forefront of a growing movement. The one unifying feature of Western democracies today is the rise of nativist, nationalist parties. All of them tap a deep and thickening vein of pessimism about the economic and political prospects of the West. In part their ascent reflects the aftershocks of the financial crisis of 2007-2008, which shook the faith of many working-class and middle-class voters in the wisdom of liberal elites. The continuing refugee crisis has also provoked a fierce backlash against newcomers in many countries. And anxieties about a globalized world have created a bull market in nostalgia.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.