Variety is reporting that Corbin Bleu will be the first star of the popular High School Musical film franchise to hit Broadway when he steps into the role of bodega owner Usnavi in IN THE HEIGHTS. Bleu will star in the show from January 25 - April 25, 2010. Corbin Bleu starred in the Emmy-award winning Disney Channel Original Movie "High School Musical" and its sequel, "High School Musical 2" alongside Zac Efron, Vanessa Anne Hudgens, and Ashley Tisdale. Bleu plays, Chad , the devoted basketball player and best friend to Troy (Efron). "High School Musical 2" premiered to 18 million viewers, making it the highest rated Disney Channel Original Movie in history and overall highest rated program in cable history.

Due to the worldwide success of "High School Musical," Bleu reprised his role as Chad in "High School Musical 3: Senior Year." The film finds the characters staging an elaborate spring musical reflecting their experiences, hope and fears about the future. "High School Musical 3: Senior Year" grossed $42 million nationally within the first few days of its premiere on October 24th, 2008.

Bleu recently wrapped production on William Dear's "Free Style." In addition to being one of the film's producers, he stars as Cale Bryant, a young motorcross racer looking to win the Amateur National Championships while also supporting his family.

Bleu's first leading film role was in Bart Freundlich's "Catch That Kid," opposite Kristen Stewart. His other film credits include Paul W.S. Anderson's "Soldier" opposite Kurt Russell, Dean Parisot's "Galaxy Quest" opposite Tim Allen and Sigourney Weaver, Kinka Usher's "Mystery Men" opposite Ben Stiller and Hank Azaria, and Duane Clark's "Family Tree."

On the small screen, Bleu starred as a boxer turned double Dutch champion in the smash hit Disney Channel Original Movie "Jump In!" with Keke Palmer and his real-life father, David Reivers. Prior to the premiere of HSM 2, "Jump In" was the highest watched Disney Channel program premiering to 8.2 million viewers. Bleu's other television credits include a starring role on the Discovery Kids/NBC series "Flight 29 Down" and guest starring roles on Disney Channel's "Hannah Montana," "ER," "The Amanda Show," "Cover Me" and "Malcolm & Eddie."

On stage, Bleu starred in the Off-Broadway production of "Tiny Tim is Dead" as well as "Brothers of the Knight" with Debbie Allen. He attended the prestigious Debbie Allen Dance Academy and then attended the Los Angeles County High School for the Arts as a theatre Major.

Due for release in early 2009 will be Bleu's second album distributed by Hollywood Records. Bleu's debut solo album entitled "Another Side," was released in May 2007. The album featured the hit single "Push it to the Limit" from his film "Jump In!" He recently released the single "Run It Back Again" from the Disney Channel Original Movie "Minutemen" which was one of the top 10 downloaded songs on iTunes. Bleu was recently nominated for a 2008 NAACP Image Award for "Best New Artist."

Bleu was born in Brooklyn , New York and currently resides in Los Angeles. He is involved with many children charities including St. Jude's Children's Hospital, Starlight Starbright and the Make-a-Wish Foundation.

In the Heights opened on Broadway to wide critical acclaim on March 9, 2008, and continues to play the Richard Rodgers Theatre. In addition to winning the 2008 Tony Award for Best Musical, Lin-Manuel Miranda, the show's creator, won the Tony Award for Best Music and Lyrics; Andy Blankenbuehler won for Best Choreography; and Alex Lacamoire and Bill Sherman won for Best Orchestrations. The original cast recording won the 2008 Grammy Award for Best Musical Show Album, and Universal Pictureshas acquired the rights to produce a feature film based on the smash hit musical.

In the Heights: Chasing Broadway Dreams, a "Great Performances" special chronicling the personal stories of composer/lyricist Lin-Manuel Miranda and the Broadway cast of In The Heights in the months leading up to opening night, premiered on PBS stations across the country in May 2009.

With a book by Pulitzer Prize finalist and Tony Award nominee Quiara Alegría Hudes and conceived by Lin-Manuel Miranda, In the Heights is directed by Joseph A. Callaway Award-winner and Tony Award nominee Thomas Kail. The music arrangements are byAlex Lacamoire and Bill Sherman. In the Heights also features Tony-nominated scenic design (Anna Louizos), costumes (Paul Tazewell), lighting (Howell Binkley), and sound (Acme Sound Partners).

In the Heights is produced by Kevin McCollum, Jeffrey Seller, Jill Furman Willis,Sander Jacobs, Robyn Goodman/Walt Grossman, Peter Fine, and Sonny Everett/Mike Skipper with associate producers Ruth Hendel and Harold Newman.

www.intheheightsthemusical.com

Photo Credit: Walter McBride/Retna Ltd.