"High School Musical: The Ice Tour"

Let's go, Wildcats! It's time for Disney's High School Musical: The Ice Tour, featuring a cast of world class skaters in the one and only live celebration of the smash hit movies "High School Musical" and "High School Musical 2!" Plus, rock the house at the exclusive High School Musical 3 Special Bonus Experience Pre-Show, with the coolest songs and hottest dance moves from the blockbuster movie, and so much more! It's a fabulous party on ice - High School Musical: The Ice Tour!

March 4 - 8, 2009

Oracle Arena, Oakland

Details and ticket information here

For more on Corbin Bleu and his CD, "Speed of Light," which is due out on March 10th from Hollywood Records, visit www.corbinbleu.com

About Corbin Bleu:

A gifted young talent who has achieved a remarkable level of success as both an actor and recording artist, Corbin Bleu continues to evolve with each new project.

Corbin Bleu starred in the Emmy-award winning Disney Channel Original Movie "High School Musical" and its sequel, "High School Musical 2" alongside Zac Efron, Vanessa Anne Hudgens, and Ashley Tisdale. Bleu plays, Chad , the devoted basketball player and best friend to Troy (Efron). "High School Musical 2" premiered to 18 million viewers, making it the highest rated Disney Channel Original Movie in history and overall highest rated program in cable history.

Due to the worldwide success of "High School Musical," Bleu reprised his role as Chad in "High School Musical 3: Senior Year." The film finds the characters staging an elaborate spring musical reflecting their experiences, hope and fears about the future. "High School Musical 3: Senior Year" grossed $42 million nationally within the first few days of its premiere on October 24th, 2008.

Bleu recently wrapped production on William Dear's "Free Style." In addition to being one of the film's producers, he stars as Cale Bryant, a young motorcross racer looking to win the Amateur National Championships while also supporting his family.

Bleu's first leading film role was in Bart Freundlich's "Catch That Kid," opposite Kristen Stewart. His other film credits include Paul W.S. Anderson's "Soldier" opposite Kurt Russell, Dean Parisot's "Galaxy Quest" opposite Tim Allen and Sigourney Weaver, Kinka Usher's "Mystery Men" opposite Ben Stiller and Hank Azaria, and Duane Clark's "Family Tree."

On the small screen, Bleu starred as a boxer turned double Dutch champion in the smash hit Disney Channel Original Movie "Jump In!" with Keke Palmer and his real-life father, David Reivers. Prior to the premiere of HSM 2, "Jump In" was the highest watched Disney Channel program premiering to 8.2 million viewers. Bleu's other television credits include a starring role on the Discovery Kids/NBC series "Flight 29 Down" and guest starring roles on Disney Channel's "Hannah Montana," "ER," "The Amanda Show," "Cover Me" and "Malcolm & Eddie."

On stage, Bleu starred in the Off-Broadway production of "Tiny Tim is Dead" as well as "Brothers of the Knight" with Debbie Allen. He attended the prestigious Debbie Allen Dance Academy and then attended the Los Angeles County High School for the Arts as a theatre Major.

Due for release in early 2009 will be Bleu's second album distributed by Hollywood Records. Bleu's debut solo album entitled "Another Side," was released in May 2007. The album featured the hit single "Push it to the Limit" from his film "Jump In!" He recently released the single "Run It Back Again" from the Disney Channel Original Movie "Minutemen" which was one of the top 10 downloaded songs on iTunes. Bleu was recently nominated for a 2008 NAACP Image Award for "Best New Artist."

Bleu was born in Brooklyn , New York and currently resides in Los Angeles. He is involved with many children charities including St. Jude's Children's Hospital, Starlight Starbright and the Make-a-Wish Foundation.