The 2018 Paulsboro High School Sports Hall of Fame Induction Banquet will induct its 25th class on Oct. 26 in the PHS gymnasium.

The 2018 Class is Gordon Redman (1966), Bob Pavloski (1971), Joe Wade (1978), Colleen Oswald (2002), Bryan Tracy (2006) and Alex Silvestro (2007). The coach/contributor is Leonard Carmichael. The 1995-96 boys' basketball team will also be inducted.

The event starts at 6 p.m. with a pepperoni and cheese social honor before a buffet dinner and the formal induction ceremonies follow.

Tickets are $40.00 and can be purchased by calling Irma Stevenson, 856-423-3787. Deadline for ordering tickets is Oct. 15.

Gordon B. Redman

Redman represented Paulsboro High School as a varsity letter winner and Colonial Conference champion in wrestling and track and field. As a freshman, he was the defensive captain of the freshmen football team. In wrestling, he won the sophomore tournament, pinning all three opponents. He won a critical match against Haddonfield to clinch the Colonial Conference championship. Track and field was the sport that Redman shined in as a high hurdler. He defeated twoi defending state champions by running a personal best time and winning the Colonial Conference championship. After graduation, Redman was drafted into the U.S. Army, where he served six years of active duty. Redman matriculated at Glassboro State College and earned a B.A. in Education and worked as a teacher in the Paulsboro School District. He was the boys track and field assistant and head coach from 1994-2002. In 1995 the boys track team went 9-0 and won the Colonial Conference championship and in 1998 the track team finished 0-9 but won the NJSIAA State Group I title.

Bob Pavlovski

Cut from the PHS freshman team in 1967, Pavlovski played on two church league teams during his freshman year at Paulsboro. As a sophomore he made the junior varsity scoring a total of 22 points the entire season. As a junior, Pavlovski made the varsity squad for the first time. He led the Red Raider is scoring and rebounding. He scored 12 points and averaged six rebounds per game for a squad that only won two games in the 1969-70 season. In his senior year, he grew to 6-foot-5. Leading the Red Raiders and the entire Colonial Conference in scoring, Pavlovski averaged 21.6 points per game and 14 rebounds per game. He scored in double figures in every game and had a career high of 33 points in one game. He was selected as the tournament MVP in the Kiwanis Christmas Tournament. He was selected 1st team All Colonial Conference and 1st team all Gloucester County as a senior. He finished 6th in South Jersey in scoring and was selected 2nd team All South Jersey. He scored over 650 points in two varsity seasons. Pavlovski received a full athletic scholarship from Elon College in 1971. In his 1st college game, he came off the bench to score 10 points in his freshman year. Pavlovski was now 6-7 and broke into the starting line up as a sophomore. His college career was cut short when he suffered a compound leg fracture as a junior. He received his bachelor’s degree in Business Administration and had a successful career in Human Resources. He worked for Del Monte Corporation and then 26 years for Atlantic City Electric (now Exelon), retiring as a Senior Business Partner. He received his Professional Human Resource designation (PHR) in 1998. Bob has been very involved in South Harrison Twp. Parks and Recreation. Committee.

Joe Wade

Wade won two district wrestling titles at 188 pounds after placing third as a sophomore at heavyweight. He won two Region 8 titles as a junior and senior as well. As a junior, Wade placed third in the state and won the NJSIAA 188-pound state title in 1978. He was a two-time All Colonial Conference All Star in wrestling and a two-time All-South Jersey first-team selection. He had a career record of 66-5. A two-year starter in football, Wade was selected All Colonial Conference in both his junior and senior years. He also participated in track and field. He earned a wrestling scholarship to Bloomsburg St. University where he earned 4 varsity letters. Wade was a two-time PSAC champion and won the EWL championship in 1982, qualifying for the NCAA Division-1 championships.

Colleen Oswald

A four-year letterwinner in field hockey and softball, Oswald lead the Red Raiders to the South Jersey Group I field hockey finals in her sophomore and junior seasons and earned second-team All Colonial Conference honors as junior. She was four-year starter on the softball team. She was selected first team All Group I and second team All-Conference as a senior pitcher. Oswald will always be remembered for her duels with Haddon Heights ace Michele Schlichtig. In one meeting, Oswald pitched 1-0, eight-inning no-hitter over the Garnets. That season she compiled over 150 strikeouts in 135 innings and pitched 11 shutouts. Her ERA was 0.59. She enrolled at Rowan University where she had an outstanding softball career. Oswald was the starting pitcher at Rowan for 4 years and made the All-Region 3 team as a sophomore. As a junior she was 2nd team All NJAC. As a senior Oswald broke 13 Rowan University school records and currently holds seven of those marks; most strikeouts in a career (555), most games pitched in a season (40), and most games started (36), innings pitched (233), victories (33), consecutive wins (20), and shutouts (13). Her 33 wins was the most in NCAA Division III that season. Oswald was selected NCAA Division III All American. She won the “Clay Award” as the Local College Athlete of the Year in 2006. Oswald is currently the head field hockey and softball coach at Lindenwold High School

Bryan Tracy

Tracy earned seven varsity letters at PHS - four in wrestling, two in cross country and one in tennis. He had a career record of 129-18 on the mat. He was a four-time District 29 champion and a three-time Region 8 Champion. Tracy qualified for the state championships all four years and finished fourth, second and third in the state his last 3 seasons at PHS. In his junior and senior years the winner of his weight class went on to win a NCAA Division I championship in college. He was a member of four State Group I championship teams and was a four-time first-team all Colonial Conference and two-time first team All-South Jersey selection. He won a title at the Caldwell Tournament and two Great Bridge Tournaments. Tracy matriculated at Brown University where he earned four varsity letters in wrestling and placed 7th in the EIWA Championships.

Alex Silvestro

Silvestro won 12 varsity letters at PHS. In football, he played on two South Jersey Group I championship teams and was selected All-Colonial and SJ All-Group 1 teams three times. He was first-team All-South Jersey as junior and a senior and made the State All-Group 1 team in his senior year. In wrestling, he had a career record of 136-15 and was a first-team All-Colonial Conference section all four years. He won 4 District 29 titles and qualified for the state championships 3 times. Silvestro placed sixth as a sophomore and 4th in his junior year. His senior year, he won the Region 8 title and went on to win the NJSIAA 215-pound state championship. He was first-team All-South Jersey as a senior. In baseball, he had over 100 hits in his career. Silvestro earned a football scholarship to Rutgers University, where he earned four varsity letters. He was selected to the All-Big East team and the All-Academic Big East team. He signed a free agent contract with the New England Patriots and was on the Super Bowl active roster for Super Bowl XLVI and a year later played for the Baltimore Ravens where he earned a Super Bowl ring.

Leonard Carmichael

Carmichael posted a 56-20 record in three seasons as the PHS head basketball coach. In his first season the Red Raiders led by freshman guard Kevin Harvey, posted a 14-10 mark. The next two seasons, the Red Raiders won the Gloucester County Christmas Tournament title and the overall Colonial Conference Championship. Its record was 21-5 in both 1993 and 1994. He was selected Courier-Post Coach of the Week six times. Carmichael left PHS at the end of the 1994 season and in 1995, the Raiders went on to win the NJSIAA Group 1 state championship. After an outstanding playing career at Trenton Central and Elizabeth City State, Carmichael coached 28 years of high school basketball and another 11 years on the college and professional levels. He also coached track and cross country for 29 years.