Post by: mcalibrary

January 12, 2024

Comments off

INDUCTEE

Coming out of small Mount Carmel Catholic High School, Frank Luchnick had no idea as to the part he would play in reviving the football program at then Bloomsburg State Teacher’s College. In 1946, coach John Hoch took over the Huskies and led them to their finest season since 1935 with a 4-3-1 record. It was in 1947 when the move was made to hire Robert B. Redman as head coach. In his first year at the helm, Redman led the team to a 5-2 record, winning their last three games by a 71-19 score. In 1948 the Huskies enjoyed the first undefeated season in school history, going 9-0, burying the opposition 185 points to 19, recording 7 shutouts and tying University of California (Pa) for the mythical Teachers College Conference championship. Frank was a guard on both teams and was named to the Associated Press All-Teacher College football team for 1948.

Following the season, Frank and teammate Tom Donan would become the first-ever Bloomsburg players to sign contracts with the NFL Pittsburgh Steelers for the then enormous salary of $3600. The 6’3”, 235 lb Luchnick was to report to the Steeler’s training camp at Alliance College in Cambridge Springs. Other notable Bloom players to sign have been Jahri Evans, Eric Jonassen, Mike Morucci, Bob Tucker, Bob Warner, and Elmer Kreisser. Despite also being recruited by the FBI at the time, he chose to complete his Masters Degree in Education at Bucknell University.

He then began a career in education as an Accounting and English Teacher at Pottsville High School. He was assistant football coach under Bud Bostick and assistant track coach under the legendary Carlton “Pete” Sterner. One of his many players was the famous General George Joulwan, Commander in Chief of the United States Southern Command. He later became the Athletic Director at Pottsville and had much input into the completion of the “Mecca” – Martz Hall in Pottsville.

After graduation from Mt. Carmel Catholic High School in 1943, Frank enlisted in the Marine Corps during WWII with the amphibious mechanized track landing forces. He spent time in the Asiatic and Pacific arenas and saw considerable action in Okinawa and Ryukyu Islands before his discharge in March of 1946.

Frank would pass away in 1997 due to complications of diabetes. During his lifetime, he was the primary caretaker for his mother in Mount Carmel and served on the MOC Church Counsel. He is survived by sisters Rita and Barbara, a most personal friend, Mary Moran of Pottsville, and nieces and nephews in the Millville, PA and NJ areas. He also had a sibling (Sister Harold) who served as a Felician Nun for over 60 years prior to her passing.