On behalf of the City Commission and citizens of Marianna, I cordially welcome you to our City.

Enjoy the rich past and promising future of the City of Marianna, bordered on the beautiful Chipola River which is a designated paddling destination. Founded in 1827 by Robert Beveridge, the City of Marianna has been the county seat of Jackson County for more than one hundred fifty years. The town was once the center of a vast area of plantations, and today tourists are invited to enjoy a stroll along the City’s oak canopy sidewalks and take the Historic Self-Guided Tour.

In addition to historic homes, visitors are invited to view the local war hero memorials in downtown Marianna, including a World War I, World War II, Korean and Vietnam Veteran Memorials located at the Jackson County Court House square, and also the state memorial honoring those who died in the 1864 Battle of Marianna, which towers above Confederate Park, a small section of the battlefield in the center of town. While in downtown, leisurely walk the streets for shopping and dining.

The City provides opportunities for organized and passive recreation. The City has multiple parks that support organized team recreational activities. The City manages approximately 291 acres of State owned land, the Chipola Greenways Hinson Conservation and Recreation Area, located on Highway 73 south. This is a beautiful passive recreational area along the Chipola River and is perfect for picnicking, canoeing, hiking, biking and enjoying the beautiful and natural wonders of Northwest Florida.

If you want to escape the heat of the summer, you can cool off at Blue Springs Recreation Area or Spring Creek.

Of course, no trip to our City would be complete without a visit to Florida Caverns State Park. The guided tours through the limestone caverns offer dazzling views. Although caves are the main focal point of the park, the 1,300 acre grounds also boast a wide variety of plants, animals, and other natural resources. It is a perfect environment for all your favorite outdoor activities, such as camping, fishing, swimming or canoeing.

We hope that your visit to Marianna will be a very memorable one, and we encourage you to visit us again soon.