The Northwest Florida town of Marianna, situated along I-10 an hour west of Tallahassee, is known as “The City of Southern Charm.” With a quaint downtown, unique eateries, a host of outdoor gems, and historic and cultural sites, Marianna is a destination offering plenty of adventures for the whole family.

At Florida Caverns State Park, outdoor enthusiasts have the rare opportunity to take guided tours of a large Florida cave system in addition to paddling, camping, biking, hiking, and camping. Blue Springs Recreation Area, a popular spot for families to cool off during summer, is home to a first-magnitude spring and Merritt’s Mill Pond, a 202-acre crystal-clear reservoir known for excellent fishing and cave diving. For birding and wildlife watching, 226-acre Hinson Conservation & Recreation Area is a must-see.

For in-town adventures, Marianna’s stores and restaurants have something for everyone. On Saturdays, shoppers can pick up fresh flowers, plants, and produce at the Marianna City Farmers’ Market.

Visitors can learn about Marianna’s past by visiting historic sites including the Joseph W. Russ House, rumored to be haunted, where guided tours are offered daily.

Plan your trip at Visit Jackson County, Fla.

WATERWAYS

Swim, paddle, and dive in Marianna.

Chipola River

Meritt’s Mill Pond

Spring Creek

Blue Springs

FAMILY FUN

Spend time in nature, visit the playgrounds, and explore the caverns.

City parks and playgrounds

Blue Springs Recreation Area

Florida Caverns State Park

HISTORY, ARTS & ENTERTAINMENT

Visit historic sites and check out local events.

Historic Joseph W. Russ House

Historic sites

Battle of Marianna

The Artists’ Guild of Northwest Florida

Events

OUTDOOR ADVENTURES

Paddle the waterways, splash in the springs, visit the parks, and hit the trails.

Birding

Fishing

Canoeing and kayaking

Disc golf

Geocaching

Cave diving

Horseback riding

Parks

Swimming

Trails

SPORTS

Play a round of golf and experience the excitement of motocross.

Motocross

Indian Springs Golf Course

DINING

Enjoy Southern favorites, handcrafted ice cream, tasty café fare, and more.

The Salt Block

Southern Craft Creamery

Penny’s Sweet Beans

More places to eat

SHOPPING

Browse boutiques, antique shops, markets, and gift shops.

Clothing boutiques

Gift shops

Antiques

Farm-to-table

More places to shop

PLACES TO STAY

Choose from a variety of accommodation types in Jackson County.