Jill Halfpenny Wiki, Biography: Jill Halfpenny was born on 15 July 1975. She is an actress from the United Kingdom. Rebecca Hopkins in ITV’s Coronation Street (1999–2000), Kate Mitchell in BBC One’s EastEnders (2002–2005), Izzie Redpath in Waterloo Road (2006–2007), and Diane Manning in In The Club (2014–2016) are some of her prominent performances. In 2004, she won the second season of the television dancing competition Strictly Come Dancing. People have been fascinated by Jill because she is also a well-known personality, but now the entire world is seeking her. Information about her is widely disseminated on social media. We have included complete information about Jill Halfpenny’s Biography, Height, Age, Family Details, Birthdays, Weight, Important Facts, and many others on this page.

If you’ve never heard of Halfpenny, you should read this. Because we have compiled all of Jill Halfpenny’s information on a single page. So check through Jill Halfpenny’s information and share this posting with your friends and family.

Jill Halfpenny Wiki

She is best known for her portrayal of Kate on EastEnders. She’s also appeared in episodes of Byker Grove and Coronation Street. Jill Halfpenny is a well-known actress who has been in a number of soap operas. She was born in England on July 15, 1975. Jill is a well-known and renowned celebrity who is known for her work as a Soap Opera Actress. She Halfpenny will be 46 years old in 2022. Jill Halfpenny is a well-known actress in the soap opera industry.

She began her acting career at the age of 14 in the BBC television children’s drama series Byker Grove, which was filmed in Newcastle’s Benwell neighborhood. Her other credits include television roles in Dalziel and Pascoe, Barbara, and Coronation Street, as well as stage work with the Hull Truck Theatre Company. In 2002, she landed the lead role of Kate Mitchell in the BBC One soap drama EastEnders. If you’re interested in learning more about her latest news, bookmark this page. Read the following parts for additional Biography news about her life.

Jill Halfpenny Wiki, Biography, Age, Height, Weight, Boyfriend, Net Worth

Jill Halfpenny Biography Real Name Jill Halfpenny Short Name Jill Halfpenny Famous As Actress By Profession Actress Boyfriend/Husband Craig Conway Children’s Harvey Reece Instagram Mentioned Below

Physical Status

Height 5′6″ Age 47 years old Weight 58 kg Food Habits Not Known Eye Color Black Hair Color Brown Shoe Size 6

Personal Details

Date of Birth 15 July 1975 Birth Place Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, England Marital Status Married Zodiac Sign Cancer Hair Length Long Nationality British Religion Christine School St Edmund Campion Roman Catholic School. Education Graduated College Webber Douglas Academy

Family Profile

Mother Maureen Halfpenny Father Colin Halfpenny Sibling’s –

Career Profile

Net Worth, Salary – Appeared As Actress Article Category Biography

Jill Halfpenny Early Life & Career

Early Life:- Jill Halfpenny went to Gateshead’s St Edmund Campion Roman Catholic School. Despite declaring on Strictly Come Dancing that she had no prior training, she attended the Webber Douglas Academy of Dramatic Art from 1994 to 1996, as well as acting schools at First Act Theatre in Gosforth, Newcastle upon Tyne, and the Reavley Theatre School in Felling, Gateshead.

Professional Career: – She began her acting career at the age of 14 in the BBC television children’s drama series Byker Grove, which was filmed in Newcastle’s Benwell neighborhood. Her other credits include television roles in Dalziel and Pascoe, Barbara, and Coronation Street, as well as stage work with the Hull Truck Theatre Company. In 2002, she landed the lead role of Kate Mitchell in the BBC One soap drama EastEnders. She began as a police officer sent to spy on Phil Mitchell, but after her cover was broken, she left the force, married Phil, and opened a nail salon. After her character was killed off, her final moments were televised in January 2005.

Jill Halfpenny Parents

Her father is Colin Halfpenny and her mother’s name is Maureen Halfpenny she has siblings whose names are not known. We only have this information for the time being, but we will update it as we Jillver more about her parents, siblings, and connections.

Jill Halfpenny Husband

Her marital status is married, according to social media posts. Her Husband/Boyfriend’s name is Craig Conway. Continue reading this story to learn more about her lifestyle, and learn more about her family here.

Jill Halfpenny Net worth

Her net worth is Not Known.

FAQs

Q.1 Who is Jill Halfpenny?

Ans. Jill Halfpenny is an Actress.

Q.2 What is the age of Jill Halfpenny?

Ans. Her age is 47 years old.

Q.3 What Is Jill Halfpenny’s Net Worth?

Ans. Her net worth is Not Known.

Q.4 Does smoke?

Ans. No.

Q.5 Does drink alcohol?

Ans. No.

Q.6 Hobbies of Jill Halfpenny?

Ans. Her Hobbies are Traveling, Exploring, Parities.

Q.7 What is the Date of Birth of Jill Halfpenny?

Ans. 15 July 1975.

Q.8 What is the name of Jill Halfpenny’s Father?

Ans. Her Father’s name is Colin Halfpenny.

Q.9 What is the name of Jill Halfpenny’s Mother?

Ans. Her Mother’s name is Maureen Halfpenny.

Jill Halfpenny Social Media

Facebook

Twitter

Instagram

YouTube

Wikipedia