Chelsea Halfpenny born September 26, 1991, is an English actor best known for her appearances as Amy Wyatt in Emmerdale on ITV and Alicia Munroe in Casualty on BBC. Halfpenny is the niece of actress Jill Halfpenny and the daughter of Newcastle DJ Paula Halfpenny. She started dating actor James Baxter in 2018, and the two announced their engagement on June 13, 2021. Who is her parents and Nices? Come down to know much more about Chelsea Halfpenny sister, father, mother, and many more below.

Chelsea Halfpenny sister| Who really is Halfpenny? Who are the parents(father, mother) of the Actress?

Chelsea Halfpenny is an English actress best known for her appearances as Amy Wyatt in Emmerdale on ITV and Alicia Munroe in Casualty on BBC. She is still working as an actress, having started her career in 2004, and has been doing so for the past 17 years. She is the niece of actress Jill Halfpenny and the daughter of Newcastle DJ Paula Halfpenny. But there is no information available about her father and sister. If we knew about Chelsea Halfpenny sister we will keep update.

Similar: Actors James Baxter married| Engagement with Chelsea Halfpenny

Would Chelsea really engage? Who is her husband?

We congratulate James Baxter and Halfpenny on their social media engagement announcement. Despite the fact that both actors have previously featured on Emmerdale, they have never shared any scenes on the ITV drama. Actor James Baxter has not yet married anyone. They only showed their engagement ring to each other in public.

Chelsea and James engaged on June 13, 2021

On Instagram, the former Emmerdale star posted, “He liked it so he went and put a friggin ring on it!!!!!!!!!” Obv instantly changed his name to ‘FIANC’ on my phone. Also, congrats to my 14-year-old self for landing the boy with the spikey hair she desired.”

Also read: Matt Stonie girlfriend Mei’s revealed their relationship through Instagram

Chelsea Halfpenny sister bio and education

Actress is born on 26 September 1991 in Gateshead, Tyne and Wear, England. Halfpenny went to St Augustine’s Primary School in Leam Lane, Gateshead, before moving on to St Edmund Campion School in Wrekenton, where her aunt, Jill Halfpenny, also went. She also went to the Reavley Theatre School in Gateshead on Saturdays for fame school sessions. Halfpenny lived in Gateshead’s Leam Lane Estate.

Chelsea played Amy Wyatt on Emmerdale from 2010 to 2013, while James played Jake Doland from 2006 to 2009. Other cast members of the ITV show were keen to share their emotions. Charley Webb, who plays Debbie Dingle, wrote, “Basically the best news of life.”

Also read: Adult model Mary Carey husband, married, and her previous relationship