Liverpool have gone retro with their away kit for next season as they turn to the 1995/96 campaign for inspiration.

A period in which they were known as 'The Spice Boys', the Reds donned a bold white and green away strip which will be coming back in August when the season kicks off. A video posted on the club's Twitter has shown stars young and old rocking the design.

Manager Jurgen Klopp also features heavily as do Trent Alexander-Arnold and Harvey Elliott. The kit features the green and white quarter pattern with black collar and cuff. It is finished with black shorts, black name and number, and white socks with a black and green trim. The club have also released a jacket in a similar style.

Anfield icon Robbie Fowler features in the clip having scored 36 times in all competitions whilst wearing the kit 27 years ago. “I have fond memories of the 1995-96 season because of the iconic white and green away strip and for scoring my most goals in one season," he told the club's website. "I’m a huge fan of the new fresh take on the white and green away kit"

Liverpool wore the kit in the FA Cup final at the old Wembley against Manchester United in 1996. It was a contest they narrowly lost as Eric Cantona scored the winner, although the white suits worn by the players before the match remain iconic.

Klopp's side travel to Chelsea on the opening weekend of the season with their second away outing of the season coming at Newcastle. Neither team are likely to force Liverpool out of their traditional red strip meaning the first time we're likely to see it could be several weeks into the campaign.

Fans who are part of the club's pre-season tour to Asia will get a chance to see it action with the kit making its debut appearance against Championship outfit Leicester at Singapore's National Stadium on July 30.

Several new signings could be wearing the kit by that point with Alexis Mac Allister already making the move to Anfield. The former Brighton man left the Amex after several impressive years and will bolster the midfield ranks at Liverpool as they look to recover after an underwhelming season.

More new faces are expected with Klopp's side linked with other midfielders having let a host go when their contracts expired. Khéphren Thuram and Nicolo Barella and among those rumoured to be on the shortlist as Liverpool look to invest and regenerate their midfield options.