The Samsung Galaxy S6, S6 Edge, and S6 Edge+ are Android smartphones manufactured and marketed by Samsung Electronics. The S6 line serves as a successor to the Galaxy S5. The S6 and S6 Edge smartphones were officially unveiled in the first "Samsung Unpacked 2015" event at the Mobile World Congress on March 1 2015, while the bigger S6 Edge+ was officially unveiled together with the Samsung Galaxy Note 5 in the second "Samsung Unpacked 2015" event at New York on August 13 2015. Alongside the S6, Samsung also unveiled the S6 Edge (and later on the bigger S6 Edge+), a variant whose screen is wrapped along the sides of the device; the curvature is usable for several additional features. The Galaxy S6 and S6 Edge were first released on April 10 2015 in 20 while the S6 Edge+ was released on August 21 2015.

Although the overall design of the Galaxy S6 still features some similarities to prior models, the construction of the device itself was revamped, with a metal unibody frame and glass backing instead of plastic. The devices also introduced an improved camera, a streamlined user interface, support for major wireless charging standards and support for a mobile payments platform that allows the device to emulate the magnetic strip from a credit card. The S6 features other hardware improvements as well, including a 1,440 x 2,560 pixels display, a new in-house system-on-chip that utilizes a 14 nm FinFET manufacturing process, and an improved fingerprint scanner.

The Galaxy S6, S6 Edge and S6 Edge+ received mostly positive reviews from critics, who praised the devices' upgraded build quality over prior models, along with improvements to their displays, performance, camera, and other changes. However, Samsung's decision to remove the ability to expand their storage or remove the battery was panned as being potentially alienating to power users, and the S6 Edge was also panned for not making enough use of its curved display to justify its increased cost over the standard Samsung Galaxy S6 which resulted in the release of the bigger S6 Edge+ later on. The Galaxy S6 Active is a way tougher version of the Galaxy S6, S6 edge, and S6 Edge+. The Galaxy S6 Active is a successor to the Galaxy S5 Active. Like the S5 Active, The Samsung Galaxy S6 Active is water-resistant, dust-resistant, and built tough.