Samsung has officially unveiled the Samsung Galaxy S6 and Samsung Galaxy S6 Edge at its "Unpacked" event at Mobile World Congress this evening.

The new phones are a step up in size and quality, with all-aluminium casing and AMOLED 5.1-inch displays.

The Samsung Galaxy S6 Edge is the more expensive of the two and features a screen that curves on both sides of the body.

Samsung has long been plagued by complaints regarding its plastic construction and the company says it has completely redesigned its flagship range to address this.

And, while it gives each phone a bit of a resemblance to arch-rival Apple's iPhone 6, the upwards shift in quality is definitely a good thing.

"Our goal was simple, we wanted the most beautiful smartphone in Samsung's history and tghe most advanced smartphone in the world," said Samsung Electronics CEO JK Shin at the launch event in Barcelona.

The tech giant says it used a new glass moulding technique to curve the glass around the Galaxy S6 Edge. And, like the earlier Samsung Galaxy Note Edge, the curve of the screen can be used for various features.

One of which is a visual representation of your top five contacts lined up down the side with the option to call or message them with a tap. Each is colour co-ordinated and there's the option to add a profile picture that displays when you swipe out from the side of the screen.

There's also the option to have the time and date displayed along the edge of the screen when the phone is laying on its back.

Additionally, Samsung has increased the pixel resolution to beyond 1080p proportions with a quad high definition display (2,560 x 1,440). It gives the two S6 phones a pixel-per-inch density of 577 and makes them much easier to see when you're looking at your phone outside.

The Korean tech giant has ditched Qualcomm as its provider of processors and is instead using an unnamed processor. Each phone has 3GB of RAM and a choice of 32, 64 or 128GB of storage.

They also have the latest Bluetooth and NFC (near-field communication) technology for connecting to accessories and even making wireless payments through the secure fingerprint scanner.

Samsung has also added wireless charging to the mix and says that charging has been upgraded so that 10 minutes of downtime will give the phone enough power to play a two-hour HD video.

Samsung has kept the same 16-megapixel camera as last year's Galaxy S5 but has added optical image stabilisation (OIS) and faster autofocus to ease the shooting process. It says the camera will now launch in 0.7 seconds - faster than any previous Samsung phone - and can be accessed by quickly double-pressing the central home button on the front of either phone.

Both the back and front-facing cameras offer a high dynamic range (HDR) mode that improves the contrast and low-light performance.

Like the iPhone 6, the camera lens protrudes slightly from the back of the phone itself. The Galaxy S6 Edge is the bulkier of the two at 7mm thick (compared to the S6's 6.8mm) but is also lighter. The Galaxy S6 Edge weighs 132g compared to the 136g of the regular Galaxy S6.

For selfie fans which, at the moment, is just about everyone, there's a 5-megapixel front-facing camera with an f/1.9 aperture lens for wide-angle pictures.

Both the Galaxy S6 and the Galaxy S6 Edge use Google's Android operating system with Samsung's TouchWiz user interface loaded on top.

This time around though, the company says it has decided to scale back the amount of apps it pre-installs the phone in an effort to streamline the experience.

The Korean manufacturer will make the two phones available on April 10th although it hasn't announced the specific pricing yet. We'll update this story as soon as we know more.