Samsung has released information it will be unveiling its Galaxy S6 and Galaxy S6 Edge smartphones in Barcelona, Spain next month, and in other markets soon after.

South Korean electronics multinational, Samsung has disclosed news it will be revealing its latest flagship phone, the Galaxy S6, which will be introduced with its curved variant, the Galaxy S6 Edge at the Mobile World Congress in Barcelona, Spain on March 1.

Users will be able to pre-order the phones two weeks before they are officially launched in stores by the middle of March, and sources are saying Samsung's latest offerings will be available in India by April 13.

Get Our Latest News for FREE

Subscribe to get daily/weekly email with the top stories (plus special offers!) from The Christian Post. Be the first to know.

Samsung previously unleashed its marketing campaign with a teaser video of the Android Lillipop handset on YouTube and an Instagram visual over the weekend. The company has also reached agreements with three mobile operators in the U.S. – AT&T, Sprint, and T-Mobile – to snowball anticipation for both phones on their websites.

Both high-end Android smartphones, said to feature an all-new full metal uni-body with a curved metal edge, will be unveiled at an invite-only Unpacked event at the MWC, with an official launch date in stores for the Galaxy S6 pegged at March 22, with the Galaxy S6 Edge's possible release between April 19 and 27.

The Samsung Galaxy S6, sporting a 20MP camera with an optical image stabilization system and low light capabilities, will be going up against the waterproof HTC One M9 with its Qualcomm Snapdragon 810 processor, also rumored to be launched at the MWC, and Sony's Xperia Z3, likewise a waterproof mobile device.

Galaxy S6 updates suggest the handset will also feature fast charging, a fingerprint scanner, and touch-based recognition to run against Apple's Touch ID. The new flagship handset will likely be retaining Galaxy S5's heart rate monitor, a card slot for micro SD and be dust resistant, as well.