03:13

About 10 percent of Brunei's population are of Chinese descent, and they regularly show a strong will to inherit the traditional Chinese culture. One middle school there has made exceptional efforts in the area, with one of its graduates now a household name in China. CGTN's Li Jiejun reports.

Wu Chun loves his old school and still makes frequent visits. A famous Bruneian actor and singer, Wu graduated from the Chung Hwa Middle School, which specializes in teaching the Chinese language and traditional values. Wu says he has spent about half of his time in China over the ten years, and what he learned at school has benefited him a lot.

WU CHUN BRUNEIAN ACTOR "Now I have a lot of work in China. It's hard to imagine if I didn't study Chinese and the Chinese culture here. As an actor, I like costume dramas. I performed in several films related to Chinese history. If I want to give good performances, I really need to be well versed in traditional Chinese values, such as loyalty, courtesy and humility."

LI JIEJUN BRUNEI "The Chung Hwa Middle School was established in 1918. In the beginning, there were just a few students. But over the past century, it has become the largest Chinese language school in Brunei. Here we can see not only pupils of Chinese origin, but also many non-Chinese faces."

In recent years, as cooperation between China and Brunei strengthens, more and more non-Chinese students have also enrolled at the school. Besides a middle school, there are also a kindergarten and a primary school on the campus. Over 2,300 students are studying here. The school said its goal is to teach the students how to be upright citizens.

XU YUELAN PRINCIPAL, CHUNG HWA MIDDLE SCHOOL "We teach the students to respect the teachers. We tell them to care for society. They should always have gratitude, and use what they learn in school to make contributions to society."

The students can learn the Chinese language, calligraphy, dancing, musical instruments, and martial arts here.

ZHAN ZIQI STUDENT "I think it's good to learn Chinese. We have to communicate in Chinese on many occasions. And I like Chinese dancing. It makes me elegant."

The teachers and students are very excited about the visit by President Xi Jinping. Often seen as a cultural envoy between the two countries, Wu feels the same way.

WU CHUN BRUNEIAN ACTOR "I went to China to play in basketball matches, when I was in middle school. This cultural exchange program impressed me a lot at that time. China's Belt & Road initiative provides a great opportunity for the two nations to strengthen cultural exchange. As people get to know each other, the friendship between the two peoples will be enhanced."

Many Bruneians say they share the same expectations. They hope relations of the two countries can enter a new era. LJJ, CGTN, Brunei.