Rabecca “Becky” Phillipson, age 46, of AuTrain, died unexpectedly on Wednesday afternoon, January 10, 2018 in Marquette, Michigan. She was born on September 21, 1971 in Columbus, Wisconsin to Wilbur and Susan (Buss) Stark. Becky grew up in Waterloo and attended Waterloo High School where she participated in forensics and the color guard. Becky graduated from WHS in 1989. She worked in the medical insurance field as a coder for physician’s offices and for Wisconsin Physicians Services. Becky married Emmett F. Phillipson on October 27, 2001 and together raised their two sons. Becky’s best job in the world was being a Mom and she was always there for them no matter what and helped them through every up and down. The family moved to AuTrain five years ago from Wisconsin and Becky was a big part of her boys’ activities at school in Waterloo and at Superior Central. She had a passion for autism awareness and was a wonderful advocate. She was a fantastic baker and cook and made the best cheesy potatoes. Becky loved hosting or going to family events and always had fun wherever and whenever she was with her family. She loved the Green Bay Packers and University of Wisconsin Badgers. Becky had a one of a kind laugh and infectious laugh. She was by nature a loving, amazing, and giving daughter, sister, wife, mother, caregiver, and friend.

Becky is survived by her husband Emmett of AuTrain; their sons – Emmett Tyler Phillipson and Ethan Wilbur Charles Phillipson both at home; father – Wilbur Stark of AuTrain; siblings – Tammy Rias of Beaver Dam, WI, Jackie Stark of Milwaukee, WI, and Brian Stark of Waterloo, WI; parents-in-law- Emmett and Lynne Phillipson of Grand Marais and Nancy Phillipson of Munising; brothers-in-law and sisters-in-law – Kimberly (Robert) Watt of Gwinn, Eric (Deidre) Phillipson of Munising, and Amanda (Tiffany) Phillipson of Little Lake; nieces and nephews – Marcus, Christopher, Carley, Monise, Fednise, Kaden, Kayla, Eli, and Ashlynn. Becky was preceded in death by her mother, Susan Stark.

Visitation will be held at the Bowerman Funeral Home in Munising on Tuesday evening from 5:00 until 8:00 p.m. and on Wednesday from 9:30 a.m. until 10:45 a.m. Pastor Sandra Kolder will conduct Becky’s funeral service in the funeral home’s chapel on Wednesday, January 17, 2018 at 11:00 a.m.