PICTURE Lucille Ball and Tinkerbell engaged in a duet and you have an apt metaphor for the neo-folk singer Becky Stark, who suggests an impish fairy from a faraway land. Her eyes are wide, and her madcap stories full of exclamation points. She seems perpetually atwitter, at once ditzy and all knowing.

She’s the voice and the creative force behind the Los Angeles-based band Lavender Diamond, which just released its quixotic debut album, “Imagine Our Love.” Taking a break from the band’s national tour, Ms. Stark was in town last weekend to attend her best friend’s wedding, which happily coincided with a mash-up of readings and performances at the New York Public Library.

She was to share the stage with Miranda July — the experimental filmmaker, performance artist and writer with whom she is collaborating on a musical comedy variety show — and the indie-rock elder statesman David Byrne, who lent Ms. Stark a guitar for the occasion.

Sitting in the greenroom before the event, Ms. Stark suspiciously eyed the slip peeking out from beneath her flouncy ’40s dress.

“It’s a little too long,” she said, fiddling with the hem of her errant undergarment.

“Rip it off,” Ms. July piped in, explaining that her lace headband was a result of similarly spontaneous deconstruction. Earlier that day, seeking festoonery, she tore the trim from a dress.

Ms. Stark tugged at the excess fabric until ... D.I.Y. eureka! She held up the scrap of material with a childlike grin.

Lavender Diamond’s fable-pop shares that free spirit. Though Ms. Stark cites Linda Ronstadt and Fugazi as influences, many songs are drenched in sunshine-y shades of Karen Carpenter.

With roots as a church singer, Ms. Stark found her cheeky streak in the Providence, R.I., punk scene while attending Brown in the late ’90s. Her 2003 punk opera, “The Birdsongs of the Bauharoque,” led to the formation of her band (which includes Ms. Stark’s boyfriend and drummer Ron Regé Jr., the pianist Steve Gregoropoulos, and the guitarist Devon Williams). Lavender Diamond was the character she personified in the opera, a half-bird, half-human sent to spread peace, love and understanding.

Which is precisely what Ms. Stark aims to do through music, irony be damned. Commanding the stage in the library’s hallowed auditorium, she roused the audience for a singalong.

And so it came to pass that the director Michel Gondry and the photographer Cindy Sherman were moved to belt out a neo-hippie neo-hymn that Ms. Stark had to admit was “kind of corny.” That made everyone laugh. “Just pretend you’re not here, and then it won’t seem real,” she said, giggling.

The whole world was gathered/At the shore of the earth/Holding hands and celebrating/The little girl’s birth. The crowd repeated the words over and over.

Ms. Stark curtsied (yes, curtsied), signed CDs, and then raced off to the Monkey Bar at the Hotel Élysée in Midtown to join her friends. Ms. Stark has known the couple, the music writer and novelist Andy Greenwald and Rachel Bien, a human rights lawyer, since Brown.

“Oh my God, I have that same dress!” she exclaimed to Ms. Bien. Oh my God, they were both wearing nude fishnet stockings! Turns out, back at college, Ms. Stark and Ms. Bien found each other thanks to their identical outfits.

“Gray bowler hat, red A-line skirt, cardigan with a pin on it,” Ms. Stark reminisced. With that, she flitted off.