Andrew Lang

1844-1912

INTRODUCTION

PRINCIPAL WORKS

GENERAL COMMENTARY

TITLE COMMENTARY

FURTHER READING

(Has also written under the pseudonym A. Hugh Longway) Scottish folklorist, novelist, poet, critic, essayist, biographer, translator, editor, compiler, and author of fairy tales.

The following entry presents an overview of Lang's career through 2003.

INTRODUCTION

Lang is best known as the editor of the twelve-volume Color Fairy Books, a collection of traditional folktales from throughout the world, translated into English, and adapted to suit the sensibilities of the Victorian era. Beginning with The Blue Fairy Book (1889) and ending with The Lilac Fairy Book (1910), the Color Fairy Book series, which totals over four hundred stories, includes such well-known tales as "The Three Little Pigs," "Cinderella," and "Hansel and Gretel." At the time of the publication of The Blue Fairy Book, children's literature in England had become dominated by realistic, sentimental memoirs of childhood, and the traditional folktale had all but disappeared. However, with the instant popularity of The Blue Fairy Book and the continued success of subsequent editions of the series, Lang brought the fairy tale back onto the bookshelves of children throughout the English-speaking world. In addition to editing several collections of legends and mythology, Lang wrote five of his own original fairy tales, including The Princess Nobody: A Tale of Fairyland after the Drawings by Richard Doyle (1884), The Gold of Fairnilee (1888), and Prince Prigio (1889).

BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

Lang was born on March 31, 1844, in Selkirk, a region of Scotland that borders northern England. Lang's experiences as a boy in the Scottish countryside, coupled with his exposure to the ballads and legends of the Scottish tradition, had a profound effect on his imagination and became the inspiration for his story The Gold of Fairnilee. Lang graduated from St. Andrews University and went on to attend

the University of Glasgow. After receiving a scholarship, he transferred to Balliol College at Oxford University, from which he graduated with a B.A. in Classics in 1866. Lang was later granted an open-ended fellowship at Merton College, Oxford, which he held for seven years. However, Lang suffered from delicate health throughout his life, which eventually led him to end his academic career. During the early 1870s, he spent time recuperating on the French Riviera. In 1875 Lang married Lenora Blanche Alleyne, and the couple moved to London where Lang worked as a writer and journalist. Lang established himself as a prominent essayist and critic, publishing articles in the London Daily News, the Saturday Review, the Spectator, and other popular British and American periodicals. For twenty-three years, he wrote a regular column entitled "At the Sign of the Ship" for Longman's Magazine. The author of some five thousand essays, reviews, and articles by the time of his death, Lang was admired by friends for his ability to compose a publishable piece in half an hour, often while simultaneously conducting a conversation. Best remembered for his prolific output of fairy tale collections, Lang also authored, edited, and translated dozens of works of poetry, essays, and biographies, as well as scholarly studies of history, literature, and anthropology. His nonfiction books include analyses of folklore and mythology, such as Custom and Myth (1884) and Myth, Ritual, and Religion (1887). A great admirer of the works of Homer, Lang co-translated Homer's The Odyssey in 1879 and The Iliad in 1883. Lang was among the original members of London's Folk-Lore Society and served as the group's president. As an authority on folk literature, he contributed the entries on "tales" and "mythology" to the eleventh edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica. While Lang's name was attached to the Color Fairy Book stories as collector, compiler, editor, and author of the prefaces for each new edition, his wife Lenora was the primary translator and adaptor of the individual stories. Thus, while Lang combed the world's literature to find these tales, he was neither the translator nor the adaptor of these works as they appear in his published volumes. The role of Lenora Lang in this ongoing project cannot be underestimated, as Lang made increasingly clear in his prefaces to each new edition of the Color Fairy Books. Indeed, after Lang's death, Lenora continued the project of translating and adapting traditional folktales, which were published in editions crediting Lang as the editor. Lang was not concerned with adhering to the original text through literal translations. Rather, he and Lenora took the approach of altering traditional fairy tales to facilitate readability for young children. Although Lang's accomplishment in the Color Fairy Books was that of a folklorist or anthropologist, his name became so closely associated with the fairy tales published in the series that the public generally regarded him as the original author of these stories. By the time of his final Color Fairy Book preface—for The Lilac Fairy Book—Lang expressed outright exasperation at the public's misconception of his role in the creation of these tales. Lang died on July 20, 1912, in Banchory, Aberdeenshire, Scotland. Before his death, he informed his wife that he did not wish to be the object of biographical scrutiny, a request which Lenora honored by destroying all of his letters and other personal papers.

MAJOR WORKS

In The Princess Nobody, Lang's first original fairy tale, a childless King consults a dwarf prophet, who promises him a child on the condition that he give "nobody" to the dwarf. Disregarding this request as a ridiculous whim, the King agrees. But when the King returns to his castle, he finds that the Queen has given birth to a baby girl, whom she decided to call Niente ("Nobody") until the King could return to give the child a name. When the Princess "Nobody" grows up, the dwarf comes to claim her, and the King has no choice but to honor his promise. The King then offers his daughter's hand in marriage to any prince who can find the Princess and bring her back. While many princes try, only the ugly Prince Comical succeeds. As a reward for his bravery and kindness, Comical is transformed into the handsome Prince Charming and marries the Princess. The construction of The Princess Nobody represents an unusual process in storybook writing. While children's books are generally written first as a story, with illustrations built around the text, The Princess Nobody is a unique exception. The pictures in The Princess Nobody, illustrated by Richard Doyle, were originally published under the title In Fairyland: A Series of Pictures from the Elf-World (1870) and accompanied a poem by William Allingham. In the early 1880s, Lang was asked by his publisher to write an original story around these illustrations. The Gold of Fairnilee, set in sixteenth-century Scotland, stands out among Lang's original fairy tales for its melancholy mood, its setting in Lang's childhood homeland, and its strong ties to the traditions of the Scottish ballad and Scottish folklore. The story's hero, Randal Ker, journeys to Fairy Land and returns home after seven years when Jean, a childhood friend, plucks a magical rose at the wishing well. Randal brings with him from Fairy Land a vial of water, which, when rubbed on the eyes, reveals the location of an ancient Roman treasure known as the Gold of Fairnilee. Randal and Jean find the gold and use it to feed their community in a time of famine. The story concludes with the marriage of Randal and Jean.

Lang's narrative tone in his next tales, Prince Prigio and Prince Ricardo of Pantouflia (1893), in contrast to that of The Gold of Fairnilee, is lightly satirical and has been described as a burlesque of the traditional fairy tale. Prince Prigio and Prince Ricardo were both strongly influenced by William Makepeace Thackeray's similarly burlesque The Rose and the Ring. In these original tales, Lang follows the adventures of the clever, but obnoxious Prince Prigio and his dim-witted son, Prince Ricardo. In Tales of a Fairy Court (1907), Lang chronicles further episodes in the life of Prince Prigio. In one of the stories, Prince Prigio travels in time, first into the future of the twentieth century, then back in time to the court of King James VI of Scotland. Lang's Tales of Troyand Greece (1907) comprises a retelling of Homer's The Iliad and The Odyssey as a boy's adventure story for children. Drawing on his own translations of Homer's works and his accomplishments as a Homeric scholar, Lang's Tales of Troy and Greece is highly regarded as one of his strongest volumes of stories for children.

The Blue Fairy Book contains folktales drawn primarily from Germany, France, Norway, and Great Britain, while the later Color Fairy Books encompass a greater range of tales from cultures throughout the world. The Blue Fairy Book retells many of the classic fairy tales that are widely familiar to contemporary audiences, such as "Hansel and Gretel," "Beauty and the Beast," "Cinderella," "Sleeping Beauty," and "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs," among others. Lang also included in The Blue Fairy Book three adaptations from The Arabian Nights and an adaptation of sections from Jonathan Swift's Gulliver's Travels. Over thirty of the stories in the Color Fairy Book series were drawn from German folktales collected by the Brothers Grimm in the mid-nineteenth century. In subsequent installments of the Color Fairy Book series, Lang widened his scope, gathering traditional tales from throughout Asia, Africa, and the Americas and making them available to his English-language readership. The Red Fairy Book (1890) includes Russian, Norwegian, Finnish, and Romanian tales. The Green Fairy Book (1892) is comprised primarily of French and English tales, including such familiar stories as "The Three Little Pigs" and "The Story of the Three Bears." Subsequent Color Fairy Books include tales from Africa, China, Iceland, Japan, and Sweden, as well as stories drawn from Native American culture. Many revised, re-edited, and re-illustrated editions of Lang's Color Fairy Book series have been published since his death. Several of the Color Fairy Books were republished in the 1940s, under the editorship of Mary Gould Davis, with new illustrations by various artists. In the 1970s and 1980s, many of the early Color Fairy Books were again reissued, with extensive revisions by Brian Alderson, who retranslated some of the tales and excluded others. The Alderson editions include Lang's prefaces to the original volumes, as well as an introduction by Alderson detailing his alterations. Alderson's scholarly approach is indicated by his numerous explanatory footnotes to each story.

CRITICAL RECEPTION

Of Lang's original fairy tales, The Gold of Fairnilee has been generally regarded as his most impressive work. Children's literature scholar Roger Lancelyn Green has echoed the opinion of many critics in asserting that The Gold of Fairnilee demonstrates Lang's storytelling skills "at his best, and at his most original and genuine." Green continued his praise of The Gold of Fairnilee by arguing that the tale "breaks away from every literary tradition from Shakespeare downwards, away even from the genuine folk-tale of Grimm and Dasent, and returns to the gloomy horrors of the Scottish Fairyland." While lacking the deep emotional undertones and melancholy atmosphere Lang so skillfully created in The Gold of Fairnilee, Prince Prigio has been praised for its humor and skillfully narrated plot, as well as the inherent charm of Prince Prigio himself. Prince Ricardo, however, has been characterized as a less-than-successful follow-up to Prigio. As Green has commented in his biography on Lang, "Prince Ricardo is not altogether as successful as Prince Prigio, largely on account of its lack of plot, and the episodic nature of its incidents, which occasionally seem a trifle forced and unwieldy. . . ." Positive reviews of the numerous posthumous editions of Lang's Color Fairy Books, as well as his original works, have served as testaments to the enduring appeal of the fairy tales and legends that Lang took such pains to collect. As a Times Literary Supplement reviewer of the 1967 volume of The Gold of Fairnilee and Other Stories asserted, "There is nothing soft or sentimental about Lang's stories. They are the real thing, with no synthetic overlay to make them 'suitable for children.' But whereas Grimm or Perrault can be frightening or grotesque, everything that Lang ever wrote is imbued with the same feeling of sanity and good sense."

PRINCIPAL WORKS

Original Fiction

Much Darker Days [as A. Hugh Longway] (prose) 1884

The Princess Nobody: A Tale of Fairyland after theDrawings by Richard Doyle (fairy tales) 1884

That Very Mab [with May Kendall] (prose) 1885

In the Wrong Paradise and Other Stories (short stories) 1886

The Mark of Cain (novel) 1886

The Gold of Fairnilee (fairy tales) 1888

Prince Prigio (fairy tales) 1889

Old Friends: Essays in Epistolary Parody (essays) 1890

The World's Desire [with H. Rider Haggard] (novel) 1890

Prince Ricardo of Pantouflia (fairy tales) 1893

A Monk of the Fife: A Romance of the Days of Jeanne d'Arc (novel) 1895

My Own Fairy Book (fairy tales) 1895

Parson Kelly [with Alfred Edward Woodley Mason] (novel) 1899

The Disentanglers (prose) 1901

Tales of a Fairy Court (fairy tales) 1906

Tales of Troy and Greece (mythology) 1907

The Chronicles of Pantouflia: Prince Prigio andPrince Ricardo of Pantouflia (fairy tales) 1943; revised edition, 1981

The Gold of Fairnilee and Other Stories (fairy tales) 1967

Editor and Compiler

Perrault's Popular Tales [preface by Lang] (fairy tales) 1888

The Blue Fairy Book [preface by Lang] (fairy tales) 1889; revised and re-edited by Brian Alderson, 1975

The Red Fairy Book [preface by Lang] (fairy tales) 1890; revised and re-edited by Brian Alderson, 1976

The Green Fairy Book [preface by Lang] (fairy tales) 1892; revised and re-edited by Brian Alderson, 1978

The True Story Book [preface by Lang] (juvenile short stories) 1893; revised as The Blue True Story Book, 1896

The Yellow Fairy Book [preface by Lang] (fairy tales) 1894; revised and re-edited by Brian Alderson, 1980

The Red True Story Book (juvenile short stories) 1895

The Animal Story Book [preface by Lang] (juvenile short stories) 1896; revised edition, 1901

The Nursery Rhyme Book [preface by Lang] (nursery rhymes) 1897

The Pink Fairy Book [preface by Lang] (fairy tales) 1897; revised and re-edited by Brian Alderson, 1982

Arabian Nights Entertainments [preface by Lang] (fairy tales) 1898

The Red Book of Animal Stories [preface by Lang] (juvenile short stories) 1899

The Grey Fairy Book [preface by Lang] (fairy tales) 1900

The Violet Fairy Book [preface by Lang] (fairy tales) 1901

The Book of Romance [preface by Lang] (folklore) 1902; revised as Tales of Romance, 1907, and as Tales of King Arthur and the Round Table, 1909

The Crimson Fairy Book [preface by Lang] (fairy tales) 1903

The Brown Fairy Book [preface by Lang] (fairy tales) 1904

The Red Romance Book [preface by Lang] (folklore) 1905

The Orange Fairy Book [preface by Lang] (fairy tales) 1906

The Olive Fairy Book [preface by Lang] (fairy tales) 1907

The Lilac Fairy Book [preface by Lang] (fairy tales) 1910

Fifty Favourite Fairy Tales: Chosen from the ColourFairy Books of Andrew Lang [edited by Kathleen Lines; illustrations by Margery Gill] (fairy tales) 1963

The Twelve Dancing Princesses [illustrations by Adrienne Adams] (fairy tales) 1966

Aladdin and the Wonderful Lamp [illustrations by Errol Le Cain] (fairy tales) 1981

The Rainbow Fairy Book [illustrated by Michael Hague] (fairy tales) 1993

A World of Fairy Tales [edited by Neil Philip; illustrations by Henry Justice Ford] (fairy tales) 1994

*The Flying Ship [illustrations by Dennis McDermott] (fairy tales) 1995

*This work was originally published in The Yellow Fairy Book.

GENERAL COMMENTARY

Edmund Gosse (essay date 1912)

SOURCE: Gosse, Edmund. "Andrew Lang." In Portraits and Sketches, pp. 199-211. London: William Heinemann, 1912.

[In the following essay, Gosse offers his personal recollections of Lang and his intellectual achievements during the 1880s, characterizing Lang as "a man of letters who laboured without cessation from boyhood to the grave."]

Invited to note down some of my recollections of Andrew Lang, I find myself suspended between the sudden blow of his death and the slow development of memory, now extending in unbroken friendship over thirty-five years. The magnitude and multitude of Lang's performances, public and private, during that considerable length of time almost paralyse expression; it is difficult to know where to begin or where to stop. Just as his written works are so extremely numerous as to make a pathway through them a formidable task in bibliography, no one book standing out predominant, so his character, intellectual and moral, was full of so many apparent inconsistencies, so many pitfalls for rash assertion, so many queer caprices of impulse, that in a whole volume of analysis, which would be tedious, one could scarcely do justice to them all. I will venture to put down, almost at haphazard, what I remember that seems to me to have been overlooked, or inexactly stated, by those who wrote, often very sympathetically, at the moment of his death, always premising that I speak rather of a Lang of from 1877 to 1890, when I saw him very frequently, than of a Lang whom younger people met chiefly in Scotland.

When he died, all the newspapers were loud in proclaiming his "versatility." But I am not sure that he was not the very opposite of versatile. I take "versatile" to mean changeable, fickle, constantly ready to alter direction with the weather-cock. The great instance of versatility in literature is Ruskin, who adopted diametrically different views of the same subject at different times of his life, and defended them with equal ardour. To be versatile seems to be unsteady, variable. But Lang was through his long career singularly unaltered; he never changed his point of view; what he liked and admired as a youth he liked and admired as an elderly man. It is true that his interests and knowledge were vividly drawn along a surprisingly large number of channels, but while there was abundance there does not seem to me to have been versatility. If a huge body of water boils up from a crater, it may pour down a dozen paths, but these will always be the same; unless there is an earthquake, new cascades will not form nor old rivulets run dry. In some authors earthquakes do take place—as in Tolstoy, for instance, and in S. T. Coleridge—but nothing of this kind was ever manifest in Lang, who was extraordinarily multiform, yet in his varieties strictly consistent from Oxford to the grave. As this is not generally perceived, I will take the liberty of expanding my view of his intellectual development.

To a superficial observer in late life the genius of Andrew Lang had the characteristics which we are in the habit of identifying with precocity. Yet he had not been, as a writer, precocious in his youth. One slender volume of verses represents all that he published in book-form before his thirty-fifth year. No doubt we shall learn in good time what he was doing before he flashed upon the world of journalism in all his panoply of graces, in 1876, at the close of his Merton fellowship. He was then, at all events, the finest finished product of his age, with the bright armour of Oxford burnished on his body to such a brilliance that humdrum eyes could hardly bear the radiance of it. Of the terms behind, of the fifteen years then dividing him from St. Andrews, we know as yet but little; they were years of insatiable acquirement, incessant reading, and talking, and observing—gay preparation for a life to be devoted, as no other life in our time has been, to the stimulation of other people's observation and talk and reading. There was no cloistered virtue about the bright and petulant Merton don. He was already flouting and jesting, laughing with Ariosto in the sunshine, performing with a snap of his fingers tasks which might break the back of a pedant, and concealing under an affectation of carelessness a literary ambition which knew no definite bounds.

In those days, and when he appeared for the first time in London, the poet was paramount in him. Jowett is said to have predicted that he would be greatly famous in this line, but I know not what evidence Jowett had before him. Unless I am much mistaken, it was not until Lang left Balliol that his peculiar bent became obvious. Up to that time he had been a promiscuous browser upon books, much occupied, moreover, in the struggle with ancient Greek, and immersed in Aristotle and Homer. But in the early days of his settlement at Merton he began to concentrate his powers, and I think there were certain influences which were instant and far-reaching. Among them one was pre-eminent. When Andrew Lang came up from St. Andrews he had found Matthew Arnold occupying the ancient chair of poetry at Oxford. He was a listener at some at least of the famous lectures which, in 1865, were collected as Essays in Criticism; while one of his latest experiences as a Balliol undergraduate was hearing Matthew Arnold lecture on the study of Celtic literature. His conscience was profoundly stirred by Culture and Anarchy (1869); his sense of prose-form largely determined by Friendship's Garland (1871). I have no hesitation in saying that the teaching and example of Matthew Arnold prevailed over all other Oxford influences upon the intellectual nature of Lang, while, although I think that his personal acquaintance with Arnold was very slight, yet in his social manner there was, in early days, not a little imitation of Arnold's aloofness and superfine delicacy of address. It was unconscious, of course, and nothing would have enraged Lang more than to have been accused of "imitating Uncle Matt."

The structure which his own individuality now began to build on the basis supplied by the learning of Oxford, and in particular by the study of the Greeks, and "dressed" by courses of Matthew Arnold, was from the first eclectic. Lang eschewed as completely what was not sympathetic to him as he assimilated what was attractive to him. Those who speak of his "versatility" should recollect what large tracts of the literature of the world, and even of England, existed outside the dimmest apprehension of Andrew Lang. It is, however, more useful to consider what he did apprehend; and there were two English books, published in his Oxford days, which permanently impressed him: one of these was The Earthly Paradise, the other D. G. Rossetti's Poems. In after years he tried to divest himself of the traces of these volumes, but he had fed upon their honey-dew and it had permeated his veins.

Not less important an element in the garnishing of a mind already prepared for it by academic and æsthetic studies was the absorption of the romantic part of French literature. Andrew Lang in this, as in everything else, was selective. He dipped into the wonderful lucky-bag of France wherever he saw the glitter of romance. Hence his approach, in the early seventies, was threefold: towards the mediæval lais and chansons, towards the sixteenth-century Pléiade, and towards the school of which Victor Hugo was the leader in the nineteenth century. For a long time Ronsard was Lang's poet of intensest predilection; and I think that his definite ambition was to be the Ronsard of modern England, introducing a new poetical dexterity founded on a revival of pure humanism. He had in those days what he lost, or at least dispersed, in the weariness and growing melancholia of later years—a splendid belief in poetry as a part of the renown of England, as a heritage to be received in reverence from our fathers, and to be passed on, if possible, in a brighter flame. This honest and beautiful ambition to shine as one of the permanent benefactors to national verse, in the attitude so nobly sustained four hundred years ago by Du Bellay and Ronsard, was unquestionably felt by Andrew Lang through his bright intellectual April, and supported him from Oxford times until 1882, when he published Helen of Troy. The cool reception of that epic by the principal judges of poetry caused him acute disappointment, and from that time forth he became less eager and less serious as a poet, more and more petulantly expending his wonderful technical gift on fugitive subjects. And here again, when one comes to think of it, the whole history repeated itself, since in Helen of Troy Lang simply suffered as Ronsard had done in the "Franciade." But the fact that 1882 was his year of crisis, and the tomb of his brightest ambition, must be recognised by every one who closely followed his fortunes at that time.

Lang's habit of picking out of literature and of life the plums of romance, and these alone, comes to be, to the dazzled observer of his extraordinarily vivid intellectual career, the principal guiding line. This determination to dwell, to the exclusion of all other sides of any question, on its romantic side is alone enough to rebut the charge of versatility. Lang was in a sense encyclopædic; but the vast dictionary of his knowledge had blank pages, or pages pasted down, on which he would not, or could not, read what experience had printed. Absurd as it sounds, there was always something maidenly about his mind, and he glossed over ugly matters, sordid and dull conditions, so that they made no impression whatever upon him. He had a trick, which often exasperated his acquaintances, of declaring that he had "never heard" of things that everybody else was very well aware of. He had "never heard the name" of people he disliked, of books that he thought tiresome, of events that bored him; but, more than this, he used the formula for things and persons whom he did not wish to discuss. I remember meeting in the street a famous professor, who advanced with uplifted hands, and greeted me with "What do you think Lang says now? That he has never heard of Pascal!" This merely signified that Lang, not interested (at all events for the moment) in Pascal nor in the professor, thus closed at once all possibility of discussion.

It must not be forgotten that we have lived to see him, always wonderful indeed, and always passionately devoted to perfection and purity, but worn, tired, harassed by the unceasing struggle, the lifelong slinging of sentences from that inexhaustible ink-pot. In one of the most perfect of his poems, "Natural Theology," Lang speaks of Cagn, the great hunter, who once was kind and good, but who was spoiled by fighting many things. Lang was never "spoiled," but he was injured; the surface of the radiant coin was rubbed by the vast and interminable handling of journalism. He was jaded by the toil of writing many things. Hence it is not possible but that those who knew him intimately in his later youth and early middle-age should prefer to look back at those years when he was the freshest, the most exhilarating figure in living literature, when a star seemed to dance upon the crest of his already silvering hair. Baudelaire exclaimed of Théophile Gautier: "Homme heureux! homme digne d'envie! il n'a jamais aimé que le Beau!" and of Andrew Lang in those brilliant days the same might have been said. As long as he had confidence in beauty he was safe and strong; and much that, with all affection and all respect, we must admit was rasping and disappointing in his attitude to literature in his later years, seems to have been due to a decreasing sense of confidence in the intellectual sources of beauty. It is dangerous, in the end it must be fatal, to sustain the entire structure of life and thought on the illusions of romance. But that was what Lang did—he built his house upon the rainbow.

The charm of Andrew Lang's person and company was founded upon a certain lightness, an essential gentleness and elegance which were relieved by a sharp touch; just as a very dainty fruit may be preserved from mawkishness by something delicately acid in the rind of it. His nature was slightly inhuman; it was unwise to count upon its sympathy beyond a point which was very easily reached in social intercourse. If any simple soul showed an inclination, in eighteenth-century phrase, to "repose on the bosom" of Lang, that support was immediately withdrawn, and the confiding one fell among thorns. Lang was like an Angora cat, whose gentleness and soft fur, and general aspect of pure amenity, invite to caresses, which are suddenly met by the outspread paw with claws awake. This uncertain and freakish humour was the embarrassment of his friends, who, however, were preserved from despair by the fact that no malice was meant, and that the weapons were instantly sheathed again in velvet. Only, the instinct to give a sudden slap, half in play, half in fretful caprice, was incorrigible. No one among Lang's intimate friends but had suffered from this feline impulse, which did not spare even the serenity of Robert Louis Stevenson. But, tiresome as it sometimes was, this irritable humour seldom cost Lang a friend who was worth preserving. Those who really knew him recognised that he was always shy and usually tired.

His own swift spirit never brooded upon an offence, and could not conceive that any one else should mind what he himself minded so little and forgot so soon. Impressions swept over him very rapidly, and injuries passed completely out of his memory. Indeed, all his emotions were too fleeting, and in this there was something fairy-like; quick and keen and blithe as he was, he did not seem altogether like an ordinary mortal, nor could the appeal to gross human experience be made to him with much chance of success. This, doubtless, is why almost all imaginative literature which is founded upon the darker parts of life, all squalid and painful tragedy, all stories that "don't end well," all religious experiences, all that is not superficial and romantic, was irksome to him. He tried sometimes to reconcile his mind to the consideration of real life; he concentrated his matchless powers on it; but he always disliked it. He could persuade himself to be partly just to Ibsen or Hardy or Dostoieff-sky, but what he really enjoyed was Dumas père, because that fertile romance-writer rose serene above the phenomena of actual human experience. We have seen more of this type in English literature than the Continental nations have in theirs, but even we have seen no instance of its strength and weakness so eminent as Andrew Lang. He was the fairy in our midst, the wonder-working, incorporeal, and tricksy fay of letters, who paid for all his wonderful gifts and charms by being not quite a man of like passions with the rest of us. In some verses which he scribbled to R. L. S. and threw away, twenty years ago, he acknowledged this unearthly character, and, speaking of the depredations of his kin, he said:

Faith, they might steal me, wi' ma will,

And, ken'd I ony Fairy hill,

I'd lay me down there, snod and still,

Their land to win;

For, man, I've maistly had my fill

O' this world's din.

His wit had something disconcerting in its impishness. Its rapidity and sparkle were dazzling, but it was not quite human; that is to say, it conceded too little to the exigencies of flesh and blood. If we can conceive a seraph being funny, it would be in the manner of Andrew Lang. Moreover, his wit usually danced over the surface of things, and rarely penetrated them. In verbal parry, in ironic misunderstanding, in breathless agility of topsy-turvy movement, Lang was like one of Milton's "yellow-skirted fays," sporting with the helpless, moon-bewildered traveller. His wit often had a depressing, a humiliating effect, against which one's mind presently revolted. I recollect an instance which may be thought to be apposite: I was passing through a phase of enthusiasm for Emerson, whom Lang very characteristically detested, and I was so ill-advised as to show him the famous epigram called "Brahma." Lang read it with a snort of derision (it appeared to be new to him), and immediately he improvised this parody:

If the wild bowler thinks he bowls,

Or if the batsman thinks he's bowled,

They know not, poor misguided souls,

They, too, shall perish unconsoled.

I am the batsman and the bat,

I am the bowler and the ball,

The umpire, the pavilion cat,

The roller, pitch, and stumps, and all.

This would make a pavilion cat laugh, and I felt that Emerson was done for. But when Lang had left me, and I was once more master of my mind, I reflected that the parody was but a parody, wonderful for its neatness and quickness, and for its seizure of what was awkward in the roll of Emerson's diction, but essentially superficial. However, what would wit be if it were profound? I must leave it there, feeling that I have not explained why Lang's extraordinary drollery in conversation so often left on the memory a certain sensation of distress.

But this was not the characteristic of his humour at its best, as it was displayed throughout the happiest period of his work. If, as seems possible, it is as an essayist that he will ultimately take his place in English literature, this element will continue to delight fresh generations of enchanted readers. I cannot imagine that the preface to his translation of Theocritus,Letters to Dead Authors, In the Wrong Paradise, Old Friends, and Essays in Little will ever lose their charm; but future admirers will have to pick their way to them through a tangle of history and anthropology and mythology, where there may be left no perfume and no sweetness. I am impatient to see this vast mass of writing reduced to the limits of its author's delicate, true, but somewhat evasive and ephemeral genius. However, as far as the circumstances of his temperament permitted, Andrew Lang has left with us the memory of one of our most surprising contemporaries, a man of letters who laboured without cessation from boyhood to the grave, who pursued his ideal with indomitable activity and perseverance, and who was never betrayed except by the loftiness of his own endeavour. Lang's only misfortune was not to be completely in contact with life, and his work will survive exactly where he was most faithful to his innermost illusions.

Horace G. Hutchinson (essay date 1920)

SOURCE: Hutchinson, Horace G. "Spencer Walpole and Andrew Lang." In Portraits of the Eighties, pp. 208-17. London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1920.

[In the following essay, Hutchinson comments on Lang's personality, his work, and the author's role as historian.]

ANDREW LANG

I hardly know why I thus couple up Andrew Lang with Spencer Walpole, unless it be that both were historians—of a sort. But it was of a widely different sort, and they would not have jogged in double harness together. Walpole's rank and mode as an historian I have just discussed. Andrew Lang was historian by accident rather—the accident that some of the people who caught his quick fancy and incited him to write about them were engaged in great historical drama—Mary Queen of Scots most notably, also Pickle the Spy, and others. Andrew Lang was a number of things intellectually, for the versatility and range of his mind were extraordinary, but of all things that which he was not was an historian at all of the type of Spencer Walpole. He did not care a bit about the measures or the political games in which the people that interested him were taking in hand, or cared only in so far as they were the setting, the scenery, for his actors. It was the actors themselves and their doings that appealed to him. And yet here again we have to make a qualification: he was interested in the activities of these persons, in the scrapes into which they fell and in the puzzles, as in a detective story, which they presented; but he was not really very interested in their characters and their motives. As he himself confessed to me once, "I can do nothing with human nature." He meant, as a writer of the novel. He was quite right in his estimate of himself. Few people probably are aware that he ever tried his hand at a novel; but he did, and very bad it was. I think it was called The Brand of Cain, or something of that kind, and I well remember his amazement to discover that I had read it. It was not altogether gratified amazement either. He was actually sorry that any one for whose opinion he cared even the least bit should have read it, so convinced was he of its badness. Of course it was only because it had his name to it that it ever got itself published.

To be sure, he wrote The Disentanglers, an ingenious idea, ingeniously worked; but it is hardly to be called a novel, or a study in humanity. He collaborated with Rider Haggard, too, in The World's Desire, but his personal share is not obvious; and, after all, its theme is a type only, and perhaps not a very probable type. And all this disability to "make anything" of human nature arose, in all likelihood, from the fact that motives and character did not present problems of real interest to him. He did not go probing down deeply into the springs of conduct; he found much more excitement in the material and the obvious. It is singular that it should be so, with his very acute intellect, but so it was.

It appears to me that I am, so far, saying everything that is negative about Lang, recording everything that he was not. It is a way, like another, of sketching a portrait, to begin with determining the lines to be left out, and having thus begun, I may continue. He was, then, as unlike as possible to Spencer Walpole, because he had not the real historian's bent of mind, he had not the weighing, judicial sense. With all my deep admiration for Andrew Lang—and let me say at once that I did admire and love him greatly—he was the last man to whom I would go for a judicious opinion on men, women, or affairs. He lived in a curious detachment, although he touched at so many points the various interests of very different men. His was, in truth, one of the most remarkable personalities and intellects that we shall find in all this portrait gallery. He touched at so many points, and yet he drove in deeply at none of them; he was really aloof all the while; and he made this merely surface contact in spite of possessing an intellect most penetrating and incisive. So, in his historical studies, if we call them so, though we should be more right in saying "studies of historical persons," he picked the actors up, let his graceful fancy, his fine intellect, and his delightful style play about with them for a time, and then dropped them back again into the welter of history for the true historian to deal with them. I have heard the term "scrappy" applied to his methods, and it was not misapplied. He himself confessed to habits of carelessness and inaccuracy in detail. I think that he exaggerated this inaccuracy: he was really far more conscientious as a writer than he gave himself the credit of being; but it is certainly impossible to think of Andrew Lang going over his proofs three times, and verifying and re-verifying his figures and citations, as Spencer Walpole did. He wrote as easily as Walpole wrote laboriously. He was indeed the quickest writer that I have ever known. I have heard him say: "Is it humanly speaking possible to write an article before dinner?"—taking out his watch—"Twenty minutes before we need go and dress! Yes, I think it just is." And off he would go—I think it was for the Daily News that he was writing at this time occasional articles about all things in general, and a few more—and scribble down the article, and as a rule these lightning articles of his were the best: these forked-lightning articles, perhaps we should say, for all his writing had the speed of merely common electricity. The reading of them did not go quite so fast. For days I have kept a letter of Andrew Lang's by me, wondering at its meaning, making intelligent guesses from time to time, and usually, at each new look, discovering the significance of some new hieroglyphic, until all was unravelled. But it was a very tangled skein, and my pity for his compositors was sore.

In its own way, Andrew Lang's intellect was the most brilliant and the most delightful that I have had the luck to encounter. I say that deliberately and with no hesitation. His fancy was so graceful, his taste so perfect. The world in which his spirit really lived was a kind of fairy-land. He came down to this terrestrial business only now and then, always with a spectator's interest in it rather than an actor's. There was a pathetic side to this. He had a great leaning to the athletic and to the primitive; the life of the savage and of the gipsy appealed to him. I am not sure but that he had some strain of gipsy blood in him. His singularly handsome dark face and large dreaming eyes gave suggestion of it, and gipsies, even of royal race, moved a good deal among the Border Scottish families to which the Langs were akin. He was thus drawn by his disposition; and yet his health was always delicate, so that the life even of the ordinary athletic man of civilisation was forbidden him. He had to be very careful in his diet; he could not travel very long distances in a day, I think because the rattle and jolt of a long train journey were too much for his head. It was all a very delicately balanced organisation, of the very finest constituents. I believe he had once been a fair bowler, with a slingy, fast action: never more than moderately good, I imagine, and less effective than his brother T. W., who was in the Oxford Eleven as a medium-paced bowler. But with this exception I can think of no form of athletics in which he took part.

And yet there was no form that did not interest him. He wrote delightfully of golf, of cricket, of fishing—he was something of a trout-fisher, by the way, though very rarely catching a trout—especially he wrote well of golf, so far as a man can write well of a game which he cannot play at all. Even a stroke a hole handicap would have complimented him too highly. But it was always the writing of an artist, though his art was not golf, but literature. He loved Sagas, and all deeds of derring-do. He loved the classics, such as Homer, because they tell stories of heroes, and he loved them even better than the Sagas, because they are heroic stories told with art, while the Sagas are absolutely artless. He would have been perfectly at home had he lived in ancient Greece, or in the Iceland of the Vikings, or in the Provence of the Troubadours—only, he would not have lived, for the climatic and sanitary conditions would have been his immediate death. But in any one of these environments he would have been more at home than in modern England, and especially in modern London. "Why people live in London," he wrote to me once, "I wonder; and my wonder ever grows." Yet he lived there, and in Marloes Road, Kensington—not one of the most romantic streets. "Where is Marloes Road?" I heard some one ask him, who wished to call on him. "You go along the Cromwell Road till you drop," said Andrew Lang. "It's there!"

So there he lived and wrote and dreamed; and it was in his dreams—by which I mean waking dreams, of course—that he was happy. He lived in Kensington, and I think that if one had asked him what life he would like best to have lived or be living—he might have said that he wished to be going with Herodotus, the old father of history, on that pilgrimage to Egypt, about which he tells us in his fourth book:

He left the land of youth, he left the young,

The smiling Gods of Greece; he passed the isle

Where Jason loitered and where Sappho sung;

He sought the secret-founted wave of Nile,

Of that old world, half dead a weary while;

Heard the Priests murmur in their mystic tongue,

And through the fanes went voyaging, among

Dark tribes that worshipped Cat and Crocodile.

He learned the tales of death Divine and birth,

Strange loves of hawk and serpent, Sky and Earth,

The marriage and the slaying of the Sun;

The shrines of ghosts and beasts he wandered through,

And mocked not of their godhead, for he knew

Behind all creeds the Spirit that is One.

That is how Lang himself writes of this bewitching adventure in the sonnet which he prefaces to a reprint of an old translation of that fourth book. The sonnet gives us a good deal of the real Lang and of his psychical cravings. He would go with the traveller for the very adventure's sake, for the brine and the tossing of the sea, for the peril by water and by land. And he would go to satisfy his yearning intellect with knowledge. He would hear stories. He would learn folk-lore, and that was of deep interest to him. Finally he would be living in a fairy-land, as remote from Marloes Road as may be.

He made up, in a measure, for Marloes Road, by going to St. Andrews in the winter—in the winter of all seasons for the East Neuk of Fife. Yet it had its delights, I know, because he used to let me come and stay with him there. The house that he took stood right on the cliff, with the splendid old ruin of the Castle on its eastern side, and northward the Firth of Tay, and Forfarshire opposite. That was a fitter habitation for a man who was dreaming of going a-Viking. He went from London, but he never went for a holiday. A holiday would be impossible for a man whose imagination worked so perpetually, and whose artistic impulse drove him to constant expression in words. He must write, and he did write, whether at St. Andrews or elsewhere. He also had the air of abundant leisure; he was always ready to talk and to idle: he took his work and his art with so little apparent seriousness that he actually never had a study, apart, to write in, either in London or anywhere else. He always seemed to regard himself rather in the light of an amateur, whose production was worth very little, so that it did not matter a jot to the world whether it was produced or not. He said to me once: "People ask me why I do not write some big book. Why should I write a big book? I have no particular message for the world."

Perhaps he had not, unless it be the common message of all artists, to make the world realise the beauty of the world as it never would do without the artist and his revelations. And yet it always made me angry to hear people talking of Andrew Lang as if he were a literary trifler, a minor poet, a writer of Ballads in Blue China, and no more. He was all this, but he was a great deal more besides. People who judged him thus had forgotten, or did not know, those serious books of his on ancient religious ceremony and so on: Custom and Myth, and Myth, Ritual, and Religion. They did not know, or did not think of, his share with Butcher and Leaf and Myers in the translations of the Odyssey and the Iliad. They did not remember his brilliant record at Oxford, nor recognise the range of his learning, stored and kept brightly ready for use by a very retentive memory. He knew old French literature, both prose and verse, better than any other man I ever met, though of course he made no speciality of it, nor of any other one subject of study. The truth is that he was so very quick of apprehension that he could grasp a subject with about half the attention that a common mind had to apply to achieve anything like the same mastery. But he worked far harder than people thought, and was far more conscientious than they supposed. For instance, I happen to know that he toiled for weeks and months over a projected history of the Jewish tribes. He did not like the point of view of Renan in his Histoire des Peuples d'Israël, although he had an unbounded admiration for it as a work of art and storehouse of knowledge. I had left him keenly engaged in this. A short while after I met him again and asked: "Well, how are the children of Israel? Are they out of the desert yet?" He had been humorously bemoaning the apparently quite unnecessary length of their sojourn in those inhospitable arenas. "Oh," he said lightly, "I have given it up, given up all idea of it; I have torn up what I had written. I have come to the conclusion that no man ought to write about it who does not know Hebrew."

He spoke thus lightly, but it was no light sacrifice that he had made. He had sacrificed months of toil, and destroyed MS. that any publisher would certainly have given good money for, even in its fragmentary style. But money, and what most men regard as the good things of this life, interested him hardly at all. Folk-lore, crystal gazing, psychical research, and old story of all kinds were the things of the spirit which really seemed to him to matter. A certain material comfort he was obliged to have, if he was to live, by reason of his delicacy of constitution, and the devoted love of Mrs. Lang assured him these, without any personal attention of his own. She shared, too, in all his literary interests, and published several books, of which Dissolving Views probably won most fame.

I do not suppose that it is possible for any one to have the least knowledge of Lang and of his work without realising the brilliance of his intellect. What I do not think has been nearly enough recognised is the warmth and kindliness of his heart. It is to be admitted of him that he was at times impatient and even petulant. Much of this, doubtless, may be put down to the score of his always rather indifferent health. It is true, however, that he habitually suffered fools badly, very badly; and also that fools were apt to suffer badly from the caustic wit which ran so readily from his pen. But there are scores of writers alive and at work today who would bear witness to the help which his kindly encouragement gave them at a time when their inexperience was in much need of such aid; and he was as liberal of his money as of his counsel. The contributors to his Red [The Red Fairy Book ], Blue [The Blue Fairy Book ], and all sorts of coloured Fairy Books were rewarded with a generosity which left very little balance for the editor, and the assistants of his musings under "The Sign of the Ship" in Longman's Magazine often ate up all the guineas that the publishers gave him for this monthly "feature."

His interests ranged widely, but two of the sides of life which are the main concern of very many men, politics and finance, appealed to him not at all, and when either of these came on the tapis he made not the slightest effort, not even so much as mere courtesy might demand, to conceal his boredom. In some ways he was more like a supernaturally brilliant child than a grown man—possibly a slightly spoilt child. It was a child's world in which his spirit moved, and moved with a whimsical fancy quite delightful.

Some of his obiter dicta are worth quoting: "This book is good, though powerful," was the opening sentence of one of his reviews of a novel in the Saturday. Of another he wrote: "A touch of the supernatural is added by the hero finding the book he wants in the London Library." This was in the early days of that admirable and now very well-equipped institution; and we may well believe that Lang, in his quest for old and little-known books on old French literature and the like, may have been a sore thorn in the side of the librarian and his ever attentive staff. He was appointed Gibbon Lecturer in Natural Theology at St. Andrews. "What line did he take?" I asked Rider Haggard, who had been at the opening lecture. "He commenced," Haggard answered, "with 'Once it began to thunder; and men began to wonder.'" It was a characteristic start for Andrew Lang to make, and perhaps the large and vague topic could not be broached much more auspiciously.

I had heard nothing of his last illness until its fatal end, and the news was very grievous. It seemed as if an element of lightness went with him from the world. But he had little reserve of strength to fight any serious attack, and, for all his gaiety and wit, he was by nature disposed to melancholy. I should imagine that his vitality was always rather below the normal. Many others have made a larger figure in the world, but there have been few in our generation of such an interesting and attractive personality.

Roger Lancelyn Green (essay date July 1994)

SOURCE: Green, Roger Lancelyn "Andrew Lang and the Fairy Tale." Review of English Studies 20, no. 79 (July 1994): 227-31.

[In the following essay, Green discusses Lang's original fairy tales, including Princess Nobdoy, The Gold of Fairnilee, and The Chronicles of Pantouflia, arguing that Lang's Pantouflia tales resemble such "literary fairy stories" as Thackeray's The Rose and the Ring.]

Text Not Available

Text Not Available

Text Not Available

Text Not Available

Roger Lancelyn Green (essay date 1946)

SOURCE: Green, Roger Lancelyn. "The Master of Fairyland." In Andrew Lang: A Critical Biography, pp. 80-96. Leicester, England: Edmund Ward, 1946.

[In the following essay, Green provides critical commentary on Lang's Princess Nobody, Prince Prigio, Prince Ricardo, and Tales of a Fairy Court. Green notes that these stories are Lang's only original fairy tales, despite Lang being regularly and mistakenly referred to as the "author"—as opposed to the "editor"—of the Colored Fairy Books.]

The Border boy, dwelling in a land of old enchantments, among hills and rivers haunted by the legends and ballads of the early days, amidst woods fragrant with old songs and old beliefs, must almost of necessity have believed in fairies. Remembering how the Selkirk boys met together of an evening to "swap" fairy-tales, how Lang delighted to wander away up the wild and silent valleys with his fishing rod; how he would sit on the green slope between the old ruin of Fairnilee and the murmuring Tweed half seen amid the green leaves; and how he would hasten back to Viewfield in the twilight, half scared of the ghosts and bogles of which he had been reading and whose ancient haunts were among the places nearby and most familiar to him: remembering all these early influences, it seems only right that the name of Andrew Lang should still be linked most naturally and universally with fairy books.

In his boyhood the old fairy beliefs and legends, the real folk-lore, were still alive in the Border country: old Nancy, the Langs' nurse, would more than half have believed the stories of ghosts and fairies, of Whuppity Stoorie and the Red Etin, which she told to her little charges in the long winter evenings by the nursery fire.

And as Andrew grew older, he read for himself all the fairy-tales that he could possibly lay hands on. Madame d'Aulnoy came earliest, and Grimm's Household Stories; the fairies of literature in A Midsummer Night's Dream, and of humour in The Rose and the Ring, but most of all, the old traditional tales, told to him orally at first, accessible only in Grimm, and in the sophisticated versions of Perrault, and the collections derived from the Cabinet des Fées, but increasing year by year as he grew older—growing as the basic fairy-tale collections were issued: The Heroes (1856), Heroes of Asgard (1857), Planché's French Fairy Tales (1858), Dasent's Tales from the Norse (1859).

Folk-lore and ballad literature were thus the deepest and most potent influences on Lang as a boy, and their influence was increased and broadened into an intellectual as well as a sentimental interest as he became more and more engrossed in the study of anthropology.

Thus it was as an anthropologist that Lang came first to the serious consideration of fairy stories, and the result was that for long he felt almost a distaste for the more literary tales. "The folklorist is not unnaturally jealous," he wrote, "of what, in some degree, looks like folk-lore. He apprehends that purely literary stories may win their way, pruned of their excrescences, to the fabulous, and may confuse the speculations of later mythologists . . . There was a time when I regarded all contes, except contes populaires, as frivolous and vexatious."1

But even by the time that his first collection of traditional fairy-tales, The Blue Fairy Book (1889) appeared, Lang had fallen away from his earlier and rather fanatical intolerance, and had already written three literary fairy stories of his own.

The "Fairy Book Series," however, contained little besides traditional tales, although these were adapted and re-written so as to make them suitable for children. It is actually only the first of the series that contains much besides folk-tales—and Lang departs further than he ever does in later volumes from any settled scheme. Thus, besides five stories from Madame d'Aulnoy, one from Madame Le Prince de Beaumont and one adaption from Madame de Villeneuve, there are two from The Arabian Nights, and—strangest choice of all—a condensed version of the first part of Gulliver's Travels made by May Kendall. How Lang came to allow this last to be included is inexplicable, for it is quite alien to anything in any of the fairy books, which never again depart from the traditional tales further than Madame d'Aulnoy, Hans Andersen and "The Three Bears."

But the book was an experiment, and of a kind that must have caused a certain amount of anxiety to Longman, the publisher, even with the great "draw" of Lang's name. For at that time the fairy-tale had almost ceased to be read in British nurseries, and the novel of child life, the stories of Mrs. Ewing, Mrs. Molesworth, and L. T. Meade, were the only fare. Writing early in 1889 in her history of children's books, Mrs. E. M. Field says: "At the present moment the fairy-tale seems to have given way entirely in popularity to the child's story of real life, the novel of childhood, in which no effort is spared to make children appear as they are." But just before the publication of the book early in 1891, she added a note: "Since the above was written eighteen months ago, the tide of popularity seems to have set strongly in the direction of the old fairy stories."2

It would probably be no exaggeration to say that Lang was entirely responsible for this change in the public taste; for The Blue Fairy Book (1889) and

The Red Fairy Book (1890), were both enormously popular from the very start, and the later volumes in the series were sure always of a wide and appreciative welcome.

The earlier fairy books were issued also in limited editions on large paper, and for the first two of these Lang wrote Introductions of some interest which do not appear in the ordinary editions. Otherwise, his own share in any of the fairy books is limited almost exclusively to the Preface—and, of course, the actual selection and choice of the stories included. These are drawn from nearly every race and nation of the ancient or modern world, and are the finest and most enduring monument to Andrew Lang the folklorist.

The tales themselves were retold, translated or adapted mainly by Mrs. Lang, though in the earlier volumes she had the assistance of many people, including May Kendall, Florence Sellar and Sir W. A. Craigie. The True Story Book and its sequel boast a greater variety of authors, including Rider Haggard, Florence Sellar and Lang himself, who told the story of Joan of Arc at some length.

Only in the first two fairy books proper does Lang re-tell any of the stories, and there his work is of considerable interest. In The Blue Fairy Book he takes the story of Perseus, drawing his material from Pindar, Simonides and Apollodoros, but he recasts it in the form of an ordinary folk-tale by the suppression of all personal and local names; Perseus is simply "The Prince," while even the Herperides appear as "The Western Fairies," singing a song as noncommittal as their name:

"Round and round the apples of gold,

Round and round dance we;

Thus do we dance from the days of old

About the enchanted tree:

Round and round and round we go,

While the Spring is green or the stream shall flow,

Or the wind shall stir the sea."

The similar song which Danæ sings is, however, an actual translation from the lyric contained in a fragment by Simonides.

The absence of names is not, of course, essential to the ordinary folk-tale; but in the case of such a story as this, it is only by such a suppression that it can be regarded with any ease as a fairy-tale of the type best exemplified in the Grimm collection, and not merely as a fragment of the grand legendary history of Homeric Greece.

In The Red Fairy Book (1890), Lang re-tells "The Story of Sigurd" from Morris's version of the Volsunga saga, and treats it rather as he had done "The Terrible Head," though without suppressing the names. This gives us the impression that Lang considered a northern setting still to be suitable for a fairy-tale, but that the Greek scene, by literary association, was no longer sufficiently simple and wild. Lang supports this in an interesting essay on "Literary Fairy Tales" which he prefixed as an Introduction to a story by the Dutch writer, F. van Eeden, which appeared in English as Little Johannes in 1895. After discussing the usual ingredients of "The Märchen, or child's story," he goes on to say that "The civilized peoples have elaborated their childlike tales into the chief romantic myths, as of the Ship Argo, and the sagas of Heracles and Odysseus . . . European peasants keep them in shapes far more akin to the savage than to the Greek form."

It could, however, be argued that the Greek myths present versions of the traditional tales containing far purer traces of their savage origin than the oral tales handed down by peasants, vitiated and adulterated from generation to generation, until recorded by the folklorists of the nineteenth century.

However this may be, Lang's aim is obvious, and in none of the other fairy books does he include any but savage or folk-tales, the French Cabinet des Fées and Hans Andersen being the only sophisticated stories admitted. And he does not again attempt to adapt any stories from the "higher mythology" of Greece, Egypt or Scandinavia, though, of course, the northern folk-tales are included.

When, later, he came to re-tell the Greek myths for children, he presented his Tales of Troy and Greece (1907) in the tradition of Kingsley's Heroes; and we feel that it is Lang the classical scholar rather than Lang the folklorist who is telling of "Odysseus the Sacker of Cities" or "The Story of the Golden Fleece."

Now although Lang never wavered from his devotion to the old traditional fairy-tales, he did soften in his early austerity towards the literary, sophisticated and burlesque fairy story. Writing in The Academy of 16th May, 1874, he solemnly rebukes Charles Deulin for not presenting his Contes du Roi Gambrinus in their primitive Märchen form: but in 1886 Lang himself re-tells the story of Johnny Nut and the Golden Goose from Deulin's book, and in so doing sophisticates his original still more. Again, in The Academy of 15th July, 1875, in reviewing Mrs. Ewing's Jan of the Windmill, Lang's highest praise for her method is that she "never burlesques things old" as do other writers for children—yet among these other condemned story-tellers Thackeray stands supreme, and twenty years later Lang is praising him for his treatment of the traditional fairy-tale in The Rose and the Ring, where he "burlesques it with a kindly mockery."3

But it was out of his profound knowledge of folktales and his intimate acquaintance with all the formulæ of the traditional stories that Lang drew the inspiration for his own original tales. Only in The Gold of Fairnilee does he stay away from what had become the recognized method of writing a modern fairy-tale; but in the Pantouflia stories, and also in the little Princess Nobody, he is following in the steps of a respectable literary tradition, taking Thackeray as his most immediate model.

In its earliest form the literary fairy-story grew directly out of the folk-tale, and was indeed little more than a sophisticated version of the popular original. Charles Perrault seems to have laid the foundation stone of the fairy edifice with his Contes de Ma Mere Oye in 1697, for although he is telling the old folktales such as "Cinderella" and "Toads and Diamonds," he is inclined to polish his original and to make it as polite and genteel as may be; and, most important innovation of all, wherever his basic tale introduces a ghost, daimon or wonder-working beast, he substitutes a fairy.

Now the true fairy represents, on the whole, a distinct tradition, which may best be dealt with when considering such a work as The Gold of Fairnilee ; but Perrault took the literary product of the old stark folk superstition, which had already been refined and made a creature of beauty and imagination by Shakespeare and the poets, and grafted it on to the Märchen stem, where of old it grew not. For the "fairy-tales" of the brothers Grimm boast few fairies, and they are rare indeed among the traditional tales of other nations.

A year after Perrault's famous little book, Madame la Contesse de Murat laid even more stress on the identity of the characters in her Contes des Fées: but the greatest name in the annals of fairyland is that of Madame d'Aulnoy, who began to produce her fairytales during the first years of the eighteenth century.

"Madame d'Aulnoy is the true mother of the modern fairy story," says Lang. "She invented the modern Court of Fairyland, with its manners, its fairies . . . its queens, its amorous, its cruel, its good, its evil, its odious and its friendly fées; illustrious beings, the councillors of kings, who are now treated with religious respect, and now are propitiated with ribbons, scissors and sweetmeats. The fairies are as old as the Hathors of Egypt . . . but Madame d'Aulnoy first developed them into our familiar fées of fairy-tale . . . It is from Madame d'Aulnoy that The Rose and the Ring of Thackeray derives its illustrious lineage. The banter is only an exaggerated form of her charming manner."4

The country of the literary fairies is a most accommodating clime, and absorbs to itself every possible characteristic that it can encompass. Madame d'Aulnoy's fées were human-sized beings who dwelt in courts closely resembling that of Louis XIV; but the genuine fairy of old belief was of dwarfish ancestry, and had been drastically reduced in stature by Shakespeare, and such crude followers of his delicate suggestion as William King and the anonymous author of "Queen Mab's Invitation," thus paving the way for the usual type of tiny fairy common in Victorian stories. And it needed but to graft on to them the wings that grew between the minute shoulders of the Rosicrucian sylphs of the Count de Gabalis and "The Rape of the Lock," to complete the picture.

At the dawn of the Victorian period came the folktales of Grimm to complicate the issue; and so strong was their influence that German very soon became the language of fairyland—of Märchenland, we would fain say, borrowing the title from F. Anstey's delicious fantasy of the fairy world, In Brief Authority.

The year of Lang's birth, 1844, saw perhaps the earliest fusion of Grimm and the French Fairy Court, in a forgotten tale, The Hope of the Katzekopfs by the Reverend Francis Edward Paget, where the new tradition is exemplified very clearly.

And when Thackeray came in 1855 to construct the greatest of this kind of fairy-story, The Rose and the Ring, it remained only for him to introduce the hearty burlesque element from Fielding's extravaganza, Tom Thumb the Great (1730), which is best echoed in the heroic blank verse of his kings and princes, in their deliciously exaggerated characters, and in the names of many of his personages.

This type of story remained fairly static after Thackeray's book appeared, and little progress was made in its development until Lang came to it in the early 'nineties, and E. Nesbit produced her Unlikely Tales in and after 1900.

A few experiments were made after Thackeray to lead the fairy-story away in other directions. Alice in Wonderland appeared ten years later, and produced many worthless imitations, some of which, such as Wanted—A King, by "Maggie Browne" (Margaret Hamer) sought, without much success, to link up the new wonder tale with the older traditions.

Lewis Carroll himself also experimented in this direction, as the children's portions of Sylvie and Bruno show; but the general tendency was towards the tale of wonder in a real life setting, of which George MacDonald seems to have been the inventor, and which Mrs. Molesworth explored further in such of her early books as The Cuckoo Clock (1877), before joining the ranks of undiluted realism beside Juliana Ewing and L. T. Meade.

But Lang, before he came to write his more serious fairy-stories, and before The Blue Fairy Book had made him king undisputed of the nursery shelf, had tossed off, in the midst of his anthropological labours, a little jeu d'esprit that is now quite forgotten, The Princess Nobody: A Tale of Fairyland (1884).

This book seems to have been suggested to him by his friend and publisher, Charles Longman. For the firm had published in 1869 a tall, slim, green volume called In Fairyland: Pictures from the Elf World, wherein "Dicky" Doyle (designer of the cover of Punch and illustrator of The King of the Golden River, and The Cricket on the Hearth) pictured in a series of forty paintings a vast and various number of elves and fairies, both winged and wingless, disporting themselves among flowers and trees, with birds and insects as playfellows. To accompany—but hardly to explain—these pictures, William Allingham had supplied a number of fairy poems.

It made a very attractive volume, and the pictures have a fascination and a charm that is all their maker's own—but it was hardly a children's book.

Lang, however, took most of the pictures and wrote a little fairy-tale to fit them. Some five illustrations are omitted, most of the rest are cut down, while the double-page "Plate IV" of the earlier volume is divided into nine sections which appear, uncoloured, throughout The Princess Nobody. Lang weaves his story round the pictures with considerable ingenuity, and very seldom do we feel that anything is brought in to account for an illustration; one or two that play no particular part in the story have little verses under them, but this is a rare concession.

Another difficulty, that of making the same person recognizable in a number of pictures—for there was little or no continuity in the original volume—is cunningly explained by the number of transformations that befall the hero, Prince Comical. Only one point seems to have baffled Lang, and that is why Princess Niente has wings in some pictures but not in others—and on this, wisely, he makes no comment!

The story itself is very slight, and consists mainly of a regrouping of certain elements traditional in many nursery tales and folk-legends, both savage and civilized.

It opens with the familiar childless King, promised a child on condition that he gives "Nobody" to the dwarfish prophet; in blithe ignorance the King promises—and finds on his return to court that a child has been born to him in his absence, a princess who, until he has chosen a name for her, has been called Niente or Nobody. When she grows up, the dwarf comes to claim her, and the King is forced to submit; but he offers Niente's hand in marriage to any prince who will restore her, and a whole host sets out, including Prince Comical, who is so ugly that all the rest make a mock of him. But he has a kind heart, and on the way he protects a Daddy-long-legs who is being tormented by some wicked fairies, and the grateful creature warns his deliverer not to sleep under the magic mushrooms. Prince Comical tells his companions, but they deride his warning, and are cast into an enchanted sleep. Guided by a friendly Black Beetle, Prince Comical steals the egg from the Blue Bird, who is thus persuaded to tell him where to find Niente. He then visits the Queen of Mushroomland, who transforms him from plain Prince Comical into handsome Prince Charming, and gives Niente to him on the one condition that he shall never know her real name. He, of course, discovers the name, speaks it—and the Princess "softly and suddenly vanished away." However, in the end, the Water Fairy, who was the godmother of the Princess, brings back Niente (or Gwendoline) to him. They journey home together, the other princes come out of their magic sleep, Prince Comical regains the form of Prince Charming (which he had lost when he spoke the forbidden name), and he and Gwendoline live happily ever afterwards.

The attraction of the story is very simple, and is of course inseparable from Doyle's delightful pictures. There is gentle, almost wistful, charm in the echoes of so many nursery tales, and Lang's rondeau at the end enshrines this sentiment:

Au temps jadis! As Perrault says,

In half-forgotten fairy days!—

"There lived a king once and a queen,

As few there are, as more have been,"—

Ah, still we love the well-worn phrase,

Still love to tread the ancient ways,

To break the fence, to thread the maze,

To see the beauty we have seen,

Au temps jadis!

Here's luck to every child that strays

In Fairyland among the Fays:

That follows through the forest green

Prince Comical and Gwendoline;

That reads the tales we used to praise

Au temps jadis!

In 1888 Lang turned aside from the high road of the literary fairy story to seek his inspiration for The Gold of Fairnilee among the dark shadows of the genuine old fairy beliefs. But a year later he returned to the Fairy Court tradition, and wrote Prince Prigio, the first of his Chronicles of Pantouflia.

In this series, even more than in The Princess Nobody, Lang employs the methods which he assigns to the old folk-tales; "a certain number of incidents are shaken into many varying combinations, like the fragments of coloured glass in the kaleidoscope."5 "Nobody can write a new fairy-tale; you can only mix up and dress up the old, old stories, and put the characters into new dresses."6 "The old, old fairy-tales are the best: it is a very difficult thing indeed to write a good fairy story nowadays, but if I know a really good one, it is The Rose and the Ring."7

It is admittedly Thackeray that Lang follows, though just as Thackeray had added to the store laid up by Madame d'Aulnoy, so Lang goes still further than he, drawing incidents and citing authorities very far removed from the simple traditional tales. It is storyland rather than fairyland in which Lang's tales are set, and in Prince Prigio he acknowledges his "several obligations to the Learned," which include Allan Quatermain, Cyrano de Bergerac and M. Paul Sébillot (an anthropologist); while in Prince Ricardo his most obvious debts are to Madame d'Aulnoy, Cornelius Agrippa, Ariosto, The Arabian Nights, and the history of Scotland.

But the guiding spirit is Thackeray's: King Grognio is own cousin to Valoroso, and Captain McDougal, who "maintained a stern military reserve" when the whole court was in tears, is nearly allied to Captain Kuttazoff Hedzoff. Indeed, Grognio claims descent, in the story, from Cinderella and Prince Giglio—by which means Lang "places" his stories in the history of Märchenland.

In the collected edition (My Own Fairy Book, 1896) of his fairy tales, Lang groups Prigio and Ricardo together as Chronicles of Pantouflia (under which title they were later reprinted as a separate volume) and he gives, in a Preface, a delightful account of the founding of the royal family of this "central European" kingdom, which was descended, he tells us, from the "Hypnotidœ" of Greece, and whose crest "is a dormouse, dormant, proper, on a field vert, and the motto, when translated out of the original Greek, means Anything for a Quiet Life."

Lang's own, slightly quizzical, account of his fairy stories describes them excellently: "In truth I never did write any fairy books in my life, except Prince Prigio, Prince Ricardo, and Tales of a Fairy Court, that of the aforesaid Prigio. . . . They are rich in romantic adventure, and the Princes always marry the right Princesses and live happy ever afterwards, while the wicked witches, step-mothers, tutors and governesses are never cruelly punished, but retire to the country on ample pensions. I hate cruelty: and I never put a wicked step-mother in a barrel and send her tobogganing down a hill. It is true that Prince Ricardo did kill the Yellow Dwarf; but that was in fair fight, sword in hand, and the dwarf, peace to his ashes, died in harness!"8 As he wrote this in 1910, The Princess Nobody would have been long out of print; while he obviously considers that The Gold of Fairnilee belongs to quite a different class of story.

The first of the Pantouflia series, Prince Prigio, appeared in 1889, a little square green book, printed in green type (and also in a limited edition on large paper, printed in black) with illustrations by Gordon Browne (the son of "Phiz") who ranks with Walter Crane and H. R. Millar, the most popular and successful illustrators of children's books in the later Victorian and Edwardian periods.

The story begins in the usual way with the King and Queen who have everything to make them happy except children. At last, however, Prigio is born. Then comes the question of whom to ask to the christening: King Grognio is anxious to invite all the fairies, but the Queen does not believe in them, and refuses to encourage his foolish superstition. But the guests all refuse to come, and the fairies turn up uninvited, and leave Prigio a collection of magic presents such as the Sword of Sharpness, Seven-League Boots and the like; but the cross old fairy wishes that he shall be "too clever." When the party is over, the Queen clears away all the gifts (which she regards as "pantomime properties") into a disused attic, where they are soon forgotten. Prigio grows up "too clever by half," and earns everyone's dislike by being always right: "He showed the fencing master how to fence, and the professional cricketer how to bowl . . . He set sums to the Chancellor of the Exchequer . . . He found out all his tutors and masters in the same horrid way; correcting the accent of his French teacher, and trying to get his German tutor not to eat peas with his knife. He also endeavoured to teach the Queen-dowager, his grandmother, an art with which she had long been perfectly familiar!"

When Prigio and his two younger brothers, Alphonso and Enrico, are growing up, a Fire-drake appears in the neighbourhood and causes a drought in the country. King Grognio, who hated Prigio even more than other people did, "was not ill pleased, for," thought he, "of course my three sons must go after the brute, the eldest first, and as usual it will kill the first two and be beaten by the youngest. It is a little hard on Enrico, poor boy, but anything to get rid of that Prigio!" This fairy-tale reasoning did not, however, appeal to that Prince (who, by the way, was lying on a sofa "doing sums in compound division for fun"), and he pointed out that if the King were right, the youngest brother, Alphonso, was the correct person to send. Prigio, it should be stated, treated the matter so lightly because he had been brought up by his excellent mother not to believe in Fire-drakes, or anything else supernatural. The two younger Princes set forth in turn, but neither of them came back; and when Grognio called upon Prigio to follow their example, the Prince produced such excellent and conclusive reasons for not doing so, that the King "withdrew into a solitary place where he could express himself with freedom." When he returned from this "solitary place where he had been speaking his mind," he ordered all the court to pack up and depart from the palace, leaving Prigio there alone.

The Prince, deprived by the mischievous courtiers of cloak, boots and money, stumbles by chance on the fairy gifts, uses them, and is most puzzled when their properties begin to be apparent—until he meets the lady Rosalind, and falling in love with her, suddenly finds himself able to believe in fairy things. At length he sets out to slay the Fire-drake, having promised to give the horns and tail of it to his lady, and accomplishes its destruction by setting it to fight the Remora, or Ice-Beast of whose existence his vast reading makes him aware in the pages of Cyrano de Bergerac. A number of complications follow, including the incident of Benson, the butler (who obtains possession of the relics of the Fire-drake and straightway claims to have killed it). And finally Prigio is set the task of restoring to life Enrico and Alphonso, which he accomplishes with the aid of the "water from the Fountain of Lions"; and at the same time he restores a whole host of knights of "every age and every clime" who had been frozen by the Remora—each of whom "lifted his sword and shouted 'Long live Prince Prigio!' in Greek, Latin, Egyptian, French, German and Spanish—all of which the Prince perfectly understood and spoke like a native." So all ends happily with the marriage of Prigio and Rosalind, and he wishes, with the aid of the Wishing Cap, that he may "seem no cleverer than other people," after which "he became the most popular Prince, and finally the best beloved King who had ever sat on the throne of Pantouflia."

Even this bald outline serves to show in what ways Lang departed from the Thackeray model, and how he made this well-explored region so much his own by means of the feeling for the world of fiction as a real place, and by the whimsical use of quotation and literary reference. It is, in fact, only a simplified form of the method with which he had experimented in The Mark of Cain and was to use again with increased effect in The Disentanglers. And it bears a certain relation also to the epistolary parodies which he must have been writing at about the same time, and which appeared the following year as Old Friends.

Such a method was admirably suited to the creation of Prigio himself, who is most cleverly conceived; for he still remains interesting and attractive even when living up to his name in the most aggravating fashion. Another character whom Lang was well able to portray was the Queen, who does not believe in fairies and magic, even against the evidence of her own senses. Is there perhaps a trace here of Lang's attitude of amused petulance towards the "realist" young lady novelist of the period, whom he describes in his anonymous satire "The Log-Rolliad" :

"While female Sceptics scream with acrid scoff

Their Faith that Miracles do not come off!

And then refute the story which they tell

By this weird Portent, that their Stories sell!"9

Certainly she is a delightfully trying person, and her stubbornness creates many opportunities for most amusing touches. When, for example, she has, unintentionally, been transported from the court to a distant castle by magic carpet, she refuses to return by the same means, which she still considers "childish and impossible," and accordingly sets out by carriage. "The King, Benson and the Prince were not so particular, and they simply flew back to Falkenstein in the usual way, arriving at 11.35—a week before Her Majesty"—who arrives, very bored and quite convinced that nothing unusual has been happening, right at the end of the book!

Another amusing character is Benson, the English Ambassador's butler. A note in the Preface that "the return of Benson (Chapter XII) is the fruit of the research of the late Mr. Allan Quatermain," suggests that Rider Haggard had invented the incident; and the similarity between the speech of Benson and of Haggard's comic servants (such as Job in She or the butler in The Ancient Allan) may even mean that Haggard lent more practical help: otherwise, Lang has caught his friend's manner very delightfully. Haggard certainly advised Lang during the writing of the story, for Lang writes such questions as "Doesn't my fairy tale need a more vivacious beginning, and what about Alphonso and Enrico?" in his letters of the period.10

And yet another debt, which Lang acknowledges in the Preface, is to "the lady" whose "invention of erudition" suggested Prigio's final wish which rounds off the story so satisfyingly: Mrs. Lang says that "the lady" was a little girl—her niece, Miss Thrya Alleyne.

The second in the series, Prince Ricardo of Pantouflia: Being the Adventures of Prince Prigio's Son, which appeared in 1893, is a pendant to the original book.

While Prigio had been kept from a belief in fairies and the use of magical properties, Ricardo goes to the other extreme, and spends his time dashing about the world on the Shoes of Swiftness, killing monsters with the Sword of Sharpness, much to the detriment of his education and his party manners. Prigio, in an attempt to teach him a lesson, substitutes shams for most of the fairy accessories, with the result that Ricardo fails in an attempt to restore Prince Charlie to the English throne, and is only rescued from a difficult situation by the resourcefulness of the magically-endowed Princess Jacqueline who is in love with him. Ricardo, profiting by his discomfiture, mends his ways, and (his education having in the meantime, we presume, embraced the works of Madame d'Aulnoy) sets out to slay in fair fight the Yellow Dwarf—who is perhaps the only example of a villain left triumphant at the end of a fairy-tale.

Ricardo's next adventure is with the "Giant-who-does-not-know-when-he-has-had-enough," which ends in disaster, as Jacqueline is captured and shut up in the mountain under which dwells the Earthquaker. Prigio comes to her aid with his superior knowledge, and destroys the monster by dropping on to him a lump of the heaviest substance in existence, namely, Stupidity, which he fetches from its storehouse on the Moon. This also saves Manoa, the City of the Sun, which the Earthquaker was about to destroy, and which turns out to be ruled by Jacqueline's father. So all ends happily with her marriage to Ricardo, and Prigio remains King of Pantouflia—"No need such kings should ever die!"

Prince Ricardo is not altogether as successful as Prince Prigio, largely on account of its lack of plot, and the episodic nature of its incidents, which occasionally seem a trifle forced and unwieldy—while Prigio goes all with a swing and an inevitability that is irresistible.

The adventure with Prince Charlie bears no relation to the plot of the book, and is so alien as to seem a disfigurement, nor is the Giant quite as satisfactory a monster as either Fire-drake in Prigio, or even the Yellow Dwarf in Ricardo. This is the more to be regretted, as there are scenes in the book of exquisite humour, and touches also of poetic feeling that is absent from Prigio. The adventure on the Moon is one of these scenes, and the chapter describing how Princess Jacqueline "Drank the Moon" to learn King Prigio's secret is an even more charming example, and contains a very attractive magic spell, versified from Cornelius Agrippa's Fourth Book of Occult Philosophy:

"Oh Lady Moon, on the waters riding,

On shining waters, in silver sheen,

Show me the secret the heart is hiding,

Show me the truth of the thought, oh Queen!

"Oh waters white, where the Moon is riding,

That knows what shall be, and what has been,

Tell me the secret the heart is hiding,

Wash me the truth of it, clear and clean!"

Prince Ricardo differs from its predecessor in being assigned to a definite period in history, for a reference to Beatrix Esmond, and the introduction of Prince Charlie at the age of fifteen would date it as 1735; from which we would assume that the events described in the main portion of Prince Prigio happened in 1718; but the cheque which King Grognio makes out to Prigio is dated 1768—a sad slip in chronology on the part of that monarch—or of the meticulous historian Andrew Lang!

Actually, Prince Prigio has no very definite period, and Gordon Browne's illustrations suggest the late middle ages or the early sixteenth century. But in Ricardo he observes the eighteenth-century setting with care; as does A. A. Dixon, also, in Tales of a Fairy Court, even though in other respects he does not seem to have read his original with much attention.

As regards this, the last work in the series, very little need be said. It was published in 1907, and is very much an attempt to recapture the atmosphere of the earlier volumes. It is more a collection of short stories than a complete whole, and is built, not very carefully, round Prince Prigio, much of which has in consequence to be retold in a shortened form which departs from the original in a number of ways, such as the marriage of one of Prigio's brothers to the Giant's daughter—though in the former story we are told quite clearly that both brothers "were in love with their two cousins," Molinda and Kathleena, whom in the end they married. Though of little importance, such inconsistencies as this suggest that Lang's power of imagining the world of fiction and fairy-tale as a real world was of a spasmodic and unthinking kind, and not the result of any orderly and preconceived plan. Lang seems to have been a trifle untidy and vague in his habits—constantly losing important letters and manuscripts—and this lack of method is reflected in all his fiction, though it is surprisingly absent from his more serious work.

Tales of a Fairy Court is the most scrappy of the fairy stories, and the book as a whole is inferior to Prince Ricardo. Here, again, the introduction of an adventure in a Scottish historical setting detracts greatly from the verisimilitude. But in other respects the use of the traditional fairy machinery is as clever and as amusingly worked out as in the earlier books; though here, too, the lack of plot makes itself felt again and again.

This was the last of Lang's adventures into the realm of Fairy-land, and is itself isolated from the earlier period when he was exploring that dim region in so many directions.

Only in the editing of the old, old tales did he persist until the end of his life, and to cull these he was obliged to go ever further afield. And the unusual nature of the later "Fairy Books" helped still more to perpetuate the belief that Lang was actually the author of the whole series. As late as 1910, when The Lilac Fairy Book appeared, he is still denying this imputation: "My part has been that of Adam, according to Mark Twain, in the Garden of Eden. Eve worked, Adam superintended. I also superintend. I find out where the stories are . . . I do not write the stories out of my own head. The reputation of having written all the Fairy Books (a European reputation in Nurseries and in the United States of America) is

. . . slowly killing me!"

Notes

1. "Literary Fairy Tales": Lang's introduction to F. Van Eeden's Little Johannes, 1895.

2. E. M. Field: The Child and His Book, 1891; pp. 235 and 242.

3. "Literary Fairy Tales": Lang's introduction to F. Van Eeden's Little Johannes, 1895.

4. "Literary Fairy Tales": Lang's introduction to F. Van Eeden's Little Johannes, 1895.

5. Lang's Preface to The Grey Fairy Book, 1900;

p. vii.

6. Lang's Preface to The Lilac Fairy Book, 1910;

p. viii.

7. Lang's Preface to Irene Maunder's The Plain Princess, 1905.

8. Lang's Preface to The Lilac Fairy Book, 1910;

p. vi.

9. "The Log-Rolliad": College Echoes (St. Andrews), 8th January 1891.

10. Letter from Lang to Rider Haggard; MS. at Ditchingham House, no date.

Roger Lancelyn Green (essay date 1946)

SOURCE: Green, Roger Lancelyn. "Fairnilee and Pantouflia." In Andrew Lang: A Critical Biography, pp. 97-108. Leicester, England: Edmund Ward, 1946.

[In the following essay, Green explores how the origins of The Gold of Fairnilee can be found in Lang's childhood experiences and literary influences.]

As a writer of original fairy stories, Andrew Lang was very much the literary man at play, and was usually content to let his light and Puckish fancy dance gaily among the scenes and situations of a generally accepted and somewhat artificial Fairyland.

But on one occasion he seems to have thrown off his habitual "cloak of indifference and light banter," and, seeking for a new and deeper well of magical and romantic inspiration, to have found it in the legends and memories of his much-loved Border home.

"For us," he writes, "the true poetry is the poetry that wakes again the true self; the wistful soul slumbering undisturbed in the tumult of the world, and only aroused, like the Sleeping Princess in the Scottish fairy-tale, by the magic song"1 And in his case the magic song was the music of the Tweed and of the waters of the north wandering among the hills where dwelt yet the echoes of old story and old belief.

"A mist of memory broods and floats,

The Border waters flow;

The air is full of ballad notes

Borne out of long ago.

"Old songs that sung themselves to me,

Sweet through a boy's day-dream,

While Trout below the blossom'd tree

Plashed in the golden stream."2

"The spirit of Faery," he said, "is a Northern spirit"3 , and it was this spirit that he invoked when he wrote The Gold of Fairnilee in 1888.

In deserting all the literary traditions of Fairyland and going for his inspiration to the Border ballads and to the ancient folk beliefs and superstitions, Lang was not acting unreasonably or from any spirit of forced innovation: for the fairies of the north are indeed the true fairies, and they were the products of the popular and literary creed of many centuries.

These fairies are of a confused origin—members, perhaps, of an early, persecuted race, dwarfish and earth-dwelling, or perhaps in origin the ghosts of men long dead. Certainly they are of a malignant disposition, and, beneath the frown of the Christian churchmen, came to be regarded as tributaries of the Devil, paying a "tiend to Hell" once every seven years, of an unbaptized babe or of some human willing to become subject to their reign. By night these evil visitants came to the homesteads of mortal folk to steal away children and leave hideous changelings in their place—a superstition still prevalent in Ireland about fifty years ago when a young woman was burnt by her husband on the charge of being a changeling. Such ancient beliefs die slowly, and only the modern age, science, industry and the annihilation of distance has succeeded in destroying them.

Among more literary classes the popular fairy-lore in the Middle Ages became diluted and changed by the addition of classical and romantic elements. Perhaps the best example of this is the Middle English poem of "Sir Orfeo," which tells the story of Orpheus and Eurydice in a setting of British fairy belief, making Persephone queen of that fairyland under the ground to which, in the ballad, the Fairy Queen leads Thomas the Rhymer.

Another confusion with the fairies was that of the elves of a more Teutonic origin, those elves who took charge of the infant Arthur in Layaman's Brut, endowing him with moral and physical virtues, and making him a present of fairy swords and armour.

Chaucer, in the Canterbury Tales, still speaks of

Pluto, that is the king of fayerye . . .

Folwinge his wyf, the quene Proserpyne,

but to him they have begun to seem beneficent spirits, and they perform a moral purpose in the story of Januarie and his false wife.

It was on such a substratum as this that Shakespeare built when, in Charles Lamb's phrase, he "invented the fairies." His transcendent imagination welded together all the earlier floating beliefs: Oberon, the "fairy knight" of Huon of Bordeau; Titania, another name for Artemis, and so by a confusion with Hekate, none other than the "quene Proserpyne"; and Puck, the more English popular fairy, descended from the Teutonic elves, and became the Brownie, the earliest mention of whom, according to Lang, is in 1518, where John Major or Muir, in his Dissertation on the Gospel of St. Matthew, "speaks of Brownies as jocular spirits who do odd jobs about a house, throw stones and other objects, and are apt to provoke curiosity rather than alarm."4

But it was from the pre-Shakespearean conception of the fairy world that Lang drew his inspiration and his materials, nor does there seem to be more than one fairy story of a later date that has any very close relation to the lines on which Lang worked.

This isolated example is called Alice Learmont, and was written by Dinah Maria Mulock, the author of John Halifax, Gentleman, at a very early stage in her career. It appeared anonymously in 1852, and was reissued as hers in 1884. It is quite possible that Lang may have known this story, though he makes no mention of it; but any similarity between it and The Gold of Fairnilee lies simply in the fact that the sources for the central theme in each story were the Border ballads of "Thomas the Rhymer" and "Young Tamlane." Dinah Mulock does not keep very near to the tradition, and shows the influence of the later literary conventions; her fairies, for example, have wings—a very late addition, dating probably from the Sylphs of Pope; but in other respects they claim to be pre-Shakespeare:—"he paints me," says the Fairy Queen in the story, "so little after received tradition, and so much out of his own fancy, that I hardly know my own likeness!"

Lang, however, does not allow any later tradition to influence The Gold of Fairnilee ; indeed, one might almost hesitate to call it a "fairy story" in the ordinary sense—as Lang himself seems to have felt when he excludes it from the list of his original fairy-tales given in the Preface to The Lilac Fairy Book.

The plot is very simple, and concerns little Randal Ker of Fairnilee, whose father is killed at the Battle of Flodden (1513) in the first chapter of the story. Randal lives with his widowed mother at Fairnilee, with Jean, a little English girl captured in a Border raid, for companion. One Midsummer Day, Randal decides to visit a fairy well on the hills beyond Tweed; he reaches it about nightfall, and when he has wished to see the Fairy Queen, she spirits him away to Fairyland. Jean, Lady Ker and Nancy, the old nurse, pass seven miserable years not knowing what has become of Randal; but at the end of that time, Jean, who is now grown up, visits the wishing well on Midsummer Eve, plucks the magic rose, and wins back Randal by the Sign of the Cross. From Fairyland Randal brings with him only a phial of magic water, a little of which, when he had chanced to rub it on his eyes, showed him the false and empty hollowness of the Fairy Queen and her realm. The old nurse, hearing the story, takes the bottle, and by anointing her eyes with it sees where the ancient treasure, the Gold of Fairnilee, lies beneath the soil of the Camp o' Rink; Randal and Jean dig it up, and with it buy food for the people in a time of famine. And the story ends happily with the marriage of Jean and Randal.

The description of Randal's abduction by the Fairy Queen is taken, in one place almost verbatim, from "Thomas the Rhymer," and Jean at the well recalls Janet in "Young Tamlane":

"She had na' pu'd a red, red rose,

A rose but barely three:

Till up and starts a wee, wee man

At lady Janet's knee."

And besides this legendary lore there is also a spice of history behind the story: Lang writes, in a humorous apology for family legends introduced into fiction: "Will the Kers of Faldonside be down on this humble head because I have told a tale in which one of them was carried off to Fairyland? Fa