It is a common phenomenon for people in using pragmatics in their daily communication. People tend to express themselves implicitly with intention which is discussed in illocutionary acts. The intention are such as commanding, informing, expressing themselves and so on. Illocutionary acts that was developed by Searle (1976) has five types, representative/(assertive), directive, commissive, expressive and declaration. One of the types that often be used is directive which is classified into few classes such as command, beg, advise and request. This research was aimed to analyzed the classes and the frequency of directive speech acts that are uttered by the characters in”Cinderella” movie. This research was analyzed by applying descriptive qualitative method which is explained in words, phrases and sentences. The data will be collected from the characters’ utterance in “Cinderella” movie. The researcher used observational method, non-participatory and note taking technique method in c...

This is a descriptive qualitative research. The data sources are thevmanuscript and video of “Avatar” film. From the sources, the researcher takes 40 declarative utterances uttered by the main character (Jake Sully) to be analyzed. The research goals are 1) to identify the contexts of declarative utterances, 2) to identify the hearer’s responses of declarative utterances, 3) to explain the pragmatic force of declarative utterances viewed from the illocutionary force. Before define the force, the researcher explains the context for a better understanding about the speaker’s intention. The results of this research are, 1) every utterance has its own context: situation, participants, ends, act sequence, key, instrumentalities, norms, and genre, 2) the hearer’s responses are words response and act response, 3) utterance’s function reflects the pragmatic force, those 40 declarative utterances bring various forces; suggesting, appointing, reporting, requesting, claiming, thanking, asking,...

This study is aimed to explain the classifications and to explain the contribution of directive speech acts analysis in the "The Message" by Moustapha Akkad to EFL learner in understanding the expression of giving the command. This study used descriptive qualitative which the writer interprets of utterances that contain the types of directive speech acts in this movie and the contribution of this research in EFL Classroom. The result of the study showed that 213 utterances of the directive of speech acts were successfully identified. There are command (182 data or 85.44 %), order (2 data or 0.94 %), request (10 data or 4.70 %), and suggestion (19 data or 8.92 %). So it can be concluded that the dominant directive is a command because this movie contained many commands of the Prophet Muhammad and his friends in the battle of Badr and Uhud. This result of this research is suggested for students. Teacher as a facilitator can use this movie as learning media. By watching this movie, the student can observe the expression of giving a command. Expression of giving command was found in basic competence (3.4 and 4.4).

In order to maintain a great means of communication between people, language use plays a significant role in the interaction process. Within the interaction process among speaker and hearer comes with an act or action along that is called speech acts, which refers to when a person is saying something, it is hoped that the hearer act as what the speaker intends him or her to do. Speech acts are always found in our daily basis, and even found in films, advertisements, and social media such as Instagram, Facebook, and YouTube. With the existence of YouTube, many short length films are found to have speech acts especially in one of the YouTube series entitled “Yakin Nikah”. By investigating “Yakin Nikah” characters’ speech acts, this research aims to explore the types of speech acts that exist and to analyse how those speech acts are then classified into Illocutionary act. This research uses descriptive qualitative method, by using several techniques such as visual analysis and textual ...

The aimed of this research is to analyze the function of the conversational implicature found in a famous American TV show, named F.R.I.E.N.D.S. The researcher used the conversational implicature theory by Grice (1975) to identify the utterance and the speech acts theory by Searle (1976) to categorize the function. The design of this research is qualitative research. The researcher used the interview method by Sudaryanto (2015) to collect data, the pragmatic identity method by Sudaryanto (2015) to analyze the data, and used the informal presentation method by Sudaryanto (2015) to present the research result. The researcher collected ten data that contain conversational implicature, and two of the data categorized as representatives/ assertives, three data categorized as directives, two data categorized as commissives, two data categorized as expressive, and the remaining data categorized as declarations. The result concludes that out of the ten analyzed data, directives is the most ...

The aim of this research is to find out the type of directive speech acts and to find out which directive speech acts most frequently used in “Koi Mil Gaya” movie. The research is conducted by using a qualitative approach. This research describes the phenomenon, the data, the situation, as it is really found. The technique of data collection in this research is a documentary study. From the result of this study, the writer finds that there are 246 utterances of directive speech act produced by the characters in the movie as 196 data. The form of the directive act can be found in utterances which contain words, phrase, clause, and sentences. From the analysis shows that in “Koi Mil Gaya” movie shows a directive speech act which contains three aspects, they are command, request, and suggestion. First, in command, there are 165 data (utterances) or 84.18%. Second, in suggestion, there are 20 data/utterances or 10.20%. Third, in a request there are 11 data//utterances or 5.61%. While the most dominant type of directive speech act is in command.

This study aims to find the forms of strategies and functions of requests in English that are used in several films with different ratings. Another objective of this research is to find the relations between the uses of strategies and functions of requests in English. Film is a picture of everyday life and we can see the cultures of a society, one of which is the use of language. To view the request speech acts in English, then two films that use English as a communication tool with regard to the different ratings were selected. The selection of films with different ratings are intended to see differences in the use of language in movies watched by children and adolescents. Rating in the selected movie consists of G (general audiences) and PG (parental guide suggested). Rating G is a film that is for the public, which means that the film can be watched by all ages. Rating PG is a movie that can be watched by children under parental guidance. Having found the forms and strategies of ...

Mario Teguh is a well known motivator in Indonesia. He has attracted Massive public attention for several years through his talkshow programs in several Indonesian television channels like Golden Ways and Super Show Talkshow. The utterances of Mario Teguh in his motivational speeches can be analyzed through a pragmatics study. This research aims to describe and analyze the types of directive illocutionary acts and illocutionary function uttered by Mario Teguh in some videos of Super Show talk show by referring to a main theory by Searle’s, Leech theories, McManis and Yule theories. By observing the frequentative utterance of directive illocutionary acts in Mario Teguh speech, we will be able to analyze what type and function of directive illocutionary acts used by Mario Teguh. The result shows that Mario Teguh tends to use four directive illocutionary acts; they are commanding, requesting, inviting, and suggesting. The functions of directive illocutionary acts used by Mario Teguh ar...