The Horn Rapids Solar, Storage & Training Project in Richland provides Washington state its first opportunity to integrate a utility-scale solar and storage facility into its clean mix of hydro, nuclear and wind resources. This facility combines solar generation with battery storage and technician training.

The site is just north of Richland, on land owned by the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers. The 20 acre project is a 4-megawatt direct current solar generating array of photovoltaic panels that can provide enough energy to power about 600 Richland homes. The project also includes a 1-MW/4MWh battery energy storage system and serves as a training ground for solar and battery technicians throughout the nation. The combination of photovoltaic solar with battery storage makes for a predictable, renewable generating resource.

History

The $6½ million storage project received a $3 million assist in 2017 from the state’s Clean Energy Fund, managed by the Department of Commerce.​

In September 2018, the City of Richland agreed to be the power off-taker of the project. Final approval of the project and participants agreement was granted by the Energy Northwest board of directors and executive board in October 2018.

Construction began in February 2020 and completed in the fall of 2020.

The project energized in November 2020.

Solar Generation

Tucci Energy Services, a Seattle-based woman-owned energy corporation, owns and operates the 4-megawatt solar portion of the project. Power from the project supplies the battery system and, through interconnection with the city of Richland’s energy distribution system, is a source of energy for local loads.

Energy Storage

Energy Northwest owns and operates the co-located battery storage system. The system smoothes the solar output, shifts off-peak solar energy generation to times when the energy is needed, and helps reduce peak energy demand. The 1MW/4 MWhr system has the capability to power about 150 homes for four hours.

Professional Training

Adjacent to the project is a training center for solar and battery storage technicians. Training will cover plant construction, operations, maintenance, and safety and hazard prevention.

National Research

Pacific Northwest National Laboratory monitors and analyzes​ data from the project to evaluate the financial benefits of incorporating battery energy storage in order to develop improved battery designs and advanced tools for incorporating intermittent renewables onto the grid more reliably and economically.​

Learn more

Solar power

Watch time lapse video #1