Boston, MA—July 12—Community Work Services in partnership with Fedcap’s Apex Technical School have received a $200,000 grant from the Re-Entry Workforce Development Demonstration Grants program, sponsored by Massachusetts Governor Maura Healey and Lieutenant Governor Kim Driscoll, to continue their work in the already successful solar photovoltaic installation training program at CWS in Boston. Classes will comprise returning citizens following incarceration.

The Apex Clean Energy Institute’s 450-hour solar training program provides hands-on training in solar photovoltaic installation that result in well-paying, sustainable jobs in the high demand clean energy sector. Specifics of the program include basic digital skills and financial literacy, micro grids/smart grids and solar energy systems design, safety, fall protection, construction, power tools, safe operation, pipe bending, and racking assembly.

In the first solar training class offered this past winter at CWS to returning citizens, 80% of those enrolled completed the program and 75% were placed in jobs averaging $54,000 annually. A recent report by the Brookings Institution has found lower recidivism from returning citizens if they have sustainable employment.

Graduates of the 450-hour solar energy training program will receive six college credits from The Fedcap Group’s partner Paul Smith’s College. These credits can be used at Paul Smith’s or other colleges or universities to secure pathways into other certificate and degree programs to participate in additional upskilling to graduates of the Apex Clean Energy Institute.

“CWS and The Fedcap Group are dedicated to creating pathways to economic well-being that go beyond simply getting people a job,” said Christine McMahon, President and CEO of The Fedcap Group, the parent company of CWS and Apex. “Our mission is focused on creating opportunities that encourage people to aim high and obtain work that has long-term prospects, and our solar technician training program is doing just that.”

“CWS has been working with the Boston Community for more than 145 years, providing high-quality job skills training and employment opportunities, and the Apex Clean Energy Institute has already put people to work in high-demand, sustainable positions with career potential,” said Craig Stenning, Executive Director of CWS Boston. “We appreciate the Healey-Driscoll Administration’s belief in our program and their dedication to addressing workforce development for all.”

The launch of the new Apex Clean Energy Institute was made possible by funding from the

Massachusetts Executive Office of Housing and Economic Development, Commonwealth Corporation, and National Grid Foundation.

About The Fedcap Group

For 87 years, The Fedcap Group has developed scalable, innovative, and potentially disruptive solutions to some of society’s most pressing needs. Serving 340,000 people this past fiscal year, The Fedcap Group provides educational services to every age group, vocational training and job attainment in high-growth industries, as well as support services such as behavioral health services—all targeted to helping people achieve long-term self-sufficiency. The Fedcap Group also invests its time and resources in broader system change—working in partnership with federal, state, and local government to improve the way services are designed, funded, and delivered.

About CWS

Founded in 1877, Community Work Services (CWS) helps people who face barriers to work obtain employment and achieve self-sufficiency through innovative job training, placement and support services. CWS is a company of The Fedcap Group.

About Apex Technical School

Since 1961, Apex Technical School has enjoyed a rich tradition of service to New Yorkers who know us well for our adult vocational technical school which offers training in skilled trades. Our hands-on training courses give individuals the basic trade and labor skills needed to secure an entry-level position in the field. Located in Long Island City in Queens, Apex offers 900-hour certificate courses in high demand areas such as: air conditioning and refrigeration, automotive service, welding technology, electrical and advanced electrical, plumbing and construction. All of Apex’s trade programs offer hands-on training in as little as 7 months. Apex is licensed by the New York State Education Department and accredited by the Accrediting Commission of Career Schools and Colleges.

Apex Technical School is a nonprofit organization and a member of The Fedcap Group, an international nonprofit, dedicated to creating opportunities for people with barriers to economic well-being.