Solar Turbines Incorporated, a wholly owned subsidiary of Caterpillar Inc., has been a pioneer in the design, manufacturer, and packaging of industrial gas turbines and related products and services for over 65 years. Solar® gas turbines play an important role in the development of oil, natural gas, and power generation projects around the world. Customers in more than 100 countries around the world count on Solar Turbines to provide rugged, reliable gas turbine systems, responsive service, and 24/7 product support - translating into low life cycle costs and excellent availability. Solar has installed nearly 16,000 gas turbines with over 3 billion operating hours of service, a level of experience unrivaled in their size class. Customers can depend on Solar support from our worldwide service network, 24-hour parts depots and factory-trained service personnel. Solar offers complete gas compression and power generation solutions, including turnkey services, financing, and operation and maintenance. Count on Solar's commitment to your complete satisfaction.

Oil & Gas

Rated from 1590-52,500 hp, Solar products for the oil and gas Industry work to power compressors and pumps for producing, processing and pipelining crude oil and natural gas, and providing power for offshore production platforms.

Power Generation

Rated from 1-39 MW, Solar’s generator sets are used for industrial power generation applications such as cogeneration, base-load electricity or emergency power for a wide variety of facilities including industrial/processing facilities, buildings and institutions, distributed power plants, and district energy systems.

Customer Services

Optimize the value of your equipment

Committed to helping customer's get the greatest output from equipment at the lowest operating and maintenance cost

As the original equipment manufacturer (OEM), Solar understands the equipment down to the smallest detail

Maintain, repair, overhaul, and upgrade services

Training programs

Machinery Management Services to help maximize the return on investment

Machinery Renewal and Upgrade

Package Refurbishment

Overhaul service to restore equipment performance

Conversions to industry-leading dry, low-emissions combustion system

A Quality, Health, Safety and Environmental (QHSE) management system to provide a safe working environment

Solar Certified Service Parts 24/7

Combined Heat and Power (Cogeneration)

Financial returns on energy savings can easily justify a cogeneration investment. But in today's markets, your benefits can extend much further. By controlling a major source of electric power, you gain leverage in an industry increasingly driven by market forces, thus more volatile and less predictable than before. With turbine-based generation in place, you can:

Insulate yourself against spikes in market power prices

Increase power reliability, thus lessening risk of critical process downtime

Create opportunities to sell surplus power at a profit

Environmentally friendly - More fuel efficiency reduces pollutant emissions to the air.

Every percentage point gain in efficiency proportionally reduces emissions of the “greenhouse gas" - carbon dioxide

Governments worldwide encourage and support cogeneration

Delivers attractive returns even where heat and power demands fluctuate

Capture exhaust heat directly for product curing and drying

Heat water or industrial process fluids

Produce steam for space heating, district heating or industrial processes

Create steam to drive absorption chillers for space cooling or refrigeration

Capable of 40 to 50 percent electrical efficiency and as high as 85 percent overall fuel efficiency with exhaust heat recovery

Renewable Fuels/Sustainability