GRID's Training Philosophy

We offer a variety of ways to gain skills in different aspects of the solar industry. Our training offers the unique opportunity to participate in the installation process from start to finish. Trainees learn while participating on real-world solar installations, getting a full picture of the industry by meeting the clients and communities served.

GRID’s vision is a transition to clean, renewable energy that includes everyone. This vision can only be realized with a solar workforce that has opportunities for all. GRID is committed to making our job training opportunities accessible and inclusive of groups that are traditionally underrepresented in solar including women, people of color and those impacted by the criminal justice system. We have several programs and initiatives to provide training and connect employers to job seekers.

Installation Training Programs

Training programs offering participants hands-on installation training to develop their skills and increase employment opportunities.

Tribal Solar Accelerator Fund

The Tribal Solar Accelerator Fund strives to provide renewable energy experiential learning and community centered opportunities for tribal members. Through TSAF Leadership Programs we offer funding, mentoring, and education on tribal renewable energy planning, policy, entrepreneurship, and other areas of technical support.

Women in Solar Program

We’re working to build a diverse, equitable and inclusive solar industry by providing pathways to technical careers for women, highlighting the voices of women of color in the industry, and providing national leadership on solar workforce diversity.

SolarCorps Fellowships

One-year placements at GRID Alternatives that give participants the opportunity to get broad and deep experience in a variety of aspects of the industry.

Solar Futures

A program to provide both classroom and hands-on solar education to K-14 students, with a focus on high school juniors and seniors, giving them with opportunities to learn more about solar power and career pathways in the booming solar industry.

Solar Spring Break

College students leave campus for an immersive hands-on experience with GRID Alternatives staff, learning how the power of the sun can bring real-world solutions to real-world problems.