JUNIOR SUITE MÁRIO DE SÁ-CARNEIRO

{May 19, 1890 {Lisbon, Portugal} – April 26, 1916 {Paris, France}}

In our luxurious Torel Palace Porto, right in the center of Porto, we honor Mário de Sá-Carneiro with one of our Suite Junior hotel rooms, with a twin bed, balcony, and pool view. This suite, decorated by the designer Isabel Sá Nogueira, stays on the penultimate floor.

One of the most peculiar features of this suite is the giant cube, based in the center of the room. This cube, where we can find the bathroom, is entirely lined with a mirror.

The portrait of the poet is audited by the painter Jorge Curval.

37 m2

Double or twin bed

Balcony

Pool view

Fireplace

Coffee machine

Mini bar

Television

Free WiFi

Air conditioning

Hairdryer

Safe

Occupancy: up to two people.

About the writer...

Mário de Sá-Carneiro was a Portuguese poet, short story writer and fiction writer, being one of the main representatives of Portuguese Modernism.

Orphaned by a mother at just two years old, Sá-Carneiro started writing poetry at the age of 12. He attended the law course in Coimbra and later in Paris, but dropped out of both, annoyed with the “extreme boring” of academic life.

The writer has always shown despair, loneliness and emotional instability, something that has been translated into his works. Sá-Carneiro met Fernando Pessoa in 1912, who was undoubtedly his best friend. Together, they founded the magazine Orpheu, in 1915. For the Portuguese press at the time, Sá-Carneiro was considered “crazy”.

In 1915, he began to write letters to Pessoa out of growing anguish, frustration, and discontent with life. A year later, Sá-Carneiro committed suicide at the age of 25, in Paris, using five vials of strychnine. In his hotel room, Sá-Carneiro left a set of letters for family and friends, along with a farewell note.

Up to the date of his death, Sá-Carneiro sent Fernando Pessoa more than 200 letters, including a “goodbye letter”, in which he reveals the reasons for ending his life. Pessoa dedicated several texts and poems to him throughout his life, considering him a “genius not only of art but also of its innovation”. The building where Sá-Carneiro lost his life is marked with a plaque in memory of the writer. Despite his short life, his works influenced several writers, among them Eugénio de Andrade.

His main works:

A confissão de Lúcio (1914);

Dispersão (1914);

Céu em fogo (1915);

Poesia (1995).

“That madness, deep down, is like so many others, a matter of the majority.” – Loucura…, Mário Sá-Carneiro.

Cookies Settings:

Cookies and other similar technologies are an essential part of how our Platform works. The main goal of cookies is to make your browsing experience easier and more efficient and to improve our services and the Platform itself. Likewise, we use cookies to show you targeted advertising when you visit third-party websites and apps. Here, you will find all the information on the cookies we use. Furthermore, you will be able to activate and/or deactivate them according to your preferences, except for any cookies that are strictly necessary for the functioning of the Platform. Keep in mind that blocking certain cookies may affect your experience on the Platform, as well as its functioning. By clicking “Confirm preferences”, the cookies selection you have made will be saved. If you have not selected any options, clicking this button will be the same as blocking all cookies. For more information, please consult our Cookie Policy.