Celebrate football Sunday and the Big Game with these free printable label templates. We've collected the best label designs so you can throw an amped up party.

The following templates range from beer bottle labels to stickers and party favors. After selecting a template, choose the label size and configuration that works best for you. Then customize the copy and design to fit your needs!

Football Beer Bottle Label Templates

Nothing says "football" more than cracking open a nice, cold beer. Take your party to the next level this year with custom beer bottle labels! Download and print various designs to distinguish between the crowd favorites in your cooler.

Pair with our waterproof labels so your designs hold up to ice and heavy handling!

Football Water Bottle Label Templates

Keep everyone at your party hydrated with these fun water bottle labels. Our sizes work with most bottle sizes and shapes so you can wrap them around the minis or standard 16.9 oz bottles.

If you're dropping these in a cooler, give our waterproof labels a try. Any paper-based materials may bleed or deteriorate when they come into contact with ice and water.

Football Wine Label Templates

Bring these fun wine bottle labels as a hostess gift or put them out for the wine drinkers at your party. They work great for red and wine whites, whatever your preference.

Adding these label printables to white wine? Make sure you purchase our waterproof labels so they hold up in the ice bucket or refrigerator!

Football Party Snack Label Templates

Label your all-American spread with ease with help from these festive cardstock table tents. Designs feature plenty of space to write or type in the name of your dish, list any allergens, or list the chef. These templates make serving buffet-style a breeze so you can sit down and enjoy the party yourself!

Football Sticker Templates & Party Décor

Everyone, even non-football fans, can enjoy the game with these fun printables. Have people bet on the final score, pass stickers around, or decorate the table. These templates help make it a party!

Football Party Favor Label Templates

Win or lose, send your guests home with a delicious and fun goody bag. Attach these printable cardstock tags to leftover food, desserts, or football-themed accessories.

We love to make hosting and partying easy. Search the site for hundreds of sticker shapes and sizes to fit any template – plus dozens of fun materials including clear labels and glossy labels.

Looking for more fun designs? Browse all of our blank and pre-designed label templates for dozens of other DIY ideas.

Be sure to share your football party decor in our Customer Ideas gallery. Our customers are our inspiration!