Barbara (Nolan) Steele

KINGSTON -, Barbara Nolan Steele, 95, of Kingston, MA, died peacefully on October 24, 2018. Barbara was born in Baltimore, Maryland on November 14, 1922 and raised by the Kelleys, the maternal side of her family in New Canaan, CT. Barbara graduated from Stoneleigh College, NH in 1942 and then worked in NYC at Vogue in the art department. Barbara was married 72 years to her high school sweetheart, pre-deceased husband, John A. Steele, Jr. Together they raised eight children in Glastonbury, CT where Barbara owned and managed Brook Farm Nurseries. The Steeles moved their family to the South Shore area in 1974 finding a love for boating and restoring old homes. Barbara, a passionate landscaper, gardener, cook, antique collector, interior designer, knitter, sewer, painter, reader, and creative organizer of family events,was the life of the party. Her passion brought her tomany places in life from owning The Steele House, an antique shop in Pembroke, to countless hours spent as volunteer organizer of the Friends of Cranberry Hospice for The Festival of Trees a fund-raiser held at Plimoth Plantation.

Beloved Mother, Grandmother and Great Grandmother, Barbara Steele leaves behind eight children; Analee M. Vallo of Southington, CT, John A. Steele III of Duxbury, MA, Katherine Conto of Sheboygan, WI, Patricia S. Bramley of Cornwall, CT, Mary Jane Brennan of Plymouth, James K. Steele of Middlefield, CT, Michael W. Steele of Kingston, MA and Matthew R. Steele (deceased).

Barbara also leaves behind 22 grandchildren and 30great grand-children. She will be dearly missed by all of her family, friends and those who knew her.

A visiting hour will will be held at the Shepherd Funeral Home. 216 Main St Kingston, at 9:00 AM followed by a funeral Mass at 10:00 AM on Monday, October 29 at St. Joseph’s Parish at 272 Main St, Kingston, MA 02364. Interment will follow at 1:00 PM at the Massachusetts National Cemetery on Connery Ave, Bourne, MA 02532.

Donations in Barbara Nolan Steele’s name can be made to Cranberry Hospice, 36 Cordage Park Circle, Suite #326, Plymouth, MA, 02360. www.bidplymouth.org