The 36th Term Meeting of the Permanent Council of TURKSOY took place in Kastamonu, one of the most ancient settlements of Turkey and hometown of Şeyh Şabani Veli, one of three spiritual leaders of Anatolia declared as Cultural Capital of the Turkic World 2018 by the International Organization of Turkic Culture TURKSOY.

The meeting took place in the historical mansion of Kastamonu “Kurşunlu Han” and gathered ministers of culture of TURKSOY member countries and representatives of international organizations who made major decisions regarding culture and art of the Turkic World for 2019.

The meeting coordinated by the Minister of Culture and Tourism of the Republic of Turkey Mehmet Nuri Ersoy gathered TURKSY Secretary General Ambassador Dusen Kasseinov, the Deputy Minister of Culture Information and Tourism of the Kyrgyz Republic Baktybek Sekimov, the Deputy Minister of Culture of Turkmenistan Nursahet Shirimov, the Representative of the Ministry of Culture of Azerbaijan Günay Aliyeva, the Representative of the Ministry of National Education and Culture of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus Şehbal Hamzaoğlu, the Chief of the Culture and Tourism Administration of the Autonomous Territorial Unit of Gagauzia (Moldova) Marina Semenova, the Secretary General of the Turkic Council Baghdad Amreyev, the President of the Turkic Academy Darhan Kydyrali, the Secretary General of TURK-Pa Altynbek Mamayusupov, the Governor of Kastamonu Yaşar Karadeniz, the Mayor of Kastamonu Tahsin Babaş, the Mayor of the city of Osh in Kyrgyzstan Taalaybek Sarybashev and the Deputy Secretary General of TURKSOY Prof. Dr. Fırat Purtaş along with representatives of various institutions and organizations as well as members of the press media.

In the opening speech he delivered at the meeting, the Minister of Culture and Tourism of the Republic of Turkey Mehmet Nuri Ersoy congratulated TURKSOY on the occasion of its 25th anniversary and expressed his gratitude, saying that: "As the UNESCO of the Turkic World, TURKSOY has been and is carrying out major activities to preserve and promote Turkic culture and increase its visibility on a global scale”.

Minister Mehmet Nuri Ersoy further said: "In line with its mission to promote Turkic culture and its values based on tolerance and brotherhood, TURKSOY has been successfully carrying out various activities around the world for 25 years."

Minister Mehmet Nuri Ersoy went on saying:

"With universal bridges of culture and art it builds to bring peoples together on a common platform TURKSOY undoubdtedly contributes to universal peace. TURKSOY assumes an important mission regarding the Turkic World. Indeed, in line with the mission it has been assuming for 25 years, it carries out activities to promote Turkic culture and its precious values such as tolerance, brotherhood and solidarity. As such, TURKSOY is a platform of diplomacy which draws its strength from common cultural values of our countries which have been coexisting in brotherhood and solidarity with eachother for centuries. Thanks to the support and contribution of our ministers of culture, this platform also acts as a major instrument of solidarity. At the same time, it has become the common voice and will of the Turkic World to promote our common cultural and artistic heritage as well as our common values and mother tongue.".

Minister Ersoy who also stressed that Cultural Capitals of the Turkic World play a key role in turning cities into cultural trademarks further added: "Let me stress that we will always support such projects. 2018 has been an unforgettable year for Kastamonu and for us. Later today, we will hold the closing event of Kastamonu with a wonderfully colourful event which wiil leave undelible traces in the minds of spectators with performances of typical melodies and dances from countries of the Turkic World."

In the speech he delivered, TURKSOY Secretary General Dusen Kasseinov extended his gratitude to the Minister of Culture and Tourism of the Republic of Turkey Mehmet Nuri Ersoy, the Governor of Kastamonu Yaşar Karadeniz and the Mayor of Kastamonu Tahsin Babaş for hosting the event and to other participants for honouring the event with their presence. Mr. Kasseinov further expressed his happiness as to the fact that the 25th anniversary of TURKSOY has been joyfully celebrated throughout the year and that the city of Kastamonu will now give over the title of Cultural Capital of the Turkic World 2018 to its next owner after having successfully born this prestigious title throughout the year.

Mr. Kasseinov who also stressed that TURKSOY has reached its 25th anniversary thanks to the multilateral contribution and benefit of all its contributors which acted all together with a strong will and determination, further said: “There are many events and activities which have become the trademark of TURKSOY since its establishment 25 years ago. In this respect, TURKSOY is the best example of sustainable cultural cooperation which benefits to all. 36 term meetings held in these 25 years; the initiative launched in 2012 to declare a Cultural Capital of the Turkic World every year, countless gatherings of painters, authors, opera singers, photographers and folk dance ensembles and the orchestras and choir of TURKSOY which enjoy worldwide recognition are all tangible proofs of the fact that Turkic republics and kindred peoples strongly benefit from this cooperation and that our common future evolves based on this cultural cooperation.”

Osh, the Cultural Capital of the Turkic World 2019

Following the opening speeches, participants of the Permanent Council went on with the next items of the agenda which included the selection of the Cultural Capital of the Turkic World 2019.

Within the framework of the initiative launched by TURKSOY in 2010, this title was born for the first time by the city of Astana in 2012. This time, the Permanent Council of Ministers of Culture of Turkic Speaking Countries unanimously elected the city of Osh in Kyrgyzstan as Cultural Caital of the Turkic World 2019.

Permanent Council members who supported the suggestion of the Ministery of Culture Information and Tourism of the Kyrgyz Republic unanimously selected the city of Osh as Cultural Caital of the Turkic World 2019.

The vote of the Permanent Council was followed by a short presentation film on Osh during which the Mayor of Osh Mr. Taalaybek Sarybashev also gave some information on Osh, the Cultural Caital of the Turkic World 2019".

The Year 2019 was declared Year of the Azerbaijani Poet Imadeddin Nesimi and the Minstrel Aşık Veysel

Upon decision of the Permanent Council of TURKSOY which declares commemorative years to pay tribute to the cultural and artistic legacy of illustrious personalities of the Turkic World and introduce them to future generations, the year 2019 was dedicated to the commemoration of the 650th anniversary of the birthday of the Azerbaijani poet Imadeddin Nesimi and the 125th anniversary of the birthday of the famous minstrel Aşık Veysel.

In line with this decision unanimously met by all members of the Permanent Council of TURKSOY, a series of events have been planed to take place in TURKSOY member countries throughout the year to commemorate and promote these illustrious personalities of the TurkicWorld.

Within the framework of its initiative launched in 2010 to dedicate each year to the commemoration of an illsutrious personality of the Turkic World TURKSOY declared the year 2014 as year of Magtumguly Pyragy and Toktogul Satylganov, the year 2015 as year of Haldun Taner and Semen Kadyshev, the year 2016 as year os Yusuf Khass Hajip and the year 2017 as year of Molla Penah Vagif.

In 2018, TURKSOY commemorated the famous Azerbaijani composer Gara Garayev and the great Kazak poet Magjan Jumabay as well as the illustrious Kyrgyz author Chingis Aitmatov with various events held around the world.

At the end of the meeting, TURKSOY Secretary General Dusen Kasseinov handed over the 25th anniversary medal of TURKSOY along with a plaquette and a Kazak “Chapan” to the Minister of Culture and Tourism of the Republic of Turkey Mr. Mehmet Nuri Ersoy.

Award Ceremony of the Kashgarly Mahmut Short Story Competition

The 36th Permanent Council Meeting of TURKSOY also featured a ceremony in which award winners of the 5th Kashgarly Mahmut Short Story Competition were handed over their prizes. While the first prize went to Reşit Hanadan’ from Kosovo for his short story “Mehmet Çavuş Geliyor” (Sergeant Mehmet is coming), the second prize went to “Hanbala and Han Bala” written by Ferzene Akbulatova from Bashkortostan (RF) and the third prize was won by Yücel Öztürk from Turkey, author of the short story “Altıncı Parmak” (The Sixth Finger). The short story “Dönmeyen Yolcular” (Voyagers with no return) by Elif Köprülü from the Iraki Turkmen region received the mansion prize of the competition.