Maintaining its uninterrupted production for half a century in the wood-based panel industry, Kastamonu Entegre is a global-scale company engaged in production in 6 countries, with investments in Romania, Bulgaria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Russia, Italy and Turkey. In the USA, it has a company that carries out wood chip supply and logistics processes. Kastamonu Entegre has become the world’s fifth largest company in the wood-based panel industry with its overseas investments extending more than 20 years, and has been among the top four manufacturers in Europe. It is one of the four largest manufacturers in the world with each of its main product groups; namely MDF, particle board, laminate flooring, and door panel. It undertakes 6% of the world laminate flooring production alone. Not only the Turkey’s industry leader with its 30% market share, Kastamonu Entegre, at the same time is by far the leader of the industry with its exports each year to 100 countries in six continents extending from China to America and Australia to Canada. With its turnover of 1.9 billion dollars and its strength, knowledge and experience in production, it provides employment to more than 7 thousand people in its domestic and foreign production facilities as well as its offices. In its production facilities with a total of 6,5 million m³/year wood-based panel production capacity, where it caters the requirements of furniture, decoration and construction industries with its MDF and particle board, laminate flooring, worktop and door skin products, it produces a volume that contributes to the formation of living spaces of 4,500 homes every day. Proud bearer of “The Biggest Turkish Investor of Italy” title, Kastamonu Entegre also happens to be the largest MDF producer and exporter of Russia.

Read more

Maintaining its uninterrupted production for half a century in the wood-based panel industry, Kastamonu Entegre is a global-scale company engaged in production in 6 countries, with investments in Romania, Bulgaria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Russia, Italy and Turkey. In the USA, it has a company that carries out wood chip supply and logistics processes. Kastamonu Entegre has become the world’s fifth largest company in the wood-based panel industry with its overseas investments extending more than 20 years, and has been among the top four manufacturers in Europe. It is one of the four largest manufacturers in the world with each of its main product groups; namely MDF, particle board, laminate flooring, and door panel. It undertakes 6% of the world laminate flooring production alone. Not only the Turkey’s industry leader with its 30% market share, Kastamonu Entegre, at the same time is by far the leader of the industry with its exports each year to 100 countries in six continents extending from China to America and Australia to Canada. With its turnover of 1.9 billion dollars and its strength, knowledge and experience in production, it provides employment to more than 7 thousand people in its domestic and foreign production facilities as well as its offices. In its production facilities with a total of 6,5 million m³/year wood-based panel production capacity, where it caters the requirements of furniture, decoration and construction industries with its MDF and particle board, laminate flooring, worktop and door skin products, it produces a volume that contributes to the formation of living spaces of 4,500 homes every day. Proud bearer of “The Biggest Turkish Investor of Italy” title, Kastamonu Entegre also happens to be the largest MDF producer and exporter of Russia.

Read more

Reach More Decision-Makers with Scale Plans

Let us show you how our accurate B2B company and contact data can help you reach the right decision makers and close more deals.

What can you expect?

See how Lusha can speed up your workflow

Learn how to reach your ideal prospects

Discover the practices of the best performing sales teams

Trusted by 280,000+ revenue teams of all sizes