The city of Kastamonu which hosted the 36th Term Meeting of the Permanent Council of TURKSOY gave over the title of “Cultural Capital” to its next owner at the Closing Ceremony of the Cultural Capital of the Turkic World 2018 held in the Ataturk Sports Hall.

The closing event featured colouful performances of more than 250 artists from Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Turkey, Tatarstan (RF), Bashkortostan (RF), Kabardino Balkaria (RF), Tyva (RF), Gagauzia (Moldova), Bosnia-Herzegovina, Serbia and Bulgaria.

In the opening speech he delivered at the closing ceremony, TURKSOY Secretary General Ambassador Dusen Kasseinov expressed hisn gratitude to the people of Kastamonu, the hometown of Şeyh Şaban-i Veli, for their excellent hospitality throughout the year.

Ambassador Kasseinov further said: “Culture and art are the most efficient tools to introduce a country and its people to the world. I can easily say that with its cultural values, beautiful nature, spiritual heritage and excellent cuisine, the city of Kastamonu has enshrined itself in the heart of the Turkic World. In a few moments, the title of cultural capital will be given over to the city of Osh. I wish the city of Osh a successful year right away.”

Other speeches of the closing ceremony were delivered by the Governor of Kastamonu Yaşar Karadeniz, the Mayor of Kastamonu Tahsin Babaş and the Deputy Minister of Culture and Tourism of the Republic of Turkey Ahmet Haluk Dursun.

Following the opening speeches, the Mayor of Kastamonu Tahsin Babaş handed over the symbol of Cultural Capital of the Turkic World to the Mayor of Osh Taalaybek Sarybashev.

The handover ceremony was followed by a wonderful concert which was held with the contribution of artists from various countries and regions of the Turkic World and took the audience in Kastamonu onto an unforgettable journey to its colourful melodies and dances.

The concert which was broadcasted live on the Turkish Radio and Television Institution TRT-AVAZ featured colourful performances of lyrical artists and dance ensembles from various regions of Turkey as well as from Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Bashkortostan (RF), Tatarstan (RF), Tyva (RF), Kabardino-Balkaria (RF), Gagauzia (Moldova), Bosnia-Herzegovina, Serbia and Bulgaria.

At the end of the concert, spectators cued for a photograph together with the artists.

The “Closing Ceremony of the Cultural Capital of the Turkic World 2018” ended with a group photograph gathering artists and protocol members.