For a man sentenced to two years and seven months in prison by the Turkish justice system in December 2022 for "insulting a high authority of the state," Ekrem Imamoglu seems to be doing very well. In front of ever-growing audiences, the mayor of Istanbul has been crisscrossing the country for weeks with the ease of a long-distance runner. The presidential election is scheduled for May 14, and this 52-year-old official is even appearing as a miracle worker, ready to heal a Turkey hit by an economic crisis, a devastating earthquake and the authoritarian drift of its leader, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who has been in power for 20 years and who is determined to stay there.

Everywhere, arms are stretched out, hands are shaken and Imamoglu is embraced. In Bursa, he said, "in the end, everything will be fine," echoing his campaign slogan from 2019, the year he won Istanbul over the Justice and Development Party (AKP), President Erdogan's party. In Kastamonu, a conservative town located on the Black Sea, people flocked to see this rising star of the Republican People's Party (CHP), founded by Mustafa Kemal Ataturk. In an even, almost solemn tone, he said: "Great things will happen in 2023." There was more applause.

In Kirklareli, the crowd, which was massive for the size of this small town in Thrace, cheered when he proclaimed from the top of his campaign bus, alongside his wife: "We have decided to make history with you!" The words flowed with jubilation that wasn't lacking in panache. He referenced freedom and democracy, employment and youth, justice, women's rights, domestic violence and the ravages of the earthquake.

Imamoglu strongly supports Kemal Kilicdaroglu, the CHP president, appointed to head the opposition coalition to confront Erdogan, but also Meral Aksener, the muse and ally of the nationalist right, whose support has never failed him.

He also willingly backs the mayor of Ankara, the very right-wing Mansur Yavas. All of them are involved in this crusade to unseat Erdogan. And then there is that little music that plays at each of his appearances, where you can hear "Ekrem baskan!" a call in the form of an injunction that literally means "Ekrem mayor!," while implying "Ekrem president!"

A thin line

In a paradox that speaks volumes about the twisted course of Turkish politics, the country's most popular official, the only one capable of beating Erdogan (by far, according to all the polls) is burning the midnight oil not for himself but for someone else. Because of his conviction, Imamoglu cannot campaign for himself. Despite this, he has placed himself not in Kilicdaroglu's shadow, but in the spotlight, like a CHP joker, galvanizing the opposition campaign in one fell swoop. No one knows how hard the pill was to swallow for the man who many already saw as being at the top. He is described as ambitious and, seeing him so active, it's easy to see why the authorities did everything to clip his wings and undermine his candidacy.