On November 6, 2018, the Embassy of Turkmenistan in Turkey jointly with the Turkish Kastamonu State University organized and held a scientific-practical conference “Turkmenistan - the heart of the Great Silk Road”, the presentation of the eponymous book by the distinguished President of Turkmenistan in Turkish and the Days of Turkmenistan in Kastamonu city, which was announced the cultural capital of the Turkic world in 2018.

As part of the events, an exhibition was organized, where the works of the distinguished President of Turkmenistan and various exhibits telling about the culture and traditions of Turkmenistan were exhibited. Also, Turkmen students studying in higher education institutions of Turkey performed a concert program. In addition, all participants were offered dishes of Turkmen national cuisine.

The events were attended by Governor of Kastamonu Province of the Republic of Turkey J. Karadeniz, Mayor of Kastamonu city T. Babash, Rector of Kastamonu State University S. Aydin, Rector of International University of Humanities and Development E. Aydogdyev, Secretary General of the International Organization of Turkic Culture D. Kaseinov, members of the Society of Turkmen-Turkish friendship, members of the faculty and Turkmen students from several universities, as well as representatives of the media.

Speakers at the scientific-practical conference spoke of the need to improve the efficiency of the international transport and logistics system in accordance with the initiatives of Turkmenistan, the implementation of important energy projects, as well as the country's foreign policy based on ensuring peace and security.

In addition, the speakers noted the creation of international transport corridors proposed by the President of Turkmenistan, the issues of ensuring energy security and the recognition by the international community of the neutral status of Turkmenistan.

All participants of the conference and presentation were presented as a gift the book of the President of Turkmenistan “Turkmenistan - the heart of the Great Silk Road”, translated into Turkish.