Britney Spears' ex-husband, Kevin Federline, is reportedly considering taking his ongoing child support battle with the pop star back to court.

Federline, who shares two sons with Spears, Sean Preston and Jayden James, currently receives $40,000 per month in child support.

However, the terms were initially set based on the assumption that both parents would have equal custody. In reality, Britney has had little to no custody time with her children for several years now, and the situation is unlikely to change soon.

Federline demanding changes for son Jayden's terms

As Sean Preston approaches his 18th birthday on September 14, child support for him is set to end. This means that Britney Spears will no longer have to pay child support for at least one of her children, which she reportedly welcomes as a relief.

The real point of contention lies with Jayden James, who is 16 and under Kevin Federline's full-time care.

Federline is exploring the possibility of seeking more child support for Jayden, which could result in a substantial increase in the monthly amount he receives from the singer.

This potential legal maneuver has raised eyebrows and stirred discussions among fans and legal experts.

The Federline family recently made headlines when they relocated to Hawaii, following Kevin's wife, Victoria Prince's job opportunity.

Some speculators suggest that this move could be an attempt to capitalize on Hawaii's unique child support laws, which can extend until a child turns 18 if they are enrolled in an accredited educational institution.

Britney's relationship with her kids

The ongoing estrangement between Britney Spears and her sons, Sean Preston and Jayden James, has garnered significant attention.

Kevin Federline's attorney, Mark Vincent Kaplan, confirmed that the boys had communicated with their mother in 2022.

However, the extent of their interaction since the boys moved to Hawaii remains unclear.

Spears posted a heartwarming message to her sons on Instagram on December 2, 2022 saying "To both of my boys... I love you... I would die for you !!! God speed my precious hearts !!! I would give anything just to touch your face !!! I send my love... Mamasita".

This child support dispute is just the latest chapter in the complex narrative of Britney Spears' life, and fans will undoubtedly be keeping a close eye on how this legal battle unfolds.