Kevin Federline is known first and foremost as the ex-husband and baby daddy of Britney Spears. The celebrity couple's divorce was finalized in 2007 following a three year marriage, per People. They share two sons and have struggled with co-parenting in the years since, though the former backup dancer — who worked for the likes of Justin Timberlake — supported Spears throughout her turbulent legal fight to end her conservatorship. By all accounts, things have settled down considerably since their devastating split.

Advertisement

Federline and Spears memorably got hitched after just a few months of dating, having initially met while clubbing in Hollywood. The pop star filed for divorce eight weeks after welcoming their second child, though Federline hinted at issues between them shortly beforehand. "We're an opposites attract," he told People. "If she gets mad and she yells at me, it just turns me on more, ya know?" Thankfully, both Federline and Spears have found love elsewhere in the years since, Spears with fiancé Sam Asghari.

The former dancer's marriage to wife Victoria Prince, meanwhile, remains curiously under-explored in the tabloids — at least comparably speaking.

Kevin Federline began dating Victoria Prince in 2008, after meeting her at a recreational bowling league, according to People. The Kennewick, Washington native was previously a pro-volleyball player, even competing against Olympians Misty May-Treanor and Kerri Walsh. She played at a varsity level in high school, and in college both at Washington State University and the University of Hawaii at Manoa, where Prince transferred and ultimately graduated from, with a Bachelor of Arts in speech. Elsewhere, Prince enjoyed jet-skiing and boating. She comes from a typical middle-class family, with three siblings. Her mother, Brenda, works as a national sales manager while her father, Mike, is an electrician. E! News confirmed Prince, a special education teacher herself, welcomed her first child with Federline, daughter Jordan Kay, in 2011.

Advertisement

However, the couple didn't get married until 2013. Federline actually proposed after pretending they were visiting the city purely for work. The duo got a marriage license and did the deed at the Hard Rock Hotel, where Prince promised "to be the best mother to our children, and be the wife that you deserve." Federline and Prince welcomed another daughter, Peyton Marie, in 2014. The happy couple keeps things fairly private, though Federline divulged to Us Weekly in 2015, "Vic is my best friend. We work well together. We both want the same things for our children. Me and Vic know how to have fun together and I think that's important."