In honor of H.P. Lovecraft’s birthday, which was yesterday (he was born on August 20, 1890), I decided that I would post two parts of my final paper I wrote in Spring 2013 during a Theory class I took at SCAD. I’ve wanted to do my own research on the horror genre and architecture for a while now. Why do we reacted emotionally to houses we know to be haunted? Where did this stigma come from and does it affect the way we build and preserve buildings? I think it would be a fun but interesting journey into a more psychological and social aspect of architectural history.

I also, within the last seven months, became a huge H.P. Lovecraft enthusiast. His science fiction and horror writings are very enjoyable to me, and I have a hard time putting them down. (If you’re a fan of Lovecraft and comic books, I highly suggest checking out the Locke and Key series by Joe Hill and Gabriel Rodriguez. Not only is it exquisitely drawn, the story is amazingly crafted. It takes place in the town of Lovecraft, and throughout the books, has references to the author.) So, the opportunity came along during our Theory class to write our final paper on any architectural history theory, applying it to buildings, architects, etc. I decided to go for broke and proposed writing about Lovecraft’s writing on horror architecture and the sublime. I fortunately had an amazing professor who was just as excited about the topic as I was. I wasn’t expecting to find that Lovecraft was an ardent historic preservationist who wrote travelogues on American colonial towns and buildings. The following are just two excerpts tying Lovecraft’s writing, architecture, and the sublime together. Also, because I am an unabashed nerd, I’m including a photo of the cthulhu doll I crocheted for the person who introduced me to Lovecraft in the first place.

From Things That Go Bump in the Night: Architecture of the Sublime in H.P. Lovecraft’s Literature by Jess Archer

He is a master of American horror and science fiction literature; a theorist and historian of “weird tales”; an explorer of the hamlets of New England and the Eastern United States; and, though it may seem unlikely, a historic preservationist and ardent lover of architecture. This is H.P. Lovecraft. His genius resides in the way he utilizes architecture in his fiction to instill the sublime in the reader. Sublime is the fear and danger a person can experience from external cues, but there must also be an inherent pleasure to this experience. This fear can be generated by physical elements as when incorporated into architecture, or in a mental state as when a person is reading a book or watching a movie. These are different ways to convey fear, but they still have the same goal of putting the viewers on edge with their ideas and perceptions of the world. H.P. Lovecraft’s literature is a successful example of architecture of the sublime by weaving theories, historic built environments, and the horror/science fiction genre together in his weird stories.

Sublime Theory – Lovecraft’s Writings in Theory

Lovecraft helps readers understand his and other horror writers’ work through his own theoretical treatise, “Supernatural Horror in Literature.”[1] His theory has been hailed as “one of the finest essays on horror fiction ever written.”[2] It is unclear whether Lovecraft ever read the works of Edmund Burke, but I venture that he did, as their thoughts on the sublime are particularly similar. In the beginning sentence of his treatise, he states, “The oldest and strongest emotion of mankind is fear, and the oldest and strongest kind of fear is fear of the unknown.”[3] Burke’s work on the sublime opens similarly with, “…whatever is in any sort terrible, or is conversant about terrible objects, or operates in a manner analogous to terror, is a source of the sublime; that is, it is productive of the strongest emotion which the mind is capable of feeling.”[4]

These analogous definitions show an understanding of Lovecraft’s work under a philosophical treatise used by architects. In his essay on the Picturesque, Uvedale Price uses Burke’s definition of the sublime to assert that there must be some astonishment to the landscape of the built environment. “… And astonishment is that state of the soul in which all its motions are suspended with some degree of horror: the sublime also, being founded on ideas of pain and terror…”[5] This demonstrates that the sublime can be found within our built environment. Lovecraft’s use of the sublime is found in literature, but he crafts his works around descriptions of the built environment that include sublime features. In “The Dreams of the Witch-House,” the first paragraph sets the eeriness of the town and house in which the main character lives. The haunted boarding house located in Arkham (a fictitious New England town Lovecraft uses in numerous stories) is described as, “…the subtle stirring of the black city outside, the sinister scurrying of rats in the wormy partitions, and the creaking of hidden timbers in the centuried house…”[6] Lovecraft continually depicts the architecture and city in such a foreboding manner that leave the reader imagining what kind of horror awaits as the story progresses.

Sublime Architecture – Travelogues and Historic Preservation into Sublime Fiction

During Lovecraft’s life, historic preservation of American Colonial villages was a pertinent topic. There were attempts to reconstruct Litchfield, Connecticut, Old York, Maine, and Colonial Williamsburg, Virginia in their original colonial condition.[7] Lovecraft himself became intensely interested in preserving this historical time period. He was strongly against modernization and believed in finding an “authentic American culture” in the “colonial or pre-industrial Anglo-Saxon golden age.”[8] As he wrote in one of his travelogues, “On the towns of the lower coast the blight of mutation and modernity has descended… mark a menacing tyranny of mechanism…”[9] His distaste for the industrial modernization of American towns is clear. He wanted to find a truthful perception of American values in the built environment. This carries through to his travelogues, and later in his fiction. Lamenting the decay and destruction of American Colonial buildings, he uses these dilapidated buildings as a symbol of horror and the sublime.

Lovecraft wrote extensively during his travels through the New England area. Believing that “vernacular culture needed to be preserved not only for its own sake, but also in order to engender a distinctly American art,” Lovecraft documented a variety of buildings.[10] Churches, town halls, houses, fortifications, and city layouts are all included in his travelogues. He even provides rough sketches of architecture and town plans for his readers to reference in his texts. His excitement of experiencing old buildings is clear while traveling through Massachusetts on a tour to the Red Horse Tavern. He convinced the driver to stop off in Dedham where, “lyes the old Fairbanks house, oldest building in New-England, and oldest frame building of English origin on the continent of North-America. Now I had never seen this structure, tho’ near as anxious to do so as to see the Red Horse itself…”[11] His passion and interest in architecture is well captured in his journals, but there is also the sense of the excitement of the sublime as well. He goes on to describe the Fairbanks house with “tumbled stone wall” and “grey, sagging roofs” with an “ineffably picturesque silhouette as seen from the road.”[12]

On a trip to the Endless Caverns near New Market, Virginia, he gives another sublime account of his ventures into the caves which “brought my soul close to the frightful and obscure frontiers of the material world, and conjured up suspicions of vague and unhallowed dimensions whose formless beings lurk ever close…” Even in travelogues, Lovecraft was promoting the experience of the sublime to readers. To him, fear of the unknown is even enjoyable on vacation.