The Messengers is a 2007 supernatural horror film directed by the Pang Brothers (Danny Pang Phat and Oxide Pang Chun) and produced by Sam Raimi. It stars Kristen Stewart, John Corbett, William B. Davis, Dylan McDermott, Carter Kolbeck and Penelope Ann Miller.

The prequel, Messengers 2: The Scarecrow, was released in 2009.

Plot[]

A terrified mother and her young son are packing to flee when an unseen attacker kills the whole family.

Five years later, the Solomon family from Chicago moves into the house, near a small town in North Dakota. Roy Solomon hopes to start a sunflower farm. Everyone has issues: their teenage daughter, Jess, is unhappy about moving, their son Ben has been traumatized ever since a car accident when Jess drove while drunk with him as a toddler, and crashed the car. Seriously injured, Ben endures extensive treatment, recovering only to be mute. Their parents, Roy and Denise, don't trust their irresponsible daughter, and are broke from all the medical expenses. Roy believes moving to the farm will help heal the family.

Ominous events begin to occur. Flocks of crows are constantly swarming the home. Some attack Roy but are driven off by a drifter named John Burwell, whom Roy hires as a farmhand. Ben can see ghosts of the mother and the children. Jess sees a woman in the sunflower field. Jess follows her into the barn. She can hear the woman say "help me". Jess says "what do you want from me" as someone crawls across the floor behind her. Jess sees the little boy crying in the corner. She asks him what is wrong and gasps at the eerie sight of him. He jumps at her as she screams. She goes to the hospital and her parents think she is inflicting her own wounds. Roy and Denise argue and Jess runs away. Bobby picks her up and they ride into town.

Back at the house, a huge flock of crows circle the barn and fly at John attacking him. While Denise puts Ben to bed she sees a lady coming out of the wall.

Jess goes into town with Bobby to investigate the house's background. At a local store, she sees a newspaper clipping of the family, revealing the father to be none other than her dad's new farmhand. Burwell is actually John Rollins, the man who, in a fit of madness, murdered his entire family (as shown at the beginning of the film). Shocked, Jess and Bobby rush back home to warn her family. All of John's memories come rushing back and he sees Denise rushing to leave. He asks her "where are you going, Mary?", thinking she's his wife and attacks her. She runs into the cellar with Ben and slams the door. Bobby and Jess arrive looking for her mom and Ben when they get attacked by something unseen. John knocks Bobby out. Jess runs to the cellar finding Denise and Ben. Denise is sorry for not believing her about the ghosts. Jess makes it pitch black in the cellar as John knocks the door open, telling his family, "you are not leaving me". Roy gets home to find Bobby knocked out, asking him where are they. He goes into the cellar where John stabs him in the back with a pitch fork. After a struggle with Jess, she knocks John into the mud yelling, "we are not your family". John struggles to come up out of the mud as his dead family pulls him under. John grabs Jesse's leg and begins pulling her in. Roy grabs her hand and with Denise's help, pulls her out. Alerted by Bobby, police and paramedics arrive shortly after. As her dad is put in the ambulance, he and Jess have a moment. Awhile after, everything returns to normal and their happiness is restored. The crows no longer attack, ghosts stop appearing, and Ben starts talking again.

Cast[]

Kristen Stewart as Jessica "Jess" Solomon

Dylan McDermott as Roy Solomon

Penelope Ann Miller as Denise Solomon

John Corbett as John Burwell/John Rollins

Evan and Theodore Turner as Ben Solomon

William B. Davis as Colby Price

Brent Briscoe as Plume

Dustin Milligan as Bobby

Jodelle Ferland as Michael Rollins

Michael Daingerfield as Police Officer

Tatiana Maslany as Lindsay Rollins

Shirley McQueen as Mary Rollins

Kieria Robinson as Katy Turner