Movies in English with subtitles

Is it possible to study English effortlessly? How can you learn to memorize words easily and quickly, rather than cramming them for hours? Is it possible to comprehend the English language?

Our service for learning English with the help of movies with subtitles says yes to all these questions. At your service is a large collection of videos to fit every taste: feature films, documentary, cartoon films, informative shows, film clips and other interesting video content. We are ready to share with you the secrets of successful learning a foreign language for free.

The benefit of watching movies in the original

Mastering a new language when watching a movie is, perhaps, the most enjoyable way of learning. No one will refuse to gain knowledge lying on the sofa. This method is perfect for people who know English at a high level, and for those who are just starting to take their first steps in learning the language.

Movies in English with subtitles have a number of undeniable advantages:

They give the opportunity to listen to the correct pronunciation, intonation, to comprehend the speech better;

teach to pronounce words without mistakes in accent, repeating phrases after your favorite movie heroes;

expand the vocabulary;

develop the visual memory for writing words by subtitles.

Motivation to learn English through movies

Interesting movies, good actors, intriguing stories – all this is a great incentive to improve your knowledge. You watch a movie with great excitement, when you can understand each word yourself. There is a desire to develop your vocabulary of phrases and understand the nuances of grammar in order to understand everything that is happening on the screen.

Rules for watching movies with subtitles

Properly selected movies will let you get the most out of watching them. For this, we recommend to follow some rules.

Select a movie according to your level of competence. Movies of any complexity are suitable for those who speak English perfectly. For beginners it is better to choose educatory material. A good alternative would be simple themed TV series shot as a video tutorial. In such movies actors use simple vocabulary, speak as clearly and legibly as possible.

Read subtitles. Duplicating the text with words at the bottom of the screen makes it easier to understand the essence of what is happening. In addition, visual perception makes it easy to learn individual phrases and lexical chunks. But do not concentrate only on subtitles. They have an auxiliary function. You should focus on then oral comprehension of the text.

Memorize words. While watching movies with subtitles, you need to take a notebook and a pen to write down new words. In order to translate a word, just click on it with a mouse. All that remains is to learn the phrase by heart.

Repeat the dialogue of actors. After watching a certain movie segment it is useful to repeat the dialogue after the screen characters. Imitation of pronunciation is very helpful in learning the language and correct pronunciation.

Watch a movie twice. After learning new words, you can check yourself and watch the movie again. This will give you an opportunity to assess how well you’ve learned unknown phrases and how clearer the plot became after watching it the second time.

Our service will help you to make sure that it is not only easy, but also fascinating to learn English through movies