Shah Rukh Khan’s 2007 drama, Om Shanti Om, remains one of the most loved films to date. Directed by Farah Khan, the film also starred Shreyas Talpade. In a recent interview, Shreyas recalled working with SRK and called him a “witty” person. He also recalled how Farah got annoyed with them on sets once due to their improvisations.

Shreyas Talpade was recently speaking to Lehren when he recalled, “Farah saw me in Dor and that’s when she thought of casting me for Om Shanti Om as Pappu Master. From day one, I was very nervous, you know, working with Shah Rukh Khan and how is he going to feel because I come from a school where we improvise a lot. So, I was thinking of quite a few things to improvise, but I said I don’t know how Shah is going to react to the whole thing.”

“So after a couple of hours, I said, whatever he thinks, let me at least go and speak with him and tell him that this is what I have in mind, because otherwise I’m going to be miserable throughout the shoot. I spoke with him and he was so happy with the whole thing. And then of course, he is so witty himself, he came up with ten things,” the actor added.

However, SRK and Shreyas’ improvisations left Farah Khan annoyed after a point and the director lost her cool on the two actors. She asked them to stop their improvisations and just read “the damn script”.

“So, through the day, we kept improvising and, you know, playing around and that chemistry started building to the point where I remember in the evening there’s one scene that we were shooting and Farah finally came and said, ‘Enough, enough of improvisations, just say whatever is written in the damn script’,” Shreyas shared.

Om Shanti Om also marked Deepika Padukone’s debut film. The film also starred Arjun Rampal and Kirron Kher in key roles. It revolved around a junior film artist (played by SRK) who was smitten by a renowned actress named Shantipriya (essayed by Deepika) but was killed as he tried to save his favourite actress. However, he takes rebirth to punish the murderers.

In 2022, to celebrate 15 years of Om Shanti Om, the film was re-released in theatres across 20 cities of the country including Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Patna, Bhopal, and Ahmedabad among others. Reportedly, the idea behind Om Shanti Om’s re-release was from one of Shah Rukh Khan’s fan clubs – SRK Universe.