Om Shanti Om (transl. Om, Shanti, and Om) is a 2007 Indian Hindi-language romantic fantasy film directed and co-written by Farah Khan with Mayur Puri and Mushtaq Shiekh. It stars Shah Rukh Khan as Om, a junior artist in 1977 who has a crush on a secretly married superstar, played by Deepika Padukone in her Hindi film debut. Her lover, a producer played by Arjun Rampal, kills her in a fire; Om witnesses this and dies from the injuries sustained from trying to rescue her. Reincarnated as a superstar in 2007, he seeks to avenge his love. Om Shanti Om also starred Shreyas Talpade, Kirron Kher, Bindu Desai and Javed Sheikh in supporting roles, and saw cameos from many Bollywood celebrities in several sequences and songs.

The film was produced and presented by Shah Rukh’s wife Gauri Khan under the banner Red Chillies Entertainment on a budget of ₹35 crore. Farah conceived Om Shanti Om while directing the musical Bombay Dreams (2002), which was based on the Indian film industry. After Shah Rukh rejected the first version of her next film Happy New Year, she was reminded of Om Shanti Om; the film’s title derives from a similar titled popular song from the 1980 film Karz. The soundtrack album was composed by Vishal–Shekhar, with lyrics written by Javed Akhtar. The background score was performed by Sandeep Chowta. The album received positive reviews and was also commercially successful, becoming the highest-selling album of the year in India.

The film was theatrically released in India on 9 November 2007 during Diwali weekend, Om Shanti Om earned over ₹215 crore worldwide becoming the highest grossing Bollywood film of the year and all time surpassing Dhoom 2; it received positive reviews, with praise for the performances and the film’s narrative. The film won several awards in major Indian film award ceremonies. At 53rd Filmfare Awards, it received 12 nominations, winning for Best Female Debut and Best Special Effects, and also won the National Film Award for Best Production Design. The climax of the movie was inspired by the climax of 1958 Hindi movieMadhumati.

Plot

1977

Om Prakash Makhija, a junior artist in Hindi cinema, is in love with a film actress named Shantipriya Kashyap aka Shanti. One evening, Om attends the premiere of Shanti’s film, and envisions himself as the lead actor Manoj Kumar. Om and his friend Pappu take on numerous small acting roles as film extras at RC Studios, a major film studio compound owned by Mukesh Mehra. One night, a drunk Om describes his fantasy of one day winning a Filmfare Award for Best Actor and makes a speech in street. At the shooting of a film, Om rescues Shanti after a fire grows out of control, and they become friends. Om tries to woo her.

One day, at an RC Studios backdrop set, Om Prakash overhears a conversation between Shanti and Mukesh Mehra. The pair have been married for two years in secret, and Shanti reveals that she is pregnant with Mukesh’s child. Mukesh seems overjoyed and asks Shanti to meet him at the set of their upcoming film titled Om Shanti Om. Mukesh promises to cancel the film, reveal their marriage to the public, and have a grand wedding on the set much to the dismay of Om. However, while in the sets, Mukesh reveals his true colors. He says that the child is going destroy both him and his career; he tells her that he has arranged for the set to burn, and lights the set up, leaving Shanti inside and locking her.

Om attempts to rescue Shanti, but is attacked by Mukesh’s guards. After the guards leave, he again attempts to rescue Shanti, but he is thrown from the building by its fiery explosion and lands in a nearby street. A disorientated Om is hit by a car owned by Rajesh Kapoor, an actor taking his pregnant wife, Lovely, to the hospital as she is in labour. At the hospital, Om remembers his moments with Shanti as he dies, while Lovely gives birth to a son, also named Om. After that, Om Prakash’s soul reincarnates into the newborn Om Kapoor.

30 years later

In 2007, Om Kapoor, nicknamed OK, is a famous actor and lives the luxurious life dreamt of by Om Prakash, but experiences pyrophobia and subconsciously inherits Om Prakash’s memories. He also bears a birthmark on his wrist similar to the “Om” tattoo which was on Om Prakash’s wrist. Om Prakash’s mother Bela visits every set of OK claiming him to be her son and OK feels weird seeing her.

Soon after his 30th birthday, OK and his assistant Anwar drive to the RC Studios compound – long neglected and in disarray after the fire 30 years earlier- to shoot for an upcoming film; while there, OK experiences unsettling memory flashes of his past life at the studio, including that of eavesdropping on Mukesh and Shanti. At an awards ceremony, Om Kapoor unknowingly delivers the same speech Om Prakash made when he was drunk, which is viewed by an aged Pappu on television. At the event, Rajesh Kapoor who is OK’s father, introduces him to Mukesh, whose introduction causes OK to fully remember the events of Om Prakash’s life. OK later reunites with Bela and Pappu, and conspires to avenge Shanti’s death by making Mukesh confess his crime.

OK convinces Mukesh to restart shooting for Om Shanti Om, and he plans to convince Mukesh that Shanti’s spirit is haunting him. To find Shanti’s lookalike, OK, Pappu, and Bela audition many actresses, and are about to give up when they finally find a super-fan of OK’s named Sandhya Bansal aka Sandy, an exact doppelgänger of Shanti. Throughout the film’s shooting, OK and his friends arrange incidents to remind Mukesh of the past including organising the film’s launch at the same ruined set. During the music launch of the film, OK taunts Mukesh by revealing the extent to which he knows the story of Shanti’s death. But when Mukesh runs after Sandy thinking she is the ghost of Shanti, Sandy accidentally cuts her arm and bleeds. Seeing this, Mukesh realises that she is not Shanti’s spirit. Mukesh tries to confront OK, but he is suddenly hit by the set’s swinging chandelier.

After Mukesh regains consciousness, OK confronts him but Mukesh reveals that he knows Sandy is not a ghost after all. During the quarrel, Sandy reappears and taunts Mukesh. She reveals that after the fire ceased to burn, Mukesh found that Shanti had survived and buried her alive below the chandelier. OK is confused about how Sandy knows this detail, since he did not know this himself. Mukesh, spooked by the fact that she knows all these details, attempts to shoot Sandy, shocked by the revelation about the murder, but Mukesh and OK fight, which results in yet another fire. Just when OK is about to kill Mukesh, Sandy stops him, saying Mukesh will die, but not by his hand. The chandelier proceeds to fall on Mukesh, killing him instantly.

Pappu and Sandy rush to join OK, who is shocked when he sees Sandy in two places at once. OK realises that the person he assumed to be Sandy was actually Shanti’s spirit, and recalls instances where supernatural events helped when OK’s plans almost did not work, realising that Shanti was responsible. She smiles warmly towards OK and tearfully bids him goodbye, disappearing as she moves into the light. OK reunites with Sandy.

Cast