Om Shanti Om is a 2007 Bollywood film directed and choreographed by Farah Khan. It stars Shah Rukh Khan and Deepika Padukone in the lead roles as the protagonists while Shreyas Talpade, Arjun Rampal, and Kirron Kher feature in supporting roles. Arjun Rampal is the Big Bad in the movie. More than forty two well-known Bollywood stars appear in the course of the film, including thirty of them (not including the stars of the film) in one song alone.

Protagonist Om Prakash Makhija (Shahrukh Khan) is a junior artist in the 1970s film industry. He and his friend Pappu (Shreyas Talpade) are trying to succeed as leading actors. Om's mother, Bela Makhija (Kirron Kher), herself a junior artist, inspires and encourages her son to become a success. He is in love with the film actress Shanti Priya (Deepika Padukone), whom he eventually befriends after saving her from a fire in set. He tries to confess his feelings to her, but he gets overwhelmed by Shanti true kindness and decides to wait for a better chance.

One day, Om tries to talk to Shanti on the set of a film, but is almost ignored. He follows her into a dressing-room, where he, unseen except by the viewer, overhears her argument with the film's producer Mukesh Mehra (Arjun Rampal) about a recent promise of Mukesh's to marry a businessman's daughter in return for funding of a film. It is here revealed that Shanti is secretly married to Mukesh, and that Shanti is pregnant with Mukesh's child. Mukesh insists that his relationship with Shanti be kept secret, arguing that its revelation will spoil his plans; but Shanti demands that they marry in public. Mukesh relents when she reveals her pregnancy. Om leaves, disappointed, and remains miserable for some days.

Unfortunately for Shanti, Mukesh really doesn't want to stay married to her, so to dispose of her he stages a "tragic accident" by tricking her to visit the soundstage of their latest film, only to trap her there and torch the place. Om, the only witness to this, tries to rescue Shanti, but he is impeded to do so, first by Mukesh's goons, and then by the set exploding. The explosion sends him to the nearby road, where he is run-over by Rajesh and Lovely Kapoor, a couple of film stars in the way to the hospital because of their baby impeding birth. They bring the poor man with them to receive medical attention, but as Lovely gives birth to a son, Om finally succumbs to his injuries

The story jumps 30 years, and introduces us to Om Kapoor, nicknamed OK, the son of the Kapoors and the reincarnation of Om Prakash. OK is a popular (albeit bratty) actor, who has the superstar life the late Om wanted for him. OK, however, has strange experiences, like suffering pyrophobia despite never having bad experiences with fire and experiencing déjà-vus in several occasions, all of them being actually echoes of his past incarnation. A chance encounter with Mukesh (now a Hollywood producer) during a wrap party makes OK's recover all of Om memories. Furious with the realization that neither Om or Shantipriya deaths received justice, OK reunites with Bela and Pappu to plan their revenge.

Tropes used in Om Shanti Om include:

Actor Allusion: Almost all the actors featured in Deewangi Deewangi use signature dance moves from their most popular movies.

Adam Westing: Anyone who is not a fictional character.

All-Star Cast: The cameos. Dear god, the cameos.

Andrew Lloyd Webber: Inspired the second part of the movie.

Bad Bad Acting: The audition montage.

Big No: Om Prakash's mom shouts a big "Nehi!" when he wants to change his name.

Birth-Death Juxtaposition: When Om dies in the hospital, a mother gives birth in the next room. The baby turns out to be Om reincarnated.

Creator Cameo: Farah Khan is the woman who fights with Om Prakash at the beginning of the movie. Lampshaded: