Shah Rukh Khan and Deepika Padukone starrer Om Shanti Om was released in 2007. Directed by Farah Khan, the film also starred Shreyas Talpade in a significant role as Pappu, the loyal and selfless friend of Om. His character garnered him immense appreciation.

On the other hand, Shreyas had appeared in the lead roles prior to Om Shanti Om. In a recent interview, the Welcome To The Jungle actor shared if he felt that his role as a supporting role overshadowed what he had achieved already.

Shreyas Talpade on opting for a supporting role in Shah Rukh Khan's Om Shanti Om

In a recent conversation with Zoom, Shreyas Talpade addressed working with Shah Rukh Khan and Farah Khan in Om Shanti Om. Discussing his views on working in the supporting role, the actor mentioned that it was his ardent wish to work with both of them.

He said the professional theory suggests that he shouldn’t have done the film because he had already done lead roles in the films like Iqbal and Dor. He cited Apna Sapna Money Money as an example to assert his point that he ‘should have probably gone for meatier roles, lead roles and solo films.’

Shreyas Talpade reveals why he couldn't refuse Om Shanti Om

However, the actor stated that another part of him wanted to work with SRK and Farah. The actor expressed his belief stating that hailing from a humble background with no family connections, it was a big deal for him.

Advertisement

He said, “You get an opportunity to work with Shah and Farah, and you feel boss, I want to work with them. Yeah, I know it’s a secondary role, but I want to work with him. When do you think will I get an opportunity to work with him again? So, all these running in your mind simultaneously and should I say no to a Shah Rukh Khan right now when I am so new in my career, and you never know what the repercussions would be.”

Shreyas further continues by adding, “So you are naïve, and you don’t have anyone to guide or tell you, okay relax, it is just the beginning, things are going to follow take your time, but then you also want to prove yourself be in that camp quote unquote, do certain things together, and you do those films which eventually you realize agar nahin karta to bhi shayad chal jata, shayad kuch aur hota (if I hadn't done those films it still would’ve worked out) but having said that no regrets whatsoever.”

Advertisement

Shreyas will be next seen in Kartam Bhugtam, set to release on May 17, 2024.