Crediting the audience of business owners and leaders with the prosperity in the state, Sen. Mark Miloscia, one of two candidates for state auditor, kicked off the Policy Summit debate Sept. 14 between him and his opponent Pierce County Executive Pat McCarthy.

Moderator Renee Radcliff Sinclair, president of TVW, asked the candidates to share what they believe is the role of the state’s lead financial watchdog and what they think qualifies them for the job.

“The role is the accountability person,” Miloscia said. “Make sure we get rid of waste in government, make sure our state agencies are serving the public correctly and it is the management and audit expert to make sure things improve.”

He added that in this election, candidates should be looked at for what they have done, citing his 30 years of auditing experience in the U.S. Air Force.

“You can actually hire me as an auditor for your business right now,” he told the audience.

McCarthy said the office is the overseer of government efficiency and that it requires a problem solver.

“We need people that care about the book of business that particular office holds,” she said. “Today, more than ever, an office like the state auditor’s office needs that outsider view and review of local and state government.”

McCarthy highlighted her experience as a county executive as her key qualification as well as being an Olympia outsider.

On maintaining trust with taxpayers, public and Legislature, Miloscia said, “you have to be very careful when given the power of 300 state auditors” and that any appearance of bias is unacceptable.

“It’s important to keep politics and bias out of the office – to be unbiased and non-partisan,” Miloscia said. “I can guarantee you’ll be measuring the integrity of my audits to make sure it is unbiased and that I stick to the facts and I don’t mix the power of my office with my own personal biases or ideology.”

Upholding the transparency of the state’s procurement process was also brought up – making sure taxpayers are getting the best deal when agencies make purchases or hire contractors.

“I know there is a role the state auditor’s office can play,” McCarthy said. “When I look Piece County, we’ve done some tremendous things to reach out to our business community to make sure we’re good partners. We have purchasing forums, so you know how to interface with local government.”

She added that she has monthly meetings with business groups and local entities that have a stake in ensuring fair and open project permitting and procurement processes.

Asked about their most important endorsements for the race for auditor, McCarthy said she has been blessed and honored that she has endorsements from “both sides of the aisle and both sides of the Cascades.”

“The citizens who have elected me year after year, in multiple positions, I think is testament to the fact that the public does the work that I do and I would like to bring that same work ethic and that same ability to reach across both sides of the aisle and to be the watchdog.”

She added that government generally does more good than it doesn’t but when something raises questions, it should have “a bright light shined on it.”

Miloscia said he is pleased that he has gotten both labor unions and businesses to endorse him.

“I can give you a long list of people who have endorsed me, but what I’m most proud of is the people who understand performance, who understand quality in audits – the professionals – they are flocking to me. They are endorsing me.”

He pointed out that former Secretary of State Sam Reed has endorsed him as has the Coalition for Open Government.

Both candidates said that while endorsements are great, accomplishments speak much more about their ability to serve in the office.