(Written April 2021)

Introduction

I’m a huge Swiftie. I have been since just a couple of months after reputation dropped, so for around three years now- which might not sound like a long time, but at this point I’ve been through five album cycles, three concert films, a documentary, eight singles and I’m emotionally preparing for the Red re-recording in November. Does she ever sleep?

I’d like to talk about three of those album cycles in particular, because in my opinion they are the three most vital points in her career: not the biggest, not the most successful, but I think the arc of reputation, Lover, and folklore had the potential to make or break her entire career. I’m going to explore each step of this arc, the reasons why each step might have taken place, how each record might have altered the public perception of her, and how she came out of it so strongly in the end.

Just to clarify before I get into this essay- just like anyone else, I’m biased towards certain records. reputation is my favourite Taylor album, and I think folklore is a fucking masterpiece. That being said, I still think Lover is a great album- I’m only going be framing it somewhat negatively here because of the context of the records it’s surrounded by. It’s a case where in my personal opinion it’s the least amazing of an incredible bunch, and I think that positive framing is quite important to remember as I go over the positives and negatives of each album. Absolutely no disrespect to Lover stans, please don’t come for my throat.

Since the two focal points of this essay are the public perception of Taylor and her artistic growth, knowing the context and history of her career is vital. So for any readers who doesn’t already follow Taylor, I’ll give a rundown of her discography up to the period I’m discussing in this essay:

The Story o̶f̶ ̶u̶s̶ So Far

At only the age of sixteen, Taylor released her debut self-titled album in 2006. Her first single, ‘Time McGraw’, had hit number 40 on the US charts, and the album itself hit number 5 on the Billboard Top 200, indicating it was a pretty immediate success, but nothing compared to what we all know came after it. It wasn’t much more than a nice country album by a nice country girl; although she was definitely building an audience, it was mostly a hit amongst country fans. A few other singles from Taylor Swift were ‘Teardrops on My Guitar’, ‘Our Song’, ‘Picture To Burn’ and ‘Should’ve Said No’- again, reasonable hits, but nothing huge. Another thing to note here is that lots of the promotion came from Taylor herself- not only did she design lots of the artwork herself, more importantly she communicated with fans openly and constantly on her Myspace page. There are countless fans I see today telling their stories about how they talked to Taylor back in 2006, and this is a pretty big factor in creating the ‘teenage girl’ audience that she became known for. This personal aspect to the album cycle not only highlights how small she was as a pop star at this point, but this intimacy is going to become important later on so keep it in mind.

Self-Titled was an absolutely modest hit compared to its 2008 follow-up, Fearless. Debuting at number one on the Billboard Top 200 charts, it was proceeded by the colossal single ‘Love Story’, a song so iconic that it remains universally recognisable to this day- to plenty of people this is still the Taylor Swift song they first think of if someone mentions her name. From this song alone you can see how much her lyrics have matured in the two year gap between her albums, using the story of Romeo & Juliet as an allegory for her own relationship- a far cry from the straight-forward, diary-esque lyrics from her first album. The album itself was huge, largely accepted as her mainstream breakthrough, and was followed by ‘White Horse’, ‘Fifteen’ and the title track ‘Fearless’ as singles- as well as her other gigantic track of this era, ‘You Belong With Me’, which is almost on par with ‘Love Story’ in terms of cultural impact. Fearless was the point at which many of Taylor’s core audience jumped on board, making it the clear choice for the first re-recording project: it’s nostalgic and iconic enough to make a splash in terms of sales, while still also having plenty of room for improvement Because although her lyricism did see improvement of the debut album, it was really a more polished and complex version of the same country sound; but her artistic identity was about to start shifting and evolving from this point onwards.

Although it wasn’t quite as explosive as Fearless, her upwards trajectory continued with the 2010 release of Speak Now. This is what I personally think is her first truly incredible album, as not only did Speak Now build on the country sound with rock elements and grand ballads, it was also entirely written by Taylor herself! Fuck anyone who says she just sings her producer’s words: this record is proof of her talent. It also happened to be her longest project yet at one hour and six minutes- I think her inability to streamline her records and cut out some solid tracks to better the whole is a very valid criticism that can be thrown at Taylor, but in my opinion Speak Now was a case where it works perfectly. Since every track was so long and, for lack of a better word, big, it all comes together in this grand tapestry of her adolescent experience. To me, this is the culmination of this era, the magnum opus of her country sound. That being said, it wasn’t as huge of a hit as Fearless was. ‘Mean’, ‘Haunted’, ‘Dear John’, ‘Back To December’, ‘Better Than Revenge’, AND ‘The Story of Us’. The most popular songs from each era are important to emphasise because public perception is going to be the focal point of this essay- and her popularity was about to skyrocket with the Swift explosion that came about with the release of Red.

Dropping in 2012, she finally made the leap into full-blown pop with the colossal singles ‘I Knew You Were Trouble’ and ‘We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together’, as well as some minor hits in ’22’ and ‘Begin Again’. It’s so obvious from the beginning of Red that this album is… different. It’s likely the result of her hiring some more experienced producers, but from those booming drums that open the album to the overwhelming combination mind-blowing note and crashing symbols at the end of ‘State of Grace’ it’s obvious that this record was special; she wasn’t just a country pop girl, she was a good artist. Taylor herself described Red as her ‘Jackson Pollock’ album, and I agree, with these pop hits mixed with some of her best-ever songs in ‘State of Grace’ and the fan- favourite ‘All Too Well’. Red was also the explosion that led to the overwhelming tabloid reporting on Taylor during the 1989 era.

Released in 2014, 1989 was the record that truly cemented Taylor Swift as a pop superstar- as the iconic quote from Barbara Walters goes, “Taylor Swift is the music industry”. Although it isn’t my personal favourite and I wouldn’t call it her best, I think 1989 is Taylor’s most ‘perfect’ album. That statement might seem strange at first, but have you seen this tracklist? Every single song on 1989 could have been a hit single- and nearly all of them were! ‘Welcome To New York’, ‘Blank Space’, ‘Style’, ‘Out Of The Woods’, ‘Shake It Off’, ‘Bad Blood’ and ‘Wildest Dreams’- I just named most of the songs on the record as the huge hits from this album, and it’s not as if the other songs are hidden, underground deep cuts either. I would guess that most people who listen to the radio have heard every single track from this album without even realising it- I know I did, and I was that kid that thought he was above pop music when I was in middle school and this record dropped. But this was the issue: when you make the perfect album, an album that spawned so many huge singles- where can you go next?

This is an issue that I think a lot of great artists struggle with: how can you top perfection? My Chemical Romance after the release of The Black Parade, Pulp after Different Class, Radiohead after OK Computer- all of them struggled with avoiding a disappointing follow-up to their landmark record, to varying degrees of success. Taylor not only had this problem, but also had the struggle of the media following and covering her every move. This coverage, however, was almost exclusively focused not on her art, but on her. The most notable example is the obsessive documentation of her relationships, every beginning and end being its own news story. Another large point of focus was on her appearance as praise and criticism of her weight raised discussions everywhere about what society deems to be attractive. The personal nature of this media coverage makes it easy to see why this had a downward spiral effect on not only her mental health (she admitted in ‘Miss Americana’ that discussions about her weight fuelled her eating disorder), but also on the over-saturation of Taylor Swift in pop culture. More media coverage led to more popularity, leading to further over-saturation of Taylor Swift, which lead to more criticism and therefore even more media coverage. Similar to Radiohead in their Kid A sessions, Taylor decided to vanish from the public eye in response to all of this. However, unlike Radiohead who went in a different, more abstract direction with the follow up to their landmark record, Taylor chose to face her reputation head-on.

reputation

We’re finally into the main subject matter of this essay. First of all, I’d like to address my personal elephant in the room- reputation is underrated as fuck. ‘Albumoftheyear.com’ has reputation as her lowest rated album at a user score of 61. And come on, Fantano, a strong 4? How can an album with songs as good as ‘…Ready For It?’, ‘I Did Something Bad’, ‘Don’t Blame Me’, “Delicate’, ‘Look What You Made Me Do’, ‘So It Goes…’, ‘Gorgeous’, ‘Getaway Car’, ‘This Is Why We Can’t Do Nice Things’, ‘Call It What You Want’ AND ‘New Years Day’ be her lowest rated album? Yes, I just listed more than half of the songs on reputation as my favourites, because that’s how fucking good it is.

‘Delicate’ is my absolute favourite Taylor song. The way it manages to balance being a stunning, chill love song while still being a catchy pop hit is unrivalled. The production is also absolutely unmatched in her discography, it has such a unique vibe for her and I love it. The vocals, especially, I love- one of my favourite things in music is when artists’ voices are absolutely drenched in vocal effects, turning it into another instrument rather than a delivery system for lyrics. I just love it so much. Don’t get me wrong, I love raw vocals- one of my favourite artists is Bright Eyes- but I think far too many people write it off as “auto-tune” without thinking about the artistic merit of it. Another artist who does this fantastically is Bon Iver, who we’ll be talking about more later in this video. In the mean-time, though, I’d like to recommend songs like ’33 “God”’, ’10 d E A T h b R E a s T ⚄ ⚄’ and ‘AUATC’ to see what I mean about the potential of vocal manipulation.

And, yes, I’m even a fan of ‘Look What You Made Me Do’. I’ll get into this more in the Lover section, but people are far too harsh on her cheesy songs- it’s another song that’s very unique for her discography, with its Disney villain-esque vibe, its very minimalistic verses and chorus with eclectic bursts of energy in-between. The queen of cheese- watch me scream “THE OLD TAYLOR CAN’T COME TO THE PHONE RIGHT NOW” every time. Talented, brilliant, incredible, show stopping, spectacular, never the same, totally unique, completely never done before, unafraid to-

The clearest theme of reputation is, well, her reputation. When people stereotype her record in the most basic terms, I think reputation comes down to ‘the Kanye drama album’ as that was the story that dominated Taylor’s media coverage in the lead-up to this era. As I mentioned earlier, reputation faces this head-on with tracks like ‘I Did Something Bad’ (“They’re burning all the witches even if you aren’t one / They got their pitchforks and proof, their receipts and reasons / They’re burning all the witches even if you aren’t one / So light me up”), ‘Look What You Made Me Do’ (“I don’t like your little games / Don’t like your tilted stage / The role you made me play / Of the fool, no I don’t like you / I don’t like your perfect crime / How you laugh when you lie”) and ‘This is Why We Can’t Have Nice Things’ (“It was so nice being friends again / There I was giving you a second chance / But you stabbed me in the back whilst shaking my hand / And therein lies the issue / Friends don’t try to trick you / Get you on the phone and mind-twist you”). While some critics such as Anthony Fantano see this as a negative, Taylor holding onto the past and turning it into songs that will age poorly, personally I appreciate the fearlessness she showed in making this project- a time capsule of her emotions in 2017. Especially with the added context we now have that she was telling the truth the entire time, it’s completely understandable that she was frustrated enough with the situation to make an album venting about it. She turned her frustration into a dark, biting pop masterpiece that’s not only filled with some of her best songs, but also stands as one of her most united concepts for an album.

That being said, reputation isn’t entirely about how she was treated by Kim, Kanye and the media. Far more of the record is taken up talking about something new for Taylor: the beginning of a long-term, happy relationship. Up until this point (and, if we’re being honest, still to this day amongst the general public), Taylor was stereotyped as the girl just making ‘break-up songs’- the whore who goes through boyfriends faster than she makes albums, some people even claiming she’s a sociopath ‘using’ them for material. Taylor meeting Joe Alwyn was a clear turning point in her career, with all of her records beyond this point dealing with the subject of true love unlike ever before- most obviously in the sunny follow-up to reputation, Lover. In the promotion for Lover, Taylor admitted that looking back this was the first time she wrote about “love that was very real”. Songs such as ‘Delicate’ (“Handsome, you’re a mansion with a view / Do the girls back home touch you like I do? / Long night, with your hands up in my hair / Echoes of your footsteps on the stairs / Stay here, honey, I don’t wanna share / ’Cause I like you”), ‘Gorgeous’ (“…you should think about the consequence / Of you touching my hand in a darkened room / If you’ve got a girlfriend, I’m jealous of her / But if you’re single that’s honestly worse / ’Cause you’re so gorgeous it actually hurts”), ‘King of My Heart’ (“Late in the night, the city’s asleep / Your love is a secret I’m hoping, dreaming, dying to keep / Change my priorities / The taste of your lips is my idea of luxury”), ‘Dress’ (“Carve your name into my bedpost / ’Cause I don’t want you like a best friend / Only bought this dress so you could take it off”) and ‘New Year’s Day’ (“Squeeze my hand three times in the back of the taxi / I can tell that it’s gonna be a long road / I’ll be there if you’re the toast of the town, babe / Or if you strike out and you’re crawling home”) deal with love and sex in an honest and upfront in a way few other projects of hers do. I’d describe it as her most intimate album: whereas projects like folklore or Taylor Swift might be more vulnerable and stripped-back instrumentally, they both have somewhat of a mask between the listener and Taylor’s true feelings- folklore, especially, uses fictional metaphorical situations throughout the entire album. reputation, on the other hand, wears its heart on its sleeve: a bare, beautiful and honest expression of love that was such a breath of fresh air in her discography.

It might seem like an odd, obscure track to focus on, I think ‘Call It What You Want’ captures the spirit of reputation better than any other cut on the record. It’s the second to last track of the record, and in my eyes it closes the book on the reputation era. Lyrically, it explores both major themes I’ve mentioned, opening with a commentary on her damaged public image (“My castle crumbled overnight / I brought a knife to a gunfight / They took the crown but it’s alright / All the liars are calling me one / Nobody’s heard from me for months” / I’m doing better than I ever was”) before bleeding into how it doesn’t matter, because she’s happy with Joe (“Bridges burn, I never learn / At least I did one thing right / I did one thing right / I’m laughing with my lover / Making forts under covers / Trust him like a brother / Yeah, you know I did one thing right / Starry eyes sparking up my darkest night”) . It has such a relaxed vibe, giving off the sense that she’s at peace despite everything, and she’s ready to move on to the next chapter in her life. It’s raw and beautiful and passionate- there’s a moment in ‘Miss Americana’ (the private acoustic performance recorded by Joe) that I think captures this perfectly, and it gets me every time.

reputation has such a unique aesthetic compared to the rest of her discography. Sandwiched between two vibrant radio pop records, it’s dark and biting in a way that hugely appeals to me. I love how unapologetic it is, not only in its straight-to-the-point lyrics, but also in its entire roll-out and vibe- the old Taylor can’t come to the phone right now because she’s fucking dead. On top of all of this, she approached the topic with self-awareness showcased in the ‘Look What You Made Me Do’ music video. Like I mentioned earlier, it’s my favourite Taylor Swift album. The songs just hit too hard, almost every track being a catchy bop that makes you throw your head back and forth- and it manages to do this while still being a cohesive, thematically rich record that captures an important moment in her life and preserves it forever.

I believe that Taylor also took the reputation era as an opportunity to reclaim her body and turn away from the male gaze. Despite having a largely female audience, as a women working under the heterosexual cis men who dominate the music industry, up until this point she had been conforming to the heteronormative male gaze. Theoretically, it sells records. It makes you desirable. Sex sells. In her brief discussion about eating disorders in ‘Miss Americana’, Taylor mentions feeling the need to starve herself in order to remain thin during the pre-rep albums:

“I tend to get triggered by something, whether it’s a picture of me where I feel like I looked like my tummy was too big, or if somebody said that I looked pregnant or something and that’ll just trigger me to just… starve a little bit. Just stop eating. I thought that I was supposed to feel like I was gonna pass out at the end of a show, or in the middle of it. I thought that was how it was, and now I realise: no, if you eat food, have energy, get stronger, you can do all of these shows and not feel it. Which is… a really good revelation, because I’m a lot happier with who I am, and I happier with, like… I don’t… I don’t care as much if, like, somebody points out that I have gained weight. It’s just something that makes my life better, the fact that I’m, you know, a size six instead of a size double zero. I mean, that- that wasn’t how my body was supposed to be. I just didn’t really understand that at the time, I really don’t think I knew it. I would have defended it to anyone who said ‘I’m concerned about you’. I was like, ‘What are you talking about? Of course I eat. It’s perfectly normal, I just exercise a lot’. And I did exercise a lot, but I wasn’t eating. And… you can’t… I just… I don’t think you even know you’re doing that when you’re doing it gradually. There’s always some standard of beauty that you’re not meeting. ’Cause when you’re thin enough then you don’t have that ass that everybody wants. But if you have enough weight on you to have an ass, then your stomach isn’t flat enough. It’s all just… fucking impossible.”

Now, I’m not going to fall into the same trap that the media did by commenting on how she looked during the 1989 era, but I’ll say this: during reputation, she looked healthy. She looked like a normal, strong person who was confident in her body, wearing outfits that fit her well and made her look good. Who gives a fuck what standards of beauty she was or wasn’t perceived as meeting, she looked good. This reclamation of her body and her style can be felt especially in the folklore era; In the little we saw of the Lover era she wore similar outfits to reputation (albeit more sparkly and colourful), but during folklore she went full cottage-core. She wore minimal makeup, traditional hairstyles, and big comfy sweaters. She broke away from the male gaze that the industry so loves by being comfortable and herself, a shift that I believe began during the reputation era.

That being said… that’s what I think of reputation. Despite ‘Look What You Made Me Do’, ‘… Ready For It?’ and ‘Delicate’ being decent hits, the reception to reputation wasn’t nearly as positive as the albums that preceded it. Although this may have in part been due to the over- saturation of Taylor’s music that I touched on earlier, the more likely answer is that people just didn’t like the sound of reputation as much as 1989. With 1989 and, to an extent, Red, Taylor set the trends, defining the pop sound for the next several years. Especially with 1989- the 80s pop throwback aesthetic was hugely influential in the pop scene, still influencing artists like Dua Lipa today with Future Nostalgia or Carly Rae Jepsen with E-MO-TION. But since then, the pop trends had moved on, and barring ‘Delicate’ Taylor largely moved against these aesthetic trends with reputation. The dark, dramatic sound of songs like ‘I Did Something Bad’, ‘Don’t Blame Me’ or ‘Getaway Car’ went against the conventions of pop music in 2017, which was dominated by soft, dreamy and catchy aesthetics. ‘Look What You Made Me Do’ in particular stood out against the crowd with its Disney Villain vibe, a sound that was clearly abrasive to lots of listeners. ‘Albumoftheyear.com’ has it rated at a user score of 44, with some absolutely brutal reviews: “I don’t know what we did, but if it resulted in this god awful song, then we sincerely apologise”.

It was clear that Taylor’s reputation had worsened with reputation. She was no longer the perfect pop queen, releasing hit after hit after hit; songs that even non-Taylor stans could enjoy when they came on the radio. reputation didn’t earn an album of the year nomination at the Grammys, which she had achieved previously with Red, Fearless and 1989, winning the latter two. In the ‘Miss Americana’ documentary we hear her instant response to this news, which breaks my heart every time: “I’m making a better record.”

I’m going to be doing some guesswork about Taylor’s state of mind from this point onward, but ‘Miss Americana’ is a massively helpful source in understanding her mindset when it comes to success: “I thought they were booing me. For someone who’s built their whole belief system on getting people to clap for you, the whole crowd booing is a pretty formative experience. That was, like, sort of a catalyst for a lot of psychological paths that I went down. And not all of them were beneficial.” I think this is an important quote in understanding why Taylor moved from the provocative and unapologetic reputation to the safe and radio-friendly Lover.

Lover

Released in the summer of 2019, Lover was a return to the upbeat and innocent vibe of 1989. The difference between reputation and this is a complete tonal whiplash… a near-literal difference between night and day. Looking at her discography they feel like a complete juxtaposition of one another, and the music itself backs this up: the playful and breezy opening track to the album, ‘I Forgot That You Existed’, feels like an outright rejection of its older brother. Lyrically, it continues the themes of ‘Call It What You Want’ by saying the drama of the past doesn’t matter: she’s moved on, forgotten about it altogether. She presents reputation almost as a footnote in her discography, a brief detour to vent about her drama before she got back on the radio pop train with Lover. Although more mature themes were present on some songs, with the politics of ‘The Man’ and ‘You Need To Calm Down’ or the love and sex heavy ‘Lover’ and ‘False God’, this album was largely rainbows and butterflies. This was immediately obvious with the release of the first single, ‘ME!’, featuring Brendon Urie.

Now, although I personally adore this track, I completely understand the perspective of those who don’t. It’s just so ridiculously fun. It was intentionally written with children in mind (mentioned, again, during the recording of it in ‘Miss Americana’) an aspect of the song that has been heavily criticised since its release, particularly with people mocking the “Hey kids, spelling is FUN!” line. Yes, it’s cringe, but I love her for it. It’s not like she doesn’t have a history of including silly lines in her lead singles anyway: “Hey kids, spelling is fun!” is just the new “the old Taylor is dead”, which was the new “This. Sick. Beat.”, which was the new “Like, ever.”.

Regardless of my own feelings towards the track, it wasn’t received particularly well. Both ‘ME!’ and ‘You Need To Calm Down’ were both commonly regarded as poor choices as lead singles, especially when bops like ‘Cruel Summer’, ‘London Boy’ and ‘Death By a Thousand Cuts’ were right there. Lover, to many, felt like a step back for Taylor- even if some people thought it was an improvement musically over reputation, it seemed to be a case of her shying away from artistic freedom, pursuing what she thought everyone wanted to hear rather than exploring different avenues of sound. This is why the quote about the 2009 VMAs incident is so important- when the world seems to be booing at you for going in your own direction in your latest artistic endeavour, what can you do but turn back?

Lover wasn’t a complete flop- it was the world’s best-selling album of 2019- but it was a disappointment to many. I, and many other Taylor Swift fans, wanted to see her make the music she wanted to, not chase commercial success- the worst thing she could do is fall into a groove of churning out sunny pop albums for the rest of her career, as many once-popular artists have. As much as I like them, tracks such as ‘The Man’, ‘I Think He Knows’, ‘Paper Rings’, ‘Afterglow’ and ‘ME!’ feel somewhat like the beginning of that- sugary, inoffensive pop music written to be played over the credits of whatever feel-good summer movie is playing in theatres that year.

That being said, I’d again like to emphasise that I really like Lover! The title track, especially, is an absolutely stunning, raw ballad that literally made me cry the first time I heard it. It’s a more mature, introspective look at her relationship than the songs describing a new, blossoming passion we heard on reputation- it’s a perspective we don’t hear often from the most mainstream pop artists who try to appeal to young people generally in shorter relationships. I think this more mature perspective is especially clear in the opening line, “We could leave the Christmas lights up ‘till January / This is our place, we make the rules”- meaningful in its intimate inconsequentiality. She described this album as “a love letter to love”, which I absolutely.. love. Throughout the entire record her vocals are the best they’ve ever been, and in many places she returns to the chill pop sound she dipped her toes into with reputation, particularly on ‘It’s Nice to Have a Friend’ and ‘Death By A Thousand Cuts’, a track that doesn’t get half the love it deserves.

The maturity of Lover’s lyricism links into an idea that’s been quite commonly discussed in Taylor’s career: the dynamic that she’s ‘growing up with her fans’, and how each new album is telling a new chapter of her life. Her first three albums, written between the ages of 15 and 19, largely deal in the themes of young, high-school love, romantic futures and discussions of success. Although it’s absolutely not true that this was her entire demographic (just look at me!), it’s true that a lot of the fans who began following her at the beginning of her career were teenage girls- just like her. They related to the themes of her songs because they were often going through the exact same thing- and as she aged, so did she. It should also be noted that these ‘chapters’ apply not only to the lyric, but also in the musical style. Self-Titled, Fearless, and Speak Now all lean heavily into the country genre for two reasons: first, it’s what she grew up with. As a teenager it makes sense that she’d continue with the music she’s comfortable with; it’s safe, and it’s what she could do best. The second reason is because, as a young solo female act in the music industry, it was almost the only option she had. In 2005, most other mainstream radio genres were dominated by bands, older women and men. Country was one of the few genres in which innocence was appreciated; it appealed to the southern Americans she grew up around. This era was followed by Red, written when she was 21, which has themes of heartbreak from a long-term relationship- a story that many fans who will have been coming out of college or university at this point, a time of growing apart from people you once saw yourself with, can relate to. It spreads its wings stylistically, making the leap into full-fledged synth pop on certain tracks like ‘I Knew You Were Trouble.’, ’22’ and ‘We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together’. This could indicate that she felt confident enough in herself and her career to experiment and make the music she truly wanted to. Making the full transition into pop, 1989, at 22, showcases a more mature attitude towards past lovers, analysing the feelings of looking back and the shared blame of the problems, rather than vilifying them as she did earlier in her career with songs like ‘Picture to Burn’ or ‘Better Than Revenge- an experience fans relate to as they grow older and experience more relationships. Finally, reputation and Lover walk hand-in-hand as, written around 25 and 27 respectively, a description of blossoming and enduring love. Many of her fans, at a similar age, may have found long-term partners who they may have moved in with and may see themselves marrying some day. The problem is that this is where the ‘maturing style’ argument somewhat falls apart. While reputation was described by her as ‘cathartic’, exploring whichever pop styles she wanted, to from hip hop to electro-ballad, Lover devolves into commercialism. However, while the style we hear may not follow the trend of maturing as an artist, the lack of this can still show us where she was in her career: she felt she had to hold onto the attention of the general public. She turned to formulaic and ‘safe’ pop to guarantee she stays on the radio, rather than taking a risk and leaping head first into soft love songs akin to ‘False God’ or the title track. She discusses this in ‘Miss Americana’:

“Everyone’s this shiny new toy for, like, two years. The female artists that I know of have reinvented themselves 20 time more than the male artists. They have to, or else you’re out of a job. Constantly having to reinvent, constantly having to find new facets of yourself that people find to be shiny. Be new to us, be young to us, but only in a new way and only in the way we want. And reinvent yourself, but only in a way we find to be equally comforting, but also a challenge for you. Live out a narrative that we find interesting enough to entertain us, but not so crazy that it makes us uncomfortable. This is probably one of my last opportunities as an artist to grasp onto that kind of success”.

But… doesn’t that also throw the entire idea that her style grew as she matured into question? Did she ever want to, or did she simply feel the need to? Personally, I think both sides can be true. Even if she felt pushed to change her style throughout her entire career, she managed to grow musically and artistically with every step. Lover, as what she felt was the last chance, was the final push towards formulaic pop as it gave her what was the best chance at succeeding. Of course this “last chance” attitude seems ridiculous considering the context we now have of folklore and beyond, but I can entirely understand her mindset. As we’ve all now seen, she’d had a rough few years career-wise and she is someone who thrives on being applauded.

As a positive note, one aspect of her writing that’s remained constant throughout all three of these albums (and since the beginning of her career) is her famous storytelling. I’ll give some more example of this during the folklore section of this essay, but I’d love to take the opportunity to establish how this has been part of her music from the very beginning of her career: an early example would be ‘Mary’s Song’. Whereas most artists- take, for example, ‘The greatest’ by Lana Del Rey or ‘Moon Song’ by Phoebe Bridgers- tend to describe a feeling within a relationship, or the emotions within a single moment, Taylor likes to describe a more long-term narrative, from first meeting someone to falling in love. In the case of ‘Mary’s Song’, Swift describes Mary meeting a boy at the age of 7 (“She said, I was seven and you were nine / I looked at you like the stars that shine”), forming a childhood friendship while their fathers joke about them falling in love (“And our daddies used to joke about the two of us / Growing up and falling in love, and our mamas smiled / And rolled their eyes”). She moves to Mary being 16 and really falling in love with the boy (“Well, I was sixteen when suddenly / I wasn’t that little girl you used to see / But your eyes still shined like pretty lights / And our daddies used to joke about the two of us / They never believed we’d really fall in love”), their first fight (“Take me back to that time we had our very first fight / The slamming of doors instead of kissing goodnight”), their proposal (“A few more years had gone and come around / We were sitting at our favourite spot in town / And you looked at me, got down on one knee”), marriage (“Take me back to the time when we walked down the aisle / The whole town came and our mommas cried”), moving back to the house where they met and living together to the age of 87 with their children (“Take me home where we met so many years before / We’ll rock our babies on that very front porch / After all this time, you and I. / I’ll be eighty-seven and you’ll be eighty-nine / I’ll still look at you like the stars that shine / In the sky, oh my my my”). She weaves together this narrative in the same way as a traditional story, with each line revealing the next step in this fictional girl’s life story, using the chorus as foreshadowing and callbacks to the beginning. And she does it all in three minutes and thirty three seconds. Similarly, she captures a similar feeling on Lover- although the popular example might be ‘Miss Americana & The Heartbreak Prince’, I’m gonna focus on ‘It’s Nice to Have a Friend’ instead. From the very first words (“School bell rings, walk me home”) Taylor tells us that this the protagonist met their love interest in school, an innocent relationship that slowly grows closer and closer (“Something gave you the nerve / To touch my hand”)until they, too, eventually get married (“Church bell rings, carry me home”). This one is especially clear in its traditional story- telling techniques, with the first line of the first and final verse mirroring one another, forcing the listener to subconsciously consider that they just listened to the story of a whole relationship; this is, in my opinion, a huge part of Taylor Swift’s appeal. She presents this romantic idea of love- which might sound like a redundant description of love, but I think it’s true. Where most other artists tend to focus on either the passion or melancholy of love, Taylor weaves this realistic but fairytale-esque ideal that everyone likes to imagine themselves in. I also think she got more ambitious and perfected this style of songwriting with folklore, which I’ll get onto a bit later.

Unfortunately, the singles from Lover just didn’t perform that well in the charts. Both lead singles, ‘ME!’ and ‘You Need To Calm Down’ were minor hits at best, each reaching the number 2 spot in North America and even lower in Britain; a huge difference compared to the dozen hits from 1989. Although the record itself did sell well, that metric is far less significant for the general public, which is largely my focus here: aside from certain notable events like the selling of her masters, ‘Miss Americana’ documentary, her appearance in ‘Cats’ (Hooper, 2019) and her winning of the ‘Artist of the Decade’ award at the 2019 AMAs, Taylor remained largely out of the public eye, staying out of the news and, well… out of relevancy. Artists like Ariana Grande and Billie Eilish had taken over as the main pop girls.

The eleven months following the release of Lover were largely uneventful. Three non-album singles were released around the turn of the decade- ‘Beautiful Ghosts’, written for the ‘Cats’ soundtrack, in November; the wonderful Christmas single ‘Christmas Tree Farm’ in December; and ‘Only The Young’ along with ‘Miss Americana’ in January. After that, from January to July, she went silent: as she said in the now-famous instagram caption, “Not a lot going on at the moment”.

folklore

Of course, we now know that was bullshit. On July 23rd 2020 she began posting posting the artwork for folklore, her surprise eighth studio album, piece by piece on instagram. This was followed by the tracklist and the announcement that it would be released in full just 16 hours later.

I remember opening Instagram just ten minutes or so after this was announced, completely unaware that there was a new fucking Taylor Swift album- an indie folk album? With seventeen new tracks? Featuring BON IVER? I remember it felt like a bizarre fever dream. Although I listen to a pretty wide range of music, I’d always say that folk is one of my favourite genres- so my girl Taylor taking this route, alongside some of my favourite artists, felt like a dream come true for me personally.

Something to note straight away was how un-commercial this album rollout felt, and what a huge contrast it was compared to Lover. Taylor began teasing Lover ten weeks before even the first single dropped, with a sudden aesthetic shift on her Instagram full of seemingly cryptic images. This led to a highly publicised 13 day countdown in Times Square leading up to ‘ME!’, which was then revealed to be full of clues about the then-unknown album, particularly its title. Lover was finally released after a full 6 months of build-up. I know lots of fans enjoy the extensive publicity for a certain era, and many felt that Lover didn’t have enough publicity compared to other eras, for me personally the reveal of folklore felt like such a breath of fresh air- I still get flashbacks to the infamous ‘five holes in the fence’ period.

folklore was supposedly written and recorded without even Taylor’s label, Republic Records, knowing- the only real piece of publicity was the music video for ‘Cardigan’, a track which got some well-deserved recognition on the radio despite being a fairly low-key single drop. The only real example of commerciality in the folklore release that could be compared to Lover is the announcement that there would be 8 different versions of the deluxe vinyl. While this does sound excessive, I don’t have a huge problem with this- the only difference between them all was that they had different artwork and coloured vinyl. It feels more like a case of “choose your favourite cover”, rather than “you need to buy all of these to complete the set” which I felt more with the four numbered deluxe Lover CDs, each of which included a unique set of diary entries, lyrics, photos and posters.

But this lack of commerciality didn’t matter- folklore was an absolutely amazing success, reaching over 80 million streams in the first day alone. It was named the year’s best-selling album by a female artist internationally (with Taylor herself the best-selling soloist and female artist overall in 2020), and was critically acclaimed with notable publications such as Pitchfork giving it an 8/10, NME an 8/10 and Rolling Stone a 9/10. It was a big deal- everyone knew that Taylor Swift had just dropped a surprise lockdown album. I knew that when my parents came home and asked if I’ve heard that Taylor Swift has released a new album.

I absolutely love how personal folklore feels. Despite wearing the mask I mentioned earlier, the wall of fiction being placed between us and the artist due to to the majority of this album being written about fictional stories, it still manages to feel like an album that came directly from Taylor’s heart. It feels like an album she truly wanted to make and felt passionate about- which isn’t to say that I don’t think she was passionate about and proud of a more commercial record like Lover, but folklore feels like Taylor without distractions. It’s her music in it’s rawest form since her self-titled debut, where I can imagine her letting the lyrics flow from her head onto a notepad and sitting in front of the piano to put it to music. In ‘The Long Pond Studio Sessions’ film she tells an anecdote about how she heard Joe- or “William Bowery”- playing the opening and first verse of ‘exile’ and asked him if they could develop it together. I doubt that kind of intimate songwriting story could ever have happened with her previous records, which are written in sessions with her producers. Another more direct comparison to her 2006 debut is the genre itself- for the first time since Red, she dove headfirst back into the country sound with ‘betty’. She dips her toes back into her country roots, exposing a certain vulnerability by acknowledging her past while proving how much she’s grown as a lyricist and an artist.

‘exile’, featuring and co-written by the incredible Justin Vernon of Bon Iver, was written about a fictional relationship. These fictional narratives- folklore, if you will- run throughout the record, with more autobiographical songs such as ‘mirrorball’ and ‘mad woman’ being the exception, rather than the rule. An example I love of these narratives is the famous ‘Teenage Love Triangle Trilogy’ consisting of ‘cardigan’, ‘august’ and ‘betty’, each telling parts of the same story from their own unique perspectives. ‘august’, told from the perspective of Augustine, describes the intense summer love affair between her and James, talking about how passionately she felt about them but how they were never hers to lose (“I can see us twisted in bedsheets / August slipped away like a bottle of wine / ’Cause you were never mine”). ‘betty’ is told from the perspective of James as they prepare to ask for Betty’s forgiveness for the affair and all the shit they put her through (“I was walking home on broken cobblestones / Just thinking of you when she pulled up like / A figment of my worst intentions / She said ‘James, get in, let’s drive’ / Those days turned into nights / Slept next to her, but / I dreamt to you all summer long / Betty, I’m here on your doorstep / And I planned it out for weeks now / But it’s finally sinking in / Betty, right now is the last time / I can dream about what happens when / You see my face again / The only thing I want do / Is make it up to you / So I showed up at your party”). Finally, ‘cardigan’ is told from the perspective of Betty as she reflects on the entire ordeal (“When I felt like I was an old cardigan / Under someone’s bed / You put me on and said I was your favourite / A friend to all is a friend to none / Chase two girls, lose the one / When you are young, they assume you know nothing”)- my personal interpretation is that this song takes place in the distant future after she slammed the screen door in James’s face; but I know other interpretations are out there- Taylor’s own head canon is that James and Betty ended up together after all of this. Side note, I don’t care what Taylor says- this love triangle is sapphic to me and nobody can change my mind on it.

Going back to ‘august’ for a second- this is my favourite song on folklore, and I think it’s an highlight of her growth as a musician, not only since the start of career but also since Lover dropped, just a year prior. I’m such a fan of non-traditional song structure, and ‘august’ shows this with its early bridge and extended outro; it also has such a dreamy aesthetic throughout that still makes me feel after my 170th listen. Swift and Antonoff manage to build a beautiful soundscape that makes it easy to visualise the events she’s talking about- I’m not sure what it is about it, but I can picture these moments so clearly, as if they’re scenes from a film. This is combines with lyrics that feel like a romantic poem: “Salt air, and the rust on your door / I never needed anything more” as well as “Your back, beneath the sun / Wishing I could write my name on it”. The lyrics and the soundscape come together to create feelings so strong you can place yourself in the moments: I can picture Augustine laid next to James, his head bowed towards the yellowing summer grass with his back exposed. They’re in the corner of a field bordered by a rickety wooden fence with the corner landmarked by a lush, proud tree. Obviously other people’s interpretations will be different, but my point is that each time I hear her describe that summer romance, it feels real. On top of this, she sings in a style I haven’t heard from her before, moving from extremely breathy and intimate verses, to light high- pitched vocals on the chorus, to a strong and almost shouty bridge. It feels mature while still having a fairytale quality to it, a beauty that absolutely anyone can appreciate. Fuck, it’s so incredibly gorgeous.

The poetry of folklore is something that can’t be ignored. I think the dream-like quality of the album, from its writing to its musical aesthetic (influenced by Aaron Dessner), is its defining feature. It’s what made it stand out against other quarantine albums, such as Charli XCX’s How I’m Feeling Now or Hayley Williams’ Petals For Armour. In her November 2020 Rolling Stone interview with Paul McCartney, she said “I was also using words I always wanted to use — kind of bigger, flowerier, prettier words like ‘epiphany,’ in songs. I always thought, ‘Well, that’ll never track on pop radio,’ but when I was making this record, I thought, ‘What tracks? Nothing makes sense anymore. If there’s chaos everywhere, why don’t I use the damn word I want to use in the song?” Not only does this once again highlight the lack of commercialism behind folklore, it also captures the idea that she wasn’t necessarily guided by song structure in the writing, but in the words that she loves; a thought process more akin to a poet than a pop star. There are countless examples of this beauty in the writing: in ‘cardigan’ (“I knew you’d linger like a tattoo kiss / I knew you’d haunt all of my what-ifs / The smell of smoke would hang around this long / ’Cause I knew everything when I was young / I knew I’d curse you for the longest time / Chasing shadows in the grocery line / I knew you’d miss me once the thrill expired / And you’d be standing in my front porch light / And I knew you’d come back to me”), ‘my tears ricochet’ (“We gather here / Weeping in a sunlit room / And if I’m on fire / You’ll be made of ashes too”) ‘invisible string’ (“A string that pulled me / Out from all the wrong arms right into that dive bar / Something wrapped all of my past mistakes in barbed wire / Chains around my demons / Wool to brave the seasons / One single thread of gold tied me to you”) and in ‘hoax’ (“My only one / My smoking gun / My eclipsed sun / This has broken me down / My twisted knife / My sleepless night / My winless fight / This has frozen my ground”). It’s fairytale-esque and filled with escapism, while simultaneously being contemplative and deeply introspective. I like the way critic Ann Powers put it:

“What is folklore if not a body constructed of memory a shared sense of the world, built of myths, heard stories, much repeated stories and stories that change because people need them to change? And I think Taylor takes that on in a very personal way throughout the record, that idea that we each have our own folklore. This is her folklore.”

As I mentioned earlier, this album features the mask of fiction between Taylor and the listener, but it still manages to be her most personal album since her debut. That is because despite being written in the third person, these lyrics are still her. The stories that resonated with her, whether it be a real piece of history like that of Rebekah Harkness in ‘the last great american dynasty’ or the presumably made up children in ‘seven’, resonated with her for a reason, and in some ways this is far more revealing than any personal story she ever got down on paper. It feels like an unfiltered confession coming directly from her mind to her lips, and I’m so pleased she made the leap to writing in this way.

Speaking of ‘the last great american dynasty’, this is the song I’d like to highlight as an example of the classic Swift storytelling on folklore. Obviously, the Teenage Love Triangle is another phenomenal example of this- honestly, it’s probably my personal favourite piece of writing from her ever- with its interweaving stories, each providing clues and context to give this big, emotionally complex picture between people. But to keep it simple and comparable to ‘Mary’s Song’ and ‘It’s Nice to Have a Friend’, let’s focus on the lifelong story of Rebekah Harkness. The track starts with Rebekah arriving in Rhode Island (“Rebekah rode up on the afternoon train / It was sunny / Her saltbox house took her mind of St. Louis”) and marrying her husband (“Bill was the heir to the standard oil name, and money / And the town said ‘How did a middle class divorcée do it?’ / The wedding was charming, if a little gauche / There’s only so far new money goes”) before his death (“Their parties were tasteful, if a little loud / The doctor had told him to settle down / It must have been her fault his heart gave out”). It describes how her life changed following this (“Rebekah gave up on the Rhode Island set forever / And flew in all the bitch pack friends from the city / Filled the pool with champagne and swam with the big names / And blew through he money on the boys and the ballet / And losing on card games bets with Dali”) and how the town reacted (“And they said, ‘there goes the last great American dynasty’ / Who knows, if she never showed up, what could have been / There goes the most shameless woman this town has ever seen / She had a marvellous time ruining everything”). What I love about the storytelling in this track in particular is that, akin to a Linklater film, it focusses more on the little moments than the big ones, such as the card game bets with Dali or how she stole her neighbour’s dog and dyed it key lime green. It could also be argued, interestingly, that the song follows the story of Holiday House more than Harkness herself, as the final verse ends with “Fifty years is a long time / Holiday house sat quietly on that beach / Free of women with madness, their men and bad habits / And then it was bought by me”, referring to Swift herself who bought the house in 2013. This interpretation helps my argument for the newfound maturity of her lyricism, taking an interesting new approach to a unique subject of a song (a building) while maintaining the same biographical storytelling style.

Another thing I’d like to quickly return to is ‘exile’ and its feature of Bon Iver. For anyone who isn’t aware, Bon Iver is an incredible Indie band who moved from styles of soft folk with 2007’s For Emma, Forever Ago, to very experimental indie with 22, A Million in 2016 (a left turn that in some ways parallels Taylor’s career arc: moving from the safe and stripped back debuts of For Emma, Forever Ago and Self-Titled to the more developed and mature Bon Iver, Bon Iver / 1989, the dark and dramatic left turns of 22, A Million and reputation, followed finally by the relaxed and mature i,i and folklore). I absolutely recommend these records to any Taylor fans reading this who haven’t checked out Justin’s discography yet, even if the latter album especially is in a very different style to anything Taylor’s ever done. My point in bringing Bon Iver up is this- would he have ever been featured on a Taylor Swift record before folklore? Up until this point most of her (predominantly male, by the way- is she allergic to female duets?) features have been extremely popular and currently relevant artists: Brendon Urie, Ed Sheeran, Shawn Mendes, Zayn, Kendrick Lamar; the kinds of artists that build hype and gain streams, not the kinds of artists I imagine Taylor listens to much in her free time. Bon Iver, on the other hand- they’re not exactly an unknown, underground artist, but they’re also not a project that the general public is following, not particularly dominating the charts. Taylor talked about how Justin was someone she’s personally a big fan of in ‘The Long Pond Studio Sessions’:

“…we’re really, really big Bon Iver fans. I was too afraid to suggest it, but when I sent it to Aaron [Dessner], I was like ‘This is, uh, hopefully a duet. We- I don’t know who with. Who would it be with? Who do you think would be good with this?’ and Aaron was like, ‘I think Justin would love this,’ … If I would have said it and he would have gone to Justin, and Justin would’ve said no, it would’ve hurt too much.”

This ties in to the idea that folklore was the album that Taylor wanted to make- it’s featuring the artists that interest her, and the artists she thinks would make the music she wants to make, such as Aaron Dessner, rather than the artists who can make the best pop hit.

A few of my other favourite songs on this record are ‘the 1’, a simple and poppy but extremely pretty introduction to the album, the aforementioned ‘cardigan’, a melancholic indie-pop track, ‘the last great american dynasty’, an extremely well written narrative that showcases the famous Swift storytelling, ‘exile’… I could go on, but honestly every single song is incredible, and necessary to this extremely tight and cohesive (albeit long) record. I honestly think this is her best ever album overall, and the only reason why it hasn’t overtaken reputation as my overall favourite is because of my personal connection to it as “my” Taylor Swift album- it’s absolutely my second favourite.

The Future, or: “Everything Has Changed”

So, where is Taylor now? Where is her career, and what is the perception of her? Since the release of folklore she’s released two new albums, both the fully original sister album evermore and the re- recorded Fearless (Taylor’s Version), with more re-recordings (or the rumoured TS10, trilogy-truthers?) well on the way. Both of these projects have been well-received and relatively successful- but, to bring the point of this essay together, I want you to consider where she would be had folklore never happened?

Lover would be her most recent album, released almost two years ago at this point, with the re- recordings instead being the largest focus of her career at this point. Not only would the re- recordings sound different without the heavy influence of the folklore era and the Antonoff/ Dessner production on the vault tracks (likely harming the critical acclaim of the project), but I sincerely doubt that even the idea of the re-recordings would be received well. The narrative would likely be that she’s an artist out of ideas, releasing two flop albums and clinging onto her popularity from 2014 by re-releasing her entire successful discography. Despite the context, it’d be disregarded as a cynical and lazy attempt at bleeding fans of their money by selling them the same albums again.

Instead, she’s an artist at the peak of her career: she’s a pop star who has managed to throw off the shackles of the industry while still maintaining her power and popularity- she’s released two critically acclaimed indie records, she’s escaped the oppressive executives at her old label and now she’s fighting to reclaim the rights to her own music. I mentioned near the beginning of this essay that the media coverage of Taylor in 2015 was focused on her and her relationships; her boyfriends, her appearance, and her drama. It should have been instead focused on the music, and in 2021 I think that’s finally happened. Any drama is about the rights of artists in the industry, and any new album is greeted with meaningful discussions about the music and its artistic merit.

You see countless people online saying “I was never a fan of Taylor Swift, but…”, and that’s really important to me, as a male Taylor Swift fan. It makes me so happy to see people finally take her seriously because it feels like it extends into my own life. I started listening to her at the end of 2017, when I was in Year 10, or freshman year for any American readers. It was a really difficult period of my life, when I had really strong romantic feelings for someone that never came to be, I was in the midst of figuring out my sexuality, and worst of all I had an emo haircut. Bands like My Chemical Romance, Paramore, Green Day and Fall Out Boy were really all I listened to at the time, and so taking this left turn into Taylor fucking Swift was something I felt like I really had to hide. But her music was so fun, and being able to turn off my brain to listen to some lighthearted pop changed everything for me. On top of that, having lyrics that I related to so heavily with these feelings I had; she sung in a way that was simultaneously more poetic and more direct than anything I’ve ever heard before, with emotions that cut straight into my own heart. I could feel what she felt in that bridge on ‘All Too Well’, I related to her struggles on ‘I Wish You Would’, and I understood exactly what place she was speaking from on ‘Delicate’. That song is still my favourite to this day because of one simple, cutting, emotional line that I haven’t ever heard from another artist: “‘Cause I like you”. It took a long time for me to, first of all, accept that I loved her music; that this was the kind of person I am, a shameless pop fan who prefers whatever I enjoy over what’s artistic and ‘good’- but also to be freely open about who I am, and that I listen to her. I feel so much freer today comfortable in myself and my mannerisms and my likes and dislikes. And so to see the people around me, both in person and online, also accept more freely that they appreciate Taylor Swift: it feels good. The fourteen year old me would be so happy to see it, and although the world has a long way to go in terms of acceptance and progressivism, this feels like a very personal, small step in the right direction.

Taylor Swift is an artist at the peak of her career. She seems happier than ever. She’s taking back ownership of her own music. She’s openly political, and using her power for good. She’s also using her influence to help the smaller artists she’s close to, like Olivia Rodrigo or Conan Grey. She’s using her money to help her fans in direct and meaningful ways outside of the public eye. She’s collaborating musically with her close friends, rather than with chart-toppers. And most importantly, she’s making the best music she ever has. Taylor Swift is such a positive force within the industry and a creative force within the pop genre, and I’m beyond excited to see what’s next.