Prince of Persia

Prince of Persia was a platform game created by Jordan Mechner in 1989 on the Apple II. One of the game's unique qualities was that enemies fought with swords, where most games at the time had enemies using projectile weapons. The film Raiders of the Lost Ark was an inspiration for the main character's acrobatic talents in the dangerous environments. Since it is release on the Apple II, is has since been ported to many other platforms.

Prince of Persia 2: The Shadow & The Flame

Prince of Persia 2: The Shadow & The Flame was created in 1994. Much like the first game, players must complete the game under a time limit, which passes in real time. The only way time can be regained is by playing a previously saved game. Takes place eleven days after the events of Prince of Persia, when the Prince suddenly finds that an impostor has taken his place, and used magic to convince the world that he is the genuine article and the Prince is the impostor. It was ported to the SNES in 1996 but had many elements removed from the game.

Prince of Persia 3D

Prince of Persia 3D was originally developed by Red Orb Entertainment, it debuted in 1999 for the PC. The release was rushed due to Red Orb's financial problems at the time and therefore did not go through bug detection and correctional stages. A Dreamcast version under the name Prince of Persia: Arabian Nights was released in 2000, developed by Avalanche Software. The port maintained the camera issues but improved upon control flaws and other bugs that were in the PC version.

Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time

Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time was developed by Ubisoft Montreal and published by Ubisoft, it was released on November 6, 2003. It was developed for the PC, PlayStation 2, GameCube, and Xbox. Later on, a 2D version was created for the GameBoy Advance and mobile phones. The game follows a character known as the Prince, son of the King Sharaman of Persia, who is tricked into releasing the Sands of Time. The Sands take over the kingdom, turning the inhabitants into monsters, but spares the Prince, Farah and the Vizier. The Prince then sets out on a long journey with Farah to undo the damage he caused.

Prince of Persia: Warrior Within

Prince of Persia: Warrior Within is a sequel to The Sands of Time. Warrior Within was released on December 2, 2004 for the Xbox, PlayStation 2, Gamecube and PC. Starting off where Sands of Time left off, the game adds new features and options for combat including giving the Prince the ability to wield two weapons at once. Warrior Within received an ESRB rating of M, unlike the T rated Sands of Time, due to blood and violent finishing moves. The game's reception was positive but was generally disliked for it is radical stylistic difference from the Sands of Time, including the change in personality of the Prince.

Prince of Persia: The Two Thrones

Prince of Persia: The Two Thrones is a follow up to The Sands of Time and Warrior Within, it is the last game in the The Sands of Time Trilogy. The Two Thrones takes place after the second ending of Prince of Persia: Warrior Within. The game starts with the Prince and Kaileena about to sail into Babylon's port, The Prince finds that the city is being destroyed by war, his ship is attacked and Kaileena is captured and The Prince sets out to find her. Later on, the Prince eventually develops a split personality, the "Dark Prince" side of him is a manifestation of the Sands of Time that tries to overcome the Prince's body and mind. When players control The Dark Prince, health steadily decreases until sand is obtained from enemies. The Prince reverts to his normal self when he comes in contact with water.

Prince of Persia Classic

Prince of Persia Classic is a remake of the original Prince of Persia, released on June 13, 2007 on the Xbox Live Arcade and on October 23, 2008 on the PlayStation Network. It maintains the general gameplay of the original but with 3D rendered graphics designed in the visual style of the Sands of Time trilogy, including more fluid animations, as well as two new modes, Time Attack and Survival.

Prince of Persia (2008)

Prince of Persia was released on December 2nd, 2008 for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3, and December 9, 2008 for PC. Scheduled for a Mac OS X release in March 2009. Taking place in Persia, a character who is only known as the Prince is caught up in a sandstorm and falls in a canyon. There he meets Elika, who is running away from guards at the time. Together they travel to the temple at the center of the kingdom. When they arrive, Elika's father soon shows up and destroys the tree of life, which begins to free the god of darkness, Ahriman. With the kingdom's land corrupted upon the destruction of the tree, the two set out together to heal the lands and stop Ahriman from escaping. Although the game ends on a cliffhanger, to date, no further games continuing the storyline have been released.

Prince of Persia: The Forgotten Sands

Prince of Persia: The Forgotten Sands was released alongside the movie Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time. It takes place in between the original The Sands of Time game and its sequel, Warrior Within. The Forgotten Sands was widely regarded as a cash-in; the Prince of Persia movie was based on the Sands of Time trilogy, but the most recent game, Prince of Persia, was an unrelated reboot, so Ubisoft inserted a fourth game into the "trilogy" in order to try and make money off of the movie. Although generally regarded as unnecessary and not living up to the heights of its predecessors, The Forgotten Sands generally reviewed well, and is considered a competent, if unremarkable, game in its own right.

It's worth noting that the main release of the game on PC, Xbox 360, and PS3 was very different from other version released on the Nintendo Wii, Nintendo DS, and PlayStation Portable. All four versions of the game have differences in gameplay and story.

Portable Games

Battles of Prince of Persia

Battles of Prince of Persia is a turned-based game for the Nintendo DS released on December 6, 2005 in the United States and Australia. The story takes place between the Sands of Time and Warrior Within. The Prince must command an army to obtain peace in his land. Players collect cards to increase the strength of their troops and then command them through the cards to defeat enemies in battle. Due to the wars, the Prince becomes more mature and his personality changes.

Prince of Persia: Revelations

Prince of Persia: Revelations is a portable version of Warrior Within for the PlayStation Portable was released on November 30, 2005 by Pipeworks which includes three new areas not in the original game.

Prince of Persia: Rival Swords

Prince of Persia: Rival Swords is a portable version of The Two Thrones for the PlayStation Portable and Nintendo Wii, released on April 3, 2007 in North America by Pipeworks which includes motion controls for the Wii version.

Prince of Persia: The Fallen King

Prince of Persia: The Fallen King was developed by Ubisoft Casablanca, released for the Nintendo DS on December 2, 2008. It is a spin off to Prince of Persia and has players assume the role of the Prince and a wizard named Zai who are fighting Ahriman's forces with a variety of attacks. The game was generally received negatively.

Prince of Persia: Time Run