Seibu Railway, one of the nation’s most artistic and convenient railway lines, is a leading railway company dedicated to presenting the rich culture and history of Japan to tourists from all over the world. Seibu Railway mainly covers the Northwest Tokyo and Saitama prefecture.

From mesmerizing natural views such as the Ashigakubo Icicles to historical Kawagoe Daishi Kitain Temple, from sacred Chichibu Shrine to magnificent Kawagoe Castle, from Moss Pink fields at Hitsujiyama Park to Kawagoe Kurazukuri Museum, various attractions along the Seibu lines offer passengers a full eye-opening Japanese cultural experience.

Your elegant journey on the rails begins the second after you step into the “fifty two seats of happiness” restaurant train specially designed by famous architect Kengo Kuma. The exterior design of the train reflects the beautiful local views during different seasons, giving you a taste of the breathtaking scenery of Chichibu.

As you are amazed by the views along the way, onboard chefs prepare delicious seasonal food that goes perfectly with the scenery. Passengers are encouraged to purchase dinner or brunch with their " fifty seats of happiness" train ticket and enjoy this unique dining experience. The Seibu lines unlimited 1-day pass is offered at the price of ¥10,000 including lunch, and ¥15,000 including dinner (prices tax inclusive).

Travelers can make reservations on the website. The official website is offered in Japanese, English and traditional Chinese.

The fifty two seats of happiness restaurant train operates on 3 main lines: Ikebukuro to Seibu-Chichibu, Seibu-Shinjuku to Seibu-Chichibu, and Seibu-Shinjuku to Hon-Kawagoe. In addition, four kinds of passes are offered by Seibu Railway:

・Seibu 1 Day Pass

・Seibu 2 Day Pass

・Seibu 1 Day Pass + Nagatoro

・Seibu 2 Day Pass + Nagatoro

(These lucrative passes offer unlimited access to all Seibu lines except for the Tamagawa Line. Limited express train (Red Arrow) tickets should be purchased separately.)

Right now, only non-Japanese tourists are eligible to buy tickets (passports are required for non-Japanese identity verification). Passes are sold at Seibu Tourist Information Center in Ikebukuro, and Seibu Railway Limited Express Ticket Center. (Note that tickets can only be used on the same day of purchase, and cash is the only payment method.)

Additionally, railway pamphlets offered on the train introduce various types of activities and attractions along the way. With plenty of choices, you will be able to create interesting travel itineraries that can include anime appreciation, food tasting, cafe tours, and more. For example, Seibu Railway stops also include Sayama, a city known for Japan’s famous refined “Sayama tea,” where you can have an authentic tea-picking and tea-tasting experience.

Information Center

Tourist information center (Opens all year, 08:00-18:00, ticket center closes at 15:00) can also be found on the first floor of Ikebukuro station and multilingual staff are there to assist you. For passengers who need to purchase tickets outside business hours, passes can be purchased at Seibu Railway Ikebukuro Station or Seibu Shinjuku Station.

Seibu Tourist Information Center in Ikebukuro

Seibu Tourist Information Center Ikebukuro (Opens all year, 08:00~18:00, ticket center closes at 15:00) can be found at the east exit of Ikebukuro station and multilingual staff are there to assist you. For passengers who need to purchase tickets outside business hours, please purchase passes at Limited Express Ticket Center at Seibu Railway Ikebukuro Station or at Seibu-Shinjuku Station.