This story is available exclusively to Business Insider subscribers. Become an Insider and start reading now. Have an account? .

Spoilers ahead for the book and movie, "Crazy Rich Asians."

Advertisement

"Crazy Rich Asians" hasn’t hit theaters yet, but it’s already breaking barriers. The film is being lauded as the first Hollywood movie with a majority Asian cast since "The Joy Luck Club" dropped 15 years ago.

The plot follows Rachel Chu, an Asian-American woman who accompanies her boyfriend to Singapore for his childhood best friend’s wedding. Of course, when she agrees to go with him to meet his friends and family, she has no idea that in his home country he is The Nicholas Young, Asia’s most eligible and wealthy bachelor.

This story is available exclusively to Business Insider subscribers. Become an Insider and start reading now. Have an account? .

Kevin Kwan’s bestselling novel was adapted into a film, and admittedly — even for those who have read the book — it can get a bit confusing to keep track of everyone and their relation to one another.

In preparation for the movie’s release, here is a guide to all of the main characters and families in the book.

Advertisement

Rachel Chu is played by Constance Wu.

Rachel is the protagonist of the book (and film), played by Constance Wu. She's an Economics professor at NYU, and she's starting to imagine a future with her boyfriend Nick Young. At least, she is until she meets his disapproving family.

Nicholas Young is played by Henry Golding.

Nick is a Young. In other words, in Asia, his family name carries incredible weight signifying his class and wealth. He is an Oxford alum and a history professor who brings his girlfriend Rachel home to meet his intimidating family.

Advertisement

Eleanor Young is played by Michelle Yeoh.

Nick’s formidable mother Eleanor is perfectly-coiffed, classy, and terrifying. Despite her polite demeanor, she has a distaste for Rachel and Nick’s relationship, and she makes her feelings known.

Goh Peik Lin is played by Awkwafina.

Awkwafina takes on the role of Rachel’s college best friend — a much-needed bit of respite from the snobbery she faces from everyone else in Singapore. Peik Lin also serves as the film’s comic relief.

Advertisement

Goh Wei Mun is played by Ken Jeong.

Peik Lin’s dad is new money and fond of all things flashy. Fortunately, he’s also a relaxed, friendly character amidst all of the high-society snobs.

Oliver T’sien is played by Nico Santos.

Oliver is Nick’s fashion-forward cousin — and one of the remarkably few wealthy family members who's friendly to Rachel.

Advertisement

Alistair Cheng is played by Remy Hii.

Eddie’s little brother Alistair is the black sheep of the family, frequently eschewing what is right and proper. He brings his flashy girlfriend Kitty to the A-list wedding of the year — and she happens to be a soap opera actress.

Astrid Leong is played by Gemma Chan.

Astrid is Nick’s cousin, known for her stunning beauty and for sporting the most fashion-forward ensembles. Despite her seemingly perfect life, she struggles to navigate her marriage to Michael.

Advertisement

Colin Khoo is played by Chris Pang.

Colin is Nick’s childhood best friend, and one of the few people who is kind to Rachel when she visits. His wedding to Araminta Lee is the high-society event of the year.

Michael Teo is played by Pierre Png.

Michael is Astrid’s husband. Despite loving his wife, he feels like an outsider amidst a sea of, well, "crazy rich Asians," and struggles to fit in and to feel worthy.

Advertisement

Bernard Tai is played by Jimmy O. Yang.

Tai is the man behind Colin’s distasteful bachelor party. He has known Colin and Nick since they were little, but they have little in common with him beyond extravagant amounts of money.

Araminta Lee is played by Sonoya Mizuno.

Araminta is the model engaged to Nick’s best friend, Colin Khoo.

Advertisement

Shang Su Yi is played by Lisa Lu.

Nick’s Ah Ma, or grandmother, is the matriarch of the Young family — which makes her a quietly powerful woman.

Charlie Wu is played by Harry Shum Jr.

Charlie is an old friend and the former billionaire boyfriend of Astrid. The two reconnect in the midst of the high-society nuptials.

Advertisement

Felicity Leong is played by Janice Koh.

Felicity is Astrid’s domineering mother.

Kerry Chu is played by Tan Kheng Hua.

Rachel’s inspiring mom immigrated from the United States and raised her daughter all on her own. This puts her in stark contrast to Nick’s high-society family, where labels are everything.

Advertisement

Eddie Cheng is played by Ronnie Chieng.

Nick’s cousin Eddie is hyper-obsessed with status. He has a private banker job, a lovely wife, and three kids, but despite it all he can’t help comparing himself to his wealthy peers.

Fiona Cheng is played by Victoria Loke.

Eddie’s wife Fiona comes from old-money, but despite her status, she does not share her husband’s obsession with material goods and presenting the family a certain way.

Advertisement

Kitty Pong is played by Fiona Xie.

Rachel’s unexpected presence is the biggest scandal at Colin and Araminta’s wedding, but Alistair’s girlfriend Kitty becomes a close second. The soap opera actress is a gaudy and unabashed social-climber, and she uses the high-class wedding to make as many connections as she can.

For more great stories, head to INSIDER's homepage.

Read the original article on INSIDER. Copyright 2018.

Follow INSIDER on Facebook.

Follow INSIDER on Twitter.

Read next

Sign up to get the inside scoop on today’s biggest stories in markets, tech, and business — delivered daily. Read preview

Thanks for signing up! Go to newsletter preferences

Thanks for signing up!

Access your favorite topics in a personalized feed while you're on the go.

Email address

By clicking “Sign Up”, you accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy. You can opt-out at any time by visiting our Preferences page or by clicking "unsubscribe" at the bottom of the email.

Advertisement