The Power of Relationships and Networks in Crazy Rich Asians

“Crazy Rich Asians” is a blockbuster hit that signified a huge step for the Asian American community in breaking into Hollywood. It depicts an exciting love story between the main characters, Nick Young and Rachel Chu, and how despite the vast differences between their backgrounds, their relationship can overcome any obstacles — including family members.

The movie depicts the power of global social networks, as the moment Nick asks Rachel to go back to Singapore with him, his mother on the other side of the world hears the news as well because the conversation is overheard by other asians in the cafe. Through a series of numerous phone calls, texts, and emails, Nick’s mom almost instantaneously discovers the news the Nick is bringing home a girlfriend she’s never met. This is an example of the direct effects of positive and negative relationships within the Young family’s social circles. Both the enemies and friends of Nick’s family tend to gossip about them, as that is what wealthy asians are notorious of. Their thirst for new information ensures that the Strong Triadic Closure Property is never violated within the network of filthy rich asians. As much of a stereotype it is, the film portrays the international network of affluent Asians as extremely well connected, with everyone knowing everyone else. This is most likely due to the Triadic Closure Principle. When Rachel meets with her college friend’s family in Singapore, they already know all about Nick Young’s family and are friends with some of their friends as well. As a result of all the well-off Asians knowing each other, Rachel feels especially lonely because she does not feel accepted into the community. Since Rachel’s only connection into Nick’s world is himself, it is difficult for her to make a place for herself in the hierarchy of crazy rich asians. It is quite incredulous how the film informs viewers of the world of high-class fashion and luxury some people in Asia live in. “Crazy Rich Asians” takes large strides not only in helping the Asian American community, but also in helping the rest of society understand Asian culture.

Source

Comments

Leave a Reply