Thu, Sep 29th 2016 10:00 am

Nardin Academy, founded in 1857 by the Daughters of the Heart of Mary, is committed to creating an exceptional learning community that allows Montessori, elementary, and high school students to both experience and make a difference in the world.

At Nardin Academy's college preparatory high school for young women, expanding service-learning experiences locally, across the country, and abroad, not only prepare students for college placement, but also for leadership and for lifelong learning. Nardin's founders lead by example, and a commitment to service work and global citizenship is at the heart of daily life. As the Daughters of the Heart of Mary are known for living in the midst of the world so that they may better respond to the need's of God's people, Nardin students broaden their horizons and explore new perspectives through participating in "Nardin Serves the World" opportunities throughout the summer months. Each weeklong service trip takes students to areas such as the Appalachian Region, to Cincinnati working with Franciscans for the Poor, and to Granada, Nicaragua where students both work on construction sites of concrete block homes and connect with families who are part of the program.

In addition to service opportunities, remarkable experiences extend beyond the walls of the classroom in several disciplines including the sciences, performing arts and foreign language. In July, a team of Nardin Academy high school students, led by rising junior Emily Augustyniak, competed in the third annual Junior Robotic Surgery Challenge, hosted in part by Roswell Park Cancer Institute. The program, which fosters surgical skills, team building and leadership skills, brought together students from 30 schools in both the Buffalo and Detroit areas. Nardin Academy's robotic surgery team "Back to the Suture" won best team award, while rising junior Savana Castelli won the Moog Simodont Challenge. Castelli had the highest score drilling on a dexterity block and removing as much of the targeted area as possible within 60 seconds.

Nardin Academy's performing arts curriculum provides students the opportunity to share their talents with the community through numerous concerts and performances during the year at beautiful theaters and auditoriums throughout Western New York. With support from dedicated faculty, music students have the opportunity to perform solos for evaluation at ECMEA and NYSSMA in order to qualify to be a participant in honor ensembles at both the regional and the national level. The Nardin choir has excelled at the NYSSMA Major Ensemble Competition, achieving Gold with Distinction at the highest difficulty level for the past two years.

Prospective high school students and their families are encouraged to stop by Nardin Academy's Cleveland Avenue campus in the heart of the Elmwood Village for Open House Oct. 2, 10 a.m. - 1 p.m. and Oct. 3, 5-7 p.m. Open House offers the opportunity to connect with current students, receive a tour, and meet with the outstanding faculty and staff. Shadow days will also be available to eighth-grade girls this fall. The shadow experience, designed and led by current students, offers a unique look into both academic and community life and the friendships forged at Nardin. By visiting campus, prospective students and their families will discover firsthand the advantage of the high school's all-girls education, where girls can nurture their passions and expand their experiences to make a difference in the world.

Applying to a new school can be overwhelming, but the admissions team at Nardin is dedicated to guiding students through the application process. Prior to the Entrance Exam on Saturday, Nov. 19 at 8:30 a.m., Nardin Academy will offer an Entrance Exam Review Course beginning Saturday, Oct. 22.