When I was in my first year of graduate school at the University of Michigan, I met Mel Hochster (chair of the math department) and his family during dinner at a local restaurant. After I said hello and introduced him to my parents, one of his children asked him who I was. Mel responded: “that is a mathematician.”

This response said many things about Mel’s kindness and generosity that continued to be reaffirmed throughout the next five years. At the time, I was surrounded by students who seemed to be much more mathematically capable than me, and his short response helped give me a bit more confidence that I belonged.

However, Mel’s response caught me off-guard. I would never call myself a “mathematician”: it seemed like a title that should be reserved for those who had contributed something important to the field, and not for beginning grad students like me. Since that time, I have often wondered: If Mel saw me as a mathematician, why didn’t I?

There are many different ideas about who counts as a “mathematician.” For example:

Wikipedia: “someone who uses an extensive knowledge of mathematics in his/her work, typically to solve mathematical problems.”

Merriam-Webster: “a specialist or expert in mathematics”

Cambridge: “someone who studies, teaches, or is an expert in mathematics”

Jean Dieudonne: “someone who has published a proof of at least one non-trivial theorem”

G. H. Hardy: “A mathematician, like a painter or poet, is a maker of patterns. If his patterns are more permanent than theirs, it is because they are made with ideas.”

Since many definitions of mathematician refer to varieties of expertise, a natural question arises: who counts as a mathematics “expert”? Jim Milgram, a Professor Emeritus of Mathematics at Stanford, claimed that he was “the only content expert in mathematics” on the Common Core Stand Standards Validation Committee, despite the fact that several members possessed graduate degrees in mathematics. His claim makes explicit an implicit message that to be a true expert in math you need to pass a very high bar.

Nearly a decade after meeting Mel in that restaurant, I have passed most recognized criteria for being a math expert: I earned a math PhD, have several published proofs, regularly speak at math conferences, and teach university mathematics. Despite this, exclusive views of expertise such as those articulated by Milgram and Dieudonne penetrate my thoughts and I still feel somewhat uncomfortable assigning this label to myself, especially around those I see as more accomplished mathematicians.

Taking an exclusive view of “mathematician” is problematic: it implies that doing real mathematics is only for a select few. Perhaps this is one of the reasons why the public sees math as something far removed from themselves, or its practitioners as natural geniuses. An exclusive view of math has a particularly negative impact on women and minorities, who are less likely to see mathematician role models who they can identify with or to see themselves as part of a mathematical community.

I now aim to follow Mel’s lead and use the “mathematician” title generously. I am proud to call myself a mathematician and am happy to welcome my students into our amazing community of mathematicians.

To Share: Do you call yourself a mathematician? If not, why not? If so, when did you start thinking of yourself as a mathematician?