From Dusk Till Dawn is twenty years old this year, just like me. Yep.

George Clooney was starring on ER as Dr. Doug Ross when Quentin Tarantino directed an episode of the hit series in 1995. The next thing we knew, Clooney was tatted up and starring in Tarantino’s next film. Here are some facts about the Gecko Brothers, The Titty Twister, and every other rambler that got rambling in the 1996 flick.

1. Quentin Tarantino wrote the vampire-meets-rough peckers script and was paid $1,500 for it by Roberto Kurtzman in 1990. It was the first script Tarantino ever sold.

2. Kurtzman wanted something he could use to show off his special effects company’s talent, but was ultimately unable to direct the flick. Kurtzman also helped out Tarantino with the infamous Ear Scene in Reservoir Dogs free of charge.

3. Salma Hayek’s character Satanico Pandemonium was Blonde Death in the original script. The name was changed when Tarantino and director Robert Rodriguez decided they wanted Hayek for the part. Alas, Hayek read the script and knew that her intense phobia of snakes would keep her from being able to perform. Rodriguez then fibbed to her that Madonna was angling for the role, which got Hayek into two months of therapy to overcome her ophidiophobia.

4. Hayek’s dance was not choreographed, with Rodriguez preferring her to move based on how the music made her feel.

5. The Ezekiel 25:17 speech given by Samuel L. Jackson as Jules Winnfield (Pulp Fiction) was originally supposed to be spoken by Harvey Keitel in From Dusk Till Dawn. The mean motherfuckin’ servant of God Jacob Fuller was going to recite the passage while fending off vampires.

6. The production suffered setbacks due to the exterior of The Titty Twister burning down and dust storms. There was also the possibility of their non-union crew bringing the wrath of union action down upon the whole thing.

7. Greg Nicotero, special effects man on The Walking Dead, had a cameo as a biker that has his beer stolen by Sex Machine.

8. Sex Machine was played by horror special effects legend Tom Savini. Frost was played by pro-football player-turned-blaxploitation star Fred Williamson.

9. It was the number one movie at the box office the week it opened. In week two, it fell to third place behind Mr. Holland’s Opus and Bed of Roses.