Quentin Tarantino is deemed by many fans as an eccentric filmmaker because of his out-of-the-box ideas and movies which often execute scenes that are too bold for the general viewers. Take, for instance, his screenplay of From Dusk Till Dawn helmed by Robert Rodriguez.

Advertisement

It boasted several acclaimed actors such as George Clooney and Salma Hayek, whose careers back then weren’t as stellar as they are now. In fact, Quentin’s film helped propel them to stardom.

Salma Hayek Reveals Quentin Tarantino Purposely Cast Himself In From Dusk Till Dawn

One of the most unforgettable scenes in 1996’s From Dusk Till Dawn was Quentin Tarantino’s Richard ‘Richie’ Gecko performing a sensual act opposite Salma Hayek’s Santanico Pandemonium.

Advertisement

The sequence in question was when Hayek’s character would pour down tequila on her leg while she forces a man to s*ck her toes. The man is no other than Tarantino’s Gecko. In an interview via The Free Library, the actress shared:

Quentin wrote that scene for himself. George was complaining because I get to beat him up. I abuse him and call him my slave. He asked Quentin: ‘How come I get beaten up and you get to s*ck her toes?’

The famed filmmaker apparently used his own credentials as the screenwriter to secure the role. For quite some time, fans have been speculating on Tarantino’s personal fixations, the reason why there were a lot of feet shown in his movies.

In his interview with GQ Magazine, he nonchalantly said: “There’s a lot of feet in a lot of good directors’ movies. That’s just good direction.” Sure, fans will take his word for it. Meanwhile, Hayek also shared that starring in the film helped overcome her fear of snakes.

Advertisement

Three months before we shot the scene, I would freak out if I saw a snake. I’d start screaming and crying. Eventually, I could touch the snake with one finger.

What made the actress conquer her fear was the necessity to pay rent. Apparently, Tarantino threatened to replace her with Madonna if she didn’t dance with the snake.

With the help of several cures such as hypnotism and meditation, her phobia was gone. “When we came to film I actually enjoyed the dance a lot,” added Hayek.

Fans Are Still Not Over Quentin Tarantino’s Controversial Scene With Salma Hayek

Fans are still making fun of Tarantino for casting himself in the role of Richie Gecko, or the guy who gets to be intimate with Hayek’s Santanico Pandemonium. Check out fans’ hilarious reactions below:

Advertisement

It’s common knowledge that Tarantino often gives himself exposure in his own films, but specifically choosing the role that gets up close and personal with Hayek’s character has become the subject of jokes over the years.

From Dusk Till Dawn is available to watch on Prime Video.