Although Quentin Tarantino is hailed by fans globally for his directorial skills, the 60-year-old isn’t really known for his acting talent. However, with a penchant for acting, Tarantino reprised his roles in his own movies, as well as a few other forgotten projects. Thus, following his lesser-known appearances, the acclaimed filmmaker is considered a terrible actor.

Advertisement

However, Quentin Tarantino after starring in Robert Rodriguez’s 1996 action horror – From Dusk till Dawn, praised his co-star George Clooney for his utmost support. Owing his success to the Batman & Robin actor, Tarantino mentioned how he followed Clooney’s lead while filming.

Also read: “Now I’m going to get fired”: Quentin Tarantino Felt His Career Was Over After Assaulting ‘Lunatic’ Actor In Debut Movie Before Harvey Keitel Saved Him

Advertisement

Quentin Tarantino’s Appearance In George Clooney’s 1996 Film

With a penchant for acting, Quentin Tarantino was often known for reprising small roles in his own movies. However, the acclaimed filmmaker also appeared in other projects as a full-time actor, alongside infamous Hollywood A-listers like George Clooney and Salma Hayek.

During his initial year in the industry, Tarantino appeared in Robert Rodriguez‘s 1996 action horror movie – From Dusk till Dawn. Reprising his role alongside Clooney, although the 60-year-old didn’t perform well, he claimed to be proud of his attempt.

Further, during a promotional interview, George Clooney hyped about his relationship with Tarantino while filming. “Quentin and I got along really well. We both have the same kind of nervous energy, you know, I’m always like this [fidgeting] and he’s always like, ‘You know, yeah, like this guy, man, like, whoa!’”

Advertisement

Also read: “I was screwing up his audition”: $45M Feminist Movie With 6 Oscar Nods Chose Brad Pitt Over George Clooney

Quentin Tarantino Owed His $59M Success To George Clooney

Developing a bond while filming the $59M cult classic, From Dusk till Dawn, Quentin Tarantino mentioned how he was often guided by George Clooney. Finding a friend and mentor in the Ocean’s Eleven actor, the 60-year-old filmmaker demonstrated the dynamics of their offscreen relationship.

“We just worked in a relationship all the time. Just worked on the brother bond. Which was easy to do, because we’re both kind of going through the same thing,” Tarantino shared.

Discussing how he followed George Clooney’s lead, Quentin Tarantino mentioned, “I just completely trusted George to lead me there, and wherever he would go, I would follow.” Further owing his success to the 62-year-old actor, Tarantino hailed Clooney for his constant support.

Advertisement

“George just kind of took care of me throughout the whole movie, the way Seth takes care of Richie, and it was very sweet, and it was very wonderful, and it paid off in tremendous dividends I think, for my opinion, as far as what we did together.”

Although From Dusk till Dawn was deemed a vampire stripper movie, because of the disgusting scene with Salma Hayek dancing with a snake and toe-suckling Tarantino, the movie became a cult classic. Made with a budget of $19M, the movie further made $59M at the box office, thus turning the movie into a 1996 hit.

Watch From Dusk till Dawn on Amazon Video.

Read more: “I had my own Terminator with me”: Robert Rodriguez Took a Massive Risk With His $405M Movie Only to Impress James Cameron for a Bizarre Reason

Advertisement