stan rosenberg election night.jpg

Sen. Stan Rosenberg stopped at Hope and Olive restaurant in Greenfield on election night to meet with Democratic supporters in Franklin County.

(Mary Serreze photo)

GREENFIELD -- Massachusetts Senate President Stanley Rosenberg will return to Beacon Hill for a 16th term after brushing off a challenge from a far-right Republican perhaps best known for his fake political websites.

Rosenberg, D-Amherst, sailed past Donald Peltier of South Hadley in the Hampshire, Franklin and Worcester District general election.

Peltier, 54, did not run a publicly visible campaign. He obtained the 300 signatures needed to get his name on the ballot, but then declined to speak with reporters and did not participate in debates or forums. On his campaign website, Peltier describes himself as a pro-gun, pro-life, anti-immigration Christian conservative.

In 2012, Peltier was the subject of an ABC News investigation after creating misleading political websites to solicit donations. Peltier did not return a telephone call Tuesday evening seeking comment on his campaign.

Rosenberg, 65, who gathered with Franklin County Democrats at Hope and Olive restaurant in Greenfield, said his top three legislative priorities would center on climate change, income insecurity and government transparency.

"As a coastal state, we'll be in jeopardy if we don't do everything we can to prepare for sea rise and adverse weather conditions," Rosenberg told The Republican. "We'll have to reduce our climate footprint, change our energy mix and focus on energy conservation."

As for economic insecurity, Rosenberg said families and individuals are "worried about losing their jobs, worried about losing their homes and worried about being able to follow through in the education of their children. It's a major concern."

He said his third focus will be working to make government more transparent and accessible. "It's very important," he said. "Trust is at an all-time low, and cynicism is at an all-time high."

Modernizing the state's tax code, reducing the cost of college and relieving student debt burden are among other key issues, he said.

Rosenberg was elected to the Massachusetts Senate in a 1991 special election after serving two terms in the House of Representatives. In the last three election cycles, Rosenberg ran unopposed.

According to campaign finance records, Rosenberg has $385,536 in his war chest and spent $52,246 between Aug. 22 and Oct. 21. Peltier has $1,000 of self-donated cash in his account and spent $161 in the same time period.