rosenberg.JPG

Senate President Stan Rosenberg is interviewed by Boston Globe reporter Josh Miller on Dec. 15, 2015.

(SHIRA SCHOENBERG / THE REPUBLICAN)

State Senate President Stan Rosenberg, D-Amherst, said his fiance has the right to consider a run for state Senate - but Rosenberg would not commit to endorsing him in a Democratic primary.

Rosenberg's fiance Bryon Hefner told Politico Massachusetts on Monday that he was considering a run for the state Senate seat being vacated by state Sen. Anthony Petruccelli, an East Boston Democrat.

"Bryon has the right, like anyone else, to consider running for public office. He's doing his due diligence," Rosenberg said. "We'll face that question if he decides to run."

Rosenberg made the comments during a public interview with Boston Globe reporter Josh Miller at a Political Happy Hour event at Suffolk University.

Other Democrats already said they plan to run, or are considering running, including State Rep. Jay Livingstone. If Rosenberg were to endorse in a Democratic primary, it could be politically awkward for him, as the leader of the body in which the new senator will serve.

Hefner and Rosenberg have a home in Amherst and an apartment on Beacon Hill, which is in Petrucelli's district. Boston Magazine reported Tuesday that Hefner is registered to vote in Amherst, although that would not make a run illegal under state law, as long as Hefner is a resident of Beacon Hill on Election Day.

Rosenberg is generally private about his personal life. Asked about a conversation he had with Hefner about Hefner's run, Rosenberg declined to discuss it. "It was a private conversation," Rosenberg said. Asked whether he thinks Hefner will run, Rosenberg said the question "is not on my mind."

Hefner previously caused political headaches for Rosenberg, when Rosenberg was preparing to ascend to the presidency and Hefner mocked the outgoing Senate president on social media. Hefner resigned his job at a communications firm after the media reported about his involvement in Senate affairs. Rosenberg said at the time that he was enforcing a "firewall" between his public and private lives. He said Tuesday that the firewall "absolutely" still exists.

On other issues, Rosenberg declined to say why the Senate left $10 million out of a budget bill to fund pay raises for University of Massachusetts faculty. "Since this is on the record, I can't actually tell you what happened," Rosenberg said.

Rosenberg said he is "conflicted" about whether to legalize recreational marijuana use, a question likely to be on the 2016 ballot.

Asked about the perception of a conflict of interest after he recently took a trip to Israel funded by a Jewish lobbying organization, Rosenberg said the trip was a study tour about economic, religious and geopolitical matters that has nothing to do with legislation that the Jewish Community Relations Council is lobbying for.

Rosenberg criticized the state's ethics regulations, which advise lawmakers to avoid "the possibility of the appearance of a conflict of interest." "It's way overreaching," Rosenberg said.