July 4 is Independence Day in the United States. It's a day where we all fire up our grills and drink all day until the sun sets and someone blows up some fireworks--hopefully without getting hurt. It's also a good day to watch some movies about Americana or the American experience.

Obviously, we're not just talking about Ken Burns documentaries--they're great, but we're all looking for something a bit more condensed. We're talking about movies that figuratively and literally get the audience screaming "America. F*** yeah!" Whether it's Nicolas Cage finding a pair of Ben Franklin's old, ridiculous sunglasses or a team of female baseball players during World War II stepping up to the plate, there are plenty of stories we love to watch over and over again.

Figuring out which movies are the perfect films to watch on July 4th was a very calculated decision which involved complex mathematics. Just kidding, this is basically just a bunch of movies that feel like classic Americana. Who doesn't love those? Also, it gives me yet another chance to talk about a robot giving Paulie a birthday cake in Rocky IV. Seriously, I talk about that moment on this site a lot.

There are plenty of movies out there that celebrate the American experience in fantastic ways, but we can't include them all, so we picked 17 of the most fun, awe-inspiring, and awesome movies to get you ready for your grillin' and chillin'. Also, you can find out where to stream them as well.

If you're interested in more hot takes on movies, check out all of Pixar's shorts ranked, horror movies based on true stories, and horror films that are way too sick and twisted.

Where to stream: Prime Video, Freevee

While The Tomorrow War is about the entire world fighting a scourge of alien beasts killing humans in the future, most of the movie is set in America. The movie features the everyman American Dan Forester (Chris Pratt) who is a really intelligent teacher, former scientist, former soldier, and current loving family man. He has to go to the future, shoot some weird beasts that eat people--and shoot spikes out of their tails--then find a way to save the future from this invasion. Although the movie was released in 2021, it is the most 1990s summer blockbuster you've ever seen. The film was released on Amazon Prime Video, so if you have a subscription, get watching.