Movie Details

Actors: Tom Berenger, Mimi Rogers, Lorraine Bracco, Jerry Orbach, John Rubinstein

Genres: Drama, Mystery & Suspense

Sub-Genres: Love & Romance, Mystery & Suspense

Studio: Sony Pictures

Format: DVD - Color,Full Screen,Widescreen,Anamorphic - Closed-captioned

DVD Release Date: 10/19/1999

Original Release Date: 10/09/1987

Theatrical Release Date: 10/09/1987

Release Year: 1999

Run Time: 1hr 46min

Screens: Color,Full Screen,Widescreen,Anamorphic

Number of Discs: 1

SwapaDVD Credits: 1

Total Copies: 0

Members Wishing: 7

MPAA Rating: R (Restricted)

Languages: English, Spanish

Subtitles: English, Spanish, Portuguese, Georgian, Chinese, Thai

Similar Movies

Betrayed

Director: Costa-Gavras

R 2000 2hr 7min

Similarly Requested DVDs

Movie Reviews

About the songs....

jddunn2 | 10/14/1999

(3 out of 5 stars)

"Well, here's some info on the great opera song in the soundtrack....good luck finding the soundtrack!!!"Aria from LA WALLY" aka "Ebben? ne andrò lontana" Composed by Alfredo Catalani (1854-1893) Performed by Wilhelmenia Wiggins Fernandez with the London Symphony Orchestra Conducted by Vladimir Cosma Courtesy by DEG Records, Inc.An opera that hasn't been staged frequently, possibly because it calls for the heroine Wally and her lover to die on stage in an avalanche. Still, the aria from Act 1 has become one of the most popular in the repertoire, helped by its use in the film Someone to Watch Over Me. Wally has been ordered by her father to marry Gellner, but she is in love with Hagenbach. She resolves to leave home for love rather than be forced into marriage, and this aria is the expression of her feelings.Recordings of the complete opera are available but are few; the aria is the highlight. It has been used before in the movie Crimson Tide, Diva as well as this one; also UK TV ads for Rowenta Powermaster."

Murder and Passion in the Big Apple

L. Shirley | fountain valley, ca United States | 02/27/2005

(5 out of 5 stars)

"This review refers to "Someone To Watch Over Me"(VHS Columbia)...

No matter how often I view this thriller, I still get caught up in the suspense, the thrills and the romance. Director Ridley Scott does an excellent job of pulling us into the lives of the characters, and like in a good Hitchcock flick, has us wanting to warn them of impending danger.

New York City is the setting. On one side of town, in Queens, a party is going on at the modest home of newly promoted Detective, Mike Keegan. It's a close knit group of cops and their wives having a great time. Meanwhile in uptown Manhattan, another party is going on in a very upscale apartment, attended by the rich and "beautiful people". One of the guests is the lovely Claire Gregory. Claire is invited to view some artwork on a lower level of the building, and it is there she witnesses the brutal murder of her friend. The murderer spots her and now her very life is in danger.

Keegan has his first assignment...babysit the witness until the perp is hauled in and identified. But Joey Venza, the killer, is ruthless and is not going to let a few cops get in the way of his plans for Miss Gregory. The film provides many heartstopping moments of thrills and suspense as he goes after her. The film is more than just a thriller though, and as the song goes, like 'lost lambs', family man Mike and Claire find passion and comfort in each other's arms. The film becomes a complex but tight story of murder and passion, that will have you immersed from the first frame to the last.

The cast are all excellent. Tom Berenger is Keegan, torn between his family and his feelings for Claire, while still protecting her from harm. The role of Claire, is tailor made for the beautiful Mimi Rogers as she just exudes class. Lorraine Bracco packs a punch(literally) as Keegan's wife. Jerry Orbach is of course the perfect choice to play "the whip", Keegan's superior, John Rubinstein is Claire's stodgy boyfriend and Andreas Katsulas(the one armed murderer in "The Fugitve"), will scare you out of your wits as Joey Venza, "the perp".

An excellent soundtrack, that flows right along with the story, will treat you to some haunting Opera music, and 3 different renditions of "Someone To Watch Over Me", including one by Roberta Flack over the closing credits. The cinematography is also a wonderful plus for this film and includes some great views of the New York Skyline, and one fabulous shot of the WTC, as Berenger and Bracco are lunching in the city.

Five stars for a film that has not lost any of it's appeal since it's release in 1987. A great thriller to add to your library. One that will stand up to repeated heartpumping viewings.

Get the popcorn ready and enjoy.....Laurie"

Good Date Movie.

jddunn2 | Denver, CO United States | 04/30/2002

(4 out of 5 stars)

"This movie somehow got overlooked in theatres, but there's no need to miss it now.Long story short: Rich socialite Mimi Rogers witnesses a mob hit and thus becomes a target. Tom Berenger is a blue-collar cop assigned to protect her. He is attracted to her, but is married (to Lorraine Bracco, playing the same character she always played before The Sopranos). Complicating matters is that she is attracted to him and the intense situation is constantly pushing them together.What sets "Someone..." apart from other movies with similar plots is that Bracco's character is pretty sympathetic so it's not a cut-and-dried issue. Berenger is drawn to Rogers because she is a vulnerable woman who needs protection. Bracco's character is a strong, independent Brooklynite who can challenge him in the relationship, but can't provide the one thing he needs (a chance to be needed). High-concept stuff when you think about it.All of this romance is sandwiched in between a pretty good thriller as Berenger attempts to protect Rogers from some very bad guys. The thriller-story is what the movie was sold on and it succeeds on that level.The DVD offers some good extras, but nothing inventive.Don't miss this one a second time."

Very well done

absent_minded_prof | Massachusetts | 03/23/2001

(4 out of 5 stars)

"Mimi Rogers plays a young socialite who inadvertently becomes a madman's target when she is the sole witness to a murder he commits. Tom Berenger is the "someone" who watches over her, the simple Irish-American cop who must stand guard over her, night and day, in her almost supernaturally opulent New York penthouse. Eventually, predictably, but still excitingly, sparks fly between them, and romance ensues. Tom Berenger's character is married to a woman played by the fiery Lorraine Bracco, who today is one of the (justly) most acclaimed stars of "The Sopranos." This love triangle tears them all apart, in painfully character-revealing ways. Meanwhile, the plot becomes more complicated when the madman eludes justice and begins stalking Mimi Rogers. She realizes that she had made a huge mistake in trusting Tom Berenger with her life, but she can't stop being in love with him. He's in a similar boat, and it rips them both apart even more.Set during the height of late 80's, post-Reagan era New York, this movie pulls absolutely no punches at all when it comes to portraying class differences. Tom Berenger must function, and keep his sanity, while shuttling back and forth between his working class Queens neighborhood and the playgrounds of the richest group of people, by far, in the entire world. I really felt for Tom Berenger's character, and his lostness among the rich... There is a moment when his wife tried to regain his interest in her by suggesting that they go to what is, in her eyes, an incredibly swank, ritzy restaurant. She's fighting hard to keep her husband, pulling out all the stops, doing everything she can think of. You can see in Lorraine Bracco's eyes, as she suggests it, that it's the nicest place her character has ever been to, the epitome of hoity-toityness. (By the way -- how did Lorraine Bracco do that?!?! She really does communicate important information with her eyes, without even speaking. That what I call acting!) All Tom Berenger's character can say in reply is the immortal line "The one in... Brooklyn?" as he tries weakly to look enthused. That's the moment, as far as I'm concerned, when you can see he's in very, very, VERY real danger of losing his soul. This movie makes you see things through his eyes, and works hard to capture perfectly differences in body language, carriage, diction, eye contact, politeness, etc. between the rich and regular Americans. The art gallery shots do this particularly well.Anyway, this movie really draws you in, as you might guess from this review. I recommend the living daylights out of "Someone to Watch Over Me." Two thumbs up."

One of the classiest thrillers ever made

jddunn2 | 05/10/2004

(5 out of 5 stars)

"This movie is fantastic. Mimi Rogers plays a wealthy socialate

who witnesses a murder. The killer is after her. Tom Berenger

plays a detective who along with two other detectives are assigned to protect her. He takes the night shift. He is married and has a son. He is impressed by Mimi Rogers upper

class lifestyle, her beautiful apartment, classical music, she

is a very classy lady. I must say Mimi Rogers was perfect for

the part she is beautiful and carries herself so gracefully.

Tom Berenger is a blue collar detective. The two actors have

excellent chemistry. Tom Berenger is married. A romance begins

with Tom Berenger and Mimi Rogers. The killer is released on

a mistake which was made for his arrest. He is crazy and goes

after Mimi Rogers. This movie has a look about it like a 1940's

movie. The sets are amazing and the locations are breathtaking.

The movie is very suspenseful and the ending is excellent. This

is one of the best movies ever made in my opinion"