Zookeeper is a 2011 American romantic fantasy family live action talking animal movie directed by Frank Coraci, starring Kevin James, Rosario Dawson, and Leslie Bibb, and featuring the voices of Nick Nolte, Sylvester Stallone, Adam Sandler, Don Rickles (in the final film he finished before his death on April 6, 2017), Judd Apatow, Cher, Jon Favreau, and Faizon Love. It is about an unlucky zookeeper who turns to the talking animals at his zoo to help him find love. It was the first MGM film to be co-produced with Happy Madison (as well as their first production to be released after the company had filed for bankruptcy the year prior), though the film, like a majority of the Happy Madison output, was distributed by Columbia Pictures. The film was released on July 8, 2011.

Filming began in Boston on August 17, 2009. The film received mostly negative reviews from critics and earned $169.8 million on an $80 million budget.

Plot[]

In 2005, zookeeper Griffin Keyes proposes to his girlfriend Stephanie, but is turned down, citing his career as a zookeeper as the reason, breaking his heart.

Five years later in 2010, Griffin is now head zookeeper at the Franklin Park Zoo, caring deeply for the animals. That night, Griffin holds an engagement party there for his brother Dave, but freaks out when he discovers that Stephanie was invited. Dave suggests Griffin come work with him at his car dealership to get Stephanie back, so Griffin considers doing it.

The animals hold a meeting that evening as they feel Griffin is the best zookeeper, so they decide to find some way to help him win back Stephanie. Jerome the brown bear suggests they teach Griffin their mating techniques, but Joe the lion protests, reminding them that it's against the animal code to talk to humans. Donald the monkey suggests that they make Griffin look like a hero when Stephanie is at the zoo tomorrow.

The next day, Donald lets Joe out, who confronts Stephanie and Dave's fiancée Robin. Griffin ruins the animals' plan by failing to jump into the lion enclosure, and instead the vet Kate, captures Joe. When he climbs out of the enclosure, Joe accidentally yells at Griffin in frustration, causing Griffin to believe he has gone mad. That night, all the animals break the code of silence and tell Griffin they will teach him to win back Stephanie. He learns their different mating rituals, ending up humiliating himself at a party in front of the other zookeepers and the guests.

Griffin then has a talk with Bernie, a forlorn Western lowland gorilla who has spent years in a deep enclosure after allegedly attacking a zookeeper named Shane. Bernie tells Griffin that Shane fell when he was abusing him, but lied, saying that Bernie attacked him. This caused Bernie to mistrust humans.

Griffin discovers that Stephanie is dating another ex-boyfriend, a bully named Gale. Joe's mate Janet tells Griffin that the best way to attract a female is to be seen with another female, so Griffin asks Kate to go with him to Dave and Robin's wedding.

In 2012, Griffin successfully grabs Stephanie's attention by first showing off with Kate, then standing up to Gale. Stephanie asks him out to dinner and after they go to a fashion show. Stephanie convinces Griffin to quit his job and he accepts Dave's job offer. This upsets Kate, and also Bernie, who tells him that Griffin quitting proves that he can't trust humans. As he leaves, Griffin warns Shane not to hurt Bernie. Kate decides to leave the zoo and accepts a job in Nairobi.

Griffin becomes a star employee at the car dealership, but finds he misses working at the zoo. When Stephanie proposes to him in the midst of his success, he refuses without hesitation, dumping her as he realizes that she doesn't truly love or accept him as an individual and that their relationship was all conditional to her. He then goes to the zoo, apologizing to Bernie who he sees has been beaten by Shane. The animals tell him that Kate is heading to the airport, so Griffin heads out to stop her; stopping at Shane's house first to attack him for hurting Bernie. Then, with Bernie's help, Griffin manages to catch Kate on the bridge and confess his love for her. The two kiss.

Six months later, Griffin and Kate get married and are back at the zoo and Bernie is now living in a new enclosure where he gets a great view of the city.

Griffin is the zoo animals's boss and is Bernie the gorilla's best friend.

Cast[]

Kevin James as Griffin Constantine Keyes, lead zookeeper.

Rosario Dawson as Kate, the zoo's veterinarian.

Leslie Bibb as Stephanie, Griffin's antagonistic love interest

Joe Rogan as Gale, Stephanie's ex.

Nat Faxon as Dave Keyes, Griffin's brother.

Ken Jeong as Venom, worker at the reptile house.

Steffiana de la Cruz as Robin Keyes, Dave's fiancé later turned wife. (De La Cruz is the real life wife of Kevin James.)

Thomas Gottschalk as Jürgen Mavroc

Donnie Wahlberg as Shane, the abusive zookeeper

Brandon Keener as Nimer

Animals[]

Tom Woodruff, Jr. as Bernie (in-suit performer)

Crystal the Monkey as Donald

Bart the Bear 2 as Jerome

Honey Bump Bear as Bruce

Animal voices[]

Nick Nolte as Bernie, a Western lowland gorilla

Sylvester Stallone as Joe, an African lion

Adam Sandler as Donald, a tufted capuchin

Judd Apatow as Barry, an Indian elephant

Cher as Janet, a lioness and Joe's mate

Jon Favreau as Jerome, a brown bear

Faizon Love as Bruce, a Kodiak bear

Maya Rudolph as Mollie, a reticulated giraffe

Bas Rutten as Sebastian, a wolf

Don Rickles as Jim, an American bullfrog

Jim Breuer as Spike, a crow

Richie Minervini as Elmo, an ostrich

Filming[]

Filming began in Boston on August 17, 2009, aiming for a release in October 2010, which was then released on July 8, 2011. Filming ended on October 30, 2009.

Tweet, the giraffe who rose to fame as a star in the classic Toys "R" Us commercials (by being cast as Geoffrey, the company's official mascot) and who appeared alongside Jim Carrey in the film Ace Ventura: Pet Detective, died after filming Zookeeper at the Franklin Park Zoo. The 18-year-old giraffe collapsed during feeding and in the care of his trainer.

The two bears in this live action film were performed by Heber City, Utah's Wasatch Rocky Mountain Wildlife veteran Grizzly actors Bart the Bear 2 and Honey Bump.

Tai the elephant was featured in a video, reportedly filmed in 2005 and released in 2011 by Animal Defenders International (ADI), which showed him being abused by its trainers. A campaign to boycott the movie was formed since the outbreak of the news. ADI has also contacted the American Humane Association, urging them to re-evaluate how they assess the use of animals in films and the statements being made which effectively endorse the use of performing animals. Animal rights advocates PETA also urged the public to boycott the film.

Soundtrack[]

"Low" – Performed by Flo Rida featuring T-Pain

"Unbelievable" – Performed by EMF

"Easy" - Performed by Commodores

Release[]

Theatrical[]

Around 50 people came to the film's premiere at the Regency Village Theatre in Westwood, Los Angeles, California to protest against the filmmakers for their alleged animal abuse. Frank Coraci claimed that the animals were not harmed during production. In an interview, Coraci stated, "...We worked with people who love their animals and [the American] Humane Association was there to ensure that they were being treated correctly. We didn’t do anything that we shouldn’t do. We treated the animals with love and respect."

Home media[]

The film was released on DVD and Blu-Ray on October 11, 2011.