MAY 27, 1911

Vincent Leonard Price Jr. was born just nine weeks before Lucille Ball. He made his screen debut in 1938, and after many minor roles, he began to perform in low-budget horror movies where he would make his mark on the genre. His final feature film appearance was in 1990’s Edward Scissorhands. Besides acting, his other passions were art and cooking. He died in 1993 at age 82.

“Lucy Cuts Vincent’s Price” (HL S3;E9) was the only time Price and Lucille Ball acted opposite one another. It aired on November 9, 1970. It incorporated his interest in art and his well-known image as a star of horror films.

Lucy Carter goes to Price’s mansion to get a painting appraised while he thinks she is there to audition for one of his horror flicks.

The painting turns out to have something painted underneath it - but it turns out not to be worth anything!

Although they are not seen in the episode, the script refers to Price’s wife Mary Grant (inset) and his daughter Vicki.

“Lucy’s all choked up. Price plays it ghoul.”

Vincent Price guest-starred on many episodes of “The Red Skelton Show” from 1958 to 1971. On these programs he acted alongside many Desilu character actors and extras.

On September 2, 1962, Linda Hope (left) accepts award for her father, Bob Hope, from Dorothy Lamour and Lucille Ball accepts award from Vincent Price at "Oscar to Wardrobers" dinner honoring Hollywood personalities and costumers.

Three days before his episode of “Here’s Lucy,” Price guest-starred on “Love American Style” in a segment called “Love and the Haunted House” which featured Ruth Buzzi, another performer that “Here’s Lucy” showcased.

On September 22, 1971, Price appeared on another popular anthology series, “Night Gallery” in a segment titled “Class of ‘99.″ That same episode also featured another segment starring Desi Arnaz Jr. titled “Death in the Family.”

Vincent Price was a popular guest on “The Hollywood Squares.” On some appearances, members of the Arnaz family also populated the grid:

Desi Jr. - September 1970

Desi Sr. - July 1972 and 1976

Lucie - July and September 1971

Price and Desi Arnaz Sr. were aboard for this 1976 Bob Hope celebrity-filled satire of Jaws - “Joys!”’

Vincent Price was a guest on “The Tonight Show” along with Desi Arnaz Sr. on April 19, 1976.

Price appeared with Desi Jr. in “House of the Long Shadows” in 1983.

Vincent Price, Lucie Arnaz, and Lucille Ball were all part of “Night of 100 Stars 2” in 1985.

Vincent Price was part of the notorious “61st Annual Academy Awards” telecast with Lucille Ball. The ceremony is widely considered to be the worst in the show’s history, and resulted in a lawsuit by Disney. Their character of Snow White was involved in an uncharacteristically crass opening number in which Price performed with other Hollywood legends. Less offensive was the musical number by Hollywood hopefuls introduced by Lucille Ball and Bob Hope. Ball’s sudden passing a few weeks later supplanted the telecast’s infamy with sympathy.