Hi All,

We are excited to release Panzer Campaigns - Scheldt ’44. This is the 24th game released in the Panzer Campaigns franchise and will not be the last. John Tiller mentioned the other week - I remember about 2001, a magazine reviewer called Panzer Campaigns "long in the tooth" after about the 3rd release

Well here we are nearly twenty years later…

We are excited to get this first, original title from Mike Prucha and Dave Michas. After building the extra content for France ’40 Gold, they chose Scheldt ’44 as their next project and have worked tirelessly to complete it. The guys have become an integral part of the JTS/WDS team, and I doubt they will be a one hit wonder.

Below is the information that will be up on the JTS web page.

…it was a battle of prime importance, at least as decisive in determining the date of final victory in the West, with all that implied for the future of Europe, as Arnhem and the Battle of the Bulge

- Major General J.L. Moulton, commander of No. 48 Commando in Operation Infatuate and author of Battle for Antwerp

Overview

On the night of September 25th-26th, the survivors of 1st Airborne Division were ferried to the south bank of the Nederrijn in a torrential downpour. Operation Market Garden had failed and Allied hopes for a speedy conclusion to the war in Europe were dashed. With a long winter ahead, Allied leaders had to grapple with the worsening supply situation in Northwest Europe. The lightning advance from Normandy and the rapid build-up of forces on the continent had placed immense logistical strain on the Allied Expeditionary Force and shortages of fuel and ammunition threatened to stall further Allied action. The massive deep-water port complex at Antwerp, delivered from the enemy intact by the Belgian Resistance on September 4th-5th, alone could remedy Allied supply woes, but this inland port was useless so long as the Germans occupied the Scheldt Estuary. Issued the unenviable task of clearing the Scheldt and opening Antwerp to Allied shipping, the men of 1st Canadian Army embarked on a miserable campaign against a determined enemy that was to be characterized by dismal weather and knee-deep mud…

Scheldt ’44 explores 21st’ Army Group’s actions in the autumn of the 1944, focusing on the Battle of the Scheldt, the Maas Salient Campaign, and the Channel Ports. Other actions in Belgium and the Netherlands are also represented, including Operation Market Garden in an all-new campaign scenario.

Scenarios

Panzer Campaigns: Scheldt ‘44 covers the major actions of 21st Army Group between September and November of 1944, including

The advance to the Dutch border, September 7th-12th

The Channel Ports Campaign, September 17th-28th

Operation Market Garden, September 17th-25th

The Scheldt Campaign (early), October 1st-17th

The Scheldt Campaign (late), October 20th-November 8th

Additional scenarios cover the 1st and 2nd Battles of Overloon and other actions from the period.

There are 46 scenarios in total including the above-mentioned campaigns. Campaign scenarios range in length from 58 turns up to 177 turns. Smaller scenarios ranging in length from 6 to 115 turns, averaging 18 turns, will provide players with plenty of challenges and battles of variable length and size.

Features

Game features include:

Game scale is 1 hex = 1 km, 1 turn = 2 hours, with battalion and company size units.

46 Scenarios – covering all sizes and situations, including specialized versions for both head to head play and vs. the computer AI.

The Master Map covers 66,400 hexes and includes much of the Netherlands, Belgium, and north-eastern France.

Five Order of Battle files covering the 21st Army Group and opposing elements of Heeresgruppe B during the period September-November 1944, including ground forces from nine Allied nations and the German Wehrmacht and Waffen-SS.

Order-of-Battle and Scenario Editors which allow players to customize the game.

Sub-map feature allows the main map to be "chopped" up into smaller segments for custom scenario creation.

All new images for unit art on both sides, including guns and vehicles.

Extensive Designer notes providing historic background to the scenarios and explanation of design decisions

Scheldt '44 provides multiple play options including play against the computer AI, Play by E-mail (PBEM), LAN & Internet "live" play, and two player hot seat.

You can get more information on the game as well as a number of free downloads here; Scheldt ’44 Product Page

We hope you enjoy this latest Panzer Campaigns title and a big thank you to the team again!