Durning History, Family Crest & Coats of Arms

Origins Available:

Ireland

The original Gaelic form of the Irish name Durning was Ó Duirnin or Ó Dornian, possibly derived from the word "dorn," which means "fist." 1

Loading...

Early Origins of the Durning family

The surname Durning was first found in County Antrim (Irish: Aontroim) located in the province of Ulster in present day Northern Ireland. The name is also specific to "Ballydurnian in County Antrim, but Durnian is the more usual form in west Ulster." 2

Loading...

Early History of the Durning family

This web page shows only a small excerpt of our Durning research. Another 164 words (12 lines of text) covering the years 1596 and 1700 are included under the topic Early Durning History in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.

Loading...

Durning Spelling Variations

The search for the origins of the name Durning family name revealed numerous spelling variations. These variants can be somewhat accounted for when it is realized that before widespread literacy people only recognized their name by pronunciation; it was up to scribes to decide how it was to be formally recorded. Variations found include Durnan, Durnane, Durneen, Durnin, Durnain, Dornan, Dornain and many more.

Loading...

Early Notables of the Durning family

More information is included under the topic Early Durning Notables in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.

Loading...

Durning migration to the United States +

Thousands of Irish left in their homeland in the 18th and 19th centuries to escape the religious and political discrimination they experienced primarily at the hands of the English, and in the search of a plot of land to call their own. These immigrants arrived at the eastern shores of North America, early on settling and breaking the land, and, later, building the bridges, canals, and railroads essential to the emerging nations of United States and Canada. Many others would toil for low wages in the dangerous factories of the day. Although there had been a steady migration of Irish to North America over these years, the greatest influx of Irish immigrants came to North America during the Great Potato Famine of the late 1840s. Early North American immigration records have revealed a number of people bearing the Irish name Durning or a variant listed above:

Durning Settlers in United States in the 19th Century

Charles Durning, who arrived in Philadelphia in 1858

Durning migration to Canada +

Some of the first settlers of this family name were:

Durning Settlers in Canada in the 19th Century

Rosey Durning, aged 24, who arrived in Saint John, New Brunswick aboard the ship "Edward Reid" in 1833

Mary Durning, who arrived in Saint John, New Brunswick aboard the ship "Daniel O'Connell" in 1834

Hugh Durning, who arrived in Saint John, New Brunswick aboard the ship "Daniel O'Connell" in 1834

Catharine Durning, who arrived in Saint John, New Brunswick aboard the ship "Daniel O'Connell" in 1834

Contemporary Notables of the name Durning (post 1700) +

Charles Durning (b. 1923), American soldier in World War II, during which he was awarded a Silver Star and three Purple Heart medals. He went on to become an Academy Award winning actor of stage and screen

Harry Michael Durning (1887-1958), American Democratic Party politician, Delegate to Democratic National Convention from New York, 1928, 1932, 1936, 1940; U.S. Collector of Customs, 1933-53 3

Related Stories +

Citations +

MacLysaght, Edward, More Irish Families. Dublin: Irish Academic Press, 1982. Print. (ISBN 0-7165-0126-0)

MacLysaght, Edward, Supplement to Irish Families. Baltimore: Genealogical Book Company, 1964. Print.

The Political Graveyard: Alphabetical Name Index. (Retrieved 2015, November 4) . Retrieved from http://politicalgraveyard.com/alpha/index.html