WASHINGTON -- Independent Ralph Nader, 74, the oldest candidate in the 2008 presidential race, says he has found a new generation of supporters.

On the ballot in 45 states, Nader thinks he'll have his best showing in his three tries for president this Election Day. He's now polling at 3 percent nationally and higher in some states -- 4 percent in Colorado and Missouri.

Nader, whose electronic skills are deeply ingrained in the 1950s, has embraced New Media. He has become a fave on YouTube with two bits with the shapely Obama Girl, with whom he has been shown sharing an office.

"We thought it would be a little spice, a little change of pace," Nader said in an interview. "It was an attempt to get more people to get on the (campaign) Web site."

Nader said he has to do these things to get attention because he faces a "media blackout," with scant attention from TV and newspapers.

"Every national poll wants me in the debates," said Nader. He claims that if weren't for the "two-party dictatorship" keeping him out of the debates, "it'd be a three-way race." The Commission on Presidential Debates was established by the two major parties.

Nader's anti-establishment, anti-corporate message resonates with young people, who dominate his Washington headquarters and his 35 field offices.

Nader thinks that Wall Street's near-collapse and the $700 billion federal bailout have given him some oomph.

"This is wild casino capitalism that brought down millions of people's livelihoods," he said. "My predictions have come true -- about Fannie Mae, about Freddie Mac, about Wall Street. We have more credibility than ever."

Nader opposed the bailout, which Obama and McCain supported, because it didn't institute extensive re-regulation of the markets.

Nader is clearly more relaxed than he was in 2004 when, in his first independent run, he had to fight Democrats state-by-state to get on the ballot. He made the ballot in 34 states. Many were angry that in 2000, when Nader was the nominee of the Green Party, he siphoned votes from Democrat Al Gore.

In 2000, Nader received 2.8 million votes, for 2.74 percent of the popular vote. In 2004, he was down to 463,653 votes, or less than a half percent of the popular vote.