Andy Roddick joined Wimbledon champion Roger Federer in the second round of the Montreal Masters with a 3-6, 6-0, 6-2 comeback win over Xavier Malisse on Tuesday night.

Roddick, the sixth seed who has earned 40 match wins this season for the third consecutive year, won his seventh straight match without a defeat against the pony-tailed Belgian.

The victory puts Roddick, who lifted the Indianapolis title last month, into a second-round clash against Argentine Juan Chela.

"I had to get used to conditions said the winner of three titles in his past six tournaments. The balls here are heavier and the courts are a bit slower than what I've been used to," he said.

"I was missing early on and he played beter at the start. I tried to put away as many shots as I could, but I didn't serve particularly well tonight."

Third seed Federer salvaged the start of his hardcourt summer as he achieved first-round success with a 6-4, 3-6, 7-5 victory over Argentine Gaston Gaudio.

The victory in Federer's first match since losing the Gstaad final the week after his Wimbledon triumph was a close affair, with the third seed coming back from a break down in the third and eventually winning on his first match point.

He faced treble break points early in the final set, with his chances of carrying on after two career losses in Canada looking grim.

"Those were basically a match point," said the 21-year-old, whose victory put him into a second-round encounter against Montreal-born naturalised Briton Greg Rusedski.

Federer said that Gaudio put up a good fight.

"He served well and played well, I didn't get many second serves. He didn't lose a lot of points on serve. I had to hang in there."

Federer admitted: "I got lucky. I was unhappy with the way he won in the second, breaking me twice."

But he plans to come good against Rusedski.

"I don't know how well he's playing, but he must be doing OK. We'll see, it will be a different match."

Another reigning Grand Slam champion also advanced, albeit in easier style.

Juan Carlos Ferrero ousted Frenchman Cyril Saulnier 6-4, 6-4.

"It's important and shows that I'm playing well," said the second-seeded Spaniard.

"I'm maintaining my level for week after week. I want to keep doing that and try to remain number one at the end of the season."

Former world number one Lleyton Hewitt, now lying fifth as he tries to win his first title since last March, had no trouble as he brushed off American Bob Bryan 6-2, 6-2.

Finalists last weekend in Washington suffered contrasting fates, with Washington champion Tim Henman going through over 14th seed Fernando Gonzalez 6-2 as the Chilean retired with a knee problem.

Henman beat Gonzalez on Sunday for the title in the US capital.

"I didn't know he was struggling, but injuries can always be unpredictable," said Henman.

"He's had some problems with his knee in the past."

Guillermo Coria's run of three straight titles - all on clay in Europe - was rudely interrupted on the cement when the Argentine quit in his match against Spaniard Feliciano Lopez after losing the first set 6-3.

In a clash that could have been dubbed Wayne's World, Zimbabwe's Wayne Black emerged with a first-round victory over South African Wayne Ferreira, who retired after dropping the first set 6-4 and trailing 2-1 in the second.

Ferreira has been nursing a groin strain since the French Open, although it did not stop him winning the title in Los Angeles on Sunday.