Legendary pop superstar John Denver is to be inducted to the Colorado Music Hall of Fame in a special benefit concert celebrating his music and life, hosted by Olivia Newton-John on Earth Day Eve, April 21, 2011 at 1STBANK Center. Tickets go on sale this Friday, at 10am MT.

The evening will feature performances by Olivia Newton-John, Nitty Gritty Dirt Band, Richie Furay, Lee Ann Womack, John Oates and other talents in a commemoration to the late musician.

Notable John Denver hits will be performed by his former band collaborators Bill Danoff and Taffy Nivert of the Starland Vocal band (co-writers of “Take Me Home, Country Roads”) and John Sommers (writer of “Thank God I’m A Country Boy”).

Famed composer Lee Holdridge, who has conducted orchestras for John Denver, Barbra Streisand, and Neil Diamond, among others, will lead the Boulder Philharmonic in a special tribute performance.

John Denver will always be associated with the Rocky Mountains and the city from which he took his name. During his 1970s heyday, he was one of the top five selling recording artists in music history.

Notable environmental activists will also join the stage in a commemoration of John Denver’s long life dedication to the environment.

Chuck Morris, President and CEO / AEG LIVE Rocky Mountains, commented, “Earth Day seems so fitting for the tribute because John used his popularity to promote the environment, his favorite cause over his lifetime.”

A portion of the proceeds from the concert will benefit environmental organizations that John Denver would have supported and the University of Colorado’s School of Music.

The tribute is to be held at the 6,500-capacity, state-of-the-art 1STBANK Center; the permanent home of the Colorado Music Hall of Fame. The venue is located only 15 minutes between Denver and Boulder at 11450 Broomfield Lane (Broomfield, CO) off U.S 1-36.

TICKETS GO ON SALE FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 18th at 10AM.

Reserved tickets are $29.50 – $79.50 plus applicable service charges. All ages welcome.

To purchase tickets and for more information visit www.1STBANKCenter.com

and www.TicketHorse.com or by calling 866.461.6556.

Directions http://1stbankcenter.com/directions/