We are pleased to announce that John Denver will be the first inductee to the Colorado Music Hall of Fame in a special benefit concert celebrating his music and life, hosted by Olivia Newton-John on Earth Day Eve, April 21, 2011 at 1STBANK Center.

The stellar evening will feature performances by Olivia Newton-John, Nitty Gritty Dirt Band, Lee Ann Womack, John Oates and more to be announced. Notable John Denver hits will be performed by his former collaborators Bill Danoff of the Starland Vocal band (co-writer of “Take Me Home, Country Roads”) and John Sommers (writer of “Thank God I’m A Country Boy”). Famed composer Lee Holdridge, who has conducted orchestras for John Denver, Barbra Streisand, and Neil Diamond, will lead the Boulder Philharmonic Orchestra in a special tribute performance.

Joining the cavalcade of entertainers will be Colorado artist and protégé of the late Denny Dent, Brian Olsen, who will tap his iconic Art in Action speed-painting to create a portrait of John Denver live, in just minutes.

Earth Day seems so fitting for the tribute because John used his popularity to promote the environment, his favorite cause over his lifetime. Notable environmental activists will also join the stage in a commemoration of John Denver’s long life dedication to the environment and a portion of the proceeds from the concert will benefit the Cousteau Society and Windstar Foundation that John Denver supported plus the University of Colorado’s School of Music.

The CMHOF will also unveil details on the permanent exhibition currently being assembled with the help of the John Denver estate that will encompass the musician’s career arc, his many interests and accomplishments, and musical legacy.

The tribute is to be held at the 6,500-capacity, state-of-the-art 1STBANK Center, located at 11450 Broomfield Lane (Broomfield, CO) off U.S 1-36, the permanent home of the Colorado Music Hall of Fame.

LIMITED TICKETS FOR JOHN DENVER FANS GO ON SALE WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 16th at 10AM at FrontgateTickets.com, TICKETS ARE ON SALE TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 18th at 10AM at www.1STBANKCenter.com and www.TicketHorse.com or by calling 866.461.6556.

Reserved tickets are $29.50 – $79.50 plus applicable service charges. All ages welcome.