Joseph “Joe” R. Andrews, 67, of Gardner, died peacefully, Monday, April 6, 2020, in Wachusett Manor, Gardner, with his wife by his side after a short illness

Born in Athol, MA on June 1, 1952, he was the son of the late Ray A. and Bertha I. (Norton) Andrews. He attended Gardner schools, graduating from St. Mary’s High School, Colorado Springs, CO, in 1973 and later earned his Associates Degree from Mount Wachusett Community College. A Vietnam War Veteran, Joe served in the United States Army from 1969 to 1976. In 1976 he enlisted in the Massachusetts National Guard, where he served full time from 1977 to 1992. He was later employed in the Housekeeping Department at the Edith Norse Rogers Memorial Veteran’s Hospital in Bedford, MA, from 2003 until his retirement in 2012.

Joe was a parishioner of Annunciation Parish of Gardner. He was a member of the Acadien Social Club of Gardner and the Ovila Case VFW Post 905 of Gardner, where he served as Veteran Service Officer until recently. A member of the VFW Honor Guard, he participated weekly in honoring numerous veterans at the Winchendon’s Massachusetts Veteran’s Memorial Cemetery. He loved to watch baseball, especially his Boston Red Sox. But the time he loved and cherished the most was time spent with his family, especially his grandchildren.

Joe is survived by his wife of 48 years, Diana Cormier-Andrews of Gardner, two sons, James Andrews and his wife Miho of Japan, and Brian Andrews of Gardner; one daughter, Joy White and her husband John of Gardner; two brothers, George Andrews of Templeton, and Ray Andrews of Gardner; three sisters, Karen Geer and her husband Peter of Missouri, Edna Muck and her husband Roland of Gardner, and Mary Roberts of Athol; five grandchildren, Braeden, Arianna and Cailynn White, Luke Tribuzio and Zoe Andrews, several nieces, nephews, and cousins.

He was predeceased by one son, Gerald “Jerry” Andrews, who died in 2011; two brothers, Clyde and Patrick Andrews; three sisters, Myrtle Thibeault, Janice Quirion, and June Cote and two unnamed infant siblings.

Funeral Services will be held at a later date.

Memorial Contributions may be made to the VFW Post 905 Relief Fund, 176 West Street, Gardner, MA 01440. Please reference in memory of Joseph R. Andrews.