Timbaland have a certain amount of philosophy in Timbaland's character but it lies dormant a good deal of the time. Timbaland are large-hearted and sincere, though a trifle blunt. Timbaland are somewhat proud and people who ponder to Timbaland's vanity become Timbaland's best friends.Timbaland have high ideals which cannot be realised. When they fail, Timbaland allow Timbaland'sself to be considerably dejected. There is a streak of restlessness in Timbaland, which causes Timbaland to cast aside an ideal before it has had sufficient time to mature. Consequently, Timbaland do not attain the success in life, nor the happiness and comfort, that Timbaland's qualities merit.Timbaland know how to express Timbaland's opinions in public and Timbaland have a neat gift for being humorous. It follows that Timbaland are credited by Timbaland's friends as being jolly good company. Certainly Timbaland are entertaining. Timbaland's friends by the way, have considerable influence on Timbaland and it is highly necessary that Timbaland should chose them wisely and deliberately.Timbaland's greatest failing is that Timbaland are versatile and that Timbaland's energies are directed into too many channels. Concentrate on fewer branches of work and pleasure, and Timbaland will greatly benefit by the change.

Timbaland will often meet with disappointments and expect more, for Timbaland tend to worry so much that the very things Timbaland are afraid of usually happen. Very shy, Timbaland have great difficulty in communicating feelings and emotions. If Timbaland will clear Timbaland's head of all worldly matters for a small period each day and sit in meditation, Timbaland will feel much peace and realise that things are not as bad as they seem.Timbaland tend to keep wandering in various places, which is why the idea of studying for a prolonged duration will not be entertained by Timbaland. But , it can give birth to negative circumstances in Timbaland's educational life. Once Timbaland gain victory over Timbaland's lethargic nature, Timbaland will perform well in Timbaland's studies. Timbaland have a morbid curiosity about unfamiliar things. Timbaland's imagination skills will grant Timbaland considerable amount of success in Timbaland's respective subjects. On the other hand, Timbaland should try to boost Timbaland's concentration power so that Timbaland do not fleet in the world of imagination while studying. If Timbaland work hard enough, no power in this universe can stop Timbaland from being successful.