Oracle Corp. history, profile and history video

Oracle Corp. provides enterprise software and computer hardware products and services. The company is organized into three businesses: Software, Hardware Systems and Services. The Software business is comprised of two operating segments: New Software Licenses and Software License Updates and Product Support. The New Software Licenses segment includes the licensing of database and middleware software, as well as applications software. Its software products are designed to operate on both single server and clustered server configurations and to support a choice of operating systems, including Oracle Solaris, Oracle Linux, Microsoft Windows and third party UNIX products. The database software is enterprise database software, which is designed to enable the secure storage, retrieval and manipulation of all forms of data, including transactional data, business information, analytics, and unstructured data in the form of XML files, office documents, images, video, spatial and other specialized forms of data, such as human genomic and medical data. This software is used for a variety of purposes, including online transaction processing applications, data warehousing and business intelligence, as a document repository or specialized data store. The middleware software is an application infrastructure software product that is designed to form a reliable and scalable foundation on which customers can build, deploy, secure, access and integrate business applications and automate their business processes. Its Oracle Fusion Middleware suites and products, which are built on the Java technology platform, can be used as a foundation for custom, packaged and composite applications. The Fusion Middleware software is available in various software products and suites, including the following functional areas: application server and application grid, service-oriented architecture and business process management, business intelligence, identity and access management, data integration, content management, portals and user interaction and development tools. The application software consists of Oracle Fusion Applications, which are a comprehensive suite of modular and next-generation software applications that include enterprise resource planning, customer relationship management, supply chain management and enterprise project portfolio management. The Software License Updates and Product Support segment provides customers with rights to unspecified software product upgrades and maintenance releases and patches released during the term of the support period and include Internet and telephone access to technical support personnel located in its global support centers, as well as Internet access to technical content through My Oracle Support. The Hardware Systems business consists of two operating segments: Hardware Systems Products and Hardware Systems Support. The Hardware Systems Products segment offerings include servers and storage products, networking components, operating systems and other hardware-related software. The segment products are designed to work in customer environments that may include other Oracle or non-Oracle hardware or software components. Its servers are designed for business critical applications and for customers having more computationally intensive needs. Storage products are designed to securely manage, protect, archive and restore customers’ mission critical data assets and consist of tape, disk, hardware-related software, including file systems software, back-up and archive software and storage management software, and networking for mainframe and open systems environments. Networking components and products are designed to connect and deploy server and storage clusters in data centers. Oracle Solaris operating system is designed to provide a reliable, secure and scalable operating system environment through a core feature development in kernel, networking, security, and file system technologies, as well as close integration with hardware features. The Hardware Systems Support segment offerings provide customers with software updates for the software components that are essential to the functionality of its server and storage products, such as Oracle Solaris, and can include product repairs, maintenance services, and technical support services. The Services Business consists of three segments: Consulting, Cloud Services and Education. The Consulting segment includes business and information technology strategy alignment, enterprise architecture planning and design, initial product implementation and integration, and ongoing product enhancements and upgrades. The Cloud Services segment includes certain of its Oracle Cloud Services offerings and technology, and Advanced Customer Services. The Oracle Cloud Services are designed to provide comprehensive software and hardware management and maintenance services for customers hosted at Oracle data center facilities, select partner data centers or physically on-site at customer facilities. The Advanced Customer Services provides support services, both onsite and remote to Oracle customers, to enable increased performance and higher availability of their products and services. The Education segment provides training to customers, partners and employees through a variety of formats, including instructor-led classes at its education centers, live virtual training, self-paced online training, training via CD-ROM, private events and custom training. This segment also offers a certification program certifying database administrators, developers, implementers, consultants and architects. The company was founded on June 16, 1977 by Lawrence J. Ellison, Robert Nimrod Miner and Edward A. Oates and is headquartered in Redwood City, CA.“

“Oracle’s History: Innovation, Leadership, Results

For more than three and a half decades, Oracle has been the leader in database software. And as it has further developed technologies and acquired best-in-class companies over the years, that leadership has expanded to the entire technology stack, from servers and storage, to database and middleware, through applications and into the cloud.

It all began when Larry Ellison saw an opportunity other companies missed: a description of a working prototype for a relational database. No company had committed to commercializing the technology, but Ellison and co-founders Bob Miner and Ed Oates realized the tremendous business potential of the relational database model. None of them realized at the time that the company they formed would change the face of business computing.

Throughout its history Oracle has proved it can build for the future on the foundation of its innovations and its knowledge of customer challenges and successes analyzed by the best technical and business minds in the world.

What does Oracle have in store for tomorrow? We will continue to provide our customers with hardware and software engineered to work together—integrated from disk to applications─that meet their business needs and solve their business problems. And we will continue to innovate and to lead the industry, while always making sure that we focus on solving the problems of the customers who rely on our technology.”

*Information from Forbes.com and Oracle.com