A Service of Remembrance was held Aug. 18 at Gospel Open Bible Church in Jefferson for David Leroy Vickers, 69, of Jefferson

Pastor Chad Cummings offered words of comfort. Honorary bearers were Tony Vickers, Jeff Vickers, Ronnie Vickers, J.J. Vickers and Jacob Vickers.

Interment was at Junction Township Cemetery west of Grand Junction.

The family was assisted by Slininger-Schroeder Funeral Home of Jefferson.

David “Dave” Leroy Vickers, son of Delmar and Rachel (Irene) Vickers, was born, August 5, 1949, in Massillon, OH. He was one of six boys born to this union. Dave passed away August 14, 2018, at Unity Point Methodist Medical Center in Des Moines.

On December 20, 1975, Dave was united in marriage to Jean Bishop in Phoenix, AZ. Dave had two daughters, Danelle and Theresa, prior to this union, and proceeded to have three more children: Tina, Tara, and Jacob. Dave was a grandfather to six grandchildren and two fur grandpuppies.

Dave moved back to Iowa with his wife Jean in 1976, where he started working at Parker Industries as a machine operator. He also worked at Tri-County driving a cement truck and then he worked the rest of his years at Electrolux for 27 years.

He volunteered at the Grand Junction fire & rescue department for 25 years, and served as assistant fire chief for 19 of those years. He was very passionate about being able to help the people in his community in time of need. Dave also helped deliver flowers at his wife’s flower shop for 20 years after he got off work, and also served as an officer for the union.

His interests included deer hunting, fishing in the early years, working on vehicles, spending time with his family and attending his kids’ and grandkids’ events. He also enjoyed watching football and westerns in his spare time.

Dave is survived by his wife Jean Vickers of Grand Junction; daughters Danelle Mason of Des Moines, Theresa (Mike) Villagomez of Lincoln, NE, Tina (Tony) Sparks of Jefferson, and Tara (Tommy Starks) Vickers of Des Moines; son Jacob Vickers of Bondurant; granddaughters Alicia (Nick) Foster, Crystal McEntire, Alexis Villagomez and Abbie Sparks; grandsons Zackary (Allison) McEntire and Joshuah Sparks; brother Ron (Julie) Vickers; and many nieces, nephews, and friends.

He was preceded in death by his parents Delmar and Rachel (Irene) Vickers; and brothers stillborn twin to Jim, James (Jim), Jeffrey (Jeff), and Gerald (Jerry).