David Leroy Vickers, 69, died Tuesday, August 14, 2018 at Unity Point Methodist Medical Center in Des Moines, Iowa.

A service of remembrance was held at 11:00 a.m. Saturday, August 18 at Gospel Open Bible Church in Jefferson, Iowa with Pastor Chad Cummings of Gospel Open Bible Church officiating. Honorary bearers were Tony Vickers, Jeff Vickers, Ronnie Vickers, J.J. Vickers and Jacob Vickers. The recorded music played was “Amazing Grace,” “Go Rest High On That Mountain” and “When I Get To Where I’m Going.” Interment was at Junction Township Cemetery in Grand Junction. Followed by lunch and fellowship at the church.

David Leroy Vickers “Dave,” son of Delmar and Rachel (Irene) Vickers, was born, August 5, 1949 in Massillon, Ohio. He was one of six boys born to this union.

On December 20, 1975, Dave was united in marriage to Jean Bishop in Phoenix, Arizona. Dave had two daughters, Danelle and Theresa, prior to this union and proceeded to have three more children: Tina, Tara and Jacob. Dave was a grandfather to six grandchildren and two fur grandpuppies.

Dave moved back to Iowa with his wife, Jean in 1976 where he started working at Parker Industries as a machine operator. He also worked at Tri-County driving a cement truck and then he worked the rest of his years at Electrolux for 27 years.

He volunteered at the Grand Junction Fire & Rescue Department where he was a volunteer for 25 years, and served as assistant fire chief for 19 of those years. He was very passionate about being able to help the people in his community in time of need. Dave also helped deliver flowers at his wife’s flower shop for 20 years after he would get off work and also served as an officer for the Union.

His interests included deer hunting, fishing in the early years, working on vehicles, spending time with his family and attending his kid’s and grandkid’s events. He also enjoyed watching football and westerns in his spare time.

Dave is survived by his wife, Jean Vickers of Grand Junction, Iowa; daughter, Danelle Mason of Des Moines; daughter, Theresa (Mike) Villagomez of Lincoln, Neb.; daughter, Tina (Tony) Sparks of Jefferson; daughter, Tara (Tommy Starks) Vickers of Des Moines; son, Jacob Vickers of Bondurant, Iowa; grandchildren: Alicia (Nick) Foster, Zackary (Allison) McEnitre, Crystal McEntire, Alexis Villagomez, Abbie Sparks and Joshuah Sparks; brother, Ron (Julie) Vickers; and many nieces, nephews and friends.

He was preceded in death by his parents, Delmar and Rachel (Irene) Vickers; brothers: a stillborn brother (twin to Jim), James (Jim), Jeffrey (Jeff) and Gerald (Jerry).

Slininger-Schroeder Funeral Home.