Veteran director David Fincer worked alongside iconic actor Morgan Freeman when they created and shot the 1995 film Se7en. Portraying the role of Detective Somerset in the crime/mystery film, Freeman loved Fincher’s work and the two decided to work together again.

Advertisement

However, Fincher never got to make his dream film with Morgan Freeman due to the latter’s failing health in the year 2008. With passing time and no hopes left, Fincher’s dream film was later picked up by Dune director Denis Villeneuve and he describes it as “Arrival on steroids”!

David Fincher Wanted His Dream Film With Morgan Freeman

Rendezvous With Rama is a 1973 sci-fi novel by writer Arthur C. Clarke (who also wrote 2001: A Space Odyssey). Naturally, veteran director David Fincher wanted to adapt the 1972 novel into a film starring Morgan Freeman in one of the lead roles.

Advertisement

The story talked about an alien spaceship that enters our solar system and a team of astronauts that try to open it up. With Freeman going through some health issues back in 2008, the film was pushed back a little.

In an old interview with First Showing, the veteran director revealed that he wished that he could have turned the book into a film. However, Fincher cited that due to Freeman’s poor health, the film would likely be never made.

It looks like it’s not going to happen. There’s no script and as you know, [Morgan Freeman’s] not in the best of health right now. We’ve been trying to do it but it’s probably not going to happen.

The filming idea was canceled and the idea rested for 16 years until veteran director Denis Villeneuve came into the picture. Known for directing the iconic Dune: Part One and Part Two movies, Villeneuve has some great news for the people.

Advertisement

In a recent interview, the director confirmed that he will be working on Rendezvous With Rama and will be adapting the 1973 novel into a film.

Denis Villeneuve Will Adapt Rendezvous With Rama Into A Film!

Denis Villeneuve is a veteran director who is known for his sci-fi filmography including movies like Arrival, Blade Runner 2049, Dune: Part One and Dune Part Two. Working and directing these sci-fi films have surely given Villeneuve enough experience to adapt Rendezvous with Rama into a film.

In a recent interview with Empire, the director confirmed the news. Although he didn’t reveal much details about the cast or anything, Villeneuve only had one thing to say about his plan.

Advertisement

[It’s like] Arrival on steroids

In the above statements, the director is talking about his 2016 film Arrival starring Amy Adams. The film was also about an extraterrestrial race and a translator finding a way to communicate with them. However, as Villeneuve said, his adaptation of Rendezvous with Rama will be much more amplified than Arrival.

Screenwriter Eric Roth (who recently worked with Martin Scorsese on Killers of the Flower Moon) is also attached to this project and fans are already excited. A release date for Rendezvous with Rama hasn’t been revealed yet but it seems that the series will take quite some time to develop,