The Shawshank Redemption star, Morgan Freeman is known for his distinctive deep voice and his excellent choice of films from different genres. The 86-year-old American film star and producer even has an Oscar registered to his name for the film Million Dollar Baby. His debut film was The Pawnbroker, which was released back in 1964, though he had an uncredited role, but the actor made a space in the Hollywood industry for himself.

Advertisement

The Oscar-winning actor has a very prolific career in the Hollywood industry and all credit goes to his breakthrough role in the film Street Smart (1987). That particular film even earned him a nomination for Best Supporting Actor at the Academy Awards. However, looking through his profile it is quite understandable that when it comes to film, he is very precise, and that’s what landed him a role in the DC trilogy, The Dark Knight Trilogy.

Read more: “If you disappoint them too many times”: Morgan Freeman Felt He Made a Mistake Making a Movie That Won 4 Oscars

Advertisement

Morgan Freeman Did Make A Fortune Out Of The Dark Knight Trilogy

The Christopher Nolan-directed Dark Knight trilogy is a billion-dollar trilogy and even ranks as one of the most watched and most praised trilogies. When the first part of the trilogy Batman begins released back in 2005, it became the second highest-grossing Batman film with a box office grossing over $371.9 million. The first part of the trilogy sealed the fact that The Dark Knight trilogy will be among the most prominent trilogies of all time.

However, Morgan Freeman backed the role of Lucius Fox in the Dark Knight Trilogy, and he nailed it. There is no denying the fact that no one would have done justice to the character of Lucius Fox alike him. It can also be considered a reason, why Robert Pattinson’s new Batman movies might not have the Character of Lucius Fox in it. However, it is tough to imagine the trilogy without Lucius Fox in it, as a wise mentor to the risk-taking Bruce Wayne.

Nonetheless, good actors come with a price, and it has been reported by TheThings that the Oscar-winning actor did make $5 million for each Batman movie he stared at. This makes it a total of $15 million for him, playing the role of CEO and president of Wayne Enterprises and one of the closest allies of Bruce Wayne, he deserves it.

Advertisement

Read more: Nolan’s Dark Knight Trilogy Star Said Part 4 Would’ve Replaced Christian Bale With Another Actor: “That was the idea”

What Is The Current Net Worth Of The Oscar-Winning Actor Morgan Freeman

The five-time Oscar-nominated and one-time Oscar-winning actor, Morgan Freeman’s net worth is supposed to be too high, considering the films he acted for. His career started back in the 1960s and it’s still running so it’s of no surprise that currently his net worth is a whopping $250 million.

Morgan Freeman earned his fortune throughout his successful career by working as an actor, voice artist, film and television producer, and a fine director. It has been reported by TheThings that he charges around $10 million nowadays for acting in a certain film and it keeps on varying from role to role. However, currently, he is filming for Gunner and 57 Seconds is on the verge of premiering on 29th September 2023.

Advertisement

Keeping aside his film and television aspects, he is a phenomenal businessman as well and has always been a hot topic for his sense of investing. While he didn’t only feature in great films, he even used the money he earned from the film to afford a lifestyle that would make every Hollywood A-lister envy him.

Read more: Morgan Freeman Openly Admitted He Returned to $501M Franchise Threequel for the Money: “It pays better than the first one”

Source: TheThings