Archduchess of Austria

Adelaide of Austria (1822-1855) was born at the Royal Palace in Milan to Archduke Rainier Joseph of Austria and his wife, Princess Elisabeth of Savoy. Named Adelaide, and known as Adele in her family, she had the title of Archduchess of Austria. Her father was the Viceroy of Lombardy-Veneto. Her grandfather was then Emperor Leopold II and her great-grandmother the famous Maria Theresa of Austria. Adelaide had a very refined education and knew no less than five languages in addition to Latin and Greek.

Duchess of Savoy

On 12 April 1842, she married Victor Emmanuel of Savoy at the Palazzina di Caccia di Stupinigi. The marriage served to cement relations between the House of Savoy and the House of Habsburg, but was seen by many at the time as an increase of the Austrian power in Italy.

Victor Emmanuel was her paternal first cousin and also her maternal first cousin, as her new father-in-law, Charles Albert of Savoy, was also her maternal uncle. Prince Victor Emmanuel was the heir of his father, the King of Sardinia. Before the succession he was called ‘Duke of Savoy’. Adelaide therefore assumed the style of ‘Duchess of Savoy’. She maintained the style of Imperial and Royal Highness until she became Queen.

Her husband’s mother, Maria Theresa of Habsburg-Lorraine, maintained a great influence on her son throughout her life. Her mother-in-law was also her cousin: both she and Adelaide were grandchildren of Emperor Leopold II.

Adelaide and her husband had eight children. Four of these had further offspring. Adelaide and Victor Emmanuel’s children included the future King of Italy Umberto I of Savoy. Adelaide was a quiet and pious woman, a loving wife and often did charity work.

Her husband, although he esteemed her, betrayed her repeatedly, especially with Rosa Vercellana, his future morganatic wife. Adelaide suffered in silence.

Queen of Sardinia

In March 1849, her father-in-law, King Charles Albert, abdicated following the events of the 1848 Revolution. Her husband succeeded him as Victor Emmanuel II of Sardinia. During her tenure as queen consort, she had three more children, all of whom died in infancy.

Queen Adelaide had no political influence, but on one occasion she supported her mother-in-law, the widowed Queen Maria Theresa, who on a well-known occasion tried to influence policy. When the Cavour government introduced reforms against the privileges of the Church in 1854, she joined her mother-in-law in supporting the latter’s appeal to the king to prevent the reform on the grounds that it was hostile to the Church and therefore unacceptable to a Christian. However, the effort was unsuccessful.

The many pregnancies had undermined her already fragile physique. In her later years she lost her hair and teeth and her face became increasingly pale.

On 8 January 1855 she gave birth to a son and a few days later, on 12 January 1855, Queen Maria Theresa died. Adelaide went to the late queen’s funeral on a cold 16th January and, on her return to the palace, caught a cold. She died four days later at the Royal Palace in Turin, after suffering an acute attack of gastroenteritis. She is buried in the Royal Basilica of Superga. In 1861 her husband was to become the first post-unification King of Italy.