''Brickleberry''

Title Card Picture format 1080p Running time 22 Minutes Creator Roger Black

Waco O'Guin Starring David Herman

Kaitlin Olson

Daniel Tosh

Tom Kenny

Roger Black

Jerry Minor Country of origin United States Original channel Comedy Central Original run September 25, 2012 – April 14, 2015 No. of series 3 No. of episodes 36 (List of episodes)

Brickleberry is an American adult animated sitcom produced by comedian Daniel Tosh and created by Roger Black and Waco O'Guin. It premiered on Comedy Central on September 25, 2012 with the episode Welcome to Brickleberry, Brickleberry is a R-Rated Show, Brickleberry is not for kids, Brickleberry is not a kids show, and Brickleberry is not a children's show, Brickleberry is for adults, not for kids, Brickleberry is for adults only, Brickleberry Embraces A R-Rated Ethos, Brickleberry Is Under The Age of 18.

Synopsis[]

The show centers around Brickleberry, a terrible national park with never-do-good park rangers. The series focuses on Steve Williams as he works to become the same glorious and highly-loved park ranger as his father, though he never succeeds because he will always be too stupid and fat. The series' secondary protagonist, Woody Johnson, always tries to boost attendance at the park to fill his pockets with money.

Cast[]

Main Cast[]

David Herman as Steve Williams

Tom Kenny as Woody Johnson

Daniel Tosh as Malloy

Jerry Minor as Denzel Jackson

Roger Black as Connie Cunaman

Kaitlin Olson/Natasha Leggero as Ethel Anderson

Recurring Cast[]

Waco O'Guin as Bobby Possumcods

Roger Black as BoDean Lynn

Tom Kenny as Dr. Kuzniak

David Herman as Jorge

Roger Black as Firecracker Jim

Waco O'Guin as Buella

Janell Cox as Anita Johnson

Harland Williams as Hobo Larry

Chris Parnell as Asher

Jake Johnson as Reverend Rosty

John DiMaggio as Todd Ford

Eric Bauza as Phil

Kevin Michael Richardson as Barack Obama

Maurice LaMarche as Flamey the Bear

Lauren Lapkus as Sandy Berkman

Roger Black as Yucko the Clown

Reception[]

Brickleberry earned high recognition in the male 18-34 demographic. On the contrary, many TV critics complained that Brickleberry isn't worth watching since it was difficult to generate sympathy for the main cast due to their sloppy, offensive, grotesque or violent behaviors and therefore they gave the show mixed reviews. Despite criticism of how simplistic and effortless the artwork and drawings looked, the humor and plot and voice acting / writing components were praised. Brickleberry fans protested that the show was in many ways better than Family Guy, a higher-budgeted show much better known by U.S. households that critics claimed was similar.

By the time Season 3 came and went, Brickleberry has maintained such a large fanbase that pre-orders for the comic book's first issue were sold out.

Trivia[]