About the author

ROBERT SCHOLES, professor of modern culture and media at Brown University, is a distinguished teacher and a leading scholar in literary studies. He has published many influential books and articles, including "The Rise and Fall of English: Reconstructing English as a Discipline "(1998); "Protocols of Reading "(1989); and "Textual Power: Literary Theory and the Teaching of English" (1985), which won the Mina P. Shaughnessy Prize of the Modern Language Association in 1986 and the David H. Russell Research Award from NCTE in 1988. Scholes is a contributor of numerous articles and book reviews to learned journals, literary magazines, and weekly reviews. His Bedford/St. Martin's publications include "The Practice of Writing, " Fifth Edition (2001) with Nancy R. Comley and Janice Peritz, and "Fields of Reading: Motives for Writing, " Sixth Edition (2001) with Nancy R. Comley, David Hamilton, Carl H. Klaus, and Nancy Sommers.

NANCY R. COMLEY, professor and chair of English and former Director of Freshman Composition at Queens College, CUNY, has written numerous articles on teaching writing and literature and on modernist literature. She has published, with Robert Scholes, "Hemingway's Genders: Rereading the Hemingway Text "(1994). Her Bedford/St. Martin's publications include "The Practice of Writing, Fifth Edition" (2001) with Robert Scholes and Janice Peritz and "Fields of Reading: Motives for Writing, " Sixth Edition (2001) with David Hamilton, Carl H. Klaus, Robert Scholes, and Nancy Sommers.

GREGORY L. ULMER, professor of English and Media Studies at the University of Florida, has published numerous professional articles and books on critical theory and electronic communication, including "Heuretics: The Logic of Invention" (1994), "Teletheory: Grammatology in the Age of Video" (1989), and "Applied Grammatology: Post(e)-Pedagogy from Jacques Derrida to Joseph Beuys" (1985). As coordinator of the Electronic Learning Forum (www.elf.ufl.edu), Ulmer collaborates with students and faculty at the University of Florida and elsewhere on projects relating to teaching, research, and service involving new media and technology.