Kalash Map — Satellite Images of Kalash

original name: Kalāsh

geographical location: East Azarbayejan, Iran, Asia

geographical coordinates: 37° 59' 29" North, 48° 9' 32" East

detailed map of Kalash and near places

Welcome to the Kalash google satellite map! This place is situated in East Azarbayejan, Iran, its geographical coordinates are 37° 59' 29" North, 48° 9' 32" East and its original name (with diacritics) is Kalāsh. See Kalash photos and images from satellite below, explore the aerial photographs of Kalash in Iran. Kalash hotels map is available on the target page linked above.

Do you like this map? Link to it or recommend it!

Register at Kalash or add new placemark for Kalash.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

Kalash hotel reservations

Book hotel in Kalash online and save money

Browse & Book hotels – low rates, no booking & cancelation fees »

Kalash hotels – Kalash hotel guide »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

Kalash hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in Kalash, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in Kalash, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included.

Kalash hotels map

The location of each Kalash hotel listed is shown on the detailed zoomable map. Moreover, Kalash hotel map is available where all hotels in Kalash are marked. You can easily choose your hotel by location.

Kalash hotel reviews

Many photos and unbiased Kalash hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision.

Kalash hotel deals

Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap Kalash hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Hotels nearest to the centre of Kalash

Lara Hotel (in Goris, distanced approximately 230 km)

Egevnut Hotel *** (in Goris, distanced approximately 230 km)

Green City Hotel **** (in Baki, distanced approximately 290 km)

The Crescent Beach Hotel (in Baki, distanced approximately 290 km)

Panorama Villa Lux Hotel (in Baki, distanced approximately 290 km)

Ramada Baku Hotel ***** (in Baki, distanced approximately 290 km)

Kempinski Hotel Badamdar ***** (in Baki, distanced approximately 300 km)

more Kalash hotels »

Kalash car rental

Compare Kalash car rental offers of 500+ suppliers

We search over 500 approved car hire suppliers to find you the very best Kalash rental prices available. You can compare offers from leading car hire suppliers like Avis, Europcar, Sixt or Thrifty as well as budget rental deals from Holiday Autos, Budget, Economy, EasyCar, or 121 carhire. Choose Kalash car hire supplier according to your preferences. The booking process is secured and is made as simple as possible. You don't have to browse through several websites and compare prices to find cheap car rental in Kalash — we will do it for you!

Car hire Kalash and neighbourhood

Car rental offices nearest to Kalash the city centre. Compare Kalash car rental offers by various suppliers.

Baku - Downtown car rental (distanced approximately 320 km)

BAKU INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT car rental (distanced approximately 320 km)

Yerevan Sayat Nova Ave car rental (distanced approximately 400 km)

Yerevan car rental (distanced approximately 400 km)

Yerevan Off Airport car rental (distanced approximately 400 km)

more offers and Kalash car hiring guide »

Flights from airports close to Kalash

Search and compare flights

Flights to nearby airports to Kalash »

Overview of flights to and from Iran »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to Kalash. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Airports in Kalash and in the neighbourhood

Airports nearest to Kalash are sorted by the distance to the airport from the city centre. Follow relate airport hotel guides for accommodation booking.

Ardabil Airport (distanced approximately 44 km) – airport hotels

Zanjan Airport (distanced approximately 140 km) – airport hotels

Rasht Airport (distanced approximately 150 km) – airport hotels

Lar A/P Airport (distanced approximately 150 km) – airport hotels

Sahand Airport (distanced approximately 150 km) – airport hotels

Kalash 3D map in Google Earth

3D map of Kalash in Iran

You can also dive right into Kalash on unique 3D satellite map provided by Google Earth. With new GoogLe Earth plugin you can enjoy the interactive Kalash 3D map within your web browser.

See the 3D map of Kalash, Iran in Google Earth »

Get more out of Kalash map

Add placemark to Kalash

No placemark has been added to this place yet. You can add the first.

users registered in this area

No users is registered to this place. You can be the first.

recommend this page

If you would like to recommend this Kalash map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is the easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

Kalash google map link options

link to us:

small Kalash google map image link

medium Kalash google map image link

large Kalash google map image link