Corgi Aviation Archive Collector Series AA33001

Vought F4U Corsair Diecast Model

USMC VMF-213 Hell Hawks, Daphne C, James Cupp, USS Essex CV-9, Solomon Islands

1:72 ScaleLengthWidthVought F4U Corsair5.5"6.75"

In March of 1943, VMF-213 arrived in the Solomons, equipped with Wildcats, but re-equipped with Corsairs before entering combat. With 13 kills, Captain Cupp was one of the highest scoring aces of this outfit. Cupp claimed his first two kills (a "Betty" and a "Zero") in this aircraft on 15th July 1943 during his second tour. The aircraft wears a white 7 in place of the previous number just forward of the national insignia. The old style black 13 is still faintly visible under the canopy and on the cowl. The aircraft bears four kill marks representing Cupp's next victories claimed on the 17th in F-4U1B No.02580. He was shot down on the 18th September and after bailing out he was picked up by the Americans and spent 18 months in hospital undergoing 14 operations.

Vought F4U Corsair

Designed to meet a US Navy requirement for a single-seat carrier based fighter, the F4U was first flown on May 29th, 1940. This versatile aircraft saw service with both the Navy and Marine Corps in WW II and in the Korean War. During its lifetime, the Corsair underwent numerous improvements such as a lengthened fuselage, a high visibility bubble-top canopy and folding inverted gull wings that provided clearance for a large propeller. Its performance advantage, 400 mph capability, the ability to withstand punishment and six .50 Browning machine guns made the F4U a devastating weapon against aircraft, ground targets and ships.

© Copyright 2003-2024 The Flying Mule, Inc.

Corgi's 1:72 scale Corsair series includes the early "bird cage" canopy variants and the mid- and late-war variants, which had a taller and wider clear-view canopy with only two frames. This model is made almost entirely of diecast metal with only the smallest amount of plastic used in its construction. The solid metal wing features oil cooler vents, machine gun ports on the leading edge and a pair of removable external fuel tanks mounted below. The all-metal horizontal stabilizers and rudder feature simulated fabric stretched control surfaces. The landing gear is robust in design and installs quickly and easily for ground display.

© Copyright 2003-2022 The Flying Mule, Inc.

Corgi Aviation Archive Collector Series

The Corgi "Aviation Archive" range presents highly-detailed, ready-made diecast models of military and civilian aircraft. The vast Aviation Archive range has become the standard by which all other diecast airplane ranges are judged. Each Corgi model is based on a specific aircraft from an important historical or modern era of flight, and has been authentically detailed from original documents and archival library material. Famous airplanes and aviators from both military and commercial airline aviation are all honored.

Corgi "Aviation Archive" diecast airplanes feature:

Diecast metal construction with some plastic components.

Realistic panel lines, antennas, access panels and surface details.

Pad printed markings and placards that won't fade or peel like decals.

Interchangeable extended/retracted landing gear with rotating wheels.

Poseable presention stand to display the aircraft "in flight".

Many limited editions with numbered certificate of authenticity.

Detailed, hand-painted pilot and crew member figures.

Authentic detachable ordnance loads complete with placards.

Selected interchangeable features such as speed-brakes, opened canopies and access panels.

Selected moving parts such as gun turrets, control surfaces and swing-wings.

© Copyright 2003-2024 The Flying Mule, Inc.