Kamal Haasan’s 1992 movie Thevar Magan directed by Bharathan is one of the evergreen films of the 69-year-old actor’s illustrious career. Thevar Magan boasted a stellar star cast starring Shivaji Ganesan, Nassar, Revathi and others in important roles and turned out to be a commercial success.

However, do you know that Revathi was not the first choice for playing Panchavarnam’s character? Yes, you heard it right. As per reports, Thevar Magan’s makers had first roped in actress Meena to enact Panchavarnam’s role. The makers even shot with her for 4 days but then felt that she was not suitable for playing a village girl’s character. They felt that she looked too young for this role and then replaced her with Revathi.

As per reports, it was Kamal Haasan, Thevar Magan’s writer, who took this decision. However, the same was not conveyed to the public, and it was said that Meena left the movie due to date clashes. Asha Kelunni, better known by her stage name Revathi, lived up to audience expectations and nailed Panchavarnam’s role.

Revathi perfectly showed Panchavarnam’s expressions in the track Inji Idupazhaga composed by Ilayaraja. Vaali penned the lyrics while S Janaki, Kamal Haasan and Minmini rendered the vocals for this track.

Social media users loved the music and Kamal Haasan’s vocals in this song. One of the users commented, “Revathi nailed her role as Panchavarnam! that innocence and cuteness". Another wrote," Two legends on the screen. Kamal and Revathi, what a performance."

Revathi had reminisced about her role in an earlier interview with Rediff.com. According to her, the director Bharathan had moulded the character so beautifully, that she would just listen to him and put in her bit.

Besides the songs, Thevar Magan received accolades for Shivaji Ganesan’s dialogues hitting out at casteism. He played the role of village head and Sakthivel Thevar (Kamal Haasan)’s father. In addition to this reason, Nassar’s terrific role as villain and Ulaga Nayagan’s (as Kamal Haasan is known) capability to play dual roles with perfection.