Develop the skills you need for a successful aeronautics career with state-of-the-art simulation devices right here at Liberty University’s School of Aeronautics (LUSOA).

Designed and built by prestigious companies like ALSIM, Frasca, and TakeFlight Interactive, our simulation technology also includes custom devices built by Liberty University’s simulator support team.

Your world-class simulator training opportunities include:

Certified flight simulators

Virtual reality experiences

AI flight instruction

Aircraft systems trainers

Learn more about the simulation devices you could be training on as an aeronautics student at Liberty University.

See Simulation Training SOQ/LOAs

Our Simulator Support Facility

Get the type of innovation and quality you’re looking for at our industry-leading Simulator Support Facility. This area is designed specifically for the creation, implementation, and maintenance of simulators and technology utilized in the aerospace industry.

Our shop area consists of moveable workstations equipped with plumbed air, power, and network access. These allow for simulator repair and production within the facility. The shop space is a hub and spoke design with the individual simulator bays surrounding the shop and is accessible for maintenance purposes through roll-up doors.

The Simulator Team has access to full surface mount device (SMD) rework stations, the liquid cooling computer builds, a full fabrication shop, 3D printers, and more.

Contact the Simulator Support Facility: lusoasimulators@liberty.edu

ALSIM ALX

The ALSIM ALX can transform into ten different flight models including multi-turbine aircraft to meet your needs. The LUSOA utilizes this turbine simulator to give you the experience of flying more complex aircraft at faster speeds. Crew Resource Management (CRM), Hydraulics, Bleed systems, and FMS training are just a small sample of the capability of this world-class, multi-use simulator.

Frasca FTD-5

The Frasca FTD-5 fleet consists of Cessna 172, and Piper Seminole FTD-5 certified devices. These simulators are equipped with a 220-degree wrap-around visual and active control loading to give you an immersive experience. The actual Garmin G1000 avionics is the same equipment that is installed in the aircraft. This gives you a maximum transference of training from the simulator to the aircraft, reducing the time and cost of training.

Frasca RTD

The Frasca RTD fleet provides a unique capability of reconfiguring aircraft types to meet your training requirements. The SOA currently operates the devices as G1000, round dial, and multi-engine trainers. These devices were key in the remote flight instruction innovation that the Simulator Team created at the height of the COVID-19 lockdowns. Because of this innovation, LU students were able to continue FAA flight instruction when in-person instruction was prohibited.

TakeFlight Lab

The TakeFlight Lab integrates TakeFlight Interactive virtual flight instructor to provide training for all of the private pilot students at LU. The lab gives you the opportunity to learn, fly, and be graded against the FAA ACS standards before you step into the cockpit. This program is leading the way to improve transference and correlation while lowering the cost and time needed to achieve your aviation dreams.