Iranians enjoy making a joke out of pretty much anything and sharing it on their smartphones, a habit some indulge in on a daily basis. And in a country with a restrictive political atmosphere, satire has gained a function beyond simple entertainment.

Now, standup comedy is being brought into Iranian homes through a new show on state TV. Khandavaneh, which translates as ‘laughmelon’ (a combination of laugh and watermelon), broadcast on the Nasim comedy channel on a number of evenings each week, has proved a huge hit. The programme is hosted by Rambod Javan, a well-known satirist popular with young people, who invites other Iranian comedians to perform standup and compete with each other on the show.

The scale of its success is rare for the state-run TV channel, which is struggling with dwindling viewer figures due to an increase in satellite channels transmitted from abroad that are free from state censorship. London-based Manoto, an entertainment channel which broadcast the Iranian versions of The X Factor and Come Dine With Me, is a major competitor. Although satellite dishes are illegal, people have them installed on their rooftops and frequent raids by the morality police have not stopped the dishes from mushrooming across the country.

Although a number of Iranians have previously dabbled in standup, the genre is only being introduced properly with Khandavaneh. Many of those performing are established satirists but the programme is giving them a platform for standup.

Javan performs in front of a selected audience of young men and women. The women wear colourful manteau and headscarves, which appears striking compared with the black chador and headscarves usually worn by women on national TV. Comedians often sing and the mixed audience clap, a scene unthinkable on Iranian state TV a decade ago.

Aliasghar Ramezanpoor, a former deputy cultural minister, said the show’s producers have been successful in reaching out to young people because Khandavaneh touches on issues that are close to crossing a line, but subtle enough not to do so.

“The group behind the show have been working with the state TV for a long time so they are fully ware of its red lines, but at the same time they know how to use references that are appealing to the youth without candidly crossing any of those lines,” he told the Guardian.

“With the emergence of social media, especially online messsaging apps like Viber and Telegram, that are popular in Iran, the joke has been elevated to become a medium of its own in Iran,” he said. “And when it’s a joke people are not too worried about it, so it gives them a platform to express themselves.”

Javan forms a double act with a Muppet-like puppet called Jenabkhan, who has a southern Iranian accent. During the programme, the puppet sings folklore songs from different parts of Iran in what many see as an attempt by the programmers to reach out across the country. Javan also introduces new books, plays and gallery exhibitions as part of his show.

Sadegh Zibakalam, a Tehran university professor and a prominent political commentator, said Khandavaneh has been successful because it is not seen as a typical state programme and is not parroting the state view on social matters. “It has a voice of its own,” he said. “It is not conforming to the views of the state. It’s somehow a genuinely normal programme.”

The programme indirectly gave an opportunity to viewers to express their political views too, Zibakalam said. During a recent competion between two standup comedians, which was open to the public to vote by sending a text, the comedian who was perceived as close to the former hardline president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, was voted down while the other comedian perceived to be close to reformists won.

Iranians have become obsessed with social media, Zibakalam said, because they face restrictions in expressing themselves in normal ways. He said it was strange for a university professor like himself to have 400,000 likes on Facebook. “This is an anomaly – you won’t normally see a European university professor with such a following on social media.”