MICHAEL Jackson was one of the greatest singers of all time.

Known as the King of Pop, Jackson tragically died on June 25, 2009, aged 50.

Where is Michael Jackson buried?

Michael Jackson is buried in the Holly Terrace Grand Mausoleum at Glendale Forest Lawn Memorial Park.

The cemetery is located five miles from Hollywood in Glendale, North Los Angeles.

Following his death, the grieving Jackson family feared his body would be dug up or damaged, so they went to great lengths to preserve him.

His body was buried in a gold coffin set in concrete which cost £18,000.

The singer was dressed in full stage costume, including a wig and full face of make up, and even his iconic white gloves.

The cemetery is closed to the public and is surrounded by high walls, and visitors have to show their ID.

Other celebrities are buried in the same place, including Bette Davis, Lucille Ball, Humphrey Bogart and Clark Gable.

When was Michael Jackson's funeral and who attended?

The King of Pop had two services.

The first one was a family service which was private and contained Michael’s personal life.

This was followed by a second service which was a televised blowout event at the Staples Center on September 3, 2009.

His brothers Randy, Tito, Jermaine, Jackie and Marlon were his pallbearers and carried the gold-plated casket into the service at Glendale’s Forest Lawn Memorial Park.

There were 17,500 guests who attended the funeral, as well as an estimated 2.5 – 3 billion viewers.

Jackson's memorial was star-studded, with the guestlist including Lionel Richie, Stevie Wonder, Queen Latifah, Mariah Carey, Smokey Robinson, Kobe Bryant, Magic Johnson and Usher, among others.

Performances by Stevie Wonder, Mariah Carey, Jennifer Hudson, John Mayer, Usher, Jermaine Jackson, and singers from Jackson's This is It Tour.

How did Michael Jackson die?

Michael Jackson died of an overdose of the drugs propofol and benzodiazepine following a cardiac arrest on June 25, 2009.

Jackson's personal physician Conrad Murray wrote in his testimony that he found the singer in bed and not breaking.

The pop legend had been rehearsing past midnight on the night of June 24, 2022 ahead of a series of comeback concerts at the London O2 Arena, and had not left his bedroom in the morning.

After trying to revive Jackson for five to ten minutes without effect, Murray called paramedics who performed CPR on the singer for 42 minutes at his house in the Holmby Hills, Los Angeles, before he was taken to the hospital.

The ambulance arrived at Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Centre at 1:14pm, and Jackson was pronounced dead after over an hour of attempted resuscitation at 2.26pm.