A year after Michael Jackson's death caused a worldwide outpouring of shock, tears and tributes, the anniversary of his passing was being marked yesterday on a quieter scale, as fans remembered their fallen King of Pop with vigils, prayer and, of course, music.

Some radio stations woke up listeners to Jackson's music; on U.S. television, all the major networks devoted a portion of their morning news programs to Jackson and more coverage was expected during prime-time hours and through the weekend. Events were planned across the globe, from Tokyo to New York.

At Jackson's final resting place at Forest Lawn in Glendale, Calif., hundreds of fans, some weeping, filed past barricades yesterday to get close to the mausoleum where Jackson is interred. Some carried bouquets; others were armed with cameras to document the moment.

Jackson died on June 25, 2009, at age 50 as he was preparing for a series of comeback concerts in London. Dr. Conrad Murray is charged with involuntary manslaughter in Jackson's death for administering the powerful anesthetic Propofol to Jackson to help the pop star sleep.

A lawyer acting for Michael Jackson's father Joe Jackson filed a wrongful death lawsuit against Murray yesterday.

The claim, seen by TMZ.com, asks for unspecified damages in connection with Michael Jackson's death and lists his mother Katherine Jackson and Michael's three children as nominal plaintiffs.

In the complaint, Joe Jackson alleges Murray withheld vital information - that he had administered Propofol - from the doctors and EMTs who were trying to save Jackson's life, TMZ said.

The complaint alleges Joe Jackson suffered more than $75,000 in damages, the minimum amount required to get jurisdiction in federal court. The case was filed in federal court because Murray's residence is outside California.

Yesterday, pictures of Jackson hung on a wall outside New York's Apollo Theater in Harlem, where Jackson and his brothers won amateur night in the late 1960s. A sidewalk plaque memorialized the singer alongside such other legends as James Brown and Smokey Robinson.

Since the Apollo helped launch the Jackson 5, it has had a strong connection to the late pop star. After Jackson's death, it became the de facto gathering place for New York fans.

"We are really honored to have played a part in launching Michael's musical career and to serve as a gathering place for people to come and celebrate his lifetime of achievement," said Jonelle Procope, Apollo president and CEO.

Procope placed Jackson's black hat and sequin glove, both from the theater's collection, beside his plaque.

Elsewhere in Harlem, the AMC Magic Johnson Harlem 9 movie theater screened "This Is It," the documentary about Jackson's preparation for his London concerts, throughout the day. And the Rev. Al Sharpton was to lead a moment of silence in the afternoon.

In Gary, Ind., Jackson's hometown, there was to be a tribute at the family home; city officials said they expected Jackson's mother, Katherine Jackson, and his niece, Genevieve Jackson, to show up, along with thousands of others. Katherine Jackson also lent her support to a "Forever Michael" fan event planned today in Beverly Hills, Calif.

His brother Randy Jackson was hoping to make the official family commemoration at Forest Lawn yesterday.

Associated Press writers Jake Coyle in New York and Anthony McCartney in Los Angeles, and Associated Press writer Eric Talmadge in Tokyo contributed to this report.