Playback Records country artist Claire Petrie’s latest single, (C’est la Vie) You Never Can Tell, is a hot track on country radio. Originally sung by the pioneer of rock and roll Chuck Berry and by Grammy-award winning country icon Emmylou Harris, Petrie put her own original contemporary country flair to this song and is her debut release to country radio. She is receiving high praise from radio and industry executives across the country, commenting on her vocal delivery and fresh sound.

“I really loved listening to her album, especially the song The One. That song is sweet and remains faithful to the Celtic roots, but takes on the character and flavor of Nashville. It’s rocking. What a talented artist!” – Ralph Murphy, Vice President of International Membership at ASCAP Nashville

“There are a lot of releases that come across the desk and this song stuck out! Our listeners love the song!” – Phil Nee, Program Director, WRCO-FM in Richland Center, WI

“FINALLY, this timeless classic song has been sung right. Claire Petrie hit it way outta the park. With a blend of the perfect voice and not overpowering blend of Cajun and country music, she delivers (C’est la Vie) to a young country audience with a real country ‘zing.’ I’ve heard Chuck Berry sing it, I’ve heard Emmylou Harris sing it, and even Hugh Lawry sing it. And they’ve all done a great job, BUT, not right, and Claire got it right!” – Jerry Proctor, Program Director, WTYS AM-FM in Marianna, FL

“Claire brings an enthusiastic, fresh, upbeat performance of a well-known song that makes it fun to listen to again.” – Cathy Horton, Operations Manager, WEBQ AM-FM in Harrisburg, IL

(C’est la Vie) You Never Can Tell is off her newest album, The One, which was produced by country music industry veteran, Jack Gale. It includes 11 tracks that profiles her impressive vocal range and pushes the boundaries of both ends of her musical scale. Her ability to belt out an up-tempo tune with both power and precision is evident on the debut single.