Decoy for a Dognapper Network CBS Premiere date October 11, 1969 Music composed by Ted Nichols Director(s) William Hanna Voice director(s) Joseph Barbera Animation director(s) Charles A. Nichols Episode navigation ← Previous Next → Title card

"Decoy for a Dognapper" is the fifth episode of Scooby-Doo, Where Are You! season one. It aired on October 11, 1969 on CBS. It was written by series creators, Joe Ruby and Ken Spears, and produced and directed by William Hanna and Joseph Barbera, the founders of Hanna-Barbera Productions.

Scooby has disguised himself as a prized show dog to trap a dognapper.

Detailed summary

Memorable quotes

Shaggy: Lucky for you, I'm a dog lover!

Buck: You blasted kids! Why didn't you mind your own business?!

Fred: Actually, catching dognappers is our business, Mr. Masters. After all, Scooby-Doo is a dog, and we love him very much.

Scooby: Aww…

Characters

Organizations

Mystery Incorporated

Locations

Earth

United States

California

Beach

Beach Boulevard

Buck's office

Gas station

Indian Gap

Indian village

Sheriff's office

Objects

Scooby Snacks

Vehicles

The Mystery Machine

Midnight Express

Production

Development

This is the last episode that Joe Ruby and Ken Spears could identify as having written themselves, with the following episodes either being written or edited by them.[1]

Filming

Music

The theme song, "Scooby-Doo, Where Are You?" was performed by Larry Marks, with lyrics and music written by David Mook, while Ben Raleigh wrote the music, respectively. The rest of the music was composed by Ted Nichols, who was credited as the musical director.

Release

Dates are in order of release:

United States: October 11, 1969 at 10:30 am on CBS

United Kingdom and Ireland:

Behind the scenes

This page or certain elements were originally from , whose content is licensed under the compatible license. View this template

Geronimo was a prominent leader of the Bedonkohe Apache.

Custer's Last Stand is a reference to the 1936 film serial of the same name. The film is based on Battle of the Little Bighorn in 1876, which was nicknamed Custer's Last Stand, due to the last war fought by George Armstrong Custer.

This is one of the few instances, perhaps even the only time, thay Scooby is seen on a leash.

This is the first instance where the gang act as real detectives and offer their services to someone (even if it does turn out to be the culprit).

This is also the first time that they decide to investigate a case that initially has nothing to do with the supernatural. Eventually, the dognapping case does become supernatural with the appearance of the Indian witch doctor and the ghost of Geronimo.

The witch doctor warns the gang that they will "meet the fate of Spanish conquistadores" if they do not leave. Spanish conquistador Francisco Vázquez de Coronado explored the southwestern United States between 1540 and 1542; he was among the first Europeans to view the Grand Canyon.

The "Batusi" is an infamous dance by Batman from the 60s TV series, starring Adam West.

When the gang discovers the Indigenous Village, Shaggy says he likes his hair where it is. This implies the racist stereotype that Native Americans would scalp people. This, of course, was based on the time period of the 1960s.

During the railroad trestle scene, in close-ups of the Midnight Express train, parts of the Santa Fe railway logo can be seen on the locomotive.

This is the first time the culprit expresses anger towards the gang for their interference. In this case, Buck Masters chastises them the very moment he was caught in the act instead of lamenting on his plans.

Errors

This page or certain elements were originally from , whose content is licensed under the compatible license. View this template

The picture of Bob's dog is originally shown in full, but the second time only its head and neck are shown. The word "Champion" also moves from inside the teal background to the white frame. The "p" in "Champion" in the second shot also looks more like a "d". The eye is different in each one too, in the first it's black and in the second the sclera is brown instead of white (which was done for animals, but not humans) which makes it look completely shut as its eyelid is half shut. Its eye dot is also a little above its eyelid.

Fred calls it a "photo", although it could be seen as a framed picture.

When the scene shifts from Fred holding it, to the entire gang, he's now holding two sheets of empty paper.

The photo goes from Fred to Shaggy, but there's no noticeable exchange between them.

As Fred is putting the new collar on Scooby, there is a line on his neck.

The chair behind Mr. Masters is temporarily blue instead of brown.

Scooby temporarily loses his spots when the garbage almost lands on him.

On Beach Boulevard, while Shaggy is talking to Scooby about taking Miller's and his dog's place for their evening walk, the top of the dog lead is poking through the collar.

The new collar is supposed to have replaced Scooby's regular one, but when Mike opens the crate and the Indian Witch Doctor reacts to seeing Scooby, his dog tag is sticking out. A few seconds later, when the Indian Witch Doctor tells Mike to get rid of Scooby, his collar is also sticking out.

As Fred announces to Daphne and Velma that they've arrived on Beach Boulevard, his teeth turn flesh colored as his mouth half closes.

Also during that time, Velma is not wearing her headphones.

Velma said the signal representing Scooby was moving awfully fast when in fact it wasn't "moving" at all. The signal flashing fast could compensate for that.

Fred and Daphne are missing from the Mystery Machine, when he says, "Okay. That's it. Here we go."

When Scooby digs his nails into the floorboards, they are brown.

As Shaggy is telling Fred about his encounter with the Ghost of Geronimo, the additional equipment in the Mystery Machine is missing.

While Scooby has his head out of the crate, two of the holes have simply been covered in brown even if it doesn't match Scooby's movements.

When Scooby looks at Shaggy trying to pull the lever, his dog collar is miscolored like his regular one. (A bit of his body below his collar is also missing so it looks like his head is floating.) When he then reacts to helping Shaggy, the new dog collar is completely blue.

Scooby's head floats again when he tells Shaggy to go faster as the train is gaining on them.

When they watch the train go past them (after Fred pulled a switch), Scooby's new collar is blue again.

After the brief fade to black after the rescue, Scooby is now wearing his regular collar. It's fairly possible that they replaced it in that brief instance, although it seems highly unlikely as the first thing Daphne and Velma seem to do is to ask Scooby if he's okay.

Shortly after the bats, as the gang enters the old Indian village, Daphne and Fred are about to go into a room (right before they see the witch doctor and Daphne falls through a trapdoor). Look closely and one part, one of the lavender strips on Daphne's skirt is missing.

Fred's figure is gone after they chase after the dognapper.

Legacy

The episode and characters have been referenced several other times in the Scooby-Doo media franchise:

In 2014, snippets from this episode are included in the opening credits to the 21st direct-to-video film, Scooby-Doo! WrestleMania Mystery.

In 2019, the witch doctor mask was for sale at the gang's yard sale in the 29th direct-to-video film, Scooby-Doo! and the Curse of the 13th Ghost.

In 2019, the Savannah Hotel has a painting of the Witch Doctor in the Scooby-Doo and Guess Who? episode "The Cursed Cabinet of Professor Madds Markson!"

In 2019, Mike is copied onto a chauffeur in the Scooby-Doo and Guess Who? episode "The Fastest Fast Food Fiend!"

Critical reception

In other languages

Language Name Meaning French L'Appât The lure Greek Δόλωμα για Απαγωγή Bait for Kidnapping Hungarian Kukackutya Dog decoy Italian Cani rapiti Kidnapped dogs

Home availability

In the United States:

March 14, 2000: Warner Home Video releases Scooby-Doo's Original Mysteries on DVD.

June 4, 2002: Warner Home Video releases Scooby-Doo's Original Mysteries on VHS.

March 16, 2004: Warner Home Video releases Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!: The Complete First and Second Seasons on DVD.

May 5, 2009: Warner Home Video releases Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!: Volume 2: Bump in the Night on DVD.

November 9, 2010: Warner Home Video releases Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!: The Complete Series (limited edition) on DVD.

November 13, 2012: Warner Home Video releases Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!: The Complete Series on DVD.

May 23, 2017: Warner Home Video releases Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!: The Complete First and Second Seasons (Hanna-Barbera Diamond Collection edition) on DVD.

December 12, 2017: Warner Home Video releases Hanna-Barbera Diamond Collection 4-Pack on DVD.

February 13, 2018: Warner Home Video releases Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!: The Complete Series (repackaging) on DVD.

June 4, 2019: Warner Home Video releases Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!: The Complete First and Second Seasons on DVD.

September 9, 2020: Warner Home Video releases Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!: The Complete Series (limited edition) on Blu-ray Disc.

September 14, 2021: Warner Home Video releases Straight Outta Nowhere: Scooby-Doo! Meets Courage the Cowardly Dog on DVD.

March 1, 2022: Warner Home Video releases Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!: The Complete Series on Blu-ray Disc.

In the United Kingdom and Ireland:

February 5, 1996: First Independent Films releases Scooby-Doo: Bumper Edition on VHS.

March 27, 2000: Warner Home Video releases Scooby-Doo!: Volume 1 on VHS.

June 20, 2005: Warner Home Video releases Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!: The Complete First and Second Seasons on DVD.

November 21, 2011: Warner Home Video releases Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!: The Complete Series on DVD.

September 13, 2021: Warner Home Video releases Straight Outta Nowhere: Scooby-Doo! Meets Courage the Cowardly Dog on DVD.

In Australia:

September 15, 2021: Warner Home Video releases Straight Outta Nowhere: Scooby-Doo! Meets Courage the Cowardly Dog on DVD.