Juliette Hopes To Expand Brand Awareness With Peachy Keen Flavor

An ultra premium peach liqueur is now hitting American consumers this summer. Juliette is now finally available for sale directly to consumers.

Cannes: Meryl Streep Reflects On Women’s Representation In Hollywood: ‘It’s Very Hard For Them To Feel Us’

Legendary actress Meryl Streep gave a masterclass during the Cannes Film Festival, where she was awarded an honorary Palme d'Or.

The Met Opera’s ‘Romeo Et Juliette’ Star Nadine Sierra Talks Travel And Opera

For these reasons, I would love to sing the part of Mimi one day.

3 Great Business Podcasts For Business Leaders And Builders

Business podcasts that focus on the business, not just a founder. Covers rivalries, operating models, M&A, challenges and growths of major household name brands.

Why You Need To Be In A Professional Throuple To Be Successful

It's best to not be alone or have one supporter; you need two different types of supporters to guide you to success.

3 Resources Every Aspiring Business Leader Should Read Regularly

You can learn to think, lead, and decide like an executive well before you become one. Keep yourself updated and educated by reading these three resources regularly.

3 New Ways To Find Mentors At Any Stage Of Your Career

Having great mentors is critical for your career path, but finding them can be difficult. Look beyond the obvious places to find mentors that provide you fresh perspectives.

The Dragon Code: Career Success Through Dragon Baby Insights

Dragon babies are believed to be auspicious, and studies show they are more successful. Turn belief into reality by applying three lessons from how they are raised.

Better Ways To Ask Your Team For Feedback As A Manager

To get the feedback you need to be a better manager, you have to ask the right questions that invites actionable and timely insights from your team.

Leadership Lessons From Stanley Cup Success To Not Miss Out On

What leadership traits are key to identifying market opportunities and crafting winning strategies? Leaders don't need to come up with every idea but need to enable them.

How To Future-Proof Your Career: A Preventative Strategy

Preventative approach is critical to good health. Why do we not apply the same approach to our careers? Instead of reacting when challenges happen, work to prevent them.

How To Prepare Before Union Strikes Happen At Your Company

The major wins of 2023 are tailwinds; more unions are expected to negotiate better deals for their members in 2024. Here's how to be prepared.

Executive Presence Traits You Can Implement Today

Executive presence requires many traits to build out over time. These are few actions you can implement immediately to noticeably improve your executive presence.

How To Change Your Career: 3 Concepts To Get You There

Career change can be daunting. These three concepts will help you navigate the change and focus on the value you can bring to the new industry and yourself.

Three Outdated Network Advice And What To Do Instead

Professionals should be selective and thoughtful about how to best use their time when they network, especially in person.