Jamie Oliver and wife Jools (whose actual name is Juliette Norton) have been married for an entire 22 years.

Delving inside their love story, it's one filled with fun, plenty of goofy pictures, a few tribulations, and five rambunctious kids to top it off.

The two met when they were just teens, in probably the most awkward of ways – a car crash instigated by Oliver himself.

Below we take you through their love story and why the British chef will always call his wife his true love and "best mate".

READ MORE: Heartbreak as TV presenter announces son's death

READ MORE: Private investigator reveals one thing she's often asked

How they met

Jamie and Jools both attended Westminster College as teens, and after catching sight of Jools in a class one day, Oliver quickly developed a desperate crush.

It wasn't until they turned 17 that the chef got the chance to actually go on a date with her though.

He and Jools joined up on a double date to the movies, for what was meant to be a simple night out. Except, on the drive over, Oliver crashed his Ford Fiesta, which was the car carrying everyone to the movies.

"We were driving there that night and then I went smashing into the back of another car," he said on Alan Carr's Chatty Man talk show. "She felt sorry for me. She thought, 'The way he drives, he needs support in life.'"

Despite the awkward beginning, Jools fell quickly for Oliver, and his bad driving.

At 17, Jools had grown an impressive career as a model and ended up moving to Japan for three months for work. But Oliver wasn't letting her slip from his fingers. Still 17, he apparently "bombarded" her with letters and faxes, which she still has to this day.

When Jools returned, they became inseparable, and rented a tiny flat in Hammersmith, UK, while Jamie worked in the kitchen at the famous River Cafe on the Thames Wharf.

READ MORE: The movie 'transformation' the world is sick of

The Naked Chef years

Right through the years of Oliver's famous TV cooking series, The Naked Chef, Jools was there.

While filming the series, TV producers rented he and Jools a beautiful big apartment in East London where he was able to cook and film.

But little did they realise the show would prove a major, global hit.

The Naked Chef debuted in 1999 and with his Essex slang and affable grin, Jamie became a much-loved face on the cooking network.

As things were looking up, he and Jools decided to tie the knot, weeding at All Saints Church in Rickling, Essex in 2000.

On the now-iconic day, Oliver wore a pale blue Paul Smith suit with snakeskin brogues while Jools wore a gorgeous strapless ivory Neil Cunningham gown.

Their first dance was reportedly to Dusty Springfield's 'I Only Want To Be With You'. Oliver's dancing was so bad, his wife ended up throwing him to the side and going solo.

"I was in my element," she recalled later.

How they work

Unlike Oliver, who worked over the next few years to eventually open his own restaurant, and publish a dozen cookbooks, Jools had different ambitions.

She has openly said that she is quite content with striving to have a life that includes "babies, baking, and roses around the door".

At the beginning, Jools' "lack of ambition" was difficult for Oliver to understand.

"Jools is interesting 'cause she's not like me at all. She hasn't got a mission, she just wants to be married to someone she loves and have a family and that's it, end of story," he once said.

"It's odd for me, because I'll go, what do you want to do? Then do that, I'll help you!

"It baffled me for ages, I almost felt she had a part of her life missing, then I thought, it's sweet and quite refreshing, especially in London."

Cruel media coverage & cheating rumours

Like any high-profile couple, with great public love, comes great public scrutiny.

Unfortunately, Oliver and Jools were not saved from this.

Over the many years of their marriage, tabloids loved to speculate on "who Jamie's shagging now", as Oliver says, which had a great impact on their marriage.

Jools even started to "snoop" on her husband, out of desperation.

Speaking to The Telegraph in 2011, she admitted: "I'll check his email. I'll check his Twitter. I'll check his phone. Everything seems fine.

"He says I'm a jealous girl, but I think I'm fairly laidback, considering."

In an interview with Closer magazine Oliver said the rumours became so pronounced, Jools even accused him of cheating.

"My missus accused me of having an affair once, because I kept disappearing and coming back with green on my knees," he said. "It was courgette season and I was in the vegetable patch!"

Jools rarely appeared on her husband's next TV show, his Jamie's School Dinners program, except for one episode.

In this particular episode, Jools gave a searing cameo, when cameras captured the chef telling her that he had just received a call from a journalist about a new rumour of infidelity.

"Have you heard the latest? I've shagged some waitress in Amsterdam," he said in front of the cameras.

In the moment, Jools lost it completely.

"It is a dirty, disgusting intrusion into my perfect family," she said in an outburst.

Speaking to The Guardian, she recalled the moment:

"I just burst into tears. There are some things you just can't take. There's so much written about us. I don't think anything I've ever read about myself is true unless I've directly said it."

The pair managed to work through the rough patch, thanks to their strong bond.

Forming a family

On March 18, 2002, the couple's first child was born: Poppy Honey Rosie.

Poppy was followed by sister Daisy Boo Pamela, on April 10 2003, and then Petal Blossom Rainbow, born April 3 2009.

On September 15, 2010, the couple's first son was born and called Buddy Bear Maurice. Buddy was followed by another son, River Rocket, born August 8, 2016.

The family are keen to welcome another child into their clan, though last year, Jools opened up about her struggles with fertility.

Speaking on the podcast, Life & Soul with Zoe Clark-Coates, the Oliver matriarch revealed she'd experienced five miscarriages over the last few years.

She even revealed that she'd been considering IVF treatment to conceive her sixth child.

"So I have thought about IVF because having researched it and spoken to some amazing people, it seems like the right option for my age," she said.

"But you know that's it's hard because also I've got a partner you know, I've got to think about him I'm not so sure he's that keen to do it that way. So I don't want to push anything, because I'm very lucky," she said.

Juggling a career and five kids

Jamie sparked controversy in 2018 when he claimed to be a "weekend parent".

By that he basically meant that he was too busy to spend time with his kids during the week, and tends to save up his weekends for proper quality time.

He told Good Housekeeping magazine at the time, "I will get to the key school events but I'm flat out Monday to Friday and normally see the children a couple of nights during the week."

He added, "I'm happy with that, I think they are fine with it."

Growing together

Despite their challenges, which include the demise of Oliver's famed restaurants in the UK and Australia in 2019, the pair have stuck together.

Speaking on The Joe Wicks Podcast this year, the cook explained: "Marriage is really hard, you are going to spend a proportion of it not liking your other half and vice versa.

"So I think not holding grudges, being able to move on is really important. Just keeping at it. I love Jools to bits and I'm really proud of the woman she has become, [and is] growing into.

"I think a lot of women struggle with ageing, but I've really enjoyed seeing Jools change throughout the years, I really have. She's definitely my best mate."

The pair are so in love, that they're reportedly planning a second wedding.

Given 2020 was their 20th wedding anniversary, but also the year that COVID-19 hit the world, their plans have been slightly pushed back.

But back in 2019, Oliver told Event Magazine, "Jools wants to get married again. We'll do it completely differently.

"It sounds a bit cheesy, but 20 is an amazing milestone. It's nice to have an excuse to get people together."

To Red Magazine he added: "Our wedding was formal, but we're so not like that. It'll be a big party. Why the hell not? I think we've done well!"