DOMINIK Mysterio doesn't just come from a sports family, but instead, a wrestling dynasty that spans across multiple generations.

Dominik Mysterio's wrestling career isn't the only thing taking off in his life, as the WWE superstar personal life is also flourishing, having married his longtime girlfriend, Marie Juliette, in March 2024.

Who is WWE superstar Dominik Mysterio?

Dominik Óscar Gutiérrez, better known under the ring name "Dirty" Dominik Mysterio, is a professional wrestler.

He was born on April 5, 1997, in San Diego, California, and is part of a wrestling dynasty.

Both his father, Rey Mysterio, and great-uncle, Rey Misterio Sr., were wrestlers.

His godfather, Konnan, is also a Cuban-born, American wrestling personality, former professional wrestler, and current wrestling manager.

Dominik's first cousin, Miguel Aarón López Hernández, better known as El Hijo de Rey Misterio, is a masked professional wrestler, otherwise known as a "luchador enmascarado."

Dominik is currently signed to WWE, where he performs on the Raw brand.

He is a member of The Judgement Day stable, a villainous team of wrestlers that include Damian Priest, Rhea Ripley, Finn Bálor, and JD McDonagh.

The faction, which has a supernatural and dark gothic team, was founded by its previous leader, Edge, on April 3, 2022.

Dominik was previously a part of the WWE's developmental brand, NXT, and served as a two-time NXT North American Champion.

Dominik has achieved several awards and accolades during his wrestling career, including:

Ranked in 5th place on ESPN's list of The 30 Best Pro Wrestlers Under 30 in 2023

New York Post's Faction of the Year in 2023, for his work with Judgement Day

Pro Wrestling Illustrated's Rookie of the Year in 2020

Pro Wrestling Illustrated's Faction of the Year in 2023, for his work with Judgement Day

Pro Wrestling Illustrated's Most Hated Wrestler of the Year in 2023

In November 2023, Dominik reportedly signed a new, five-year contract with WWE, which would ensure his stay through 2028.

While details of the contract, including its compensation, are unknown, the extension will likely add to Dominik's already impressive net worth.

According to Salary Net Worth, Dominik has a net worth of around $2 million.

Who is Dominik Mysterio's wife, Marie Juliette?

Despite being in an on-screen relationship with professional wrestler Rhea Ripley, Dominik Mysterio is a taken man.

He is married to Marie Juliette, who was born on July 3, 1997.

According to WrestlingWorldCC, the duo first met in high school when they were both just 14 years.

In 2011, Dominik walked into a Spanish class he wasn't even supposed to be in, and accidentally stumbled into Marie.

They began dating just a few weeks later, and have been in a relationship ever since.

They both attended Horizon Christian Academy in San Diego, California, graduating in 2016.

It's unclear how active Marie is on social media, as her accounts are private as of March 2024.

Her Instagram boasts 105,000 followers, and she doesn't appear to have X or TikTok accounts.

Marie Juliette has kept her private life out of the spotlight despite her famous beau.

On November 8, 2022, Dominik posted a photo to his Instagram, celebrating the couple's 11 year anniversary.

"11 years today with the love of my life. To many more," he captioned the post, alongside a purple heart emoji.

In an August 2023 interview with Bakers Bantering, Dominik also revealed that the couple are committed to each other despite their eccentricities, like Dominik's mullet.

"So, Marie...she's gonna hate me for saying this, but she's obsessed with me to where she's like, 'I don't care what you do,'" the WWE star revealed.

"She's like, 'I just love you,' and I'm like, 'Oh, I appreciate that,'" he added.

"I'm just like, 'But be honest with me.' I was like, 'Because we're getting married pretty soon and like I'm gonna have this mullet.'"

"And she's like, 'I don't care.' She's like, 'Have the mullet.' And I was like, 'All right, sick.'"

"That's how I know she's a trooper," he added.

When did Dominik Mysterio and Marie Juliette get married?

Dominik Mysterio and Marie Juliette first announced their engagement in January 2023.

Dominik posted a photo of him holding hands with his then-fiancé, showing off her diamond ring with a sandy beach and ocean waves in the background.

Just over a year later, the couple officially got married on Thursday, March 7, 2024.

A verified Dominik Mysterio fan account posted a video of the happy couple dancing to Lewis Capaldi's song, Pointless, during their wedding reception.

"STUNNING," they tweeted.

"Congratulations to the newly weds Mr & Mrs Gutierrez," they added.

The marriage was complete with WWE superstars in attendance, including Liv Morgan, Rhea Ripley, Bo Dallas, and Rey Mysterio.

Damian Priest and Austin Theory also served as Dominik's groomsmen.

Dominik was also jokingly booed at his own wedding, a nod to his villainous arc in the WWE world.

A few days after the couple tied the knot, Dominik posted a series of photos to his Instagram celebrating the big day.