Two weeks ago, I wrote about a love letter that Victor Hugo wrote to his mistress, Juliette Drouet, shortly after fleeing France to live in exile. In that post, I remarked that over the course of their impressive 50-year relationship, Juliette penned roughly 20,000 letters to the storied author. It’s a mind-boggling number. Perhaps even more surprising is that the letters still exist. The University of Rouen, in partnership with the Sorbonne, is in the midst of a Herculean effort to transcribe them and put the text online. So far, they’ve posted close to 12,000 of Juliette’s missives. I say “transcribe” because photocopies of the original letters are quite difficult to read. Below, is an example.

But I digress. In recent weeks, I’ve read Juliette Drouet’s Love-Letters to Victor Hugo, by Luis Guimbaud, written in 1915. It’s a reasonable biography of Juliette’s life, which includes a few hundred of her letters spanning the years 1833, when she first met Hugo, until her death in 1883. There are probably better biographies but this one is available for free through the Gutenberg project. Understanding this woman has been a perplexing and sometimes frustrating task. At times, she seems resourceful and strong-willed. At others, she is prattling and insecure. Across the decades, her relationship with Hugo, oscillated like a high-frequency sine-wave between blissful and abusive.

What follows is some of what I’ve concluded about a complicated woman who lived and loved more than 150 years ago.

A Tumultuous Relationship

I don’t know how many of Juliette’s letters I’ve read at this point but the number is in the hundreds. Despite considerable effort, it was a challenge to find samples of her writing that portray the woman in a flattering light. A handful of themes repeat themselves ad nauseam and I categorize them as follows.

Elated by a recent visit by Hugo, Juliette exudes joy and gratitude to have been graced by his presence.

Juliette expresses her admiration of Hugo and/or his latest work, heralding his genius.

Suspicious of Hugo’s absence or rumors of an affair, Juliette decries Hugo’s infidelity and the pain he continually inflicts upon her.

Juliette belittles her self worth while honoring Hugo’s brilliance. She can only repay him with her unyielding devotion.

After a heated quarrel, Juliette threatens to put an end to the relationship since both parties have hurled unthinkable insults at each other and will be better off without the other.

Juliette begs Hugo to allow her to stop writing daily letters to him as the exercise has become repetitive and hollow.

Note that last bullet point. That’s right. The reason why there are 20,000 letters from Juliette to Hugo is that he insisted that she write to him every day! (She often wrote multiple letters in one day). Before I discovered this, I wondered why Hugo, a man of the people, known for extraordinary eloquence, would stick with a woman who, at least in my eyes, hounded him with myriad insipid reports. Extremely rare are the times when Juliette speaks of a current event or any incident outside of their couplehood.

Unfortunately, my perspective arises from a one-sided study. In addition, I’ve only seen a small fraction of what Juliette wrote. Hugo’s letters may also be online. However, I’ve not taken the time to search out his replies of apology or reciprocated adoration. Gradually, however, I’ve come to believe that Hugo, despite his stature, was burdened with his own insecurities. He stayed with Juliette, at least in part, because time and time again, her gushing praise lifted his spirits. Here is an example:

On Stage, in the Audience, and Excluded from the Theater

Juliette met Victor Hugo in 1833, at the age of 27. A striking beauty yet lackluster actress, she had landed a part in Hugo’s play Lucrece Borgia. The young playwright was smitten and soon set his sights on Juliette, sweeping her off her feet. Shortly thereafter, Hugo installed her in an apartment where the two could meet in secret. Worried that her beauty would attract more attentive suitors, he insisted that she not go out unless he was with her. Sequestered in her Parisian flat, Juliette fretted her days away. Her acting career, which had never been stellar, slowly disintegrated into stardust.

Not surprisingly, Juliette was extremely jealous of Hugo’s leading ladies, some of which he was known to have slept with. Hugo promised to write parts for her and indeed he occasionally did so. Unfortunately, he was neither director nor casting agent and Juliette was always replaced with another actress. Her letters demonstrate the depth of her heartbreak and disillusionment when an eagerly anticipated role fell to one of her rivals. In 1839, the couple celebrated a secret marriage, marked by Juliette’s final renunciation of her acting career and Hugo’s vow to never leave her.

Hugo constantly controlled her movements. At times, she was allowed to go to the theater to see his latest production. However, Juliette was expected to report upon the actors’ performances, the staging, and the audience reaction. She enthusiastically carried out her duties yet was too-often crushed and infuriated when suddenly Hugo would rescind a prior promise to send her a ticket and she’d once again be left to spend an evening alone.

Juliette consoled herself with the realization that she was often the first person to read or hear Hugo’s plays, poetry, and prose. She became his copyist, often performing minor edits and even researching some of his characters. Her letters express overwhelming gratitude for this privilege and abundant appreciation of his manuscripts. She especially loved it when Hugo would take the time to recite his writing to her. In her defense, I somewhat agree that she did hold a place of extreme privilege. Hugo wrote some of the 19th century’s greatest masterpieces—stories that thrive to this day. Below is an excerpt from a letter in which Juliette wrote to Hugo regarding her eagerness to learn the fate of certain characters from Les Miserables.

Juliette’s Life in Exile

In my previous post, introducing Juliette Drouet and Victor Hugo’s love affair, I described Juliette’s efforts to organize Hugo’s perilous escape to Brussels in 1851. After heavily criticizing Napoleon III and attempting to join a coup to overthrow the new emperor, Hugo found his life was in danger and he needed to flee into exile. Juliette arranged for false identity papers, a disguise, and a series of safe houses where Hugo could hideout as he made his way to Belgium. As I mentioned, she also looked after his precious manuscripts and personally delivered them to him after he had settled in Brussels.

A few months before their flight, Juliette learned of another of Hugo’s torrid affairs. Hugo had been seeing the actress Léonie Biard who upon learning of his commitment to Juliette, had begged Hugo to dump her. When he refused, Biard gathered up all of the love letters that she’d received from Hugo and delivered them to Juliette. Not for the first time, Juliette was enraged by Hugo’s infidelity. This time, however, rather than threatening to leave she redoubled her determination to remain at his side. The necessity to leave France served two important purposes. First, it saved her lover from prison, and second, it kept him far from Biard’s seductive and meddling grasp.

Ever vigilant, Juliette continued to look after Hugo’s manuscripts. She worried that Hugo’s works might fall into larcenous hands before they were published or before he’d received credit for having written them. Still in Brussels, in 1852 she wrote:

Indeed, the couple’s life in exile began to settle into something somewhat resembling normalcy. They continued to maintain two residences, first in Brussels, then on the island of Jersey, and finally on Guernsey. Juliette seems to have been much happier during this period. She eventually lived in her own little house that Hugo bought for her. They had more time to spend together as Hugo was no longer distracted by the need to oversee the production of his plays, or by demands to attend business meetings or late-night soirées. Hugo also profited from the isolation, as he could now write with far fewer interruptions. Juliette’s persistent proximity was unlike that of Hugo’s wife and children, who would come and go from his side. His immediate family members would reside with him for months at a time and then return to France for long periods.

Increasingly, Hugo gave Juliette further work as a copyist to keep her busy but she also enjoyed preparing meals for him and the two went for regular walks together. Now permitted to leave her home by herself, she made a few friends and even became close to some of Hugo’s children. Oddly enough, Hugo’s wife Adèle actually came to accept Juliette and the two occasionally sent gifts to one another. One Christmas, Adèle invited Juliette to a party that the Hugo family was throwing for local children. Juliette declined the overture but expressed her appreciation. In her will, Mme Hugo asked her sons to look after Juliette in case of their father’s death.

A Return to Paris

In 1870, Victor Hugo ended his days of exile and returned to France. His wife Adèle had died in 1868 and in 1873, forty years after they’d met, he and Juliette settled into the same apartment in Paris. Juliette continued to work as feverishly as ever, still copying manuscripts and now taking full responsibility for managing Hugo’s home. Hugo was then 71 and you might think that is libido had settled somewhat. In September of that same year, however, Juliette discovered a love letter to him, written by one of their domestic employees. To make matters worse, the young woman, Blanche Lanvin, was the daughter of close friends.

Perhaps habituated to his betrayals, Juliette resigned herself to Hugo’s unrestrainable flings and carried on with life as the affair proceeded for the next five years behind her back. In October 1873 she penned this rather eloquent screed:

In the final years of her life, Juliette took great pleasure in welcoming Hugo’s grandchildren into her home. I’ve sadly not found time to tell you about Juliette’s daughter, Claire Pradier, born before Juliette began seeing Hugo and cared for largely by her father. It’s hard to imagine that all of Juliette’s sacrifices were worth it, but opportunities were scarce for women of the 19th-century. Juliette died on May 11, 1883, after years of suffering from stomach cancer. Hugo’s entourage dissuaded him from attending her funeral which took place the following day. Hugo’s friend, Auguste Vacquerie, a noted journalist and man of letters delivered the eulogy.

An Influential Mistress

It’s evident that Juliette meant far more to Victor Hugo than his other vassals of amusement. While not alone in the role, she was a lifelong partner that he heavily relied upon. Historians, psychologists, students of literature, and doctoral candidates of many stripes will undoubtedly be combing through both lovers’ archives for decades. There they are bound to uncover many more examples of Juliette’s contributions to Hugo’s life’s work.

One astute researcher recently revealed a link between Hugo’s poem Paroles dans l’ombre and words from a letter that Juliette had composed to him. In Juliette’s version, she complains to Hugo about his inattentiveness during a visit on the previous evening:

Hugo’s poem which bears a striking resemblance to the letter:

So concludes my brief look into the life of Juliette Drouet. I leave it to others to sort through her prolific output and match it to the mountains of correspondence and classical masterpieces that her dominating lover produced. My hope is that as such discoveries are made, they’ll give us better insights into Juliette’s existence and that she’ll emerge as a smart and industrious beauty who despite her limited options helped to create a literary genius that the world salutes to this day.

End note: I hope you’ve enjoyed reading at least half as much as I’ve enjoyed writing this post. The translations were particularly fun for me but may well be subject to other interpretations. Please let me know in the comments if you see Juliette’s words in a different light. The same holds true for my descriptions of historical events and timelines.

Other Resources

Project Gutenberg ebook, Juliette Drouet’s Love-Letters to Victor Hugo

Université de Rouen, Juliette Drouet, Lettres à Victor Hugo

Open Edition Journals, « La page sortie de mon encrier » : les révélations de Juliette Drouet sur la genèse de l’œuvre de Hugo

Internet Archive, Full text of “Victor Hugo et Juliette Drouet; d’après les lettres inédites…”

Wikipedia, too many pages to recall