On the morning of February 4, 2014, Juliette Marie Carpenter went peacefully to be with the Lord. Juliette was born on July 10, 1920; she was the third child of George and Sarah Brown. Juliette attended the St. Barnabas and St. Pius Catholic Schools, and she graduated from Frederick Douglass High School in 1939.

Juliette has always loved sports. She said she was an "adolescent tomboy." She played baseball, basketball, and even football with the boys in the neighborhood. In fact, she was a star player on the Frederick basketball team. Juliette jokingly says that Cory McNeill, her grandson and assistant basketball coach for the University of Virginia Women's Basketball Team, inherited his basketball skills from her. Her love for sports continued as was evident in her undying devotion to the Baltimore Colts, Baltimore's NFL Football Franchise prior to the arrival of the Baltimore Ravens. She not only attended all of the home games, but also the away games.

During World War II, Juliette worked at Glen L. Martin, a company that built airplanes; as an electrician. Her job was to wire all of the pilot's controls in the cockpit. She was the first African-American and the first female of any race to work this operation at Glen L. Martin. According to Juliette, the inspectors said that if Juliette did the job, they knew it was done correctly. How's that for Women's Power in 1943 from a twenty-three year old? After the war, Juliette worked for the State Department in Washington, D.C. She started as a clerk and worked her way up to become a supervisor. After commuting to Washington for twenty-five years, she resigned. She then began to work for the State Of Maryland in a supervisory position where she worked for five years until she retired. Juliette worked hard during her adult life, but she knew how to have a good time. She loved to "dress up," dance and enjoy the nightlife. The nightlife for blacks was on Baltimore's famous Pennsylvania Avenue. Juliette and her friends frequented the Sphinx Club and the Club Casino, which was managed by her late brother, George A. Brown, Jr. In fact, Juliette is featured in a video about Pennsylvania Avenue at the Reginald F. Lewis Museum of Maryland African American History and Culture.

In 1943, Juliette married a wonderful man, Robert "Pity" Carpenter. Four years later their daughter, Pamela was born. She was born on her father's birthday, and their wedding anniversary. Pity and Juliette separated a few years later, but they remained friends.

Juliette is fortunate to have personally experienced two outstanding historical events. She walked with Martin Luther King, Jr. in the "March on Washington" in 1963, and she witnessed the inauguration of the first Black President of the United States of America, Barack Obama. Juliette truly lived a blessed life.

She was survived by her daughter: Pamela, two grandsons, Anthony and Cory; two granddaughters-in-law, Robin and Kim, five great grandchildren, Brionna, Austin, Anthony, Gabrielle and Cayden; two sisters, Augustine and Bette; two brothers, Thomas (Elroy) and Earl (Plump); one brother-in-law, Golden (Sputs); two sisters-in-law, Shirley and Sylvia; several nieces and nephews, as well as a host of other relatives and friends.

Funeral Services were held on Saturday, February, 15, 2014, at the Church of St. Cecilia. Pallbearers were David Camak, Mark Jeter, Zachary McDaniels, Mark Glaze, Donnell Moses and John Gloster. Honorary Pallbearers were Earl Brown, Thomas Brown, Anthony Carpenter, Austin Carpenter, and Cayden McNeill.

Juliette was born on July 10, 1920; she was the third child of George and Sarah Brown. Juliette attended St. Barnabas and St. Pius Catholic Schools. She graduated from Frederick Douglass High School (Baltimore) in 1939.

Juliette has always loved sports. She says she was an "adolescent tomboy." She played baseball, basketball, and even football with the boys in the neighborhood. In fact, she was a star player on the Frederick Douglass basketball team. Juliette jokingly says that Cory (McNeill), her grandson and Assistant Basketball Coach for Georgetown University Women's Basketball Team, inherited his basketball skills from her. Her love for sports continued as was evident in her undying devotion to the Baltimore Colts, Baltimore's NFL football franchise prior to the arrival of the Baltimore Ravens. She not only attended all of the home games, but also the away games in Chicago, Atlanta, Cleveland, Detroit, and Wisconsin. Juliette still watches football every Sunday. However, she has replaced her stadium seat with a warmer and more comfortable chair at her daughter and son-in-law's house, Pamela and B=clayton "Pete" McNeill.

In writing this story, Pam, Juliette's daughter, said that she would be remiss if she didn't mention GSN, the Game Show Network, Juliette's other passion. Her favorite shows are "Wheel of Fortune," "Who Wants To Be a Millionaire," Chain Reaction," "Family Feud," and "Password." She is by no means a passive viewer. Amazingly, at 88 years old, she can still solve the puzzles and answer the questions correctly.

During World War II, Juliette worked at Glen L. Martin, a company that built airplanes; she was an electrician. Her job was to wire all of the pilot's controls in the cockpit. She was the first African-American, and the first female of any race to work this operation at Glen L. Martin. According to Juliette, the inspectors said that if Juliette did the job they knew it was done correctly. How's that for Women's Powering 1943 from a 23 year old? After the war Juliette worked for the State Department in Washington, D.C. She started as a clerk and worked her way up to become a supervisor. After commuting to Washington for 20 years, she resigned. She then began to work for the State of Maryland in a supervisory position. She worked there for 5 years and then retired. Juliette worked hard during her adult life, but she knew how to have a good time also. She loved to "dress up", dance and enjoy the nightlife. The nightlife for blacks was on Baltimore's famous Pennsylvania Avenue. Juliette and her friends frequented the Sphinx Club and the Club Casino, which was managed by her brother, George A. Brown, Jr. at the time. In fact, Juliette is featured in a video about Pennsylvania Avenue at the Reginald F. Lewis Museum of Maryland African American History and Culture.

In 1943, Juliette married a wonderful man, Robert "Pity" Carpenter. Four years later their daughter, Pamela was born. She was born on her father's birthday, and their wedding anniversary. Pity and Juliette separated a few years later, but they remained friends. They even dated occasionally. Robert was always loved by the Brown family, and he never separated from his daughter, Pam. He was a fantastic father, and he was her "rock' until the day he died, January 28, 1999.

Juliette's immediate family consists of her daughter, Pamela, son-in-law Clayton ("Pete"), grandsons Tony and Cory, granddaughter-in-law, Robin, and great grandchildtren, brionna, Austin, and Anthony.

Juliette is fortunate to have personally experienced two outstanding historical events. She walked with Martin Luther King, Jr. in the "March on Washington" in 1963, and she witnessed the inauguration of the first Black President of the United States of America, Barack Obama.

Juliette has truly lived a blessed life.

Beloved and cherished are the memories of Robert Carpenter, called to rest by God on Thursday, January 28, 1999.

Robert, lovingly known as "Pity" was born august 17, 1919, in Baltimore, Maryland. He was the third in a family of four children born to the late Robert and Eliza Bishop Carpenter.

Robert, a kind and gentle man with deep religious faith was a member of Payne Memorial A.M.E. Church for over seventy years. He was honored for his diligent work while serving on the Steward Board, and he ws an active participant in establishing the new Payne Memorial A.M.E. Church. Throughout his life, Robert was a conscientious worker in his church and an invaluable servant. Robert exemplified the true essence of Christian Service.

He was educated in the public school system of Baltimore City, where he graduated from Frederick Douglass Senior High School in 1938.

Robert married Juliette Brown on August 17, 1943. This union was blessed with one daughter, Pamela, who clearly was the "center" of his life.

He joined the United States Army in 1943, and served in World War II. He was a recipient of the Good Conduct Medal, the European, African and Middle Eastern Theater Ribbon, and the World War II Victory Ribbon. Attaining the rank of Sergeant, Robert provided a valuable service to his country.

Robert worked at the United States Coast Guard Yard as Chief of Storage and Supplies. In 1985, he retired after forty-three years of government service.

Robert was a jazz enthusiast all of his life. He maintained a large collection of Jazz music which brought him and his friends many hours of pleasure. Robert and his friends, Leo Hunt, Charles Blackwell and Wayland Bell, "The Jazz Club," sat through many sets in the Baltimore area.

Robert was particular about his appearance; he was an impeccable dresser. The salesmen at Hamburger's Department Store grinned like Cheshire cats when they saw him coming through the door. They quickly calculated their commission. However, most of all Robert was an extraordinary father, a gentleman and a man of integrity and dignity.

Robert was survived by his wife, Juliette; a devoted daughter, Pamela; a son-in-law, Clayton; two grandsons, Anthony and Cory; one granddaughter-in-law, Robin; one great granddaughter, Brionna; one brother, John; a devoted companion, Anne; six sisters-in-law; six brothers-in-law; many nieces, nephews, and other loving relatives and friends.

Funeral Services were held on Wednesday, February 3, 1999 at the Payne Memorial A.M.E. Church with Reverend Dr. Vashti McKenzie officiating.

Pallbearers were Mark Glaze, Martin Glaze, Zachary McDaniels, John Gloster, Tyrone Watts, and Tyrone McNeill. Honorary Pallbearers were Anthony Carpenter, Cory McNeill, John Carpenter, and Augustus Harrison.