Campus walks: in the northwest Quadrangles

There is an out-of-the way place in the northwest region of the Main Quadrangles. This is the sequence of buildings, ranging from Searle Chemistry Laboratory through Snell and Hitchcock Halls, located behind Jones and Kent Laboratories, built around a nice square. These buildings are dedicated to chemical research, and some of them are closed to public. The place is thus less busy than the other parts of the quads as only students and staff members having permission are allowed to enter these buildings.

It is admittedly Jones Laboratory, especially room 405, that has the most interesting history. Room 405 is the place where scientists involved in the Manhattan Project first isolated and weighed a sample of plutonium in 1942. As a first step, on August 18, 1942, a team of physicist Glenn Seaborg isolated a very small quantity of the new element. Measurements were successfully performed somewhat later. Finally, on September 10, 1942, researchers determined the new element’s atomic weight that enabled scientists to use the first artificially manufactured isotope of an element in various forms of nuclear energy. It was a pivotal moment in science as what happened was the first isolation of a weighable amount of an artificially produced isotope of any element. Over and above this direct use, the whole process brought the possibility and potential of creating synthetic elements in sight. Interestingly, but not surprisingly, the site was contaminated with radioactive waste. Ryerson Physical Laboratory, Eckhart Hall, Kent Chemical Laboratory, and George Herbert Jones Chemical Laboratory were all affected. Interior surfaces, ducts, and drains in these buildings got contaminated in the years ranging from 1942 through 1952 by radioactive materials, so the U.S. Department of Energy had to decontaminate the whole complex. This process took place between 1982 and 1987. Now the site is safe. It was officially tested and certified that the site conformed to applicable cleanup criteria and standards, and the Department of Energy released the property for unrestricted use. No supplemental limits or institutional controls are in effect at the site, and Department of Energy does not require on-site monitoring or any form of surveillance. Today we can still find room 405, but it no longer looks like it used to back in the day. However, some of the equipment they used for the experiment is on display in the entrance hallway of the Laboratory.

My days are the same as they were previously. Working from early in the morning until late in the afternoon, allowing myself a free day once a week. As I found the upcoming course entitled ‘The theory of income II’, which is macroeconomics, not too interesting, I decided to go back to Nancy Stokey’s stuff. I was fascinated by dynamic programming, so I expected the continuations to the course, ToI II and III, to go along the path we laid down in ‘The theory of Income I’. I was disappointed to realize that these courses are headed to other directions. I spend most of my time (okay, this is a nice way of putting that all of the time I spend working) doing the math from line to line. This is about defining dynamic problems in ways that can be solved in dynamic programming. Some models take hours to solve, others may take days. When working in dynamic programming you devote most of your efforts to proving that a problem is formulized in a way that meets the prerequisites available in formal assumptions. Simply put, you must check if these assumptions hold in your problem. Concavity and continuity of functions, convexness of sets, upper and lower hemi-continuity of correspondences—these are some of the features you must have. Only after these proofs can you turn to solving the problem by finding appropriate strategies to solve the Bellman equation, which lies in the heart of any dynamic programming problem. There are powerful algorithms available, but still, solving Bellman equations always take some creativity. I have never learnt this much ever in my life. Sometimes it’s tough. For instance, yesterday I was struggling with recursive preferences. I was tired by the afternoon, so when I first saw the formalism, I didn’t understand a single word… or rather equation. Sometimes you have more equations than sentences. I tried to find some pointers, and soon afterwards I landed at the Epstein–Zin preferences, and a Palgrave entry, and they finally helped. Travelling on the bus back to home I was kind of starting getting the hang of it, and while walking from the bus stop I was able to create an example to start with. Finally I took some notes.

The weather is still silly. On Wednesday it was freaky: very early in the morning (okay, I would say, in the middle of the night—on Wednesdays I get up at 1:30AM to do a recovery run before catching a night university shuttle to get to the department and to start working at 4AM) it was 20°C. I needed to be wearing only a pair of shorts. By the afternoon it was chilly again. However, slowly but surely spring arrives at the campus.