OTL Ayn Rand, after emigrating to the US from the USSR, moved out to Hollywood and managed to land a few jobs writing for the big studios. It was during this period she first wrote The Fountainhead where she espoused the beginnings of what would become Objectivism, a philosophy with far-reaching influence with famous adherents such as Alan Greenspan and Paul Ryan basing their policy ideas and decisions on her works. Another of her influential adherents was Nathaniel Branden who would go on to invent the concept of the self-help book and the craze for those that followed.

However when one reads her books and leaves aside the philosophy she had some rather interesting concepts from a sci-fi perspective like a static electricity generator, cloaking devices, and some kind all-purpose superalloy. That suggests, regardless of one's opinions on Objectivism (I personally loathe it with a passion), when it came to sci-fi concepts she was quite creative and capable of thinking outside of the box.

What would be the most plausible way for Rand, with a PoD after she comes out to California, to instead become a famous sci-fi writer for the silver screen and printed page? What impact would Rand becoming a sci-fi author instead of a philosopher have on the 20th century and beyond?

Here's a crazy idea. After being put through the Hollywood machine and getting screwed over one too many times, she comes to the realisation that maybe the reds are onto something and takes a sharp turn to the left. Eventually she ends up getting blacklisted during McCarthyism.

Didn't Hitler say it was harder to radicalise a moderate than it is to make them exchange one form of extremism for another? (If it isn't clear, I'm referring to Rand as a radical I'm also not a follower of Hitler or saying he's correct, I just remember hearing that quote from him.)

Collaboration

Cant remember if Heinlein had any successful collaborations. There would be a large age difference, & Ayn had a later life reputation for insufferable arrogance. If that is correct Heinlein, who actually had a sense of humor, would have trouble working with Ms Rand.

Heinlein's second wife, Leslyn, was somewhat of a collaborationist in that she had a reputation for being able to doctor scripts. (From William Patterson's 2 volume biography of Heinlein.) How much she contributed to the finished product while RAH was learning his craft is a matter of conjecture, as he destroyed many old records after his third marriage to Virginia Gerstenfeld.

That said, Heinlein mentioned, obliquely, Rand's philosophy in The Moon Is A Harsh Mistress, with approval. And the only Rand he is reputed to have salivated for is his high school friend, the "fan dancer" Sally Rand.

So far as the divine Ayn's prose and science fiction ideas, the ideas were rather pedestrian for SF at that time, and her prose was never less than abominable. (I really wish Dorothy Parker had sais something witty and nasty about her, but she was evidently beneath notice.)

So far as the divine Ayn's prose and science fiction ideas, the ideas were rather pedestrian for SF at that time, and her prose was never less than abominable. (I really wish Dorothy Parker had sais something witty and nasty about her, but she was evidently beneath notice.)

Parker is reported to have said "This is not a novel to be tossed aside lightly. It should be thrown across the room with great force." However it is unclear if she actually said that.

According to Wikipedia, Ayn Rand pretty much retired from writing SF after Atlas Shrugged, which means that all of her fame just comes fom four books written in a span of 5 to 7 years.

So my obvious answer to the challenge "Make Aym Rand a famous SF author" would be: "Make Ayn Rand continue to write SF through the 1950's" Eventually she will improve in storytelling as well as style and somewhere around 1959-1965 she might produce a couple of really great novels, so that 'Atlas Shrugged' is today regarded as a nice first try but otherwise just an indication as how far her writing has improved since.

I disagree with this. How is it going to help if he throws it in the trash?

The first half was actually pretty decent which suggests an editor or a clear storyline. Then I got the feeling she was being paid by the word for the rest as it kept repeating itself.

Maybe focusing on Rearden (Best character in Atlas Shrugged) and D'Anaconia (Tied with Rearden) while reducing the clutter makes it bearable and the community take her seriously.

Biggest change I can think of is that women become a force in sf sooner. Especially true if Rand does more hard sci fi or space opera type stuff. Having one of the grand old men be a woman would lay the groundwork for a generation to be more receptive to later feminist movements, while making sf harder to dismiss as boys genre.

Would it be possible for Rand to meet Isaac Asimov? Maybe seeing how he is able to couch his philosophical statements in his stories give a her a new direction.