DALLAS (DFWCBS.COM)

- Republican Presidential candidate Mitt Romney and his wife Ann are holding a fundraiser at the Hilton Anatole Hotel Tuesday night.

Hours earlier, Mrs. Romney arrived under Secret Service escort at former George W. Bush's Preston Hollow neighborhood in Dallas, where she attended a fundraiser hosted by the former First Lady, Laura Bush. A spokesman said the former President didn't attend.

But it's remarks by Mitt Romney at a fundraiser last May still getting a lot of attention. At a gathering a Boca Raton, Florida home, Mr. Romney told campaign donors nearly half the country doesn't pay federal income taxes, and they prefer President Obama.

On the video, released by the liberal magazine Mother Jones, the former Massachusetts Governor can be heard saying, "There are 47 percent who are with him, who are dependent upon government, who believe that they are victims, who believe the government has a responsibility to care for them, who believe they are entitled to health care, to food, to housing, to you name it. That that's an entitlement. And the government should give it to them. And they will vote for this President no matter what."

Michael Thompson lost his furniture business, and has been looking for a new career for a couple of years now. He says, "I'm working my tail off."

Thompson says he supports President Obama and calls Romney's remarks insulting. "Why am I insulted," asks Thompson. Because I don't think it's true."

Claudia Fowler, who volunteers for the grassroots organization, Obama for America agrees. She says, "It's really scary thing to think he's going to get elected and that he's going to represent 53% of America if he says he loves America, you need to love of all America and not just a certain percentage."

Romney isn't backing down from his remarks. Tea Party member Katrina Pierson agrees that Romney shouldn't. Pierson says, "I think what Mitt Romney should do is double down on his statement and keep telling the American people the truth."

Whether the truth or insulting, political analyst John Weekley says it's getting closer to election day, and anything that takes Mr. Romney or the President off message could prove troubling.

Weekley says, "A gaffe that say could have been made months ago, wouldn't have had much affect, can have much more profound affect right now because the voters are watching."

No word how much money Mr. Romney will raise at his fundraiser at the Anatole. The general reception costs $2500 per person. To get a private dinner with Mitt and Ann Romney, you'd have to make a $50,000 donation.

As is typical, no news cameras will be allowed inside the fundraiser. For weeks now, CBS 11's Jack Fink has requested an interview with Mr. Romney, but the campaign has repeatedly declined.

Also Check Out: