Mitt Romney-Organization, Texas

updated December 20, 2007

ROMNEY FOR PRESIDENT, INC.

ROMNEY FOR PRESIDENT EXPLORATORY COMMITTEE, INC. (formed Jan. 3, 2007)

THE COMMONWEALTH PAC (2006 cycle)

...endorsed by

U.S. Rep. John Carter (TX-31) (Dec. 20, 2007)

U.S. Rep. Kay Granger (TX-12) (Sept. 25, 2007)

U.S. Rep. Lamar Smith (TX-21) (July 25, 2007)

U.S. Rep. Mike Conaway (TX-11) (Mar. 24, 2007 Opinion Piece in the Midland Reporter-Telegram)

former U.S. Rep. Henry Bonilla - represented TX 23 from 1993-2007 (announced June 14, 2007)

Governor Romney's Texas Statewide Finance Committee

Co-Chairs (announced Nov. 13, 2007)

Thomas R. Phillips - Served as Chief Justice of the Texas Supreme Court from 1988 to 2004. He was initially appointed and then elected and re-elected by the people of Texas four times. A Dallas native, Phillips earned a B.A. from Baylor University and then a J.D. from Harvard Law School, where he was one of Governor Romney's classmates. From 1981 to 1988, he was judge of the 280th District Court in Harris County. He was appointed to the Texas Historical Commission in 2005 by Texas Governor Rick Perry. Since 2005, Phillips has been a partner in the Austin office of the law firm of Baker Botts LLP, concentrating in appellate law and arbitrations.

Allan "Bud" Shivers - Austin businessman. His career includes founding and serving as chairman and board member of a solid waste business, real estate development company, savings and loan company, as well as a farming organization and a mineral royalty business. Shivers served in leadership roles in several state and local organizations including chairmanship of the Texas Chamber of Commerce, Texas Lyceum, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission and Shivers Cancer Center. Currently, he is founder and chairman of the Seton Fund, the endowment arm of the Seton Healthcare Network, and board member of TIRR Systems, a rehabilitation healthcare organization.

Pete Winstead - A founding shareholder Of Winstead PC. His early professional career includes the field of federal taxation and related matters and as a former chair of the Section of Taxation, State Bar of Texas. He remains active in advising clients on many corporate and business transactional matters, primarily in a strategic role. In 1997, Pete was appointed by Governor Bush to be the first chair of the Texas Turnpike Authority.

Members (announced March 27, 2007)

David Baldwin (Houston) – Baldwin is a Managing Director of SCF Partners.

Louis Beecherl, Jr. (Dallas) – Beecherl was a 2000 and 2004 Bush Pioneer and North Texas Finance Chair for Bush-Cheney 2004. He began his professional career in the energy industry, eventually serving as Chairman and CEO of Texas Oil and Gas Corp. from 1957 to 1977.

Larry Benson (San Antonio) – Benson is on the Board of Directors for Lone Star Capital Bank, N.A. He is a car dealership owner and former part time owner of the New Orleans Saints.

Scott Caven (Houston) – Caven is a Managing Director and Regional Manager for Texas of Atlantic Trust Company, a private wealth management company. He is a member of the board of University Texas Regents system.

Joe Dilg (Houston) – Dilg is a Managing Partner of Vinson & Elkins, one of the largest law firms in Texas.

Paul Engler (Amarillo) – Engler is the co-founder and CEO of Cactus Feeders, a large and successful cattle feeding operation. Cactus Feeders is the world's largest privately-owned cattle feeding company.

Jonathan Fairbanks (Houston) – Fairbanks is President of Bassoe Offshore, an international investment and offshore brokerage firm.

James B. Francis, Jr., Romney National Finance Co-Chair (Dallas) – Francis is President of Francis Enterprises, Inc. and a 2000 and 2004 Bush Pioneer. His business includes public affairs consulting, private placement work and investments. He was also State Chairman for Senator Kay Hutchison's last two Senate election campaigns. Francis will also serve as a National Finance Co-Chair for the Romney for President campaign.

Robert Gauntt (Houston) – Gauntt is a founding Partner in Avalon Advisors LP, a Houston based investment management firm.

Doug Hodo, Jr. (Houston) – Hodo is President of McGriff, Seibels & Williams of Texas.

Robert B. Holland, III (Dallas) – Holland is a former U.S. Representative to the World Bank from 2002 to 2006 and a 2000 Bush Pioneer. In January 2007, he was named a Member of the Board of Affiliated Computer Services, Inc., an IT solutions service provider.

Dr. Scott Holliday (Dallas) – Holliday is a practicing anesthesiologist and is a member of Pinnacle Anesthesia Consultants of Dallas.

William Hutchinson (Dallas) – Hutchinson is President of Dunhill Partners, a 23 year-old Dallas commercial real estate brokerage and management firm. The firm both owns and manages a number of significant retail and office properties in Dallas and Fort Worth and suburbs such as Plano, Frisco and Southlake.

Drew Johnson (Dallas) – Johnson is a General Partner at CIC Partners. He previously worked for McKinsey and Company and is a graduate of both Brigham Young University and Harvard Business School.

Walter Johnson (Houston) – Johnson is Founder and Chairman of Amegy Bank, one of the state's largest banks.

David Jones (Houston) – Jones is the Principle and Partner with DINI Partners. He is a member of the George Bush Presidential Library Foundation Advisory Council.

Jim McGrath (Houston) – McGrath is President of CEO Communications in Houston. He served in the George H.W. Bush White House and is currently the speechwriter for the former President.

Joseph Meister (Dallas) – Meister is an attorney with Hughes & Luce, a member of Maverick PAC and an officer of the Republican Lawyers of Dallas.

John Muse (Dallas) – Muse was a Bush Pioneer in 2000. Muse is Chairman of HM Capital Partners, a private equity firm that specializes in leveraged buyouts.

Ross Perot, Jr. (Dallas) – Perot is Chairman of Perot Systems, an Information Technology services provider founded by his father, H. Ross Perot, Sr. He is also the Founder and Chairman of Hillwood Development Company.

Bob Perry (Houston) – Perry is the owner of Perry Homes, one of Texas' largest homebuilding companies.

Kevin Rollins (Austin) – Rollins is the former President and CEO of Dell, Inc.

George Seay (Dallas) – Seay is Co-Founder and CEO of Annandale Capital, a multi-asset class money management firm. He is also Co-Founder and Chairman of Legacy.

L.E. Simmons (Houston) – Simmons is the Founder and President of Houston-based L.E. Simmons & Associations and a 2000 Bush Pioneer.

Matthew Simmons (Houston) – Simmons is Chairman and CEO of Simmons & Company International. Simmons is Chairman of Simmons and Company International, an energy investment bank.

Mark Wallace (Houston) – Wallace is President and CEO of Texas Children's Hospital, the nation's largest children's hospital

Logan Walters (Houston) – Walters is ... a former Assistant to President George W. Bush. [ed. 9/13/09]

Unofficial

http://texansformitt.blogspot.com (July 2006-Jan. 2007)

Copyright © 2007 Eric M. Appleman/Democracy in Action