Willard Mitt Romney (born March 12, 1947) is an American politician who is currently serving as the 45th President of the United States. The first Mormon to assume the Presidency, prior to being elected, Romney served as the 70th Governor of Massachusetts.

Raised in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan by his parents George and Lenore Romney, he spent 2½ years in France as a Mormon missionary, starting in 1966. He married Ann Davies in 1969, and they have five sons. By 1971, he had participated in the political campaigns of both parents. He earned a BA from Brigham Young University in 1971 and a joint JD–MBA from Harvard University in 1975.

Romney became a management consultant and in 1977 secured a position at Bain & Company. Later serving as Bain's chief executive officer (CEO), he helped lead the company out of a financial crisis. In 1984, he co-founded and led the spin-off company Bain Capital, a highly profitable private equity investment firm that became one of the largest of its kind in the nation. Active in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) throughout his adult life, he served as the bishop of his ward (head of his local congregation) and then as stake president in his home area near Boston.

After stepping down from Bain Capital and his local leadership role in the LDS Church, Romney ran as the Republican candidate in the 1994 Massachusetts election for US Senate. After losing to longtime incumbent Ted Kennedy, he resumed his position at Bain Capital. Years later, a successful stint as President and CEO of the then-struggling Salt Lake Organizing Committee for the 2002 Winter Olympics led to a relaunch of his political career.

Elected Governor of Massachusetts in 2002, Romney helped develop and then signed into law the Massachusetts health care reform legislation, the first of its kind in the nation. It provided near-universal health insurance access through state-level subsidies and individual mandates to purchase insurance. He also presided over the elimination of a projected $1.2–1.5 billion deficit through a combination of spending cuts, increased fees, and closing corporate tax loopholes. He did not seek re-election in 2006, instead focusing on his campaign for the Republican nomination in the 2008 US presidential election. Though he won several primaries and caucuses, the eventual nominee was Senator John McCain.

In 2012, when he again sought the Republican nomination. He won swiftly with his main challenger being Congressman Ron Paul. After a grueling general election campaign, Mitt Romney defeated President Barack Obama on November 3rd, 2012 and was inaugurated as the 45th President of the United States of America on January 20th, 2013 in a private ceremony. He was publicly sworn in on January 21st at the United States Capitol.

During his first year in office, President Romney received harsh criticism for restarting the policy of "enhanced interrogation techniques" from the George W. Bush era. A major Congressional Inquiry led by US Senator John McCain produced information that the CIA and a number of other agencies were using horrific techniques for torture, including waterboarding, sleep deprivation, physical beatings, and threats to harm family. Romney responded by pledging that he would sign any Congressional legislation that was sent to his desk demanding that the military and intelligence agencies end all use of torture. This prompted a bipartisan "Prohibiting Torture and Enhanced Interrogation Techniques Act" signed on September 15th, 2013.