This couple is one of my favourites on the soap opera passions.

A Little Background Info on Ethan Winthrop and Theresa Lopez-Fitzgerald.

Theresa's Mom Pilar has been the Crane's house keeper for years.

Theresa has loved Ethan for as long as she can remember, she always believed they were destined to be together. She believed fate would bring them together one day.

Theresa was a lttle obsessed over Ethan for a while, and he didnt even know who she was.

Theresa became Ivy Crane's(Ethan's mother) personal assistant, to get closer to Ethan. She was planning Ethan's wedding to longtime love Gwen Hotchkiss. Theresa wanted Ethan, Gwen suspected that and Ethan had no idea.

Eventually Ethan fell in love with Theresa, he called off his wedding to Gwen and decided he would have to think about who he wanted to marry. He later chose Theresa, and then called off their wedding when Ivy's secret, that Ethan was not a crane came out, but Ethan changed his mind, they had still planned to get married, even the double wedding with Sheridan and Luis was planned, the dresses had been bought and the wedding was about to go off without a hitch, that is until Gwen told the tabloid that theresa was the one who exposed Ethan, and once again, Ethan called the wedding off. Just as i think things are going to work out, Ethan loves Theresa and Theresa loves Ethan, Julian walks into the picture, and ruins it, he gets Theresa drunk, marries her and sleeps with her, all without her even knowing, then Theresa finds out she's pregnant, UHOH!! Ethan finds out the truth they broke up for good, and Theresa had the baby with many complications, oddly enough Gwen basically saved both of their lives, after a while Ethan decides he must choose between Gwen and Theresa, he ultimately chooses Theresa, until Gwen announces she's pregnant with his child! That throws a wrench into Theresa's plans, Ethan ends up doing the right thing so he thinks and marries Gwen. Enter Fox, Ethan's half brother, he takes quite the liking to Theresa and is unknowingly helping her win Ethan back, will her plan work? I hope so!!!