The Chengdu 2025 Local Organising Committee (LOC) has revealed the new logo of the 12th edition of The World Games.

In December 2023, the Chengdu 2025 LOC initiated an international contest to create the logo, mascot and slogan of The World Games 2025, calling for designers’ ideas globally. Worldwide contributions ran until the end of February 2024.

A total of 9,235 (national and international) submissions were received from national and foreign applicants, a testament of the world’s creativity to develop the visual identity of the International World Games Association (IWGA) flagship event next year. The submissions breakdown unfolds as follows: 3,562 logo ideas received, 1,924 mascot creations and 3,749 slogans.

The winning design of the Chengdu 2025 logo was revealed on 17 May 2024, while the Chengdu 2025 mascot and slogan will be unveiled at the ‘One Year to Go’ event in August 2024.

The logo design is inspired by iconic Chinese symbols such as the giant panda, the hibiscus flower, and the Chinese knot. The top part ingeniously incorporates the facial features of the giant panda and reflects the history and culture of Chengdu as the host city, and the Sichuan Province where Chengdu is located.

The centre of the logo represents the Chinese knot which symbolises unity, prosperity, and luck. It emphasises the importance of unity and embodies the core values of The World Games, resonating with the participants and audiences.

In addition, the overall design is inspired by the hibiscus flower through seamless integration of the giant panda with the Chinese knot, to incorporate the essence of Chengdu into The World Games.

Finally, the emblem achieves a balanced and harmonious colour scheme by utilising cool colours vertically and warm colours horizontally. This creates a sense of depth and coordination among the five colours: red, yellow, green, black, and white.

John Fairley, the esteemed British designer behind this emblem, is a member of the Royal Society of Arts. With over two decades of designing experience and a distinguished career leading branding projects at renowned international creative agencies, Fairley’s reputation precedes him.

"The arrangement of these geometric elements not only signifies the interconnected fate of humanity but also underscores respect for cultural diversity across nations. This balance between individuality and mutual respect finds its purest expression in the sporting arena,"

Fairley reflects. "My sincere wish is that athletes from all corners of the globe, regardless of race or nationality, engage in friendly and wholehearted competition at The World Games 2025 Chengdu next summer."

IWGA President José Perurena said: “On behalf of The World Games community, I would like to thank all the contest participants and congratulate the winner. Taking in worldwide contributions wasn’t an easy task, but this new logo has received unanimous praise from those who have seen it. The IWGA is looking forward to its use in the forefront of the promotion of Chengdu 2025.”

The announcement of the logo aligns with just under 450 days to go to The World Games 2025 to be hosted from 7-17 August 2025, featuring 35 sports, 61 disciplines and a total of 254 medal events.

The International World Games Association (IWGA) is a non-profit-making international sports organisation recognised and supported by the International Olympic Committee. The IWGA comprises 40 International Member Sports Federations. It administers and promotes The World Games (TWG), a multi-sport event held every four years that features around 35 sports on its programme. The next edition of TWG will be in Chengdu (CHN) from 7-17 August 2025. 5,000 participants from more than 100 countries are expected to take part in this 12th edition. The latest Games were hosted by Birmingham, Alabama (USA).