Not ready to purchase a subscription? Click to download the free sample version Download sample

Famous for being the home of China’s most famous creatures, the giant pandas, Chengdu is one of China’s most livable cities. It lies at the start of the modern silk road, connecting China’s hinterland to Europe and leading the development of the region.

See the fact file below for more information on the Chengdu or alternatively, you can download our 21-page Chengdu worksheet pack to utilise within the classroom or home environment.

Key Facts & Information

HISTORY

Chengdu was built in 316 B.C. by Zhang, and it is considered to be one of the earliest developed cities in China.

During the early Xia Dynasty, Shu Country, which is located in the Chengdu Plain, had formed a highly developed bronze civilization.

This turned out to be an important source of Chinese civilization and the birthplace of the Chinese nation.

The 5th Kaiming Emperor moved the capital and named it Chengdu.

Chengdu’s economy further prospered during the Qin and Han Dynasties.

Chengdu became a metropolis during the Qin Dynasty.

During the Western Han Dynasty, Chengdu’s population reached nearly 40 million people.

Chengdu became the capital of Shu during The Three Kingdoms period.

During the Song Dynasty, Chengdu’s silk industry accounted for more than 70% of the total production of China.

For commercial development, Chengdu accepted the world’s first ever paper money, “Jiaozi”.

On December 27, 1949, Chengdu became the station of the People’s Liberation Army.

In 1952, Sichuan Province was restored and Chengdu was named as the capital.

GEOGRAPHY

Chengdu is the capital of China’s southwest Sichuan province.

Chengdu covers a total area of 12.3 thousand square kilometers or 4,749 square miles, with a population of 11 million people.

Chengdu is located in the west of Sichuan Basin and in the center of Chengdu Plain.

Chengdu’s climate is largely warm with high relative humidity all year.

CULTURE

Some of China’s most treasured literature works come from Chengdu.

Chengdu is home to two masters of Fu (a form of Chinese rhymed prose), Sima Xiangru and Yang Xiong.

Sichuanese is the native language in Chengdu, and it is also often called the Sichuan dialect.

Chengdu has more tea houses and bars than Shanghai, despite Chengdu having less than half the population of Shanghai.

Noodles, wontons, dumplings, pastries, sweet rice balls, drinks, salads, and soups are the common snacks in Chengdu.

In 2010, Chengdu was announced as the second UNESCO City of Gastronomy for its well-known history as a food city.

ATTRACTIONS

As home to the giant pandas, Chengdu has their own Research Base of Giant Panda Breeding located just 10 kilometers away from downtown.

Giant pandas, lesser pandas, black-necked cranes, white storks, and over 20 species of rare animals are being taken care of in this research base.

The base has facilities for researchers, a training center, and a museum.

The Giant Panda Museum was opened in 1993 and is the world’s only thematic museum for rare and endangered animals.

Located in the southwestern part of downtown Chengdu is the Wuhou Temple, also known as Wuhou Shrine Temple of Marquis.

This temple is dedicated to the Marquis Wu of the Kingdom of Shu during the Three Kingdoms Period, Zhuge Liang.

Inside this temple are three other temples: Temple of Liu Bei, which can be seen when you pass through the second gate; Temple of Zhuge Liang, which holds the statue of Zhuge Liang; and Sanyi Temple, which is divided into three parts (Prayer, Temple, and Corridors). Also, there is the Tomb of Liubei or Huiling Mausoleum, which is located in the west side of Wuhou Temple.

Located in the southwest of the Duijangyan Irrigation System of China is the Mount of Qingcheng.

Mount Qingcheng is one of the most famous Taoist mountains in China.

The mountain is surrounded by numerous peaks, and it is shaped like a city.

The mountain can be divided into two parts: the anterior and the posterior.

The anterior part of the mountain is the main part of the scenic area, which covers an area of about 15 square kilometers.

Jianfu Palace can be seen as you climb up the mountain. It was originally constructed during the Tang Dynasty.

West of the mountain is the location of the Tianshi Cave, which is the major temple in the mountain.

The cave holds a stone statue in the style of the Sui Dynasty.

Jiuzhaigou National Park, also known as Jiuzhai Valley National Park or Jiuzhaigou Valley, is located in the northern part of Chengdu.

The park has blue lakes, waterfalls, green forests, and snow-covered mountains.

ADDITIONAL FACTS

The logo of Chengdu is inspired by the Golden Sun Bird, which is an ancient artifact from the Jinsha Ruins unearthed in 2001.

In 2009, the World Cyber Games Grand Finals was held in Chengdu recording a first time for China to host the world’s largest computer and video game tournament.

In 2011, Volvo built its first manufacturing base in China in Chengdu.

Chengdu is considered to be one of the first service outsourcing bases in China.

Chengdu is considered to be the largest trade center in western China, with its market covering all of Sichuan Province.

Chengdu Worksheets

This is a fantastic bundle which includes everything you need to know about the Chengdu across 21 in-depth pages. These are ready-to-use Chengdu worksheets that are perfect for teaching students about the Chengdu which is one of China’s most livable cities. It lies at the start of the modern silk road, connecting China’s hinterland to Europe and leading the development of the region.

Complete List Of Included Worksheets

Chengdu Facts

More On Chengdu

Test Yourself!

Know Chengdu

Chengdu’s History

The Province

Cities in Sichuan

Unscramble Them

Eat Eat Eat

Spiciness

Travel in Chengdu

Link/cite this page

If you reference any of the content on this page on your own website, please use the code below to cite this page as the original source.

Link will appear as Chengdu Facts & Worksheets: https://kidskonnect.com - KidsKonnect, March 31, 2020

Use With Any Curriculum

These worksheets have been specifically designed for use with any international curriculum. You can use these worksheets as-is, or edit them using Google Slides to make them more specific to your own student ability levels and curriculum standards.