Chengdu Airlines carry-on baggage must not weigh more than 5kg per piece and should not exceed the dimensions of 55 x 35 x 25 cm.

Passengers flying Economy Class and Business Class on Chengdu Airlines are entitled to one item of carry-on baggage per passenger.

Passengers flying First Class on Chengdu Airlines are entitled to two items of carry-on baggage per passenger.

29th November 2022

Chengdu Airlines takes delivery of first A320neo

Chengdu Airlines has reportedly taken delivery of its first Airbus A320neo. This is a huge step for the airline as it means it can expand its network of routes to more domestic destinations in China.

The airline has also put in orders for 2 more of the A320neo - delivery dates for these are yet to be announced.

27th March 2018

Chinese-produced ARJ21 launches 10-day 'demonstrative operations' in Inner Mongolia

An ARJ21 is seen at Ulanhot airport in Inner Mongolia. The jet has launched a 10-day "demonstrative operations" to prepare for its highland operation.

China's first domestically developed regional jet, ARJ21, launched a 10-day "demonstrative operations" on Tuesday in Inner Mongolia to prepare for its highland commercial operation.

The jet, operated by Chengdu Airlines, the first commercial operator of the jet, is operating return flights daily between Hohhot and Ulanhot through March 30 with onboard passengers, said Commercial Aircraft Corporation of China, its developer.

It is the first time that the ARJ21 has returned to Inner Mongolia after it started flying commercially in 2016. The jet made its test flights in low temperature and highland conditions in Hulun Buir in Inner Mongolia for its airworthiness certification between 2010 and 2014.

The 90-seat ARJ21 was designed to fly in conditions prevalent in China's central and western regions. It can take off and land at nearly all the highland airports in the country. It can also fly in temperature of minus 30 degrees Celsius, according to COMAC which has won 453 orders for the jet from 21 customers at home and abroad.

The airline flies four ARJ21s between Chengdu, capital of Sichuan Province, and Shanghai as well as other cities in the east, central and southwest of the country. They have flown over 50,000 passengers since it began commercial operations in June 2016.

December 2017

Chengdu Airlines puts ARJ21 on regional route

Chengdu Airlines has put the Comac ARJ21 regional jet on its first regional route, after using the jet on services to major domestic cities for over a year.

The carrier is now using the aircraft on the Chengdu-Shangrao route. Shangaro is a city in northwest of Jiangxi province.

In a statement, Comac says the aircraft will be able to launch or raise frequencies on point-to-point routes between small and medium-sized cities. It will also help these cities connect more economically.

Chengdu Airlines has so far used the ARJ21 on services from Chengdu to Shanghai, Changsha, Jiana and Hefei..

The airline had previously told FlightGlobal that it will first ply the ARJ21 on services to established domestic airport, to ensure the aircraft's safe and reliable operations, as well as to help build customer awareness of the indigenous jet.

It took delivery of its first ARJ21 in November 2015, and put it into operations in June 2016, between Chengdu and Shanghai.