Lenti í því sama þegar ég tók þennan áfanga... En þetta á ég frá kennaranum:

Setting

Bassindale, England

Plot

Acid Row is the nickname for a housing project, known as Bassindale Estates, in a small suburb of London. The population consists mostly of single mothers with small children; elderly pensioners, alone, afraid, and waiting to die; and the drug dealers who have made this conclave a very dangerous place.

The novel tells two different stories that are loosely connected. On one hand there is the story of a riot on the estate, which breaks out when people find out that there is a paedophile living there. The main characters here are Sophie, a young doctor taken as a hostage by the father of the paedophile; Melanie, a feisty young woman trying desperately to keep her small family together; and Jimmy, a brave young man who transcends his criminal background to become a hero. On the other hand, there is the story of a missing 10-year-old girl, Amy Biddulph and her rather mixed-up family. The missing girl is at some point believed to be held hostage in the paeodophile’s house.

Characters

People on the estate

Jimmy James, Melanie’s boyfriend, father to her unborn child

Melanie Patterson (19), pregnant w. 3rd child

Gaynor Patterson, Melanie’s mother

Colin Patterson (14), Melanie’s brother

Rosie (4) and Ben (2) Patterson, Melanie’s children

Wesley Barber, Colin’s mate, drug addict

Kevin Charteris, Colin’s mate

Nicholas Hollis (Milosz Zelowski), paedophile

Franek, father of Nicholas, keeps Sophie captured

Eileen Hinkley, old lady who helps Jimmy

Mrs Carthew, owns a house they let people through

Lisa Shaw (14), helps Gaynor get people away from the street

Clara Frensham, opens her house to help Jimmy and Sophie

People at the Health Centre

Sophie Morrison, doctor

Jenny Monroe, receptionist

Harry Bonfield, senior doctor

Fay Baldwin, health visitor

Amy’s ‘family’

Laura Biddulph

Amy Rogerson/Biddulph (10), Laura’s daughter

Martin Rogerson, Amy’s father, Laura’s ex-husband

Edward/Eddy Townsend, Laura’s ex-boyfriend

Franny Gough (18), Eddy’s girlfriend on holiday in Majorca

Mrs Gough, Franny’s mother

Gregory Logan, lives with Laura

Kimberley (15) and Barry (13), Gregory’s children

Police

DCI Tyler, inspector in charge of Amy investigation

DS Gary Butler, working on Amy case

WPC Hanson, policewoman who is injured on the estate

PC Ken Hewitt, working on estate riot

Others

Bob Scudamore, Sophie’s fiancé

Melanie Patterson

Facts

At the time the book happens Melanie is 19 years old and pregnant. She already had two children, the first one she had when she was 14 years old and the second one when she was 16, and she only had a vague idea of who the fathers were. Jimmy James was the father of her unborn child, and he was a troublemaker, just got out of prison for robbery among other things.

She was alike her mother, they both smoked and drunk often, even though the kids saw them. She had a brother named Colin who was 14, and other younger brothers and sisters (who were not specially mentioned). Fay Baldwin, who worked at the Health clinic and was the one who blabbed to Melanie about the peadophile, did not think a lot of Melanie and thought she was unfit as a mother and believed she sold herself. But it is not likely that she did even though she slept around.

She was a small blonde, and was careless about her looks, she did not try to cover her pregnant belly.

Character

She was rather careless person, and the fact she did not know who the fathers of her children were is a good point. Although she was careless she could get feisty when she needed too.

What she did

Fay Baldwin told Melanie and her mother, Gaynor, that a peadophile was living next to them (accidentally missed it out because she was so angry Melanie did let her kids run around and play like they wanted), and that they could possibly take Rosie. For that reasons Melanie and her mother organized a protest march to attract the government’s attention to the poor situations in their neighborhood (the neighborhood was full of children and women). So they spread the word about the molesters.

When the protest day arrived, she took the children outside with her, but when she realized that the protest would get out of control, she took them back inside.

Vona að þetta hjálpi þér eitthvað oggupogg ;)