Doctor Who: The Collection - Season 14, first released as a limited edition on Blu-ray in May 2020, is being re-released by BBC Studios on 27th July 2020 due to unprecedented demand for this season in the classic collection. All content, extras and artwork will remain the same as the 1st edition.

You can pre-order Doctor Who: The Collection – Season 14 from tomorrow at Amazon and HMV online.

In 1976, Doctor Who took a dramatic new turn, electrifying audiences with changes in format, companion and appearance of the TARDIS. Season 14 saw the departure of the Doctor’s long-term companion Sarah Jane Smith, and the introduction of Leela. The season contains some of Tom Baker’s most iconic serials, with intrepid investigations in Victorian London, deadly robots in a murderous whodunit, a return to the Doctor’s homeworld, and one of the saddest goodbyes in Doctor Who history.

Producer Phillip Hinchliffe led Doctor Who through a creative high, joined by Elisabeth Sladen as Sarah Jane Smith, Louise Jameson as the Doctor’s captivating new companion Leela and guests stars Tim Pigott-Smith, Stephen Thorne, Peter Pratt, Pamela Salem, David Collings, Christopher Benjamin and Trevor Baxter.

With all episodes newly remastered from the best available sources, this Blu-ray box set also contains extensive and exclusive special features which include:

Immersive 5.1 surround sound - The Deadly Assassin

Brand new audio commentaries - Tom Baker and Matthew Sweet on selected episodes of The Face of Evil and The Talons of Weng-Chiang.

Behind the Sofa - New episodes with Tom Baker, Louise Jameson, Philip Hinchcliffe, plus companions Sophie Aldred and Peter Purves.

Our Sarah Jane – Elisabeth Sladen Tribute - A feature-length look at the life and career of Sarah Jane Smith, played by Elisabeth Sladen.

Whose Doctor Who Revisited - Toby Hadoke meets the producers and grown-up stars of the very first Who Documentary.

In Conversation - Matthew Sweet chats to producer Philip Hinchcliffe.

Blu-Ray trailer - Louise Jameson has trouble with her new home assistant.

Brand new interviews

Rare archive material

Convention footage

HD photo galleries

Scripts, costume designs, rare BBC production files and other gems from our PDF archive

Doctor Who: The Collection – Season 14 includes the following stories from 1976-1977:

The Masque of Mandragora

The Hand of Fear

The Deadly Assassin

The Face of Evil

The Robots of Death

The Talons of Weng-Chiang