Singer Justin Timberlake’s house is in Los Angeles, CA.

Also an actor, producer and entrepreneur, Justin Timberlake’s net worth is $175 million.

In the spotlight from a young age, Justin Timberlake was on Star Search in 1991 and then cast as a mouseketeer in the revived television show “The Mickey Mouse Club.” He and JC Chasez, another mouseketeer, were recruited to be singers in what would become “‘N Sync.” He dated former castmate and singer Britney Spears from 1999 to 2002.

Justin Timberlake released three studio albums with ‘N Sync then launched his solo career with “Justified.” His second album debuted at the top of the Billboard 200. His awards include eleven MTV Video Music Awards, nine Grammy Awards, seven American Music Awards and four Emmy Awards. His artistic collaborations include Duran Duran, 50 Cent and Madonna.

His acting roles include “The Social Network,” “Shrek the Third,” “Black Snake Moan,” and “Just Friends.”

He has been active as an entrepreneur, attached to three restaurants – “Chi,” “Destino” and “Southern Hospitality” -- and co-founder of a line of clothing.

In addition to dating Britney Spears, other notable significant others include Cameron Diaz, whom he dated from April 2003 to December 2006. He started dating his wife, actress Jessica Biel, in 2007. They were engaged in December 2011 and married in Fasano, Italy at the Borgo Egnazia resort in October 2012. Jessica Biel gave birth to the couple’s son – Silas Randall Timberlake – in April 2015.

He has been No. 12 in 2008 and No. 26 in 2014 on the “Forbes” Celebrity 100 list and also second on the “Best-Paid Celebrities Under 30” list. He was called the third richest musician of 2013 by “Billboard.”

Justin Timberlake has contributed to music education programs in schools and donated money from his Australian tour to Wildlife Warriors, which was founded by Steve Irwin. He also has donated $100,000 to the Memphis Music Foundation and the Memphis Rock N’ Soul Museum.

Homes - Celebrity - Entertainment - Musicians

Links: en.wikipedia.org, www.celebritynetworth.com, www.architecturaldigest.com, nypost.com, www.mansionglobal.com

By: DonMartini