Breakfast in Memphis is definitely not for the faint of heart. This is no avocado-toast town. It’s all about real food for real people. And for Justin Timberlake, not to mention much of the Memphis population, it begins and ends with The Arcade. Located in the heart of downtown, The Arcade is Memphis’ oldest restaurant and one of its most popular.

Just a couple of miles away from the spot where rock music was born, you can also explore the birthplace of Southern soul. Otis Redding, Albert King, Wilson Pickett, Isaac Hayes, Booker T. and the MGs — when it comes to the soul and R&B sounds of the ‘60s and ‘70s, Stax is ground zero.

While the record label itself is long gone, the Stax museum, near the site of the original recording studio, keeps the memory of this extraordinary musical era alive. Along with tons of photos and artifacts — including Isaac Hayes’ seriously tricked out gold-plated 1972 Cadillac, the dance floor from Soul Train, and a complete 1906 Mississippi delta gospel church — there’s also a fascinating documentary that provides plenty of insight on Stax’s history.

Visiting Memphis and not eating dry rub BBQ is like visiting Italy and not eating pasta. It’s just what you do. And when you do it, it should be done at The Rendezvous, the quintessential rib joint in a quintessential BBQ town.

Much like Gus’, it’s a place Justin Timberlake nearly always pops into when he comes home. First opened in 1948 and still family owned, The Rendezvous is a basement restaurant located across from the famous Peabody Hotel. With its location tucked away in a nondescript alleyway, just finding it makes you feel like you’ve earned your BBQ feast. Once there, the downstairs area opens up into a sprawling brick-walled cavern dotted by tables with checked tablecloths and customers up to their elbows — sometimes literally — in Memphis dry rub.

When rounded out by the perfect sides and a pitcher of beer, it becomes the sort of meal to build an entire trip to Memphis around.