Before Greece became one of the many Roman dominions located on the wide Mediterranean coast, its main city, Athens, had stood the test of countless centuries of history.

The Athenians had a metropolis with their own identity, and the Romans knew the immense cultural legacy that existed in the city. However, Athens had to expand, grow beyond its traditional limits and in order to do so, a border had to be marked between the old city and the new city.

It is not known whether the person who commissioned the construction of the arch was actually Emperor Hadrian. It is presumed that it was a monument built as a compliment by the Athenian citizens themselves to the ruler, who had a deep affection for Greek culture and way of life.

Today, the Arch of Hadrian still stands, and still represents a clear division between what was Classical Athens and Roman Athens.

One of the things that stand out the most about this ancient arch is its location, since it is relatively close to the mythical Temple of Zeus, precinct and archaeological site also known as the Olimpeion. Likewise, the arch is easy to recognize, as it is 18 meters high and made entirely of marble.

In addition to its historical importance, Hadrian’s Arch is also an architectural treasure of incalculable value. Its design is simple, but it has stood for 19 centuries, with almost no damage. This makes it a wonder from another time, which has arrived in excellent condition to this day.

Likewise, one of the great curiosities of the Arch of Hadrian are its inscriptions, which on one side reads “This is Athens, the ancient city of Theseus” while the other side of the arch states that “This is the city of Hadrian, and not of Theseus ”.

Like the origin of the bow itself, the true meaning of these words remains a mystery. Despite this, it is easy to see that these inscriptions refer to ancient Athens, which belonged to Theseus, and modern Athens, which began with Hadrian.

Although Hadrian’s Arch is not one of the most popular tourist attractions in the Greek capital, it is worth a visit. If you are a fan of history, you will love being close to such an ancient monument, you can also take all the photographs you want.

Despite this, you have to be careful, since the Arch of Hadrian is on a busy road with a lot of vehicular traffic. For this same reason, it is not very frequented by tourists and it is usually clear.

With the proper precaution and the best disposition, taking a short walk to see the mythical Arch of Hadrian, a tribute to one of the men who created modern Athens, will be a journey that you will want to do many more times.