Some buildings in Hadrian's Villa, as the Maritime Theatre and Piazza d’Oro, show trabeation with a characteristic curvilinear shape decorated with figured friezes. The dispersal of most of the decoration of Hadrian’s Villa in public and private collections involves difficulties in replacing the friezes in each building. As already known, the architectural decoration of the southern pavilion of Piazza d’Oro, subjected to anastylosis operations in the sixties, had been soon removed, because considered a wrong solution. Also in the Maritime Theatre several figured friezes have been wrong replaced inside the building, as already stated by recent studies. A new integrated approach applied to the study of the curvilinear shape friezes, belonging to the Maritime Theatre (ADEMBRI, DI TONDO, FANTINI 2009), allowed to make new reliable assumptions about the replacement of the architectural decoration (Adembri, Di Tondo, Fantini, Granada 2010, soon to appear; Adembri, exhibition catalogue of the last exhibition in Hadrian’s Villa, 2010); however, the state of conservation of the masonry does not provide enough evidence for the reconstruction of the original aspect of this building. Piazza d'Oro, which shows an architectural decoration very close to the Maritime Theatre, could be a meaningful comparison to a better understanding of the design solutions adopted in Hadrian’s buildings with curvilinear shape. Figured friezes from Piazza d’Oro, preserved in the Villa and in other Italian and European collections, are the key elements for solving the problem of how the curvilinear marble elements were assembled.

This article provides a study of Hadrian arches from three main locations: Jordan, Turkey, and Greece. Collectively within these countries, four arches have been found the Hadrian arch at Jerash (Gerasa) in Jordan, the Hadrian arch in Antalya and Ephesus, both in Turkey, and the Hadrian arch in Athens, Greece. The units of our analysis include all the different designs and plans used in constructing these arches. The analyzed design and planning units constitute a database that enables the identification of similarities and differences between these four arches. The study included is descriptions of the arches, which are then compared with one another. although many can be found from the time of the Roman Emperors in the Eastern and Western Roman Provinces. it is generally considered that the Hadrian Period is one of the more important Roman periods, something evident through that period's architectural elements and decorations. Though we only find the Hadrian's Arches at four locations, there are many locations where we can find such Hadrian building as baths or theaters, and others coming from the time of this emperor's reign. This article has examined the architectural elements and decorations found on the Hadrian's Arches, as well as other buildings dating from the Roman period, both in the Near East and elsewhere.

During the restorations carried out between 1964 and 1972 of Hadrian’s Villa it was found a strange marble handmade, broken into various pieces that once assembled seemed to be a sort of maquette of a stadium. For many years scholars and researchers tried to guess and interpret its real function (an architectural model, a marble fountain, a game, etc.) but still remained some doubts. Thanks to a new research came out some relevant outputs: first of all, the handmade was a model of a building for spectacles (munera and venationes) that was never built inside the Villa, but the second result was even more interesting because it dealt with the architectural designing of a specific typology of buildings that we can find in almost all places visited by Hadrian during his reign: Cesarea of Mauretania (Cherchell, Algeria) , Virunum (Klagenfurt, Austria) Skythopolis (Beth-Shean, Israel), Lucera (Italia). The fragments of the marble model were surveyed by means of 3D laser scanner, and then ...

This chapter examines the theory of Greek and Roman architecture. It begins by considering the traditional understanding of theory as more important than practice before turning to a discussion of Vitruvius’s treatise De architectura and his theory on architecture, particularly his ideas about the principles of symmetria, eurythmia, and decor. It then explores the design of ancient buildings and the theories underlying their construction. It shows that theoretical aspects of architecture emerged in ancient Greece and Rome over the course of the Classical and Hellenistic periods, which were consolidated by Vitruvius in his treatise. The chapter concludes by highlighting how theory related in a meaningful way to practice.

This article includes a study of the composite capitals on the Hadrian’s Gates at three locations: Gerasa, Antalya, and Ephesus. Hadrian’s Gates were selected as a case study because it is one of the most important Buildings with composites capitals. A typological study of composite capitals shows two types, the first, composite capitals (Ionic capital with flutes and acanthus leaves), The second, composite capitals (Ionic capital with Palme and acanthus leaves), Those types were used on Hadrian’s Gates during the Roman Period. The study includes description and comparative study of the composite capitals found in Hadrian’s Gates and other Roman Locations.