The Acropolis Museum in Athens celebrated the 1900th anniversary of Hadrian’s accession with the presentation of an exquisite portrait of the Emperor found on Syngrou Avenue and an interesting video showcasing the Emperor’s immense building program in Athens. The presentation ran from 15 January to 31 March 2017.

Hadrian was a dedicated philhellene who admired Greek culture. He visited Greece on several occasions during his reign (124/5, 128/9 and 131/2 AD) and was especially fond of Athens, where he resided as a private citizen from 111 to 113 AD. Pausanias writes that “Hadrian’s generosity to his subjects was bestowed most of all on Athens”, whilst Cassius Dio tells about Hadrian’s generosity in a passage referring to his stay: “He granted the Athenians large sums of money, an annual dole of grain, and the whole of Cephallenia”. The philhellenic Emperor did all he could to raise Athens to a special position in the Roman Empire and hoped to restore the city to the greatness of its distant past. Hadrian’s affection for Athens and Greek culture in general may well have been established during his childhood education.

The Historia Augusta also tells us that Hadrian’s devotion to Greek studies earned him the nickname “Graeculus” (Greekling) in his youth. Before becoming Emperor, he was archon of Athens in 112 AD, the highest office a citizen could aspire to. An epigraphic inscription on a statue base in the Theatre of Dionysus confirms his position.

The portrait of Hadrian presented at the Acropolis Museum was found in 1933 on Syngrou Avenue in Athens, on the road to Phaleron, and is kept at the National Archaeological Museum (inv. 3729).

Made of Pentelic marble in a Greek workshop, this portrait shows Hadrian with the corona civica (oak wreath crown), which denotes the Emperor as the saviour of the people. The iconography of the central disc of the crown inlaid with the figure of an eagle, the emblem of Zeus, also identifies Hadrian as Olympios, directly linking him to the great god Zeus. His gaze is directed upwards and mirrors the slight leftward torsion of the head, which was intended to be set onto a colossal statue. The nose and the central forelock are broken, and no restorations were done on this portrait.

The configuration of the hair and locks associate this majestic portrait with the so-called “Imperatori 32” type, one of the seven sculptural types attributed to the extant corpus of Hadrian portraits. Approximately 160 examples of sculpted portraits of Hadrian have been found to date, and the “Imperatori 32” type was a type popular in Italy and the provinces (most notably in Greece and North Africa). The “Imperatori 32” type is distinct for its two rows of locks above the temples and its forehead with two parallel wrinkles. The three-dimensional rendering of the irises and pupils indicates that this portrait was made in the 130s when Hadrian dedicated the Temple of Zeus Olympios in person.

Alongside this portrait, an interesting video produced by the Museum showcased the numerous building projects Hadrian embarked upon during his reign.

Production: The Acropolis Museum

Texts: Dimitris Pandermalis

Image and editing: Kostas Arvanitakis

Translation: Lydia-Antonia Trakatellis

Here’s the transcript of the video’s text, which presented Hadrian’s building program in Athens, accompanied by some of my photographs taken during my recent trips to Greece.

1. The year 2017 sees the 1900th anniversary of the ascent to the throne of Hadrian, an admirer and benefactor of Athens. The Acropolis Museum pays tribute to the immense program of the Emperor who renewed and expanded the urban planning of Athens and signified the revival of Greek Letters and Science during the Roman Empire.

2. Above the ancient road leading from the Acropolis to the Olympieion, a two-story gate was erected, marking the boundary between the old city of Athens (the city of Theseus) and the new city (the city of Hadrian). The Athenian Neapolis stretches under the Zappeion and the National Garden. To date, archaeological excavations at the site have located luxurious mansions, baths, and a gymnasium.

3. In 131/2 AD, in a magnificent ceremony, Hadrian inaugurated the temple of the god in the ancient Sanctuary of Olympian Zeus, for which construction had begun in the 6th century BC but was concluded with the generous donation of the Emperor. The gigantic temple of the Corinthian order across from the Acropolis was twice the size of the Parthenon, with a surface of approximately 5,000 sq m. Its interior housed the Chryselephantine statue of Zeus.

4. The temple covered a surface of approximately 5,000 sq m and was symmetrically positioned in a rectangular enclosure with a perimeter of 673 m. Along the precinct, hundreds of bronze statues of the Emperor were erected and dedicated to him by the Greek cities. Behind the west side of the temple, a colossal statue of the Emperor facing the Acropolis and visible from a great distance was dedicated by the city of Athens.