Tabloid scandals come and go, but some are so fully entrenched in celebrity history that we'll never forget them. The Jude Law and Sienna Miller cheating debacle of 2005 is certainly one of those events.

The actor's nanny came forward to spill the beans about their secret affair, leading Law to release a public statement of apology.

Here's everything that happened.

READ MORE: Five of the biggest bombshell revelations from Netflix's Anna Nicole Smith documentary

What happened to Jude Law and Sienna Miller?

Jude Law and Sienna Miller began dating after meeting on the set of their 2004 film Alfie, and got engaged on Christmas Day of the same year.

Just a few months later, news broke that Law had cheated on Miller and slept with their nanny.

He released a statement reading: "I just want to say I am deeply ashamed and upset that I've hurt Sienna and the people most close to us. I want to publicly apologise to Sienna and our respective families for the pain that I have caused. There is no defence for my actions which I sincerely regret and I ask that you respect our privacy at this very difficult time."

READ MORE: What happened to Mischa Barton?

Who was the nanny that Jude Law slept with?

In May 2005, it was reported that the Sherlock Holmes actor was having an affair with Daisy Wright, the nanny of his three kids from his previous marriage to Sadie Frost.

READ MORE: Inside Kevin Costner's two divorces and his seven children to three different women

After Frost confronted Daisy about the affair and fired her from the position, Daisy went to the press and revealed all about her relationship with Law.

Daisy explained that she exposed their affair after being disappointed in the actor: "I was extremely upset about the way I was dismissed just like that from my job... I felt that Jude should have fought for me."

How long were Jude Law and Sienna Miller together?

Miller was only 23 years old when the affair went public. The couple stayed together, but broke up the following year, in 2006. They briefly reunited in 2009.

Miller has since defended her decision to stay with Law, but maintains that it was one of the hardest times of her life. At the time, she was performing in a play in London with shows every night. "That was one of the most challenging moments I hope I'll ever have to experience," she told Daily Beast in 2020. Because with that level of public heartbreak, to have to get out of a bed let alone stand in front of 800 people every night, it's just the last thing you want to do."

The couple split for good in 2011, and don't remain in contact. She told Porter in 2016: "We don't see each other that much. I care about him enormously."

READ MORE: Why you never see Jessica Alba on the big screen

READ MORE: The many loves of Rod Stewart: A deep dive into the rocker's colourful personal life

Did Jude Law stay with the nanny?

As part of his apology to Sienna Miller, Law cut off communication with Daisy, the nanny with whom he had an affair. She was dismissed from her position and moved on from the family.

Who is Sienna Miller married to?

Miller has never been married. In 2011 Miller dated actor Tom Sturridge – they got engaged and share a daughter born in 2012, but split in 2015.

She has been dating model Oli Green since 2022.

READ MORE: The Barrymore acting dynasty: Every famous member of Drew Barrymore's family

How many wives has Jude Law had?

Law married his first wife, Sadie Frost in 1997. They had three kids and divorced in 2003, shortly before he met Sienna Miller.

He married girlfriend Phillipa Coan in 2019, in an intimate ceremony in London, and the couple welcomed a daughter the following year.

What is Daisy Wright doing now?

Daisy Wright withdrew from the spotlight after being paid handsomely for her tell-all interview about Law. She went back to nannying; in 2011 she opened her own staffing agency. Wright has two kids and is very private, with almost zero online presence.

READ MORE: Nicole Kidman's four kids: What are they up to now?

Who did Jude Law have a baby with and how many kids does he have?

Jude Law has six children. His three eldest are from his first marriage to Sadie Frost: Raff, Rudy, and Iris.

In 2008, he had a brief relationship with model Samantha Burke, who gave birth to their daughter Sofia in 2009, though the couple didn't stay together.

His fifth child, Ava, was born in 2015 to his singer-songwriter ex Catherine Harding, after they met during a summer in Europe. "Whilst they are no longer in a relationship, they are both wholeheartedly committed to raising their child," the actor's rep said in a statement at the time.

Law and his wife Phillipa Coan welcomed a baby girl in 2020.

READ MORE: The years-long controversy surrounding The Flash star Ezra Miller, explained