Sienna Miller has opened up about the pain she felt when her then-fiancé, Jude Law, was publicly revealed to be having an affair with their nanny.

Law and Miller began dating in 2003, just after he split from ex-wife Sadie Frost, with whom he shares three children. The couple got engaged in 2004, but in 2005 Law issued a public apology to Miller for having an affair with his children's nanny.

They stayed together for another year and a half, before splitting up in 2006. Now, Miller has spoken candidly about that time in her life, and how it thrust her into the public spotlight.

"That was one of the most challenging moments I hope I'll ever have to experience," Sienna said in a new interview with The Daily Beast. "Because with that level of public heartbreak, to have to get out of a bed let alone stand in front of 800 people every night, it's just the last thing you want to do."

At the time, the British actress was starring in the play As You Like It on London's West End.

"It was really hard," she added. "And the other thing was, it was at the height of all that paparazzi madness, and in London where there was an epidemic of bad behaviour. They knew where I would be every night."

She went on to explain that she's basically blocked the bad memories out of her mind.

"There's a whole six weeks of that experience that I don't remember. I have no recollection of it. People who came to see me said we had dinner, and I don't remember. I was in so much shock over it all. And I'd really just begun. I was only 23. But if you get through that, you feel like you can get through anything," she said.

After their split in 2006, the pair rekindled their romance in 2009 –– they were seen attending Broadway shows together, and spent Christmas together with Law's children.

They called it quits again in 2011.

Miller says that the worst part of the whole experience was the way she was treated by the media. "There were moments where it came close to making me really feel crazy, and it was incredibly aggressive."

In fact, she felt so cornered that she decided to fight back against the media who were invading her privacy.

"I secretly recorded paparazzi on a lighter that was a camera, and got a privacy act taken to a high court to get the law changed in England, which essentially means that if I'm anywhere or coming out of anywhere where I can expect privacy they're not allowed to take my photo," Miller shared.

In the past she's spoken openly about her battle for privacy, particularly after her phone was hacked in the 2011 News Of The World scandal. She gave evidence in court, saying: "I would often find myself almost daily, I was 21, at midnight running down a dark street on my own with 10 big men chasing me.

"The fact that they had cameras in their hands meant that was legal. But if you take away the cameras, what have you got? You've got a pack of men chasing a woman, and obviously that's a very intimidating situation to be in."