Jude Law and Sienna Miller first met in 2003 when they starred together in the romantic comedy Alfie, a remake of the 1966 film of the same name. That same year, Law was enmeshed in a messy divorce from his then-spouse, actor and designer Sadie Frost, whom he'd married in 1997, but that proved to be no impediment to the glamorous new couple. They were engaged by the end of 2004. But their happiness was short-lived, as twin tabloid scandals rocked the relationship—one of them tied to a larger drama involving hacked voicemails and shady tabloid reporters. Read on to learn how Miller's supposed affair with Layer Cake co-star Daniel Craig seemed to be confirmed by an affectionate voicemail that surfaced during a court case.

RELATED: Ali MacGraw "Knew" She'd Have Affair With Co-Star Steve McQueen: "I Was Obsessed."

Both took part in affairs that became tabloid sensations.

In 2005, Miller and Law were involved in a major tabloid scandal, when Law's children's nanny, Daisy Wright, went public with claims that she'd had an affair with the actor when he and Miller were together.

Miller took the news hard, according to contemporary accounts, even breaking down onstage during a play in which she was performing at the time. Recalling that time in a 2020 interview with The Daily Beast, the now-41-year-old actor said, "There's a whole six weeks of that experience that I don't remember. I have no recollection of it."

However, Miller's own rumored affair would soon come to light in the pages of the News of the World tabloid, which in 2005 published claims that the actor was involved with future James Bond Craig—her co-star in the 2004 crime drama, Layer Cake.

RELATED: Hugh Grant Blamed Cheating on Elizabeth Hurley on One of His Roles.

Miller told Craig she loved him in a voicemail.

While the source of the rumors about Law's affair named herself, the origin of the claim that Miller had a dalliance with Craig was much murkier. According to TheThings, after the story broke in the News Corp.-owned tabloid News of the World, reporter Dan Evans claimed that someone anonymously delivered him an incriminating voicemail from Miller to Craig.

"Hi. It's me. Can't speak. I'm at the Groucho [a club] with Jude. I love you," Miller reportedly says in the voice message.

The claims were also supported by tips from Miller's driver, who sold his story to The Telegraph. Per the same outlet, when word of the affair reached Law's camp in advance of News of the World running the story, the actor's public relations team worked with the paper to "backdate" the scoop to make it appear as though Miller had already cheated by the time Law began his relationship with Frost.

Craig's voicemail had been hacked.

It wasn't until nearly a decade later that the voicemail hacking routinely done by tabloid papers in the U.K. in search of scoops became public knowledge, surfacing as part of a court battle against News of the World. Both Law and Miller took the stand during the 2014 trial to testify to how the paper had exposed their business by unethical means. For her part, Miller said she didn't specifically remember recording the voicemail to Craig, whose phone had been hacked, she did admit that it was "absolutely feasible" that she did so some time in 2005, according to The Guardian.

Miller claimed the voicemail was genuine, but blown out of proportion.

Miller admitted she had "probably" left the message but told the court that tabloid headlines blew it out of proportion. Ending the call with "I love you" was not indicative of a passionate affair, she said, but simply how she would've ended any phone call with her Layer Cake co-star.ae0fcc31ae342fd3a1346ebb1f342fcb

"I think the thing that is being slightly misconstrued about this voicemail message was that I said 'I love you' and that this was some incredibly important declaration of love," she said, as reported by The Telegraph. "Since we became friends in 2003m I always ended my phone calls with 'I love you,' as I did with all my friends and family."

According to the paper, Miller characterized her relationship with Craig to the court as "a very brief encounter."

For his part, Craig never addressed the rumored romance publicly.

Law and Miller later reunited.

In the wake of the scandals, the Miller and Law broke off their engagement, separating in November 2006.

In 2008, Miller's name was in the tabloid headlines again when she became involved in an affair with actor Balthazar Getty, who was married at the time. Meanwhile, Law was briefly involved with model Samantha Burke, who gave birth to his fourth child in September 2009.

A few months later, in December 2009, Law and Miller got back together, reportedly amid both starring in different plays on Broadway. By early 2011, however, they had broken up again.