William S. Burroughs is a member of the following lists: Heroin, Former Scientologists and American poets.

Contribute

Who is William S. Burroughs dating? William S. Burroughs girlfriend, wife list. Help us build our profile of William S. Burroughs! Login to add information, pictures and relationships, join in discussions and get credit for your contributions.

Relationship Statistics

TypeTotalLongestAverageShortestMarried1 7 years, 8 months - - Dating4 8 years, 7 months 3 years, 4 months 5 years Total5 8 years, 7 months 4 years, 3 months 5 years

Details

First Name William Middle Name Seward Last Name Burroughs Full Name at Birth William Seward Burroughs II Alternative Name William Lee Birthday 5th February, 1914 Birthplace St. Louis, Missouri, USA Died 2nd August, 1997 Place of Death Lawrence, Kansas, USA Cause of Death Heart Attack Buried Bellefontaine Cemetery, Saint Louis, St. Louis City, Missouri, USA Height 6' 1" (185 cm) Build Average Eye Color Brown - Light Hair Color Salt and Pepper Zodiac Sign Aquarius Sexuality Bisexual Religion Occult / Thelemite Ethnicity White Nationality American University Harvard University (1936), Mexico City College(1949-1952) Occupation Text Novelist, short story writer, essayist, painter, spoken word performer, outlaw, , ex-convict, (former) criminal Occupation Author Claim to Fame Best known for the books "Junkie" (1953) and "Naked Lunch" (1959), and also for being a primary figure of the Beat Generation. Music Genre (Text) Satire, Paranoid Fiction, Beat literature Family Member William S. Burroughs Jr. (son) (author)

William Seward Burroughs II (; February 5, 1914 – August 2, 1997) was an American writer, visual artist, spoken word performer and chaos magician credited as a primary figure of the Beat Generation and a major postmodern author who influenced popular culture and literature. Burroughs wrote eighteen novels and novellas, six collections of short stories and four collections of essays, and five books have been published of his interviews and correspondences. He also collaborated on projects and recordings with numerous performers and musicians and made many appearances in films. He was also briefly known by the pen name William Lee. Burroughs created and exhibited thousands of paintings and other visual artworks, including his celebrated 'Shotgun Art'.