Serena Williams exemplifies courage, beauty, power and style, and has overcome insurmountable odds to win 23 career Grand Slams. Her remarkable tennis achievements combined with her off-court success in fashion and philanthropy, as well as a strategic partner and investor, makes her one of the most recognizable global icons in the world.

Serena was born in Saginaw, Michigan to Richard Williams and Oracene Price. While still an infant, the family moved to Compton, California where she began playing tennis at the age of four. At nine, Serena and her family moved to Florida. Since that time, she has become the most dominant figure in tennis.

Serena has won 23 Grand Slam titles, tied with Stefi Graff, as the most titles won in history of the Open Area, with her most recent win at the 2017 Australian Open while pregnant. In the summer of 2016, Serena won the Wimbledon Championship in both singles and doubles alongside her sister Venus.

In 2015, Serena won four grand slams: Wimbledon, the French Open, the Australian Open, and the 2014 US Open, a feat affectionately known as the “Serena Slam” and ended the year on the cover of SPORTS ILLUSTRATED as their “Sportsperson of the Year.”

Overall, Serena has 23 Grand Slam singles titles and 14 Grand Slam doubles titles. She’s won 783 Professional singles matches, 185 doubles professional matches, 72 WTA singles titles, 23 WTA doubles titles, Gold Medal in Doubles in 2000 (Sydney), 2008 (Beijing), 2012 (London), and Gold Medal in Singles in 2012 (London).

Off the court, fashion, acting and dancing are Serena's passions. She was named a “Fashion Trendsetter” by VOGUE for harnessing her passion to create her HSN Signature Statement collection; an aspirational brand that is accessible to the common consumer. In 2016 alone, Serena was featured on the covers of SELF, GLAMOUR, WSJ MAGAZINE and FADER. Only to be topped by her 2017 cover of VANITY FAIR and 2018 cover of VOGUE, HARPER'S BAZAAR UK, and INSTYLE and the release of her own clothing line 'Serena.'

Serena is a dedicated philanthropist. She started the Serena Williams Fund, is a global Goodwill ambassador for UNICEF, and in the fall of 2016, she joined philanthropic forces with her sister Venus to establish the Williams Sister Fund where they launched their first endeavor in their hometown of Compton: the Yetunde Price Resource Center. Named after their eldest sister who was killed by senseless gun violence, the Resource Center conducts community asset inventory and develops a comprehensive resource network designed to connect residents affected by violence with service providers. In February 2016, Serena partnered with the Helping Hands Jamaica Foundation to build a school in Jamaica and has funded and opened two schools in Africa that are currently in operation.

Serena splits her time between Palm Beach, Florida and Los Angeles, California with her husband Alexis Ohanian and her first child, Alexis Olympia Ohanian, Jr.