Birthdate: September 26, 1981

Birthplace: Saginaw, Michigan

Zodiac Sign: Libra

The younger half of arguably the most talented sisters in professional sports, Serena Williams is shining as one of tennis’ brightest stars.

Serena Williams - Growing Up

Serena and her famous sister, Venus Williams, started playing tennis at a young age, while growing up in the rough community of Compton, California. Their father wanted them to excel at the sport, creating an escape from the inner-city. And the sisters did just that. Throughout her childhood, Serena’s name was at the top of the amateur ranks lists and by the time she was 14, she'd already turned pro!

Young Serena and Venus Williams

Serena Williams - As a Pro

Since turning pro, Serena Williams has won an incredible seven Grand Slam singles titles. Four of those seven happened in one year! In 2003, Serena won all four Grand Slams (Wimbledon, Australian Open, French Open, US Open). Throughout her career, Serena has competed with her sis Venus for the number one spot but in [kwlink]recent history[/kwlink], she's been far from the top player. After an injury-plagued 2006 season, where her ranking fell all the way to 95, Williams has vowed to get back to the number one spot in 2007.

Serena Williams - Extracurricular Activities

Serena has been known to make fashion statements through her flashy and colorful outfits on the court. She even has her own fashion line, Aneres (which is her name spelled backwards). Serena Williams has also done some acting and modeling work. She has appeared in TV shows like My Wife and Kids and The Simpsons and . Serena also posed in the 2004 Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue.

Serena Williams - Did U Know?

Serena’s all-time favorite TV show is Golden Girls.

Serena Williams is a huge Marilyn Monroe fan.

Even though she's fearless on the court, Serena Williams is afraid of the dark!

Serena Williams is allergic to peanuts.

Some of Serena’s favorite musical acts include Beyonce, Brandy and U2.

Serena Williams is the youngest of five girls, but there are only four surviving Williams girls. Her older sister Yetunde was killed in 2003.

Serena Williams Says...

"Family's first, and that's what matters most. [Venus and I] realize that our love goes deeper than the tennis game."

Related Stories: