Emerson. Do the thing and you will have the power to do the thing.

I am spending time with my son this weekend. Yeeeeaaa!!!

I am keeping this post short.

During the home football games in college, there was a cheer that would ALWAYS get the students riled up. It was the “Do It” cheer ( I gave it that name because I have no clue what they called it.)

The cheer began with some simple hand clapping. The cheerleaders would then begin their cheer saying “DO IT, DO IT, DO IT”. Of course, the crowd repeated the chant back. Then the cheerleaders would say “NOW STOP! AND LET THE FRESHMEN DO IT”. Back to the chant “DO IT, DO IT, DO IT” while the freshmen in the crowd stood to their feet dancing and gyrating. Moving up to the next class, the cheerleaders would shout “NOW STOP! AND LET THE SOPHOMORES DO IT”. “DO IT, DO IT, DO IT” would be shouted back as the freshmen sat down and the sophomores stood to their feet dancing and gyrating.

This continued on through the juniors and the seniors. It didn’t stop there though.

After the seniors, the cheerleaders screamed to everyone in the stands “NOW STOP! AND EVERYBODY DO IT”. At which point, everyone in the stands would stand dancing and gyrating screaming…

DO IT, DO IT, DO IT

DO IT, DO IT, DO IT

DO IT, DO IT, DO IT

That’s my message today. If you have a dream today that you haven’t been tending to then “Stop! And, do it!”

If you have a goal that you have been waiting for the right time to begin your journey towards then I want you to get to stop what you’re doing, get to your feet and do it.

If you have been knocked down today and feel like you can’t get up up…

If you have been told ‘no’ so many times that you feel like you might need to have to file for a change of name…

If you have simple been on the fence about whether to move forward in your life after a bad relationship (or maybe you’re still in one)…

Read this very carefully…

STOP! and…

DO IT, DO IT, DO IT

If you have to sing the mantra out loud to yourself then sing it.

DO IT, DO IT, DO IT

If you don’t think you have enough courage right now to go through with it, then trust in these words: Yes, you can do it! But you have to get up and…

DO IT, DO IT, DO IT

D Arlando Fortune

Keep it as simple as A, B, C’s; 1, 2, 3’s; and, do, re, mi’s

PS. Sign up to this blog to keep getting more stories and to learn how to us storytelling over selling.