For the past ten years I have been a cheerleader (and still counting). I started off as a Lincoln Lynx, became a LaSalle-Peru Cavalier, and now I am a Lindenwood Lion, I have attended too many practices to count. I have cheered numerous basketball and football games. I have competed in many competitions.

Cheerleading has taught me very valuable lesson. Thanks to cheer I now know how to do winged eyeliner and game-day hair/makeup, but those aren’t the type of lessons I’m talking about. Cheerleading has taught me about life. It’s taught me a lot about myself. It’s taught me how

STANDING UP FOR MYSELF

I have gotten very good at stating my case and standing up for myself. I cannot count how many times I have had to battle with people over the topic of if cheerleading is a sport or not. (WHICH IT IS….DON’T GET ME STARTED)

ENTHUSIASM

To be a cheerleader you need S-P-I-R-I-T! You’re a cheerleader AKA the cheerful person who is in charge of getting everyone excited.

CONFIDENCE

If you don’t believe you can do something you’re not going to. You have to have confidence and believe in yourself when it comes to cheerleading. This applies to competitions and performances, game-day activities, and everything else that cheerleading entails.

FOCUS & DETERMINATION

In order to perform skills you need to be all about that skill. The flipping, throwing, jumping, and catching takes concentration. It takes the want to accomplish it. You may not get a skill the first time you do it. You become determined and driven to get those skills that you have been focusing so hard on.

TEAMWORK

A cheer squad isn’t made of one person. In order to have a stunt, pyramid, or basket happen you need your team. You need to learn how to work together with others in order to reach your goal. You need your team for skills, for support, and to make up a squad.

BE FEARLESS

What kind of person willingly runs and throws their body around trying to deify all laws of gravity? What kind of person trust others enough to let them throw them around? What kind of person would let someone free fall in the air and expect them to fall correctly and safely into their arms? Cheerleaders that is who. The skills we perform require us to be fearless.

DEALING WITH HIGH PRESSURE SITUATIONS

Cheerleading competitvely has taught me to stay grounded in high pressure situations. For competitve cheerleading, you get two minutes and thirty seconds on a mat to make your mark. Hours on hours of practice come down to that moment. No pressure, right?

COMMITMENT

If you’re a cheerleader it is because you love it. There is no part-time cheerleaders. The season for us is about all year-round. You have those long tiring practices when coach says “last time” but really it is never the last time. You spend hours in those practices, cheering games, traveling and participating in competitions, and so much more.

TAKING CRITICISM

There are plenty of things that can go wrong and that you can do wrong in the sport of cheerleading. Sometimes it is your fault that something falls. When that happens someone is going to correct you. Receiving correction and pointers from coaches has helped me to understand how to take criticism. They are not saying I did something wrong because they don’t like me. They are always working to help me figure out the best way to do something.

SETTING GOALS

Cheerleading has continuously pushed me to set goals for myself. I am constantly wanting to get better and increase my skills. Cheerleading challenges me to set goals to push myself to the next level.

NEVER STOP SMILING

Your life may feel upside down or you might actually be upside down in a back tuck…..never stop smiling.