Julius Axelrod, the American pharmacologist and neuroscientist who has died aged 92, shared the 1970 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his discovery of how chemicals called neurotransmitters regulate mood and behaviour - work that has revolutionised the treatment of depression, anxiety and other psychiatric disorders.

Axelrod was known affectionately throughout the scientific community as "Julie"; and for 30-odd years, "Julie's laboratory" at the American National Institute of Mental Health's Laboratory of Clinical Science was the destination of choice for the brightest of the world's post-doctoral pharmacology students.

Axelrod was never in any doubt about the significance of his research. When once asked at a press conference whether Sigmund Freud was "dead", he replied: "Not for people who want to spend their money on psychoanalysis; but for the treatment of severe mental illness, yes, he is."

The son of Jewish immigrants from Galicia, in what is now Poland, Julius Axelrod was born on May 30 1912 on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, where his father supported the family as a basket-maker. Julius attended Seward Park High School, developing an interest in history, literature and science.

Rejecting his family's hopes that he would train as a rabbi, he enrolled at New York University and, after one year, transferred to the City College of New York, a free-tuition "proletarian Harvard", from which he graduated with a degree in Biology in 1933.

By now Axelrod had conceived an ambition to go on to study Medicine, but American medical schools of the time imposed quotas on Jewish entrants, and his applications were rejected. "I wasn't that good a student," he reflected later. "But if my name was Bigelow I probably would have gotten in."

Graduating in the middle of the Depression and finding work in his field hard to come by, Axelrod considered taking a job as a post office clerk. But he then landed a post at New York University as a laboratory technician.

In 1935 he took a job at the New York City Department of Health's Laboratory of Industrial Hygiene testing vitamin supplements added to food, particularly milk. In 1938 he lost his left eye in an accident involving an exploding bottle of ammonia, and this disability barred him from military service.

He remained at the Laboratory for 11 years, during which time he took night classes at New York University, earning a master's degree in Chemistry in 1941.

This research led to the development by Johnson & Johnson of the new drug Tylenol; but the significance of the papers, and Axelrod's role in the research, had wider implications for pharmacology. It was he who developed the measurement techniques which allowed the two men to unravel the metabolic pathways involved in the absorption of acetaminophen, and his technical analysis included broad general principles for sensitive measurement techniques, with guidelines for their application.

Axelrod worked with Brodie for eight years, but although he acknowledged the senior man as his mentor, he felt increasingly frustrated that he was not getting due credit for his role in their joint research. Having no doctorate, Axelrod was regarded in the scientific community as little more than Brodie's technician.

In 1954 he took a leave of absence from the National Institutes of Health to attend George Washington University, where, the next year, he obtained a doctorate; his thesis, based on his previous research on enzymes in brain metabolism, was entitled The Fate of Phenylisopropylamines. The same year he joined the American National Institute of Mental Health's Laboratory of Clinical Science as head of the pharmacology section, and it was here that he began his work on the activity of neurotransmitter hormones.

A soft-spoken man with a self-deprecatory sense of humour, Axelrod recalled how it was from his dentist that he learned he had won a Nobel Prize. "In what?" he inquired. "Peace," the dentist replied. Axelrod assumed the man was joking and it was some hours before he discovered the truth.

In later life he reflected that the Prize (which he shared with the British pharmacologist Sir Bernard Katz and the Swedish physiologist Ulf von Euler) had come at a price, in that "people read my papers more carefully" and he was always being bombarded with invitations to speak. His general rule was to accept only the ones which interested him, "or the ones in Paris".