Outpost

Scott Mackay

Tor hard cover

Another debut novel from a Canadian -- there seems to be a trend this month. A group of human prisoners escape from a hi-tech alien prison, only to find themselves enmeshed in a war between two alien races for control of the human past, the key to which lies buried in the time of the Italian Renaissance. A rich story of time travel, aliens and alternate history. The Great Wheel

Ian R. MacLeod

Harcourt Brace hard cover

First novel from the noted short story writer. In 2170, the Endless City occupies the entire coast of North Africa. Global warming and climate control have created perpetual cloud cover. Father John Alston offers the people who live in squalor on the city borders as much spiritual comfort aid as he can. But when he discovers that the koiyl leaf chewed by the border people may be causing cancer, it triggers an investigation which leads to a surprising trail. Voyages by Starlight

Ian R. MacLeod

Arkham House hard cover

Another fine collection from Arkham House, this one featuring the author of The Great Wheel.

Art: Mark Salwowski

The Cassini Division

Ken MacLeod

Tor (hardcover, 240 pages, $22.95 US)

Publication date: July 15, 1999

Ken MacLeod has been compared to Bruce Sterling, and Iain Banks in his native Britain. This is his first novel released in the US. "Ellen May Ngewthu is a young woman with centuries of experience, a soldier and leader of the elite defense force of the utopian Solar Union. In the twenty-fourth century the forts of the Division, in orbit around a mysteriously transformed Jupiter, are the front line in humanity's long standoff with the unknowable posthumans -- godlike and remote beings descended from those who transformed themselves with high technology centuries ago. The posthumans' capacities are unknown... but we know they disintegrated Ganymede, punched a wormhole into Jovian space, and altered the very surface of the solar system's largest planet with their incomprehensible artifacts. Worst of all, we know that they have been bombarding the solar system with powerful data viruses for generations. Now Ellen has a plan to rid humanity of this threat once and for all. Her quest will take her to the mid-Atlantic towers of Solar Union Earth, to the green ruins of London, and to the long-separated libertarian colony of New Mars. In the process, much will be revealed -- about history, about power, and about what it is to be human." The Stone Canal

Ken MacLeod

Legend hard cover

Jonathan Wilde, a 21st century anarchist agitator is dead, but his memory is immortal. Now that memory is stored in his clone, a young man who is searching for the man who killed him. From the author of The Star Fraction. Kingdom Come

Elliot S. Maggin, art by Alex Ross

Warner Aspect hard cover

Kingdom Come was an epic DC Comics series with some truly impressive art by Chicago artist Alex Ross. Now novelist Maggin, author of the bestselling Last Son of Krypton, brings us the novelization. It's early in the 21st century, and a new generation of young superheroes is threatening to tear the world apart... until the Man of Steel returns from self-imposed exile to forge a group of champions to bring the world back from the brink. With new colour plates by Alex Ross. Heart of the Hero

Rickey R. Mallory

New Concepts Publishing (Web novel, 250 pages, disk or download, $3.99 US)

Publication date: January 1998

We don't usually list Web fiction. The ability for anyone with a keyboard and a discount HTML text to post their unpublished manuscript has brought a new definition to the words "vanity press," and much of it isn't worth the electrons it's printed on. Still, there are certainly exceptions. New Concepts Publishing is striving to bring some hard-fought recognition to this maligned sub-genre, and they're slowly succeeding. With Rickey Mallory's "future romantic suspense" novel, Heart of the Hero, they may have found a winner. It's received a 5-star review from Affaire de Coeur, the download version is now listed at Amazon.com, and Tom Easton of Analog says, "If that downloading public wants a science fiction romance, they should love this one." "A hero's welcome awaited Danny White when he returned home. But the space station accident had cost him more than the numerous operations and months of recuperation he'd had to endure. It had cost him all the memories of his past life. He knew nothing of the person he had been or the family he'd left behind. All he knew was that when his wife looked at him, fear darkened her eyes. And the more Danny learned about the man he had been, the less he wanted to find that man's memories inside himself." Available on disk or download for $3.99. Wingman: The Circle War

Jack Maloney

Zebra/Pinnacle

Star Wars: Essential Guide to Characters

Andy Mangel

Del Rey trade paper

In large format, the guide has culled characters from all Star Wars licensed fiction and non-fiction.

Art: Clidd Nielson

Dawn Song

Michael Marano

Tor (hardcover, 398 pages, $24.95 US/$34.95 Canada)

Publication date: June 1998

An ambitious first novel from a medieval historian who specialized in the Kabbalah and alchemic lore (and it shows). Belial, the Unbowed One, the horned prince who strives endlessly for the beauty of a future filled with despair, is at war with another great power of Hell -- Leviathan, the Enfolded One, an enormous armoured worm, a blind idiot which seeks only the perpetuation of ugliness. The latest theatre for their eternal battle: Boston, 1990, at the dawn of the Gulf War. Lawrence has newly arrived in the city, determined to make a new life for himself but struggling with guilt over his father's death and a breakup with his lover. When a powerful shape-changing succubus, a newborn agent of Belial, chooses the top of Lawrence's building as her home, events begin to tumble towards destiny...

Review by Victoria Strauss

Doug Beekman

The Jackal of Nar (Tyrants and Kings, Book 1)

John Marco

Bantam Spectra (trade paperback, 660 pages, $14.95/$22.95 Can)

Publication date: March 9, 1999

First volume in a new fantasy series from a debut author. Looks very intriguing. "This masterful debut of a military fantasy series probes the emotional landscapes and moral dilemmas of a reluctant warrior, the brave yet sensitive Richius Vantran. Ordered by the Emperor to halt a revolt by a religious faction, Vantran's success wins him both Imperial favor and a wife -- though neither sits well with him. For in battle, he fell in love with a member of the very religious faction he put down. Torn between duty and passion, Vantran surprises himself by choosing to love the enemy--and march against his old companions."

Review by Victoria Strauss

All the Other Things I Really Need to Know I Learned from Watching Star Trek: The Next Generation

Dave Marinaccio

Pocket hard cover

Author of (in case you couldn't guess) the previous bestseller, All I Really Need to Know I Learned From Watching Star Trek. Armchair philosopher Marinaccio takes readers on another lighthearted tour of the human condition, mapped across the adventures of Captain Picard, Riker, Data, Worf and the rest of the crew of the Enterprise-D (as well as Star Trek: Deep Space Nine and Star Trek: Voyager). Drawing on anecdotes from his own life he offers new observations on life's everyday challenges, inspired by the Emmy Award-winning series.

John Jude Palencar

The Terrorists of Irustan

Louise Marley

Ace (trade paperback, 323 pages, $13.95/$19.99 Can)

Publication date: June 1, 1999

This looks like a breakout book for Marley -- a complex far-future fable of oppression and rebellion. From the author of Receive the Gift and Sing the Warmth. "Zahra IbSada is a talented medicant on the planet of Irustan. In a nation where women's rights are drastically restricted, her job allows her to see much joy-and pain-in the lives of the women she heals. A wife is brutally beaten. A prostitute suffers at the hands of her employers. And her best friend Kalen struggles to save her daughter from a cruel marriage. She begs Zahra for help. Although Karen's plan goes against her medicant vows, Zahra reluctantly agrees. But this silent act of terrorism will have far-reaching consequences -- for herself, and for all the women of her planet..." Receive the Gift

Louise Marley

Ace paperback

The third novel from new author Louise Marley, author of Sing the Warmth and Sing the Light, finds the situation grim in the House of Soren. Itinerant Singers have united under the brutal Cho, whose lethal Gift has brought Soren under his control. The Cantor of Soren has been killed, and those who serve Cho do so out of fear. No ones dares to oppose him.. except for Cantrix Sira, the only one strong enough to stop him. But the Conservatory branded her a traitor years ago. Sing The Warmth

Louise Marley

Ace paperback

This is a sequel to Sing The Light, set on a frozen planet.

The Eleventh Plague

John S. Marr and John Baldwin

Harper Collins/Cliff Street Books hard cover

In Southern California, two children die of a disease believed to be nonexistent in the U.S. Within hours, horses at the legendary Churchill Downs are dying of an unidentifiable virus. The deaths bear uncanny similarities to the Fifth and Sixth Plagues described in the Book of Exodus -- and every month another monstrosity claims its victims, as each one sees the reenactment of a progressively more catastrophic plague. Noted virologist Jack Bryne discovers the events are not only connected, but deliberate acts of bioterrorism. The only problem is, he's the prime suspect. Tomorrow, When the War Began

John Marsden

Crown

Art: Yvonne Gilbert

Cloudbearer's Shadow (Sword in Exile Trilogy, Book 1)

Ann Marston

HarperPrism (paperback, 330 pages, $5.99 US/$7.99 Can)

Publication date: February, 1999

The start of a new fantasy trilogy from the Canadian author of The Rune Blade Trilogy. "Cloudbearer's Shadow" inaugurates a breathtaking new series centered on Gereth, the youngest and the last of the unfortunate lords of Skai. Called home from exile by his dying father, he finds the Maedun conquest of his homeland all but complete. The rune blade called Bane has been lost forever to dark sorcery, and the Somber Riders rule the island of Celi. The runes lied. The Skai King who was prophesied never came. It is too late for Celi. Or is it?." Broken Blade

Ann Marston

HarperPrism paperback

Star Trek: The New Voyages

Sondra Marshak & Myrna Culbreath

Bantam Spectra

A reissue of the Trek anthology containing eight new stories featuring Kirk, Spock and the original cast, with intros by Gene Roddenberry, William Shatner, Leonard Nimoy, eforest Kelly, and more.

Art: Stephen Youll

A Clash of Kings (A Song of Ice and Fire, Book Two)

George R.R. Martin

Bantam Spectra (hardcover, 762 pages, $25.95 US/$37.95 Can)

Publication date: February 9, 1999

The sequel to A Game of Thrones continues one of the most critically acclaimed sagas of last year -- and one of the most popular ongoing fantasy sagas in our offices. "Transporting readers into a forgotten land of revelry and revenge, wizardry and warfare, A Clash of Kings is a tale in which maidens cavort with madmen, brother plots against brother, and the dead rise to walk in the night. Here a princess masquerades as an orphan boy; a knight of the mind prepares a poison for a treacherous sorceress; and wild men descend from the Mountains of the Moon to ravage the countryside. Set against a backdrop of incest and fratricide, alchemy and murder, the price of glory may be measured in blood. And the spoils of victory may just go to the men and women possessed of the coldest steel and the coldest hearts. For when rulers clash, all of the land feels the tremors."

A Game of Thrones Review by Jim Seidman

Great Science Fiction Stories: Under Siege

George R.R. Martin, (Narrated by Andy Nelson)

Infinivox audio

Infinivox continues their top-notch work in bringing classic short stories of the genre into an audio format, with the perfect products to help make your morning commute vastly more pleasant. In George R.R. Martin's tale of time-travellers' last-ditch effort to win a war and escape the plagues and poisoned winds of their world, a small team of desperate soldiers is catapulted back to the nexus points of human history. A Game of Thrones (A Song of Ice and Fire, Vol. 1)

George R.R. Martin

Bantam Spectra

Paperback version of one of the most acclaimed fantasy sagas from last year. An original epic that focuses as much on court intrigue and the multi-faceted conflict between vying humans as it does on magic and mystery, the story centers on the last heirs of the old dynasty of the Seven Kingdoms, a teenage boy and girl, who live in exile with dreams of reclaiming their throne from "The Usurper" -- Robert Baratheon, the man who overthrew the cruel king.

Duane O. Myers

The House of Bairn (The Magelord Trilogy, Book 3)

Thomas K. Martin

Ace (paperback, 292 pages, $5.99 US/$7.99 Can)

Publication date: May 1, 1999

The final volume in the Magelord trilogy follows Magelord: The Awakening and Magelord: The Time of Madness. "An ancient legend of fear still holds the land in its grip. While those with the Power flee King Gavin's wrath, Bjorn, a simple hunter, discovers that he has this same outlawed ability. Pursued by the king's legions, Bjorn conjures an escape--and is transported into the past. Now he must marshal his ancestors in order to bring those held down by fear to a new future. For the pain and anguish of his memories must never be repeated..." Magelord: The Awakening

Thomas K. Martin

Ace paperback

The first book in a new trilogy from the author of A Call to Arms. The old tales of the Time of Madness are still told, when the godlike MageLords fought great battles that nearly destroyed the world. The MageLords were sorcerers who looked upon ordinary men with contempt and who are still feared and hated. But now is the time for a new tale. Books by Lisa Mason Warrior Enchantresses

Kathleen M. Massie-Ferch and Martin H. Greenberg, ed.

DAW paperback

It includes fifteen tales of special women who become masters of both martial and magical arts including Tanith Lee, Melanie Rawn, Rebecca Ore and Jennifer Roberson. Ancient Enchantresses

Kathleen Massie-Ferch, Martin H. Greenberg & Richard Gilliam, e

DAW paperback

It is a collection of sorceress stories with an intro by Melanie Rawn. I Am Legend

Richard Matheson

Tor trade paper

One of the great classic vampire novels of this century (first published in 1954) is reprinted in a handsome new edition along with a collection of ten other horror stories by Matheson. "Robert Neville is the last living man on Earth... but he is not alone. Every man, woman, and child in the world has become a vampire, and they are all hungry for Neville's blood. By day he is the hunter, stalking the sleeping undead through the abandoned ruins of civilization. By night he barricades himself in his home and prays for the dawn." Twice adapted for the screen, this will soon appear again in a new version directed by Ridley Scott (Alien, Blade Runner) and starring (*choke*) Arnold Schwarzeneggar in the role first made famous by Vincent Price (The Last Man on Earth) and Charlton Heston (The Omega Man). Robert Bloch: Appreciations of the Master

Edited by Richard Matheson and Rica Mainhardt

Tor trade paper

Robert Bloch, author of Psycho, died last year. This tribute volume includes essays and introductions from such folks as Ray Bradbury, Stephen King, Peter Straub, John Carpenter, Arthur C. Clarke, Wes Craven, and Peter Straub, surrounded by twenty of Bloch's best short stories. Countdown to Millennium

Rodney Matthews

Overlook Press trade paper

Thirty-one months left. Got your dinner reservation yet? I hear all the good restaurants are booked. Hour of Judgment (An Inquisitor Andrej Kosciusko novel)

Susan R. Matthews

Avon/Eos (paperback, 260 pages, $5.99/$7.99 Can)

Publication date: December 9, 1998

I think Avon/Eos is really getting the hang of these design-centered covers. It's been almost a year since the imprint was launched with a strict policy that favored design over painted art, with some clear successes (Cosm, An Exchange of Hostages, The Crimson Sky) and some notable failures (White Light, Dry Water). Lately there's been a lot more of the former however, and if it continues -- as it clearly does this month -- I wouldn't be at all surprised to see more publishers follow suit. Hour of Judgment is the third novel in the adventures of Inquisitor Andrej Kosciusko, a man of honor and principle in a very dark universe -- a man who excels at his chosen profession: torture. The sequel to An Exchange of Hostages and Prisoner of Conscience. Prisoner of Conscience

Susan R. Matthews

Avon/EOS paperback

The author of the powerful debut novel An Exchange of Hostages returns to the world of the Bench Federation, where Andrej Koscuisko serves as a reluctant Inquisitor, rooting out those who threaten the ruling order with quiet efficiency. Andrej has been posted to the penal facility at Port Rudistal, where hundreds await interrogation... and where he must risk both his career and his life to expose the truth behind the black walls of Domitt Prison. Special introductory price. An Exchange of Hostages

Susan R. Matthews

Avon Books paperback

Against his will the surgeon Andrej Koscuisko has come to a military center in deep space to train as "Ship's Inquisitor" -- a training that often violates many of his deepest convictions. And ultimately he may be forced to sacrifice all he holds dear.

Peter Peebles

Nocturne for a Dangerous Man

Marc Matz

Tor (hardcover, 495 pages, $25.95/$36.95 Can)

Publication date: July 7, 1999

This debut novel is a near-future thriller staring Gavilan Robie -- former counter-terrorist operator, martial arts expert, connoisseur, and musician. But when he's approached by the head of a huge engineering consortium to go head-to-head with an eco-terrorist group and recover her kidnapped lover, even Robie may have more than he bargained for. "Gavilan Robie was part Cheyenne, part Basque, part any number of distinguished ancestors, many of whom spoke in his thoughts when he was feeling particularly down. He was puzzled when a major corporation asked him to recover the kidnapped Siv Matthiessen. It wasn't really his kind of thing -- since retiring from the Action Rescue Committee, he specialized in recovering stolen art. But he agreed to do it when, among other persuasions, the most powerful computer in the world endorsed him."

Stephen Bradbury

Perseus Spur

Julian May

Del Rey (paperback, 329 pages, $6.99/$9.99 Can)

Publication date: July 1, 1999

An adventure of the Rampart Worlds, and a brand new SF novel from the author of The Many-Colored Land and The Golden Torc. "When rebellious Asahel Frost was expelled from the Interstellar Commerce Secretariat on trumped-up charges, he lost it all: wife, citizenship, fortune, self-respect. Exiled to a beautiful but remote planet in the Perseus Spur, Frost became Helmut Icicle, a man without a past or a future. But someone remembered Asahel Frost -- remembered him enough to send an assassin to kill him. And in so doing, brought him back to life. Now, determined to track down the would-be assassin, Helmut finds himself caught in a conspiracy as convoluted as it is deadly. His sister, Eve, has mysteriously vanished. His estranged father wants him to find her with the assistance of the lovely Matilde Gregoire, who happens to hate his guts. As Helmut follows the tangled strands of deceit, greed, and violence back to their common source, he begins to wonder if he is the hunter or the hunted..." Magnificat (The Galactic Milieu, Vol. 3)

Julian May

Del Rey

Book three of the trilogy, following Jack the Bodiless and Diamond Mask. "Humanity is well on its way to achieving unity with the inhabitants of other planets within the Galactic Milieu. But Marc Remillard and his followers are determined to elevate mankind above all other races by insidious means. Only Marc's brother, Jack the Bodiless, and the girl called Diamond Mask can stop him."

SF Site Review Pegasus

Marianna Mayer, K. Y. Craft

Morrow hard cover

From the author of Baba Yaga and Vasilisa the Brave and Turandot comes a beautifully illustrated version of the tale of Bellerophon, the son of the king of Corinth, who must secure the help of the legendary winged horse Pegasus to battle the monstrous Chimera.