Frederick IX was King of Denmark from 1947 to 1972. Born into the House of Glücksburg, Frederick was the elder son of King Christian X and Queen Alexandrine of Denmark. He became crown prince when his father succeeded as king in 1912. As a young man, he was educated at the Royal Danish Naval Academy. In 1935, he was married to Princess Ingrid of Sweden and they had three daughters, Margrethe, Benedikte and Anne-Marie. During Nazi Germany's occupation of Denmark, Frederick acted as regent on behalf of his father from 1942 until 1943. Frederick became king on his father's death in early 1947. During Frederick IX's reign Danish society changed rapidly, the welfare state was expanded and, as a consequence of the booming economy of the 1960s, women entered the labour market. The modernization brought new demands on the monarchy and Frederick's role as a constitutional monarch. Frederick IX died in 1972, and was succeeded by his eldest daughter, Queen Margrethe II.

Sol turns thousands of years of human wisdom from the world’s spiritual traditions into a totally unique personality profile. To get your own profile, check compatibility with friends and much more, download the Sol App today.

Some of their strengths

King of Denmark Frederik IX has many admirable traits.

Based on spiritual traditions from around the world, they are someone who can be described as Imaginative, Creative, Kind, Energetic, Intuitive, Brave, and Passionate.

Soulful and Understanding

According to Mysticism’s Astrology tradition, King of Denmark Frederik IX is someone who is a soulful, understanding, and conscious person, who combines smarts with a deep talent for creativity and imagination. A person who is a bit of a "lone wolf".

Active and Precise

Based on Daoism’s Ba-Zi or ‘Chinese Zodiac’ tradition, people who know King of Denmark Frederik IX well know them as someone who can be tough, active, and sharp, like a sword.

Truthful and Kind

According to Hinduism’s Jyotisha or ‘Vedic Astrology’ tradition, many would also describe King of Denmark Frederik IX as someone who is honest, compassionate, imaginative, and instinctual.

A person who enjoys new challlenges, is a magnet for attracting other creative types, good at identifying opportunities, and who is good at forming loyal, lifelong friendships.

Communicative and Intelligent

Based on the Mayan Tzolk’in or ‘Mayan Astrology’ tradition, King of Denmark Frederik IX is someone who tends to have a desire to communicate with others, either verbally, through written form, or otherwise, and to have a knack for understanding art, beauty, and aesthetics.

They are also someone who is reflective, mysterious, and purposeful, who enjoys quiet and solo work, and who thrives in positions where there is no need to report to someone else.

Creative and Imaginative

According to Judaism’s Kabbalah tradition, King of Denmark Frederik IX tends to be someone who is sensitive, imaginative, creative, and somewhat of a dreamer. Who is intuitive and compassionate, and who has a friendly, easygoing, calming and relaxing effect on people and for whom friends and family mean the world.

Some of King of Denmark Frederik IX's challenges

While King of Denmark Frederik IX has many strengths, nobody is perfect. They also have some challenging traits they need to manage.

For example, King of Denmark Frederik IX can be Indecisive, Unrealistic, Short-tempered, Impulsive, Temperamental, Pleasure-seeking, and Non-confrontational.

Indecisive and Unrealistic

One of King of Denmark Frederik IX's key challenges is that they are someone who can come across as indecisive and unrealistic.

King of Denmark Frederik IX must also exercise caution as they can have difficulty dealing with responsibility, authority, or criticism.

Unrealistic and Indecisive

King of Denmark Frederik IX is someone who can be unrealistic, indecisive, and lacking in confidence, who can be impulsive when it comes to making important decisions, have difficulty collaborating with others, can be argumentative and not willling to accept criticism, and who can be disappointed by the high expectations they place on others.

Lethargic and Unrealistic

Finally, King of Denmark Frederik IX also can be too soft, lazy and lethargic, and who can have difficulty finding others who share a similarly dreamy outlook on life.