DESCRIPTION

We all want our event to stand out from the rest. We want to be sure our guests and customers leave the event, party or promotion delighted with what they have seen and how they’ve been entertained. Above all, we want to be memorable!

Hire a Giant Snow Globe complete with imitation snow, themed props and décor as a centre-piece for your themed event, promotion, Christmas installation, celebration or party, and you are guaranteed to create memories…. and a cause a stir!

Climb into a magical Winter Wonderland scene and surround yourself with fabulously-fake snow! Up to 8 people at a time can climb inside our walk-in inflatable Snow Globe so it’s great for group photo opportunities!

Cameras will be clicking (do they still do that?) and everybody will be using their mobile phone cameras to take photos and videos of their friends, colleagues and family inside the Snow Globe. It creates amazing memories and fabulous Social Media posts! If you prefer, we can arrange for one of our Operators to take photographs for you, or hire an event photographer – please ask if you would like to add this service.

A giant snow globe will bring a new dimension to your event. You can have Snow Ball fights, roll around, make snow angels, plus it creates amazing photo opportunities as your guests stand inside and become part of the scene inside the globe!

It’s hard to see who has more fun, the adults or the children, once the snow starts flying! Hire a walk-in Snow Globe to guarantee fun and Christmas Entertainment!

If used for promotion of an event or product the snow globe can be fully branded, ensuring huge advertising opportunities as everyone who gets involved uploads their photos onto social media. Great for ‘Tag Yourself’ campaigns!

We can create fully bespoke Snow Globes for Brand Activations and PR Stunts. Please speak to a Sales Consultant for more information.

Our Snow Globe is world-class quality with a lightweight steel-base (patented design); it is quick to set up, and customers climb through an airlock at the rear of the globe, and then step through the Winter Scene backdrop into their own personal Narnia! Once inside, customers can swirl the imitation snow around towards the blower, based at the front of the globe, thereby controlling the amount of Snow they want in their photo.

Spread festive magic at your event… Hire a Giant Inflatable Walk-In Snow Globe!

Christmas Themed Props for Hire include:

Gingerbread People

Frosty the Snowman

Reindeers & Elves

Candy Canes

Penguins

Nutcrackers & Toy Soldiers

Soft Snowballs

White Picket Fence

A Giant Inflatable Snow Globe is perfect to hire for:

Shopping Centres

Winter Wonderland Themed Events

Promotions

Brand Activation

Christmas Parties

Christmas Installations

Corporate Events and Parties

Council Events

Exhibitions

Note: This is an extremely popular Christmas activity so please book your Giant Snow Globe in advance to avoid disappointment. Call our Snow Event Team on 01253 351100.

Technical Information

Size of Globe mimimum: 3.3m wide x 3m width and height

Working area required: minimum 4m around the globe.