The Giant’s garden mirrors the state of his soul—and, in a broader sense, symbolizes the journey that a person’s soul undertakes in order to find redemption. Before the Giant returns home from his seven-year vacation, his garden reflects only the innocence of the children who play there. Like the biblical Garden of Eden, it remains pristine, tended only by the will of nature—yet far from being overgrown and wild, the garden remains orderly and peaceful. It is beautiful, bountiful, and safe, all for the benefit of the children. When the Giant arrives home, he selfishly drives out the children from his garden, and raises a high wall around the property to keep them out. This also drains the garden of warmth and life, as Spring, Summer, and Autumn follow the children out, leaving only the forces of Winter to occupy the place. The Giant’s cold-hearted nature, which permits no relationships to grow between him and his neighbors, manifests in the actual cold that settles upon the garden, which keeps all the trees and flowers dormant. He cannot enjoy the natural goodness of the garden because he has spurned the natural goodness within himself and within the children.

The children bring springtime back to the garden when they sneak inside the wall, but only while they are present; when the Giant approaches, the children flee in fear, and it immediately becomes Winter again in the garden. Though the Giant has by this time realized the error of his ways (“How selfish I have been!”), he has yet to atone for his selfish behavior. The natural order of seasons only returns permanently when the Giant performs a genuine act of kindness that runs contrary to his earlier selfishness. When he helps the little boy—Christ in disguise—into the tree in the corner of his garden, the tree bursts into blossom all at once. Thenceforth, the Giant enjoys the garden alongside the children, because he deserves it.

Furthermore, by embracing the children as his friends, the Giant also embraces the childlike qualities by which the children themselves merit such blessings from nature—trust, love, openness, and generosity. These are qualities which the Christian Gospels encourage as pathways to heaven. Wilde’s story conforms to this view, as the Christ Child explicitly welcomes the Giant into the garden of Paradise as reward for sharing his earthly garden with the children.