Leroy Name Meaning in English

What does the name Leroy mean? What is the meaning of the name Leroy, lucky number, lucky stone, origin and religion.

The name Leroy is a French baby name. In French the meaning of the name Leroy is: The King (from 'le roi'). Originally a surname, it is now more common as a first name.

Leroy Name Meaning, Origin & Details

Related or Similar Names

If you like the meanings or synonyms of name Leroy; we have created list of popular names that can be considered as alternative of the name Leroy.

Below names are with similar meaning as King. Explore the list below for names that not only share a similar meaning to "King" but also encapsulate the essence and significance associated with the name "Leroy."

Need Sibling Names For Leroy?

Brothers sibling names for Leroy can be chosen from the list below.

Leroy Name Lucky Number 9

Leroy Name Numerology And Personality

Leroy has the numerology 9. The meaning of this name is King. People with numerology number 9 are the people who are thought to be very selfless and very kind towards the people and everyone around them. These are the people who are always thinking of others over themselves and they take care of everyone around them.

These people believe in creative expression and that is one reason why they are thought to be very humanitarian. The gender of this name Leroy is Boy. They always think of what they can do for the humanity.

The religion is Christian. These are the people who are very obligatory of everything and they also only believe in giving and you will definitely never find these people in takers because they are always the givers. They do not wait for others to do things for them so that they can do it in return rather they are first one to make a move.

Leroy Ethnicity Distribution

Popular personalities with Leroy Name.

Leroy Name Wallpaper

Leroy name 3D wallpaper and writing styles, Write Leroy name on photo online, Leroy name writing style online, Write Leroy name on image online, Write Leroy name pic & wallpaper, Leroy 3D name wallpapers editing, Leroy new wallpaper, Leroy 3d name creator online, Leroy name background maker, Create my name in style for Leroy

See Leroy Name Wallpaper ⟶

How People Search Leroy