Jenny Emery Davidson and Nancy Sindelar

In the living room of the Hemingway home in Ketchum, Idaho

This is the last post for the Sleeping with Hemingway’s Ghost blog. I will leave Ketchum tomorrow with a wealth of interesting information and hopefully use it in a new book. Staying at the Hemingway home has been a wonderful experience, and the residency has been an excellent opportunity to have meaningful conversations with those who knew Ernest and examine significant resources regarding Hemingway’s time in Idaho and the details surrounding his death.

People have been generous with their time and open to answering my questions about Hemingway’s life here, and the residency apartment has been comfortable and convenient. However, it’s difficult to put into words the experience of actually living in this house-day after day, night after night, experiencing the view of the Sawtooth Mountains and the isolation of this beautiful location. Ernest found a perfect place to write, but the isolation may have been difficult when he was in a “black mood.” It’s so quiet, and one can’t help but think about all the went on here.

I am grateful to the Community Library for this opportunity and appreciate the solid work of Jenny Emery Davidson, Executive Director, in creating the Hemingway Legacy Initiative. Thanks also go to Martha Williams, Programs and Education Manager, who connected me with people who were knowledgeable about Ernest’s life here, and to Harley Hamilton, who shared a morning of skiing, local history and companionship with me. Thanks too to those who provided feedback on the blog and the Visit to Papa’s Places talk. Your comments were helpful and greatly appreciated. Finally, a big thank you to Becky Sindelar for her technical support and her willingness to bring the blog to life.

The Lodge at Sun Valley

Ernest and his friends lived in the town of Ketchum, but most came to the area to work at or at the invitation of the Sun Valley Resort. Developed in 1937 as a destination resort by the Union Pacific Railroad, the resort became a haven for movie stars, millionaires and prominent political figures.

Ernest was accompanied here by Gary Cooper, Barbara Stanwyk, and Ingrid Bergman, but Arlene Dahl, John Wayne, Ronda Fleming and Ann Southern were here too as was the Shah of Iran. Some, like Norma Shearer, stayed on a more permanent basis. Shearer married her children’s ski instructor, Marti Arrouge.

Part of the attraction of the resort was the healthy outdoor lifestyle, but also the fact that the famous were treated with respect and not a lot of unwanted attention. The Kennedy clan spent Christmas 1965 at the resort. Family members who were able to ski the upper mountain came into the Roundhouse on a regular basis for lunch. They took a table in the corner, and no one made a big deal about their presence. The day after Christmas I saw Robert Kennedy on a chairlift wearing a new ski jacket, which must have been a gift. He smiled as our chairs passed in opposite directions. Jackie Kennedy and her children spent Christmas here too. While going up on the River Run chair, I observed her at the top of lower River Run taking a private lesson with Sigi Engel, who was head of the ski school at the time. He was on his knees adjusting her ski boots before they prepared to head down a beginner run.

The country’s first destination ski resort is now over 80 years old and has been “re-imagined” for a new generation. The guestrooms are larger, and there’s a 20,000 square foot spa, a fitness center, a yoga studio, re-appointed restaurants, lounges, lobbies and more. However, some things are still the same. The resort is still a safe haven for celebrities and a playground for those who can handle six feet of snow falling in a week and slightly slower mornings due to avalanche mitigation.

Ernest Hemingway’s Tombstone in the Ketchum Cemetery

Buried near him are his fourth wife, Mary, his sons, John and Gregory, his granddaughter, Margaux, and his friends, Gene Van Glider and Taylor Williams

Ernest’s Ketchum-Sun Valley friends remember him with admiration and speak with enthusiasm about his love of hunting and fishing. When Ernest arrived in 1939, he quickly made friends with the Sun Valley publicist, Gene Van Glider, and the Sun Valley photographer, Lloyd Arnold. As his circle of friends grew, there were frequent hunting trips to local areas followed by dinners at the Hemingways’ house. Mary is remembered as a welcoming hostess and a good cook, who learned to prepare enjoyable meals featuring duck or pheasant.

When Ernest died, his friends were hounded by reporters for statements and information but maintained a respectful silence. When I was here four-five years after his death, people still didn’t say much about Ernest, merely commenting that his son and grandchildren lived here.

Now, as I interview his friends or children of his friends, I am learning more about the personal reactions to his death. When Mary was asked for a statement for the press, she said he was “accidently killed” from a shotgun he had been handling. This statement upset Jack, who didn’t want people to think his father had handled a gun “carelessly.” Though most knew it wasn’t an accident, it was about a year before Mary admitted it was a suicide.

Some friends say they grieved for the loss of a good friend. Some say they were angry that the guns and ammunition were still in the house and available to Ernest. Others simply wonder why he would end his life when he was loved by so many.

A Place to Write

Hemingway liked to write in the early morning. This former maid’s quarters may have been one of his quiet writing retreats.

I pursued the Ketchum Writer-in-Residence opportunity because I wanted to learn more about the last days of Hemingway’s life. One of the topics I’ve been exploring is Ernest’s ability to write. Where did he write? Was his frustration visible? Did his frustration lead to his suicide?

Over the last week and a half, people have been open about sharing their recollections and opinions about the last days of his life. However, I have learned more about his interest in hunting, his loyal companions and guides, and his favorite hunting grounds, than I have about his writing habits.

The information I have gained about his writing hasn’t always been consistent. Some believe he wrote in the back bedroom of his house, standing at a typewriter near a window. However, the one source who, actually saw him write, says he wrote in a small building separate from the house. This building was originally constructed as maid’s quarters, but when Ernest used it as a place to write, it contained only a standup desk, a typewriter, a stack of paper and a waste basket. He would type, read what he wrote, and if he didn’t like the result, pull the paper from the typewriter, crumple it and throw it in the wastebasket.

Maybe in his struggle to write, Ernest tried to write in both places. It’s well documented that he always followed a strict pattern of behavior for his written work. In 1954 Ernest described his writing routine to George Plimpton, saying,

When I am working on a book or a story I write every morning as soon after first light as possible. There is no one to disturb you and it is cool or cold and you come to your work and warm as you write. You read what you have written and, as you always stop when you know what is going to happen next; you go on from there. You write until you come to a place here you still have your juice and know what will happen next…

Given Ernest’s strict adherence to routine, I’m coming to believe that when writing became difficult, Ernest’s daily routine was destroyed. His creativity was replaced with anxiety and depression.

My last visit to the Community Library was in 2015. Since then, the library has expanded not only in size, but in programming. The physical size the library has grown to occupy almost an entire city block; the lecture hall has been enhanced with sophisticated video equipment; and plans for additional expansion continue. The programming also has expanded. The Community Library serves the Wood River Valley as a traditional library, but also offers contemporary programming, museum resources and oversees the Mary and Ernest Hemingway House in Ketchum. The Hemingway house, which includes 13.9 acres of land, is on the National Register of Historic Places, and the Hemingway House and Legacy Initiative sponsors the residency program for writers, scholars and artists.

Today the house was busy with a film crew from Idaho Public Television, who were filming final details for a segment on Hemingway’s time in Idaho that will be aired in March. Tonight, I will be presenting “A Visit to Papa’s Places,” which will be Livestreamed from the library’s lecture hall. Below is the press release that announced my residency and the details of tonight’s talk.

Contact: Martha Williams January 12, 2021

Programs and Education Manager FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

208.806.2621

mwilliams@comlib.org

The Community Library

announces Hemingway scholar Nancy Sindelar as first writer-in-residence of 2021

KETCHUM, IDAHO – For two weeks this January, The Community Library welcomes Nancy Sindelar, Ph.D., scholar and previous presenter at the Library’s annual Ernest Hemingway Seminar, for a residency at the historic Ernest and Mary Hemingway House.

Sindelar has spent more than 30 years in education as a teacher, administrator, university professor and consultant and has published numerous articles and three books. Her biography of Hemingway, Influencing Hemingway: The People and Places That Shaped His Life and Work, was inspired by her time teaching in Oak Park, Illinois, and written to document how Hemingway’s early years and the people and places he was drawn to in his adult life contributed to his thoughts, actions, and writing.

In addition to her 2014 and 2015 presentations in Ketchum, Sindelar has presented at the International Colloquium Ernest Hemingway in Havana, Cuba; at the American Literature Association Conferences in Washington, DC, Boston and San Francisco; and at the Hemingway Society Conferences in Venice, Italy and Oak Park, Illinois. She also has presented at the American Library in Paris, keynoted the Michigan Hemingway Society Conference and the Hemingway Days Festival in Key West, Florida, and guided a walking tour of young Hemingway’s Oak Park at the 2016 Hemingway Society Conference. Sindelar is a board member of the Ernest Hemingway Foundation of Oak Park and teaches “Hemingway: The Man, The Writer, The Legend” at University of California, Riverside.

“I’m honored to be the Hemingway Writer-in-Residence and have the opportunity to research Hemingway’s final years and hopefully talk with people who remember him,” says Sindelar of her upcoming residency. “Many years ago I learned to ski at Sun Valley and worked at the Roundhouse and Trail Creek Cabin. Returning to this special place is the thrill of a lifetime!”

As part of her residency, on Tuesday, January 26, Sindelar will present “A Visit to Papa’s Places,” a virtual presentation touring the places Ernest Hemingway lived and worked: Oak Park, Illinois; Paris, France; Chamby, Switzerland; Toronto, Canada; Key West, Florida; San Francisco de Paula, Cuba; and Ketchum, Idaho. She will share photos of these places and consider the impact these places had on the life and work of the legendary author. The program will air at 6:00 p.m. on the Library’s Livestream at http://www.livestream.com/comlib and will be recorded for later viewing.

The Hemingway Writer-In-Residence program is a component of the Library’s Hemingway Legacy Initiative, which aims to expand the humanities in Idaho through the iconic literary figure of Ernest Hemingway. Since 2019, the residency program has hosted screenwriters, poets, novelists, historians, and musicians, helping the Library to promote ongoing literary work and creativity in the Wood River Valley.

The Hemingway House and Preserve has been part of The Community Library since May 2017. The residence is a private home where Library staff and visiting scholars work on preservation and conduct research. The Community Library is a privately funded library serving the Wood River Valley of central Idaho. Its mission is to bring information, ideas, and individuals together to enhance the cultural life of the community.

For more information, visit http://www.comlib.org and visit us on Facebook. Residency inquiries should be directed to Martha Williams at mwilliams@comlib.org. Event and press inquiries should be directed to Molly! Goodyear at mgoodyear@comlib.org.

LIVESTREAM – “A Visit to Papa’s Places” with writer-in-residence Nancy Sindelar

January 26 @ 6:00 pm – 7:00 pm

Photo credit: The Community Library Jeanne Roger Lane Center for Regional History David Meeker Collection on Ernest Hemingway.

The longer I stay in the Hemingway house in Ketchum, the more I realize the extent to which Hemingway had an amazing ability to accommodate and enjoy a wide variety of settings and cultures. As a child he grew up in Oak Park, Illinois, a suburb of Chicago. He excelled at large suburban high school, but also was happy spending summers in a remote part of Michigan, where he learned to hunt and fish.

As a young adult, he jumped at opportunities to spend time in Italy, France, Switzerland and Spain and immersed himself in the cultures of those countries. He enjoyed the food and people in France and learned to ski and sled in Switzerland. In Italy he saw the horror of war first-hand, and in Spain he developed a fascination with matadors confronting death in the bullring.

Later he chose to live in places where he could pursue his life-long interest in fishing and hunting. Fishing drew him to Key West and Cuba, and hunting drew him to Africa and eventually Ketchum, Idaho.

Tuesday evening January 26, I’ll be talking about the some of these places and focusing on his various homes. “A Visit to Papa’s Places” will be streamed live at 6 pm MST and available at https://livestream.com/comlib/papas-places.

Ernest Hemingway hunting in Ketchum circa 1941

As I read the transcripts of the local oral histories and talk with people who knew Ernest, his devotion to a life of action and ritual becomes abundantly clear. Given his strict Christian upbringing and his experiences on the Italian front during World War I, he used these early experiences to formulate a set of rules he thought necessary for survival in the modern world. Important to these rules or code of behavior were showing “grace under pressure” and living a life of action and ritual.

Whether going on African safaris, fishing in the Gulf Stream, skiing through trees or doing front-line news reporting in war zones, Ernest consistently put himself in situations where he could model grace under pressure. His actions and rituals involved serious writing in the morning and adventurous activity in the afternoon. Writing in the morning was a regular activity. The adventurous activity depended on the locale. In Paris he’d go to horse races, in Key West and Cuba he’d fish, and in Ketchum he’d hunt for ducks or pheasant or target practice on clay pigeons or Magpies.

The local histories don’t say much about Ernest’s writing habits… “I don’t think he talked to anybody about his writing projects. That was locked in his brain…” However, they document his rituals, such as always going to the post office every day about 10:30 or 11:00 and his various hunting activities, be it Sunday trap shoots near his house, shooting magpies at Silver Creek Gun Club, or hunting for ducks and pheasants in nearby marshes and fields. As in other parts of the world, Ernest’s love of hunting and fishing generated not only pleasurable activity, but also loyal and fun-loving friendships.

Ernest and Mary (aka Pickle) Hemingway in front of the Lodge at Sun Valley

It’s fairly well documented that Ernest Hemingway liked to find nicknames for his family. He had one for each of his four wives. Hadley was Cat. Pauline was POM (Poor Old Mom). Martha was Brother. Mary was Pickle. He found nicknames for his children too. John was Bumby. Patrick was Mouse. Gregory was Gigi.

Now that I have the opportunity to talk with some of the people in Ketchum who knew Ernest and read some of the transcripts of the oral histories, I’m learning that Ernest’s use of nicknames extended far beyond wives and children. He had a nickname for friends who were celebrities, a nickname for friends who were neighbors and a nickname for hunting and fishing guides. Gary Cooper was Coops. Marlene Dietrich was the Kraut. Ernest’s friend and hunting companion, Forrest MacMullen, was Duke. His friend and neighbor, Don Anderson, was the Kid. His hunting and fishing guide, Taylor Williams, was BearTracks.

In conversation and in oral histories, the Ketchum friends speak kindly of Ernest. Most shared his love of hunting and his appetite for a good meal and appreciated his ability to tell a good story. To all of them, he was Papa.

Ernest Hemingway sitting in the living room of his Ketchum house circa 1960.

The room looks the same today. He is sitting on a green sofa, probably watching a TV that is built into the wall across from him. The large windows behind him look out onto the Big Wood River and the Sawtooth Mountains. Nothing has changed, except, of course, he’s not there.

Much has been written about Hemingway’s life and literature. Biographies have focused on his entire life, various time periods in his life, as well as his relationships with wives and others. His novels and short stories have been analyzed by the scholars, and the influences of painters, writers, wars, and geography have all been documented.

My interest in coming to Ketchum and Sun Valley was to learn more about the final years of Hemingway’s life. There still are people here who knew him and remember him. I wanted to hear first-hand their thoughts and recollections. Also, the Community Library and the Regional History Museum have gathered a variety of resources that may be helpful in understanding the progression of a life that was filled with action and adventure and ended in despair and desperation.

When Ernest first visited Sun Valley, he had a reputation for being indestructible. His larger-than-life legend was built not only on the strength and courage of the heroes in his novels and short stories, but also on his personal life. Photographs of the author on African safaris, deep-sea fishing in the Gulf of Mexico, attending bullfights in Spain as well as his front-line involvement in World War I, the Spanish Civil War and World War II all contributed to the image of the adventurous, masculine author. Coupled with his handsome smile and his ability to charm listeners with storytelling, a larger than life legendary figure was created and admired around the world and in Sun Valley. Then came the gloom.

By the time Ernest actually lived in the Ketchum house his ailments from various injuries, the pressures for more articles, short stories and novels, and the political complications of being a U. S. citizen with a house in Cuba began to take their toll. In his desire to fully live a courageous life of action, Ernest suffered numerous injuries. In addition to two skull fractures and at least seven other concussions and other sub-concussive head traumas, he developed an enlarged liver due to heavy use of alcohol, skin cancer due to many hours in the sun as well as back problems that now prevented him from skiing.

By 1960 the injuries and ailments affected not only his physical health but also his mental health. He became increasingly moody and irrational and writing was a struggle. Since I was familiar with the Ketchum Sun Valley area, I felt compelled to visit and talk to those who remembered him. I wanted to answer the question, What went wrong?, for myself and potential readers.

Ernest and Mary Hemingway with Gary and Rocky Cooper circa 1959

The Hemingway house is in Ketchum, Idaho, the town associated with the Sun Valley Resort. Ernest’s first introduction to Sun Valley was in 1939 when Averell Harriman developed the resort as a destination for travelers on his Union Pacific Railroad.

Ernest was invited to stay the Sun Valley Lodge as a guest. Gene Vann Guilder, the resort publicist, thought the now famous author and outdoors man would enjoy the mountains of Idaho and might generate some good publicity for the resort. At Sun Valley Ernest joined Gary Cooper, Barbara Stanwyck, Ingrid Bergman and other celebrities, who also were offered free accommodations in an effort to promote the resort. Attracted to the ambiance of the Sun Valley Lodge, the beauty of the Sawtooth Mountains and the abundance of wild game, Ernest often returned to Sun Valley for duck hunting.

Ernest made friends with the local ranchers, but also interacted with a sophisticated and wealthy group of friends who were drawn to the rugged mountain setting. He especially enjoyed hunting with Gary Cooper, who had played the role of Robert Jordon in For Whom the Bell Tolls, and balanced his hunting and fishing expeditions with dinners at the Sun Valley Lodge, the Christiana Restaurant and Trail Creek Cabin. In 1959 Ernest told Gianfranco Ivancich, “Very nice people live here in these valleys. The farmers and ranchers. We shoot together and have fun. Mary made a party for 40 people two days after Christmas at Trail Creek Cabin and it was very good.”

I came to Sun Valley the winter of 1966 and learned to ski while working on the mountain at the Roundhouse Restaurant and in the evenings at Trail Creek Cabin. Though Ernest’s son and granddaughters lived here then, not much was said about the Hemingways or Ernest’s death. Now, the area is filled with references to Hemingway. There’s a Hemingway School, ski runs named Upper, Middle and Lower Hemingway, a Hemingway Memorial and the Ketchum Community Library has launched the Hemingway House and Legacy Initiative, which includes the Writer in Residence program and a Center for Regional History. As in other parts of the world, Hemingway’s life in Ketchum and Sun Valley fascinates readers and aficionados of his adventurous lifestyle.

The Sun Valley Resort and ski area have changed too. Visitors no longer take the Union Pacific Railroad but arrive by plane or car. The Lodge at Sun Valley has been remodeled to include a spa, Trail Creek Cabin has been upgraded, and the single chair lift, the first chair lift in the US, has been replaced with a high-speed gondola. The changes are good, and I’m thrilled to be back.