Ketchum, Idaho – It was 1939 and Ernest Hemingway could not go back to the Spain he loved after backing the losers in the Spanish Civil War. So he found the next best place.

It was 68 years ago this month that Hemingway first visited Sun Valley-Ketchum, Idaho, a connection that would last until his death by his own hand in 1961.

Now aficionados and scholars of the man’s hard, lean, cutting-edge prose will gather here next week for the third annual Ernest Hemingway Festival – four days of talks, film, a dinner and tours of Papa’s favorite local haunts.

After discovering the area when the founders of the Sun Valley Lodge, the resort’s centerpiece, lured celebrities here as an endorsement, Hemingway found it “nourished his imagination in exile,” said Susan Beegel, editor of The Hemingway Review and a Hemingway scholar.

“That is probably Ketchum-Sun Valley’s most important contribution” to Hemingway’s work, said Beegel. These two small, isolated towns in central Idaho adjoin each other in the Wood River Valley surrounded by jagged mountain ranges in every direction.

Hemingway found a Spain-like similarity with the rugged mountains, trout-filled streams and the second-largest Basque population outside the Pyrenees. He fished, hunted and skied with locals and the likes of Gary Cooper, Ingrid Bergman and Howard Hawks.

He wrote much of “For Whom the Bell Tolls” in Sun Valley while staying at the Sun Valley Lodge and also wrote “A Moveable Feast” while living in the area.

In his quintessential biography, “Ernest Hemingway: A Life Story,” Carlos Baker writes about Hemingway returning to the area on a 1946 trip. “He was ecstatic as ever with the vales of Idaho. The air was bracing and the hunting excellent. From mid-October onwards they dined on game nearly every night, with mountain sheep, elk and venison steaks, pheasants and ducks.”

The theme of this year’s festival is the Paris years, and Beegel will speak on “America in the 1920s: Why Hemingway Went to Paris.” Hemingway’s grandson, John, will give the keynote talk, “Hemingway in Paris: The Crazy Years.”

In an e-mail interview from France, where he lives, John Hemingway said he will discuss his grandfather’s “early years in Paris and how they affected him as a writer and a man. … It was a fascinating period in his life.”

Beegel will talk about the United States in the 1920s. With Prohibition in full force and an anti-immigration zeitgeist not unlike today’s, it was not a place that fit Hemingway’s cosmopolitan sensibilities. He learned to drink in Europe, and Paris was an extremely affordable place for a young writer to hone his craft with the other expatriates, said Beegel.

The culture of Paris at the time was a place of “experimentation in art, music and sex … a very freewheeling kind of place,” she said.

Like his grandfather, John Hemingway lived in Spain and recently moved to France. “I came to Europe because I had this romantic idea that a writer should go abroad … but then again maybe it’s in the genes.”

In his book “Strange Tribe,” just published by The Lyons Press, John Hemingway explores his father Gregory’s (Ernest Hemingway’s youngest son) complicated relationship with Ernest. “I couldn’t help but pick up on the obsession my dad had with his father. He never wore it on his sleeve, but the conflict between the two, and with his own sexuality, were ever present,” he writes.

“He (Gregory) was a manic depressive, he cross-dressed, and he eventually had a sex-change operation. He drank and got into fights, did time in jail. But more than anything else, he missed his father terribly. Missed him and hated him at the same time. Hated him, and blamed himself for Ernest’s suicide in 1961,” John Hemingway writes.

Both Ernest and Gregory were bipolar and “shared a fascination with androgyny.” Gregory died in 2001 at the Women’s Correctional Facility of the Miami-Dade County Jail. John Hemingway said he is not bipolar and his conflicts with his father are different.

“And I’ve never had the kind of doubts regarding my sexuality that they had,” he wrote by e-mail. “My big problem was understanding and relating myself to them.”

Sexuality was a big theme in Hemingway’s work, said Beegel, the Hemingway scholar. “He was interested in homosexuality, lesbianism and heterosexual conflict,” she said. “It was Hemingway who smuggled James Joyce’s ‘Ulysses’ into the United States when it was banned.”

Many of his short stories, like “Up in Michigan,” dealt with sexual encounters based on his own. With its forthright sexual descriptions, there were problems in publishing it here, but not in Paris.

Hemingway pal Gertrude Stein used the French word inaccrohable to describe the story. It means a painting too shocking to be hung, said Beegel.

Andy Stiny is a reporter at the Idaho Mountain Express in Ketchum, Idaho, and a former contributing writer for Empire Magazine.

The Ernest Hemingway Festival

Various sites in Sun Valley-Ketchum, Idaho. Sept. 20-23 | FREE | For more information, go to www.ernesthemingwayfestival.org or call the Sun Valley/Ketchum Chamber & Visitors Bureau at 866-549-5783.

Hang out at Papa’s favorite haunts

Want to eat and drink in the same places Ernest Hemingway did? Perhaps snag a wily rainbow trout in the same pristine waters where he fished?

The Third Annual Ernest Hemingway Festival in Sun Valley-Ketchum, Idaho, includes a daily Hemingway Hangouts Guided Tour. The Community Library in town has the third-largest collection of Hemingway documents and photographs in the country and a typewriter said to have been used by Papa. Regional History Librarian Chris Millspaugh will be glad to answer your questions.

In addition to the drinking haunts, you can visit the Ketchum Cemetery where Hemingway was buried on July 6, 1961, and the Hemingway Memorial.

On a recent visit to the cemetery the gravesite’s marble slab was covered with several dozen pennies. A carafe of plastic flowers lay overturned at the slab’s edge.

Hemingway took his life with a shotgun in the foyer of his Ketchum home on July 2, 1961. He and his fourth wife, Mary, purchased the property in 1959 and spent an estimated three to eight months there during the last two years of his life.

The home is not open to the public, but Mary left it to The Nature Conservancy when she died in 1986. The Conservancy will hold a fundraising dinner there during the festival. The Conservancy also owns and operates the 825-acre Silver Creek Preserve about 25 miles south of Ketchum.

Silver Creek is a spring-fed stream in which Hemingway and friends fished and hunted ducks. It is open to the public for these activities, as well as hiking and birding. Hemingway’s first son, Jack, was instrumental in preserving these lands.

Back in town, you can visit Michel’s Christiania restaurant, formerly the Christiania, where Hemingway had his last dinner with Mary the night before he died. The restaurant was a favorite.

Among his other local haunts were bars and restaurants like the Sawtooth Club and Whiskey Jacques (formerly the Alpine), where he ate and tossed back a few. Local book stores sell guides describing these places.

He finished “For Whom the Bell Tolls” at the Sun Valley Lodge and drank in the lodge’s Duchin Bar (named after bandleader Eddie Duchin) and ate at the nearby Ram Restaurant.