Heidi Klum and her ex-husband Seal reunited as they both attended their son Henry's high school graduation in Pacific Palisades, California on Friday.

The former couple married in 2005 and announced they were separating after seven years in 2012. Their divorce was finalised two years later.

Both the German supermodel, 51, and the British singer, 61, looked in good spirits at the ceremony where they posed for pictures with their 18-year-old son.

Heidi attended the graduation with her husband, German musician Tom Kaulitz, and Seal was accompanied by his assistant-turned-girlfriend Laura Strayer.

Along with Henry, Heidi and Seal are parents to Johan, 17, and Lou, 14. Seal is also the adoptive father of Heidi's daughter Leni, 20, who she had with her ex Flavio Briatore.

Heidi cut a typically stylish figure for the day in a pale pink pinstripe blazer and matching trousers.

The former Victoria's Secret Angel also wore a pair of red-tinted glasses and let her blonde locks fall loose down her shoulders.

Her husband Tom, 34, who she married in 2019, opted for a black loose-fitting shirt and matching trousers along with a pair of sunglasses.

Seal looked dapper in a black suit and a white shirt while his girlfriend Laura turned heads in a white and grey striped midi dress.

Heidi and Seal were not seen posing for any photos together at the event, instead opting to take snaps with Henry alongside their respective partners.

During their marriage, the couple renewed their vows to each other every single year on their anniversary in front of family and friends.

They released a statement in 2012 announcing their intention to divorce, saying: 'While we have enjoyed seven very loving, loyal and happy years of marriage, after much soul-searching we have decided to separate."

'We have had the deepest respect for one another throughout our relationship and continue to love each other very much, but we have grown apart.

'This is an amicable process and protecting the well-being of our children remains our top priority, especially during this time of transition.'

Seal has been in a relationship with Laura since 2021 while Heidi and Tom were together for a year before their wedding.

The pair's age gap has previously made headlines, given Heidi is 16 years older than her husband.

'I'm 50 and no longer 20. I'm not a young girl who hasn't experienced anything yet or has no idea about life,' she acknowledged to Glamour UK last year.

'Time won't stand still for me and Tom will never catch up with me. I'll always be 16 years older, and I'm aware of that,' Heidi continued.

'I know that I will look older than him sooner. Maybe it will be a problem for me in ten years' time, maybe he won't like it then,' she reflected.

'In 20 years, I'll be 70. I usually plan for the future – but with my husband, I live in the here and now.'