Heidi Klum has revealed that she feels like she has 'a partner for the first time' in husband Tom Kaulitz, despite marring ex Seal seven times.

The Project Runway host, 46, gushed over her 'amazing' third husband in a candid new interview, while making a thinly-veiled dig at her former spouse.

It comes after she revealed that both she and Tokio Hotel guitarist Tom, 30, tested negative for COVID-19 after displaying symptoms.

Heidi married Tom in February 2019 just two months after he popped the question.

They then tied the knot again in a lavish ceremony in August aboard the luxury Christina O yacht.

She told The Sun: 'I had a very busy year last year. It’s been amazing. I met my husband two years ago. It’s like I have a partner for the first time.

'If I have troubles or I’m trying to figure something out, he’s an amazing listener and it’s just amazing to have a partner. I’m just a much ­happier person.'

She continued: 'For the first time, I have a partner who I can ­discuss everything with. Someone who shares duties that we all have in our life. I used to be on my own with everything.'

Her subtle swipe at ex Seal came despite the fact Heidi 'married' the singer seven times in total.

The couple married in a star-studded ceremony in May 2005, six months after the Kiss From A Rose hitmaker proposed.

Throughout the course of their marriage, the couple renewed their vows every year in an elaborate ceremony on their anniversary, with the last being in 2011 - effectively having a 'wedding' seven times in total.

Seal and Heidi eventually called time on their union in 2012, with their divorce finalised in October 2014.

The former couple share sons Henry 14, and Johan, 13 and daughter Lou, ten.

Heidi also has daughter Helene, 15, with ex Flavio Briatore, though Seal officially adopted her in 2009.

The German model was also married to stylist Ric Pipino in 1997. They went on to divorce in 2002.

Heidi added to the publication that since her wedding to Tom was her third, it was 'easier' as she 'wasn’t as nervous.'

It comes after Heidi finally confirmed on Instagram that she does not have coronavirus - 10 days after taking the test.

Sharing a snap of herself on social media on Tuesday, she captioned it: 'Day 14 of staying home #covid_19negative.'

She then replied to a fan who asked how she was, stating: ''[I'm] much better thank you. I just have a bad cold and trying to get over it. Sending love out to you and everyone!'

The presenter has been self-quarantining inside her $9.875M Bel-Air mansion since falling ill on March 7, which effectively shut down production on the third season of NBC's America's Got Talent: The Champions.

Curiously, Heidi's third husband Tom Kaulitz received his negative test results way earlier on March 16 when she told a fan she expected her results last 'Thursday.'