Heidi Klum and her ex husband Singer Seal have reunited for a Christmas kiss after taking their children out for a festive meal.

The former couple have remained close since their split in 2012 and this year is no different as they met up for a touching family meal during the holiday season.

Seal was snapped cupping his former wife's face as they kissed each other goodbye after the meal in front of waiting photographers.

Seal recently seemingly compared his marriage split to reading Chekhov , according to reports.

The 52-year-old made the grandiose statement as he tried to skirt around the fact his new album 7, and in particular his song The Big Love Has Died, appears to be about the breakdown of his marriage to Heidi Klum .

In an interview with Times 2, the Kiss From A Rose singer declared he didn’t care if people thought it was about his model ex – who he split from in 2012 after seven years of marriage.

He said: “People will have their ideas. What I want the listener to experience from this album is when the relationship fails it’s like the third act of a Chekhov play.

"The death in act three of Chekhov is the low point from which eventual resolution springs.” Right.

Continuing he added: “People can say what they will. I don’t want people poring over them for clues. Sure, I’ve been through some turbulent experiences, but then hasn’t everybody?” he mused.

“We live in a quantum age.

“You look at my album from one perspective and you see the end of my relationship with my ex wife. I look at it and I see aggregate of all romance distilled into art.” So do we Seal, so do we.

Seal also denied that his current partner – Erica Packer – is pregnant, branding reports “rubbish”.

Heidi and Seal shocked the world when they called time on their romance as they always appeared to be one of the strongest couples in showbiz.

Things appeared to become a little acrimonious between the pair when Seal publicly slammed her for “deciding to sleep with the help”. She was in a relationship with her bodyguard at the time.

Heidi came under fire last week when she controversially described herself as the mum and dad to her kids.

She was forced to defend her comments, saying: “It is frustrating to me that some other media outlets are taking what was said in the article to suggest that I was aiming to malign my children's father. Because I was not!

“In the article, I say that, as a single parent, 'I'm a mom and a dad at the same time.' And that is the case when I'm alone with our kids ... and I assume the same rings true when they are with their dad.'

Heidi added: “As a single parent, you have so many roles – you are wearing all the hats. The mom hat, the dad hat, the chef hat, the teacher hat, the disciplinarian hat, the clown hat and the work hat.

“You have your hands full, but you just try your best because it's all about raising happy and healthy kids. That's all we both want.”

In the original interview with Redbook, she said: “Obviously things have changed, but they haven't changed drastically,'

“[Seal] was never your typical dad who left for work in the morning with his briefcase and would be home by dinnertime every night. He traveled a lot. The kids knew it was part of his job. I'm a mom and a dad at the same time.”