Who is Heidi Klum’s husband? Does she have any kids and what is her relationship history? The former supermodel has captivated fans with her stints on Project Runway and as a judge on America’s Got Talent. In addition to her career in show business, people have always been interested in learning about her personal life.

In this article, we will explore all about Heidi Klum’s husband along with her kids and previous relationships.

Who is Heidi Klum husband?

Heidi Klum is married to Tom Kaulitz.

US Magazine reports that the Project Runway alum Heidi Klum and Tom Kaulitz were first seen kissing in March 2018 during the filming of America’s Got Talent. Their relationship progressed rapidly, leading to a secret wedding in July 2019, followed by a larger celebration in Capri, Italy, in August 2019.

How many kids does Heidi Klum have?

Heidi Klum has four kids.

Heidi Klum has four children: sons Henry and Johan, and daughters Lou and Leni. While Leni’s biological father is Klum’s ex-boyfriend Flavio Briatore, she was later adopted by her ex-husband Seal. Despite not having any children of his own, Tom Kaulitz, Klum’s current husband, shares a close bond with her children. According to People, they even helped him plan a surprise proposal for her in 2019.

Heidi Klum relationship history

Heidi Klum’s romantic history features several high-profile relationships. Here’s a closer look into her relationship history:

Ric Pipino: According to Closer Weekly, the supermodel married hairstylist Ric Pipino in 1997, just as her modeling career was taking off. However, they divorced in 2002.

Anthony Kiedis: As per Ranker, in 2002, Klum started dating Red Hot Chili Peppers frontman Anthony Kiedis having met backstage at one of the band’s concerts. During the course of their relationship, they were pictured together numerous times.

Flavio Briatore: Ranker states that after her divorce, Klum began a relationship with Flavio Briatore, the managing director of Renault’s Formula One team. Their romance became public in March 2003, but they split up later that year. At the time, Klum was pregnant with their daughter, Leni.

Jay Kay: In the early 2000s, Heidi Klum reportedly dated British musician, Jay Kay briefly. After just a few months, the couple’s romance ended. Per Hello!, Jay Kay even penned a song about Heidi called ‘Love Foolosophy,’ included in Jamiroquai’s 2001 album A Funk Odyssey.

Seal: As per People, Klum met the British singer-songwriter Seal in New York in 2004. They began dating soon after, and he was present for her daughter Leni’s birth in New York City. The couple married on May 10, 2005, and had three biological children together. Klum and Seal separated in 2012, finalizing their divorce in 2014.

Martin Kirsten: As per Ranker, following her separation from Seal in 2012, Heidi Klum began dating her former bodyguard, Martin Kirsten. They met when he was assigned to watch over the supermodel and her family, and they clicked right away. However, after over two years of dating, the two relationship ended in 2014.

Vito Schnabel: In 2014, Klum began dating New York art dealer Vito Schnabel, as reported by Ranker. The couple frequently appeared together in public but ended their relationship in September 2017.