Heidi Klum, 49, and Seal, 60, had a captivating first date. After spending the evening in combination, the type informed the singer that style she was once pregnant with her now 18-year-old daughter, Leni Klum.

"I laughed and said, 'Already? That's amazing!'" the Crazy hitmaker said of his reaction in 2008. "She said, 'Not with you stupid.'" Leni's organic dad is Flavio Briartore, an Italian businessman whom Heidi had dated for roughly nine months in 2003. Given the scenario, Seal made up our minds to adopt Heidi's firstborn.

A 12 months after Leni's delivery, the couple — also anticipating their first child together — tied the knot in an intimate rite in Mexico. Seal and Heidi went on to have 3 extra youngsters — sons Henry Samuel, 17, and Johan Samuel, 16, and 13-year-old daughter Lou Samuel. They were the absolute best family till Heidi filed for divorce in April 2012, marking the get started of a nasty court battle.

During their separation, Heidi began dating her bodyguard, Martin Kristen. However, Seal claimed the affair had begun even prior to their cut up.

RELATED: Is Seal Still Making New Music?

How Did Heidi Klum & Seal's Divorce Get So Nasty?

During their divorce lawsuits, the paparazzi stuck Heidi and Martin putting out on the seashore. Seal responded by way of an interview with TMZ. "Whilst I didn't expect anything better from him," he stated of the security specialist.

"I would of thought that Heidi would have shown a little more class and at least waited until we separated first before deciding to fornicate with the help."

Shortly after, Heidi defended herself from Seal's accusations, telling Katie Couric: "He has a very unique choice of words, I 'm used to them. I don't know, I don't love that, it's obviously not true, I never looked at another man while I was with him. He's moved on, and so have I."

But that wasn't the handiest reason issues were given heated up between the former couple. Despite the amicable nature in their split, the two were given into a custody dispute. The Kiss from a Rose singer also contested Heidi's declare that they had no joint property to divide between them.

Seal was worth $15 million whilst the former Victoria's Secret Angel used to be value $70 million. In October 2014, when their divorce was finalized, TMZ revealed that there used to be no spousal make stronger introduced on both sides. However, the pass judgement on did not disclose their settlement on custody and asset department.

RELATED: Howard Stern Calls Heidi Klum "Out Of Line" For Controversial Mother Daughter Photoshoot

What Really Happened Between Heidi Klum & Her Bodyguard?

In the same Katie interview, Heidi set the record instantly on how her relationship with Martin started. "[Martin]'s a great man and recently we just got to know each other from a completely different side," she explained. "He's been with our family for the last four years. He's cared for our four children and helped us tremendously." She famous, "I trust him with my children's life."

A chum of Heidi's also said at the moment that Martin "was always her rock" and that "while everything was crumbling in her personal life he was there for her." The insider added: "He shows real care and concern for her and her children. She relies on him. It's a little bit of cliché with The Bodyguard movie. I don't know what will happen in their lives."

In January 2014, People introduced that the two had broken up. "Martin was there for her during a challenging time in her life and it was something she will always be grateful for," mentioned a supply close to Heidi. Another insider stated that Martin had stopped working for Heidi after the breakup.

"They are no longer working together," they mentioned. "Life is about timing. He was incredibly supportive and they were there for each other, but they're moving on now. They still have a great friendship." Martin in the end became Chris Cornell's personal bodyguard.

In 2017, it was reported that Martin had given the past due singer two Avitan pills at 11.30 p.m., in a while after his ultimate performance. He also came upon the musician's body in the bathroom of his suite at Detroit's MGM Grand, after kicking down the door at the insistence of Chris' spouse.

RELATED: What Happened Between Heidi Klum And Red Hot Chili Peppers Singer Anthony Kiedis?

Who Is Heidi Klum's Husband Now?

Heidi has been married to Tom Kaulitz, 33, since 2019. They had a grand wedding ceremony ceremony in Capri, Italy, seven months after he popped the query. Tom is the guitarist of the band, Tokio Hotel. The two were first spotted making out in March 2018 at a Lorraine Schwartz release party.

In February 2023, the two celebrated their fourth anniversary by means of posing nude on a chain of Instagram snaps. "Love of my life ❤️," Heidi wrote. In June 2018, a supply advised Us Weekly that "Heidi's smile when she's with Tom says more than 1,000 words." They added that "Tom makes her incredibly happy! Tom is a man of a whole different level. He’s very confident and totally committed to their relationship."

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7tbTErZ%2Bippeoe6S7zGifnqGUnnqsuNSmqmadnpmypXnHnqlmqpWhrrW1zqeqoaGgYsSqwMdmqp6ZXZeypK3UrJxmp5Zitaa%2BjJumnbGXqq6zsMto