Heidi Klum is honeymooning with her new husband, Tom Kaulitz.

The 46-year-old model was married to singer Seal and stylist Ric Pipino previously.

Heidi celebrated anniversaries with Seal with elaborate vow renewals, and each year they got remarried.

Heidi Klum is honeymooning with her new husband Tom Kaulitz. When it comes to marriage, the model and former Project Runway host is a total pro, and this isn't her first rodeo, er, honeymoon.

So, how many times has Heidi been married before? She has two ex-husbands, but she's actually had more than two previous wedding ceremonies. She seems to love tying the knot, considering she married Tom twice this year. Here's what you need to know about Heidi's previous weddings.

Heidi's first husband was Ric Pipino.

The model took her first trip down the aisle in 1997 with stylist Ric Pipino. They were married for almost five years when the couple divorced in 2002.

In 2003, Heidi then dated Flavio Briatore, former Renault F1 team manager, per Daily Mail. However, their relationship ended before exchanging any rings. Heidi was pregnant with with their daughter, Leni, when they broke up.

Heidi and Seal said "I Do" with seven ceremonies over the years.

In 2003, Heidi met her most famous love, Seal, in a hotel lobby, The Atlantic reported. Seal popped the question in December 2004 on a glacier in Whistler, British Columbia. The couple opted for another scenic destination, Seal's beachfront home in Mexico, for their star-studded wedding on May 10, 2005.

Heidi and Seal marked each anniversary with elaborate vow renewal ceremonies, and Heidi legally changed her last name to Samuel in 2009. "They wanted it to feel like a real wedding, but still have a theme," a source told People about their fifth anniversary celebration.

Here's everything you need to know about Heidi's recent I do's:

"Each year, Heidi and I get remarried," Seal told the publication. "It’s a great party, but for about an hour, we go off on our own down to a private beach. We sit there with the kids and read vows to each other as the sun sets. It’s a very special moment to us."

The celeb couple brought together 100 friends and family, including their children, Leni, Henry, Johan, and Lou, at Donald Trump's Mar-a-Lago Club in Palm Beach, FL, for their final "wedding" in 2011, New York Daily News reported.

Heidi Klum and Seal in 2011

Less than a year later, on January 22, 2012, Heidi and Seal shocked everyone when they announced their separation after almost seven years of marriage, and essentially seven weddings. Heidi filed for divorce on April 6, 2012 and changed her last name back to Klum afterward.

Heidi and Tom Kaulitz tied the knot after less than a year together.

Heidi married Tokio Hotel guitarist Tom Kaulitz, 29, for the second time in August. The couple got engaged in December and secretly became husband and wife earlier in the year, per TMZ.