HEIDI Klum is a supermodel and TV personality who has appeared on dozens of magazine covers - including the Sports Illustrated swimsuit edition.

Klum - who is also an Instagram star - was a mainstay on shows like Project Runway and America's Got Talent.

Who is Heidi Klum’s husband, Tom Kaulitz?

Tom Kaulitz is a singer, songwriter, and producer.

He is a member of the rock band Tokio Hotel, which was formed in 2001 and is hugely popular in Germany. Like Heidi, the rocker is also from Germany.

His twin brother Bill is the lead singer of the group.

Tom was previously married to Ria Sommerfeld, but they split in 2018.

Heidi previously said that she feels like she has a partner for the first time.

“If I have troubles or I’m trying to figure something out, he’s an amazing listener and it’s just amazing to have a partner," she told The Sun earlier this year.

'I’m just a much ­happier person.”

She added: “For the first time, I have a partner who I can ­discuss everything with.

"Someone who shares duties that we all have in our life. I used to be on my own with everything.”

Heidi and Tom started dating in 2018 before secretly marrying in February 2019. The couple wed again in Italy during the summer.

They were set up through a mutual friend who worked on Germany's Next Top Model, according to W Magazine.

Both had recently been divorced, and the couple share a 16-year age gap.

Who else has Heidi Klum been married to?

Heidi Klum has been married three times. From 1997 to 2002, she was married to celebrity hairstylist Ric Pipino.

After her first marriage ended in divorce, the supermodel moved on and married Grammy Award-winning singer Seal.

They two tied the knot in 2005 but split up in 2014. Before the split, Heidi and Seal famously renewed their vows at least six times.

How many children does Heidi Klum have?

Heidi Klum has four children, including three with Seal.

Italian businessman Flavio Briatore is the father of her oldest child, Leni Olum Klum. They welcomed Leni in 2004 after their relationship had ended.

She was pregnant with Leni when she started dating Seal. According to People, Seal adopted Leni in 2009.

In 2005, Heidi and Seal welcomed their first son, Henry Samuel. A year later they had another son named Johan Samuel.

Finally, the former couple had their fourth child and second daughter. Lou Samuel was born in 2009.

In 2020, she revealed that it is hard being a co-parent with the singer.

She told Red magazine, "We try as good as we can. There’s always a reason why you’re not with someone anymore, you know?

"It’s not all rosy-rosy. It just isn’t. So sometimes it’s hard, but then you have to all come together as a family and sometimes everything is just like hopping on clouds."