In light of the celebration today of the 200th anniversary of Abraham Lincoln’s birth, here’s what every Norwich resident should know about Lincoln’s visit to the city on March 9, 1860.

Norwich was one of only five places where he spoke in Connecticut, not only on that campaign trip in support of Republican Gov. William Buckingham’s re-election, but perhaps his entire lifetime.

The Wauregan Hotel is the only structure of those places — New Haven, Hartford, Meriden and Bridgeport — that has survived.

The trip helped cement his ties with Buckingham, who later was re-elected governor and turned out to be one of Lincoln’s most loyal and supportive governors during the Civil War.

Those three items of interest are courtesy of Norwich City Historian Dale Plummer, who successfully lobbied to save the Wauregan, where Lincoln apparently spent the night after delivering his speech at the old City Hall.

In short, history was in the making, though certainly few, if any here, could have foreseen just how high Lincoln would rise in stature. The Aurora, a Democratic paper in Norwich, essentially described Lincoln as the loser from Illinois. Daniel Tyler introduced Lincoln to a Connecticut-wide audience as a potential U.S. vice president.

But historical hindsight, particularly involving a legend like Lincoln, makes nearly everything about a subject significant.

Buckingham link

Bill Champagne, president of the Norwich Historical Society, has his own favorite Lincoln facts as they relate indirectly to local history.

Lincoln’s good friend Buckingham lived in Norwich — where the Buckingham Memorial stands now on Main Street — while serving as governor.

Also, Lafayette Sabine Foster, who became acting U.S. vice president after Lincoln was assassinated on April 14, 1865, was born in Franklin, grew up in Norwich, practiced law in the city, and was Norwich mayor. The Norwich Free Academy library stands at the site of his former home.

“Norwich, during the Revolutionary War, was an important city,” Champagne said. “And during the 19th century, it was a very important city.”

Important city

Bill Stanley, who writes a column for The Norwich Bulletin, agreed Lincoln’s visit to Norwich signified the power and wealth of the city at that time.

“During the Civil War, we had both U.S. senators and the governor here,” Stanley said. “We were a town of strong influence.”

That influence was based on Norwich’s status as a train and riverboat transportation hub.

But the larger historical context of Lincoln’s visit interests Michael Burlingame, a Mystic resident and state liaison to the National Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission.

“It’s often said that Lincoln grew in the presidency, but all of the great qualities he manifested as president were evident from (1854 to 1860),” said Burlingame, who recently wrote a 2,000-page, two-volume book titled, “Abraham Lincoln: A Life.”

Those qualities included political eloquence, the skills to organize the Republican party and an ability to get various factions to cooperate.

Well known

By the time Lincoln arrived in Norwich, residents here would have known him as the man who stood up to the nation’s most prominent and formidable politician, Stephen A. Douglas, in a series of seven debates in 1858.

Even more fresh in their minds would have been Lincoln’s Cooper Union Address delivered Feb. 27 in New York City. Lincoln outlined what Burlingame said was a powerful anti-slavery argument, specifically noting Congress had the power to forbid slavery in the Western territories.

Lincoln’s speech in Norwich was a reprise of the Cooper Union address. He was also six years removed from the end of what Burlingame said was a five-year, mid-life crisis.

Lincoln went into the crisis a hack politician. He emerged a man who believed he had a God-given purpose in life and who was ready to take on national politics, and later, a war with the survival of the nation on the line.

Norwich, it turns out, caught more than a glimpse of this rising star.