To me, Abraham Lincoln is perhaps America’s most inspirational president. He grew up in poverty, was almost entirely self-educated,

was considered unattractive and socially awkward, and yet rose from obscurity to the highest office in our country. He didn’t even survive one term, and yet I don’t know of any president

who is held more dear in the hearts of American people. Lincoln’s life serves as the perfect encouragement for each of us: Regardless of our background or heritage, we can lead a life of noble service if we’re willing. While Alan and I were down in the hills of Kentucky last week, we stopped by the Abraham Lincoln Birthplace National Historical Park to pay homage to his great American hero—our sixteenth president and the man who successfully led our nation

beyond civil war toward the possibility of civil peace (although I don’t think we’ll ever have true peace until Jesus returns). I was inspired by studying again his humble background and austere childhood. Lincoln was born at Sinking Spring Farm, Kentucky, on February 12, 1809. It was a simple one-room log cabin, as was common in those days. His mother, Nancy Hanks Lincoln, died when he was only nine, and the family had to move many times because of land disputes. How did a child with such limited upbringing and experience become one of the greatest pillars of our nation? I believe with all my heart it was due to his reverence for the Bible. Abraham Lincoln believed, read, absorbed, and ordered his life according to the precepts found in the Bible. And, what about you and me? It doesn’t matter what our background has been. It doesn’t matter if we’re plain and simple. It doesn’t even matter if you’re feeling old and run down as you read this post. God has promised that all those who come to him in faith

and drink in the truth found in his Word (just as Abe Lincoln did) will become beautiful and fruitful! We might not be among the world’s greatest leaders…or maybe we will… But, we can all live such that our memory is blessed by those who knew us

and approved by God with a “Well done, thou good and faithful servant.”

“Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful. But his delight is in the law of the Lord; and in his law doth he meditate day and night. And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not wither; and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper. The ungodly are not so: but are like the chaff which the wind driveth away. Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous. For the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous: but the way of the ungodly shall perish.” (Psalm 1)

(The first two photographs of Lincoln are from Wikipedia, but I took the rest of the photos on our trip last week to Kentucky and Abraham Lincoln Birthplace National Historical Park.)