1909 marked the centennial of the birth of Abraham Lincoln. The nation’s year-long centennial celebration was marked in truly American fashion with commemorative souvenirs and events of all kinds. Items held by the Lincoln Financial Foundation Collection reveal that variety.

For example, special commemorative tokens were sold—some for the general public and some especially for members of the Grand Army of the Republic, an organization of Union Army veterans.

Commemorative ribbons like this one featuring Lincoln’s portrait framed beneath a bronze eagle and this portrait pin and ribbon created by Ehrman Manufacturing Co. of Boston were also popular.

Centennial postcards provided Americans another way to honor the president. This one surrounded Lincoln’s portrait with flags and stars in red, white, blue, and gold.

This calendar, published by the Westchester Woman's Club of Mount Vernon, New York, had an embossed cover and included Lincoln quotations and illustrations of Lincoln sites as well as monthly calendars for 1909.

The Third National Bank of Springfield, Massachusetts, marked the year by distributing to its customers this pamphlet containing the Gettysburg Address, the Second Inaugural Address, Lincoln's Springfield farewell address, and his letters to Mrs. Bixby and Gen. Hooker.

Believing that “one of the great features of the Lincoln Centennial should be to bring to the children of this country those elements of his character, influence, and greatness which they can appreciate,” Lilian C. Bergold of the University of Chicago published this collection of “stories…poems, songs, and programs” for elementary students and teachers.

February 12, 1909—the actual birthday anniversary—was proclaimed a national holiday by President Theodore Roosevelt, who delivered an address at Lincoln’s birthplace in Kentucky on that day. The address was published with decorative borders in Collier’s special Lincoln Centennial issue.

Birthday celebrations were held in many cities. This booklet, for example, is the program for Cincinnati’s “Lincoln Day Celebration,” organized by the city’s Lincoln Centennial Memorial Association. The program included music by a children’s chorus and an orchestra, an “Address,” and an “Oration.”

The Lincoln Club of Brooklyn-New York held a celebratory banquet. The menu included fillet of striped bass, saddle of lamb, French peas, breast of guinea hen, asparagus, and assorted cakes and macaroons.

The Chicago Hebrew Institute offered four days of celebratory programs, including one for Yiddish-speaking people, one for youth, and one for children.

Lincoln’s home state of Illinois appointed a special commission to oversee the celebration of “the anniversary of the birth of this greatest of all American statesmen.” The two-day celebration’s events included speeches by state politicians and jurists, the French and English ambassadors, and William Jennings Bryan; banquets sponsored by various groups; religious services; a meeting of the Grand Army of the Republic; a special session for high school students and faculty; a reception at the governor’s mansion; and a visit to the Lincoln Tomb at Oak Ridge Cemetery. A summary of events and the speeches were then published by the Illinois Centennial Commission.