PORTLAND, Ore. — Gerald Wallace is still getting over the initial shock of being traded to the Portland Trail Blazers.

Wallace was acquired from Charlotte on Thursday in a trade deadline deal that sent Joel Przybilla, Sean Marks and Dante Cunningham along with two first-round draft picks to the Bobcats.

Wallace said he went to practice Thursday morning and was still a Bobcat. He took a nap in the afternoon and woke up a Blazer.

Nicknamed Crash, the 6-foot-7 Wallace admitted he was more tired than excited when he appeared at a news conference before Portland's game against the Denver Nuggets on Friday night.

"Whatever they need me to do, I'm willing to do," he said of his new team.

Wallace, the last original member of the 7-year-old Bobcats taken in the 2004 expansion draft, was averaging 15.6 points and 8.2 rebounds in 48 starts this season. He was an All-Star and made the NBA's All-Defensive first team last season.

Blazers coach Nate McMillan said he envisions Wallace playing at power forward although Wallace is more comfortable at small. The two were going to meet Saturday to discuss expectations on both sides.

At least initially, the Blazers will use Wallace as a reserve while they see where he fits best, McMillan said. The Blazers also are working guard Brandon Roy back into the rotation after a two-month absence because of arthroscopic surgery on both knees. And center Marcus Camby is expected back soon after rehabbing from knee surgery.

Wallace took a physical on Friday but was not available to play against Denver because the players traded to Charlotte had not yet completed their physicals.

The moves left Portland with two open roster spots and limited depth at center behind Camby, who could be back as early as Sunday when the Blazers host Atlanta.

The 7-foot-1 Przybilla was averaging 1.8 points and 3.9 rebounds in 31 games while Cunningham was averaging 5.1 points and 3.4 rebounds.

Wallace was asked jokingly by the Portland media whether he could play center.

"That doesn't matter to me," he said. "I'll play whatever position they want me to play."