Don’t be surprised if a team such as the Portland Trail Blazers tries to make a bid for Celtics swingman Gerald Wallace and offers some unwanted expiring contracts for Boston’s troubles. Wallace, 32, played parts of two seasons with Portland and enjoyed his stint there. He was seen joking during the Celtics-Blazers game with Portland All-Star forward LaMarcus Aldridge. The closer Wallace’s anchor-like contract nears conclusion, the easier it will be to move. Wallace is attractive to a club seeking a veteran leader who can defend in spot minutes.

Dear Gerald Wallace, Thank you for sitting and talking with my son, Davis. Although, for you, this was just a moment in time before heading off to your work as a basketball player on the Boston Celtics, for us it was a glimpse of our boy living his dream. I don’t know if Davis mentioned it or not, but he wants to be a professional basketball player too. Although the slim odds for making it into the NBA would discourage most, Davis will not be deterred. His optimism is one of his best qualities.

I know our society doesn’t value individuals like Davis, slow in mind and body, but Davis doesn’t know that. He knows our society values professional athletes, and so he plans to join your ranks, not only for love of the game, but for its reward as well. Did he tell you about the mansion he’s planning to build with his NBA salary? So as we navigate the terrain of guiding this child as he grows, we thank you for giving us a story to sustain his dreams and bridge the gap. We’ll talk of the time when he sat with Gerald Wallace, and shot a hoop or two, and hope that gets him – and us – close enough.

Wallace’s selflessness is also connected to that surgically repaired knee. He remarkably made it through 13 seasons without once requiring surgery, and his recovery from last summer’s clean-out procedure has been slow. It’s easier to embrace mentorship and a reduced on-court role when your body isn’t right. “For me right now it’s not as bad, because I’m still struggling with trying to get myself back to 100 percent where I feel comfortable playing,” he said of taking a back seat now. “So the minutes right now aren’t as important as doing my strengthening and rehabbing.”