If you are a sci-fi geek like myself then one of your favorite actors of the genre has to be Lance Henriksen.

Lance Henriksen has been in some of the most iconic and classic science fiction films and television shows on record. Starting back as a character actor in Steven Spielberg’s Close Encounters of the Third Kind to becoming the lead in the cult classic television series Millennium, he has never failed to entertain viewers. Of course one of his most memorable movie roles was Bishop, the android from Aliens co-starring Sigourney Weaver, Michael Biehn and Paul Reiser.

Henriksen has played it all. From spit and polish FBI agents and detectives to the gritty, hard-driving killers, vampires or motorcycle gang-banger. His versatility is so honed that he can also come off as a kind, sensitive loving father and husband and national hero as he did playing Astronaut Wally Schirra for the Academy Award winning film The Right Stuff.

The actor’s career has spanned 53-years and shows no signs of slowing down. In 2014 alone he will star in no less than 11 new productions. The two being most talked about are Harbinger Down and Bring Me the Head of Lance Henriksen – both currently in post-production.

Harbinger Down takes place aboard a fishing trawler of the same name with Henriksen leading a group of grad students studying the effects of global warming on ocean life within the Bering Sea. When they come across the debris of an old piece of Soviet spaceship wreckage that contains tiny tardigrades – lifeforms able to withstand the onslaught of cosmic radiation. They have mutated and after thawing from the ice of the wreckage begin taking the humans as hosts and that’s when the excitement and carnage begins.

The release date for Harbinger Down is TBA but you can catch an early preview on March 29 & 30, 2014 during the Monsterpalooza at the Marriott Burbank Hotel and Convention Center in Burbank, California.

Lance’s other anticipated film, Bring Me the Head of Lance Henriksen, co-stars another sci-fi icon – Tim Thomerson (Trancers) who has found that age has caused fewer and fewer film roles to come his way so in a last ditch effort to find how he can get back some of his early-days hiring mojo he goes on a quest to find the one man and his former filming co-star Lance Henriksen to learn his Dorian Gray secret of hire-ability and acting longevity. However, what he finds will surprise not only him but the viewing audience as well.

Likely to become a comedy/sci-fi cult favorite and directed by Seeking Dolly Parton helmer Michael Worth, Bring Me the Head of Lance Henriksen is set for release sometime in late 2014 or early 2015.