Lance Henriksen News

Phoenix Theatre Ensemble To Present METAMORPHOSIS, An Immersive Experience

Join Phoenix Theatre Ensemble for their limited run of METAMORPHOSIS, an immersive experience inspired by Franz Kafka's classic novella. Created by PTE Company Members Clara Francesca & Leo Lion, catch the performances at KafkaTech at Studio Exhibit Photography Studios.

THE ARTIFICE GIRL Starring Lance Henriksen Lands Acquisition

It was announced that XYZ Films has acquired North American rights to Franklin Ritch’s critically acclaimed sci-fi film THE ARTIFICE GIRL, following its US premiere at South by Southwest Film Festival. The film stars Tatum Matthews (THE WALTONS: HOMECOMING), Lance Henriksen (ALIENS), Sinda Nichols, David Girard, and Ritch.

MAMMOTH FILM FESTIVAL Set For Takeoff March 2-6, 2023

Mammoth Film Festival has emerged as one of the fastest growing festivals in the world. This year's edition takes place March 2-6, 2023 and is one of the most highly anticipated destination festivals on the calendar for filmmakers and film lovers globally.

Mammoth Film Festival Unveils First Round Of 2023 Program Featuring Over 80 Films

The highly anticipated Mammoth Film Festival, taking place from March 2 to 6, 2023, has announced the first round of this year's robust program.

Zed Fest Film Festival 2021 Announces Opening Night Film Line-Up

Zed Fest Film Festival 2021 has announced their opening night line-up. The 12th Annual Film Festival Runs November 11 Through November 13, 2021 Laemmle Noho 7, Noho Arts District, Ca.

Sundance Classic RUBY IN PARADISE Lands February Re-Release

Quiver Distribution announced today that it will be rereleasing writer and director Victor Nunez’s 1993 award-winning film “Ruby in Paradise” in a new HD master that was fully restored from the original camera rolls and audio tracks and looks and sounds better than ever before.

Where Can You Stream Your Favorite Halloween Movies in 2020?

Have you been wondering how you’re going to celebrate Halloween at home this year?

Films from SLAVE PLAY's Jeremy O. Harris, Julie Taymor & More Join Line-Up at Sundance Film Festival

The nonprofit Sundance Institute announced today the showcase of new independent feature films selected across all categories for the 2020 Sundance Film Festival. The Festival hosts screenings in Park City, Salt Lake City and at Sundance Mountain Resort, from January 23a?"February 2, 2020. The Sundance Film Festival is Sundance Institute's flagship public program, widely regarded as the largest American independent film festival and attended by more than 120,000 people and 1,300 accredited press, and powered by more than 2,000 volunteers last year.

Music Heals War Wounds In New Movie OILDALE

An aspiring country singer and her young brother befriend three homeless veterans in 'Oildale,' a new independent motion picture about the unique challenges often faced by veterans, after they return home from war.

Laura Linney Joins Viggo Mortensen in FALLING

Laura Linney has joined the cast of Viggo Mortensen's family drama “Falling,' according to Variety. Hannah Gross and Terry Chen have also joined the film's cast.

Viggo Mortensen Makes Directorial Debut With FALLING

Viggo Mortensen will make his directorial debut in “Falling,” a story of a son's relationship with his aging father, while also producing, writing, and starring in the project, according to Variety.

THE UNWILLING From Oscar-Nominated Director Jonathan Heap Out On DVD, Blu-ray & VOD 5/1

Vision Films is set to release Award-winning horror movie 'The Unwilling' from Academy Award-nominated writer/director Jonathan Heap to DVD, Blu-ray and VOD on May 1st 2018.

THE UNWILLING From Oscar-Nominated Director Jonathan Heap Out on DVD, Blu-ray & VOD May 1st

Vision Films is set to release Award-winning horror movie “The Unwilling” from Academy Award-nominated writer/director Jonathan Heap to DVD, Blu-ray and VOD on May 1st 2018.

Photo Flash: New Film GONE ARE THE DAYS Premieres in Los Angeles

Last night, Oculi Entertainment & Directional Entertainment held the premiere of their new film Gone Are the Days at the Laemmle Music Hall Theater in Beverly Hills, CA. The film is set in early twentieth-century Old West drama starring, Golden Globe® nominee, Lance Henriksen and Academy Award® nominee Tom Berenger, and also starring Danny Trejo, directed by Mark Landre Gould.

GONE ARE THE DAYS Set for an Exclusive Limited Theatrical Engagement in Los Angeles

Oculi Entertainment, Directional Entertainment are proud to announce the release of their new film Gone Are the Days, an early twentieth-century Old West drama starring, Golden Globe nominee, Lance Henriksen and Academy Award nominee Tom Berenger, and also starring Danny Trejo, directed by Mark Landre Gould.

New Film GONE ARE THE DAYS Opens 3/23

Oculi Entertainment, Directional Entertainment are proud to announce the release of their new film Gone Are the Days, an early twentieth-century Old West drama starring, Golden Globe nominee, Lance Henriksen and Academy Award nominee Tom Berenger, and also starring Danny Trejo, directed by Mark Landre Gould.

Meet The Cast Of HAPPIEST PLACE ON EARTH By Philip Dawkins

Once upon a time in 1955, a magical kingdom was built on the founding principles of dreams, American idealism, and our wildest hopes. Eight years later, a quintessential American family reeling from the loss of their King embarks on a quest for restoration and deliverance in this kingdom. 50 years later, their expedition is brought to dazzling life in an effort to understand one's place in family, the American way, and whether happiness is truly a place where dreams come true.

Mischa Barton's Latest Film DESERTED Debuts on Cable and Digital HD Today

Invincible Pictures has announced the February 28th Cable VOD and Digital HD release of Ashley Avis' DESERTED.

Mischa Barton is DESERTED on Cable VOD and Digital HD Today

Invincible Pictures has announced the February 28th Cable VOD and Digital HD release of Ashley Avis' DESERTED. Mischa Barton ('The O.C.', The Sixth Sense) stars as a recently released felon looking to start fresh with the brother she left behind.