ADC is a global leader in providing network infrastructure products and services that enable the profitable delivery of high-speed Internet, video, data, and voice services to residential, business and mobile subscribers worldwide. Their innovative, high-performance fiber connectivity and wireless coverage and capacity solutions support a broad range of network applications that help their customers provide new and advanced services to meet their own customers' unrelenting demand for bandwidth.\nFounded 75 years ago, ADC continues to build on a strong heritage of providing solutions and services that support its customers' migration to next-generation networks in many countries across the globe. As the leading service providers and enterprises worldwide invest in infrastructure that delivers broadband services to business, residential and mobile subscribers, ADC's breadth of solutions and experience, together with its strong financial position, make the company a reliable partner in addressing today's network realities and preparing for tomorrow's communications demands.

Heidelberger Druckmaschinen Aktiengesellschaft (Heidelberg) has been a major provider and partner for the global printing industry for many years. They offer our customers all necessary components essential to the success of their business activities in commercial and packaging printing. They develop and produce core technologies themselves, while complementary components and technologies are provided to their customers via strategic partnerships. Their products, service offerings and consumables, as well as their partnerships, are tailored to meet specific future-oriented customer needs and are geared towards their customers' economic success. With their own sales and service branches and via partners, they supply their customers in around 170 countries worldwide with products, services and consumables, generating Group sales of around € 2.43 billion in the 2013 / 2014 year under review.

A CGI Animation Company. Pixar began as the computer graphics project of the Computer Division at Lucasfilm Ltd, created in 1979. The Computer Division was led by Ed Catmull and the graphics project (soon called Pixar) was run by Alvy Ray Smith. Pixar was a hardware company developing highend image processing tools - in particular the Pixar 2D Frame Buffer. In 1984 they hired John Lasseter to help them produce their first animated film, primarily to demonstrate the power of their hardware. Over the years Lasseter created more animated shorts to demonstrate the Pixar, in 1986 creating Luxo Jr. Pixar was spun out of Lucasfilm and was purchased by [Steve Jobs](/person/steve-jobs) in 1986, at which point it became an independent company, although still a hardware company, and run by Ed Catmull and Alvy Ray Smith. Failing to grow the hardware business, they became increasingly dependent on revenue from their animated projects, first doing commercials. Eventually they made a deal with Disney to produce the first full-length feature film entirely in CG. Jobs was not very focused on Pixar, and was trying to sell it in the early 90s. But on the strength of early viewings of Toy Story, he instead took Pixar public. The rest is history. Pixar was acquired by [The Walt Disney Company](/organization/the-walt-disney-company) in 2006, making Jobs the largest shareowner in Disney.