PHILADELPHIA (AP) – Ricky Davis scored 14 of his 22 points in the fourth quarter and Kevin Garnett had 15 points and 14 rebounds to lead Minnesota to a 95-84 win over the Philadelphia 76ers on Sunday night.

Mike James scored 20 points for Minnesota, which stopped a three-game losing streak.

James and Davis combined to lead the Timberwolves’ push in the fourth. James made three 3-pointers in the quarter and teamed with Davis to score 23 of Minnesota’s 27 points, helping the Timberwolves get a road win for only the third time in nine games.

Allen Iverson, fined last week for skipping a bowling event, led the Sixers with 26 points. Samuel Dalembert had 15 points and nine rebounds, and Chris Webber 11 points and nine rebounds. The Sixers have lost four straight and 11 of 13 since starting the season 3-0 for the first time since the 2000-01 season.

That year ended with an Eastern Conference title for Philadelphia. This one might land them in the lottery.

When Davis wasn’t jawing with taunting front-row fans, he was knocking down baskets from all over the court to boost Minnesota’s lead early in the fourth. He opened the quarter with an 18-footer, hit his first 3-pointer of the game, and sank two free throws for a 75-67 lead.

When Davis converted a three-point play late in the fourth he gave the Timberwolves their first double-digit lead, 83-73.

James added two of his 3s late in the quarter to provide some cushion and Minnesota shot 52 percent overall from the floor. The Timberwolves outrebounded the Sixers by eight and became the latest team to exploit Philadelphia’s woeful defense.

Iverson and Garnett carried their teams for most of the first three quarters in a tight game where neither team could build a lead larger than six points. Davis sank an 18-footer in the final minute of the third to help put the Timberwolves ahead entering the fourth.

Notes: Philadelphia F Kyle Korver sat out his second straight game with a sprained left ankle. … Former Villanova star Randy Foye scored eight points in his first game back in Philadelphia. The Wildcats and coach Jay Wright watched the game from the upper deck, and Foye left several tickets from other friends and family. Foye attended the Villanova win on Saturday night. … Iverson was whistled for a technical in the third.

AP-ES-12-03-06 2054EST