Laura Hippen was born at the Beatrice Hospital, Beatrice, Nebraska on June 15, 1931 to Gerhard (George) and Rebecca (Schmidt) Hippen. She was baptized by Pastor J.B Reents at Zion Lutheran Church northwest of Filley, Nebraska on July 6, 1931. She was confirmed by Pastor J.H Reents on June 9, 1946 at the American Lutheran Church in Filley. Her family lived in rural Adams, Nebraska, where she attended country school. Then they moved to a farm east of Filley until Laura was in junior high, when they moved to a farm near Lewiston. She graduated from Lewiston High School in 1949, going on to receive a diploma from the National Business Institute, Lincoln, Nebraska.

Laura was united in marriage to Kenneth Mort on October 10, 1954, at the American Lutheran Church in Filley, with Pastor J.H. Reents officiating. To this union were born two children - Russell Allen and Peggy Ann. Kenneth and Laura lived and worked together on their farm west of Pawnee City until November, 1984, when they moved to Pawnee City.

Laura began her banking career at Farmers State Bank in 1967, where she served for 41 years, becoming Assistant Vice President and Loan Officer. During that time Farmers State Bank merged with Citizen’s State Bank, which turned into Pawnee County Bank, and now is Union Bank, Pawnee City Branch.

Laura belonged to several different organizations, including American Legion Auxiliary, VFW Auxiliary - serving this organization as president for 3 years, PEO Chapter AV, Coterie Club, and SENCA Advisory Board. She was a past member of Pawnee City Rotary, Pawnee City Historical Society Board, and Pawnee City Library Board. Laura was a member of Zion Lutheran Church, Pawnee City, where she taught Sunday School for many years and assisted her husband Kenneth while he served in several of Zion elected offices.

Laura loved her grandchildren and great-grandchildren, and went to many ball games and other events in which they participated. She also enjoyed hunting with her family and traveled around the country supporting Kenneth’s hunting trips. Laura loved all wildlife, but loved cats and dogs most of all.

Laura departed this life on March 20, 2023. She was preceded in death by her parents, George and Rebecca Hippen, an infant brother Henry, an infant sister Irene, sister Arene Janssen and husband Henry, brother Harvey Hippen and wife Irene, brother Clarence Hippen and wife Arlene, her twin brother Lorance Hippen and wife Charlene, brother Erwin Hippen, sister-in-law Ruth Hippen, nephews David Hippen, Scott Hippen and Keith Hippen, Les and Norman Janssen and niece Dorothy Heidemann.

She is survived by her husband, Kenneth, son Russell (Loree) Mort of Nebraska City, daughter Peggy (Darrell) Wininger of Omaha, grandchildren Jessica (David) Buell, Rebecca (Doug) Appelgren, Jacob (Erica) Mort, Maureen Farrell and Judson (Katy) Farrell, great-grandchildren Brianna, Jackson, Brooklyn, Derek, Maci, Britney, Emery, Brax, Trax and Matthew, sister-in-law Pat Hippen and nieces and nephews.

A Traveling Grandma

From Jessica, Rebecca, Jake, Maureen and Jud

Jessica - Grandma was one of the most special people in my life. I sat with her at countless baseball games watching Jake play at Nebraska. She loved watching sports of any kind. We had the best season tickets right under the shade and next to the hotdog stand. As I grew my own family our time together was more weekly phone calls. She and I loved our cats. We could talk for an hour about our pets. If you weren’t watching, she was feeding the family dogs under the table. When I picture Grandma, she is in the most comfortable soft blue recliner holding two cats watching Husker volleyball. Grandpa of course in a neighboring blue recliner just as comfortable. I will miss her spunk, love and company.

Rebecca - When I think about the relationship I had with Grandma, my most beautiful moments came later in life, or you could say when I became a mother. I was the first to give her great grand babies. The biggest moment that we bonded over was when I was blessed with twins. This was so important to Grandma. She talked so highly of being a twin and she was so proud to see twins passed on. We had many conversations and texts about her great grandkids. Through conversations she would show me her huge heart, compassion and comfort. Many times we shared tears together. I will never forget the love and grace she showed me when I was raising my children. Her love was so deep, sincere, and honest.

Jacob - Grandma Mort was my ultimate fan! For those of you who knew her knew she was always preparing for the next game and it didn’t matter where it was. From the CABA Little League World Series all the way to the Big 12 Championship Games, I could guarantee that when I looked in the stands, my Grandma was always there.

Maureen - I am insanely lucky to have had such a strong, smart, educated, witty and loving Grandma. I will never forget the endless ball games she and my Grandpa attended together. I actually think they attended 5 basketball games in one day for each of us grandkids. They were always together, a united front and unwavering love and commitment to each other and our family. They were in their 70th year of marriage: how amazing is that. I have so many wonderful memories of conversations with her. One of my favorites is when she told me about taking the bus from her hometown and moving to Lincoln to attend Business School after high school. I remember thinking how insanely brave that was for a woman in her era. And what a great role model for me. There are countless other memories, such as getting candy from her closet in her office at the bank as a kiddo. As well as conversations about her childhood, my childhood, my life, my son “her handsome boy” and so much more. She loved her family and her faith. And I’m so grateful God gave me her as a Grandmother.

Jud - I spent countless hours in the car when I was younger talking with Grandma on our road trips to go hunting or fishing across the country. I’ll never forget the many stories she shared with me and the life lessons she taught me. When I became a banker, she was very excited to hear I followed in her footsteps. I’ll always remember talking with her about how banking used to be and how much it has changed today. I’m grateful to have a Grandma who was there for you at every opportunity. She was thoughtful, kind and ahead of her time.

Funeral Services 10:00 a.m., Friday 24, 2023 at Zion Lutheran Church, Pawnee City, Nebraska, with Pastor Tim Llewellyn officiating. Visitation on Thursday, March 23, 2023 from 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., at Wherry Mortuary, 919 G Street, Pawnee City, Nebraska. Interment at the Pawnee City Cemetery, Pawnee City, Nebraska. Memorials to family choice. Online condolences may be left at www.wherrymortuary.com. Services entrusted to Wherry Mortuary, 919 G Street, Pawnee City, Nebraska.