Obituary

Laura Mae (Rose) Brown was born December 8, 1947, to the union of Ella Louise Rose and Joe C. Rose, Sr. in Jackson (Utica), Mississippi.

After her parents separated, she moved to Lincoln, Nebraska with her mom and brother Joe, Jr. While residing in Lincoln, at an early age, she became a member of Mt. Zion Baptist Church under the leadership of Reverend Stringer. In the early 1960's, she, her mom, and brother Joe moved to Omaha, Nebraska. She began her 9th grade year at Technical High School and met Robert Lee Brown, a senior. Laura moved back to Chicago to spend time with her father but her and Robert remained committed to one another during that time. She went on to finish her high school career in Chicago, IL at DuSable High School and returned to Omaha, Nebraska while Robert moved onto the Navy. Recognizing the importance of her relationship with Christ, she joined Salem Baptist Church under the leadership of Reverend J.C. Wade, Sr. After Robert returned from the Navy, he and Laura married on June 11, 1967, at Salem. To that union were born 3 children, JoAnn, Tina and Robert, Jr.

Laura was a woman of class and grace. She was a very loving and kindhearted person; to know her was to love her. She possessed a wisdom that gave her the ability to lovingly tell you about your situation in a way that would make you think about your choices and not feel judged. She was able to calm you while in a distressed state and help you see the bigger picture, that God is and always will be in control regardless of what we see with our natural eyes.

Her passion as a long-time advocate and educator of children was reflected throughout her life. She began her career at HeadStart and later moved on to open her own childcare facility named Brown's Castle. While Brown's Castle was a great success, she chose to align with Omaha Public Schools and remained employed with OPS for nearly 40 years until her retirement in 2020.

As an active, long-time member of Salem Baptist Church, Laura was instrumental in working with the youth, specifically in Sunday School and Vacation Bible School. She also participated in the Youth Choir and advanced later to the Salem Inspirational Choir.

Laura was very creative and a great organizer. She regularly assisted in planning and coordinating weddings for Salem members and others who sought her skilled services.

Laura was preceded in death by her parents John and Ella Louise Hill, Sr.; father Joe C. Rose, Sr; brother Anthony C. Hill; sister Antoinette C. Hill; brother James Hill; granddaughter Robin Loray Brown; nephew Cornelius Hillard III; and niece Alicia Prince.

Laura leaves to cherish her memory, husband Robert Lee Brown, Sr. ; Brother Joe C. Rose, Sr. (Jackie) of Lakeland, FL; Sister Annette Hillard (Cornelius) of Opelousas, LA; Brother John Hill, Jr of Omaha, NE; Cousin/Sister Brenda Smith of Atlanta, GA; daughter JoAnn Gosa of Baker, LA; daughter Tina Brown of Omaha, NE; son Robert L. Brown, Jr (Ciara) Omaha, NE; Additionally she leaves, her grandchildren: LaQuandra McManus, StarLynn Brown, Lee Brown, Andre Brown, Robynn Brown, RyLeah Brown, Tierra Hickerson, Vershawn Adams, Monae Brown, and 17 great grandchildren; sister in love Rosetta Kinney (Christian) Shawnee, KS; sister in love Ellen White (Howard) Omaha, NE; brother in love Ed Brown (Bredette) Omaha, NE; sister in love Wanda Barksdale Omaha, NE; sister in love Margaret Brown, Atlanta , GA; Special Friends: Anny Brooks, Marsha Cabbell, Donna Watts, the Salem Baptist Church Family and a host of nieces, nephews and relatives whom she loved dearly.

Wake will be held Friday August 19, 2022, 6:00-8:00 pm:

Good Shepherd Funeral Home

3809 N 90th Street

Omaha, NE 68134

Funeral Service will be held Saturday August 20, 2022, 9:00 am

Paradise Baptist Church

2124 Lothrop Street

Omaha, Nebraska 68110

Interment:

Mount Hope Cemetery

7602 Military Avenue

Omaha, Nebraska 68134

Tributes