Birthdate: July 31, 1986

Birthplace: Magnitogorsk, USSR

You think the Pittsburgh Penguins is all about Sidney Crosby? Wrong! This Russian hockey star is one of the main reasons they have a chance at the Stanley Cup! Kidzworld's got the bio!

Childhood

Growing up in Russia, Evgeni Malkin was born to play the game of hockey. His father Vladimir was a defenseman for one of Russia's top professional hockey teams. When Evgeni was 17 years old, he joined the Metallurg Magnitogorsk team of the Russian Superleague. That same year he played on the Russian under-18 team alongside future NHL superstar Alexander Ovechkin. After his first professional season, Evgeni was so impressive, he was drafted second overall in the 2004 NHL Draft by the Pittsburgh Penguins. However, a contract dispute between his Russian team and the Penguins delayed Evgeni's NHL debut for a couple of years. For the next few years, Evgeni shined in the international spotlight by being named MVP of the 2006 World Junior Championships.

NHL Career

Evgeni finally made his NHL debut in October 2006. He immediately proved he was well worth the wait, as he became the first player in the history of the league to score a goal in each of his first six games. In his rookie year, he collected 85 points, which was enough to earn him the Rookie of the Year award. Evgeni also formed good chemistry with teammate Sidney Crosby. The two are considered the modern day Wayne Gretzki and Mark Messier. He came back the next year even stronger by making the All Star team and led the Penguins to the playoffs. This season, Evgeni collected a career-high 106 points and was named a finalist for the Hart Trophy - the league's MVP award.

A Special Player

Evgeni has the chance to be one of the best players the league has ever seen. He has superior offensive skills, he can score in bunches and can find the open man. There are not too many players who see the ice like Evgeni can. His puck handling ability is so good, people say he's got that puck on a string. Evgeni can also play any forward position on the ice.

Did U Know?

Evgeni Malkin is 6'4" and weighs 195 pounds.

Evgeni Malkin is a south paw. He holds the hockey stick left handed.

Evgeni Malkin idolized hockey player Pavel Datsyuk as a kid.

Evgeni Malkin is sponsored by Nike and Bauer.

Evgeni Malkin represented Team Russia in the 2006 Olympic Games.

Evgeni Says...

"The most important that my dream was to play in NHL. It was difficult to have all those changes in the lifestyle, on the ice. But to have that kind of teammates that I have, it became much easier. I have huge support from all my teammates, from all the guys on the ice."

Related Stories:

Sidney Crosby Biography

Roberto Luongo Biography

Alexander Ovechkin Biography

More Pro Athlete's Biographies!

Share It!

Like It!