The University of the East (UE) is a private university in Manila, Philippines. UE was founded in 1946 as the Philippine College of Commerce and Business Administration (PCCBA), which became the University of the East in 1951. The University of the East has two extension campuses in addition to its main campus in Manila, and now enrolls over 20,000 students. UE’s mission is to seek "the development of a just, progressive and humane society" by educating "morally upright and competent leaders in various professions, imbued with a strong sense of service to their fellowmen and their country." University of the East’s website>>

Office of Extension and Community Outreach

The Office of Extension and Community Outreach seeks to deliver technical, entrepreneurial, computer literacy, industrial arts, supplementary feeding program, dental health, literacy and communication services to marginalized local communities in collaboration with NGOs, Government Agencies, and Civil Society. The OECO was launched in 1995 as the Office of Community Outreach. Since that time, the OECO has adopted a number of poor local neighborhoods and schools. Outreach activities in these areas have include seminars, special teaching sessions, information drives, hands-on trainings, civic work, child-feeding, cleanliness & beautification, street-sweeping, painting, pave-stone installation, tree planting, and civil engineering. Learn more>>

Kabalikat sa Kabuhayan: UE’s Sustainable Community Livelihood Projects

Office of Extension and Community Outreach (OECO) in partnership with the Department of Labor and Employment-National Capital Region (DOLE-NCR) launched the Kabalikat sa Kabuhayan Project. Its main objectives centered on empowerment, self-reliance, social equity, and stability. Twenty-two residents from UE’s adopted communities were awarded with seed money to help them start up their own small businesses since their chance of employment is very slim. In order to enhance their skills in handling business and finances, UE community worker-volunteers spearheaded a series of intensive seminars, trainings and workshops. Today, their respective small businesses are continuously operating and served as their main source of daily living.

College-based Community Outreach Programs