About UEL

The University of East London is a careers-first university.

We prepare our students for the jobs of the future and have been doing this proudly for 125 years.

Hero Carousel

Our story started in 1898. We've survived wars, celebrated momentous sporting events and fought against society's biggest sustainability issues.

Now in the digital age, the world of work is rapidly changing, and we're adapting to ensure our graduates have the skills and resilience to succeed in their careers and make a positive impact on society and the planet.

Pioneering Futures

In 1898, the University of East London was founded with the aim of serving both its local community and a wider audience. Our belief is that education is a potent tool in decreasing inequality and promoting a brighter future for everyone. As a demonstration of our dedication to this cause, we partnered with Luke Gray, a former student, to produce an interactive mural at our Docklands Campus that mirrors our fundamental principles. Luke is a surrealist street artist who combines conventional painting methods with augmented reality and integrates various textures and designs into his creations.

The careers-led university

We're changing the face of education to match the ongoing fundamental shift in working cultures. We have collaborated with industry to re-develop, re-design and validate our course portfolio, so the knowledge our students gain reflects the changing needs of industry and prepares our learners for sustainable careers of the future.

Your career

Our vision

We've always been a pioneering institution and Vision 2028 is our ambitious 10-year strategy. We're reshaping education for the benefit of all, giving students from any background the skills and opportunities to thrive in the modern world.

London is moving east

The East of the capital is full of opportunities with businesses, developments and innovative careers at every turn. The Olympic Boroughs have the youngest, fastest growing, and most multicultural neighbourhoods in the UK. There has never been a better time to live and learn in east London.

UEL’s 40,000 students represent over 160 different nationalities from across the globe

1 new tech company is formed every hour in London (uktech.news)

There will be 125,000 new jobs in East London by 2030 (london.gov.uk)

With campuses in Stratford and the Royal Albert Dock, we're at the heart of it all. Global businesses are making the area their base and the skyscrapers of Canary Wharf create a brilliant backdrop. Because industry in the area is connected to the rest of the world, so are we.

The location of the Docklands campus is simply amazing. During my very first day in university, it was early morning, I was quite nervous, but when I saw the sunrise and the reflection of the sun in the river, that made me stop, think and calm down."

Kristiyan Krastev

BA (Hons) Computer Games Design: Story Development

Our community

There's plenty of choice in London. But you won't find anywhere like the University of East London. Nowhere else quite matches us for a unique sense of community.

Our community is made up of over 40,000 total students from over 160 different countries studying at the University of East London and collaborative partners.

Ethnicity breakdown*: Asian 34%, White 26%, Black 24%, Mixed 5%, Other 4%, Not known 6%

Gender breakdown*: Female 57% , male 43%

57%

57% of our students are the first in their family to attend university

160

Our students represent over 160 different nationalities

20%

We have a growing postgraduate talent pool, making up 20% of our student body

We embrace diversity. As our campuses are home to people from all walks of life, who join us from all corners of the globe, it ensures our students develop new ideas, discover new opportunities and make new connections.

(* From available data for 2020/21. Figures rounded to nearest whole number)

Equality, diversity and inclusion (EDI)

Impacting lives

Our research is aligned with the United Nations' Sustainable Development Goals and has a positive impact globally and locally. The University's Research Excellence Framework (REF) 2021 submission demonstrates a particularly sustained impact in sustainability, health and social policy.

92% of our research is recognised as world-leading, internationally excellent, or internationally recognised (REF 2021)

We are investing in cutting-edge research that will create sustainable cities and communities, reduce inequalities, and transform health and well-being.

Our research

#BeTheChange

You'll learn to lead and make an impact at the University of East London. So, whoever you are, wherever you're from, we'll make sure you're fit for the future too.

The University of East London is ranked in the world's top 250 young Universities (Times Higher Education 2021).

Want to accomplish remarkable achievements and change the world?

Register your interest

You may be interested in

Undergraduate

The University of East London is the careers-led university. Our mission is to prepare you for the jobs of the future and make positive change.

Read about undergraduate study at UEL

Contact us

Find all the useful numbers including emergency contacts and links so you can contact the right people in our university.

Contact UEL

Finding us

See our campus maps, get directions on how to travel to and between our campuses.

Learn more about our campuses

More ways to meet us

From campus tours to personal statement workshops, we run events throughout the year to help you discover more.

Discover more events at UEL

Our Clearing call centre is open between 9am - 7pm, Monday to Friday

Clearing is not available for international students. Please submit your application via the apply links on the relevant course page.