Pioneering futures since 1898

The University of East London is a vibrant, forward-thinking, institution providing inclusive education for all.

Hero Carousel

125 years of providing a careers first education for our community

The University of East London was established in 1898 to serve the local community and beyond. We believe education is a powerful tool in reducing inequality and creating a better future for all. To showcase this commitment, we collaborated with former student Luke Gray to create an interactive mural at our Docklands Campus that reflects our core values. Luke is a surrealist street artist who blends traditional painting techniques with augmented reality and incorporates textures and patterns into his work.

Careers-First

The University of East London, once called the 'People's University', aimed to offer education to working-class Londoners in 1898. Now, it focuses on providing accessible and sustainable careers focused education.

Strength in diversity

At the University of East London, we embrace diversity, foster innovation, engage with communities, and champion East London's ongoing development.

Driving change

The way we work is changing and we want it to change for the better. We are courageous, bold and not afraid to challenge the status quo to make positive change in the world and find new ways to learn, develop and grow. An expensive suit or the right accent shouldn’t hold more importance than your skills or creativity.

Education for all

As the 'university of the people' we believe in inclusive education to increase opportunity, drive social mobility, boost health and improve lives. We equip our students with valuable skills, emotional intelligence and digital proficiency to thrive in their careers.

Industry collaboration

We work closely with industry to ensure that our curriculum matches up with the rapidly changing work environment so that our students are prepared for the careers of the future.

Sustainable future

We want to be the most sustainable university in London, and we’ve been working towards creating healthy spaces and practices at all levels of the institution. We’re working towards becoming net zero carbon by 2030 and we’ve embedded sustainability throughout our teaching in subjects ranging from fashion to architecture and beyond.

Our work alongside industry partners like Siemens continually inform our sustainability practice and inform our course portfolio development, recently we’ve been working on launching an MSc in Smart Cities.

Social purpose

We advance knowledge and innovation to help people and the planet - through research, community outreach and innovative education models. We encourage our students to give back to their communities and contribute to the planet in positive ways. Community is at the heart of everything we do. We are committed to improving wellbeing in societies at a local, national and global level.

Undergraduate open days

Attend an open day and learn how you can take the next step in your career.

Book undergraduate open day

Postgraduate open events

Meet staff, students and explore our facilities.

Book postgraduate open event

Undergraduate courses

Explore the wide range of undergraduate courses at UEL.

View our courses

You may be interested in

Success stories

From sports stars to CEOs, UEL has a wide variety of graduates doing lots of fantastic and exciting things.

Discover East London

Discover the East London we love from people who live, learn and work in the East End.