This tape opens with the end of a documentary presented by Jonathan Miller, about the history of the insane asylum.

Then, The Complete Citizen Kane, a documentary about Orson Welles’ masterpiece. Drawing heavily on an earlier Arena interview with Welles, this programme starts rather whimsically with the opening titles and narration of Orson Welles’ Heart of Darkness – which was intended to be his first film, but was abandoned when the budget was deemed too high.

The ‘News on the March’ narrator William Alland was drafted in to narrate the documentary in the same staccato style used in Kane.

They talk about his broadcast of War of the Worlds, which, purely coincidentally, was on the last tape I looked at.

When it comes to the ‘controversy’ over the true authorship of the movie, this documentary improves over the earlier Arena programme in that it actually talks to Pauline Kael, whose essay ‘Raising Kane’ placed much of the credit of authorship over Citizen Kane with the co-writer Herman J Mankiewicz, and seemed to seek to deny Welles any trace of authorship of the screenplay. I suspect her intentions were closer to wanting to restore credit to Mankiewicz, who she saw as not having had enough credit, with Orson being accused of wanting to take sole screenplay credit himself.

There used to be a complete version of this available, that’s since been removed, so here’s the first of many clips from the programme.

BBC Genome: BBC Two – 13th October 1991 – 21:10

Following the documentary, recording switches to an episode of Film 91, in which Barry Norman reviews:

City Slickers

Doc Hollywood

Edward II

Mortal Thoughts

There’s a report on the BBC’s recent feature film production. Plus a brief tribute to Donal Houston, who had recently died.

BBC Genome: BBC One – 15th October 1991 – 22:20

Following Film 91 there’s a trailer for an Inside Story documentary The Nightrider about the Ku Klux Klan and the racist murders of civil right leaders.

Then, the very start of A Breed Apart starring Donald Pleasance, but this recording stops almost immediately. Underneath, it’s Citizen Kane, which had followed the documentary, still in progress. The tape stops before the film ends.