Supplementary material provided by Harlan Lebo,

author of Citizen Kane: A Filmmaker’s Journey

♦ Budget: Estimated and actual

These budget figures from RKO’s financial report dated March 8, 1941, compare the original budget estimates for Citizen Kane with the actual costs absorbed by the studio. Today, with film costs routinely topping $50 million, and often much more, it seems hard to appreciate RKO’s fussiness in 1940 over a budget that totaled little more than $600,000 in direct expenses — even requests for additional expenses as small as $10.

Citizen Kane — budget

♦ Guide to RKO soundstages: RKO-Pathe and RKO Gower

The RKO soundstages on Washington Boulevard in Culver City are now part of the Culver Studios. The main RKO lot at Melrose Avenue and Gower Street in Hollywood was purchased by Gulf & Western, at the time the parent company of Paramount Pictures. (RKO Projection Room 4, where Rawlston ordered Thompson to learn about Rosebud, is now an office on the Paramount lot.)

Citizen Kane — RKO soundstages

♦ Third Revised Final Script with overlay

The contributions to the screenplay made individually by Herman J. Mankiewicz and Orson Welles were expertly detailed by Robert L. Carringer in his 1978 study The Scripts of Citizen Kane. Mankiewicz and Welles conferred at considerable length before work began on the first of at least seven drafts that were penned. Further revisions by the pair were made on the screenplay before filming began in the summer of 1940 using the script referred to as Third Revised Final. Harlan Lebo has created an overlay using that Third Revised Final script and a new transcript of the finished film he fashioned. This overlay reveals hundreds of deletions and additions made by Welles to the screenplay during the production.

Citizen-Kane-3rd-Revised-Final-Script-with-Overlay

♦ Scene-by-scene guide

This scene-by-scene guide was timed using the 2011 digital transfer of Citizen Kane, which is included in the 70th anniversary release packages of the film (both single disc and “ultimate collector’s edition”). The official release length of Citizen Kane is 10,734 feet of film, or one hour, fifty-nine minutes, sixteen seconds. The total displayed length of the 2011 Blu-ray and in this scene-by-scene guide is seven seconds longer because of the addition of three seconds of black leader at the beginning of the film, two seconds of black at the end, plus two seconds that have crept into the length because of minuscule differences over the span of a two-hour film in the transfer between the analog film and the digital disk. Thus the total running time of the Blu-ray is one hour, fifty-nine minutes, twenty-three seconds.

Citizen Kane — scene by scene guide

♦ Orson Welles on the meaning of Rosebud (1941)

During the production of Citizen Kane the publicity department readied a statement attributed to Orson Welles on the meaning of Charles Foster Kane’s dying word, “Rosebud.” It is dated January 15, 1941, a month and a half after Welles shot his final scene for the film.

Citizen Kane – Rosebud

♦ Full, newly-updated list of cast and crew

We all know Orson Welles starred, directed, produced and co-wrote his first Hollywood feature, but who was the boom operator? Answer: Jimmy Thompson. Ruth Warrick and Dorothy Comingore played the wives of Charles Foster Kane, but whose hands were used when Susan Alexander Kane put together a jigsaw puzzle Why, it was Ivy Keene! From the stand-ins to the stars, find out who worked on the film, both credited and uncredited.

Citizen Kane cast and crew

Citizen Kane is available on 4K UHD and Blu-ray in the U.S. from the Criterion Collection. It is available in Europe through Warner Home Entertainment.

“To me, Orson is so much like a destitute king. A destitute king — not because he was thrown away from the kingdom — but (because) on this earth, the way the world is, there is no kingdom good enough for Orson Welles.” — Jeanne Moreau

* * *Wellesnet is dedicated to the memory of Orson Welles (May 6, 1915 – October 10, 1985). Best known for his stage productions of Voodoo Macbeth, Cradle Will Rock and Caesar; the radio play The War of the Worlds; and the films Citizen Kane, The Magnificent Ambersons, Touch of Evil, Chimes at Midnight and The Other Side of the Wind.