Director: Orson Welles

Screenplay: Herman J. Mankiewicz, Orson Welles

Release Date: 1941

Budget: $839,727

What better place to start a movie review website than the one and only Citizen Kane, proclaimed by many to be a masterpiece and even the greatest movie ever made. There have been many reviews on Citizen Kane already, so instead of doing a normal review, I will be talking about the composition.

With this perspective in mind as you begin to watch Citizen Kane, you may notice that there is rarely ever any space in the frame that goes wasted and unused. This unutilized space is sometimes called “Dead Space.” A few obvious examples of this are shots like these:

Both shots clearly display a lack of dead space and are very intriguing to look at. In the first shot, the double mirror creates an eye-catching spectacle. In the second shot, nearly every surface has a specific pattern, and there are no blank white walls. In addition, in both shots, there is exceptional lighting, reflecting the mood of the scene.

The next important thing to note and pay attention to is that often times the way a scene is shot displays what a character is thinking and feeling. In the second shot, you see that Citizen Kane is standing extremely far from the camera and is completely covered in shadows. This sharply contrasts Kane’s normally open and central position in the shot (as depicted in the next image displayed). Take a moment and guess what Kane is feeling. In that scene, Kane’s wife has just left him. Even without the full context, given his character, it would be fairly easy to recognize that Kane is feeling sad and alone.

In another shot, the movie Citizen Kane utilizes framing and cinematography to convey social status and power:

Notice that the camera viewing Kane is positioned looking up at himself and that all the other characters on the screen seem to fade into the background.

Overall, the cinematography, framing, and lighting of Citizen Kane makes the viewing experience very enjoyable and certainly warrants a re-watch if you didn’t notice these things before. This movie is an excellent example of the early successes of film-making, and it paved the way for the many movies made after its time.

That’s it for this review. If you enjoyed, leave a comment telling me so. If you notice a mistake or something you disagree with, please let me know, and in case I don’t see you later, good afternoon, good evening and goodnight.