Jon Hammond with the great Theodore Bikel –

some lady was trying to crowd in to my photo, anyway it was

nice of Mr. Bikel to pose for the photo with me after a long show – JH

Theodore’s Wiki http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theodore_Bikel

Theodore Bikel

Born Theodore Meir Bikel

May 2, 1924 (age 88)

Vienna, Austria

Occupation Film, television actor

Years active 1946-present

Spouse(s) Ofra Ichilov (1942-43; divorced)

Rita Weinberg Call (1967-2008; divorced; 2 children)

Tamara Brooks (2008-2012; her death)

Theodore Meir Bikel (born May 2, 1924) is a character actor, folk singer and musician. He made his film debut in The African Queen (1951) and was nominated for an Academy award for his supporting role as Sheriff Max Muller in The Defiant Ones (1958).

Bikel is President of the Associated Actors and Artistes of America and was president of Actors’ Equity in the late 1970s and early 1980s. He serves as the Chair of the Board of Directors of Meretz USA,[2] where he also lectures. His autobiography, Theo, was published in 1995.

Bikel was born in Vienna, Austria, the son of Miriam (née Riegler) and Josef Bikel from Bukovina.[3] Being active in Zionism, his father named him after Theodor Herzl, the founder of modern Zionism. Following the Nazi occupation of Austria, Bikel’s family fled to Palestine, where his father’s contacts helped the family obtain British passports.[4]

Bikel started acting while in his teens. He co-founded the Cameri Theatre there—which has gone on to become one of Israel’s biggest theaters—before he moved to London to attend the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in 1945.[5] In 1948, Michael Redgrave recommended Bikel to his friend Laurence Olivier as understudy for the parts of both Stanley Kowalski and Mitch in the West End premiere of Tennessee Williams’ A Streetcar Named Desire.[6] Bikel graduated from understudy to star opposite the director’s wife, Vivien Leigh, who would go on to recreate her role as Blanche DuBois in the film version opposite Marlon Brando.

Bikel was the President of the Actors’ Equity Association, in which office he supported human rights. At the 1977 AFL–CIO Convention, Bikel (right) welcomed the Russian dissident Vladimir Bukovsky (center) upon his release from the Soviet Union. Tom Kahn (left) was an assistant to AFL–CIO President George Meany

After several plays and films in Europe, Bikel moved to the United States in 1954, and became a naturalized citizen in 1961. He was the U-boat first officer to Curt Jürgens in The Enemy Below (1957) and played the captain of the Russian submarine in The Russians Are Coming, the Russians Are Coming (1966). He also portrayed the sadistic General Jouvet in The Pride and the Passion (1957) Bikel was screentested for the role of Auric Goldfinger in the James Bond film Goldfinger (1964). The screentest can be seen on the “Ultimate Edition” DVD released in 2006. Bikel also appeared in Frank Zappa’s 1971 film 200 Motels.

On Broadway he originated the role of Captain von Trapp in The Sound of Music in 1959, for which he received his second Tony nomination. Bikel did not like his role in “Sound of Music” because his ability to sing was limited in the play, and he did not like to perform repeatedly the same role of the Captain. In 1964, he played Zoltan Karpathy, the dialect expert, in the film version of My Fair Lady. Since his first appearance as Tevye in the musical Fiddler on the Roof in 1967, Bikel has performed the role more often than any other actor (more than 2,000 times to date). When an injury required 74-year-old fellow Israeli performer Chaim Topol (veteran of many productions of the stage show and star of the motion picture of Fiddler on the Roof) to withdraw from a high-budget, much-promoted 2009 North American tour of the musical, Bikel substituted for him in several Canadian appearances, including Calgary in January 2010, and had scheduled appearances in the musical beyond his 86th birthday in May of that year.[7]

In the 1950s, Bikel produced and sang in several albums of Jewish folk songs, as well as Songs of a Russian Gypsy, in 1958. He was a co-founder of the Newport Folk Festival (together with Pete Seeger and George Wein) in 1959. In 1962, he heard Bob Dylan give his premiere performance of “Blowin’ in the Wind”. Bikel then went to his scheduled performance and became the first singer besides Dylan to perform the song in public. Bikel (with business partner Herb Cohen) opened the first folk music coffeehouse in Los Angeles, The Unicorn. Its popularity led to the two opening a second club, Cosmo Alley, which in addition to folk music presented poets such as Maya Angelou and comics including Lenny Bruce. Bikel became increasingly involved with civil rights issues and progressive causes, and was a delegate to the 1968 Democratic Convention.[8]

In addition to scores of appearances on film and on the stage, Bikel was a guest star on many popular television shows. He appeared in an episode of the 1954 NBC legal drama Justice based on cases from the Legal Aid Society of New York.[9] He also appeared in the episode entitled “The Faithful Pilgrimage” of CBS’s Appointment with Adventure anthology series. The particular episode was written by Rod Serling. He also appeared in a second episode of Appointment with Adventure entitled “Return of the Stranger.”

Later, Bikel guest starred on Rod Serling’s The Twilight Zone (episode “Four O’Clock” as Oliver Crangle). He appeared on episodes of Wagon Train, Hawaii Five-O, Columbo, Charlie’s Angels, Cannon, Little House on the Prairie, Mission: Impossible, Gunsmoke, Dynasty, All in the Family, Knight Rider, and Law & Order. He appeared on the game show Super Password as a celebrity guest in 1988.

In the early 1990s, he appeared on Star Trek: The Next Generation, in the episode “Family”, playing Sergey Rozhenko, the Russian-born adoptive father of Worf, who, as a petty officer on the Starfleet vessel Intrepid, had found Worf at the site of the Khitomer Massacre and taken him home to raise as his son. Bikel performed two roles in the Babylon 5 universe. In 1994, he portrayed Rabbi Koslov in the first season episode “TKO”. In 1998, he appeared in the TV movie Babylon 5: In the Beginning as Anla’Shok leader Lenonn.

In February of 2012, Bikel played the title role in Visiting Mr. Green with the Harold Green Jewish Theatre Company in Toronto, Ontario.

[edit]Actors’ unions and charities: Leadership

Bikel is president of the Associated Actors and Artistes of America. He was president of Actors’ Equity in the late 1970s and early 1980s, in which office he supported human rights. At the 1977 AFL–CIO Convention, Bikel welcomed the Russian dissident Vladimir Bukovsky upon his release from the Soviet Union.[1] U.S. President Jimmy Carter appointed him to serve on the National Council for the Arts in 1977 for a six-year term.[citation needed] In 1962 he co-founded Actors Federal Credit Union.

On January 28, 2007, he agreed to serve as chair of the Board of Directors of Meretz USA, where he also lectures.

His autobiography, Theo, was published in 1995 by Harper Collins, and re-issued in an updated version by the University of Wisconsin Press in 2002. He is a member of the High IQ collective Mensa International.[10]

[edit]Marriage

Bikel married his third wife, conductor Tamara Brooks (1941-2012), in 2008.

[edit]Discography

Songs of a Russian Gypsy (1958)

Bravo Bikel (1959)

Songs of Russia Old & New (1960)

A Folksinger’s Choice (1964)

Songs of the Earth (1967)

A New Day (1969)

Folk Songs From Just About Everywhere (1958)

Theodore Bikel Sings More Jewish Folk Songs (1959)

Theodore Bikel Sings Song of Israel (1960)

[edit]Filmography

The African Queen (1951)

Moulin Rouge (1952)

Never Let Me Go (1953)

The Little Kidnappers (1953)

The Love Lottery (1954)

Betrayed (1954) (uncredited)

The Divided Heart (1954)

The Young Lovers (1954)

The Colditz Story (1955)

Above Us the Waves (1955)

The Vintage (1957)

The Pride and the Passion (1957)

The Enemy Below (1957)

Fräulein (1958)

I Bury the Living (1958)

The Defiant Ones (1958)

I Want to Live! (1958)

Woman Obsessed (1959)

The Angry Hills (1959)

The Blue Angel (1959)

A Dog of Flanders (1960)

My Fair Lady (1964)

Sands of the Kalahari (1965)

The Russians Are Coming, the Russians Are Coming (1966)

Sweet November (1968)

My Side of the Mountain (1969)

Darker than Amber as Meyer (1970)

200 Motels (1971)

Victory at Entebbe (1976) (TV)

Columbo: The Bye-Bye Sky High IQ Murder Case (1977) (TV)

The Stingiest Man In Town (1978) (TV) (voice)

The Return of the King (1980) (voice)

The Final Days (1989) (TV)

Shattered (1991)

Shadow Conspiracy (1996)

Crime and Punishment (2002)

Decorations and awards

1959 Academy Award nomination for Flucht in Ketten (The Defiant Ones)

1992 Honorary Doctorate of the University of Hartford

1997 Lifetime Achievement Award from the National Foundation for Jewish Culture

2008 Golden Rathausmann of Vienna (November 27)

2009 Austrian Cross of Honour for Science and Art, 1st class (November 15) — with Theodore Bikel.

The Tradition Continues! 18th Year Musikmesse-Session – Wir Sehen Uns, ab 12 April Freitag Abend – Jon Hammond Band

21:00UHR

– Jazzkeller-Hofheim –

Joe Berger guitar

Peter Klohmann tenor sax

Totó Giovanni Gulino schlagzeug

Jon Hammond orgel

Youtube http://youtu.be/4JtoWjSFow0

WATCH THE VIDEO HERE: Jazzkeller Hofheim Jon Hammond Band Little Wing

http://archive.org/details/JazzkellerHofheimJonHammondBandLittleWing

Jon Hammond’s annual Musikmesse-Session in Jazzkeller Hofheim, here paying tribute to Jimi Hendrix covering Little Wing

with Joe Berger guitar, Giovanni Gulino drums, Peter Klohmann tenor sax, Jon Hammond on Sk1 Hammond organ

*Note: When Jon Hammond was younger playing electric accordion he was known as The Jimi Hendrix of The Accordion,

see image 1971 age 18 http://www.accordionradio.com

*WATCH THE VIDEO HERE: Jon Hammond unveiling Sk1

Downloaded 252 times

http://archive.org/details/JonHammondJonHammondFirstRoadTestSk1PocketFunk

Jon Hammond – Arriving for gig Jazzkeller Hofheim

Youtube http://youtu.be/vp7pNTp6seo

Jon Hammond Band Unveling and First Road Test of Sk1 combo organ Pocket Funk 1,759

Jon Hammond Band playing original composition “POCKET FUNK”

Joe Berger – guitar

Peter Klohmann – tenor sax

Giovanni Gulino – drums

Jon Hammond – Sk1 Hammond Suzuki stage keyboard weighs only 15 lbs. as opposed to 425 lbs.= B3 Organ

— at Jazzkeller Hofheim

Jon Hammond: Waterproof Hammond Organ and Lucky Frog Umbrella

Miho Nagai

Ethan Khan

Yusuke Nishimura

Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, Japan

Trevor Barton

Works at Super One Foods

Katty Dee

Moscow, Russia

Marc Loy

Paris, France

Daniel Rogue

Le Lude, Pays De La Loire, France

Joseph Timmons

Journalist/Editor at Xombiewoof Magazine

Ryan Erickson

The Pas, Manitoba

Rangsima Sukham

Vladyslav Sendecki

Hamburg, Germany

Waichiro Tachikawa

Works at Suzuki Musical Inst. Mfg. Co., Ltd.

Leslye Layne Russell

Co Owner at Russell Guitars

Kenneth Guerra

DLSP San Pablo City

Jon Hammond and Joe Berger will be appearing at Winter NAMM daily, and also in the night

http://www.namm.org/thenammshow/2013/concerts-performances/friday?page=3 — with Joe Berger at The NAMM Show

King at Self employed

Ryan Erickson

The Pas, Manitoba

Ethan Khan

Joseph Timmons

Journalist/Editor at Xombiewoof Magazine

Waichiro Tachikawa

Works at Suzuki Musical Inst. Mfg. Co., Ltd.

Jeff Guilford

Birmingham Conservatoire

Orhan Sandikci

Musik club Indra at Ich bin selbständig- ich arbeite selbst und ständig

Daniel Rogue

Le Lude, Pays De La Loire, France

Bernard Purdie sporting backward beret look – blogger lady in background, Jon Hammond

— with Bernard Purdie

Mary Ellen O’Neil Davis

UCC, Cranford NJ

Joseph Timmons

Journalist/Editor at Xombiewoof Magazine

Robert Mousey Thompson

Hyattsville, Maryland

Greg Christopher

Teaneck High School

Caleb Barnett

Birdville High School

Michael Grammar

Houston, Texas

Janice Harrington

Ambassador of Authentic American Music at All over the world

Rob Waxman

Paul Hollands

Drummer/Percussionist/shaman @ at ‎รђฬเzz ภคtเ๏ภ, ภא.‎

Giannis Giannakopoulos

Victor Cornette

Turner Battle

Dave Thompson Drummer

Scottsdale, Arizona

Alex D’Önofrio

Musician at Tap and Barrel

Christian Fabian

Bill Jewell

Eddie Bimonte

Owner at Eddie’s Pet Service

Seth Zowader

Juke J Jimmy

Lead Vocalist / Frontman for Juke Joint Jimmy and The Houseparty Rockers © at Lead Vocalist/ Frontman

Fred Taylor

Worked nationwde as drummer/percussionist/arranger/producer/audio engineer at Self-employed drummer, composer, producer.

Jay Okubo

Jazz Buyer (Sales/Promotion Dept.) at Tower Records

Leah Esposito

Rainey Kato

Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan

Seigo Sato

代表取締役社長 at 株式会社トーシン

Steven W. Ross

Hofstra University

Tore Pettersen

Øksnes

Rob Taco

Wichita Technical Institute

Frank Di Minno

Director of Strategic Marketing/Music Producer – Advertising & Video Games at Warner/Chappell Music

Neil Levine

Jersey City, New Jersey

Nick Styelz

Presidential Drummer at Styelz Musicians Inc.

Vince Wilburn Jr.

American Conservatory of Music

Chuck Crocker

Elk Grove Senior High School

Jeff Feinstein

Kenny Wilkins

Musician, Photographer, Wildlife at Self Employed and Loving It!

Mustafa Khaliq Ahmed

Percussionist at Where have you worked?

Nicky Gebhard

Mönchengladbach, Germany

Malcolm Joseph

Works at LOW NOISE CREATOR

Fedj Sylvanus

Live Sound Engineer at The palace

Roderick Stewart

Jamie Simpson

Owner-Operator at Booya! Amplifier Services

Abel Sanchez

Coral Gables, Florida

Greg Dwinell

Works at Musician, Orange Sound, Audio Museum of Science Inc

Jamie Alexander

Shenandoah University

Marc Nellis

Jens Skwirblies

Eckernförde

Mitchel Delevie

Record Producer/Songwriter at MITCHEL DELEVIE PRODUCTIONS

Karen Frisk

Jazz Vocalist & Owner of AccountServe-CT at Self-employed

World Always On Jon’s Journal December 14 2012

*WATCH THE VIDEO HERE: World Always On Downloaded 495 times http://archive.org/details/JonHammondTheWorldisAlwaysOn-JonHammond

http://laterent.blogspot.com/2012/12/world-always-on-jons-journal-december.html

Jon Hammond for Alcatel-Lucent / Bell Labs: “On stage, on television or on the radio waves everyday I feel lucky because I’m ALWAYS ON! Jon Hammond Musician, television personality and radio broadcaster Jon Hammond boarded a Concorde in 1981 to travel from New York to Paris at supersonic speed, and he never slowed down. Jon travels the world, touring in Europe and Asia two or three times each year while broadcasting his “HammondCast” morning radio show seven days a week…

Anaheim California — L to R: Jon Hammond, Joe Berger, Tony Arambarri just after Joe’s NAMM Oral History recording session – Youtube http://youtu.be/uFFMVHCkZ8w

Job Title: Musician, Product Endorser – short version here also

http://www.namm.org/library/oral-history/joe-berger

*WATCH THE VIDEO HERE: Pocket Funk 2012 Jazzkeller Frankfurt Musikmesse Warm Up Party Jon Hammond Band

Youtube http://youtu.be/Nn6BjZoJyEk

Jon Hammond’s annual Musikmesse Warm Up Party in Jazzkeller Frankfurt featuring Tony Lakatos tenor saxophone, Giovanni Gulino drums, Joe Berger guitar, special guest:

Lee Oskar harmonica and Jon Hammond at the Hammond Sk1 organ powered by TecAmp 2 x 12 Neodymium rig special thanks to Thomas Eich TecAmp.

This evening marks 26 years continuous Musikmesse for Jon and also on his 59th birthday, special thanks to the Saray Pastanesi Baeckerei & Konditorei bakery for baking the beautiful Chocolate on Chocolate cake which you will see in this film, thanks Martina for wonderful presentation, Eugen Hahn, Marc and all Jazzkeller Frankfurt Team, Messe Frankfurt, P.Mauriat Music Saxophones Alex Hsieh team, Suzuki Hammond, Tombo Lee Oskar team, camera by Jennifer http://www.HammondCast.com see you next year!

Pocket Funk as heard on The Jon Hammond Show TV program on MNNTV and on Late Rent album – Behind The Beat http://behindthebeat.com/2004/12/jon-hammond-late-rent/ by Steve Rosenfeld “Jon Hammond says “the fingers are the singers.'” The latest CD from this exceptional and soulful Hammond organist is the proof. “Late Rent” draws on decades of great recording sessions and top live performances to showcase his own playing and many top jazz and funk artists. It shows why the Hammond organ is one of the most enduring electric instruments and why Hammond is one of its best players.”

StageDive Feature:

http://www.stagedive.com/jonhammondband/videos/777/Francoise-Pujol-and-Band-special-performance-presented-by-Cobi-Narita-on-911-at-ZEBs-NYC

honor of anniversary of 9/11, pianist Francoise Pujol direct from Paris France wi

th her Band at ZEB’s New York City performing her original composition “Not Yet” *note, from Francoise – in French the title is really: “Pas Encore” ( = “Not Yet” ) ( not yet …blond !, not yet … dead ! ) with (also from Paris) Marc Loy vocals, Florent Richard Fender bass, Alain Gouillard drums – camera: Jon Hammond and announcement at end before his playing. This was a special program produced by great lady of Jazz, Cobi Narita and Saul Zebulon Rubin with many top jazz performers. Frank Owens was the master of ceremonies and also played wonderful piano with his trio backing many of the vocalists and saxophonists Frank Staton (97 years old) and BIlly Harper who also performed on this special evening. “Tuesday, Sept. 11, 2012 – REMEMBERING SEPT. 11 – NEVER AGAIN! AND CELEBRATING JAZZ IN NEW YORK” Enjoy! Jon Hammond

Joe Morello His NAMM Oral History was completed on June 8, 2007

http://www.namm.org/library/oral-history/joe-morello

Joe Morello’s influential drumming style was showcased on the landmark Dave Brubeck recording of “Take Five.” Ever since, he has inspired generations of performers. Joe became an icon in the music product’s industry through his long associations with manufacturers as an endorsee, music retailers as a clinician, and publishers as an author of successful method books. He gave advice and lessons to all who ask, and was often known to be the last to leave a clinic – ensuring all questions have been

answered.

Joe Morello the legendary Jazz Drummer July 17, 1928 – March 12, 2011

Instead of hearing aids, he had a lady who would repeat everything in to his ear – Jon Hammond

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joe_Morello

Joseph Albert Morello (July 17, 1928 – March 12, 2011) was a jazz drummer best known for his 12½-year stint with The Dave Brubeck Quartet. He was frequently noted for playing in the unusual time signatures employed by that group in such pieces as “Take Five” and “Blue Rondo à la Turk”. Popular for its work on college campuses during the 1950s, Brubeck’s group reached new heights with Morello. In June 1959, Morello participated in a recording session with the quartet — completed by the alto saxophonist Paul Desmond and the bassist Eugene Wright — that yielded “Kathy’s Waltz” and “Three to Get Ready,” both of which intermingled 3/4 and 4/4 time signatures

Morello suffered from partial vision from birth,[3] and devoted himself to indoor activities. At six years old he began studying the violin, going on to feature three years later as soloist with the Boston Symphony Orchestra, playing Mendelssohn’s Violin Concerto, and again three years later.

At the age of 15 Morello met the violinist Jascha Heifetz and decided that he would never be able to equal Heifetz’s “sound”, so switched to drumming, first studying with a show drummer named Joe Sefcik and then George Lawrence Stone, author of the noted drum textbook Stick Control for the Snare Drummer. Stone was so impressed with Morello’s ideas that he incorporated them into his next book, Accents & Rebounds, which is dedicated to Morello. Later, Morello studied with Radio City Music Hall percussionist Billy Gladstone.

After moving to New York City, Morello worked with numerous notable jazz musicians including Johnny Smith, Tal Farlow, Stan Kenton, Phil Woods, Sal Salvador, Marian McPartland, Jay McShann, Art Pepper, Howard McGhee, and others. After a period playing in McPartland’s trio, Morello declined invitations to join both Benny Goodman and Tommy Dorsey’s bands, favoring a temporary two-month tour with the Dave Brubeck Quartet in 1955; Morello remained with Brubeck for well over a decade, only departing in 1968. Morello later became an in-demand clinician, teacher and bandleader whose former students include Danny Gottlieb, Max Weinberg, Rich Galichon, Phish drummer Jon Fishman, Gary Feldman, Patrick Wante, Frankie Valli and the Four Seasons drummer Gerry Polci, Jerry Granelli, and Glenn Johnson.

External videos

Oral History, Joe Morello explains how he became a member of The Dave Brubeck Quartet. interview date June 8, 2007, NAMM (National Association of Music Merchants) Oral History Library

Morello appeared in many Brubeck performances and contributed to over 60 albums with Brubeck. On “Take Five”, he plays an imaginative drum solo maintaining the 5/4 time signature throughout. Another example of soloing in odd time signatures can be heard on “Unsquare Dance”, in which he solos using only sticks without drums in 7/4 time. At the end of the track, he can be heard laughing about the “trick” ending. He also features on “Blue Rondo à la Turk”, “Strange Meadow Lark”, and “Pick-Up Sticks”.

During his career, Morello appeared on over 120 albums, 60 of which were with the Dave Brubeck Quartet. He authored several drum books, including Master Studies, published by Modern Drummer Publications, and also made instructional videos. Morello was the recipient of many awards, including Playboy magazine’s best drummer award for seven years in a row, and Down Beat magazine’s best drummer award five years in a row. He was elected to the Modern Drummer magazine Hall of Fame in 1988, the Percussive Arts Society Hall of Fame in 1993, and was the recipient of Hudson Music’s first TIP (Teacher Integration Program) Lifetime Achievement award in June, 2010.[4]

Joe Morello died on March 12, 2011, at his home in Irvington, New Jersey. He was 82 years old. His death was announced on his website, although no cause of death was given — with Joe Morello

Frankfurt Germany — Jon Hammond with Volker Buchele in the Fernandes TecAmp stand at Frankfurt Musikmesse — at musikmesse

Frankfurt Germany — Jon Hammond and Ralph Voggenreiter of Voggenreiter Verlag – I’ve been to 26 consecutive Musikmesse’s but I bet Ralph has me beat! – JH — at musikmesse

Go for the Sound! – and don’t forget your Hat – Jon Hammond and Alex Mingmann Hsieh PMauriat Saxophones — with Alex Mingmann Hsieh

New York NY — Time for Gyros Plate dinner with good friend Andy Christo #1 good music fan on MacDougal Street in Greenwich Village – L to R: Joe Berger, Andy Christo, Jon Hammond Ali Baba Restaurant 126 MacDougal St

New York — with Joe Berger

New York NY — King of Radio & TV Joe Franklin with Jon Hammond in Joe’s famous office “Memory Lane”

Youtube http://youtu.be/NEWGszvpduU

Joe Franklin “King Of Nostalgia” Host of Radio & TV who’s guests have been entertainers like Bill Cosby to legends like Bing Crosby, Charlie Chaplin,

John Wayne, Marilyn Monroe, Cary Grant, John Lennon, here with Jon Hammond.. — with Joe Franklin

Jon Hammond and Joe Berger aka Ham-Berger

Joe is playing through the Leslie G37 100W 1×12 Guitar Combo Amp, Jon has the hammer down through the 300 watt Leslie model 3300 Youtube http://youtu.be/H-wZJpToWbE — with Joe Berger at Namm

Jazz Organist Jimmy Smith was absolutely hilarious here, exactly one month before he kicked the bucket unfortunately

Youtube http://youtu.be/HYHNxdXCny4

Jimmy Smith NEA Jazz Master Award Recipient Hammond Organist telling last jokes just one month before he passed away on February 8 2005. Filmed by Jon Hammond on NEA Panel including Kenny Burrell, Slide Hampton, Paquito D’Rivera, A.B. Spellman.

Jimmy tells the story about his adventures driving his Hammond B3 Organ and musicians in a Hearse and story of (like the commercial) “Got go gotta’ go gotta go right now…almost made it” while on the gig on bandstand. Hilarious must see.. Jon Hammond — with George Wein

Melvin Sparks March 22, 1946 – March 15, 2011 – Jon Hammond

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Melvin_Sparks

Melvin Sparks (March 22, 1946 – March 15, 2011)[1] was an American soul jazz, hard bop and jazz blues guitarist. He recorded a number of albums for Prestige Records, later recording for Savant Records. He appeared on several recordings with musicians including Lou Donaldson, Sonny Stitt, Leon Spencer and Johnny Hammond Smith.[1]

Sparks was born in Houston, Texas, United States, and raised in a musical family. He received his first guitar at age 11. Sparks began working in the rhythm and blues genre as a high school student, first with Hank Ballard and the Midnighters, and then with the Upsetters, a touring band formed by Little Richard, which also backed Jackie Wilson, Curtis Mayfield and Marvin Gaye.[2]

Sparks moved to New York City and worked as a session musician for Blue Note and Prestige Records. As part of the burgeoning soul-jazz scene of the late 1960s and early 1970s, Sparks often backed organists like Jack McDuff, Dr. Lonnie Smith and Charles Earland. Sparks released his debut album, Sparks!, for Prestige in 1970.[2]

He was seen on Northeastern television commercials as the voice of Price Chopper’s House of BBQ advertising campaign.[3]

Sparks died on March 15, 2011, at age 64, at his home in Mount Vernon, New York. He had diabetes and high blood pressure. — with Melvin Sparks

Frankfurt Germany — Jon Hammond setup in Jazzkeller Frankfurt – Hammond Sk1 organ through TecAmp Puma 900 – 2 x 12″ Neodymium drivers – Youtube http://youtu.be/AJT522j_nPQ

Get Back In The Groove Jon Hammond Band in Jazzkeller Frankfurt

2012 Annual Musikmesse Warm Up Party hosted by Jon Hammond Band in Jazzkeller Frankfurt “Get Back In The Groove” / Tribute to 9/11 by Jon Hammond

with Tony Lakatos tenor sax, Joe Berger guitar, Giovanni Gulino drums,

Jon Hammond at the Hammond Sk1 organ,

special guest Lee Oskar harmonica.

This performance marks 26 years consecutive attending Musikmesse Frankfurt and

it was also on the birthday of Jon Hammond March 20th, 2012 with a big chocolate on chocolate cake baked by Saray Pastanesi Baeckerei & Konditorei bakery — at Jazzkeller

Ulm Germany — Excellent amplifier for Lead/Rhythm and or Bass/Organ – from Professor Klaus Maier class room at Ulrich-von-Ensingen-Realschule Ulm – Jon Hammond

http://www.uve.schule.ulm.de/

ULRICH-VON-ENSINGEN-REALSCHULE

Frauenstraße 101

89073 Ulm

– Bonnie Raitt and Jon Hammond

*Thanks for coming over to check out my band at Shoreline Amphitheatre Bonnie! – Jon

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bonnie_Raitt

Bonnie Lynn Raitt (born November 8, 1949) is a renowned American blues singer-songwriter and slide guitar player. During the 1970s, Raitt released a series of acclaimed roots-influenced albums which incorporated elements of blues, rock, folk and country, but she is perhaps best known for her more commercially accessible recordings in the 1990s including “Nick of Time”, “Something to Talk About”, “Love Sneakin’ Up on You”, and the slow ballad “I Can’t Make You Love Me”. Raitt has received nine Grammy Awards in her career and is a lifelong political activist.

Tradition Continues,

Theodore Bikel, Fiddler on The Roof, Musicians Union, Local 802, Hofheim am Taunus, Gisela Stang, Jazzkeller-Hofheim, Jon Hammond Band, Rock, Blues, Jazz, Sk1 Organ

Tags: Blues, Fiddler on The Roof, Gisela Stang, Hofheim am Taunus, Jazz, Jazzkeller Hofheim, Jon Hammond Band, Local 802, Musicians Union, Rock, Sk1 Organ, Theodore Bikel, Tradition Continues