Bonjour tout le monde.

je ne sais pas si je suis au bon endroit pour poser mes questions?

Est ce qu’il existe dans KiCad un raccourci pour insérer les caractères µ et Ω dans les valeurs composants?

Comment changer l’origine des feuilles, positionner X0,00, Y0,00 en bas à gauche?

Merci à vous.

Cordialement.

Hello everybody.

I don’t know if I’m in the right place to ask my questions?

Is there a shortcut in KiCad to insert the characters µ and Ω in the component values?

How to change the origin of the leaves, position X0.00, Y0.00 at the bottom left?

Thank you.

Sincerely.

When I say OS, in the case of Linux, it also depends on the desktop. I use the Compose key method as it handles the vast majority of my needs like typing accented characters in other languages, the ° symbol for temperatures and GPS coordinates to Maps, and fractions like ⅔ which are typed as Compose, 2, 3. For less common characters I can bring up kcharselect which gives access to the whole Unicode shebang (is there a hebang? ). For emojis, I can bring up the emoji selector popup. So there are plenty of existing solutions in this space.

Incidentally font is not needed in the title, as characters have an independent existence to their graphical depiction.

You also robbed OP of their second question in your title.

I always forget the character combinations, but in Linux Gnome, there is the Characters application that can be easily opened and searched for characters (it remembers the latest used ones). In Windows, there is a similar application, Character Map.

Strangely, the ohm sign has its own character in Unicode, U+2126, but this doesn’t work well in different applications such as KiCAD. As mentioned above, it is better to use the Greek letter Ω, which is U+03A9.

I use KCharSelect on Linux and used the Character accessory on Windows for all special characters. Never bothered to learn the key combinations.

Note that KiCad provides no preview of text in the font you’ve selected (be it the KiCad font or a TTF one if using v7), so you only see if the font supports a given character when you validate the text. A bit tedious for some special characters that are not ultra-common. A text preview with the selected font would be an appreciated addition. I don’t know if it’s planned for v8, or planned at all.