CHERRY FIVE

Though the LP cover notes only list two musicians' names, singer Tony Tartarini (previously known as Toni Gionta and former singer with L'Uovo di Colombo) and drummer Carlo Bordini (that also played in a duo Rustichelli & Bordini), the group also included three members of Goblin, keyboard wizard Claudio Simonetti, guitarist Morante and bass player Pignatelli, with the first two of them being credited as composers for all the album tracks.

In fact the group, named Oliver, had been created by Simonetti and Morante, that also went to England in late 1973 to audition a singer, and englishman Clive "Artman" Haynes (or Clive Heinz, as he was then known) was briefly in the band, recording some tracks with them. He was sacked then, and didn't appear on the album.

With new singer Tartarini the group recorded what was to become their first and only album in 1974, after a name change to Goblin, but it was soon shelved when Carlo Bordini refused to sign a contract with Cinevox as it could damage his career as session musician. The others went on with a new drummer, leaving out Bordini and Tartarini and recorded Profondo rosso.

The unreleased album was shelved for a couple of years, and only released in January 1976 with the name of Cherry Five (a name that really didn't belong to any real group), and only Tartarini and Bordini were credited on the cover, maybe someone thought that it could damage the Goblin's career!

Even if it's not particularly representative of the Italian prog sound, the LP is a genuine rarity due to the great world success Goblin achieved with some of their soundtrack works, and is in many collectors' want lists.

A keyboard based album, sung in English, Cherry Five has strong influences by the likes of Genesis and Yes, especially in the fluid keyboard parts and powerful bass sound. It contains six long tracks with the opening Country graveyard and The picture of Dorian Gray. This last title, translated in Italian as Il Ritratto di Dorian Gray was in fact the name of Claudio Simonetti's first band.

The two musicians whose names appeared on teh cover of the Cherry Five album, Tony Tartarini and Carlo Bordini, have reformed this group in 2015 with Ludovico Piccinini (guitar), Gianluca De Rossi (keyboards) and Pino Sallusti (bass) for a concert at the International Music Fair in Genua and to record a new album, Il pozzo dei giganti, issued by Black Widow and containing three long tracks inspired from Dante's Divine Comedy, to revive the legendary name of this band.

A genuine rarity, due to the Goblin connection and the small number of copies pressed, Cherry Five album was pressed in 1975, as demonstrated by the date on the label, but released in January 1976. By the way the recording dates on the cover are false, it had been recorded in 1974, not 1975.

The Vinyl Magic CD reissue, that was out-of-print for many years, has been recently replaced by a new one by Cinevox.

The first vinyl reissue ever released in Italy was made by AMS in 2009.

CHERRY FIVE

Comments by BLACK WIDOW

Between Past and PL. In 1976 appeared the album of a mysterious group, the Cherry Five. They are in fact, as the insiders well know, songs recorded two years before by a group then partly merged in the Goblin. The record company decided to publish anyway the recording, putting on the cover the name of the two artists who had not followed the band: the drummer Carlo Bordini ("Rustichelli e Bordini Opera Prima") and the singer Tony Tartarini ("L'uovo di Colombo ","Reale Impero Britannico").

The vinyl became over the years a "cult" for connoisseurs of progressive rock. After almost forty years, Bordini and Tartarini meet each other again thanks to Black Widow Records and they record a new album with a group of musicians from different backgrounds: the prog keyboardist Gianluca De Rossi (Taproban), the rock guitarist Ludovico Piccinini (Prophilax ), and the jazz musician Pino Sallusti on bass.

The first track, which gives the title to the album, is inspired by the XXXI canto of the Dantesque Inferno and is followed by other episodes from the Divine Comedy, "Manfredi" (Purgatorio) and "Dentro la cerchia antica" (Paradiso). The texts of Tony Tartarini speak of the Giants punished for their pride and doomed for all eternity to regret the sun and their own force; of Prince Manfredi who faces his destiny of death in battle and after death entrusts to Dante a letter for his daughter Costanza still alive; of a Florence surrounded by the ancient walls and not yet ravaged by civil war.

Each episode has its own musical character: the Pozzo dei Giganti pays homage to the prog suites of the 70s, above all Tarkus by Emerson, Lake and Palmer; Manfredi features a sound inspired by the Gentle Giant and contains two songs written by the founders of the group; Dentro la cerchia antica offers a progressive-medieval style as it was characteristic of the 70s.