Artist

CAMMELLO BUCK

RUSTICHELLI - BORDINI

CAMMELLO BUCK:

Paolo Rustichelli (keyboards, vocals)

Pino Belardinelli (guitar)

Mauro Morlacchi (bass)

Carlo Bordini (drums)

RUSTICHELLI-BORDINI:

Paolo Rustichelli (keyboards, vocals)

Carlo Bordini (drums)

Rustichelli-Bordini were an unusual duo of keyboards and drums that released a little known and incredibly good album in 1973 before disappearing.

The origins of this duo lay in a group called Cammello Buck, formed in 1971, which even appeared at the first Villa Pamphili Pop Festival in Rome, May 1972.

With a new bass player, Windy (real name Pasquale Cavallo, coming from the latest line-up of Panna Fredda), they signed a contract with the Delta label, but didn't get to release anything despite some demo recordings, and their management suggested to reduce the four-piece to a duo in the same style as the UK band Hardin & York.

The album, Opera prima, is a very good LP, obviously based on keyboards and the lack of other instruments is not particularly heard. The vocal parts are short and the voice is not great.

The LP contains six long tracks with Icaro and the instrumental Natività being the best cuts.

Rustichelli & Bordini appeared at Naples' Be-In Festival in June 1973 and supported West Bruce & Laing in Rome.

After the album Carlo Bordini was contacted by a group called Oliver, that included Claudio Simonetti, Massimo Morante and Fabio Pignatelli, this was to be the first line-up of Goblin; he also appeared on the original Cherry Five album and on their 2015 reunion work, Il pozzo dei giganti.

In 2022 on the De Rossi e Bordini CD (Ma.Ra.Cash MRC 098), the duo included reworkings of two tracks from Il pozzo dei giganti by Cherry Five and two from Opera prima.

A rare album, Opera prima was issued by RCA in a limited number of copies, and many of these came with a promo white label.

Some copies contained a small card (approx.14.5x9.8cm) with a quotation on popular music by Marcel Proust, which was also included in other contemporary RCA albums (among these Rovescio della Medaglia/Contaminazione, Festa Mobile/Diario di viaggio della Festa Mobile, Perigeo/Abbiamo tutti un blues da piangere and Maurizio Monti/L'amore).

It has a gatefold cover and with the same cover has been reissued in Japan (RCA/Edison CR 10060) and Korea (SRML 1013).

No counterfeits exist.

The album has been reissued on CD in March 2003 by BMG with mini-LP gatefold cover and obi, as part of their "Dei di un perduto rock" series, and later repressed in October of the same year when a second batch of those CD's came out.

The CD was announced by BMG as being also available with standard jewel case (cat.no. 74321-98509-2) but was probably never issued in this form.

No recording exist by Cammello Buck, but the group had two songs, To wake up in the morning and To be a horse included in the soundtrack of the 1972 movie Don Camillo e i giovani d'oggi directed by Mario Camerini.

Paolo Rustichelli, now living in the USA, has two websites at www.paolo.org and www.myspace.com/paolorustichelli

Thanks to Federico Bordo and Paolo Verda for information