September, 1981: Alan-Michael Spaulding is born to Alan Spaulding and Hope Bauer.

November, 1983: Hope divorces Alan and moves to New York with Alan-Michael.

July, 1987: Alan-Michael returns to Springfield by parachuting into the Bauer's 4th of July barbecue.

October: Alan-Michael and Dinah Marler get into an accident with Harley Cooper, who is on her way to give birth. Alan-Michael and Dinah help her deliver Daisy (later renamed Susan).

July, 1988: Alan-Michael and Harley plan to marry so that he gain access to his trustfund.

September: Phillip tries to buy Harley off to keep her away from Alan-Michael. Phillip later changes his mind about Harley and teaches her how to fit in with the rest of the Spauldings.

February, 1989: Alan-Michael Spaulding and Harley Cooper marry.

October: Jealous of the amount of time Harley is spending with her ex-boyfriend, Dylan Lewis, while they try to locate their daughter (whom Harley had given up for adoption), Alan-Michael finds Daisy and tries to pay off her adoptive parents. When they refuse, he kidnaps Daisy. When Harley discovers what he's done, she returns Daisy to the Lemays and leaves him.

February, 1990: Alan-Michael sleeps with Blake.

April: Blake fakes a pregnancy to get Alan-Michael to marry her.

June: Alan-Michael and Harley divorce and he marries Blake Thorpe. While on their honeymoon, Alan-Michael is kidnapped by Blake's lover, Gary. Alan-Michael is rescued by Blake's father, Roger Thorpe, and Blake tells him that she lost the baby.

November: Blake accidentally shoots Alan-Michael and is kidnapped by Gary.

December: Gary reveals to Alan-Michael that Blake faked her pregnancy and A-M leaves her.

January, 1991: Alan-Michael and Blake divorce.

September: Alan-Michael falls for Eleni, who is in love with Frank.

December: Alan-Michael takes Eleni to Paris so that she can talk to Frank and arranges for her to find Musette in Frank's bed.

February, 1992: Alan-Michael Spaulding and Eleni Andros marry in the airport after Blake calls immigration on Eleni.

July: Musette comes to Springfield and begins blackmailing Alan-Michael. In response, he hires Pierre to get rid of her.

August: Pierre plants a bomb, which injures both Musette and Mallet. Worried that he'll lose Eleni when she finds out what he's done, Alan-Michael switches her birth control pills with sugar pills. Meanwhile, Eleni discovers the truth and makes plans to leave him for Frank.

September: Eleni goes to Greece when her mother has a stroke. Alan-Michael goes with her and they sleep together while she's under the influence of sleeping pills.

October: Eleni finds out that she's pregnant and reconciles with Alan-Michael.

November: Pierre returns and kidnaps Harley. Alan-Michael saves her life by taking a bullet for her and Pierre is killed by Mallet.

February, 1993: Eleni finds out that A-M switched her birth control pills and that Frank is the father of her baby. After Eleni leaves him and moves in with Frank, Alan-Michael gets drunk and sleeps with Blake. When Eleni finds out about the tryst, she demands a divorce.