Voting Rules

People on this list must have gone to University of Maryland, College Park and be of some renown.

The University Of Maryland, College Park has a long history of nurturing talented individuals who go on to achieve fame and success in various fields. This prestigious institution has enriched society through the accomplishments of its distinguished alumni. As readers delve into the numerous stories of these accomplished professionals, they will discover the depth of expertise and influence that these famous University Of Maryland alumni have brought to the world.

The University Of Maryland, College Park empowered its famous alumni to excel in their careers. The impressive achievements of these trailblazers exemplify the stellar education provided by the University of Maryland, and serve as an inspiration for future generations.

The professional successes of famous University Of Maryland, College Park alumni demonstrate how the institution equips its students with the skills and knowledge needed to flourish in diverse fields. Larry David, co-creator of the iconic television series Seinfeld and star of Curb Your Enthusiasm, has left an indelible impression on modern comedy and elevated the entertainment industry. Sergey Brin, co-founder of Google, revolutionized internet technology and transformed the way we access information. Kevin Plank, founder and CEO of sportswear brand Under Armour, reinvented athletic apparel, bringing innovation to the world of sports.

The awe-inspiring journey of notable former students of the University Of Maryland, College Park make clear the transformative power of an exceptional education. Their outstanding achievements highlight their talent, hard work, and exceptional education. By exploring the lives and careers of these famous University Of Maryland alumni, one can truly appreciate the significant contributions they have made to society,

Ranked by

Commentator, Businessperson, Political writer

Age : 73

Birthplace : USA, Denver, Colorado

Karl Christian Rove (born December 25, 1950) is an American Republican political consultant and policy advisor. He was Senior Advisor and Deputy Chief of Staff during the George W. Bush administration until his resignation on August 31, 2007. He has also headed the Office of Political Affairs, the Office of Public Liaison, and the White House Office of Strategic Initiatives. Since leaving the White House, Rove has worked as a political analyst and contributor for Fox News, Newsweek and The Wall Street Journal. Prior to his White House appointments, he is credited with the 1994 and 1998 Texas gubernatorial victories of George W. Bush, as well as Bush's 2000 and 2004 successful presidential campaigns. In his 2004 victory speech Bush referred to Rove as "the Architect". Rove has also been credited for the successful campaigns of John Ashcroft (1994 U.S. Senate election), Bill Clements (1986 Texas gubernatorial election), Senator John Cornyn (2002 U.S. Senate election), Governor Rick Perry (1990 Texas Agriculture Commission election), and Phil Gramm (1982 U.S. House and 1984 U.S. Senate elections).

Comedian, Television producer, Film Producer

Age : 77

Birthplace : Brooklyn, New York, USA

Larry David is an American writer, comedian, actor, director, and television producer. Born on July 2, 1947, in Brooklyn, New York, David was raised in a Jewish family which has significantly influenced his work. His journey to fame was not immediate, but rather a testament to his persistent dedication to his craft. David's early career was marked by several roles as a stand-up comedian and writer for popular shows including 'Saturday Night Live'. However, it was his co-creation of the sitcom 'Seinfeld' with Jerry Seinfeld in the late 1980s that truly catapulted him into the limelight. Serving as the show's head writer and executive producer, David's unique brand of humor, often drawn from everyday life scenarios, became a hallmark of 'Seinfeld', contributing greatly to its immense success and enduring popularity. In addition to 'Seinfeld', David's other notable work includes the creation of 'Curb Your Enthusiasm', a critically acclaimed HBO series where he stars as a fictionalized version of himself. The show, known for its improv-based format, has further solidified David's standing as a leading figure in comedy. Throughout his career, David has been honored with multiple awards, including two Primetime Emmy Awards for 'Seinfeld'. His distinctive comedic style, characterized by a masterful blend of sarcasm, observational humor, and often uncomfortable social situations, continues to leave an indelible mark on the landscape of American television comedy.

Executive Management, Businessperson, Entrepreneur

Age : 50

Birthplace : Russia, Moscow

Sergey Mikhaylovich Brin (Russian: Серге́й Миха́йлович Брин; born August 21, 1973) is an American computer scientist and Internet entrepreneur. Together with Larry Page, he co-founded Google. Brin is the president of Google's parent company Alphabet Inc. As of June 2019, Brin is the 13th-richest person in the world, with an estimated net worth of US$50.1 billion.Brin immigrated to the United States with his family from the Soviet Union at the age of 6. He earned his bachelor's degree at the University of Maryland, College Park, following in his father's and grandfather's footsteps by studying mathematics, as well as computer science. After graduation, he enrolled in Stanford University to acquire a PhD in computer science. There he met Page, with whom he built a web search engine. The program became popular at Stanford, and they suspended their PhD studies to start up Google in Susan Wojcicki's garage in Menlo Park.

Television director, Television producer, Film Producer

Age : Dec. at 53 (1936-1990)

Birthplace : Greenville, Mississippi, USA

James Maury Henson (September 24, 1936 – May 16, 1990) was an American puppeteer, animator, cartoonist, actor, inventor, filmmaker, and screenwriter who achieved worldwide notice as the creator of The Muppets (1955–present) and Fraggle Rock (1983–1987); and as the director of The Dark Crystal (1982) and Labyrinth (1986). He was born in Greenville, Mississippi and raised in Leland, Mississippi and University Park, Maryland.Henson began developing puppets in high school. He created Sam and Friends, a short-form comedy television program, while he was a freshman at the University of Maryland, College Park. He graduated from the University of Maryland with a degree in home economics, after which he produced coffee advertisements and developed experimental films. He co-founded Muppets, Inc. in 1958, which became The Jim Henson Company. Henson joined the children's educational television program Sesame Street where he helped to develop characters for the series. He and his creative team also appeared on the sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live. He produced The Muppet Show during this period, premiering the series in 1976. He gained attention for his creations, particularly Kermit the Frog, Rowlf the Dog, and Ernie; and he was involved with Sesame Street for over 20 years. During the later years of his life, he founded the Jim Henson Foundation and Jim Henson's Creature Shop. He won the Emmy Award twice for his involvement in The Storyteller and The Jim Henson Hour. Henson died in May 1990 at age 53 from toxic shock syndrome, an unexpected event that was widely lamented in the media and entertainment industry. In the weeks following his death, he was celebrated with a wave of tributes. He was posthumously inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1991 and was selected to be one of the Disney Legends in 2011.

Age : Dec. at 38 (1957-1995)

Birthplace : USA, Chicago, Illinois

Essex Hemphill (April 16, 1957 – November 4, 1995) was an openly gay American poet and activist. He is known for his contributions to the Washington, D.C. art scene in the 1980s, and for openly discussing the topics pertinent to the African-American gay community.

Age : 51

Birthplace : Kensington, Maryland

Kevin A. Plank (born August 13, 1972) is an American billionaire businessman and philanthropist. Plank is the founder, CEO and chairman of Under Armour, a manufacturer of sportswear, footwear and accessories, based in Baltimore, Maryland.