See other formats

Digitized by the Internet Archive in 2012 with funding from LYRASIS Members and Sloan Foundation . •• http://archive.org/details/maryland21univ •J 1 ■ l> 7, oIllllK' \\l iiiiiIm-i- Oii«- >0\ <'llllM'l'-l>«'«-4'IIllM*r IJ> If I Filly 4 «-■■«*. I In- 4 «|M ?Ae cAi ARYL All D PUBLICATION OF THE UNIVERSITY"' MARYLAND ALUMNI 7 m% w * '>& , m rmory, The best Wu lo come from XpftjflHjtf/tH L_ Tetfa%elcome *°Wh , ,h. Lord Boltimore °-—dfo )o orderforloyolo^ . . a„d comfortable r,„ it Re ax after chairs can make it. . relax ANY TIME! games . • • lOR0 BALTIWOR* HOTEt sc^f ^BALTIMORE. MD. MULBERRY 2357-2358 V PRINCE GEORGES BANK AND TRUST COMPANY Resources Over $24,000/000.00 Established 1915 Prince George's Largest Financial Institution COMPLETE BANKING FACILITIES FIVE CONVENIENT LOCATIONS VISIT OUR OFFICE AT 4513 COLLEGE AVENUE MEMBER FEDERAL DEPOSF1 INSURANCE CORPORATION IT'S GOLDEN AUTUMN • EXTRA COMFORT • EXTRA SCENIC BEAUTY • EXTRA CONVENIENCE by GREYHOUND Autumn-painted scenery . mild, crisp weather . . uncrowded hotels and re- sorts — all combine to mahe Fall the ideal Take- a-Trip Time. And it's so easy, so convenient, jo low in cost by comfortable Greyhound SuperCoach. EXTRA SAVINGS, TOO! GREYHOUND Giving a Party? • You can serve gay sandwiches, punch, and a delicious cake to as many as 50 guys and gals, or more, for as little as 58c a person. Call Clement's Pastry Shop for complete information. • Clement *.s 708 Thirteenth St., N.W. RE 4478 NA 4118 WASHINGTON For Jitte MthoQXaptlO call NO rth 3800 9 SI* NO rth 4538 ini 14IK sum m w . wmmciM i. o c Harvey L. Miller THE VALUE OF LOYALTY ££■ MOW," asked a Baltimore news- $ |_paperman, "do the members of the University faculty in general feel about Dr. Byrd's controversy with 'the' Baltimore newspaper?" We told the reporter that the Mary- land faculty, as well as the Maryland alumni and student body, were solidly behind President Byrd, appreciating that he has accom- plished so much for the University that loyalty to the Uni- versity's President is synonymous with loyalty to the Uni- Dr. Byrd yersity. Not long ago a group of Maryland alumni attended a banquet at which a prominent Maryland alumnus likened "the shadow of Thomas Jefferson which will always be recognized as falling across the campus of the University of Virginia" with the shadow of Dr. Byrd similarly across Maryland's campus. To Maryland alumni that is not laying it on too thick at all. They know the zeal and devotion, the continuous drive and relentless effort which Dr. Byrd has successfully expended toward the astounding development, academically and physically, of the University. They appreciate Dr. Byrd's ability as a leader and as an administrator. It is therefore quite natural that Maryland University people are intensely loyal to Dr. Byrd in his leadership and undertakings and to him personally. The writer has been around a bit, in the Service and out, many times in tight spots where the pay-off was on loyalty and loyalty alone. You won if you had it. You were sunk if you lacked it. This column might not be a bad spot to elaborate on loyalty. The most important feature of loyalty is that you can neither order nor buy it. There is no way in which you can con- jure it into being. YOU HAVE GOT TO EARN IT! Loyalty can be earned only by giving loyalty. Loyalty from the bottom up cannot be retained without according loyalty from the top down. If anybody, anywhere, in any field of endeavor can show us a better example of loyalty than that which Dr. Byrd has shown for the State of Maryland and University of Maryland, then we'll show you ten year old newsboys who can make gold watches out of old straw hats. There are people on the Maryland campus who laugh off the newspaper attacks on Dr. Byrd simply because they Open Every Day From 11 A. M. to 1 2 P. M. Itataurant "Where Statesmen Dine" Famous For Food Dean of Capital Restaurants Mecca of W ashingtonians • Steaks • Chops • Sea Fooils 1411 Pennsylvania Ave. N. W. Washington, D. C. •Ur SEA FOOD RESTAURANTS 9th and MAINE AVE., S. W. The Name That Comes To Mind Whenever Fine Seafood Is Mentioned OPEN EVERY DAY DAIIY 11:45 A. M. to 9 P. M. SUNDAY 1 to 9 P. M. II O GATE'S RULON-HENDERSON, INC. WASHINGTON, D. C. Toll Your Sons ami Daughters Four things they must be to have a successful life: MUST BE HONEST MUST BE SOBER MUST BE INDUSTRIOUS MUST BE ECONOMIZING If any one of the four is left out, the person is a failure. Now, the last one, "economizing," is where HAINES, The Shoe Wizard comes in. That is, when you buy a pair of HAINES' shoes, you save any- where from 50c to $2.00 on the pair. This is economizing in Its true sense. HAINES The Shoe Wizard The Man Who Molces The Wonderful Prices Possible. LONG WEAR • EVERYWHERE believe tlu- attack- ere bo greatly over- played that they lose all semblance of "punch," like the Shakespearian char- acter who "protesteth TOO much the little girl who liked canned peaches hut didn't care for then ■ day. Then others who tret so trosh (turned mad at the unfair, scurrilous, below the belt assaults, that they have about made up their minds that the whole situation traces back to an error of judgment on the part of Noah when tie permitted a pediculus and his mate to board the Ark. Loyalty is a permanent characteristic. Like ted hair or buck teeth, you have it or you lack it. There are no "degrees" of loyalty. You can't mark a fellow "2.5" in loyalty. He's loyal "4.0" or he's loyal "0.0." It's "A" or "F" and no middle ground. You can't be a little bit loyal any more than you can be a little bit dead. A loyal fellow is loyal to his God, to his country, to his family, to his friends, to his school but, above all, he is loyal to himself. Without the latter he wouldn't be loyal to anybody or anything. That is the self respect which the Bard of Avon summed up, "Above all things to thine own self be true. Thou can'st not then be false to any man." Loyalty is mankind's greatest virtue. Pity the unhappy jruy who lacks it. Loyalty is greater than love for love is loyalty, one toward another. It is greater than religion for religion is loyalty to God. It is greater than patriotism for patriotism is loyalty to one's country. Loyalty is greater than charity for it includes charity, one toward another. Loyalty is a hard taskmaster. It asks, at times, great sacrifices and, at other times, the humblest of chores. The greatest example of loyalty to ideals was provided by the Gentle Jew- nailed to the cross on the Hill of Skulls so that millions of stained glass win- dows the world over today stand as symbols and reminders of Him who showed the way to die for loyalty. £iMtfy the World* Since 1919 • SCIENTIFIC LABORATORY INSTRUMENTS] (Chemical . . . Biological Physical . . . Research Engineering) • MATERIALS TESTING EQUIPMENT AMERICAN INSTRUMENT CO., INC. Silver Spring <Sj]J^>- Maryland Custom Cabinet Work Unpointed Furniture of Quality Book Cases To Your Specifications FREE ESTIMATES A & K Woodworking Co. 626 INDIANA AVE., N. W. Washington, D. C. STerling 7052 VOLUME XXI NOVEMBER-DECEMBER 1919 MM HER ONE N ARYLAND PUBLICATION OF THE UNIVERSITY - MARYLAND ALUMNI Published Ei-Monlhly al the University o! Maryland. College Park. Md. and. entered al the Post Office. College Park. Md.. as second class mail matter under the Act of Congress of March 3. 1879. Mary S. Brasher, Circulation Manager; Sally Ladin Ogden. Advertising Director. 3333 N. Charles Street. Baltimore 18. Maryland. HARVEY L. MILLER, Managing Editor S3. 00 per year Fifty cents per copy ALUMNI COUNCIL Dr. Arthur I. Bell, President. Alumni Council C. V. Koorts Vice-President David L. Brigham. General Alumni Secretary Alumni Council Representatives AGRICULTURE— J. Homer Remsberg 18. James L. Ward 31. Mahlon N. Haines '96. ARTS & SCIENCES— Dr. Arthur Hersberger '32, Winship I. Greene '26, Thomas J. Holmes '24. BUSINESS & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION— Austin C. Diggs '21. Chester W. Tawney '31. Jos C Longridge '26. DENTAL— Dr. C. Adam Bock '22. Dr. Arthur I. Bell 19. Dr. Arthur L. Davenport 18. EDUCATION— Ramon Grelecki 43, Warren Rabbit! '31, Mrs. Mildred Smith Jones '22. ENGINEERING— Fred Cutting '34, C. V. Koons '29. Walter R. Beam. Jr. '47. HOME ECONOMICS— Hazel Tenney Tuemmler '29, Nellie Smith Davis '23. Mary F. Chaney '<*- LAW Judge Wm. Henry Forsythe. Jr. '97, J. Gilbert Prendergasl '33. Judge Eli Frank. MEDICAL— Dr. Albert E. Goldstein 12, Dr. Wetherbee Fort 19. Dr. Thurston R. Adams '34. NURSING — Virginia Conley '40. Ethel M. Troy 17. Clara M. McGovern. PHARMACY— Mathias Palmer '25. Frank S. Balamsone 25, Morris L. Cooper '26. THE 9 nduitlial BANK OF WASHINGTON Member, National Bankers' Association Member, American Bankers' Association Associate Member Washington, D. C. Clearing House U. S. Government Depository Member Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 11th and U Sts., N. W. WASHINGTON, D. C. T. A. CANNON CO., Inc. Wholesale Produce Dealers Fancy Fruits and Vegetables Union Market Terminal 1272 5th Street, N. E. Phone ATlantic 3201 WASHINGTON 2, D. C. JACK MULLANE FOR HIRE TUXEDOS • FULL DRESS CUTAWAYS • CAPS • GOWNS HOODS • MASQUERADE COSTUMES WIGS 714 11th STREET, N. W. MEtropolitan 9395 Washington, D. C. In Flanders field and in the Par Pa- cific stand crosses, row on row, where brave men died at some disputed barri- cade Out of loyalty to their country. Those who die for loyalty never die in vain. Death is only incidental to life and time hut loyalty and ideals do not perish. Many men have been, figuratively — and some literally — , crucified because they were loyal. An ounce of loyalty is worth ten pounds of cleverness. Elbert Hubbard, the famed Sage of East Aurora, once wrote, "If you work for a man, in heaven's name work for him. As long as you are part of an in- stitution do not condemn it. By doing so you are not injuring the institution; rather, you are disparaging yourself. If you must condemn, why, resign your position and when you are out, damn away to your heart's content!" We always thought old Fra Elbertus had something there and we liked par- ticularly his concluding line, "Get in line or get out!" One of the finest examples of loyalty to a subordinate was demonstrated by Abraham Lincoln in his famous letter to General Hooker. The development of the Lincoln-Hooker situation also shows the great cost of disloyalty and points up the fact that lack of it can- not be offset by ability and knowledge. Hooker had made it a practice to criticize his superior, General Burnside. Hooker had also criticized President Lincoln and had stated that the coun- try needed a dictator. Burnside had failed. Hooker had let it be known that he would have succeeded where Burn- side had failed. Lincoln's very good was not. However, man, did not let his friendship for Burnside stand in the way of loyalty to his country. So Lincoln gave Hooker command of the Army and accorded him every sup- port. However, Hooker did not win. He had to be relieved. Hooker suffered and many good men suffered with him. He and they drew the penalty of the criticism that had killed loyalty to Hooker. Hooker was replaced by a Silent Man who was widely criticized for his per- sonal habits, his tactics, his administra- tion. But the Silent Man criticized no Burnside was friend. Hooker Lincoln, a great THE BEST COSTS NO MORE AT< ML, DECORATORS' I • auto cuss SERVICE • PLATE CLASS for effective use of Glass • SAFETY GLASS for Home and Office • • • • PLEXIGLASS FREE ESTIMATES | • mirrors MILES GLASS CO. 4th & Fla. Ave., N. E. (Main Office) FR. T234 1354 H Street, Northeast .... LI. 3-1 178 1 1th and N Streets, Southeast - LI. 3-0080 BANK OF SILVER SPRING Drive In Banking Facilities NO PARKING WORRIES New Address 8701 GEORGIA AVE. SILVER SPRING, MD. MEMBER FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION W. R. HILL COMPANY • Office Supplies • Governmenl Contractors Phone: NOrth 1663 1315 13th Street, N. W. WASHINGTON 5, D. C. 1 206 1 9th ST., N. W. • WASHINGTON 6, D. C. Phone STerlins? 7515 PHOTO-OFFSET * PLANOGRAPHING * LITHOGRAPHING Listed below are a few of the many diversified printed pieces we produce economically in black or color. DIRECT MAIL FOLDERS POSTERS BROCHURES CATALOGS REPORTS RECORDS CHARTS PHOTOGRAPHS STATISTICS LETTERHEADS PATENT DRAWINGS OFFICE FORMS STATEMENTS MAPS FACSIMILES {3Y PARK Transfer Co. ♦ Heavy Hauling ♦ WASHINGTON, D. C. NORTH 5753 THE BEST IN Hardy AZALEAS All Colors ami si/«'s Wholesale and Retail Joseph P. Gilmore 2510 17th STREET, N. E. WASHINGTON, D. C. one in return. He even bad kind things ., about the enemy. Intensely loyal t<> bii ropei sell a- to those under him, he kept his mouth shut and minded his own business. In his day a- in this day a man can be kept very busy at just minding bis own business. The Silent Man took the cities and won the war. We quote hi.- mcmoii>. "We have fought a great war and won a great victory for a great President. The credit i> due to a determined, loyal Army." Whenever some one questions the all encompassing value of loyalty; when doubt in that premise assails you, read ovei Lincoln's letter to Hooker. It is a gem. Here it is: — "Executive Mansion. "Washington, January jo. ; "Ma jar General Hook* "General: I have placed you at the head of the Army of the Potomac. Of course, I hate done this upon what ap- pears to me to be sufficient reasons, and yet I think it best for you to know that there are some things in regard to which I a in not quite satisfied with yon. "I believe you to be a brave and skill- ful soldier, which, of course, I like. "J also believe you do not mix politics with your profession, in ivhich you are right, "You have confidence in yourself, which is a valuable if not indispensable quality. "You are a)iibitiou8, ivhich, within reasonable bounds, does good rather than harm, but I think that during General Burnside's command of the Army you have taken counsel of your ambition and thwarted him as much as you could, in which you did a great wrong to the counti~y and to a most meritorious and honorable brother officer. "I have heard, in such way as to be- lieve it, of your recently saying that both the army and the government needed a dictator. Of course, it was not for this but in spite of it. that I have given you the command. Only those gen- i nils who gain successes can set up dictators. What I now ask of you is military success, and I will risk the dictatorship. "The government will support you to the utmost of its ability, which is neitl < . nor less than it has done and will do for all commanders. I much fear that the spirit you have aided to infuse into tin Army, of criticizing their commander and withholding con- fidence from him. trill note turn upon I shall assist you as far as I can to put it down. Neither you nor Na- poleon, if he were alive again, could get any good out of a n Army while such a spirit prevails in it. And now, beware of rashness; beware of rash- ness, but itith energy and sleepless vigilance go forward and give ns vic- tor ■ "Yours very truly. A. LINCOLN." LEADERSHIP Part of the mission of a college edu- cation is to fit the graduate for leader- ship. However, a degree alone cannot do it. Education can only show the way. One of the most essential, yet most elusive qualities is that quality known as leadership. It is difficult to define. Yet it is BO real that its lack makes the difference between just a good worker (Concluded on page -15 1 Mrs. STABLER'S TICKET and TRAVEL NART ♦•♦ JORDAN'S MUSIC CO. 13th and G STREETS, N. W. Telephone REpublic 7307 ♦•♦ Tickets for • Concerts • Theatres and • Sporting Events ♦•♦ In Washington, Baltimore and New York WALTER C. DOE & COMPANY Electrical Contractors 602 Massachusetts Ave., N. W. REpublic 1223 WASHINGTON, D. C. UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND'S BOARD OF REGENTS A Terrapin Photo (Silling)— Peter W. Chichesler, E. Paul Knolls, Mrs. John L. Whilehursl. Senator Millard E. Tydings. Judge William P. Cole. Jr., chair- man; Stanford Z. Rothschild, secretary; Charles P. McCormick, J. Milton Patterson, treasurer; Philip C. Turner. (Standing) — Dr. H. C. Byrd. University president; Harry H. Nutlle, Edward F. Holler. A Board of Regents, composed of outstanding citizens of the Stale in various walks of life, governs the University of Maryland. The President of the University, by law, is Executive Officer of the Board. Members of the Board are appointed by the Governor of the State for terms of nine years each, beginning the first Monday in June. The Stale law also provides thai the Board of Regents also shall constitute the Slate Board of Agriculture. Mrs. Whilehursl, serving her second term, enjoys the distinction of being the only woman ever to serve on the Board. Judge Cole and Senator Tydings were fellow graduates at College Park in 1910 and both later were graduated from the Law School in Baltimore. IN A move expected to have vast educational implications, eleven Southern states have entered upon a mutual plan to aid one another in de- veloping a sound program of higher education. For the first time in the his- tory of this country, a regional system of education has been effected. For the time being the plan will cover only the fields of medicine, dentistry and veterinary medicine. Under this project, the colleges and universities that now maintain such graduate schools will admit students from other states. They will be accepted on the same basis as residents of the states where these regional centers are situ- ated. In this way, it is hoped, the South will be able to develop strong profes- sional schools on a regional basis. Be- cause of the tremendous expense in- volved in setting up a medical school, for example, it will be cheaper for a state to send its students to a medical school that already exists in a near-by state. In Ten States A Board of Control for Southern Re- gional Education was created by action of ten state legislatures — Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina and Tennessee. Virginia has been admitted pending removal of certain legal objections. Alabama, Texas and West Virginia are expected to join soon. Various reasons prompted the crea- tion of this board. For some time Southern educators have recognized the fact that they could not hope to set up EDUCATION IN REVIEW Regional System Is Seen as a Great Advance In Higher Education in the South By BENJAMIN FINE New York Times all the educational facilities needed on a state-wide basis. They knew that if they were to offer their students an adequate program of higher education, they would have to cooperate and pool their resources. Composition of Board The operation of the plan is simple. The Board of Control membership will include the Governor and three mem- bers, one a Negro, for each participat- ing state. Four institutions will provide serv- ices in veterinary medicine — Alabama Polytechnic Institute, Tuskegee Insti- tute, the University of Georgia and Oklahoma A. & M.'College. They will accept 119 first-year students under the regional arrangements, and will receive $1,000 per student from the states. Seven universities — Duke, Emory, Louisiana State, Meharry Medical Col- lege, Tennessee, Tulane and Vanderbilt — will admit 187 medical students, at $1,500 per student. Six institutions will provide services in dentistry — Emory, Loyola of Louisiana, Maryland, Med- ical College of Virginia, Meharry and Tennessee. They will accept 210 stu- -15}. dents, and the states will pay them $1,500 per student. Under the pooling arrangement, the universities will select the students ac- cording to their own admission policies and standards. However, the states will certify students as eligible, based on criteria that they establish. Under present plans, 233 white students and 231 Negro students will receive train- ing in 1949-50 at a cost of $1,500,000 to the states. The plan will have no effect on present segregation policies: white and Negro students will continue to attend their own respective schools. Further Development Expected Other fields are now under consid- eration. Regional arrangements may ultimately be adopted in graduate studies, social work, architecture, for- estry, engineering, agricultural and professional education. Moreover, ac- cording to the sponsors of the regional plan, other methods through which the institutions of higher learning can jointly serve the needs of the South might include joint use of research fa- cilities, exchange of faculty members and voluntary specialization. MANUFACTURERS OF HIGH GRADE MILLWORK m CABINETWORK AND STORE FIXTURES WASHINGTON WOODWORKING CO., INC. 912 Fourth Street, N. W. NAtional 5624 All types of CUSTOM MADE WOODWORK II c art "TAILORS OF THE WOODWORKING INDUSTRY" ARROW TYPEWRITER CO. TYPEWRITERS Bought • Sold • Repaired • Rented 604 F STREET, N. W. ST. 8177 WASHINGTON, D. C. ItUUilmUltmt STAIR AND ORNAMENTAL IRON WORKS ORNAMENTAL IRON • ALUMINUM STAINLESS STEEL . BRONZE 2014 FIFTH ST., N. E. WASHINGTON, D. C. P B OTTO • L. H. OTTO Propt DUpont 7550- "SSI According to Dr. John E. [vey, Jr., director of the regional board, the widespread support tliat has been re- ceived from the South indicates thai the new project will expand. He points out that by planning as a region the South can provide itself with the lead- ership, the imagination and the skills which it needs. Southern educators point out that the South has been dependent upon insti- tutions in other regions for the braining of leaders in many fields. In many Southern states no institution ofl courses at the Doctor of Philosophy level in any field. Both Qualit) and Quantity Regionalism in education, the univer- sity officials hold, is a way to improve both the quality and quantity of ad- vanced college training at a minimum cost. For example, there are five vet- erinary medical schools within the region. To provide plant facilities and develop a first-class veterinary college would cost close to $3,000,000. Thus the savings to a state under the re- gional plan will he considerable. Be- sides, it will help existing institutions strengthen their programs, rather than add other possibly second-rate ones to compete with the universities that now serve the South. Enthusiastic support for the regional plan was expressed by Millard F. Cald- well, former Governor of Florida, chairman of the Board of Control. Mr. Caldwell said that the Southern states, working together, could build the finest system of higher education in the United States or the world. He said the alternative, on a state-wide rather than regional basis would mean that Southern education would continue to "limp along," unable to meet the total needs of the region. Duplication of Effort It is obvious, Mr. Caldwell went on. that many states are duplicating what others are doing and in many fields none is doing a first-rate job. Various fields are wholly ignored. No state, he pointed out, can supply the best in every phase of education, because of lack of money or because of insufficient students to create an adequate school. Regional planning and cooperation ap- pear to be the answer. Other sections of the country have manifested an interest in similar pro- grams for their own needs. Dr. John Dale Russell, director of the division of highei education. United States Office of Education, believes that the pattern of cooperative support now being de- veloped on a regional basis in the South can be extended ultimately to all the states and territories. In fact, the American Council on Education is plan- ning to call together representatives from various groups some time this fall to see if the regional plan can be put into practice elsewhere. According to President Colgate W. Darden of the University of Virginia, the Southern regional program will measurably stimulate and improve col- -!6V lege and university facilities for both white and colored students. This plan, ed, is not in any way a racial one, as it will improve educational facilities for both whites and Negri Tulane University, participating in the regional program in medicine, is confident that the plan will strengthen higher education as it will eliminate duplication of facilities. Similarly, the president of Louisiana State University two strengthening effects on edu- cational facilities in the South: (1) It will provide immediately some expan- sion of professional education, and < 1 1 the agitation and planning in connec- tion with regional education will add to the general concern about education in the South. Low-Coal Specialized Training The University of Tennessee, an ardent supporter of the regional plan since its inception, considers regional education a sensible method of giving Southern youth the highest quality of specialized training at a minimum cost. The plan enables each participating ins'itution to build exceptionally strong staffs in selected specialized fields in- stead of spreading its financial re- sources too thinly over a greater area of advanced studies. From the standpoint of a privately endowed institution, the immediate ef- fect of the regional plan, Emory Uni- versity notes, will be to provide finan- cial support in extremely expensive fields of professional education. Can Help South Meharry Medical College, where Negro students are trained, has signed a contract with the Regional Council to enroll competent students of the states in this region. President M. Don Clawson observes that it costs about $2,000 a year to educate a medical stu- dent. The tuition is $500, and now with the $1,500 that will be received from the state sending a student, the college will be in a sounder financial condition. It is clear that the project is ex- ceedingly significant. It can help the South build and develop a sound tern of graduate and professional schools that will be the equal of any in the country. The implications not only for the South but for the rest of the country are far-reaching. A new pattern has appeared in higher educa- tion that will have a profound influ- ence on colleges and universities every- where. ERRATTM In the last issue of "MARYLAND." in the article "Education of the Blind." by Mrs Alice C. Dwyer, B.S., R.N.. the caption under Mrs. Dwyer's photograph indicated that she had served in the Navy at Pearl Harbor during the Japanese sneak attack of 1941. Mrs. Dwyer advises the editor that the caption was incorrect in that she had served in the Navy at Pearl Harbor as Assistant Chief Nurse from 1 No- vember 1942 to 4 June 1944, but not during the attack of 1 December 1941. "MARYLAND" regrets the error. SOCIAL CALENDAR Following la ■ list of social events for the 1949-50 season: October 29 — Saturday Homecoming November .'? — Thursday GLADYS SWARTHOUT and Mixed Glee Club. Coliseum. 8:00 p.m. Followed by annual reception November 3-12 (Monday-Saturday) University Theatre Play Central Auditorium, 8:15 p.m. November 6 — Sunday Chamber Music Concert Recreation Building, 4:00 p.m. November 17 — Thursday Orchestra Concert Central Auditorium, 8:00 p.m. December 12-17 (Monday-Saturday) University Theatre Play Central Auditorium, 8:15 p.m. December 14 — Wednesday THE MESSIAH, Mixed Glee Club Coliseum, 8:00 p.m. December 15 — Thursday Christmas pageant and lighting of Christmas tree Near Rossborough Inn, 7:00 p.m. January 12 — Thursday- Band Concert Coliseum, 8:00 p.m. February 16 — Thursday Baltimore Symphony Orchestra Coliseum, 8:00 p.m. March 6-11 (Monday-Saturday) Operetta — Clef and Key Central Auditorium, 8:00 p.m. March 23— Thursday- Glee Club Concert Coliseum, 8:00 p.m. March 27-April 1 (Monday-Saturday) University Theatre Play Central Auditorium, 8:00 p.m. April 3, 4, 5 (Monday-Wednesday) Creative Dance Concert Central Auditorium, 8:00 p.m. April 18— Tuesday- Band and Orchestra Concert Coliseum, 8:00 p.m. April 27— Thursday Interfraternity Sing Coliseum, 8:00 p.m. May 2— Tuesday RICHARD TUCKER and Mixed Glee Club, Coliseum, 8:00 p.m. May 4 — Thursday- Band Outdoor Concert 8:00 p.m. May 15-20 (Monday-Saturday) University Theatre Play Central Auditorium, 8:15 p.m. May 16— Tuesday- May Day University Green Quadrangle 3:30 p.m. A Sign of Dependability In Any Kind of Weather Among thousands of home-owners and businessmen in the Washington, Maryland and Virginia area, Griffith-Consumers is well known for dependable deliveries of fuel oil and expert burner service. (SlFFITH-(ONSUMERS 1413 New York Avenue MEtropolitan 4840 Washington, D. C. COAL • FUEL OIL • OIL BURNERS • AIR CONDITIONING INSULATION • ROOFING • STORM WINDOWS & SCREENS FENCING • FLOOR COVERINGS • BUILDING MATERIALS CLEAN HERBIVEROUS EASY TO RAISE fPfc '-rw PLEASANT TO HANDLE ECONOMICAL TO RAISE LITTLE SPACE NEEDED RAISE CHINCHILLAS (The hobby with a future) Chinchilla farming is new, fascinating and interesting. Those who follow it find a clean, healthful vocation, a profitable business with a future of unpredictable magnitude. A limited number of select breeding pairs are now available. For information inquire Sparks Chinchilla Farm 5885 Rollins Avenue, Seat Pleasant, Md. • Phone Hillside 6339 in TODAY'S LIVING COSTS A Timely Report by the Bureau of Business and Economic Research, College of Business and Public Administration IN A STUDY of the cost of living by the Bureau of Business and Economic Research of tin- Univer- sity of Maryland, it i- concluded that consumer prices will not decline to pit-war levels and that there is considerable evidence of stabilization at a high level. Appearing under the title "Living I Some Relationships," the report cover.- a historical compari- son, particularly of the two post-war periods; com- parison of the relative importance and similarity of changes in the important components of consumer costs and a summary of major factors influencing present tendencies. One section of the study indicates the historical re- lationship between total living costs and rentals in 59 cities, including Baltimore and Washington. The effect of war controls and current review of rent increases provides a pattern which still is transitional to a peacetime relationship. However, in general, according to Dr. John H. Cover, Director of the Bureau, the question is raised as to whether the usual concept of the cost of living is determinant largely of the "food basket" cost is valid. One comparison of changes in consumer prices is illustrated in the following sentence, indicating the low purchasing power of current dol- cept for the current period of adjust- ment, rent would appear to be the one component most serviceable in estimat- ing the total cost of living. Dr. Cover lars: "Since the composite price of ap- parel rose in 1948 to more than 200 per cent of the 1936 price, the dollar in 1948 was worth less than 50 cents in the purchase of apparel at current prices." Baltimore Prices Current food prices in Baltimore are considerably higher, as a whole, than the average for the U. S.. while apparel prices and rents are slightly lower than the I'. S. average. Apparel prices in Baltimore rose in 1948 to the highest point in the 36-year period observed. but this peak was not far above the high point of 1919. Food reached a maximum composite price in 1947. 217.8 per cent as compared with the 1918 rela- tive of 1 4 1 > . 4 per cent: each of these percentages are related to the prices for the period 1935-39 as 100 per cent. While the total cost of living as well as rent- and food reached low points in 1915, apparel prices were lowest in 1914. Prior to the war. the composite cost in Baltimore reached its maximum in 1920. rent in 1925, food in 1918, and apparel in 1919. I). C. Rents Of necessity, families must sacrifice purchases in Bome categories when one or two of the major components are relatively out of proportion. For in- stance, Washington, I). ('., tends to be the city of highest relative rentals. Families, therefore, reduce purchases of other commodities in comparison. The relative importance of major compo- nents differs widely throughout the l. S, As a result of this inconsistent re- lationship between food, apparel, house operation, and other costs, the rent factor normally appears to have the greatesl Bingle effect of all components upon variations in the total cost of living among Btatea, Consequently, ex- Prospective Changes In the concluding section of the re- port lists of apparent inflationary and deflationary factors are provided as an aid in estimating the probability of re- spective changes. "Among inflationary factors observa- ble today are the following: 1. A 'full employment' policy is a basic- objective of the national administration. With the threat of a serious depression, heavy deficit financing of public works and other developments to reduce un- employment would result in an increase- in the public debt and an inflation of the money supply. 2. Continued international stresses. and certainly military conflict would acutely aggravate inflation. •>. Present and prospective programs for national defense, social security, and public welfare will likely increase Federal Government expenditures. Ac- companied by public resistance to addi- tional taxation, this would require con- siderable borrowing. Government Obligations 4. Current holdings of government ob- ligations are large, and their conversion into cash for use in the market is easy. 6. Pressure upon state and local gov- ernments has developed to increase pub- lic expenditures through the issuance of obligations li. It is probable that private debt will increase relative to income. 7. Since OUT domestic dollar is not tied to the gold standard, the money supply can readily be expanded by public and private borrowing from the banks. B Success in their demands for in- creased income by large groups would -{8 V tend to press against the price level. Hither of two contrasting public attitudes. — a concern about the pur- chasing power of the dollar, or an over- optimism regarding prosperity, — could lead to the expenditure of current cash balances and an accelerated inflationary spiral. "Deflationary factors include: 1. Mounting efficiency, through in- creases in productivity, resulting in lower co>ts per unit of production. 2. Intensified competition and a de- crease in shortagt .'J. Willingness of individual and insti- tutional investors to acquire large holdings of government securities. 4. As real incomes increase, a ten- dency to retain larger cash balance ALUMNI IN IHERTO RICO The 1949 meeting of the Association of Graduates of the University of Maryland was held at the Hotel Melia in Ponce, Puerto Rico, September All Maryland graduates of the island were invited and invitations were also given to all the dentists and physicians practicing in the territory. One session of the meeting was addressed by Dr. Ernest B. Xuttall (1931), Professor of Fixed Partial Prosthesis in the School of Dentistry, who presented a paper on "Speech Defects and Their Relation to Oral Anomalies." The chief medical paper was presented by Dr. Theodore E. Woodward (1938). Associate Pro- ior in the School of Medicine, on "The Pharmacological Character: of the Newer Antibiotics.*' This alumni organization is doing ex- cellent work in effecting a strong alli- ance of the dental and medical alumni. Carlos F. Maristany. D.D.S., is presi- dent of the group: Ernest C. Yordan, M.D., is the secretary. MARYLAND AT DUPONT Two scientists who received their de- grees of doctor of philosophy in or- ganic chemistry in 1949 and one who received his doctor's degree in chem- ical engineering have joined the Du Pont Company. Dr. Rowland K. Adams, formerly of Colmar Manor, Md.. has joined the Jackson Laboratory of the Organic Chemicals Department, Deepwater Point. X. J. He was a Du Pont fellow at Maryland during the academic year - 19 (Maryland:— Ph.D. '49; B.S. "44: A&S, Chemistry i. Dr. Edward H. Price, formerly of Prostburg, Md., has joined the Ph; Department in Arlington. X. J. He is a member of Phi Kappa Phi (Maryland: — Ph.D. '49: B.S. '42: A&S. Chemistry). Dr. William E. Lusby, Jr., formerly of Hyattsville. Md.. has joined the com- pany's Pigments Department, in New- port, Del. (Maryland:— Ph.D.. Chem. Eng. '49: B.S. '42. Fng.t. •••••••••••••••••••* BRISK VXD DULL "Business," said the scissors grinder. "is fine. I inver saic things so dull." IMPRESSIVE SET A scene from Ihe "Taming of lhe Shrew." Kenard Clafee does a bit of whip cracking on his wedding night. THEATRE AT MARYLAND University's Speech Training Program Includes Impres- sive Stage, Radio Activities SPEAK of speech training and the first thing that comes to mind is the old days of William Jennings Bryan or the Lyceum lecture series. While the Speech Department at Maryland is mainly concerned with developing the art of speech making in the college stu- dent, it takes pride in the progress of theatre techniques and radio broadcast- ing, two fields that are as important today as the Lyceum circuit was in its day. Many alumni still remember the Foot- light Club productions before the war, but they may be saddened by the fact that the name was abolished in 1947, and the club joined forces with the Speech Department to form the Univer- sity Theatre. Now, this organization at- tracts more student help than any other extracurricular activity on the campus. Courses In All Fields With the great increase in theatre- minded students, the department, head- ed by Dr. Ray Ehrensberger in the Col- lege of Arts and Sciences, has been able to offer courses related to all fields of the stage production. Included in the speech curriculum now are such sub- jects as acting, stagecraft, theatre his- tory, make-up, costuming, scene design, play direction and production. Students taking these subjects learn the theory in the classroom, but get their greatest value out of applying what they learn in actual production of major and ex- perimental plays presented by the Uni- versity Theatre. Work on these plays, however, is purely voluntary, and none of the drama courses requires partici- pation in any of the year's productions. All shows are financed and produced by students for campus audiences with the help of trained faculty members. Modern Set-Up This student-faculty set-up has made present day productions a far cry from those of pre-war days. Improvement is evidenced by the attraction of Washing- ton and Baltimore drama critics, sell- out houses and extra performances by student demand. A well-rounded program is planned at the beginning of each school year by the Theatre Staff, a board made up of student officers and faculty. The season usually includes classic, period and mod- LIVE WIRE Under Dr. Ray Ehrensberger. pictured above. Head of the Department of Speech, College of Arts and Sciences, dramatics and radio have made great progress in recent years. ern plays, ranging from farce to tragedy. Each play is selected with its cultural value in mind. This gives the campus theatre-goer a chance to see plays he would not ordinarily see even by traveling to New York. Good Season The 1948-49 season opened with Thornton Wilder's "Our Town," the play that caused a mild sensation on Broad- way because of its lack of scenery. It was produced here in the same manner and gave some twenty young thespians a chance to display their acting ability. Robert Sherwood's philosophical melo- drama, "The Petrified Forest," followed as the second major production. It gave the student a taste of the wanderlust philosophy which grew out of the de- pression days. In its third play the Uni- versity Theatre surmounted the lack of stage space in an ambitious production of G. B. Shaw's "Androcles and the THE PETRIFIED FOREST Scene from the first act of "The Petrified Forest," the second major production of last year. Duke Manlee and his men have just come in to get a bite to eat. -in THE MAN WHO WOULD BE SICK Scene from the experimental production. "The Man Who Would Be Sick.' so sick here as he is being haiassed by his daughter and servant. He doesn't seem Lion." Shakespeare's "Taming of the Shrew" closed the season in bang-up fashion, and it was just that. Audiences raved over its bawdy, hilarious presen- tation. Experimental Beside the four major shows, the Uni- versity Theatre presented two experi- mental plays during the year for in- vited audiences. "The Man Who Would Be Sick," an adaptation of Moliere's "The Imaginary Invalid." and Jean Anouilh's version of the Greek tragedy. "Antigone," were done in the arena staging technique. The main function of experimental plays is to develop new talent for the major shows, but some turn out to be more entertaining than the big plays. The new season will be opened with Tennessee Williams' first success, "The Glass Menagerie," early in November. This is to be followed by Edmond Ros- NARRATOB Pernell Roberts strikes a dramatic pose i a shot from the University Theatre's exper mental production of "Antigone." Rober: was narrator in the modernized version. tand's "Cyrano de Bergerac," the classi written during the Romantic perio< Several plays are being considered fc the third and fourth production and wi be announced at a later date. Two e? perimental plays are also on the pn gram to fill out the season. Lack Space The Central Auditorium has been n decorated but stage facilities still lim the selection of plays. However, a pel manent sound system has been adde< and the stage lighting equipment hs been greatly improved. Plans to rem vate the Coliseum for future produ< tions are in the embryo stage, but whe the new field house is built, the Speec Department hopes to move all its facil ties to the boulevard site. Radio broadcasting is no side line i the Speech Department either. Whe TAMING or THE SHREW Kenard Clafee as Petruchio does a bit of taming in a scene from last spring's produc- tion of Shakespeare's bawdy "Taming of the Shrew." ANDKOCLES AND THE LION Scene from the University Theatre's production of G. B. Shaw's "Androcles and the Lion. Left to right are Dick Lusher. Mary Alta Hogin and Pernell Roberts. - 10r the department moved its headquarters into the new classroom building, it ac quired two newly equipped Btudios, a control room and a radio workshop. These rooms serve classes in radio pro- duction, radio workshop, radio speech, announcing, acting and writing. Students enrolled in these classes gel experience in making studio broadcasts and transcriptions. Alter receiving this training, they are qualified to start work in most any type of commercial broad- casting. Several students have an oppor- tunity to take part-time jobs with local stations while still in training. Public address announcers for home football games are also selected from these classes. Visit New York The courses are climaxed in the spring- by a trip to New York where students have a chance to witness pro- fessional production of nation-wide broadcasts. Here they have a chance to discuss various phases of the business with experienced technicians. Because the university is located in the Washington metropolitan area, it is not justifiable to establish a Univer- sity station. Radio and dramatics have made great progress in recent years under Dr. Ehrensberger, wrho became head of the department in 1939. He is a man who believes in the cultural development of the college student and has built his de- partment on that ground. The depart- ment is still growing, and the growth will not end until every facility in the field of speech can be offered Maryland students. Already the Speech Depart- ment is considered one of the best in the East. BALTIMORE CLUB The University alumni living in the Baltimore area met on September 20 to launch an alumni Club. Dr. Frank Black '04 Pharmacy has been chosen President of the group. More than two hundred fifty attended the initial rally held at the Alcazar and featuring F. Murray Benson '23 Law as Master of Ceremonies. Lee R. Penning- ton '15 Engineering, Administrative Assistant to Director J. Edgar Hoover of the F. B. L, was the featured speaker. He reviewed the workings of the F. B. I. and stressed the importance of alumni interest in eliminating subversive ele- ments in this country. Mr. Pennington is responsible for all F. B. I. activities relating to bank robbery, forgery, kid- napping, and accounting. Both his son and father graduated from the Uni- versity. Dr. Arthur I. Bell, President of the University Alumni Association and Third Vice-President of the Baltimore Club, keynoted the meeting and em- phasized the importance of the forma- tion of an alumni club. In view of the large concentration of former students in the area. He said, "Without excep- tion, those asked to participate in the formation of a Club gave the idea their whole-hearted support. All of us have come to realize the terrific import of such an organization in furthering the University of Maryland and in develop- ON THE AIR Pictured above is a group of radio students rehearsing a radio show in the new studios. They learn mike technique, direction and operation of all types of radio equipment. In the background the students' director signals for a cue. ing a closer relationship among all of us holding degrees from this institution. With the welfare of the state uppermost in our minds, we as civic minded citizens must recognize the importance of our University to our state and to those who live within its boundaries. With the wel- fare of the state uppermost in our minds, therefore, and with a deep in- terest in the University of Maryland we set our sights on a great future for the University and for our alumni club." Mr. Benson introduced Dr. Black with this comment, "Our object is to get together beauty and brawn — the output of the University of Maryland." Dr. Black expressed appreciation to the many who have served as members of the Program, Publicity, Promotion and other Committees. He introduced members of the Membership Committee who in turn obtained a number of char- ter memberships from those present. Dr. Black urged alumni to take their cue from the more than one hundred who had been initially interested in the for- mation of the Club. He pointed to the time and energy required to assure the success of the Club on an extensive scale. He outlined the meeting plans for the ensuing year. The next function is scheduled for November 15 at the Alca- zar, Cathedral and Madison Sts., in Bal- timore. It will commence at 8:00 P. M. and will feature a talk by Head Coach Jim Tatum and movies of the Maryland- Michigan State game. Brooks Bradley '37 Arts and Sciences, is Chairman of the affair. Dean J. Ben Robinson of the Dental School and a member of the Class of 1914 reviewed the past history of the University and asked that alumni con- tinue the interest in their School they had shown as students. He said, "The University has made great progress in the last twenty-nine years. It is the youngest of the land-grant colleges and -UH- its creation was unique. It is a collection of fine Colleges with traditions brought together to form an unexcelled institu- tion of learning. No University has progressed more rapidly or has more to offer than Maryland." Officers who will serve until the an- nual election in May, 1950 include the following: — President — Dr. Frank Black, '04, Pharmacy First Vice-President — Dr. Albert E. Gold- stein, '12, Medicine Second Vice-President — A. V. Williams, '17, Engineering Third Vice-President— Dr. Arthur I. Bell, '19, Dentistry Secretary-Treasurer — Mr. James O. Proctor, '39, Education Executive Board Agriculture — J. W. Stevens. '17 Arts & Sciences — Walter Brooks Bradley, '37 Business & Pub. Adm. — Austin C. Diggs, '21 Dentistry — Dr. J. Ben Robinson, '14 Education— Dr. Charles W. Sylvester, '08 Engineering — H. H. Allen. '10 Home Economics— Bettv McCall Roberts, '23 Law— William J. O'Donnell, '41 Medicine — Dr. Daniel J. Pessagno, '20 Nursing — Miss Virginia Conley, '40 Pharmacy — W. Arthur Purdum, '30 Committee members named by the Club officers and representative of each of the eleven Schools of the University include: — BALTIMORE CLUB COMMITTEES Promotion Dr. W. H. Triplett. M.D. Virginia C. Conley Dr. Harry B. McCarthy Dr. B. Olive Cole Arthur G. Van Reuth Austin C. Diggs Jessie Krojovic Beatrice Y. Jarrett Wm. C. Rogers Walter P. Dent Nellie S. Bucky Reception Dr. Conrad Inman Mrs. Flora Street Dr. Thurston R. Adams William Waples Mason Albritten Chester W. Tawney Brooks Bradley Edward M. Tenney Kenneth Rublick John R. Mitchel Greba Hofstetter Membership Dr. Albert Goldstein Mrs. Ethel M. Troy C Adam Bock Dr. John Krantz E. E. Powell Edgar Coney Kenneth Horvath Harry McDonald A. Lamar Benson Charles E. Miller Frances Welch Publicity Mrs. Roger Whiteford Martha Ross Temple Betty McCall Roberts James Swartz Charles Whiteford College o[ Special § Continuation Studies Col. Schroeder ( olonel Schroeder COLONEL Benry J. Schroeder has been appointed Assistant to the Dean and Instructor in the College of Special and Continuation Studies, Uni- versity of Maryland. one! Schroeder received his B.S. from the U. S. Mili- tary Academy at West Point in 1917 and his M.S. from Yah- University in 1923, having ma- jored in engineering. -'- . Since retiring from the Army, Colonel ^^ Schroeder has com- jM pleted his residence ^M A I credit for graduate M^r ^k I course requirements ^F ^fl I at Maryland for his Ph.D. in Education. w^fl During the past year ; he has been assist- ant to Dean Harold Benjamin in Mary- land's College of Education. In view of the numerous projects Maryland is carrying on in cooperation with various military establishments. the University is fortunate in having a person of Colonel Schroeder's capa- bilities. The experience and academic training he has had will be invaluable in further developing the excellent edu- cational programs already in existence. Maryland In German] The University of Maryland opened five education centers in Germany to give the occupation personnel an op- portunity to obtain two years of college credits. It will be the first time in Germany that resident college credits will he offered to those doing classroom work under the Army and Air Force educa- tion program. Arrangements for these centers, to be established in schools already oper- ated by the Army and Air Force, were made in a -i\tecn-day survey, under- taken at the requesl of the Army, by Dr. George -1. Kabat, Dean of the Col- lege of Special and Continuation Studio of the University of Maryland. The center- in Nuernberg, Frankfurt and Wiesbaden are staffed by seven Uni- versity of Maryland professors. They will teach history, sociology, political science and public speaking. When not teaching, Doctor Kabat said, these professors would he free to do personal research or study at near- by German university l i,. courses began October 31. The school terms will last eight weeks and the three-hour classes will he held in off-duty hours. The professors will rotate in the edu- cational center-. Fach eiyht-wcek term will count for three semester boui Maryland. The students will pay 25 per cent of the fee and the Coveriiment the re- mainder. The fees are $24 for three semester hours. These college experimental cent are being established because the Army and Aii Force now are requiring a higher educational standard -at least two years of college' education — for their officers. In addition to officers, both regular and reserve, those eligible to take these voluntary courses are enlisted men. airmen, American civilians and their dependents. Doctor Kabat revealed that when this new plan in college education was pre- sented to Lieut. Cen. Clarence R. Huebner, deputy commander in chief in Europe, he asked three questions: "How will it operate? Will it work? How much will it cost?" When the facts were explained, he replied: "What are we waiting for? Let's get the project started." In his survey. Dr. Kabat took part in fifteen conferences and spoke at several army and air force information and education meetings. He indicated there would be a con- nection between the new program and the University of Maryland foreign study centers for graduate students at Paris, Zurich and Munich. These centers, operated by the Uni- versity's Language Department, will assist the seven professors by selecting qualified professors to teach German at the new army education centers. The seven professors, Drs. Verne E. Chatelain. Lyle Mayer, Bruce L. Melvin, Martin W. Moser, David S. Sparks. Phyllis Bates Sparks, and Warren L. Strausbaugh, were flown to Germany from Westover (Mass.) Air Base. They will rotate their classes among the six educational centers. The new school will be known as the University of Maryland Kuropean Com- mand College of Special and Continua- tion Studies. DEAN STAMP REPORTS 1 lean Adele H. Stamp, one of the most familiar of campus figures, tells of news from "her (Jills." She reports that Dorothy Simpson ':;."» is now Mrs. Doyle. lives in Pasadena. California and has two girls of her own. Ellen Jane Kaiser '•27 married Elmer Heavens, also of '~l~ and they live in Alhambra, California. A son is now in high school. Ruth Mile-; 'HI is now Mrs. Henderson and lives in Long Beach, California. We hope more alumni will take a cue from Miss Stamp and send this type ol news to the Alumni Office for publica- tion in our magazine. \12V GRAD U ATE CHEMICAL COURSE GENERAL BULLENE, DR. BTRD AM) DR. HUFF AN- NOUNCE NEW ARMY COURSE ESTABLISHMENT of a graduate program for instruction and re- search in the physical and biological Bciences at the Army Chemical Center, Fdgewood. Maryland, was announced jointly by Commanding General E. F. Bullene and the University of Mary- land's President, Dr. II. C. Byrd. The new program will offer profes- sional employees high-level graduate training, utilizing the laboratories and pilot plant equipment of the Medical Division and Technical Command — and will draw on the University of Mary- land, other universities, and experi- enced university instructors now on the scientific staffs of the Chemical Corps for teaching. The University of Maryland and the Chemical Corps, will supervise and con- duct graduate level instruction. The staff of instructors will be drawn from graduate faculties of the University of Maryland and other accredited univer- sities, as well as from qualified mem- bers of the Chemical Corps. The super- visors from Maryland will correlate in- struction with that offered elsewhere by the university, prepare and conduct examinations, and grant advanced de- grees. Referring to the program, General Bullene said. "Development of the scientific ability of the younger men so that they may grow professionally and advance to positions of higher respon- sibility, and provision for the older men of opportunities to participate in basic research and to publish their work, is vital to continued success of the re- search and development program of the Chemical Corps." "The University of Maryland wel- comes this opportunity to extend its service in graduate instruction and re- search to another national defense agency," said President H. C. Byrd of Maryland. "It is proud to work with the Chemical Corps, knowing that this association will not only contribute di- rectly and specifically to the State and Nation, but that it will also stimulate and enrich other graduate instruction and research in the physical and bio- logical sciences under the university's care. The University of Maryland recognizes that its public character and geographical location provide it with unparalleled opportunities for educa- tional and research service, and it pro- - to do all that it can to live up to the responsibilities these opportunities imply." Courses in physical and organic chemistry, biochemistry, mathematics, chemical engineering, and phyaiology, will initiate during the fall semester beginning in September. Students may work toward tin- de- gree of Blaster of Science or Doctor <>t" Philosophy, or may participate in the program without seeking a degree. Present plans allow qualified students approximately eight hours of class and laboratory instruction per week. Of this time not mote than four hours will be within the normal working time. Pro- visions will he made for keeping: certain laboratories and libraries open evenings and Saturdays to permit out-of-hours research and study. Attraction of the more promising re- cent graduates to the government serv- ice and encouragement of research in the basic physical sciences, has resulted from graduate programs that have been established for some time in the Na- tional Bureau of Standards; the De- partment of Agriculture; the Naval Research organizations such as the N'aval Research Laboratory, and the Naval Ordnance Laboratory, and the David Taylor Model Basin; and the Ordnance Dept. and the Signal Corps of the U. S. Army; and the U. S. Air Force. The University of Maryland has pioneered in the training of government scientists and was the first institution to offer graduate courses at the Naval Research Laboratory, and now offers an extensive graduate program in co- operation with this and other Navy, Army, and Air Force research organi- zations in Washington. Ground work for the Chemical Center Graduate program was laid in discus- sions extending over the past several years, culminating in the First Chem- ical Corps Conference on Scientific Per- sonnel during October 1948, in which the Chief, Research and Development Group, General Staff; the Department of the Army Director of Personnel; the Chief, Chemical Corps, representatives of the U. S. Civil Service and represen- tatives of all technical branches of the Chemical Corps participated. The Graduate program at the Chemical Center implements some of the policies formulated by the conference. On be- half of the University, the conduct of the negotiations was assigned to Dr. Wilbert J. Huff, Chairman of the Di- vision of Physical Science and Profes- sor of Chemical Engineering by Presi- dent Byrd. The Technical Command and Medical Division of the Chemical Corps between them employ about 500 scientists and engineers with training at least equiva- lent to Bachelor's and Master's degrees at recognized universities, and more than fifty with a Ph.D. or M.D. De- gree. More than twenty members of the staff have taught chemical engineering, or medical subjects in universities and a large number contribute regularly to scientific literature. The two research and development groups provide an excellent technical library. The laboratories and the at- tendant scientific and engineering equipment are equal to those found in the best universities and medical schools. FOR YOUR FUEL NEEDS Stebbins Anderson Co CALL About fuel Budget Plan The Stebbins-Anderson Company lias been in the Fuel business for over half a ecu tury and the selling of Quality Products has been a tradition with our linn. We maintain fully qualified personnel for the installation, repairing and servicing of burners. To facilitate prompt Fuel Oil service we have recently installed tanks of 60.000 gallon capacity at Towson. These, plus our storage facilities at Riderwood, is full assurance we can quickly supply all your oil requirements. WE RECOMMEND THE CENTURY OIL BURNER! Safe — Silenl — Clean — Fully Automatic, buill for stability and long life. This burner has a scien- tifically designed boiler head that assures com- plete combustion and fuel savings; all moving parts cushioned in neophene rubber. A QUALIFIED, DEPENDABLE FIRM TOWSON Towson 6600 J. E. GREINER CO. CONSULTING ENGINEERS 1201 SAINT PAUL STREET BALTIMORE, MARYLAND SCHOOL SUPPLIES OFFICE SUPPLIES Maryland Office Supply Company The Stationery Store In Baltimore 111 WEST BALTIMORE STREET BALTIMORE, MARYLAND VISIT OUR BEAUTIFUL GREETING CARD DEPARTMENT {12} THE GLENN L. MARTIN COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING AND AERONAUTICAL SCIENCES. UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND. COLLEGE PARK In lhe foreground is a B-26 Douglas Invader used for instruction cf students in the College of Air Science and Tactics. Dean Steinberg DEAN S. S. STEINBERG, of the Glenn L. Martin College of Engi- ne and Aeronautical Science, at- tended the convention of the Pan- American Engineering Societies (UPADI) in Sao Paulo, Brazil, from July 9 to July 14. 1949, immediately following the Sixth Convention of L'SAI (The Union of South American Engineering Socie- which was held on July !•. That evening, the formal closii _ the USAI Conven- tion and the open- ing of the LP AIM meetings took place at the Municipal Theatre i i ; Paulo at which each chief of delegation made an address. The presiding officer was Dr. Clovia Pestana, Minister of Railroads and Public Works, who repre- sented the President of Brazil. The delegal ted the Cubatao Hydroelectric Plant of the Sao Paulo Tramway Light and Power Company; the Via Anchieta. that outstanding mountain highway tx i'aulo and Santos, the world's foremost coffee The d. insported Dean Steinberg Qlenn J^. Martin College of ENGINEERING and AERONAUTICAL SCIENCES Walter R. Beam. Jr. '47 from Sao Paulo to the meetings in Rio on the first air-conditioned train ever to travel in Brazil. En route a stop was made at Volta Redonda for an inspec- tion of the Steel Plant. Dining Dean Steinberg's stay at Sao Paulo, he attended the organization meeting of the Pan American Commit- tee on Technical Standards. The formal opening of the First Pan American Engineering Congress took place at the Municipal Theatre in Rio de Janeiro at which several chiefs of dele- gations, including Dean Steinberg, de- livered addree In the interim, between I the meetings of the Committee on Constitution for I'PADI continued. meeting of the official delegates of all the countries represented, the Con- stitution for UPADI was unanimously adopted. Of the 22 countries in the Western Hemisphere invited to the I'PADI meetings and to the Cong the following IT sent delegates: Argen- tina, Brazil. Canada, Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador. Guatemala, Mexico. Nicara- gua, Paraguay. Peru, United States. Uruguay, and Venezuela. It was de- cided that when the national engineer- ing societies of 15 nations have accepted the UPADI Constitution, the organiza- tion would be considered formed, and that thereafter an organization meeting would be held in Havana, Cuba, pro- vided that country had accepted mem- bership in the organization. Throughout the discussions for the founding of UPADI. the United States delegation acted as observers and were available to advise and to express opin- ions regarding the probable attitude of the engineering profession in the L'nited States with reference to each of the provisions of the proposed Constitution. The delegate from Canada and those from Venezuela also acted as obser- The hope was expressed by all the mbled delegates that the United States engineers would find the Consti- tution of UPADI acceptable and that they would join that organization at an early date. It is estimated that the potential membership of UPADI from its possible constituent organizations is 108,000 pro- fessional engineers, consisting of about 12,000 now in USA1. 90,000 represented bj Engineers Joint Council, and 0,000 in the other countries of the hemisphere, including Canada. The First Pan American Engineering Congress, officially authorized and spon- sored by the Government of Brazil, was attended by 800 engineers, officials, and guests, representing nearly all the coun- tries of the Western Hemisphere. Of the registered engineers 540 were Brazil- ians. The next three largest registra- tions were 74 from Argentina. 40 from the United States and 36 from Uruguay, all exclusive of their families. Approxi- mately 350 papers were represented of which more than 100 were from United States engineers. The large number of papers from the United States is due largely to the excellent work in develop- ing the interest of North America en- gineers done by L. J. Hughlett of the Committee for U. S. Participation in the Congress. The official United States delegation consisted of the following 17 members of the five constituent societies of Engineers Joint Council who were in attendance at the Congress: ASCE AIME Ackerman A. J. Agthe. F. J. Feld. Jacob „ „ T Hamilton. E. P. Brown, i.. I. Maikwell. Kenneth W. Carson, W. H. Steinberg. S. S. Kellv. S. F. Strange. O. M. ASME Ackerman, A. J. Carson, W. H. Harrison. R. E. W Hughlett. L. J. McCudden, W. J. Pope, Joseph AIEE Parker. W. W. AIChE Cook. P. M. Westphal, C. W. Dean Steinberg served as Chairman of the United States delegation and Dean W. H. Carson of the University of Oklahoma was Vice Chairman. The program of the Congress was unusually comprehensive in scope and dealt with all the major branches of Engineering. The presiding officer was Engineer F. Saturnino de Brito Filho who did an excellent job in what were, at times, difficult situations. The official languages of the Congress were Eng- lish, French, Portuguese, and Spanish. Translations were made at meetings as needed and requested by the delegates. It is interesting to note that of the 350 papers presented, more than a third were in English, somewhat less than a third in Portuguese, a smaller number in Spanish and only a few in French. Each paper presented to the Congress was referred to one of nine Commissions dealing with the various branches of Engineering into which the Agenda were divided. These Commissions were as follows: 1st, Transportation and Communications; 2nd, Construction; 3rd, Power; 4th, Urban and Rural En- gineering; 5th, Sanitary Engineering; 6th, Industrial Engineering; 7th, Min- ing Engineering and Geology; 8th, Teaching of Engineering; 9th, Miscel- laneous. Dean Steinberg was selected to serve as President of the Commission on In- dustrial Engineering with Engineer Justiniano Allende Posse, of Argentina, as Vice President. Professor G. Corning Professor G. Corning lias been added to the faculty of the Glenn I.. .Martin College of Engineering and Aeronau- tical Sciences. Professor Corning will teach air craft design and air plane detail drafting. He has been in the aviation industry as draftsman and designer for eleven years. Professor Corning is a graduate of New York University. He worked at Brewster Aeronautical Corporation, Long Island City, New York; National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, Langley Field, Virginia; Republic Avia- tion Corporation, Farmingdale, Long Island; and Boeing Aircraft Corpora- tion, Seattle, Washington before join- ing Maryland's faculty. For the last three years at Boeing, he was in the primary design depart- ment, primarily developing commercial jet transports for domestic and over- seas airline use. Professor Corning is married and has a seven months old daughter. Dean Steinberg, Chairman At a meeting of the Maryland State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors, Dean S. S. Steinberg of the University of Maryland College of Engineering was elected Chairman of the Board to suc- ceed Dr. A. G. Christie of Johns Hopkins University whose term on the Board had expired. Dean Steinberg, who is the representative on the Board of the Civil Engineers of the State, was originally appointed a member by former Gover- nor H. R. O'Conor in 1941 for a five year term. He was re-appointed in 1946 and for the past few years has served as Vice Chairman. The other members of the Board are Dr. G. M. Hebbard, Davi- son Chemical Corporation, Vice Chair- man, who represents the Chemical En- gineers; J. W. Gore, Bethlehem Steel Company, Secretary, representing the Electrical Engineers; J. R. Baker, Penn- sylvania Water and Power Company, representing the Mechanical Engineers; and A. E. Pohmer of Baltimore, repre- senting the Land Surveyors. Prof. Duane R. Keller A recent addition to the faculty of the College of Engineering is Professor Duane R. Keller, who has been appoint- ed Assistant Professor in the Depart- ment of Civil Engineering. His courses will be primarily in Mechanics and Strength of Mate- rials. Professor Keller is a graduate of Ohio University where he received the Degree of Bache- lor of Science in Civil Engineering in 1942. He received his Mas- - ter's Degree from ^^m .£, ^fl I the University of gflV ak I Alabama this year. I His early practical experience was with the Babcock and Wil- cox Company in Ohio, following which he accepted a -U5r commission in thi of Engii ■ U. S. Army, and i now ;i major in the reserve. Following the wai • d In the Engineering Department of the Curtiss-Wrighl Corporation at Colum- bus, Ohio, and in L946 joined the faculty of the University of Alabama in the Department of Engineering Mechat where he has taught for the last three years. Scribner Tops Kim Scribner's sailplane, a powerless stranger in Washington skies, did an outside loop at 300 m.p.h. for the Mid- dle Atlantic Soaring Meet in Washing- ton— a difficult enough feat even with an engine helping. Chief pilot for Pan American World Airways, Scribner attended Maryland's College of Engineering, 1938, 1939. Kim also tied with Roscoe and Dave Christman of Quakertown, Pa., for the endurance record, keeping their wide- winged craft in the air for three hours and three minutes. EILEEN A. CARBERY Miss Eileen A. Carbery has been ap- pointed to the Home Economics depart- ment of New Jersey College for Women, Rutgers University, the state university of New Jersey. Miss Carbery is from Washington, D. C, where she was a research assistant in the Bureau of Human Nutrition and Home Eco- nomics. She received a B.S. from Cor- nell University and M.S. from the Uni- versity of Maryland in 1949. PRESIDENT Prof. Keller Miss Alma H. Preinkert, Registrar of Ihe University of Maryland, was recently elected to a Iwo-year term as President of the Maryland Federation of Women's Clubs. This organization numbers 12,000 members and is composed of 106 clubs. The program for the year emphasizes adult education and citizenship and work is concentrating on the objective, "Strengthen Democracy." The Federation is planning Town Meetings all over the stale to arouse community interest in vital public questions. VETERAN DRUGGISTS HONORED The Baltimore Veteran Druggists' Association presented the Silver Cups to five of their members who had celebrated their seventy-fifth birthday. Left to right: — Walter L. Pierce. James E. Hancock. Charles Stevens. Benjamin Woolford. Charles E. Sonnenburg. School o( PHARMACY Marvin J. Andrews '22 Mr. Judson H. Sencindiver JUDSOX Holmes Sencindiver, son of the late Capt. J. Morgan Sencin- diver and Henrietta Kratz Sencindiver. was horn at Martinsburg, West Vir- ginia, April 20, 1875. He attended the Charles Town Male Academy, Charles Town, \Y. Va. and graduated from there in 1890. On Novem- ber 20, 1890, he en- tered Kearfott's Drug Store (his uncle* at Martins- ville, Virginia, and served his appren- ticeship until 1895. when he came to Baltimore and ma- triculated at the Maryland College of Sencindiver pharmacy ,now School of Pharmacy, University of Maryland) and graduated in 1897. On February IT. 1898, he purchased his first drug stole at Wilkins Avenue and Payson Street. Baltimore, which he sold and then purchased another drug stoic at 36tb Street ami Elm Avenue. Hampden, Baltimore, on January 17. 1900. Five years later he sold his store and joined the H. K. Mulford Co., rep- resenting them in Washington, I). ('. until 1911. In that year he became sales manager for the National Vaccil Antitoxin Institute in Washington. D. C, travelling every state in the Union and parts of Mexico and Canada selling antitoxins and vaccines. From 1915 to 1918 he acted in the same capacity for Lederle Laboratories, E. R. Squibb A and from 1918 to 1920 was associ- ated with the Calco Chemical Company as their representative in Washington. D. C. selling pharmaceuticals to the U. S. Government. In 1921 he purchased the Bi-Oxol Chemical Co. of New York, manufacturing drug specialties and cos- metics. In 1929 he moved his labora- tories to Baltimore and in 1930 bought the old drug store of Jos. T. Carnes, in Cockeysville, Md., where he is now en- gaged in the retail drug business as well as manufacturing several specialties under the name of Judson Laboratories. He is a member of the American Pharmaceutical Association, Maryland Pharmaceutical Association, National Association of Retail Druggists. Mt. Moriah Lodge A. F. & A. M.. Life Mem- ber of B.P.O. Elks and charter member of the Lions Club of Cockeysville. Md. In June, 1949 he was elected Honor- ary President of the Alumni Association of the School of Pharmacy, University of Maryland, and is very much inter- ested in the Scholarship Fund of the School of Pharmacy. He was recently appointed Chairman of the Committee on Deceased Members of the Maryland Pharmaceutical Asso- ciation. Mr. Sencindiver is interested in many phases of his profession. He conducts an unusual suburban pharmacy, is well in- formed concerning modern business methods, and is held in high esteem in his community and by his fellow phar- macists. Alpha Zeta Omega The twenty-ninth annual National Convention of the Alpha Zeta Omega Pharmaceutical Fraternity was held July 17-2H. 1949 at the Book-Cadillac Hotel in Detroit. Michigan. Alpha Zeta Omega, with chapters in many Colleges of Pharmacy throughout the country, is represented at the Uni- versity of Maryland, by the Kappa Chapter. The convention was attended by many local members both students and gradu- ates of the University of Maryland. The student member selected this year, by the local chapter, to participate in the - 16 T.A.M.P.A. PRESIDENT At the convention held at Ocean City in June, the T.A.M.P.A. selected Luther C. Dawson (pictured above), to direct their activities for the 1949-50 period. Luther is a native Baltimorean. born De- cember 20. 1889. He attended the public schools and the Baltimore City College. He is also a graduate of Bryant and Stratton Business College. To list the many associa- tions of which he is a member would almost fill an entire page and place him in the Who is Who" of the Blue Book. We do note a few of these in naming the Masonic Lodge. Shriner's Scimitar Club, and Scottish Rile. Elks, Wedgwood Club and others. Mr. Dawson is vice-president of the Henry B. Gilpin Company. Wholesale Druggists. On Christmas Day. 1912. he was united in marriage to Carolyn L. Davis, and they have one son. who represents Eli Lilly and Com- pany in Norfolk. Virginia, and two grand- children. T.A.M.P.A. should make great strides during the year. convention activities was Morton Cohen, a senior at the School of Pharmacy. Among the national officers elected for the coming year, were Frederick T. Berman, as Sergeant-at-Arms and Henry G. Seidman, as Editor-in-Chief of the "Azoan," the official publication of the fraternity. Both men are gradu- ates of the University of Maryland and are well known among local pharma- cists. Baltimore was awarded the 1950 con- vention, and as host chapter, the local group is already at work planning an elaborate welcome for the many gi expected at that time. AT OHIO STATE Alvin Ray Howard, Bachelor of Arts. Maryland '47. received the degree of Master of Arts at Ohio State Univer- sity in September of this year. •••••••••••••••••••• RIGHT ON TIME Big "M": "I warn you, I shan't be able to pay for this suit for three months." Tailor: "Oh. that's all right, sir. Don't uorn/." Big "M": "Thanks. When will it be ready!" Tailor: "In three months, sir." BOKAY Under the title "H<w Abort Dr. Byrd For Our Next Governor?" tlu- Queens- town News said : "It must bo a very pleasing surprise to smell flowers while you can enjoy their fragrance while rusticating on this planet. Here's a bunch that Charlie B. Ward presented to Dr. Byrd: 'Dr. H. C. Byrd, president of the University of Maryland, gives credit to Governor Lane for the wonderful growth of that splendid institution. President Byrd is a modest man. The people of the Free State know to whom credit is due; the University's development into a first rate school is due to the powerful driving force ami tremendous energy of Dr. Byrd. "'If Maryland is to take its place in the Union as a state of the first rank, our people should draft Dr. Byrd for Governor. Without any disparagement of Governor Lane and the other estima- ble gentlemen whoso names have been suggested as gubernatorial candidates. President Byrd stands out as a moun- tain peak among little hills. He would give the Free State a lift, an impetus, a force that would make Maryland the envy of our sister states. How about a Byrd-for-Governor draft?' " SPEAKS FOR MOOSE Dr. H. C. Byrd, president of the Uni- versity of Maryland, delivered the main address at the formal dedication of the Silver Spring Lodge, Loyal Order of Moose's new home at 926 Wayne avenue. He spoke at the Silver Spring Armory. Dr. Byrd is a member of the Board of Governors of "Mooseheart," well known "Child City" of the Moose Lodges at Mooseheart, 111. Praise of the Loyal Order of Moose for its work in behalf of the youth of this country was the keynote of Dr. Byrd's address. He said, "There's something in the Moose that's akin to religion," as he pointed to their efforts toward educat- ing and making responsible citizens of thousands of boys and girls who have lost their fathers. In order that children may have the advantage of becoming good citizens and living up to the things for which this nation stands. He urged his audi- ence to see that their objectives included belief in God, betterment of home life and loyalty to their country. m TW5RP, TOE TEBJ? BU> A PIN-UP GIRL is not ^™ necessarily a baby sitter. In Russia you either sing in the same key or get slapped into the same pokey. In the family of world nations Uncle Sam is the kin they love to touch. Old fashioned girls used to darn their husbands' socks. Now they sock their darned husbands, rguing over treaties is better than read- over casualty lists. A ing Drugs an.l incdu m. - constitute ihe chief stock in trade of every siic<t-.-l'ul drug stoic. It is much hotter l<> establish the dm-; stoic as a health center than as ■ source of supply for anything and everything. There is an occasional store that fills few prescriptions and still makes money, but there is no store anywhere that enjoys a good prescription business that does not make money. It is therefore logical that druggists make every effort to get all the prescription business there is to be had. Along with competent professional service, high quality prescription merchandise should be featured. The markets of tlie world offer no finer pharmaceuticals and biologicals than those bearing the Lilly Label. Lilly is our featured line. THE HENRY B. GILPIN COMPANY BALTIMORE 1, MARYLAND WASHINGTON 4, D. C. NORFOLK 10, VIRGINIA INSTITUTION PHYSICIANS' SURGEONS' HOSPITAL NURSES' AND LABORATORY The Murray-Baumgartner Surgical Instrument Co. EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES 5 AND 7 W. CHASE STREET BALTIMORE 1, MD. Telephone, SAratoga 7333 Look To Your Future and Save! Liberal Dividends L OYOLA. FEDERAL SAVINGS & LOAN ASSN. BALTIMORE 1, MD. THE COLSON-MERRIAM COMPANY 1623-29 Aisquith Street BALTIMORE 2, MD. MUlberry 2849 • HOSPITAL EQUIPMENT in} Ill '( unmet" AN \i:i [I IK m the I of "Coronet," titled "What's Be- hind •>-," by Norman Madelyn Carlisle, refers in con- siderable detail to the research efforts of Dr. H. J. Figge, faculty member of the University <>f Maryland School of Medicine. Part- of the article are quoted below: "Every minute of the day, mysterious rays from Borne remote corner of Bpace, ibly the stars, come hurtling through the atmosphere to bombard the earth with showers of particles. You feel, hoar or see them, but at this v.ry moment they are hammering at your body. In the time it takes you to read this paragraph, you will be hit by m.ne than 200 particles, with energies equivalent to billions of electron volts. •What are these rays? Where do they come from? What do they do to you? For nearly half a century, scientists all over the world have been seeking an- swers to these baffling questions. Driven by the feeling that we stand on the threshold of breath-taking discoveries, they have a growing conviction that in the cosmic ray they may find the an- swers to some of the most fundamental mysteries of the universe. "Significant are the experiments of Dr. H. J. Figge and his associates in Baltimore. Like most cancer research- ers. Figge began his thinking with the fact that cancer is somehow related to the life process. Something strange hap- pens to normal, living cells; they keep on living but become killer cells that eventually destroy their host. What causes the change ? "Suppose the existence of certain cancer-causing chemicals — chemicals which would lie harmless and inert in most bodies most of the time. And then Buppose they were activated by some kind of ray and thus given a deadly power. "Figge found minute quantities of chemicals which might be suspected. In laboratory tots, they are found in the bodies of animals which readily suc- cumb to cancer. What makes these usually harmless chemicals become ac- tive? "It -truck Dr. Figge that cosmic ray- could be the answer. He knew, of course. that the amount of radiation actually hitting human beings was not very it. Hut what if you totaled all the COsmic-ray radiation over a lifetime, or considered the cumulative effect of such radiation on generation after genera- tion? "Figge decided to raise one set of mice in an atmosphere free of lays, an- other >et in a normally charged atmos- phere. Hut how could a researcher create an atmosphei I rays ? Phys told Figge lie would either have to retire Tim feet underground, or build a labora- .vith a lead io"i 49 feet thick. "Thereupon, the experimenter decided other way to accomplish the same objective. He would step up osmic radiation hitting »ome of the mice, and leave the rest in a normal atmosphere. "Figge put lxl mice in aluminum cages, over five of the cages he placed lead plates a quarter-inch thick - not to protect the mice but to caUf highly charged particles. Next, all the mice were injected with a cancer-pro- ducing chemical. Then the researchers sat back to wait. "After ten weeks they made their first Something amazing had taken place. Some of the mice in a normal at- mosphere had cancer — 33 per cent of them. This was not remarkable, how- ever, because the powerful chemical ad- ministered was certain to cause cancer in all the mice eventually. What was re- markable was the fact that, in ten weeks, 75 per cent of the mice exposed to rays had cancer. In one cage, where the cosmic showers had been intensified by the use of lead plates, 91 per cent were stricken. "The Figge experiments are just one more chapter in the story of cosmic-ray exploration, which began at the turn of the century. At that time, it was noticed that our atmosphere possesses to a slight extent the power to conduct elec- tricity. This meant that it must contain broken atoms, or, in other words, atoms whose positively and negatively charged component parts had become separated. What was causin<r the separation? Could it be the result of some kind of radiation ?" A. ( . Coble, M.D.. '85 Dr. A. C. Coble graduated from the University of Maryland, March 17. 1S85, with the degree of M.D.. and re- turned to Dauphin, Pennsylvania with fifteen cents in his pocket. Before graduating he started to read and , . _ s t u d v medicine with his brother. Dr. Allison B. Coble. By way of e a r n i n g more money to go into practice, he was JL time-keeper and ^L paymaster for a ^^^| . yV of bridge ^k builders who built ^k k bridges in Perry- _ ., ville, Md., Reading, Dr. Coble Pa.. Laudon, Tenn.. Pulaski. Va., and one bridge across the Schuylkill River in Philadelphia. In July. 1SSS he received his certifi- cate as druggist and opened a drug -tore in Dauphin. Later he took up the practice of medicine after his brother's death in 1890. Years of hard work, filling his own prescriptions, working almost day and night to comfort those in dist: traveling through snow-storms, was the routine of Dr. Coble. ■ Dr. Coble delivered nearly 4,000 babies, the largest one weighing 14 lbs. and the tiniest one, two and one-half pounds. IB- mixed most of his own medicines, and still does. People come from a radius of fifty miles, and medicine is often sent to Chicago and Florida. Dr. Coble has been a railroad sur- geon for sixty years and still si a ich. For years he was a great baseball fan, taking in all the games played by the home team of the Dauphin-Perry I . League. Up until two years ago he attended these games, but age and eye- Bight now prevent this. Dr. Coble is a member of the Perry- Lodge, No. 458, F.&A.M. Marysville. which he joined in 1890. He poled a boat across the river to these early- lodge meetings. He is a member of the Harrisburg Consistory and the Zembo Shrine of Harrisburg. He was a delegate to the Republican State Convention in 1891, and also served as school director for a period of thirty-one years. Dr. Coble holds membership in the Penn. State and Dauphin Co. Medical Societies, a member of the Paxton Lodge, No. 621. He was born July 6, 1859, which makes him over 90 years old. Brother. 76, lives in Schenectady. N. Y. Dr. Coble never had any children. He lived in Dauphin on the same street since 1882. At Walter Reed The University of Maryland pre- two college courses at the Army Med- ical Center. Walter Reed General Hos- pital this fall for military personnel with classes twice weekly for a period of 15 weeks. The courses are in Public Speak and Psychology. Those successfully completing either or both of the courses will be given full credit from the University. The post's Troop Information and Education funds will be used to pay 75'. of the tuition for officers and en- listed personnel interested in attending the classes. Heads Psychiatry Dr. Jacob Ellis Finesinger returned to Baltimore to head the department of psychiatry at the University of Mary- land's School of Medicine. He will make periodic visits from Boston where he had been on the staff of the Massachusetts General Hospital since l'.L'i.S, shortly after the psychiatric department was established there. In January, he will assume full-time duty. Dr. Finesinger is engaged in work on series of motion pictures of actual therapeutic sessions for the Veterans Administration and for the Army. During the war he conducted studies on aviators, giving psychological and physiological tests to determine who would make a good pilot and who wouldn't. - Farther studies included experiments ,m the effects of breathing mixtures low- in oxygen (anoxia). This project will be moved to the University of Maryland and continued, he said. •■ rhere is evidence, but not yet proof," he said, "that some psychosomatic troubles (physical illnesses in which emotions play a large part) may be due to some difficulty in handling oxygen uptake." He said he was looking forward to the opportunities at the University of Maryland. "Everything I've asked for has been done," he said. Thos. C. Wilder '41 Thos. C. Wilder. Maryland. M.D. '41, was recently awarded the degree of Master of Science in Surgery at the University of Minnesota. MARYLAND VETERAN When classes were resumed at the Univer- sity of Maryland this semester. Lewis W. Cromwell, 69, veteran chief electrician at the College Park campus, pictured above with student Pat Keck, '19, was on hand to greet new students for his 22d year. It also was his last time. Mr. Cromwell, a familiar "landmark" at the University since August, 1928, is to retire November 1. When he does, the University will lose one of its most colorful characters. For to stu- dents and alumni, Mr. Cromwell is as well known as Tesludo, the bronze terrapin. Wearing his familiar overalls and a pair of "sneakers," Mr. Cromwell looked over some of the approximately 10,000 students who at- tended classes for the first time this year. Students who know Mr. Cromwell refer to him affectionately as "Short Circuit." This stems from his trouble-shooter job. Mr. Cromwell knows all the answers when it comes to electrical engineering. He holds two degrees from Purdue University — a Bachelor of Science and Bachelor of Elec- trical Engineering. Mr. Cromwell also is known for his knowl- edge of various languages. He can speak six of them and knows "words and phrases" in another 15 or 20. Much of his time at the University, where he lives, is spent in the campus library. Here he browses through books, picking his fa- vorites and taking them to his room. He has lived on the campus for 20 years since the death of his wife. His present quar- ters are in Sylvester Hall. Mr. Cromwell was born October 4, 1879, in Albany, Ga. When he retires, he wants to "travel around the world" and then settle down in Havana. Cuba was one of five places where he worked before coming to the Uni- versity. The others were Venezuela, Colom- bia, Peru and India. "When I leave, I certainly intend to visit Egypt, Palestine, Hawaii, Tahiti and possibly Alaska, before settling down," he declared. "But I'll miss this place," he added. This year he saw about the same number of students as were present last year. Just about all of those at College Park will know Mr. Cromwell or will have seen him before he retires. "You can't miss him," a youthful under- graduate explained. A GLASS MILK BOTTLE is the best container for the delivery and pro- tection of milk. It is • CLEAN * CLEAR * SPARKLING TRANSPARENT (See the cream line) IMPARTS NO FOREIGN TASTE OR ODOR Insist on YOUR milk in GLASS bottles THERE IS NO SUBSTITUTE AS GOOD! THE BUCK GLASS COMPANY Fort Avenue and Lawrence Street BALTIMORE 30, MD. Manufacturers of Baltimore's Glass Milk Bottles for a Half Century. Reese Press PRINTERS 301 E. LOMBARD ST. BALTIMORE 2, MD. RUBBER MILLERS, Inc. Manufacturers of INDUSTRIAL RUBBER ROLLERS ACID TANKS • PIPES • HOUSINGS AND FITTINGS RUBBER LINED 709 SOUTH CATON AVE. . BALTIMORE 29, MD. -I 19 r School o[ DENTISTRY Dr. J. C. Biddix The Alumnae of the School <>i Dentistrj By Theresa A. Edwardi and Gardner P. H. Foley »| RING the iii -t fifty yeai formal dental education, dating from the founding of the Baltimore College of Dental Surgery in L840, the dental colleges and the dental organi- sations in genera] were strongly op- posed to the entrance of women to the profession. Before L866 a few women had practiced dentistry in this country without benefil of degrees, but it was not till that year that Lucy Hobbs Taylor, a graduate of the Ohio College of Dental Surgery, became the first woman in the world to receive the den- tal degree. The second woman to re- ceive the D.D.S. degree and the first woman to complete the two-year course was Henrietta Hirschfield of Germany, a graduate of the Pennsylvania College of Dental Surgery in 1869. In the early 1870's the faculty of the Baltimore College of Dental Surgery, under the leadership of Dean Ferdinand J. S. Gorgas, adopted a liberal attitude towards the acceptance of women stu- dents. The experience of the oldest dental college in graduating six women during the period 187:5-1878 had an im- portant effect on the development of careers in dentistry for women. There have been thirty-four women graduates from the dental schools in Baltimore: fourteen from the Baltimore College of Dental Surgery; nine from the Dental Department of the Univer- sity of .Maryland; and eleven from the Baltimore College of Dental Surgery, Dental School, University of Maryland. Only two foreign countries are repre- sented in the geographical distribution of these graduates: Germany with nine and China with two. This country lias representatives from nine states, one territory and the District; Maryland 5, Puerto Rico 4, Connecticut :'>, North Carolina :i, Pennsylvania 2, Florida 1, Delaware I, Virginia 1, New York 1. West Virginia L, and the District of Columbia 1. Kmii.K FOEKING (1ST.'.)- The fifth woman to receive a dental degree and the first woman to he graduated from the Baltimore College of Dental Sur- gery was Dr. Foeking of Danzig, Prussia. She deserves recognition also as tlie first woman to receive a dental or medical degree from a Maryland school. She conformed to all the rules and regulations of the College and made an excellent impression on the faculty and her fellow students by her proficiency and earnest application. She graduated with high honors. Her senior thesis, "Is Woman Adapted to the Den- tal Profession?", was published in the lo. Foeking practiced very successfully in Berlin. Louise i \< obi (1874) Like her predecessor, Dr. Jacobi was from Ger- many. She also graduated with hitfh honors and thus gave added support to the justification of the school's liberal policy towards women students. Dr. Jacobi practiced in Berlin in partner- ship with her aunt. Dr. Hem Hn BChfield. Elsie Von Heyden (1876) No in- formation is available concerning Dr. Heyden other than that she was from Germany. PAULINE BOECK < 1*77) - In the Balti- more Sun's account of the thirty-seventh commencement Dr. Boeck, of Germany, was described as "a modest, intelligent looking young lady who bore her honi rs amid the continued applause . . . with becoming grace." Elvira Castneb (1878)— The fifth woman graduate of the Baltimore Col- lege of Dental Surgery also came from Germany. Adolfine Peterson (1878) — The fact that the first six women graduates from the Baltimore College of Dental Surgery were Germans reflects the European reputation of the College and also the superior qualities of the Ger- man women of that period. Eva E. SEMON (1899)— After the graduation of the two German women in 1878 the College changed its policy and decided not to matriculate any more women students. The maintenance of this regulation over many years ac- counts for the interval of twenty-one years between the sixth and seventh alumnae. Dr. Semon, of Maryland, was the first woman from the United States to receive a degree from the Baltimore College of Dental Surgery. E. R. Brush (1901)— Dr. Brush, of Florida, was one of two women to graduate in the Class of 1901. C. c. Walker (1901)— Dr. Walker. of Pennsylvania, received recognition for her excellent work with non- cohesive gold foil. Bessie Burns Bennett (1902) — The second Maryland alumna. Dr. Bennett was active in student affairs, especially as a contributor to the annual. Mary Parker Bosley (1903)— Dr. Bosley was from Maryland. Sarah S. Ackerman (1904) — The first foreign alumna to be graduated since 1878. Dr. Ackorman returned to Germany to practice her profession. Mary A. Bane (1909)— Highly re- garded by her classmates Dr. Bane, of Connecticut, was the first New England woman to graduate from the Baltimore College of Dental Surgery. •••••••••••••••••••• HASHM \UI\S Among campus visitors was <m old time sergeant with enlist meat stripes from his shoulder >•< his cuff — and carry tWO by hand. "Gee," cracked Snorky, "you must have surely heat in before Pearl Harbor." "Son," re/died the old titna. "I teas in before Pearl WhiU ." 20 r Cecil L. Goetz (1909)— Dr. Goetz, Baltimore, and her classmate, Dr. . were the last women to graduate from the Baltimore College of Dental Surgery, which graduated its last class in L928 prior to its becoming a part of the University of Maryland. Geobgiana Monks (1909) — Dr. Monks, of Connecticut, was the first woman to graduate from the Dental Department of the University of Mary- land, established in 1882. Lena ('. Sparck (1910)— Dr. Sparck, of Maryland, practiced for several years at 713 West North Avenue in Baltimore. Later she practiced at Patapsco Avenue. Dr. Sparck died in L947. Eva CARROLL Carter (1914) — Com- ing to the University from Kiverton, Virginia, Dr. Carter was a prominent member of the remarkable Class of 1914. Dr. Carter, a class officer, re- turned to her alma mater in June to join with an amazing number of her classmates in their thirty-five years re- union. In each of the three years of the dental course she won honors in competition with her classmates, and stood tenth in her class at graduation. Her address is the N'isson Building, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, where she practices orthodontics. Lois MCKEOWN (1915)— Dr. Mc- Keown, of Stanley, North Carolina, the recording secretary of her class, won many honors, including the James H. Harris gold medal for the best non- cohesive gold filling. Elsie Rooe-Scimeca (1915) — Enter- ing the dental course as Elsie Roof, of Bremen, Germany, Dr. Scimeca married a physician during her third year. Like her classmate, she won several honors. Ella Brookshire Cox (1918) — A native of Bodin, North Carolina, Dr. Cox married George K. Brazil. Her present address is 119 West 57th Street. New York. Brownie Lee Lewis (1918) — Dr. Lewis, of Roseboro, North Carolina, was one of three women graduates of the Class of 1918. A specialist in exo- dontia, she resides at 110 Coram Street, Durham. North Carolina. Carmen Anna Mora (1918)— Dr. Mora, of Mayaguez, Puerto Rico, has the honor of being the first Puerto Rican woman to graduate in dentistry from Maryland. She graduated with honors, ranking sixth in her class. Her address is Liberstad Street, Mayaguez. Lottie BRICKNEB (1923) — As an undergraduate Dr. Brickner did a good deal of teaching in the night schools of Baltimore, teaching shorthand at Balti- more City College and English at the Jewish Educational Alliance. She is the widow of Dr. Joseph A. Themper, a 1921 graduate, who died in 1939. She is Secretary of the Women's Dental Society of New York and practici 2410 Kinjrs Highway, Brooklyn. Provtoencia Yiera (1925)— After practicing for several years in her native Puerto Rico, Dr. Yiera married. Since her marriage she has been in- active in the professional field. Her address is Box 781, Rio Piedras, Puerto Rico. MARCO] in v l'n;\ \m>k/-Maim i (1927) The Minus] described this na- tive Of San Juan, Puerto Rico, as "a picture of loveliness." FBANCISCA GUER&A (1928) Like thf two women graduates immediately preceding her, Dr. Guerra came to the I Diversity from Puerto Rico. She is practicing the specialty of pedodontia in Ponce. Amy H. Kuan (1933)— The first Chinese woman graduate of the School of Dentistry, Dr. Kwan hailed from Tientsin, where many of her relatives were engaged in the practice of medi- cine. Her present address is 165 Rue St. Louis, Trenton, North China. Gertride C. Y. Huang (1934)— Well remembered by her classmates because of her pleasant disposition and her highly capable work as a student, Dr. Huang, of Tientsin. China, married Dr. Peter McLean, a classmate. They prac- ticed together in China until Dr. Huang's death in Shanghai, on October 11, 1940. After several very trying years in China, following the death of his wife, Dr. McLean went with their three children to his native Trinidad, where he is now practicing-. Carlotta Augusta Hawley (1936) — From Washington, D. C, Dr. Hawley graduated with honors. She is specializ- ing in orthodontics, following in the footsteps of her famous father. Her ad- dress is 915 19th Street, N.W., Wash- ington, D. C. Naomi A. Dunn (1939) — In the month after her graduation Dr. Dunn married a classmate, Dr. Irving W. Eichenbaum. They practice in adjoining offices in New Britain, Connecticut, Dr. Dunn's home city. The mother of two children, Dr. Dunn devotes her energies to conducting a specialty practice in orthodontics and periodontics, managing her home, and rearing a family. Her address is the Hatch Building, 24 Wash- ington Street, New Britain. Dr. Dunn and her husband returned in June for the ten years reunion of their class. Verda Elizabeth James (1939) — Following her graduation Dr. James, of Milford, Delaware, was granted a Carnegie Fellowship for two years' study at the University of Louisville Dental School. The results of h