On this Page 5

Francois Mauriac:

Youngest Member of V*

Academie Francaise

The

Literary

and

Critical

Page

UT of the scorching soil of his

B native Gironde, a land tortured

with thirst and whipped by angry,

implacable hail, have grown the

novels of Francois Mauriac—novels

which have already enormously influenced

contemporary French literature

and which are destined, I feel

sure, to have a powerful effect upon

English writers of fiction. Already

two of them ("Therese," and "Viper's

Tangle," which is selling extremely

well in Melbourne at the present

moment) have been translated into

English, and it seems reasonably

certain, especially after his recent

election to the Academie Francaise,

that Mauriac's other work will

shortly be made accessible to English

readers. For that reason I intend

to make an effort in this article, not

so much to estimate and criticise his

various novels as to give a general

impression of the sort of novels they

are; to try to elucidate the continual

effort at self-explication that is apparent

in every single thing he writes;

and to try, also, to make you see and

understand the war that is being

waged within him between his religion

and his art.

A Racial Difference.

Those who have not made a special

study of French literature may find

Mauriac, at first, a difficult man

to read. The French novel has

never in any way resembled the

English novel, and Mauriac is the

most indigenous, the least cosmopolitan

of all French writers. To

understand him it is necessary to

realise that in his country the novel

concerns itself with the drama of

minds rather than with the clash

and fusion of human personalities,

and that, as a rule, its appeal is made

sheerly to the Intellect. ... I am

not sure if I make myself clear.

You will say that the best English

novels do the same thing. '. . •

Not exactly. Their appeal is not

solely to the intellect. I know of a

girl who must have gone to school at

some time, I suppose, though you

would never think it to hear her

speak, who works in the most menial

position in a woollen factory, and who

reads with profound appreciation

books as different as those of John

Galsworthy, Mary Webb, Henry Handel

Richardson, L. A. G. Strong,

Clemence Dane and Victoria Sackville

West. ... I don't think she would

understand Francois Mauriac. And

yet, a French girl, in similar circum-

stances, just might. That is the

difference—it is racial and traditional.

Deep down into the soil of La

Gironde Mauriac has plunged his

peasant roots. He knows himself

only at Malagar, the family vineyard,

the very spot where, over a century

ago, his mother's shepherd ancestors

halted with their flocks. The same

sun which ripens his grapes has

brought his books to maturity; his

wine and his novels are equally children

of that sultry earth. In his

own case, at all events, there is wisdom

in Mauriac's saying that a writer

who is cut off from the provinces

is cut off from humanity. For, in

his own province he has a complete

little universe, a universe that he

knows and understands—and loves.

"Despite its nakedness," he says,

"I love the place, which is tantamount

to saying that I love myself."

Just so much does he think of himself

as part of the land that bore

him!

The "Family" in France.

It is a primitive, almost savage

country, dumb, harassed; by turn

suffocated, and drenched by brief

storms; a pitiless land where sun and

fire devour the wounded pines, and

where houses murmur with the humming

of awakened flies. It is a land

peopled with narrow, violent, gloriously

virile peasant stock: a province

where everybody knows everybody

else, where the memory of a scandal

endures until the fifth generation, and

the memory of an insult lives longer.

It is the stronghold of that sacred

French institution: the Family! And

the slogan of the family is: to save

appearances; not to betray oneself

or one's clan; to guard a family

secret with one's life. There is no

happiness in Mauriac's world; but

since, in a way, it is a world of his

own making, the reason might be

sought within himself, and might be

found in that he lacks a sense of

humour.

Such was the land and such the

people to mould the little Mauriac.

From childhood he accumulated material

for his books, learning to read

the signs of the sky and of the earth;

knowing the thrill and peril of the

grape harvest; seeking to comprehend

his taciturn, inscrutable neighbours.

At the same time, Mauriac must

not be taken simply for a regional

novelist. We know that type well

in English: gifted men and women

who paint faithfully and minutely

their own particular little corners of

the earth. Francois Mauriac is not

concerned with showing you his< province,

pointing out its curiosities, its

beauties. Bather, in his books does

the land become a part of the consciousness

of the people he creates.

It is never described. As his stories

unfold the forces of nature take shape

as frightening presences, menaces,

presages of evil. The storm over

Argeloux is no less essential to the

drama of Therese Desqueyroux than,

in order that we may know that

woman of fire, is her eternal cigarette.

One may say of all Mauriac's

books that a story of the Gironde is

woven into every human drama. . . .

But, for all that, his chief end is

less to portray the land and people

of Guyenne than to explore his soul

and to paint the tragic "landes" of

his own heart.

Disciple of Proust?

Never before in the history of

literature, probably, has there been

so much chatter about schools and

tendencies as there is to-day. It is

all part, no doubt, of our modern

passion for analysis and the cardindexing

of writers' minds and style.

That being so, it has been natural,

I suppose, for critics to vivisect

Mauriac and put him down as a follower

of Proust. It is a conclusion

to which I am unable to subscribe.

I believe that Mauriac's novels—or

the seeds of his novels—were in the

little boy who went to school to the

Marist Fathers at Bordeaux, and spent

his holidays at Malagar. I think

they grew to power and strength as

he grew, and, when the time was

ripe, burst out of him like a river

in torrent—a force that ho man

could stay. . . . The very first thing

one notices about him is his independence,

his determination to be

free.

That Proust Influenced him, as he

has influenced most living miters,

there can be little doubt. But

Mauriac a conscious disciple of anybody's!

That I shall never believe.

Verse is the natural outlet for

young men who feel the seed of literary

talent stir to life within them,

and Francois Mauriac has given us

in Yves ("Le Mystere Frontenac") a

picture of a young poet which might

well be autobiographical. His own

first poems, like those of the youthful

Yves, brought him swift recognition,

and won him the esteem and

friendship of Paul Bourget and

Maurice.Barres. Already in these early

poems we are aware of the struggle

between his religious responsibilities

and the consciousness of his duty as

an artist—which are perpetually at

war within himself, as they are in

everything he writes. Only in his

two latest books does he begin to see

that the two are not only reconcilable,

but actually complementary.

He has said recently that in his boyhood

he was surrounded by religious

influences and precepts, and given

no solid dogmatic instruction, so that

his Catholic sensibilities were developed

at the expense of his Catholic

intellect. It has taken a great many

years, and it has taken grievous

suffering, to establish the equilibrium

which, as his latest books bear witness,

he has at last achieved.

Before War—and After.

In 1913 Mauriac published his first

novel, "L'Enfant en chaines." In it

he douses with irony the artistic impulses

to which youngsters love to

succumb, and the phases of moral

reform which the ardent supporters

of Marc Saignier (Catholic democrat

and pacifist) considered the absolute

pinnacle of their age. It is a

stimulating "religious" notfel. Not,

of course, an edifying treatise or

plea for some moral principle, but

rather a measure of truth regarding

an average spiritual life in a given

era. ... It was followed in 1914 by

"La robe pretexte."

Though he never refers to it, the

most casual observer can see that the

war was the turning point in Mauriac's

career. Those two early novels,

sensitive studies, exquisitely written,

hold no promise of the terrific things

that were to come. . . . Convalescent

after the war, he wrote "La chair et

le sang," a book which no other age

save ours could have produced, and

one which posterity will find it hard

to understand. With the other

young writers of France he faced a

state of things which, possibly, no

(Continued on page 27.)

Mauriac's home, Malagar, which readers of his books will quickly recognise. o the left of the vineyards is the famous pine forest, which extends for many miles. Help

Mauriac's home, Malagar, which readers of his books will quickly recognise.

o the left of the vineyards is the famous pine forest, which extends for

many miles.

none Help

Francois

Mauriac

(Continued from page 3.)

generation had faced before: the

spectacle of a nation's youth; vicarious

and disillusioned; crazy with

despair in the midst of their triumph.

The banners of France came glorious

out of the war, but the boys who

carried them were vicious and cruel,

«nd rick with bitterness and grief.

Mauriac, a little older than the

others, more intelligent, more mature,

saw more deeply than they saw and

felt more keenly. ... "La chair et

le sang" was followed in swift succession

bv "Preseances," "Le Baiser au

Lepreux." and "Genitrix." With the

two lost Mauriac stepped for good

and all out of his youthful chrysalis.

With them his genius was declared;

and each subsequent novel marked a

new stage along a ghastly Journey

of frightenlngly unhappy books. Towards

the end of "Vipers Tangle," an

atrocious and magnificent book, a

glimmering of light is visible, and

with "Le Mystere Frontenac" he

emerges into daylight at last.

Sparing nothing, inventing nothing,

exaggerating nothing, he set

about infusing life into that gallery

of villains which, beginning with "Le

baiser au lepreux," he has drawn

with such astringent realism. Whether

he likes it or not, it is by his j

villains Mauriac will be remembered, i

and It is by his villains that he mustj

be judged. They are not a pretty;

crew: Therese Desqueyroux, who poi- :

soned her husband; the woman in;

"Genitrix"—a book with the same

theme as D. H. Lawrence's "Sons and ;

Lovers—who let her daughter-inlaw

die; that young animal, Daniel, j

in "La fleuve du feu"; Pierre, thej

Pharisaic and scrupulous Catholic

of "Destins," and the old miser in j

"Viper's Tangle." \

A Rapier Mind.

j

Francois Mauriac is blessed—or;

cursed—with a penetration, a critical!

swiftness which gives to his delinea-;

tion of characters sort of ferocity;!

and that, together with his alarming j

lucidity, has made him the enfant;

terrible of French letters, and one;

of the most widely admired writers;

In the world to-day. ... His pessi-;

mism and his preoccupation with the i

dark side of things make one wonder;

If he believes in the celebrated;

aphorism that out of beautiful senti- ;

ments bad literature jfc made. He ;

confessed recently that he used toj

think that by "purifying the source," ;

or by striving to make himself as!

perfect as possible, he could cure his;

books of the evil that was in them; a;

good tree, he said, cannot bring!

forth evil fruit. But, by degrees, hej

came to realise that even in the state:

of grace his characters still had their;

roots in, and drew their life from,|

all that was least pure in his inner;

consciousness. And, he ruefully;

admits, he is never very successful!

with his virtuous characters. Con-;

sciously or unconsciously, Mauriac, In'

his efforts to "purify the source,"!

appears to have adopted the Freudian ;

theory that to cure oneself of the

obsessions that torment one It is

necessary only to bring them to the

light, necessary only to talk about

them that they may disappear.

Without ranging myself alongside

the Freudians, I would like to suggest

that art may be one such means of

liberation. Every artist dreams; lives

various lives. It is his way of eliminating

the poison that is fn him, and

of ridding himself of his monsters.

Thus Mauriac, in his books, exorcises

his devils, and thus—if the

theory is correct—his true confession

will be found not in any memoirs

he may chance to write, but in the

characters he has created.

Francois Mauriac: Catholic.

There are critics who have always

hailed Mauriac as a Catholic novelist.

There are others who put the

date of what they are pleased to

call his conversion after the publication

of "Destins," "the only story in

which there is a definitely anti-

Catholic bias." I am Inclined to

throw in my lot somewhere between

the two. I can see no trace of a

conversion, but neither would I call

the early Mauriac a Catholic novelist,

though all his books beiar witness

that he was a novelist who also happened

to be a Catholic. As for "Destins,"

I don't know that I should

brand it anti-Catholic. It is a book in

which the normalities of a certain

kind of Catholic life are laid bare to

the scalpel, etched with a red-hot

needle. His ruthless picture of Pierre,

the devout Catholic, at once Pharisaical

and scrupulous, is one of the most

relentless and virulent things he has

done. But we all know that such

Catholics exist, and holding them up

to public ignominy can hardly be

called anti-Catholic. He is filled

with horror and bitterness at the

atrocious ill-will of so-called Christians.

And surely Catholics, above

all others, should loathe and

shun such vipers. No: Mauriac

may be accused of concerning himself

too much with vice—never with

making it palatable. He may be reproached

with his taste for evil characters,

but there is nothing in him

more Christian than his love for the !

straying sheep and the daughters of ;

perdition. In his eyes the foulest!

human creature is not the sinner,:

but the hypocrite—the Pharisees like 1

Pierre.

i

Maturity, Not Conversion.

What I see in Mauriap, after

"Destins," is not conversion but maturity.

The books that come afterwards

are full of the certainty that

life is a spiritual thing, almost supernatural,

a mystery. The things we

think we love are only shadows; the

phantoms we cannot hold hide the

true light, which, until death makes

life whole, always escapes us. This

development, this fieche of idealism

which reaches its pinnacle in

"Viper's Tangle" has its germ in the

little poems of his boyhood. . . .

This is no conversion. It lis a new

fidelity to, a richer understanding of,

'the doctrine that troubled his youth

and turned his young manhood into

an arena where Francois Mauriac

came to grips in bloody combat with

—Francois Mauriac.

This new security, this mature and

joyous. acceptance of his faith, has

induced in him a new frame of mind.

. . . Having come to the end of his

tunnel, as it were, with "Le Nceud

de Viperes," it was his intention to

call his latest book "Le nld de

Colombes," but he changed the title

(fortunately, I think) to "Le Mystere

Frontenac." Having rebelled so

roundly and so soundly against his

provincial famines, their esprit de

corps, their narrowness, their absurdities,

their prejudices, their .tyranny,

he has repented now of having a

little calumniated them, and in this

latest book he goes to the other extreme,

in unity, devotion, and unselfishness.

Modern and Original.

I have dealt here only with

Mauriac the novelist. I must leave

to somebody else the interpretation

of the other Mauriacs: poet, philosopher,

biographer, polemicist, historian.

His peculiar gifts have made

him a master in all those spheres, but

it is, I think, as a writer of fiction

he will live. Those fiery novels of

his, with their strange construction,

their particular involuntary rhythm,

their mettlesome unpreparedness and

their lack of detail, are utterly unlike

any other novels in the world.

Written always at full speed, full of

self-abandon, of blunt apostrophe, of

impatience, and of muffled lyricisme,

they are as native to this twentieth

century as they are to the province

whence they draw their being. They

are novels which our literature should

welcome in translation. One of

them at least, "Viper's Tangle," is a

great novel, and, what is more, a

great Catholic novel. The thing to

admire in Mauriac now is that he

has had the courage in that book,

and in "SoufErance du Chretien," to

exact from his heroes not the facile

devotion which, alack and alas, has

come to characterise Catholic novels,

but- sound, manly conviction, and

absolute sincerity towards themselves.

"Non pas la vertu, Isa," he

writes in "Le Noeud de Viperes,"

"mais la saintete," and in "Ce qui

etait perdu" we find: "Tu as recu la

plus grande de toutes les graces; tu

te vols, tu te connais."

Mauriac's Sincerity.

"I am tormented by the thought,"

Mauriac writes, "of my responsibility

as a Catholic writer. That label,

which I accept, means that numerous

young people confidently read my

books and are ready to follow me.

•And if the least misunderstanding

should arise, I run the risk of leading

them!astray, who knows! even of corrupting

them. ... I think of it insistently,

and this anxiety is for me

a daily obsession. The conflict between

God and the flesh, the question

of sin—no. for me these things

are not humbug. They are, on the

contrary, a profound reality from

the which I know not how to make

my escape." •

There is no doubting Mauriac's

sincerity, but now and again in his

books it , seems (to the lay mind at

all events) that the theology of

novelists is not above suspicion.