SHE'S a renowned author who helped bring feminism to the forefront through her literature.

Here's what you need to know about the British writer...

Who is Angela Carter?

Angela Carter was a renowned feminist, writer, journalist and author who was born on 7th May 1940.

She was born Angela Olive Stalker in Eastbourne and attended Streatham and Clapham High School.

Enthusiastic from a young age, she followed in her father's footsteps and started working at The Croydon Advertiser.

Angela studied English Literature at Bristol University.

In 1960 she married her first husband Paul Carter whose name she adopted professionally.

After divorcing Paul in 1972 she spent a large portion of the 70's as a writer in residence at universities including that of Sheffield, Brown, Adelaide and East Anglia.

Angela married for a second time in 1977 to Mark Pearce with whom she had a son.

Just two years later she wrote her famous The Bloody Chamber as well as her well-cited The Sadeian Woman and the Ideology of Pornography essay.

As well as her fictional writing, she wrote many articles for publications such as a The Guardian, The Independent and New Statesman.

In 1992 Angela succumbed to lung cancer at the age of 51 at her home in London.

What other fiction has The Bloody Chamber author written?

Angela has an extensive collection of literature to her name ranging from novels to poetry to commentary.

Her fiction work includes:

Shadow Dance

The Magic Toyshop

Several Perceptions

Heroes and Villains

Love

The Infernal Desire Machines of Doctor Hoffman

The Passion of New Eve

Nights at the Circus

Wise Children

Fireworks: Nine Profane Pieces

Black Venus

American Ghosts and Old World Wonders

Burning Your Boats

Five Wuiet Shouters

Unicorn

The Curious Room

The Donkey Prince

Comic and Curious Cats

What are her best quotes?

“Cities have sexes: London is a man, Paris a woman, and New York a well-adjusted transsexual.”

“She herself is a haunted house. She does not possess herself; her ancestors sometimes come and peer out of the windows of her eyes and that is very frightening.”

“The child's laughter is pure until he first laughs at a clown.”

“The tiger will never lie down with the lamb; he acknowledges no pact that is not reciprocal. The lamb must learn to run with the tigers.”

“I think I want to be in love with you but I don't know how.”

“I desire therefore I exist.”

“Out of the frying pan into the fire! What is marriage but prostitution to one man instead of many? No different!”

“There was a house we all had in common and it was called the past, even though we'd lived in different rooms.”

“There is a striking resemblance between the act of love and the ministrations of a torturer.”

“Is not this world an illusion? And yet it fools everybody.”

“Love is desire sustained by unfulfilment.”

“It is far easier for a woman to lead a blameless life than it is for a man; all she has to do is to avoid sexual intercourse like the plague.”

“The invisible is only another unexplored country, a brave new world.”

"She was like a piano in a country where everyone has had their hands cut off.”