Definitely larger than Mariposa (everything is) /forums/images/graemlins/frown.gif

Had a crackin' sail in her the last two days though. Daughter #2 and I took Mariposa round to Loch Goil and spent a very rainy night at anchor. She's just back from a year back-packing around the world and had lots of tales to tell. We had a long beat back down Loch Long, a short dead run back to the Gareloch, and a vicious beat back to our mooring. All-in-all a grand couple of days.

Built for the First owner Group Captain Ken Gatwood DSO DFC /forums/images/graemlins/wink.gif

[This Beaufighter is probably the most famous of them all. On 12th June, 1942, crewed by Flight Lieutenant A.K. Gatward (Pilot) & Sergeant G. Fern (Observer), this aircraft dropped a French Tricolore on the Arc de Triomphe, Paris, and then strafed the nearby Headquarters of the Kriegsmarine.

As you can see, by this time the spinners had been removed from the propellers, and the Direction Finding (D/F) Loop added behind the cockpit.

Also the standard Coastal Command camouflage of Extra Dark Sea Grey, Dark Slate Grey and Sky had been introduced - but still with roundels underwing and very pale grey code letters. There is a well-known photo of this aircraft, showing it at least one month later as it has the Type C1 (narrow white & yellow) roundels and narrow white fin flash stripe; but the original type A1 (equal width circles) were not replaced until July 1942 - hence my drawing shows the earlier type.

Flt Lt Gatward went on to command a whole Beau Coastal Strike Wing later in the war with the Mk.X (and also, of course, higher in rank).]

Grp. Ctn. Gatward was a pilot with Coastal Command for the duration of WW2. He is celebrated for hedge-hopping a Beaufighter in 1943 in to the heart of occupied Paris where he dropped a huge Tricolour onto the Arc de Triomphe, then straffed the German Kreigsmarine's HQ. Later he commanded a Canadian unit for the D-day landings, sinking several minesweepers and harbour defence vessels. His decorations included the Distinguished Flying order and the Distinguished Flying Cross with Bar as well as the Legion d'Honneur. After the war he flew he first operational jets in the RAF.

You had to get a pic of the side stained with a rust streak. The other side's tidier.

I have been trying to find the bit of steel for years... I even took the rubbing strake off and dug out an old screw and thought I cured it. A couple of weeks later...

I am resigned to an occasional wipe with a sponge and oxalic acid.

Yep, Aja... Flap of Loch Riddon. Yep, 9_Ton_Doug, 8 tonner. Spot on, Sailorman. I did some research on Ken Gatward when I bought the boat. He sailed out of Woodbridge in Essex and regularly went cross channel for various reunions.

Aja, I assume you overtook me in the West Kyle (most boats do). I had a fairly boistrous sail down Loch Fyne. As you see from the pic I had one reef in. I called into Kames to watch the rugby and give the dog a walk and was on home mooring for about 21.00 in flat calm and moonlight.

A good weekend but I was a bit spooked by the forecasts (severe F8) so wasn't as adventurous as I might have been.