By of the

Bucks forward Carlos Delfino is making major strides toward a comeback from a concussion that has sidelined him for the past two months.

Delfino, wearing his Bucks shorts and a T-shirt, worked out 45 minutes with Bucks assistant Bill Peterson on the Bradley Center court before the Bucks played the Miami Heat on Friday night.

After the workout, Delfino said in an interview that he hopes to be able to go 1-on-1 at some point next week and gradually increase his fitness. He said he hopes he can return in a few weeks and also indicated he will not have to play with a soft protective helmet.

"This is the first time I've worked out with the lights and the music," Delfino said. "I worked out for 45 minutes. I'm just trying to get back in shape.

"I was joking because I feel like I've got no legs. It's been two months and the first three weeks I was doing nothing physically. It's something where I have to take the time and get back in shape.

"The good thing is I've been able to work out for the next couple days. Maybe in the next couple days I will start to mix with the guys and have some contact."

Delfino suffered the concussion in the second game of the season at Minnesota on Oct. 29 and took further hits in games against Charlotte and Indiana. He has been out of the lineup since leaving a game against New Orleans on Nov. 6.

"My goal is to try to be close to my level by the all-star (break)," Delfino said. "I'd like to be 80% or 90% of my level by then.

"I'm optimistic, maybe 10 days (he'll be back). The workouts will tell. I need to be strong enough with my legs to create the contact or avoid the contact. Right now I'm not."

Bucks coach Scott Skiles said Delfino would travel to New Jersey with the team on Saturday and possibly have a 1-on-1 or 2-on-2 workout in Newark.

"He went through part of the shootaround today and he's scheduled to travel with us for the first time," Skiles said. "As long as he doesn't have a setback, he might be a week away, something like that."

Skiles joked when asked about Delfino not wearing a protective helmet.

"Thank goodness," Skiles said. "He's got an awful big head. We don't want to put a helmet on that thing."

Delfino said he was grateful for the support of his doctors, his family and the Bucks organization. He said he started to make more progress in his recovery around the start of the New Year.

"I knew it was going to be like that; everyone was telling me," Delfino said. "Because it was a long stretch I was a little frustrated.

"From one day to another it changed a lot. We started to increase day by day. For four or five days in a row I've been working for half an hour, 45 minutes (on the court). Then trying to get some treadmill or elliptical (work) or biking.

"I'm trying to adapt, to get my body moving again. This is therapy for me, playing basketball again is a great feeling."

Delfino said he had talked to several specialists who indicated he would not have to wear a helmet.

"They think it's not a good idea," he said. "I feel better without it. All the league and the people know I have this concussion.

"I have it cleared from the doctors and if they say it's not necessary I'm not going to wear it."

Delfino has missed 27 games since leaving the game against the Hornets on Nov. 6.

"If I wasn't sure about my situation, I wouldn't play," Delfino said. "I'm not desperate for playing. I want to help my team but I would never push my health.

"I feel really happy. It's therapy for everyone. It's like the sun coming out. It's an injury where you think about the simple things about life and you really see what kind of people you have around.

"I'm really glad to have all my family and all my friends in all the bad moments I've had the last two months. It's just great for me and for them to be back on the court.

"It will be a process. But the good thing is I've started. You feel fresh and you feel you can help. Now when I see the game and I get frustrated, I can go work out or I can come and shoot.

"Before I was just stressing and thinking and thinking. Hopefully I can be back soon to help this team."