A difficult night turned into a true downer for the Milwaukee Bucks on Friday at the Bradley Center.

The Bucks were missing center Andrew Bogut due to injury and forward Ersan Ilyasova due to illness before their Eastern Conference matchup against the Miami Heat.

But forward Carlos Delfino suffered a scary fall late in the second quarter and was taken off the court on a stretcher after suffering neck and jaw pain, according to team orthopedic physician Michael Gordon. Delfino had full movement in all extremities and was taken by ambulance to St. Luke's Hospital for precautionary X-rays, according to a team statement.

Delfino drove the baseline and missed a layup attempt and went to the floor, where he inadvertently was stepped on by Miami forward Udonis Haslem, who was grabbing the rebound.

The Bradley Center crowd was hushed for several minutes as medical personnel placed Delfino on the stretcher and wheeled him out of the arena.

"It's real tough," said Bucks center Kurt Thomas. "You never want to see one of your teammates get injured. He definitely had a tough fall there.

"I did see he had a nasty gash on his chin. He's a tough competitor. When the stretcher comes out and they pull out a neck brace, it's a disturbing sight. But he was moving his extremities.

"It was a freak accident. Haslem was going up for a rebound and didn't see him underneath. It was just an unfortunate situation out there on the floor, and you never want to see anyone in that position."

The Bucks lost, 87-74, as Miami pulled within one game of the fifth-seeded Bucks in the Eastern Conference race.

"We'll keep our fingers crossed and hope he's OK, or if there's something wrong it's minor and he can be well," Bucks coach Scott Skiles said of Delfino.

The 6-foot-6 Argentine has played a major role for the Bucks this season while starting 58 games. He was averaging 11 points, 5.4 rebounds and 2.7 assists while playing 30.3 minutes a game entering the game Friday.

"It's tough," the Bucks' John Salmons said. "We definitely hope everything is well with him. His health is more important than anything else. Hopefully he can come back 100%; that's all we can hope for."

Bogut missed the game due to a mid-back strain, which instantly brought back memories of the 7-foot center's lower back injury that sidelined him for 43 games last season, including the final 31 games.

But this was a different injury, and Skiles said Bogut would continue to undergo treatment. Bogut reported to the Bradley Center for treatment Friday morning but was not at the arena during the game.

Skiles said he did not consider Bogut's injury to be a serious one, and sources indicated no magnetic resonance imaging exam was taken.

"This doesn't have anything to do with what happened last year," Skiles said. "This is in his upper mid-back. . . . I would hope he'll play on Sunday."

Bogut, too, downplayed the injury Friday morning after the team's shoot-around. He said he had not experienced the mid-back injury before.

"I've just had trouble moving around," Bogut said. "I don't think it's anything major.

"I've felt it for a couple days now. I didn't practice yesterday; did treatment around the clock yesterday. I did 3 or 4 hours worth. I'm trying to get it loose; it won't break free at the moment. It's one of those things, it could be free in a day, it could be free in 3 or 4 hours. It could be free in two or three days.

"It's different with everybody. Hopefully sooner than later."

The Bucks coped with Bogut's absence by starting Thomas at center. Thomas had played an increasing role in recent games and starred in Milwaukee's road victory over Denver on Saturday night, playing 25 minutes when Bogut was plagued by foul trouble.

But Thomas was limited to 15 minutes by foul trouble and finished with four points and four rebounds. The veteran fouled out with 6:45 remaining when he picked up a loose ball foul going over Haslem.

"It was tough to get into a rhythm when you're out there for 2- or 3-minute stretches, in and out of the lineup," Thomas said. "But that's not an excuse; I've got to find a way to adjust.

"There was a tough whistle out there on me tonight, but unfortunately for us Miami was playing on all cylinders and Dwyane Wade was really attacking the basket. We couldn't make a shot on the other end and we definitely couldn't get stops."