Mike Ehrmann/Getty Images

The Miami Heat are one of the best teams in the NBA, but the Milwaukee Bucks will bring them serious competition tonight.

The Heat will be traveling to a team that is full of young talent with the Bucks, and it should be the equivalent of a modern-day track meet.

Where: Bradley Center, Milwaukee, Wis.

When: Wednesday, Feb. 1, 8:00 p.m. ET

Watch: Not nationally televised

Live Stream: NBA League Pass

Listen: ESPN Radio

Betting Line: Over/Under: 196, Spread: Milwaukee +6.5

Taking into consideration that both teams' combined average is around 198, I would normally stay away from the over/under. In this case, Miami is too good on defense for this game to get that out of hand. I will also take Miami giving the points.

Scott Boehm/Getty Images

Injuries: CBSsports

Bucks

Andrew Bogut, Out

Heat

Mike Miller, Probable

Heat Player to Watch: Chris Bosh

While LeBron James and Dwyane Wade steal most of the spotlight, Chris Bosh has been quietly having a monster season. Bosh is averaging over 20 points and just fewer than eight rebounds per game and handling the pressure of playing in the spotlight much better.

Bucks Player to Watch: Brandon Jennings

Jonathan Daniel/Getty Images

The Milwaukee Bucks needed to find their top man, and it looks like Brandon Jennings has taken playing point guard for the team seriously. Not only has he become an on-court leader, the star is averaging almost 20 points, five assists and three rebounds per game. Not too shabby.

What They’re Saying

Miami Heat Play-by-Play man Eric Reid is reporting on Twitter:

Key Matchup: LeBron James vs. Carlos Delfino and Mike Dunleavy

Mike Ehrmann/Getty Images

There will never be a game that the Miami Heat play when LeBron James is on the floor that he isn’t the key to their success. Whether it’s on offense or defense, he is the most purely talented player on their team. While Carlos Delfino and Mike Dunleavy will do their best to stop him, even if they let the Bucks have six players on the court, LeBron will still get 30 points.

Prediction: Heat 94, Bucks 84

Check back for more on the National Basketball Association as it comes, and check out Bleacher Report’s NBA Page to get your fill of all things basketball.