Double Murder is back with a magical pair of reviews for the original, and remake of, The Wizard Of Gore!

The original Wizard Of Gore, made in 1970, was one of the last splatter films made by Herschell Gordon Lewis in his original, genre-creating run as a filmmaker. In 2007, Jeremy Kasten released his remake featuring the talents of Kip Pardue, Bijou Philips, and most notably, Crispin Glover. Tune in to Double Murder to see if the low-budget original can outshine the modern remake! Danny! and Tim also discuss Herschell Gordon Lewis’ marketing career (including induction to the Direct Marketing Hall of Fame), the Crispin Glover library of films, and how creep Sonya can be when entering a room.

Subscribe to DOUBLE MURDER on iTunes or check it out in the web player below. Be sure to follow the DOUBLE MURDER PODCAST page on Facebook, and write us at DoubleMurder@Bloody-Disgusting.com!

Cinelounge Sunset is partnering with Rustic Films to present an outstanding weekend of movies on Sunset Boulevard in Hollywood this weekend, August 17 & August 18.

The lineup includes Justin Benson and Aaron Moorhead movies Resolution and The Endless, as well as Jim Cummings’ Thunder Road, a shorts block, and more.

Here’s the full lineup…

Resolution. Horror/Mystery. Directed by Justin Benson and Aaron Scott Moorhead. Written by Benson. Produced by Benson, Moorhead, and David Clarke Lawson Jr.

From Rustic Films. (Color, 2012, USA, 93 minutes, not rated.) Starring Peter Cilelloa, Vinny Curran, Emily Montague, Kurt David Anderson, Skyler Meacham, Josh Higgins.

Soon-to-be-a-dad Michael makes a last-ditch effort to save his longtime but addicted friend Chris from a foreseeable drug related death. Visiting Chris and handcuffing him to an exposed plumbing pipe, Michael forces his buddy into detox, but while watching over his friend he also discovers that all is not right within the territory Chris has drifted into. Situated on Indian Reservation land, the area seems to attract a number of strange people. Someone or some thing has a longtime interest in recording activities in the area, all captured on a variety of recording devices (CDs, film, phonographs, etc.). Michael comes to understand he’s been pulled into the latest “story” of an unseen entity, one with a grizzly resolution projected for him and his pal unless they can possibly work out their own agreeable alternate ending.

Saturday, August 17 at 4 p.m. Cast and crew will appear in person.

Biosphere. Science fiction/Comedy. Directed by Mel Eslyn. Written by Eslyn and Mark Duplass.

Produced by Eslyn, Maddie Buis, Zachary Drucker, Shuli Harel. From Rustic Films. (Color, 2022, USA, 106 minutes, not rated) Starring Sterling K. Brown and Mark Duplass.

In the not-too-distant future, the last two men on earth must adapt and evolve to save humanity.

Saturday, August 17 at 6:30 p.m. Mel Eslyn and a special guest will appear in person.

Secret. Mystery. Written and directed by S.N. Swamy. Produced by Rajendra Prasad.

From Rustic Films. (Color, 2024, India, 119 minutes, not rated) Starring Aparma Das, Kalesh Ramanand, Dhyan Sreenivasan, Manikuttan, Jacob Gregory, Andra Mohan.

Secret promises to be a gripping tale that explores the science of omens (Nimitha Shasthram), psychological turmoil, and the strength of friendships.

Saturday, August 17 at 9 p.m. Cast and crew will appear in person.

The Endless. Fantasy/Horror. Directed by Justin Benson and Aaron Moorhead. Written by Benson, Produced by Benson, Moorhead, David Lawson Jr., Lael Naim, Thomas R. Burke.

From Rustic Films. (Color, 2017, USA, 111 minutes, not rated. Starring Justin Benson, Aaron Moorhead, Callie Hernandez. Tate Ellington, Shane Brody, Lew Temple.

This mind-bending thriller follows two brothers who receive a cryptic video message inspiring them to revisit the UFO death cult they escaped a decade earlier. Hoping to find the closure that they couldn’t as young men, they’re forced to reconsider the cult’s beliefs when confronted with unexplainable phenomena surrounding the camp. As the members prepare for the coming of a mysterious event, the brothers race to unravel the seemingly impossible truth before their lives become permanently entangled with the cult.

Sunday, August 18 at 4 p.m. Cast and crew will appear in person.

Thunder Road. Comedy. Written and directed by Jim Cummings. Produced by Natalie Metzger, Zack Parker, Benjamin.

From Rustic Films. (Color, 2018, USA, 92 minutes, not rated) Starring Jim Cummings, Kendall Farr, Nican Robinson, Jocelyn DeBoer, Macon Blair, Chelsea Edmundson. Jim Arnaud.

A police officer in a Texas town, always tries to do the right thing, but he has more often than not done the wrong thing resulting in having a less than perfect life. He often tries to plan his actions whenever he can, but his impetuous nature and hot-temperedness often makes him do something else he didn’t plan, while he also does not have the best gauge of what is socially acceptable or what is standard social convention. In that imperfect life, he didn’t have the best relationship with his dancer/dance teacher mother, as didn’t his two siblings. He and his wife Ros have been separated for a year now on her initiative, which has resulted in him only seeing their now nine year old daughter Crystal on the weekends. And many of his fellow officers only tolerate him, including the police chief, with his married partner, Nate Lewis, looking out for him as much as he can do so. Two events have the potential to unravel Jim’s life even further. First, his mother passes away. He still wants to do right by her even after death, and by association wants even more to do right for Crystal in having that parent-offspring relationship he didn’t have with his mother. And second, Ros not only files for divorce, but in planning on moving out of town with her current boyfriend Chris, petitions for full custody of Crystal.

Sunday, August 18 at 6:30 p.m. Jim Cummings will appear in person.

Also on Sunday, August 18: Aaron and Justin’s Shorts Block, and an Unannounced Side Project.

Grab your tickets to all events now.

Cinelounge® Sunset is located at 6464 Sunset Blvd., Hollywood, CA 90028. Capacity is limited, and tickets and refreshments must be purchased in advance.