The first trailer for It Ends With Us, starring Blake Lively and Justin Baldoni, introduces Lily Bloom’s rollercoaster of romance and trauma.

The film, adapted from Colleen Hoover’s novel of the same name, follows Lily Bloom (Lively), a woman who overcomes a traumatic childhood to embark on a new chapter in Boston, where she chases her lifelong dream of opening her own business, a flower shop.

Along the way, she meets charming neurosurgeon Ryle Kincaid (Baldoni), whom she sparks an intense connection with. But as they fall deeper in love, Lily starts to see sides of Ryle that remind her of her parents’ relationship.

Life gets even more confusing for Lily when her first love, Atlas Corrigan (Brandon Sklenar), suddenly reenters her life and her relationship with Ryle is upended. This pushes Lily to realize that in order to make difficult decisions for her future, she must learn to rely on her own strength.

The trailer (below) shows Lively’s Lily being swept up in romance with Ryle (Baldoni), but when violence surfaces she says, “But 15 seconds. That’s all it takes to completely change everything.” The trailer flashes back to young love between Lily and Atlas (Sklenar) and teases a reunion towards its end. “If one day you had a daughter, what would you say to her if she came to you and she said the person she loved was hurting her,” she asks Ryle. “What would you say to her?”

Lively ends the footage with a voiceover: “As hard as this choice is, we break the pattern, or the pattern breaks us.”

Baldoni also directs It Ends With Us, from Columbia Pictures/Sony and Wayfarer studios, with Alex Saks, Jamey Heath and Christy Hall serving as producers. Baldoni, Lively, Hoover, Steve Sarowitz, Andrea Ajemian and Andrew Calof are also executive producers. And Jenny Slate, Hasan Minhaj, Amy Morton, Alex Neustaedter and Isabela Ferrer round out the cast.

Last month, Hoover opened up to People magazine about Lively’s performance in the big-screen adaptation of her best-selling novel, saying that it was “captivating, stunning and emotional.”

“There aren’t enough words to describe her phenomenal talent,” the author added. “Blake Lively truly brought Lily Bloom to life in a way that exceeded all my expectations.”

Hoover released It Ends With Us in 2016, but it gained a new life in 2021 when it blew up on “BookTok.” Its popularity on the platform made her the best-selling novelist in the U.S. at the time, with more than 20 million books sold.

The movie hits theaters Aug. 9.