FITZROY WYNN (Christopher Plummer) is part ham actor, part theatrical genius, a man whose immense ego is being eaten away by his certain age, which is advancing. He has the fine, slightly worn good looks of an old-time matinee idol who finds it difficult to go to bed at night after the show.

When first seen in ''Lily in Love,'' which opens today at the Baronet, Fitz is on a New York stage, playing the last scene in the final performance of a long-running hit comedy, written by his wife, Lily (Maggie Smith). In performance, Fitz is something to behold. He teases belly- laughs out of mere giggles. A pause between two quite ordinary lines of dialogue is recklessly elongated until it takes on cosmically comic significance. If left to his own devices, Fitz would never allow the curtain to come down.

Fitz is incorrigible on stage and off, but Lily has learned how to put up with it, even with his patronizing her as his ''in-house writer.'' At the beginning of ''Lily in Love'' Fitz is nearing his wit's end. Not only has his show closed, but Lily has also written a smashing script for a new film with no part for him. ''If you want it,'' she tells him blithely, ''the woman's role is yours.'' Why can't he play the male lead?

Among other things, Lily says, the role is that of a handsome, young, European aristocrat and, she points out kindly, he's not European. Fitz reacts much in the manner of John Barrymore being stung by Carole Lombard's hornet in ''Twentieth Century.'' He might well play a death scene for her, but that wouldn't get him the part, only a funeral. He must be practical.

With the help of his longtime agent, Jerry Silber (Adolph Green), and the magic of a makeup man, he disguises himself as one Roberto Terranova, a blond, youngish Italian actor with a profile more majestic than a cigar-store Indian's. Fitz not only lands the role but, when he meets Lily for the first time in Budapest, where the film is being shot, it's also apparent that, if he wants, ''Roberto'' can land Lily.

''What's your husband like?'' he asks Lily. Lily: ''Oh, Roberto, I don't want to talk about my marriage on such a beautiful day.'' Roberto pushes on: ''I saw your husband's 'Romeo' in London. . . .'' Lily: ''Was n't it a hoot? Don't you think 48 is a bit old for Romeo?''

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.