AFTER DEATH is a documentary exploring the nature of Near Death Experiences with experts, people telling their stories and recreations of some of the more notable examples. AFTER DEATH is a fascinating, inspiring look into the nature of thousands of near death experiences, the scientific evidence, the encounters people had with the afterlife, Heaven, Hell, and Jesus, and how the experience affected people, with some wonderful special effects and a strong message of hope, love, purpose, meaning, and life.

The movie opens by looking at an in-depth scientific study of reported Near Death Experiences conducted by Dr. Michael Sadom. Sadom’s study only examined the stories people told about being unconscious yet having out-of-body experiences where they could view the procedures that happened to them while they were in operating rooms or being treated by paramedics. The study found that the people’s description of what they saw were rather accurate. Dr. Sadom believes that this provides some scientific confirmation of people’s experiences. However, he says that the other experiences people relate, about traveling through tunnels, seeing dead relatives, going to Heaven or Hell, seeing dead relatives, or speaking to Jesus, can’t be scientifically confirmed because they’re too subjective.

Researchers note that the Near Death Experiences are remarkably similar, but with unique twists. Also, the filmmakers interview numerous people about their experiences and even recreate some of them. Special effects are added to punctuate the stories.

AFTER DEATH is a fascinating, inspiring look into the nature of thousands of near death experiences. The scientific data confirms that at least parts of the experiences are real.

The movie’s second half, however, delves deeply into the spiritual nature of many of the experiences. Most people have positive spiritual experiences that bring them overwhelming feelings of health, beauty, hope, and love. Statistics show, though, that 27 percent of the people have negative, or harrowing experiences. For example, one man in the movie says he found himself being shoved down a dark, shadowy tunnel by gray figures with malicious intent. It became so intense that he found himself calling out to the Jesus of his youth, whereupon Jesus whisked him away to a heavenly place and told him he needs to return to his life and express love to other people. Sadly, he said his wife and children have so far rejected Christ’s message of love to him.

AFTER DEATH has wonderful special effects that help make it an engaging cinematic experience. Best of all, however, it has a strong Christian worldview promoting hope, love, purpose, meaning, and life. It encourages viewers to stop and consider Eternity. It also tells viewers, “What we say and do really matters.”

AFTER DEATH has no heretical or aberrant teachings about Jesus, salvation, Heaven, or Hell. It steers clear of turning any of the near death experiences into specific theological conclusions.