In celebration of its 30th anniversary, The Killing Fields, the haunting war story based on true events from the 1975 Khmer Rouge takeover of Cambodia, will make its Blu-ray HD debut today, January 7.

Warner Bros. Home Entertainment (WBHE) is releasing the film, which stars Sam Waterston (TV's "The Newsroom"), Haing S. Ngor (Heaven & Earth), and John Malkovich (In the Line of Fire). The Killing Fields was directed by Roland Joffé (The Mission) and produced by David Puttnam (Chariots of Fire).

The Killing Fields won three Oscars (1984) for Best Supporting Actor (Ngor), Best Cinematography (Chris Menges) and Best Editing (Jim Clark) as well as nominations for Best Picture, Best Screenplay (Bruce Robinson), Best Director (Roland Joffé) and Best Actor in a Leading Role (Waterston). WBHE will release The Killing Fields in a premium 36-page Blu-ray book ($27.98 SRP), which includes rare photos, production notes and other material. Synopsis: This emotional and brutally honest true story follows Pulitzer Prize-winning New York Times reporter Sydney Schanberg (Waterston), who remains in Cambodia in 1975 after the government falls. He convinces his friend and translator Dith Pran (Ngor) to stay with him to report on the bloodbath perpetrated by one of the most brutal regimes of the 20th century and on the United States' role in precipitating the horror. The two continue to work until the Khmer Rouge, the terrorist government that killed nearly 3 million, arrests them. Schanberg is eventually released and returns to New York. Pran is sent for execution but barely manages a daring escape from the killing fields and from Cambodia. With the help of Schanberg, Pran emigrates to the U.S. and becomes a staff photographer for the New York Times. Special Features:

Commentary by director Roland Joffé

Theatrical trailer

The Killing Fields 30th Anniversary Edition Blu-ray Rating: R

Run Time: 141 min.

Street Date: January 7, 2014

Order Date: December 3, 2013

Pricing: $27.98 SRP

Catalog#/UPC: 1000436984 /883929374267 Note: All enhanced content listed above is subject to change. Academy Award(s) and Oscar(s) are registered trademarks and services marks of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Blu-ray Disc and Blu-ray and the logos are the trademarks of Blu-ray Disc Association. Warner Home Video Blu-ray Discs offer resolution six times higher than standard definition DVDs, as well as extraordinarily vibrant contrast and color and beautifully crisp sound. The format also provides a higher level of interactivity, with instant access to extra features via a seamless menu bar where viewers can enjoy features without leaving or interrupting the film. About Warner Bros. Home Entertainment Inc.

Warner Bros. Home Entertainment (WBHE) brings together Warner Bros. Entertainment's home video, digital distribution and interactive entertainment businesses in order to maximize current and next-generation distribution scenarios. An industry leader since its inception, WBHE oversees the global distribution of content through packaged goods (Blu-ray Disc and DVD) and digital media in the form of electronic sell-through and video-on-demand via cable, satellite, online and mobile channels, and is a significant developer and publisher for console and online video game titles worldwide. WBHE distributes its product through third party retail partners and licensees, as well as directly to consumers through WBShop.com and WB Ultra. About Warner Home Video

With operations in 90 international territories, Warner Home Video, a division of Warner Bros. Home Entertainment Inc., commands the largest home entertainment distribution infrastructure in the global video marketplace. Warner Home Video's film library is the largest of any studio, offering top quality new and vintage titles from the repertoires of Warner Bros. Pictures, Turner Entertainment, Castle Rock Entertainment, HBO Video and New Line Cinema.

To post a comment, you must register and login.