MIAMI (AP) Former Miami Heat forward Mike Miller said Friday he did not want details of a failed investment with someone accused of operating a multimillion-dollar real-estate fraud released publicly.

Miller said his attorney, Andrew Fine, was not authorized to tell The Miami Herald for an article posted online late Thursday night that he was considering a lawsuit. Miller, who now plays for the Memphis Grizzlies, told The Associated Press on Friday he's not even sure how much money he lost.

"I regret the unauthorized information shared disclosing a potential lawsuit and my private business dealings in the recent news reports," Miller wrote in a text message to the AP. "The Heat has always supported me and my family and we are grateful for our relationship with the team and its owners. They have given me and my family more than we could have ever asked for and for that I am so thankful!!"

Miller said he has not personally discussed the failed investment with anyone from the franchise. He also reached out to at least two Heat officials Friday to apologize for any misunderstanding.

In an unrelated twist, the Heat have invited Miller and Jarvis Varnado - both members of last season's team - back for Tuesday's championship ring ceremony. Miller was designated as Miami's amnesty player last summer and signed as a free agent with the Grizzlies. Varnado was waived by the Heat earlier this week.

A Heat employee allegedly introduced Miller to Haider Zafar, a Pakistani native and U.S. legal resident who is awaiting trial on wire fraud and other charges. Fine testified at Zafar's bond hearing in August that Miller and other Heat players, along with other Florida residents, invested $8 million with Zafar.

A person with knowledge of the case told AP that the other players are forward Rashard Lewis and guard James Jones, speaking on condition of anonymity because the case remains active.

Fine did not immediately return an email. The Heat did not have immediate comment Friday.

Zafar's 135-count indictment - which does not mention the basketball players - describes a scheme he allegedly used to swindle a Washington businessman of $10 million between 2008 and 2010. Zafar pleaded not guilty this summer to all charges.

---

AP Legal Affairs Writer Curt Anderson contributed to this report.