Reshmi Ghosh is a television actress who has acted in many popular serials. She was born and brought up in Kolkata. She has done her schooling from Carmel Convent School. She completed her graduation from Jogomaya Devi College with first class marks. This Bengali beauty has grown up from being a very shy girl to a confident model and an aspiring actress. Reshmi Ghosh has a sister who was a student of Loreto College.

She walked away with the Miss India-Earth title. She was also rewarded the second National Costume Award for the outfit specially designed for her by one of the most reputed designers of the Indian subcontinent, Ritu Kumar. After coming back to India Reshmi Ghosh joined the Green Peace Organization. She has also done some major modelling assignments include Bacardi Lemon Show, Woolen Garments and walking the ramps for Sabyasachi Mukherjee, Kiran Uttam Ghosh and Anamika Khanna. Her major ad campaigns include Khadims, Ibiza, Brainware Computers, Sunlight, Junior Horlicks and Coca Cola. She had also featured in ventures of an agency dealing with import and export business of various fabrics. She has also done ad campaigns for Madhushree Sarees in Kolkata. Reshmi Ghosh was also crowned the Sananda Tilottama pageant in the most prestigious beauty contest of Kolkata. She has won accolades from the best in this show business.

Reshmi Ghosh has also appeared in many Bengali films but did not get much success. The year 2001 saw her as a more matured actress as she acted in two National Film Development Corporation (NFDC) films. Later she shifted her base to Mumbai. There she got selected for enacting the role of Bhoomi in the popular Balaji television serial 'Kyunki Saas Bhi Kabhi Bahu Thi' in the serial she portrayed a negative character. Her acting skills were well praised by the directors and audiences. She later on acted in many other serials like 'Karam Apnaa Apnaa', 'Tere Liye' and others. She also took part in the dance reality show 'Nach Baliye 4.'

Television Works of Reshmi Ghosh

Kyunki Saas Bhi Kabhi Bahu Thi

Kahe Naa Kahe

Karam Apnaa Apnaa

Kaun Jeetega Bollywood Ka Ticket

Kayamath - Mallika

Nach Baliye 4 - Herself

Maan Rahe Tera Pitaah

Tere Liye - Nupur