Reshmi Ghosh, the Bengali beauty, has grown up from being a shy girl to a confident model and an aspiring actress. Her claim to fame is her appearance at the Miss Earth Pageant where she represented the country.

The Fa Femina Miss India Earth 2002 has already had her share of name and fame. She was crowned Tilo Hama (Sananda-Rakme) in Kolkata in 1999. Reshmi has won accolades from the best in the business.

India's prominent designer Ritu Kumar who designed her outfits terms Reshmi an absolutely beautiful woman with a strong sense of Indian identity when dressed in saris. With 76 contestants in the fray at the Miss Earth contest, chances were that each one would end up looking like the other so Ritu designed ethnic Indian outfits for her.

For Reshmi, Ritu chose a different colour palette - white saris and fuschias to compliment her dusky looks and help her stand out. Returning the compliments, Reshmi says, "It was a privilege to meet Ritu Kumar. Her creations are out of this world. I loved the way I look in her white sari."

She learnt several important lessons during the course of training for Miss India. As she explains: "I learnt to be confident, poised, composed and improved my communication skills. It was imbibed on my mind that 'I am unique,' and was taught how to control my emotions and sentiments."

When asked about the plus and the tough side of the training, she explains: "Each and every session at the training, starting from the work-out, art of living, catwalk training, hair and skin care, speech and diction classes, workshops on Indian art, music and dance etc. helped me grow as an individual. Therefore it would be difficult for me to single out any one class as the most effective. I found the speech and diction classes by Sabira Merchant, very tough initially."

She had started preparing herself mentally and physically eight months before she went for the selection rounds.

Reshmi did not win the Miss Earth Pageant, but still it was a memorable experience for her. Apart from keeping a watch on her wardrobe, Reshmi also worked on her knowledge of current affairs and keeping her body in shape by sticking to a regulated diet.

She says," Winning and losing as we all know are a part of life. If I do not succeed, I will move ahead. That is my principle in life, because I believe life has so much more to offer."

The Bengali beauty has grown up from being a shy girl to a confident model and an aspiring actress. She is already playing a few important roles in Bollywood movies. In Saazish she plays the character of a very strong woman who loves herself and loves money. It's ironical that Reshmi in real life describes herself to be emotional and touchy. Her role is quite similar to the one played by Bipasha Basu in her debut film Ajnabee. Reshmi says, "I have been often told that we have a similar screen presence. We look alike because of our dusky skin and large eyes.

Till now, Reshmi has acted in a few Bengali films where they prefer "fair and fragile" actresses. In the year 2001, she acted in two National Films Development Corporation (NFDC) films, and the next logical step was obviously Bollywood. Having set her sights high, the sky is the limit for Reshmi Ghosh. And with perspiration and inspiration backing her dreams, she is bound to do fantastically well.