Reshmi Name Meaning in English

What does the name Reshmi mean? What is the meaning of the name Reshmi, lucky number, lucky stone, origin and religion.

Name Reshmi generally means Silky, is of Indian origin, Name Reshmi is a Feminine (or Girl) name. Person with name Reshmi are mainly Hindu by religion.

Reshmi Name Meaning, Origin & Details

Meaning: Ray of light or Sun rays, Silken, Full of light Hindi: प्रकाश या सूर्य की किरणों का रेश, रेशम, प्रकाश से भरा Gender: Girl Origin: hindi Religion: Hindu Suitable for: Girls / Female / Women Hardness: Medium hard to pronounce Uniqueness: It is a common name Short & Easy: Not very short Syllables: 2.5 Syllables, 6 Letters and 1 Words

Reshmi Name Meaning in Hindi ⟶

Related or Similar Names

If you like the meanings or synonyms of name Reshmi; we have created list of popular names that can be considered as alternative of the name Reshmi.

Below names are with similar meaning as Ray of light or Sun rays, Silken, Full of light. Explore the list below for names that not only share a similar meaning to "Ray of light or Sun rays, Silken, Full of light" but also encapsulate the essence and significance associated with the name "Reshmi."

Need Sibling Names For Reshmi?

Sisters sibling names for Reshmi can be chosen from the list below.

Hindi Name Birth Star (Janam Nakshatra), Rashi & Syllables

Reshmi Name Lucky Number 9

Reshmi Name Numerology And Personality

Reshmi has the numerology 2. People with numerology 2 are known to be one of the most cooperative and that is because they are very quick to adapt to whatever environment they choose to be in. They do not keep overthinking everything rather they start to work immediately.

The gender of this Reshmi is Girl these people are also very inclusive of everyone which makes them considering and they do not let the people around them feel left out. They are always very compassionate and affectionate towards everyone and that is why they are heart of any get together. The meaning of this Reshmi is Ray of light or Sun rays, Silken, Full of light.

These people are always the first ones to mediate whenever something serious occurs and they are also very good at partnering with people which definitely makes them one a kind.

Popular personalities with Reshmi Name.

Reshmi Name Wallpaper

Write reshmi in spanish, Reshmi name 3D wallpaper and writing styles, Write Reshmi name on photo online, Reshmi name writing style online, Write Reshmi name on image online, Write Reshmi name pic & wallpaper, Reshmi 3D name wallpapers editing, Reshmi new wallpaper, Reshmi 3d name creator online, Reshmi name background maker, Create my name in style for Reshmi

See Reshmi Name Wallpaper ⟶

How People Search Reshmi