Frank Anthony Castillo (April 1, 1969 – July 28, 2013) was an American Major League Baseball starting pitcher. Castillo played for the Chicago Cubs (1991–1997), Colorado Rockies (1997), Detroit Tigers (1998), Toronto Blue Jays (2000), Boston Red Sox (2001–2002, 2004), and Florida Marlins (2005).

Sol turns thousands of years of human wisdom from the world’s spiritual traditions into a totally unique personality profile. To get your own profile, check compatibility with friends and much more, download the Sol App today.

Some of their strengths

Frank Castillo has many admirable traits.

Based on spiritual traditions from around the world, they are someone who can be described as Adventurous, Generous, Intelligent, Confident, Brave, Honest, and Energetic.

Independent and Brave

According to Mysticism’s Astrology tradition, Frank Castillo is someone who is an independent, brave, and honest person who approaches life with energy, intuition, passion, and generosity. A person who sees life as a journey not a destination.

Passionate and Intense

Based on Daoism’s Ba-Zi or ‘Chinese Zodiac’ tradition, people who know Frank Castillo well know them as someone who can be passionate, proud, and intense, like the sun or a blazing fire.

Imaginative and Sentimental

According to Hinduism’s Jyotisha or ‘Vedic Astrology’ tradition, many would also describe Frank Castillo as someone who is imaginative, sentimental, and in touch with emotions.

A person who has extremely good memory and analytical skills, likes to make sure that everyone gets along, enjoys all kinds of situations and people, has a talent for travel and languages, and who makes lifelong friends.

Justice-seeking and Insightful

Based on the Mayan Tzolk’in or ‘Mayan Astrology’ tradition, Frank Castillo is someone who tends to be intolerant of unfairness in life, and who has an uncanny ability to reveal the truth in any situation.

They are also someone who is intuitive, imaginative, and an agent of change, and who is always dreaming of life's great possibilities and partnering with people to try to achieve those possibilities.

Independent and Dynamic

According to Judaism’s Kabbalah tradition, Frank Castillo tends to be someone who is independent, dynamic, and courageous. Who can be positive, energetic, self-reliant, and adventurous, and who can make friends easily.

Some of Frank Castillo's challenges

While Frank Castillo has many strengths, nobody is perfect. They also have some challenging traits they need to manage.

For example, Frank Castillo can be Short-tempered, Impulsive, Hesitant, Narcissistic, Arrogant, Status-seeking, and Irritable.

Short-tempered and Impulsive

One of Frank Castillo's key challenges is that they are someone who can come across as short-tempered and impulsive.

Irritable and Moody

Frank Castillo is someone who can be irritable and moody, have a tendency to experience self-doubt, be too secretive, can take too many risks, and who can have an extreme approach to managing personal finances.

Aggressive and Domineering

Finally, Frank Castillo also can be aggressive, impatient, impulsive, and short-tempered.