Here are five fantastic female weird fiction authors for you!

Margaret St. Clair – Certainly few writers in speculative fiction are more deserving of a revival—or more undeservedly neglected. I know I am not alone in thinking this way, as the VanderMeers included her work in both The Weird and the forthcoming The Big Book of Science Fiction. – Weird Fiction Review. Read one of her short stories for free here.

K. J. Bishop – Read one of her short stories for free here.

Gertrude Barrows Bennett (a.k.a. Francis Stevens) – Read her full novel Citadel of Fear free here. In the midst of the Women of Genre Fiction Challenge, I’d like to direct your attention to Gertrude Barrows Bennett—possibly the most important female writer of speculative fiction that you’ve probably never heard of. Her sustained run of fantasy fiction published between 1917 and 1923—around a dozen stories, including five novels—have led to a growing acceptance of her importance to the history of the genre, following decades of neglect. Bennett (1884–1948) turned to writing when her journalist/explorer husband died while on an expedition, soon followed by her father, leaving her with a newborn daughter and invalid mother to support. – Worlds Without End

Liz Williams – Read one of her short stories free here. She has a Ph.D. in philosophy of science from Cambridge. She has had short fiction published in Asimov’s, Interzone, The Third Alternative and Realms of Fantasy, among others. – Fantasy Literature

5. Margo Lanagan – Writers rarely achieve international and multi-genre renown on the basis of just one short story, but that was exactly what happened with Margo Lanagan and “Singing My Sister Down,” which appeared in her collection Black Juice (published by Gollancz in 2004 and HarperCollins in 2005). “Singing My Sister Down” is written from the point of view of a boy watching the slow execution of his sister, and is a spectacular example of how Lanagan’s work provides “a glimpse into weird, wondrous, and sometimes terrifying worlds” (from the starred review for Black Juice in School Library Journal). – Nightmare Magazine