Brenda Russell (née Gordon; born April 8, 1949) is an American singer-songwriter, producer, and keyboardist. Russell has a diverse musical range that encompasses R&B, pop, soul, dance, and jazz. She has received five Grammy nominations.

Life and career

In her late teens, she joined the Toronto production of Hair, during which time she had begun to play the piano. In the early 1970s, she married musician Brian Russell when they were both in the band Dr. Music. The couple went on to produce Rufus's "Please Pardon Me" (on their album Rufusized) and contribute backup vocals to Neil Sedaka's "Laughter in the Rain". The Russells also featured as backing vocalists for Elton John's concert at Wembley Stadium on June 21, 1975. Credited as Brian & Brenda, they released two albums on John's Rocket label being Word Called Love in 1976 and 1977's Supersonic Lover.

In 1979, Russell's self-titled debut album was released by A&M Records. The album got to number 20 on the Billboard Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart. A track from the LP called "So Good So Right" also got to number 8 on the Billboard Adult Contemporary Songs chart, number 15 on the Billboard Hot Soul Songs and number 30 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart.

In 1983, she released her third album, Two Eyes, on Warner Bros. Records. The album got to number 16 on the Blues & Soul Top British Soul Albums chart in the UK.Russell eventually relocated to Sweden where she began writing songs for her next album.

Russell then issued her follow up album, Kiss Me with the Wind, in 1990. The album got to number 25 on the UK Blues & Soul Top British Soul Albums chart. She then produced and guested on Phil Perry's 1991 album The Heart of a Man. The album rose to No. 17 on the Billboard Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart. Russell also featured on the 1991 charity single "Voices That Care", which reached number 11 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number 6 on the Billboard Adult Contemporary Songs chart.

She then released the album Soul Talkin' in 1993 on EMI Records. Russell went on to produce Diana Ross on her 1995 LP Take Me Higher. The album got to number 10 on the UK Pop Albums chart. She also contributed to the score for the 1998 film How Stella Got Her Groove Back and appeared in the film Liberty Heights where she also performed two songs for the film's soundtrack.

In 2005, saw a Broadway musical version of Alice Walker's The Color Purple. Produced by Oprah Winfrey, the show's score was written by Russell and lyricists-composers Allee Willis and Stephen Bray. Russell and her co-writers were nominated for a Tony Award (for Best Score) and a Grammy Award (in the Best Musical Show Album category).

In 2016, Russell received a Grammy nomination for The Color Purple in the category of Best Musical Theater Album.

Legacy

Artists such as Hot Chip have also been influenced by Russell.

Accolades

Grammy Awards

Russell has also been nominated for a Tony Award.

Filmography

Russell featured as a singer in the feature films American Hot Wax, The Santa Clause, and Liberty Heights.

To learn more about the artist, please visit