Alexandra “Alex” Brenda (Russell) Birch

A Person of Faith -

Alexandra “Alex” Brenda (Russell) Birch, age 68, of Mechanicsburg, and formerly of Camp Hill, died on Friday, January 19, 2018. Alex was born on Saturday, July 16, 1949 in Southampton, NY to the late Edwin Fairman Russell and Sarah Consuelo (Spencer-Churchill) Russell. In addition to her parents, Alex is preceded in death by: Marguerite “Maze” Blouin, who helped raise Alex and her sisters and who was a second mother to them.

Alex’s survivors include her three sisters: Serena Balfour and her husband, Neil, of England, Consuelo Judson of New York City, NY, Jacqueline “Jackie” Williams and her husband, Eugene, of New York City, NY; her 12 nieces and nephews; and her beloved dog, Molly.

A person of faith, Alex was a lifelong member of the Episcopal Church who attended Mt. Calvary Episcopal Church in Camp Hill for many years and St. Luke’s Episcopal Church in Mechanicsburg. Alex always found much comfort in her faith and her church involvement. She was proud to have worked at the Patriot News where her father, Ed Russell, served as publisher for many years. She loved the French language and enjoyed speaking French especially with Maze who taught her the language. Alex enjoyed traveling, especially in Europe. Animals were close to her heart and she deeply loved her companion, Molly, who was faithful and attentive to Alex till the end.

A brief time of gathering with Alex’s family and a prayer of thanksgiving will be held at 2:00 p.m. on Sunday, January 21, 2018 in Oak Terrace at Bethany Village West, 325 Wesley Drive, Mechanicsburg, PA 17055; with Reverend Dr. Brand W. Eaton offering the prayer. Cremation with release by scattering in England will be private and at the convenience of the family.

The family sends their most heartfelt thanks to everyone at Bethany Village who so lovingly cared for Alex. Contributions in celebration of Alex’s life can be made to any animal charity of the donor’s choosing.

Alex’s family has entrusted her care to Myers – Buhrig Funeral Home and Crematory in Mechanicsburg, (717) 766-3421. Read Alex’s full obituary and sign her official guest book at Buhrig.com.