Brenda Russell has built her real estate career on area expertise, attention to detail, ultimate professionalism and exceptional service. A 20+ year veteran, she has been included in New Jersey Monthly magazine as a 5 Star Professional since 2012 and has garnered NJ Realtors® Circle of Excellence awards recognizing her demonstrated merit in the field of salesmanship. Brenda's clients speak enthusiastically of her dedication: "Brenda is an honest, established professional who worked tirelessly 24/7 to find a suitable and qualified buyer for our home. Her advice, demeanor and experience were invaluable to us. We encountered several hiccups during the attorney review process . . . but they were all smoothed over with Brenda's advice and experience. She had encountered these issues numerous times throughout her career and offered several solutions to what seemed overwhelming problems to us." -DF "With laser-like focus Brenda guided us and the contract to closing. She addresses issues promptly, professionally and passionately. Brenda brings a personal touch to the relationship that inspires confidence and security during a stressful time." -MBF "To say that Brenda is a person who is knowledgeable of the real estate marketplace would be a major understatement. She is extremely analytical, thorough and resourceful. These traits tend to slow down the productivity of most people. With Brenda there is an amazing velocity when it comes to getting things accomplished." -JT Native to Western New York, Brenda holds a Bachelor of Arts Degree from Lake Forest College, Illinois and has been a resident of Madison since 1986. She has served the community as a Board member for both the Jersey Battered Women's Service and the Madison Public Library and as a member of the Planning Board of Madison. A mother of two, Brenda was an active member of Madison's Junior School and High School PTOs. She remains involved with various community activities in addition to pursuing her avid love of skiing, tennis and paddle tennis. Brenda's geographical areas of expertise include Morris, Union, Somerset and Essex Counties. Professional memberships: National Association of Realtors New Jersey Board of Realtors Garden State Multiple Listing Service