Suspiria is a 1977 Giallo occult horror film directed by Dario Argento. The plot follows a young American dancer who joins a mysterious German ballet school however, as her time there evolves she becomes weary and concerned about the dark secrets behind the school.

Suspiria is no stranger to many ‘top ten’ lists with its ambiguous sensational tones of all things witchy, haunting audience members long after their viewing. This film has always been on my radar yet, I never understood its alluring appeal. That was until I recently took a chance and watched it. And now here I am completely bewitched and enthralled by Argento’s vision of beautiful anarchy. Suspiria grabs the viewers attention within the opening sequence; the anxiety inducing music alongside the kaleidoscope of colours blasting across the frame conjure an illusive dream world which helps cement its position as a timeless piece of incredible filmmaking.

The film’s composer is the Italian prog-rock band, Goblin. Goblin and Argento had worked before together in his previous title ‘Deep Red‘ (1975). Suspiria’s attentive score racks heavily throughout, the heaping and creeping synthetic tones both bewilder and entice the viewer into a dream-like state that rings more to the nightmare than a blissful fantasy. The symphony composed features slight demonic whispering and chanting, almost like a curse or a spell. This combined with the irregular use of synthesizers and clanging banging screeches enhance the blurring of a visual and auditory piece that allows Argento to spin a state of dread.

Suspiria has an immense lighting set up where every set is multicolored and dripping with a hyper realistic style. The film often has non-directed coloured light sources. For example, in one scene Suzy (our protagonist [Jessica Harper]) lies in bed ready to turn the lights off. Instead of being met with expected darkness, a bright glowing green light is cascaded over the walls, which transitions into warm red tones being splashed into the frame. The randomness of such colours is ignored by the characters as if what we are seeing is not actually happening on the screen and is in our minds only. The evilness that lingers in the schools halls has managed to penetrate our senses and twist our vision to see what ‘it’ wants us to see. It can be argued that it is an aura of magic like a witches spell.

Argento creates a surreal world through the use of wide angle lenses that create the image of exaggerated large dance halls that appear daunting and haunting. Scenes are often drawn out with long takes, which force the spectator into an uncomfortable position, as if they are watching something they shouldn’t be, producing a sense of voyeurism.

The nature of the school is immediately suspicious, the hallways are unnaturally long, with the ceilings and doorways being oddly high and tall. However, this works to the film’s advantage as characters often look as if they are being swallowed up by these large doorways and condensed into the mystical land that is the ‘world of Suspiria‘.

It was common at the time for Italian filmmakers to use additional dialogue recording. In Suspiria the actors spoke in their native language, with some actors speaking German, and others speaking English or Italian. The dubbing creates a disconnection from the reality of the characters. However, this is done on a beneficial note. The movie is constantly toying with the audience’s senses (sound, sight, touch) so when we see the actors dialogue as seemingly unnatural (even though there is nothing particularly wrong with it) it creates a sense of uneasiness where we feel that something is not right but we are not sure what.