Kolkata born Miss India Earth 2002, Reshmi Ghosh is not a new face on small screen. The sultry super sexy siren is one upbeat lady full of cheer and positive energy something that comes across in her full-throated laughter. With her talent, perseverance and hard work, she has made a name for herself in the world of small screen. The gracious lady is currently essaying the negative lead Urmila for SaharaOne Television’s saas bahu drama ‘Piya Ka Ghar Pyaara Lage’. Reshmi in an candid conversation speaks about her role in the serial, her love for acting and lots more….

Briefly explain us your character in Piya Ka Ghar…

Urmila’s character has grey shades to the hilt. She belongs to a lower middle class family of Kapoorthala. She had lost her parents at a very tender age and had never experienced even a single delicacy of life. Like every other girl she had always dreamt of getting married in a very rich family and lead a peaceful and luxurious life. Thus she marries Angat but her dreams are shattered when she gets to know that Angat has lost whatever he had. Now she is back to basics but when she gets a chance to attend Pinki’s wedding her dying dreams see a ray of hope. Urmila’s character is negative who for the sake of security in her life starts creating misunderstandings and disputes in Harbans’s family. In order to succeed in her plan she first take Rano in her confidence then creates differences between Rano and Sejal, and also between Sejal and Bittu so that the family throws out Sejal from the house. She at last achieves what she wants, to get rid of Sejal. Now Urmila’s next step is to have the whole family out of their house thus taking over their riches and lead a luxurious life. In short Urmila is a girl belonging from a very lower middle class of the society who wants to achieve all her dreams for which she’s ready to cross any obstacle and make or break anything and everything that may elude her from attaining her dream.

How does it feel to play Urmila in the serial?

I am super excited and I think it is really an honour to be chosen for this different role. The production house was trying to rope me for quite some time. Despite my busy shooting schedules I accepted to play Urmila.

How has the experience been being a part of ‘Piya Ka Ghar…’?

Oh! It is good. I am getting an opportunity to work with Sanjeeda Sheikh, Muni Jha and Giriraj Kabra. All the others in the show are also fantastic to work.

Tell us about your background in the field of acting?

Since being crowned Miss India Earth 2002 I have appeared in several Bollywood films as well as serials and advertisements. I debuted on small screen with ‘Kyunki Saas Bhi Kabhi Bahu Thi’. After that I did shows like Kahe Na Kahe, Karam Apna Apna, Kayamath, Tera Liye, Mata Ki Chowki, Shobha Somnath Ki, and Baba Aisa Varr Dhoondo.

What prompted you to take up this role?

I have been playing different characters since I entered this industry. I was looking for a challenging role. I accepted the role of Urmila so I could perform something different for the viewers. I think after playing this role I will be remembered as a multi-talented actor.

What do you think about yourself as an actor and your views on Tellywood?

Frankly I think acting is in my blood and if I wish I can be onsets all the time. Acting is my first love. On the TV industry I think it is indeed very fascinating and has much scope for an actor to perform and reach the masses. That’s why off late even filmstars have started descending to TV. Once you are into it you can never leave it.

What is your take on a person’s beauty?

For me beauty of a person is his heart and soul that shine beyond the physical appearance. It is the inside that means more than the outside.

For more information, please contact:

Atul Malikram