This media is not currently available online. Contact the Image and Film Licensing team about access

Description

Physical description

Ghetto Currency, 50 kronen, German Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia. Used in Theresienstadt Ghetto (Terezin, Czechoslovakia). The Theresienstadt Ghetto notes were printed by the National Bank in Prague.The notes have a central vignette of Moses holding the tablets containing the Ten Commandments. They are dated 1 January 1943 but did not see actual circulation until May, 1943.The notes were worthless except to rent library books and the elaborately engraved style and inscriptions were copied from the Litzmannstadt (Lodz) Ghetto issues of 1940. The note appears slightly worn, creased and discoloured.

History note

The Theresienstadt Ghetto, located near Prague, was a creation of SS General Reinhard Heydrich, appointed Reichsprotektor of Bohemia and Moravia (Czechoslovakia) in late 1941. Originally, it was designed as a "model" camp for holding prominent and respected Jews and to impress the international community. It was the only camp the International Red Cross was allowed to visit. A Nazi propaganda film, "The Fuhrer Gives a City to the Jews", was made on the subject . A Council of Elders (Judenrat) was responsible for running the Ghetto and reported to the SS. Ultimately, the Theresienstadt Ghetto was used as a transit point to the Auschwitz extermination camp. One of 61 ghetto notes found in an unlabelled bag. Three of the best condition notes of each value have been catalogued (see CUR 20913 : CUR 20933).

Object Details

Category

Currency

Related period

Second World War (production), Second World War (association)

Production date

1943-01-01

Materials

whole: paper

Catalogue number

CUR 20930

Our collections information

We have over a million object records online, and we are adding to this all the time. Our records are never finished. Sometimes we discover new information that changes what we know about an object, such as who made it or used it. Sometimes we change how an object is interpreted. We sometimes make mistakes in our spelling, transcription or categorisation, or miss information out of our records.

Read more about our collections and the information we hold. Developing our collections information

If you have concerns about the language in this record, or you have information to improve it, please share your feedback.

Our collections information

Please use this form to give us feedback on an object. The form will be sent to our Collections Management Team who will use it to improve our object records. We receive a lot of comments and can't respond to each one, but we do read them all and will respond where we can.

Read more about our collections and the information we hold.

Object

Your feedback

Name

Email address

(we will only ever use it to respond to you about your feedback)

Related content

IWM A 13308

Second World War

How Britain Celebrated Christmas During The Second World War

Six years of war brought many changes to familiar festive rituals. Christmas celebrations during the Second World War often had to be scaled down or adjusted as restrictions and shortages took their toll.

Share this