The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was established in 1988 by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the UN Environment Programme (UNEP) to provide governments with scientific information they can use to develop climate policies. IPCC reports are also key inputs into international climate change negotiations under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.

Thousands of people from all over the world contribute to the IPCC’s work. The IPCC does not undertake new research or monitor climate-related data. Instead, it conducts assessments of the state of climate change knowledge on the basis of published and peer-reviewed scientific and technical literature. Scientists volunteer their time to assess the thousands of scientific papers published each year to provide a comprehensive summary of what is known about the drivers of climate change, impacts and future risks, and how adaptation and mitigation can reduce those risks. IPCC assessment reports are intended to be policy relevant, but not policy prescriptive. The IPPC’s first assessment report was released in 1990.

61st Session of the IPCC (IPCC-61)

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change will try to keep its seventh assessment cycle on track, aiming for progress on its strategic planning schedule and the outlines of upcoming reports.

60th Session of the IPCC (IPCC-60)

Delegates took crucial decisions on its work plan for seventh assessment cycle, including on the products and timelines for its outputs. Deliberations illuminated diverging views and priorities, and what might have been a straightforward agenda setting exercise evolved into fraught deliberations that ran all night Friday and well into Saturday morning.

59th Session of the IPCC (IPCC-59)

As the world contends with raging wildfires, floods, droughts and record-breaking temperatures, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) initiated its seventh assessment cycle by electing the leaders who will guide the Panel’s work in providing timely information to support policymakers as they confront a rapidly changing environment.

58th Session of the IPCC (IPCC-58)

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Sixth Assessment Report is a clarion call to the world: the time for serious action on climate change is now, before it’s too late. The adoption of the Synthesis Report and its Summary for Policymakers marks the end of the sixth assessment cycle and raises questions about how the next assessment cycle should proceed.

57th Session of the IPCC (IPCC-57)

With the publication of Synthesis Report from the sixth assessment cycle delayed until March 2023, delegates at IPCC-57 focused on the need to prepare for a smooth transition to the seventh assessment cycle, to ensure the Panel remains relevant and continues to provide much needed scientific guidance to advance ambitious climate action.

56th Session of the IPCC (IPCC-56) and 14th Session of Working Group III (WGIII-14)

With greenhouse gas emissions at their highest ever and rising, delegates and authors worked overtime to finalize the Summary for Policymakers, which presents the key findings of their report, “Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change.”

55th Session of the IPCC (IPCC-55) and 12th Session of Working Group II (WGII-12)

As a summary of impacts across both human and natural systems, the latest IPCC report, “Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability,” recounts widespread losses and damages to nature and people.

54th Session of the IPCC (IPCC-54) and 14th Session of the Working Group I (WG I-14)

The first Working Group contributed to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s Sixth Assessment Report providing a comprehensive assessment of the physical science underpinning past, present and future climate change.

53rd bis Session of the IPCC (IPCC-53 bis)

Delegates sought to advance the intergovernmental process around the IPCC’s influential climate change reports despite the pandemic, the virtual setting, and simmering tensions.

52nd Session of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC-52)

During the week-long meeting, participants agreed on an outline for the Synthesis Report of the Sixth Assessment Report, engaged in detailed consideration of the organization of future work in light of the Global Stocktake (GST) under the Paris Agreement, and also adopted the Gender Policy and Implementation Plan.