Lucas Davi is assistant professor for computer science at University of Duisburg-Essen, Germany and Principal Investigator in the Collaborative Research Center CROSSING. He studied IT-Security at Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany and received his PhD from TU Darmstadt in computer science in 2015.

His research focus includes aspects of system security and trusted computing, particularly software exploitation techniques and defenses. He received best paper awards at DAC, ACM AsiaCCS, and IEEE Security & Privacy. His PhD thesis on code-reuse attacks and defenses has been awarded with the ACM SIGSAC Dissertation Award 2016.

Volker Gruhn is leading the Software Engineering, esp. Mobile Applications Group at the paluno - The Ruhr Institute for Software Technology. His research interests are in agile model-driven development, especially in methods for the development of mobile, distributed software systems. He was the general and program chair of the German Software Engineering Conference SE 2006, and is a program co-chair for ICSE 2008.

In the 1990s, Volker Gruhn worked at the Fraunhofer Institute for Software and Systems Engineering (ISST) and was a member of the executive board of a software company of Veba AG. He subsequently became professor for applied computer science at the University of Dortmund, with a research focus on the development of component-based software architectures and e-business applications. From 2002 until 2010 Volker Gruhn was leading the Applied Telematics/e-Business Group at the University of Leipzig. He is founder and chairman of the board of software company adesso AG.

He is author and co-author of about 250 national and international publications.

Klaus Pohl is a full professor for Software Systems Engineering at the University of Duisburg-Essen. He is founding director of paluno – The Ruhr Institute for Software Technology – and director since 2010. From 2005 to 2007, he was the scientific founding director of the Irish Software Engineering Research Centre (lero).

His research interests include adaptive systems, digitization / big data, cloud computing, cyber-physical systems, service orientation, variability management, and requirements engineering.

He is/was coordinator of many research projects and member of scientific and industrial steering committees, including the European Technology Platform NESSI (Networked European Software and Services Initiative), the European BDVA (Big Data Value Association) and the German Innovation Alliance SPES (Software Platform). Klaus Pohl is/was program and general chair of several international and national conferences, including the 29th Intl. Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering (CAiSE 2017), 35th Intl. Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2013), 9th and 12th Intl. Software Product Line Conference (SPLC 2005/2008), 18th Intl. Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering (CAiSE 2006), German GI Software Engineering Conference 2005, Intl. Requirements Engineering Conference (RE 2002).

He is (co-)author of more than 250 peer-reviewed publications and six text books. As a consultant, advisor, and expert he supports national and international companies, research associations and programs.

Amr Rizk studied industrial engineering at TU Darmstadt and received his doctorate with distinction from Leibniz Universität Hannover in 2013. After a postdoctoral period in the USA and the UK, he returned to TU Darmstadt to lead a junior research group on “Adaptive Overlay Communication” in the field of Multimedia Communication from 2016 to 2019. In 2019, he completed his habilitation on “Adaptive Queuing Models for Communication Systems” and, after a short time as a junior professor at Ulm University, moved to the University of Duisburg-Essen as Professor of Applied Computer Science at the Faculty of Business and Economics.

One focus of his new field of expertise “Networks and Communication Systems” is on the networking of cyber-physical systems (CPS). These are becoming increasingly important, especially in the context of Industry 4. 0, and are used, for example, in modern production facilities or intelligent power grids. By combining the physical and digital worlds, they are the basis for a variety of innovative applications that usually require a powerful and flexible network. “We are therefore researching networking mechanisms that can autonomously adapt at runtime and are therefore resilient to disruptions and attacks”, says Prof. Rizk. “Similar to how the automotive industry is pushing the idea of a self-driving car, we are aiming for the self-driving network.” No less visionary is another research interest of the 37-year-old scientist. He has been working for years with immersive virtual reality applications that are streamed using multi-path and multi-interface communication. One aim is to make volumetric – i.e., three-dimensional, walk-in videos – tangible by means of intelligent data transfer.

Dr. Gregor Schiele is professor for embedded systems. Since November 2014 he leads the Embedded Systems group at the University Duisburg-Essen. Before that he was working from 2012 to 2014 at the Insight Centre for Data Analytics and the Digital Enterprise Research Institute (DERI) as well as at the National University of Ireland, Galway. From 2006 to 2012 he was working at the department of Prof. Dr. Christian Becker at the University Mannheim. He wrote his doctorate in 2007 at the University Stuttgart at the department of Prof. Dr. Kurt Rothermel.

The core of his current research interest consists of adaptive embedded systems as well as the Internet of Things. He has great interest in how embedded systems can be operated with as little maintenance as possible, in a cheap and reliable way over a long operation time of several years to decades by using three-dimensional environmental models and methods of artificial intelligence.

Stefan Schneegaß is assistant professor for computer science at the University of Duisburg-Essen since May 2017. He studied systems engineering at the University of Duisburg-Essen (2005-2011) and defended his doctoral dissertation at the University of Stuttgart in 2016. In his dissertation, he focused on enriching mobile interaction with garment-based wearable computing devices.

The overarching goal of his research is to help users interacting with computing devices und create easy to understand and easy to use interfaces for them. Thereby, he is researching novel interaction concepts for mobile, wearable, and ubiquitous computing systems. He is particularly interested in virtual and augmented reality, brain-computer interfaces, Internet of Things (IoT), implicit feedback through electrical muscle stimulation, and usable security.