The focus of this workshop is on all aspects of cryptographic hardware and security in embedded systems. The workshop will be a forum of new results from the research community as well as from the industry. Of special interest are contributions that describe new methods for efficient hardware implementations and high-speed software for embedded systems, e.g., smart cards, microprocessors, DSPs, etc. We hope that the workshop will help to fill the gap between the cryptography research community and the application areas of cryptography. Consequently, we encourage submissions from academia, industry, and other organizations. All submitted papers will be reviewed. The topics of CHES 2005 include but are not limited to:

Computer architectures for public-key and secret-key cryptosystems

Efficient algorithms for embedded processors

Reconfigurable computing in cryptography

Cryptographic processors and co-processors

Cryptography in wireless applications (mobile phone, LANs, etc.)

Trusted computing platforms

Smart card attacks and architectures

Tamper resistance on the chip and board level

True and pseudo random number generators

Special-purpose hardware for cryptanalysis

Embedded security

Cryptography for pervasive computing (e.g., RFID, sensor networks)

Device identification

Nonclassical cryptographic technologies

Side Channel Cryptanalysis

Rump Session

For the second time there will be a rump session at CHES. The rump session is an informal session in which participants give short presentations on recent results, work in progress, and other topics of interest to the CHES community. Presentations that are not purely technical in nature are also possible (we are not opposed to jokes and puns!)

If you'd like to present at the rump session please write a 1/2 page abstract and drop it off at registration desk by noon (12:00) on Tuesday (August 30). Depending on the submissions received, the chairs will select a program for the Rump Session. The decisions will be published at registration desk by 18:00 on Tuesday. The presentations will be short, 3 slides max, 5 minutes max. You can use a computer or overhead slides (transparencies at registration desk).

Best Paper Award(s)

For the second time at CHES, Best Paper Award(s) will be given based on the written contribution in the proceedings. The selection committee is composed of the two program chairs.

CHES Banquet

The banquet takes place on Wednesday evening in the National Museum of Scotland on Chambers Street. Map and directions can be found on the CHES Banquet page.

Instructions for Authors

Authors are invited to submit original papers and are strongly encouraged to use our Electronic Paper Submission System .

The submission must be anonymous, with no author names, affiliations, acknowledgments, or obvious references. It should begin with a title, a short abstract, and a list of keywords. The paper should be at most 12 pages (excluding the bibliography and clearly marked appendices), and at most 15 pages in total, using at least 11-point font and reasonable margins. Submissions not meeting these guidelines risk rejection without consideration of their merits. All submissions will be blind-refereed.

Only original research contributions will be considered. Submissions which substantially duplicate work that any of the authors have published elsewhere, or have submitted in parallel to any other conferences or workshops that have proceedings, will be instantly rejected.

The submission deadline for CHES 2005 has passed.

All deadlines end on 23:59 Pacific Standard Time (PST) on the given date. Submission deadline: March 1st, 2005. Acceptance notification: April 29th, 2005. Final Version due: May 29th, 2005. Workshop: August 29th - September 1st, 2005

(after CRYPTO 2005, August 14th - 18th).

Mailing List

If you want to receive subsequent Call for Papers and registration information, please register for news.

Program Committee

Ross Anderson, Cambridge University, UK

Mohammed Benaissa, The University of Sheffield, UK

Suresh Chari, IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, USA

Kris Gaj, George Mason University, USA

Louis Goubin, Universite de Versailles-St-Quentin-en-Yvelines, France

Jorge Guajardo, Infineon Technologies, Germany

Çetin Kaya Koç, Oregon State University, USA

Peter Kornerup, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark

Pil Joong Lee, Postech, South Korea

David Naccache, Gemplus, France and Royal Holloway, University of London, UK

Elisabeth Oswald, Graz University of Technology, Austria

Christof Paar, Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany

Daniel Page, University of Bristol, UK

Bart Preneel, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium

Pankaj Rohatgi, IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, USA

Ahmad Sadeghi, Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany

Kouichi Sakurai, Kyushu University, Japan

David Samyde, FemtoNano, France

Erkay Savas, Sabanci University, Turkey

Werner Schindler, Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik, Germany

Jean-Pierre Seifert, Intel, USA

Nigel Smart, University of Bristol, UK

Francois-Xavier Standaert, Universite Catholique de Louvain, Belgium

Tsuyoshi Takagi, TU Darmstadt, Germany

Elena Trichina, Spansion, USA

Ingrid Verbauwhede, ESAT/COSIC Division, Kotholieke Universiteit, Leuven

Colin Walter, Comodo Research Lab, UK

All correspondence and/or questions should be directed to either of the Organizational Committee members:

Berk Sunar Josyula R Rao (Program co-Chair) (Program co-Chair) Electrical and Computer Eng. Dept. IBM Watson Research Center Worcester Polytechnic Institute P.O. Box 704 100 Institute Road Yorktown Heights Worcester, MA 01609-2280, USA NY 10598, USA Phone: +1 508 831-5494 Phone: +1 914 784-6692 Fax: +1 508 831-5491 Fax: +1 914 784-7455 Email: sunar@ece.wpi.edu Email: jrrao@us.ibm.com

Colin Walter Christof Paar (General co-Chair) (Publicity Chair) Cryptography Dept. Electrical Eng. & Information Sciences Dept. Comodo Research Lab. Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany 10 Hey Street Universitätsstraße 150 Bradford, BD7 1DQ, UK Bochum, D-44780 Germany Phone: +44 (0)1274 730505 Phone: +49 (0)234/32-22994 Fax: +44 (0)1274 730909 Fax: +49 (0)234/32-14389 Email: colin.walter@comodo.com Email: cpaar@crypto.rub.de

History of CHES

This will be the seventh CHES workshop. CHES '99 and CHES 2000 were held at WPI. CHES 2001 was held in Paris, CHES 2002 in the San Francisco Bay Area, CHES 2003 in Cologne, and CHES 2004 in Boston. The number of participants has grown to more than 200, with attendees coming from industry, academia, and government organizations.

Workshop Proceedings

The proceedings will be published in Springer's Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS) series in time for distribution at the workshop. Accepted papers should be formatted according to the NCS default author instructions (see file "typeinst.pdf"). Notice that in order to be included in the proceedings, the authors of an accepted paper must guarantee to present their contribution at the workshop.

Visa Information

Very few conference attendees (if any) will need to obtain visas for entering the UK. A list of countries whose nationals are affected is given here. Some of the larger countries in the list are Turkey, India, Pakistan, China and Taiwan. The UK Home and Foreign Offices provide an anonymous on-line questionnaire here which will determine whether a visa is required. The process of obtaining the visa is usually fast and painless. Please contact the general chair if you need a letter of sponsorship to support an application.