LONDON, UK - 21ST December, 2005 - Today Ubisoft, one of the world's leading video game publishers, announced that it has signed an exclusive licensing agreement with Taito Corporation of Japan to publish and distribute three video game titles in 2006. Under the terms of the agreement, Ubisoft will distribute the Taito-developed games in North American and European territories. The first title to be released by Ubisoft will be ExitTM, a puzzle action game for people of all ages, exclusively for the PSPTM (PlayStation®Portable) system in February.

"Exit's unique graphics and fluid style make this yet another innovative puzzle game in Ubisoft's arsenal," said Jay Cohen, vice president of publishing at Ubisoft. "Ubisoft is excited to be bringing three of the industry's most innovative titles to gamers this year."

As "Mr. ESC", a professional escapologist who can rescue people from just about any situation Exit players must guide themselves through numerous obstacles while rescuing victims from life-threatening situations. Situations include braving fires, earthquakes and other disasters in various environments such as buildings, hospitals and subways. Players will undertake myriad actions, including running, jumping, climbing onto ledges and climbing down ropes on their way to becoming the ultimate escape artist.

Key Features:

Intense action puzzler: Players use decision-making skills and wits to escape various obstacles while rescuing people from more than 100 different emergencies. Additional levels are also available for download.

Do whatever it takes to get everyone out in time: Rescue people and find the fastest way out while braving exploding factories, burning buildings and flooding subways. Players will climb ladders, move objects, slide down ropes and collect numerous rescue devices to assist them in their missions.

Turn victims into allies: Saved characters can be enlisted to help move heavy objects, master tricky obstacles and help each other.

Smooth, stylish character design and movement: Accompanying the intense action are some of the most stylish graphics to be seen on the PSP system, allowing for a viscerally and aesthetically satisfying experience.

For more information about Exit for the PSP system, please visit www.ubisoft.com.

About Ubisoft:

Ubisoft is a leading producer, publisher and distributor of interactive entertainment products worldwide and has grown considerably through its strong and diversified lineup of products and partnerships. Ubisoft has offices in 21 countries and sales in more than 50 countries around the globe. It is committed to delivering high-quality, cutting-edge video game titles to consumers. Ubisoft generated revenue of 538 million Euros for the 2004-2005 fiscal year, an increase of 8 percent over the previous fiscal year at constant exchange rates. To learn more, please visit www.ubisoftgroup.com.

® TAITO CORP. 2005, 2006. All rights reserved. Published and distributed by Ubisoft Entertainment under license from TAITO CORP. EXIT is a trademark of TAITO CORP. used under license by TAITO CORP. Ubisoft and the Ubisoft logo are trademarks of Ubisoft Entertainment in the U.S. and/or other countries.