JERUSALEM — Yitzhak Shamir was a fighter for the Jews long before Israel’s creation, an underground leader who led militias against the Arabs and British.

He made no apologies and no compromises — not as an underground fighter, an intelligence agent who hunted Nazis, and as one of Israel’s longest-serving prime ministers who refused to bargain for land.

The 96-year-old Shamir, who clung throughout his life to the belief that Israel should hang onto territory and never trust an Arab regime, died Saturday at a nursing home in Herzliya, north of Tel Aviv. Israeli media said Shamir had suffered from Alzheimer’s disease in recent years.

Shamir was Israel’s seventh prime minister, serving as premier for seven years, from 1983-84 and 1986-92, leading his party to election victories twice, despite lacking much of the outward charisma that characterizes many modern politicians. Barely over 5 feet tall and built like a block of granite, he projected an image of uncompromising strength during the first intifada, or Palestinian uprising against Israel in the West Bank and Gaza.

His time in office was eventful, marked by the massive airlift of thousands of Ethiopian Jews to Israel, the Palestinian uprising and the 1991 Gulf war, when Iraq fired 39 Scud missiles at Israel.

“Yitzhak Shamir was a brave warrior before and after the founding of the State of Israel,” said Israeli President Shimon Peres, Shamir’s longtime political opponent. “He was loyal to his views, a great patriot and a true lover of Israel.”

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Shamir “led Israel with a deep loyalty to the nation and to the land and to the eternal values of the Jewish people.”

The White House praised Shamir for helping to forge strong U.S. ties.

“Yitzhak Shamir dedicated his life to the State of Israel. From his days working for Israel’s independence to his service as Prime Minister, he strengthened Israel’s security and advanced the partnership between the United States and Israel,” the statement said.

Defeated in the 1992 election, Shamir stepped down as head of the Likud party and watched from the sidelines as his successor, Yitzhak Rabin, negotiated interim land-for-peace agreements with the Palestinians.