Cape Fear is a 1991 thriller remake, directed by Martin Scorcese. In this film, Max Cady, a violent ex-convict seeks revenge on his lawyer for withholding evidence during his trial in the past. The lawyer’s family lives in a web of fear as Max Cady torments them.

Here’s how you can watch and stream Cape Fear via streaming services such as Starz.

Is Cape Fear (1991) available to watch via streaming?

Yes, Cape Fear is available to watch via streaming on Starz.

Sam Bowden, an attorney, makes a mistake during a client’s trial for a violent crime. Now, after 14 years in prison, the ex-con, Max Cady, is out and seeking revenge. He is not after the lawyer himself, but rather after his wife and daughter to give him a taste of loss. The lawyer cannot stop him legally while the family is in a dangerous situation where they must fight back for their lives.

This 1991 remake of Cape Fear stars Robert De Niro as the ex-convict Max Cady and Nick Nolte as the lawyer Sam Bowden. Jessica Lange plays the lawyer’s wife Leigh Bowden while Juliette Lewis plays his daughter Danielle Bowden.

Watch Cape Fear (1991) streaming via Starz

Cape Fear is available to watch on Starz.

It is a streaming platform that lets you binge award-winning shows, gain access to a vast library of popular movies, and also download them for offline viewing – all ad-free.

You can watch via Starz by following these steps:

Go to Starz.com’s sign-up page.

Select either the six-month plan or the monthly plan

The standard rate for the six-month plan is $46, excluding any special offers

The standard for the monthly plan is $9.99 per month, excluding any special offers

Starz is also available as a Prime Video Channel, meaning that subscribers to the Amazon Prime Video service can also receive discounted access to Starz. The discounts offered vary throughout the year. You can sign up here.

Cape Fear’s synopsis is as follows:

“Sam Bowden is a small-town corporate attorney. Max Cady is a tattooed, cigar-smoking, Bible-quoting, psychotic rapist. What do they have in common? 14 years ago, Sam was a public defender assigned to Max Cady’s rape trial, and he made a serious error: he hid a document from his illiterate client that could have gotten him acquitted. Now, the cagey Cady has been released, and he intends to teach Sam Bowden and his family a thing or two about loss.”

NOTE: The streaming services listed above are subject to change. The information provided was correct at the time of writing.

Box Office Results: Kung Fu Panda and Dune Again Lead the Way

In a repeat from last weekend, the animated adventure Kung Fu Panda 4 and Dune: Part Two led the box…

Movies Jeff Ames 16 mins ago

Wolf Man Movie Begins Shooting at Blumhouse

Jason Blum has shared a picture of director Leigh Whannell on the first day of filming for Blumhouse’s Wolf Man…

Movies Neil Bolt 36 mins ago

Ant-Man 3’s Katy O’Brian Recalls ‘Absolutely Chaotic’ Filming Process

Ant-Man and the Wasp: Quantumania star Katy O’Brian recently opened up about the filming process of the third Ant-Man film,…

Movies Anthony Nash 20 hours ago

The Family Plan 2: Mark Wahlberg Sequel Being Talked About, Says Director

Director Simon Cellan Jones has spoken about the possibility of making The Family Plan 2 — a sequel to his…

Movies Spencer Legacy 2 days ago