The Profile for the Empire of Japan from the Real World.

Summary[]

The Empire of Japan (大日本帝國 Dai Nippon Teikoku, literally meaning "Empire of Great Japan") was the historical nation-state and great power that existed from the Meiji Restoration in 1868 to the enactment of the 1947 constitution of modern Japan. They once built an empire that enveloped most of east Asia.

Command Structure[]

Territories []

Kyoto

Age founded/conquered: 1868 A.D.

Territory type: First Capital

Inhabitants: Japanese People

Civilization Stats []

Tier 11: Industrial: The Empire with the aid of Western influences made them industrialize rather quickly, and create steam powered naval vessels.

Power Sources[]

Energy Source: Paraphernalia

Nature: Stealth (Many of their soldiers are skilled at camouflage to hide themselves from their enemies, especially in jungle like terrain and achieve surprise attacks) Human Physiology (The members of the faction are humans with standard skills in combat)

Science: Biological Manipulation (With the use of Germ Warfare or poisoning water sources to slow their enemies)

Conquest Stats[]

Tier 9-A: Multi-Country: Since their later years they have expanded and conquered most of the Eastern Asia nations, which include the following:

Korea

Hong Kong

Philippines

Indonesia

Eastern China

Taiwan

Burma

Indochina

Malaysia

Manchuko/Manchuria

Vietnam

Laos

Cambodia

Inner Mongolia

Power Stats[]

Attack Potency: Large Building: Japanese battleships with main cannons should be comparable to other WW2 ships at the time. Small Building: Japanese aircraft with explosives. Wall: Japanese tanks' main gun should be around 113,614-590,490 J. Street: Japanese soldiers with standard firearms. Athletic: Standard Soldiers melee strength.

Durability: Large Building: With sheer size of the Japanese naval vessels which can take explosives and still float. Wall: Japanese fighters with their size and take substantial firearms. Wall: Japanese tanks which are small and can be damaged by significant explosions. Street-Athletic Human: Japanese soldiers with or without weapons.

Speed: Subsonic: Speed of Japanese Zeros which can go at 351 mph. Superhuman: The speed of Japanese naval ships crossing seas. Peak Human: The speed of the Type 97 Chi-Ha tank which goes 24 mph. Athletic Human: The running speed of regular Japanese Soldiers.

Strengths/Pros[]

The Japanese forces are skilled when it comes to defending various locations, they dig tunnels and caves in on various islands that they used to draw in and attack their enemies, They can even wait out their enemies or withstand Naval Bombardments. Imperial Japan has an exceptional naval force which was necessary for them to expand in an oceanic part of the world. Most of their forces are driven by the ideology that their Emperor is a God, and that their efforts are rewarded with Death before Surrender.

Weaknesses/Flaws []

Despite being a fast moving empire that conquers vast territory, it's island nation have very limited resources (very little oil) to keep up the war effort.

Wins/Loses[]

When a battle is decided, list the wins and loses below.