Quiz Answer Key and Fun Facts

1. In the early months, Dimitri took care of Natalie. Just then, news began to erupt about his previous wife, Angelique. It was thought that Angelique died in which city?

Answer: Vienna

Natalie grew to love Dimitri as he took care of her after the harrowing experience trapped in the well. However, Dimitri's past life soon put a dent on things for the lovebirds when it was revealed that his first wife, Angelique, was actually alive. Many believed that Angelique had died in Vienna.

2. Who did Dimitri hire to be Angelique's nurse?

Answer: Gloria Marsh

Angelique remained comatose so Dimitri sought out a nurse to take care of her as she made a recovery. He retained Gloria's services despite the fact she betrayed heroine Dixie in sleeping with her husband, Craig. Nonetheless, Dimitri viewed Gloria's medical expertise as the key ingredient in bringing Angelique out of her lengthy coma.

3. At whose club was Terrence beaten by two racist thugs?

Answer: Tom Cudahy

"All My Children" kicked off a story discussing the harms associated with racism. Terrence Frye sought employment after school with a position at Tom Cudahy's fitness club. Unbeknownst to him, one day a couple racist men brutalized him to the point where he required hospital care. Despite heightened wounds, Terrence came away without permanent physical damage.

4. Erica drove Adam nuts by transforming Chandler Mansion into a more feminine residence.

Answer: True

Adam had blackmailed Erica into remarrying him so she pledged to get him back. At Chandler Mansion, she redecorated virtually every aspect of the place to fundamentally alter it into a womanly place. In the process, Adam transformed from a control freak into a miserable husband.

5. Hayley accepted Brian's marriage proposal.

Answer: False

Brian and Hayley dated for many months so he wished to take that leap into marriage. He proposed to Hayley one day but she informed him that she was not ready to become Mrs. Brian Bodine. This upset him since he felt Hayley was his soulmate but nonetheless Hayley stuck by her word not to be his fiancée.

6. An Li and her mother were in Pine Valley in 1992. An Li's mother worked for whom?

Answer: Palmer Cortlandt

After Hayley rejected his marriage proposal, Brian got smitten with An Li Chen, a new arrival in town. An Li and her mother had originally resided in China but came to America for a better life. Throughout 1992, An Li's mother resided at Cortlandt Manor since Palmer employed her as a maid.

7. Who attempted to get his hands on Hayley's trust fund?

Answer: Will Cortlandt

Brian and An Li wed, which sent Hayley for a tailspin so she got involved with bad boy Will Cortlandt. Hayley felt that Will was sincere with her but in actuality he wanted her money from the trust fund Adam arranged. It took Hayley several weeks to realize what Will's intentions were.

8. Who wound up pregnant?

Answer: An Li Chen

Brian and An Li shared a short term courtship that however did result in An Li winding up pregnant. They spoke about what to do when it came to her baby so An Li decided to go through with her pregnancy and raise their baby. Shortly after An Li gave birth, she left town since Pine Valley gave her enough trouble.

9. Who did Galen ask to help her out with Carter Jones?

Answer: Trevor Dillon

Attorney Galen Henderson received bad news that her abusive ex-husband, Carter Jones, was in town. She demanded that Trevor assist her in making sure he does not harm her anymore. Trevor went on a relentless pursuit of Carter, as the dastardly guy also set his sights on hurting Natalie.

10. Who was kidnapped twice this year?

Answer: Natalie Dillon

Natalie initially was kidnapped by Janet when her deranged sister took her to a reclusive cabin with intentions to kill her. Thankfully, Natalie came out of it alive but still injured as Janet shot her during this scheme. Later on in the year, Carter Jones developed an obsession with Natalie that led to a kidnapping. Trevor ended up rescuing Natalie before he could do immense harm to her.

Source: Author CAGuy0206

This quiz was reviewed by FunTrivia editor Gamemaster1967 before going online.

Any errors found in FunTrivia content are routinely corrected through our feedback system.