Left-side or left-hand traffic may seem backwards for most U.S. drivers, but it's nothing new; in the 17th and 18th centuries, it helped control the flow of horse-drawn carriages on London Bridge. These laws set the trend for many of the world's countries that drive on the left side of the road.

Most countries drive on the right side of the road, which makes sense since most people are right-handed. Many of the lefty-accommodating countries are former British colonies before that have since won their independence. Before renting a car abroad, it always helps to check the driving standards for your destination.

Right-hand traffic actually predates the British Empire by several centuries. Historical findings have proven that this method dates back to Roman times when wagon drivers organized their own traffic system for economic reasons.

Which Side Is the Steering Wheel on to Accommodate Left-Hand Traffic?

When driving abroad, you'll notice that most countries with left-hand vehicles will place the steering wheels on the right side. This driver's seat placement is necessary for a left-hand drive car (LHD car) because it allows drivers to react better to oncoming traffic and see important road signs and speed limits.

Travelers from right-hand-traffic (RHT) countries may find it challenging to adapt to the inverse nature of LHD cars and speed limit signs posted in km/h instead of mph in a European country. However, with some practice (and hopefully some patience from other drivers), switching sides will become easier during your road trip.

Another important difference between right-hand drive (RHD cars) and left-hand drive vehicles is that several pairs of wipers are designed to move moisture from right to left instead of left to right. This operation allows vehicles driving on the left side of the road to shed moisture away from the driver's side.

Many newer wipers use hand-free sensors to trigger movement as they detect the first few raindrops. However, if your LHD car has levers on the sides of the steering wheel, always test them before beginning your road trip as the lights and wipers may be on the opposite side (compared to your own car at home).

The following is a list of some of the left-hand traffic (LHT) countries that are also some of the most popular tourist destinations around the world.

6 European Countries That Practice Left-hand Driving

Channel Islands (including Guernsey and Jersey)

Cyprus

Ireland

Isle of Man

Malta

United Kingdom (including England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland)

14 African Countries With Left-side Road Traffic

Botswana

Eswatini (formerly known as Swaziland)

Kenya

Lesotho

Malawi

Mauritius

Mozambique

Namibia

Seychelles

South Africa

Tanzania

Uganda

Zambia

Zimbabwe

16 Asian Countries That Drive on the Left-hand Side of the Road:

Bangladesh

Bhutan

Brunei

East Timor

Hong Kong

India

Indonesia

Japan

Macau

Malaysia

Maldives

Nepal

Pakistan

Singapore

Sri Lanka

Thailand

12 South Pacific Countries Where You'll Drive a Left-hand Car

Australia (and its territories, including Christmas Island, Cocos Islands and Norfolk Island)

Fiji

Kiribati

Nauru

New Zealand (and its territories, including Cook Islands and Tokelau)

Niue

Pitcairn Islands

Papua New Guinea

Samoa

Solomon Islands

Tonga

Tuvalu

21 Other Countries and Territories That Practice Left-Hand Driving

Anguilla

Antigua and Barbuda

Bahamas

Barbados

Bermuda

British Virgin Islands

Cayman Islands

Dominica

Falkland Islands

Grenada

Guyana

Jamaica

Montserrat

Saint Helena

Saint Kitts and Nevis

Saint Lucia

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines

Suriname

Trinidad and Tobago

Turks and Caicos

United States Virgin Islands

Original article: All the Countries That Drive on the Left Side of the Road