Aster is a neighborhood in North Edmonton.

Smiles Dental Group has a dental clinic that is located just 15 minutes away, via driving from Aster. This means our talented team of dentists, and their staff is happy to provide the residents of Aster with exceptional dentistry services!

The staff at our dental clinic has over 100 years of combined dental experience, and we are ready to accommodate all your dental needs!

We’re always accepting new patients as well, call in to book now!

We cover a wide variety of dental services to meet every possible need you may have. Are you nervous about going to the dentist? That’s ok, you’re not alone. We always accommodate our patients so they are as comfortable as they can possibly be at their dentist appointment. We also offer sedation dentistry services, to keep you relaxed and at ease during the entire dental procedure.

Dr. Alexander Yeh has a passion for performing dental procedures and patient care. He enjoys all aspects of general dentistry and provides care in the following areas: cosmetic dentistry, dental implants, TMJ treatment, and sleep apnea. He is a graduate of the University of Alberta Faculty of Science and the University of Manitoba’s Faculty of Dentistry. Outside of work, Dr. Yeh enjoys spending time with his family.

Credentials: University of Manitoba’s Faculty of Dentistry, University of Alberta Faculty of Science

Dr. Tan trained in Edmonton, and graduated from the University of Alberta (UofA) with a Doctorate of Dental Surgery and Bachelor of Medical Science Degrees. At the UofA, he received academic awards for the AAP excellence in periodontology and clinical dentistry. Dr. Tan had excellent mentors and practiced in a surgical center early on which helped him excel in all aspects of general dentistry.

Dr. Tan has a keen interest in oral surgery and root canal therapy. He is trained in nitrous oxide and oral conscious sedation for comfortable dental surgeries and wisdom teeth removal. Much of his free time is spent at CE courses to learn about up-to-date techniques beyond those achieved in dental school. He takes pride in working with anxious patients and building trust to develop personalized care plans tailored to each patient’s specific needs.

Dr. Tan’s hobbies include being outdoorsy, enjoying Edmonton’s river valley, gardening, reading, working out, and he recently began homebrewing.

Dr. Tan is fluent in English, Mandarin Chinese, and Cantonese.

Credentials: University of Manitoba’s Faculty of Dentistry, University of Alberta Faculty of Science

Dr. Usman Mohammad is a General Dentist, who graduated from the University of Manitoba with a Bachelors of Science and a Doctor of Dental Medicine. Dr. Mohammad is dedicated to providing quality care and values patient satisfaction and strives to build long-lasting relationships. He enjoys watching hockey and is a die-hard Oilers fan. He also enjoys volunteering his time with various charitable organizations, such as Kindness in Action, whereby dental relief is provided to under-served populations globally.

Credentials: University of Manitoba

Dr. Benjamin Jinn is a general dentist who graduated from the Faculty of Dentistry at the University of British Columbia. Before Dr. Jinn became a dentist, he was in the Faculty of Pharmacy at the University of Alberta. He is very passionate about providing the best patient care and enjoys performing a wide range of dental procedures. Some of his hobbies include photography, traveling, biking, and working out.

Credentials: University of British Columbia