An aster flower is a flowering woody plant in the family Asteraceae. Asters are related to daisies, marigolds, chrysanthemums, and sunflowers. The aster is a perennial, meaning it comes back every year without having to be replanted.

"Aster" means star in Greek, named after the goddess Asteraea. In the art of floral arrangements, the aster flower means love, wisdom, and faith. It is also the flower for the month of September.

In the large and diverse Asteraceae family, there are roughly 20,000 different species. Flowers are usually purple, blue, pink, or white with a vibrant yellow center, resembling stars like their name suggests. They are used in fresh as well as dried flower arrangements.

Asters generally bloom late in summer or early fall, giving gardens a splash of color late in the season. Asters also attract butterflies and bees, making them a gardener's favorite.

The aster flower is called a capitulum. It is actually a grouping of flowers that, when viewed from a distance, looks like a single flower. The bright yellow center of the capitulum helps attract pollinators. The petals of the aster flower are generally long and thin, resembling the rays of the sun. An aster flower outline looks like a bright, multipoint star. Asters can have one or multiple layers of petals.

There are roughly 180 different species of true aster. There used to be a lot more, but they have been removed and reclassified throughout the plant world. Most true asters (minus one) are native to Eurasia. Even though most of the flowers in the family Asteraceae that are native to North America are not technically classified as asters anymore, they are still grouped together due to how they look (morphology) and how they are commonly known. Most people know them by the common name aster, and most florists still consider these wildflowers to be asters. In North America, there is one true aster, Aster alpinus or the alpine aster. All the rest have been reclassified into other genera.

There are many genera of flowers that grow in North America. They include:

New England, Symphyotrichum novae-angliae

New York, Symphyotrichum novi-belgii

Aromatic, Symphyotrichum oblongifolium

Heath, Symphyotrichum ericoides

Smooth, Symphyotrichum leave

Calico, Symphyotrichum lateriflorum

Wood, Eurybia divaricata.

Some of the more uncommon asters include

California, Symphyotrichum chilense

Alpine, Aster alpinus

Chinese, Callistephus chinensis, which is an annual, meaning it has to be replanted every year

Blue Moon, Callistephus Tall Pompon Blue Moon, also an annual.

What is an Aster Flower?

There's nothing quite like a flower garden that showcases flowers in a variety of colors, shapes, and sizes. One flower that adds a brilliant autumn hue is the aster flower, a cousin of the daisy and sunflower. The aster flower is a member of the larger Asteraceae family of flowering plants, which includes over 20,000 different species. Specifically, the aster flower itself is a perennial favorite of gardeners because of its vivid color and daisy-like appearance.

A brilliant aster flower

A native wildflower to many areas, asters can be found in purples, reds, whites, and pinks. Depending on the species, they can grow from one to six feet in height. The aster flower itself has a round center (typically yellow) surrounded by clusters of narrow petals. It is named for its star-like appearance of ray-like petals emanating from a central area (Aster means 'star' in Greek). Asters grow on a woody stem or stalk, which gives the taller bushes the extra support they need.

Types of Aster Flower

There are over one hundred different species of true aster flowers, as well as many hybrids. In general, asters are often grouped into two main categories: New England asters and New York asters. Each has many different cultivars, or varieties. New England asters tend to be very tall, growing up to six feet in height. New York asters are somewhat smaller, but can still reach three to five feet in height. New England asters have thick and hairy stems, while New York asters tend to have stems that are smooth and thinner.

A group of aster flowers

Many New England aster flowers are native wildflowers in the central and eastern parts of the U.S. Examples of cultivars of the New England asters are the Honeysong Pink, which has vivid pink flowers, and Wedding Lace, which is white. New England asters prefer full sun and bloom in late summer and early fall, bringing color to a garden that is beginning to fade. New York aster flowers also prefer full sun and bloom in later summer and early to mid-fall. Cultivars include the Royal Ruby, which is maroon in color with a yellow center, and the Blue Lagoon, which has bright blue flowers. These are typically medium-sized bushes, and both types of asters attract pollinators such as bees and butterflies.