About Wayland, MA

Wayland is a 15.9 square mile town in Middlesex Country, Massachusetts, located in the MetroWest area around Boston. Wayland was the first settlement of the Sudbury Plantation (as it was originally known), which was established in 1638. If it sounds familiar, it might be because the town was immortalized in the Pulitzer Prize-winning book, “Puritan Village: The Formation of a New England Town” by Sumner Chilton Powel, published in 1963.

Today, Wayland is a wealthy suburban town with an excellent school system. At first glance, it might look like other New England towns, but according to locals, there are a few things that make Wayland stand out from other small New England towns. For one, people actually smile and wave to you on the street, which is almost unheard of in some places!

Wayland is also more sparsely populated, which sets it apart from the dense suburbs you see around most of Boston. This makes the town less friendly to pedestrians, but it also means more privacy and quieter surroundings. If you’re used to living in the noisy city, you might be surprised when you hear crickets outside your window at night after moving to Wayland.

Wayland’s residents are passionate about their town and active in both town meetings and school activities. You’ll find some of the best homes in New England here, too. They tend to be on the pricey side, but the area is generally regarded as one of the best places to live and raise a family in Massachusetts.

Wayland used to have a rail stop from 1965 to 1971, but the station was eventually closed due to poor track conditions. Currently, Wayland does not have its own stop on any commuter rail line. The closest stops are in Lincoln (about a 10-minute drive) and in Natick Center (about a 13-minute drive).

If you plan on driving into Boston on your commute, there are multiple ways to do so. The most direct route is probably to take US-20 East to I-95 South, then transfer to I-90 East into Boston. You can also stay on US-20 East the entire way if you so choose.

Alternatively, you could head north on I-95, then transfer over to the Concord Turnpike (MA-2) to get into the city. A third route takes you on I-95 all the way up to where it connects with I-93, heading south into the city.