Overview

Wayland is a very small village located in the state of New York. With a population of 1,719 people and just one neighborhood, Wayland is the 646th largest community in New York. Much of the housing stock in Wayland was built prior to World War II, making it one of the older and more historic villages in the country.

Occupations and Workforce

When you are in Wayland, you'll notice that it is more blue-collar than most other communities in America. 39.69% of Wayland’s employed work in blue-collar jobs, while America averages only 27.7% that do. Overall, Wayland is a village of professionals, transportation and shipping workers, and service providers. There are especially a lot of people living in Wayland who work in healthcare (13.93%), management occupations (7.38%), and office and administrative support (7.24%).

Demographics

In terms of college education, the citizens of Wayland rank slightly lower than the national average. 15.65% of adults 25 and older in Wayland have a bachelor's degree or advanced degree, while 21.84% of adults have a 4-year degree or higher in the average American community.

The per capita income in Wayland in 2022 was $28,632, which is low income relative to New York, and lower middle income relative to the rest of the US. This equates to an annual income of $114,528 for a family of four. However, Wayland contains both very wealthy and poor people as well.

The people who call Wayland home describe themselves as belonging to a variety of racial and ethnic groups. The greatest number of Wayland residents report their race to be White, followed by Black or African-American. Important ancestries of people in Wayland include German, Irish, English, Italian, and French.

The most common language spoken in Wayland is English. Other important languages spoken here include Spanish and Portuguese.

The Neighbors

There are two complementary measures for understanding the income of a neighborhood's residents: the average and the extremes. While a neighborhood may be relatively wealthy overall, it is equally important to understand the rate of people - particularly children - who are living at or below the federal poverty line, which is extremely low income. Some neighborhoods with a lower average income may actually have a lower childhood poverty rate than another with a higher average income, and this helps us understand the conditions and character of a neighborhood.

The neighbors in the neighborhood in Wayland are lower-middle income, making it a below average income neighborhood. NeighborhoodScout's research shows that this neighborhood has an income lower than 70.5% of U.S. neighborhoods. With 33.2% of the children here below the federal poverty line, this neighborhood has a higher rate of childhood poverty than 84.1% of U.S. neighborhoods.

The old saying "you are what you eat" is true. But it is also true that you are what you do for a living. The types of occupations your neighbors have shape their character, and together as a group, their collective occupations shape the culture of a place.

In the neighborhood, 38.8% of the working population is employed in manufacturing and laborer occupations. The second most important occupational group in this neighborhood is executive, management, and professional occupations, with 31.8% of the residents employed. Other residents here are employed in sales and service jobs, from major sales accounts, to working in fast food restaurants (17.9%), and 8.3% in clerical, assistant, and tech support occupations.

Ethnicity / Ancestry

Boston's Beacon Hill blue-blood streets, Brooklyn's Orthodox Jewish enclaves, Los Angeles' Persian neighborhoods. Each has its own culture derived primarily from the ancestries and culture of the residents who call these neighborhoods home. Likewise, each neighborhood in America has its own culture – some more unique than others – based on lifestyle, occupations, the types of households – and importantly – on the ethnicities and ancestries of the people who live in the neighborhood. Understanding where people came from, who their grandparents or great-grandparents were, can help you understand how a neighborhood is today.

In the neighborhood in Wayland, NY, residents most commonly identify their ethnicity or ancestry as German (31.2%). There are also a number of people of Irish ancestry (20.5%), and residents who report English roots (15.5%), and some of the residents are also of Italian ancestry (5.2%), along with some Sub-Saharan African ancestry residents (4.3%), among others.

Getting to Work

How you get to work – car, bus, train or other means – and how much of your day it takes to do so is a large quality of life and financial issue. Especially with gasoline prices rising and expected to continue doing so, the length and means of one's commute can be a financial burden. Some neighborhoods are physically located so that many residents have to drive in their own car, others are set up so many walk to work, or can take a train, bus, or bike. The greatest number of commuters in neighborhood spend under 15 minutes commuting one-way to work (40.7% of working residents), one of the shortest commutes across America.

Here most residents (75.7%) drive alone in a private automobile to get to work. In addition, quite a number also carpool with coworkers, friends, or neighbors to get to work (14.6%) and 5.9% of residents also hop out the door and walk to work for their daily commute. In a neighborhood like this, as in most of the nation, many residents find owning a car useful for getting to work.