IAIN SOFTLEY (Director/Executive Producer) made his feature film directorial debut on the acclaimed drama BackBeat. Softley also wrote the script, which chronicled the earliest days of the Beatles and the poignant romance of German photographer Astrid Kirchherr with the "fifth" Beatle, Stuart Sutcliffe. The film starred Sheryl Lee, Stephen Dorff and Ian Hart and opened to worldwide critical praise in 1994.

In his native England, Softley has earned a reputation as a specialist in the areas of the arts, music documentaries and music videos. He has worked with a variety of musicians, including: The Style Council, The Christians and Level 42. His credits as a television documentary director include work with guitarists Robert Fripp and Andy Summers, and actor Steven Berkoff.

Softley is a graduate of Queen's College in Cambridge, England, where he also directed a number of highly-praised theatrical productions.

MICHAEL PEYSER (Producer) most recently produced three very different comedies under the banner of his company, Mike's Movies: Camp Nowhere, Jonathan Lynn's The Distinguished Gentleman, starring Eddie Murphy, and The Night We Never Met, starring Matthew Broderick. He is currently producing Matilda, directed by and starring Danny DeVito.

His other producing credits include the comedy hits Ruthless People, starring Bette Midler and Danny DeVito, and Big Business, starring Midler and Lily Tomlin. He also served as the executive producer on the offbeat comedy Desperately Seeking Susan and the suspense thriller F/X. In addition, Peyser was one of the founding partners of Hollywood Pictures, where he handled all phases of creative development and production.

Hailing from New York, Peyser began his career doing production jobs on Milos Forman's Hair and John Schlesinger's Marathon Man. He was then production manager and associate producer for Woody Allen on the director's films Manhattan, Stardust Memories, The Purple Rose of Cairo, Broadway Danny Rose, Zelig and A Midsummer Night's Sex Comedy. During this period, he also worked as executive in charge of production on the hit comedy Arthur, starring Dudley Moore and Liza Minnelli.

RALPH WINTER (Producer) has enjoyed a successful and varied producing career in the film industry.

He has worked on several of the extremely popular Star Trek feature films, serving as a producer on Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country, which earned multiple Academy Award nominations. He also executive produced Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home and Star Trek V: The Final Frontier, and was associate producer on Star Trek III: The Search for Spock.

He most recently produced the science fiction thriller The Puppetmasters, starring Donald Sutherland. In addition, Winter was the executive producer on the recent comedies Hocus Pocus and Captain Ron. He also independently produced the film The Perfect Weapon and was co-executive producer of the Vietnam War action drama Flight of the Intruder.

Winter began his career in 1981 as the director of post-production of Paramount Television. He later became executive in charge of production for Harve Bennett Productions, where he oversaw the acclaimed longform television projects "A Woman Called Golda" and "The Jesse Owens Story."

JANET GRAHAM (Co-Producer) most recently served as the co-producer of the comedy Camp Nowhere, starring Christopher Lloyd. She had previously worked as the associate producer on Jim Abrahams' hit comedy Hot Shots!, starring Charlie Sheen.

Graham is a graduate of the prestigious Peter Stark Motion Picture Producing Program at the University of Southern California. Later, she earned the post of vice president for producer Michael Peyser's development company, Mike's Movies. Their first film collaboration was The Night We Never Met, on which Graham was the associate producer.

RAFAEL MOREU (Screenwriter) counts HACKERS as his first feature film script.

Of Cuban-American descent, Moreu was born in Miami and attended New York University, where he studied at the Circle in the Square Theatre School. He later worked as a script reader and story analyst for Fine Line, Miramax, and New Line, where he discovered the script, Hangin' With the Homeboys. He went on to serve as director of development for Robert Halmi's company, RHI, where he developed six telefilms. During his tenure there, he was primarily involved in adapting outstanding stage plays for television audiences, including Marsha Norman's "Getting Out" and Michael Weller's "Spoils of War."

Moreu is also a founding member of the Seraphim Theatre Company in New York, which is dedicated to developing new playwrights.

ANDRZEJ SEKULA (Director of Photography) was the cinematographer on Quentin Tarentino's award-winning hit Pulp Fiction and had previously collaborated with the director on his acclaimed drama Reservoir Dogs. He more recently reunited with Tarentino to shoot his segment of the much anticipated film Four Rooms.

Among his other film credits are the HBO film Body Language, for director George Case, Oleanna, directed by David Mamet, Sleep With Me, Bank Robber, Across the Moon and Three of Hearts.

Sekula was born in Poland, where he began his career as a cinematographer on documentaries. In 1980, he moved to London, where he was accepted to the National Film and Television School. By the mid-1980s, he found himself in demand on commercials, music videos, short films and documentary features.

JOHN BEARD (Production Designer) has created the atmosphere for several highly-praised and diverse features.

He includes among his previous film credits Vincent Ward's Map of the Human Heart, Robert Young's Splitting Heirs, Mike Figgis' The Browning Version, Terry Gilliam's Erik the Viking, Martin Scorsese's controversial The Last Temptation of Christ, Mary Lambert's Siesta and Julien Temple's Absolute Beginners.

Beard earned a degree in interior design from the Kingston College of Art London, and began his career as an assistant to production designer Brian Eatwell. He went on to become the art director on Terry Gilliam's Brazil and on Nicolas Roeg's films Eureka and Bad Timing.