by Cheri Barner

After years of paying his dues in commercials, music videos, and BBC

documentaries, Iain Softley made the difficult leap into feature films

directing. Softley’s first film “Backbeat“, the story of Stuart Sutcliffe,

received critical raves, allowing him to go big budget with his second

film, “Hackers“. But after the techno-thriller “Hackers” proved to be a misfire

both at the box office and with critics, Softley nearly became one of

independent film’s many one hit wonders. Recently, Softley answered

question about his new project. “The Wings Of The Dove” is being released

by Miramax.

indieWIRE: How did the director of “Backbeat” and “Hackers” come to choose a

Henry James novel for his next movie?

Iain Softley: I was offered the book when I was in post production for

“Hackers” by Steve Evans, who is one of the producers on the film. I looked

at the book about the same as Hossein Amini the screenwriter, and I think

we were both confused as to why this book had been chosen as a potential

film, because it’s very episodic, there is very little dialogue, it’s all

action that you can’t translate at first sight. It’s almost a series of

psychological commentaries, almost an impressionistic piece, it was

obviously going to be quite a chore to adapt it. But in the process of

discussing this, we both realized that it, particularly in the character of

Kate Croy, was a very interesting story about love and betrayal.

The characters themselves, have a dark side to them that to us, made them

fascinatingly human. (They are) full of contradictions, not easy to read

initially, which suggested to us that they were really interesting

characters for a film treatment. We had the idea of approaching it as film

noir. My approach was from the beginning was to not make something that was

to the traditional literary adaptations — to reach an audience that was

interested in cinema, but who might be unaware of the book, as most of the

audience would be. There was a sense in which I wanted to be different from

those films in that we were concentrating on the things that were perhaps

similar between those periods and now, as opposed to the things that

distinguished it. And to only include things if they worked in terms of

film, and be really ruthless with the source material. So I started working

with Hossein, and we spent about eight months on the script together.

iW: Since Kate was the impetus for your interest in the project, was that

the most important role for casting purposes?

Softley: Yes, she was, and the relationship between Kate and Merton was

very important as well. There was sort of an age span that the part could

be played in, and it was really when I met Helena (Bonham Carter) that I

realized that (her’s) was really the right kind of combination of ages. She

needed to have a child like vulnerability on the one hand, but also to have

a womanly sexuality — and Helena can really play that gamut.

iW: You chose to change the novel, creating a nude love scene at the end of

the film, why?

Softley: Well, it was really on two levels; one, was that it was a piece of

social observation, you know that this is something that often happens in

relationships that are breaking up, that people make one last desperate

attempt to resuscitate the relationship. Often it ends in a desperate

clinging to each other, almost like drowning souls. On the other level it

really was a portrayal of the fact that all of the deceptions, all of the

veils were pulled away, that here were the characters naked in front of

each other, confronting each other with just themselves. In a sense there

is, I feel, a redemption at the end, because for the first time they are

aware of what they’re doing. They’re being honest with themselves. They’re

asking each other direct questions, and giving each other direct responses.

So it was really the inexorable move towards the core of the relationship,

and the realization of what it’s come to.

iW: How was the translation of the book?

Softley: It was a massive, I mean the only way to approach the book was to

say “We’re completely forgetting the book.” We didn’t refer to it when

writing the script at all, it was just done from memory. Interestingly in

the notes for the book that I read, there is an interview with Henry James

where he talks about the possibility of doing a theater production of “The Wings Of The Dove”, and I was very reassured that he had as a bold an

approach to reconceiving his work for a different medium as we had. That he

took to completely changing the story once he put it on stage, which really

indicates to me the hopelessness of attempting to be too literal in a

translation.

iW: Did you have an idea of who you wanted to play the parts when you were

writing the script?

Softley: I don’t really envisage people at the beginning. I try not to

because, apart from the obvious thing of avoiding disappointment if one

cannot get the person that one had in mind for the whole process of writing

the script, I think that it’s important to start with a blank sheet of

paper through audition process, and really to be open to be surprised by

people. We might to have seen people in one role when they come in, and you

might see a woman who is only known as an action movie actress who actually

has this incredible background in some independent work that one might not

be aware of, and when you put the actress together with the text in an

audition it’s interesting how often one’s surprised that people reveal a

side that’s different from the stereotypes that you might have.

iW: Did you know there were other Henry James films coming out at the same

time?

Softley: The first we knew of it was when we realized that there were other

actresses and other people auditioning for another film in the Chateau

Marmont at the same time as we were, and it happened to have been another

Henry James film. So that was quite interesting.

iW: Were you worried about the competition?

Softley: I think in an ideal world there wouldn’t be any other’s around. I

have to be honest about that, but there comes a point when one has to have

confidence in the work of oneself.

iW: What’s next?