The sound of reggaeton was exposed last week during a segment of the MTV Video Music Awards in Miami, but it's been working itself into the mainstream all summer.

The genre's popularity on radio stations caused Billboard magazine to create a new Latin Rhythm Airplay chart, and has record-label executives clamoring to sign artists who perform the style.

As radio stations across the nation, and specifically in Florida, continue to add reggaeton songs (such as "Gasolina" by Daddy Yankee and "Oye Mi Canto" by rapper Noreaga) to their playlists, indications are that reggaeton may be more than a blip on the music radar.

It's a sound that's gaining fans by the day, and giving the music industry the boost it's been seeking, said Sne, a Tampa Bay-area promoter.

"I think reggaeton will cross over to the fullest extent," said Sne, who organized Saturday's "Reggaeton Explotion" concert at the St. Pete Times Forum.

Four weeks ago, Tampa country station WYUU 92.5 FM changed formats to become "La Nueva," a Spanish-speaking station that gives listeners their fill of salsa, rumba, merengue and reggaeton.

"It's not just for clubgoers. It's like salsa and merengue ... reggaeton is for everyone," Sne said.

Among the artists scheduled to perform at "Reggaeton Explotion" are Nicky Jam, Lito and Polaco, Rakim and Ken Y., and Speedy.

At first listen, reggaeton sounds like Latin rap (and not at all like reggae), but after a few beats, it's apparent that it's more complex. Reggaeton's myriad sounds are made up of three distinct elements: A syncopated drum-machine beat, a Latin- or tropical-style percussion rhythm, and an emcee's rap with female vocals on the hook (both in Spanish).

That combination is what Leila Cobo of Billboard says gives reggaeton staying power.

"It's less rap and more sing-songy," said Cobo, who's the magazine's Latin bureau chief. "The rhythmic bass has the same rhythmic pattern, and that defines the style."

For 10 years, reggaeton was at the center of Puerto Rico's underground music scene, Cobo said. El General of Panama introduced reggaeton to the province, and is considered a legend among his peers, having inspired such acts as Daddy Yankee, she said.

Angie Romero, assistant music editor for Vibe magazine, said one of reggaeton's most notable artists, Tego Calderón, has signed with Atlantic Records and secured his own joint venture so he can cultivate more reggaeton acts. What's more, the reggaeton-producing duo Luny Tunes signed a publishing deal with EMI Music in August.

"It's evolving, and integrates other sounds like hip-hop, more salsa and other beats from the Caribbean," Romero said. "And that makes it intriguing for the listener."

But Romero said she is concerned the genre's rapid growth might weaken the product, because the music industry has a tendency to sign lesser-quality artists to capitalize on the market.

Right now, "there's a necessity for \[artists\] to be great at it," Romero said. "There's only room for a few people to stand out ... the innovators."

According to Cobo, it wasn't until 2002, when Jamaican dancehall artists such as Sean Paul ("Gimme the Light") broke into the United States mainstream market, that the window opened for a reggaeton crossover.

"It really did start in New York," Cobo said. "It has been on Miami radio heavily since last September. It was impossible not to hear."

The Aug. 20 issue of Billboard stated that 17 stations around the country, including 14 monitored by Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems, have flipped to a Latin-music format.

Another clue that the popularity of reggaeton isn't a passing fad, Cobo said, is when international acts decide to record reggaeton remixes or feature reggaeton artists on their songs.

For example, the original version of Shakira's single "La Tortura" from "Fijación Oral Vol. 1" has a reggaeton beat. The Spanish-language song has already crossed over to non-Spanish-language radio stations in Tampa.

Much like dancehall, reggaeton's catchy melodies are what has made it popular in nightclubs. The lyrics are often about life on the streets, love, relationships and passionate dreams.

Two local clubs, the Coliseum in Bradenton and Fly in Sarasota, offer a reggaeton Latin night. Some of Tampa's nightclubs have dedicated at least one night a week to reggaeton music, Sne said.

The increased interest within the local nightlife encouraged Sne to develop a stadium-sized reggaeton concert.

"It's just another form of musical expression," he said. "It's been sitting idle for some time, but this will get the ball rolling."

Reggaeton Explotion With Nicky Jam, Lito and Polaco, Rakim and Ken Y., Speedy, more. Presented at 6 p.m. Saturday in the St. Pete Times Forum, 401 Channelside Drive, Tampa. Tickets are $36.75 to $76.75, plus service charges. (Hurricane Katrina donations will be accepted at the box office.) Call (727) 898-2100 or access www.stpetetimesforum. com.

TICKETS