Edwin Santiago and some of his buddies drove up from Bradenton Saturday night for a multiartist concert billing itself the "Reggaeton Explotion" at the St. Pete Times Forum.

"Reggaeton's taking over," the 18-year-old Manatee Community College student enthused. "Pretty soon, 50 Cent will be rapping our music."

Countless international offshoots of hip-hop abound. But none has had anything close to the seismic impact of reggaeton, a Spanish-language musical style that originated in Panama and was later popularized in Puerto Rico.

After years of being mostly limited to Latin music circles and dance clubs, reggaeton is enjoying its breakout moment.

Daddy Yankee, the genre's first superstar, played Madison Square Garden last month on the heels of his hit Gasolina and multiplatinum sales of his 2004 album Barrio Fino. Growing numbers of U.S. radio stations are switching formats to capitalize on the growing market for reggaeton and Latin dance music, including the Tampa Bay area's own WYUU-FM 92.5.

And in one of the ultimate tributes to a genre's coming of age, Billboard magazine last month launched a new Latin Rhythm Airplay chart, prompted largely by the reggaeton boom.

Despite its name, reggaeton derives more of its underlying rhythm from Jamaican dancehall than traditional reggae _ more Shabba Ranks than Bob Marley.

It's a style that was on marvelous display Saturday at the Forum. If the tiny audience of 1,562 was probably well short of what the show's promoters had hoped for, the performers didn't seem to let it bother them once they hit the stage.

Some of the acts artfully combined rapping with vocals straight out of the Latin ballad tradition, such as the Brooklyn duo Joe Rock and Smoove and the Dynamic Dominicans of Reggaeton, or DDR, from the Bronx.

Others presented a more aggressive rhyming style, nicely exemplified by Los Retumbadores of Tampa and the San Juan-based Latin Grammy-winning veterans Lito y Polaco.

When emcee Cassidy of the latter group rapped, "Mama, no tengas miedo de bailar conmigo los dos solos sabroso el estilo de Cassidy," you had to admire the effortless flow of his lyrics, even if you didn't know he was saying, "Girl, don't be afraid to dance with me/The two of us alone spices the flow of Cassidy."

As he waited backstage to perform his headlining set, Puerto Rican emcee Nicky Jam marveled at how far the scene has come.

"These parties started in garages on a little island called Puerto Rico," he said. "Now it's all over the world."