William Joseph Boone, age 94, of Louisville, Kentucky, passed away August 5, 2016. He was born January 22, 1922, in Howardstown, Kentucky, to Charles Henry and Margaret O’Leary Boone. In addition to his parents, he was preceded in death by his brother, Charles Daniel Boone and his sister, Mary Angela Boone Donahue, and a son, John Paul Boone.

Bill, also fondly known as Billy Joe in his younger years, grew up in the small town of Howardstown, Kentucky on his family's farm.

He was a member of the United States Marine Corps and served in the South Pacific Theater of Operations during World War II.

Upon returning home, he married the love of his life, Betty Jane Wimsett, in New Haven, Kentucky, in 1948.

A devout Catholic, he was an active member of St. Bartholomew Parish for many decades.

He was the foundation of a close-knit, loving family, who remain so to this day. He will never be forgotten by those whose lives he generously touched.

In addition to his parents, he was preceded in death by his brother, Charles Daniel Boone and his sister, Mary Angela Boone Donahue, and a son, John Paul Boone.

He is survived by his devoted wife of 67 years, Elizabeth Jane (Betty) Wimsett Boone; four children; Jani (Dave) Rose, Cathy (Bob) Blackburn, Annie (Steve) McDevitt, Jeff (Elaine) Boone, and daughter-in-law, Diane Heichelbech Boone. Also surviving are grandchildren Heather Arguello, Elizabeth Boone, Allison (Colin) King, Rachel McDevitt (Josh Bixler), William Boone, Jay (Bekah) Boone, Blake Blackburn, Katie Boone, and Anthony Boone. Two great-grandchildren and one on the way also survive

His funeral Mass will be at Noon Wednesday, August 10, 2016 at Our Lady of Lourdes Catholic Church, 508 Breckinridge Ln. with burial in Resthaven Cemetery.

Visitation will be from 2:00- 7:00 p.m. Tuesday at Highlands Funeral Home, 3331 Taylorsville Rd.

In lieu of flowers, the family requests that donations be made to the Feed My Neighbor program

at the Cathedral of the Assumption 433 S 5th St, Louisville, KY 40202.