John William “Blind” Boone was born in 1864 during the Civil War. His mother was Rachel Boone, a slave owned by descendants of Daniel Boone.

Rachel escaped from her owners in Kentucky and made her way to the Union Army camp in Miami, Missouri. In 1861, Abraham Lincoln and the U.S. Congress determined they would not return escaped slaves to their owners. Rachel was considered captured enemy property or “contraband of war.” She was classified as a “contraband cook.”

At the Army base, Rachel met Boone’s father, the company bugler, who disappeared from their lives shortly afterward. Rachel left the army and raised Boone by herself in Warrenton, Missouri, where she cleaned, cooked and cared for the children of wealthy families.

When Boone was 6 months old, he was diagnosed with “brain fever,” probably meningitis. The swelling in his brain was so extensive, doctors performed an unorthodox operation to relieve the pressure. Surgically removing his eyes, they saved his life, but left him blind.

His incredible talent in music surfaced very early. At 5 years old, he got a tin whistle, a crude sort of flute. He could play any sort of tune on it and imitate birds with shocking precision. The 5-year-old organized his own neighborhood street band with older boys playing drum, tin whistle and tambourine. He began his professional career at age 7 when he got a French harp, or harmonica. He played at parties and public events for money.

He and his mother lived in a cabin behind the big house of the white family where she worked. He grew up with the white children. According to Mrs. Sam M. Davis, friends of the family, Boone had an extraordinary sense of hearing. “He knew the voices and could detect the footsteps of everyone with whom he came in contact. Often when he was very young, his playmates would try to slip up on him, always unsuccessfully. He was never deceived as to their identity. ... His memory through all of the 47 years of concert life never failed him when called upon to recognize old friends he had known in his boyhood.”

Living in poverty, working as a maid, Rachel wanted the best education for her son. The townspeople of Warrenton recognized Boone’s talent. They took a collection to pay for tuition and travel to the Missouri School for the Blind in St. Louis. The 9-year-old boy traveled over 200 miles alone by train.

At the school, Boone excelled at music and loved meeting new people. But when a new manager was hired, the school became segregated. Boone was taken out of music classes and put to work making brooms. To escape, he began to sneak out to the speakeasys and bars of St. Louis to listen to a new genre of music, ragtime.

Subscribe: Get unlimited access to our local coverage

When he was expelled from the school for running away, he had no money and lived on the streets, playing and singing wherever he could to make money. A railroad conductor found Boone nearly starving and allowed the pre-teen to earn his train fare home by playing the harmonica for passengers.

Back home, Boone played piano in churches and other gatherings. A well-to-do Black businessman, John Lange, heard him play. Lange offered to manage Boone’s career. A lifelong partnership and friendship began. Lange sent the young musician to the Christian College in Columbia, where he was trained in classical music by Anna Heuerman, who fostered Boone’s lifelong love of classical music.

In 1879, When Boone was 15 years old, he and Lange formed the Boone Concert Co. and started a tour that would last for almost half a century. At first, they traveled by horse and wagon so they could bring their own piano. They were afraid white people would not want a Black person playing their piano. Boone was soon so successful they found no one minded if he played their piano.

Boone was also a master composer and played many of his own songs. When traveling through Missouri in April 1880, he was slated to play in Marshfield. The skies turned green, and winds howled. The band hunkered down in place. A tornado blew through Marshfield, tearing apart the town and killing over 100 people. While deciding whether to go on with the show, Boone composed a new song about the cyclone. The piece, called “The Marshfield Tornado” has three movements, beginning with a quiet Sunday morning at church. The second movement is the approach of the storm and the roaring devastation as it tears through. The last movement is the fading of the storm and return to peace.

Boone and Lange decided to put on the show and to donate the proceeds to help rebuild the city of Marshfield. Many of the survivors of the tornado came. Boone started with his new masterpiece. The “Marshfield Tornado” was so powerful and realistic, half the audience got up and ran out, fearing another tornado was upon them.

“The Marshfield Tornado” became one of Boone’s most popular songs. Unable to read or write notes, Boone played by ear. He could listen to any song once and repeat it note by note. This skill became part of his act. He challenged the best local pianists to come on stage and play any song. No matter how difficult, he could repeat it note by note. Lange offered a prize of $1,000 to anyone who could stump Boone. He never had to pay it out.

To be continued ...

— Kathy King Johnson is former executive director of the Cheboygan Opera House.