Niels Bohr

Born

Niels Henrik David Bohr

7 October 1885

Copenhagen, Denmark

Died 18 November 1962 (aged 77)

Copenhagen, Denmark

Resting place Assistens Cemetery Alma mater University of Copenhagen Known for

Bohr magneton

Bohr model

Bohr radius

Bohr–Einstein debates

Bohr–Kramers–Slater theory

Bohr–Van Leeuwen theorem

Bohr–Sommerfeld theory

Complementarity

Copenhagen interpretation

Spouse(s) Margrethe Nørlund (m. 1912) Children Aage, Ernest, four other sons Awards Nobel Prize in Physics (1922)

Hughes Medal (1921)

Matteucci Medal (1923)

Franklin Medal (1926)

Foreign Member of the Royal Society (1926)

Max Planck Medal (1930)

Faraday Lectureship Prize (1930)

Copley Medal (1938)

Order of the Elephant (1947)

Atoms for Peace Award (1957)

Sonning Prize (1957)

Scientific career Fields Theoretical physics Institutions Thesis Studies on the Electron Theory of Metals (1911) Doctoral advisor Christian Christiansen Other academic advisors Doctoral students Hendrik Kramers

I. H. Usmani Other notable students Lev Landau Influences Influenced Signature

Niels Henrik David Bohr (7 October 1885 – 18 November 1962) was a Danish physicist who made foundational contributions to understanding atomic structure and quantum theory, for which he received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1922. Bohr was also a philosopher and a promoter of scientific research.

Bohr developed the Bohr model of the atom, in which he proposed that energy levels of electrons are discrete and that the electrons revolve in stable orbits around the atomic nucleus but can jump from one energy level (or orbit) to another. Although the Bohr model has been supplanted by other models, its underlying principles remain valid. He conceived the principle of complementarity: that items could be separately analysed in terms of contradictory properties, like behaving as a wave or a stream of particles. The notion of complementarity dominated Bohr's thinking in both science and philosophy.

Bohr founded the Institute of Theoretical Physics at the University of Copenhagen, now known as the Niels Bohr Institute, which opened in 1920. Bohr mentored and collaborated with physicists including Hans Kramers, Oskar Klein, George de Hevesy, and Werner Heisenberg. He predicted the existence of a new zirconium-like element, which was named hafnium, after the Latin name for Copenhagen, where it was discovered. Later, the element bohrium was named after him.

During the 1930s Bohr helped refugees from Nazism. After Denmark was occupied by the Germans, he had a famous meeting with Heisenberg, who had become the head of the German nuclear weapon project. In September 1943 word reached Bohr that he was about to be arrested by the Germans, and he fled to Sweden. From there, he was flown to Britain, where he joined the British Tube Alloys nuclear weapons project, and was part of the British mission to the Manhattan Project. After the war, Bohr called for international cooperation on nuclear energy. He was involved with the establishment of CERN and the Research Establishment Risø of the Danish Atomic Energy Commission and became the first chairman of the Nordic Institute for Theoretical Physics in 1957.

Publications:

The Theory of Spectra and Atomic Constitution

Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge

The structure of the atom [Nobel Lecture]

Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality be Considered Complete?

The Mechanism of Nuclear Fission

On the Constitution of Atoms and Molecules

The Quantum Postulate and the Recent Development of Atomic Theory

Neutron Capture and Nuclear Constitution

Discussions with Einstein on Epistemological Problems in Atomic Physics

On the Notions of Causality and Complementarity

Velocity-range relation for fission fragments

Electron Capture and Loss by Heavy Ions Penetrating through Matter

Quantum Mechanics and Physical Reality

Determination of the surface-tension of water by the method of jet vibration

The Penetration of Atomic Particles Through Matter

Natural Philosophy and Human Cultures

Disintegration of Heavy Nuclei

Transmutations of Atomic Nuclei