When visiting the Financial District of Manhattan, historic Fraunces Tavern is not to be missed. Tucked amongst the high rises and only two blocks from the waterfront, the tavern has lasted the test of time and proudly adorned the corner of Pearl and Broad Streets for 300 years. If the hustle and bustle of the city is getting to you, sneak away into the cozy tavern for good food and drinks, live music and an important history lesson.

History

In 1719, Stephan De Lancey built the building that is now Fraunces Tavern on Pearl Street as a private residence for his family. In 1762, a man named Samuel Fraunces purchased the De Lancey mansion and converted it into a tavern, first called “The Sign of Queen Charlotte Tavern,” which became locally known as “Queen’s Head Tavern.” As a prominent building in the city, the tavern would play a central role in many facets of the American Revolution. Leading up to the war, the Patriot society Sons of Liberty used the tavern for their meetings and debates.

Just prior to British occupation of the city in autumn 1776, Fraunces fled to New Jersey with his family; however, in 1778 he was captured and brought back to the city to cook for British General James Robertson. It was during the seven-year British occupation of New York City when Samuel Fraunces allegedly provided meals for American prisoners held in the city (he also claimed to have passed important information about the British occupation to General Washington). During the British occupation, Samuel Fraunce’s Loyalist son-in-law operated the tavern.

Towards the end of the war, the tavern was used for a British-American Board of Inquiry, which met in the building from April to August 1783.

Fraunces Tavern is best known for General George Washington’s emotional farewell to his officers, which took place in the Long Room of the tavern on December 4, 1783. A description of this memorable event is best told by someone who was there.

In 1830, Colonel Benjamin Tallmadge (who was present at the farewell) wrote about that day. This is part of his account:

The time now drew near when General Washington intended to leave this part of the country for his beloved retreat at Mt. Vernon. On Tuesday, the 4th of December it was made known to the officers then in New York that General Washington intended to commence his journey that day.

At 12 o’clock the officers repaired to Fraunces Tavern in Pearl Street where General Washington had appointed to meet them and to take his final leave of them. We had been assembled but a few moments when his Excellency entered the room. His emotions were too strong to be concealed which seemed to be reciprocated by every officer present.

After partaking of a slight refreshment in almost breathless silence the General filled his glass with wine and turning to the officers said, “With a heart full of love and gratitude I now take leave of you. I most devoutly wish that your latter days may be as prosperous as your former ones have been glorious and honorable.”

After the officers had taken a glass of wine General Washington said, “I cannot come to each of you but shall feel obliged if each of you will come and take me by the hand.”

General Knox being nearest to him turned to the Commander-in-chief who, suffused in tears, was incapable of utterance but grasped his hand when they embraced each other in silence. In the same affectionate manner every officer in the room marched up and parted with his General in chief. Such a scene of sorrow and weeping I had never before witnessed and fondly hope I may never be called to witness again.”

Interesting Facts

The beautiful small bricks that make up Fraunces Tavern were imported from the Dutch Republic

When New York City became the capital of the nation after the war under the Articles of Confederation, Fraunces Tavern housed the departments of Foreign Affairs, Finance, and War

The building suffered multiple major fires (1832 & 1852) and reconstructions (1890 & 1907), which have greatly changed the make-up of the original tavern

Our Visit & Recommendations

Today, Fraunces Tavern (54 Pearl Street, New York City, NY 10004) operates as a restaurant, bar and museum. Despite many renovations over it’s 300 years of existence, Fraunces Tavern currently has a few rooms restored to it’s original 18th-century style and has a lot to offer to the city visitor.

Additionally, Fraunces Tavern has multiple bars and rooms that can be reserved for an event or simply relaxed in with an afternoon drink in hand. The Independence Bar on the first floor boasts one of the largest draft beer selections in the city and has live music on the weekends- come on Sunday if you enjoy traditional Irish tunes.

My favorite, the Dingle Whiskey Bar, has a roaring fireplace in the winter and early spring, oversized leather chairs and an incredible selection of spirits. One of my fondest memories of New York City is relaxing here by the fire with a bourbon in hand.

Aside from the bar and restaurant scene on the first floor, Fraunces Tavern has a phenomenal museum on the second and third floors of the building, which has operated since 1907. Open 7 days a week (12 – 5pm Mon-Fri, 11am-5pm Sat-Sun), it’s admission is $7 per adult (with special pricing students, children and military). You can walk directly up to the second floor to pay your admission and begin the self-guided tour.

The first and most famous room on the tour is the Long Room. Through extensive research and use of authentic colonial furniture, the museum has restored the room that George Washington said farewell to his officers. I spent quite a bit of time here, trying to imagine the historic scene that unfolded on that December day. After all of the battles, hardships and great risk to life and limb, these leaders of the Continental Army gathered together in peace. They were able to share a drink and honor their cause, their commander and their soon-to-be new nation- what a wild moment in American and world history!

The second floor also has the Scott Gallery and the beautiful Clinton Dining Room. The Clinton Dining Room is a Federalist style dining room that is covered in rare Zuber wallpaper (one of only 11 surviving today- another original hangs in the White House).

The third floor has a few galleries that display rare and unique artifacts and paintings. Many of these relics are directly tied to George Washington and the founding of our nation. These include a painting of George Washington at Dorchester Heights by James Stuart (a copy of Gilbert Stuart’s 1806 original) and a lock of his hair.

One of my favorite items on display is a carriage panel from the coach that carried George Washington to his Presidential Inauguration on April 30, 1789. The oil painting is the original Great Seal of the United States, which was approved by the Continental Congress in 1782.

We ended our tour in the patriotic Flag Room, where dozens of colonial-era flags are on display. This room is used for guest speakers, events and is a good spot to sit and reflect.

Despite the ever-growing and changing city around it, Fraunces Tavern has remained a staple of southern Manhattan. 300 years after being built, Fraunces Tavern and its museum does a great job preserving the history of the iconic building and the remarkable moments that happened within its walls.