In 1783, to mark his retirement from the Continental Army, George Washington held a farewell dinner at the Fraunces Tavern, on Pearl Street. Earlier in the war, a crew including a number of skilled black sailors had saved Washington’s life by evacuating him to Manhattan during the disastrous Battle of Brooklyn, but they weren’t invited to the party. So, when the Fraunces Tavern Museum began organizing “Fighting for Freedom: Black Patriots and Loyalists,” it seemed only right that the era’s best-known portrait of a black mariner should hang as the exhibition’s centerpiece.

“I was so thrilled to show the painting. It’s in just about every book on AfricanAmerican history,” Nadezhda Williams, the curator of the show, which runs through July, said. “There are only a few images from this period of AfricanAmericans in uniform, and they tend to be generic. This painting was different—an individualistic portrait of what might be a real African-American Revolutionary War veteran.”

The painting features a sailor, standing in front of a clipper ship. He is wearing a blue officer’s coat and a shirt open to his solar plexus. Dr. Alexander McBurney, a retired Rhode Island urologist, bought the painting for thirteen hundred dollars from an art dealer in 1975, in a fit of bicentennial fever. “Just looking at other people’s ancestors doesn’t appeal to me at all,” McBurney said. “But this is special.” Though its provenance is unknown, the painting has been featured in textbooks and television programs and displayed at museums. After agreeing, last June, to lend it to the Fraunces, McBurney decided to get the sailor cleaned up for his New York début.

Art restoration projects always entail risk, and the sailor was assessed, for insurance purposes, at up to three hundred thousand dollars. McBurney sent him to Boston’s Peter Williams (no relation to Nadezhda Williams), who has a special interest in maritime subjects. He had no idea that his beloved sailor would turn out to be harboring a secret.

“We tried to clean a section of the painting, what would be the sitter’s left hand,” Williams said. “We applied solvent on black fingers and saw a white hand. At that point, nothing else was important.” Continuing with the cleaning, the restorer found that the sailor’s bare, brown chest had been painted over a fine white shirt. A few more swipes of solvent revealed fair hair and a white ear. The restorer believes that the original white face was sanded away and painted over with the new black face. Williams guesses that the cover-up work was done not long before McBurney purchased the picture.

Williams says that he had suspicions about the portrait from the start. For one thing, although the painting was webbed with centuries of craquelure, the sailor’s face was unblemished. Williams had scanned the painting with an ultraviolet light, which should have identified any areas that had been retouched. “Someone was pretty devious,” he said, explaining that the forgers had coated the painting with a special UV-light-blocking varnish. He went on, “We all want black heroes, and that’s what’s behind this. Create a black hero and you’ve got a marketable painting.”

A few weeks before the painting was due to arrive in New York, Nadezhda Williams, the Fraunces curator, received a call from Dr. McBurney. “I asked him, ‘How’s our black sailor doing?’ ” Williams recalled.

“He’s just fine, but he’s white,” McBurney told her.

“First there was denial, thinking Dr. McBurney was joking,” Williams recalled. “And then, finally, acceptance and picking up the pieces—especially a piece to fill the blank spot on that gallery wall!” The place of honor in the exhibit is now occupied by Jean-Baptiste Le Paon’s portrait “Lafayette at Yorktown.” The French General is depicted standing beside the Continental Army’s black master spy, James Armistead, who holds Lafayette’s horse.

The value of McBurney’s picture has dwindled to about three thousand dollars. But McBurney is demonstrating an admirable dance-with-the-date-you-brung mentality. He’s even had the sailor restored to his faux blackness. “He’s an old friend now,” he said. “For more than thirty years, he’s occupied a position of honor in the dining room, and he’ll stay there.”