Built by the De Lancey family between 1719 and 1722 and sold to Samuel Fraunces in 1762, Fraunces Tavern and Museum is the oldest standing structure in Manhattan. The building has taken many forms over the centuries, being used among other things as a private residence, a dance school, a boarding house, and as one of the most important taverns of the Revolutionary War.

Taverns like Fraunces were important community meeting places in the 18th century, where residents and travelers could exchange knowledge and the news of the day. Several New York City clubs and organizations held meetings at Fraunces Tavern, including the New York City Sons of Liberty and the New York Society Library, and it served as the founding place of the Provincial Congress in 1775, the temporary colonial government during the Revolution. The Provincial Congress held a banquet in the Long Room on June 18, 1776 to show appreciation for General George Washington and his officers for their defense of the colony.

On November 25, 1783, British troops left New York City, the last American city to be occupied. This day would be later be referred to as Evacuation Day. George Washington led the Continental Army in a parade through the city, and Governor George Clinton’s Evacuation Day celebration was held at Fraunces Tavern.

Restoration of Fraunces was completed in 1907, and on December 4, the anniversary of Washington’s Farewell speech, the Museum and Tavern were dedicated and opened to the public. In 1965, 54 Pearl Street was designated as a New York City Landmark.

Appropriately, Zuber's War of Independence was installed in the Clinton Room on the 2nd Floor, donated in 1968 by Dr. George Clinton Andrews. The 32 non-repeating panels of this scenic wallpaper were printed by Zuber with an amazing 2300 hand-carved wood blocks and 360 colors.

Zuber’s War of Independence was first printed in 1852. The panels illustrate important moments in the American Revolution, including the capture of a British stronghold by American forces on Weehawk Hill, the surrender of British General Cornwallis at Yorktown, the triumphant arrival of General Washington into Boston, and two battle scenes in front of the Natural Bridge and Niagara Falls.

The Surrender of Cornwallis to Washington at Yorktown or The Capitulation: General Cornwallis is handing his sword to General Washington in defeat. The triumphant American troops are contrasted with the dour English soldiers on the right of the panels. One soldier is crying into the British Flag, another is bowed in disgrace and a third is has his arm in a sling. Zuber emphasized the French contribution to the war showing the Marquis de Lafayette and French soldiers in uniform.

Washington’s Entry into Boston Harbor: The American Flag is flying high from every church, spire and boat in the harbor. This incredible attention to detail is what has made Zuber wallpapers so famous. Washington on a white horse tips his hat to the excited onlookers, followed on horseback by other heroes of the Revolution and a representation of Tipu Sultan who was fighting the British in India and who was followed closely by the founding fathers.