The charming story of Molly, a little pig rescued from the bush, has crossed the linguistic and cultural divide, becoming the first Indigenous and bilingual book to feature in a national public awareness campaign that encourages children to develop the habit of reading.

Moli det bigibigi, by debut writer Karen Manbulloo and illustrated by the Binjari community of northern Australia, is written in Kriol and English. In schools, libraries and book shops across Australia on Thursday Molly's exploits were followed as part of the Australian Reading Hour initiative, along with four other special edition reads by The Wiggles, Matt Stanton, Mick Elliott and Sally Rippin.

In another first announced on Thursday, Australian Catholic University revealed it will require trainee paramedics, aspiring lawyers and student maths teachers to spend time reading selected novels in recognition of the power of fiction to build empathy and improve psychological wellbeing.

The university aims to name a "book of the year" and provide a free copy to new students, with first-year courses drawing on the cultural and social themes of the novel as a way of broadening student perspectives.

The university's book for 2020 will be Richard Yaxley's This Is My Song, a three-generation family story about a grandfather who survives Auschwitz and whose grandson revives a song written before the war.

Professor Margot Hillel, chair of the university's academic board, said the decision reflected a desire to see the liberal arts sit at the heart of the university's identity. A good book evokes an emotional response, asking its readers to relate to the characters on the page and to "live their lives vicariously". "This Is My Song will do that for anyone who reads it," Professor Hillel said.

Likewise, Hachette Australia's Louise Sherwin-Stark noted Moli det bigibigi had special meaning for the author and her community.

"It was the first book Karen's grandchildren have ever read in their first language, which is pretty special," Sherwin-Stark said.

The Australian Reading Hour initiative encourages children and adults alike to drop everything and read a book for one hour on a set day each year. The inclusion of Moli det bigibigi in the program this year, the International Year of Indigenous Languages, meant that children in communities where Kriol is spoken were able to take part in their first language for the first time.

"And for kids everywhere else, Moli det bigibigi tells a wonderful and funny story of life in a remote community," Sherwin-Stark said.

Loading

Manbulloo travelled from her home near Katherine to La Perouse Public School to share her book with around 50 students, revealing that Molly the pig is now seven years old, bigger than ever but on a diet, restricted to five Weet-Bix and a range of fruits and vegetables.

The school is about to start a Dharawal language program, in collaboration with the local Gujaga preschool, to learn about the world's oldest living culture. Teachers are also learning the local language, history and culture and will use this knowledge in their daily teaching.

Molly looks to be heading on another adventure soon, too, with a sequel to Moli det bigibigi on the cards.