Zoe Salmon has married her fiancé William Corrie in a secret ceremony in Barbados.

The former Blue Peter host, who got engaged to William on the exotic island last November, revealed she didn't even tell her parents before eloping at the lavish Sandy Lane resort.

Speaking in the latest issue of Hello! magazine, the 36-year-old gushed: 'I can't wait to get home and tell everyone.'

The former Miss Northern Ireland tied the knot with butcher William, 30, at the exclusive beach resort - which boasts A-listers like Rihanna and Oprah Winfrey as fans.

Proving to be the ultimate celebrity hotspot, it's also where golfer Tiger Woods got married in 2004.

Zoe said: 'I didn't even tell my mum and dad, although running off to get married does run in the family so they will be thrilled for us.'

She added: 'We'll have a big party when we get home, I'm sure of that. I want an excuse to wear my dress and feel the magic again.'

Revealing her wedding details exclusively to Hello!, she disclosed her dress of choice was a beaded gown with a long train from wedding designer, Berta.

'When I saw Zoe arrive I thought, 'Wow!'', William said, of seeing his bride in her dress.

Zoe added: 'What was so lovely was that every single conversation we had that day was with each other.

'It was really intimate and we had so much space to breathe and take in every special moment.'

The former beauty queen accepted Northern Irish butcher William's proposal over dinner at the Sandy Lane Hotel last year.

The couple have been together for five years this month after meeting at a friend's wedding in Castle Leslie, County Monaghan - where Sir Paul McCartney famously married Heather Mills in 2002.

In an interview with the Belfast Telegraph soon after the engagement, Zoe spoke of her shock when William proposed.

She said: 'We hadn't talked about marriage, so when he proposed I was really surprised, and when he presented the ring I was doubly surprised.

'It looks amazing. I am in awe of the fact he wanted to be traditional and asked my parents - Joe and Priscilla - in advance.

'I am a traditional girl.'

Zoe's romance with William comes after she dated another fellow Northern Irish man - former Hollyoaks actor Gerard McCarthy.

The pair split in 2009 after 18 months together, with Gerard declaring 'there's plenty more Salmon in the sea' following the end of their romance.

The blonde started her career when she won Miss Northern Ireland in 1999, before turning her attention to presenting.

She co-hosted Blue Peter to 2004 until 2008 and also appeared as a contestant on Dancing On Ice in 2009.

Earlier this year, she played the title role in the panto production of Cinderella at the Theatre Royal Windsor.