She tied the knot to her long-time partner in a secret ceremony on the Caribbean island two years ago.

And Zöe Salmon appeared in high spirits as she returned to Barbados for a romantic getaway with her husband William Corrie on Sunday afternoon.

The former Blue Peter presenter, 38, caught the eye as she exhibited her slender frame in a plunging bedazzled bikini top, complemented with a pair of black lace briefs.

Looking every inch the siren, the Northern Irish host commanded attention as she displayed her slender legs and washboard abs in the barely-there ensemble while frolicking on the beach with her handsome man.

Zöe maintained her stylish look in the accessory department as she sported a pair of hooped earrings and chic cat-eye sunglasses, tied in with her incredibly flashy wedding ring.

Boasting her naturally radiant complexion, the Celebrity Masterchef star went make-up free and framed her stunning visage with her straight locks.

Meanwhile, William, 32, kept up with his wife's good looks as he showcased his hunky frame in a pair of two-tone blue shorts.

Protecting his eyes from the sun, the butcher donned gradient-style sunglasses as he enjoyed a stroll along the sandy shores of the beach.

The couple enjoyed glasses of fizz on their idyllic break as they tapped into full relaxation mode while reclining on deck chairs.

Laughing and joking, the pair later ventured into the sea for a refreshing dip, with Zöe showing off her lithe as she waded waist deep into the water.

Zöe and William are known to be fans of the holiday hot spot, after eloping to Barbados to get married in 2016.

After tying the knot at the exclusive Sandy Lane Hotel - where golfer Tiger Woods got married in 2004 - Zöe told Hello: 'I didn't even tell my mum and dad, although running off to get married does run in the family so they will be thrilled for us.

'We'll have a big party when we get home, I'm sure of that. I want an excuse to wear my dress and feel the magic again.'

Revealing further details of her wedding, she disclosed her dress of choice was a beaded gown with a long train from wedding designer, Berta.

'When I saw Zöe arrive I thought, 'Wow!'', William said, of seeing his bride in her dress.

She added: 'What was so lovely was that every single conversation we had that day was with each other. It was really intimate and we had so much space to breathe and take in every special moment.'

The former beauty queen accepted Northern Irish butcher William's proposal over dinner at the Sandy Lane Hotel in 2015.

However, Zöe later revealed the heartbreaking reason behind their secret wedding - explaining that her mother Priscilla, who passed away last year after a long battle with two terminal illnesses, was too poorly to travel at the time.

Speaking to Belfast Live, the TV personality said: 'My parents knew all about it, they paid for our wedding. But mum was just too ill to be there. Mum's illness was so private, she didn’t want anyone to know.

'I couldn't have married at home because mum couldn’t have made it. But the fact we all did it meant it didn’t feel sad that Will and I got married on our own.'

The couple have been together for six years after meeting at a friend's wedding in Castle Leslie, County Monaghan - where Sir Paul McCartney famously married Heather Mills in 2002.

Zöe's romance with William came after she dated another fellow Northern Irish man - former Hollyoaks actor Gerard McCarthy.

The pair split in 2009 after 18 months, with Gerard declaring 'there's plenty more Salmon in the sea' following the end of their romance.

The blonde started her career when she won Miss Northern Ireland in 1999, before turning her attention to presenting.

She co-hosted iconic children's show Blue Peter to 2004 until 2008, and went on to appear as a contestant on Dancing On Ice in 2009.