She decided to marry husband Will Corrie in secret earlier this year in Barbados, without her nearest and dearest present.

But former Blue Peter Presenter Zoe Salmon has now revealed the heartbreaking reason why they opted to elope without a single family member to witness their union at the exclusive Sandy Lane Resort on the Caribbean island.

Speaking to Belfast Live, the TV personality, 36, explained her mother Priscilla – who passed away last month after a long battle with two terminal illnesses - was so ill at the time that she couldn’t travel.

Scroll down for video

Contrary to reports that she hadn't told her relatives about her nuptials, Zoe said: 'My parents knew all about it, they paid for our wedding. But mum was just too ill to be there. Mum's illness was so private, she didn’t want anyone to know.

'I couldn't have married at home because mum couldn’t have made it. But the fact we all did it meant it didn’t feel sad that Will and I got married on our own.'

Zoe added: 'I spoke to mum and dad after the wedding – they hadn’t known the exact day that week we were doing it, so that was the surprise bit. But they were thrilled for us.'

Although admitting 'people were baffled' by the choice to simplify their wedding, Zoe said their special day was 'lovely'.

And she said eloping runs in the family, with her parents tying the knot in Bournemouth on their own and her sisters Lara and Naomi running off to Mauritius and Antigua respectively to get married.

The blonde beauty revealed her late mother gave her a bottle of Chanel No5 as her something borrowed – which made her feel like she was there with her on the day.

The couple had been together for five years after meeting at a friend's wedding in Castle Leslie, County Monaghan - where Sir Paul McCartney famously married Heather Mills in 2002 - and got engaged in Barbados in 2015.

Aside from wedding bells, it's been a difficult time for the Northern Irish stunner, who is currently starring on Channel 4’s The Island with Bear Grylls, as she revealed her mind was constantly on home and her mum as she filmed the series in February.

Zoe admitted being on the show was a 'constant concern' as she was without a phone or contact but was reassured by the production company that she would be notified should anything happen.

The former Dancing On Ice star - who took part in the show to raise awareness for the charity Stand up to Cancer - explained it was thinking about her mother Priscilla that got her through the difficult experience.

Although her career is important to her, Zoe insisted the past few months have put things into perspective after work commitments left her based in London and fearing she might get the chance to say bye to her mum.

The TV star revealed her flight was delayed upon hearing her mother wasn't doing so well but got back in time to say her final goodbyes in her native Bangor the night before she passed away.

Reflecting over her difficult year, Zoe revealed she can in the someday show her future children how 'lovely Granny Salmon was'.

Following her passing, Zoe and her family have set up The Priscilla Edith Salmon Fund with the Northern Ireland Hospice in memory of her.

The blonde first started her career when she won Miss Northern Ireland in 1999, before turning her attention to presenting.