Ultimate Fan

Joined: Sep 2006

Posts: 8,672

Gus and Harley "because they will forever belong together"

This is a thread where fans can "Gush" about their favorite couple

Gus & Harley.

Gus/Harley Shipper List

- DefLeppardFan

- Dommie

- Evil Poptart

- Laurababora

A look back at Gus and Harley's romance

2001

FBI agent Gus Aitoro came to Springfield to investigate the Santos crime family. He had a vendetta against them because Danny Santos's father had murdered his father. Danny, in the meantime, was on trial for his mother, Carmen's murder. Gus planted evidence to ensure that Danny would be incriminated, but Michelle exposed the scheme. Once Carmen returned from the "dead," Danny was set free, so he accepted a job offer from Alan Spaulding. Gus, however, could not let Santos go. He pursued Danny and Michelle, who were trying to steal Spaulding funds to implicate the mob. Meanwhile, Harley was married to Phillip Spaulding, but she threw him out when he grew obsessed with his former love, Beth. After a fight, Harley had drunken sex with Rick and wound up pregnant. Their son, Jude, was born in a jail cell after she was pulled over for speeding. Harley tried to call Rick, but reached Gus instead. Aitoro had to deliver the baby, even though it was a breech birth. By the end of the year, Gus struggled to get his mind off Harley.

2002

Rick and Harley's loveless wedding plans were called off when she fell in love with Gus, and Rick admitted that he had feelings for Mel. Gus moved in with Harley, causing Phillip to take Zach away from his ex-wife. To help her in the custody case against Phillip, Harley brought Eden, Gus's sister, to town to clear him of a juvenile murder charge (he'd taken the blame for Eden), but she reneged on confessing.

2003

Phillip granted custody of Zach to Harley. She was shot on the job, but recovered. Gus saved Alan, who had been drugged by Alexandra. Harley's detective/legal-aid agency (Harley's Angels) competed with Gus to find a missing person. Gus was stunned when he read old letters that his parents wrote and learned that his mother had been barren. Harley and Gus worked together to discover his true parentage. They learned that Phillip's childhood nanny, Regina, was actually Gus's mother. Originally, Gus was convinced that he was really a Santos, but after coming face-to-face with his presumed-dead mother, he was shocked to learn that Alan was actually his father.

2004

Gus and Harley's wedding plans were marred by his loyalty to his newfound family, the Spauldings. The couple set a wedding date, but Alex was embroiled in the Antimonium drug scheme. Gus let a dead man take the blame for the crime, a fact that he kept secret from Harley. On their wedding day, Harley viewed a security video of Alex and Gus discussing the crime; she called off the nups. Weeks later, Harley told Gus that if he gave up his Spaulding connection, she would get back together with him. She returned his ring when he refused. Then, Phillip came up with a plot to close down the Cooper family diner, Company. Gus, who was working for Spaulding, tried to stall his brother; he and Beth ended up saving Company by learning that an endangered bird migrated in the area. Later, Gus came into contact with Phillip's new assistant, a middle-aged woman named Ruth. Turns out, it was really Harley in disguise; she was trying to take down Phillip. Phillip kidnapped his younger children, promising to return them at a certain time if Harley met him. That night, Phillip was shot and presumed dead.

2005

Gus made himself sick as he tried to prove that Harley was innocent of Phillip's murder. The estranged couple grew close again, but Harley was sent to prison for the crime and they broke up. In prison, Harley ran into her ex-husband, Mallet, who was the warden, and she had to confront her past with him. Alan orchestrated Harley's transfer to a dangerous prison, but on the way, the bus crashed and Mallet let Harley escape with Gus. The reunited lovers fled Springfield in an ice-cream truck. They headed to New York City and searched for a witness to prove Harley's innocence. With Mallet's help, the couple managed to prove that Alan killed Phillip. However, they still didn't have a happy ending, even though they were engaged again. Alan insisted that Phillip was still alive. Harley became obsessed with proving whether it was true, so she teamed up with Mallet; Gus pleaded with her to focus on their wedding. Mallet and Harley rehashed their failed marriage, but ultimately, Harley returned to Springfield (she and Mallet had been in Florida following a lead) and married Gus in a lovely wedding that was officiated by Ross Gus and Harley settled into domestic bliss with only a few bumps. Mallet moved to town and became Gus's partner on the force. Meanwhile, Harley became CEO of Spaulding. By the end of the year, Gus grew more and more paranoid about Alan's imminent release from the sanitarium. On New Year's Eve, Alan was set free, but Gus kidnapped his father and drove off in a limo

2006

With Gus gone, Harley had to stay strong for her children, Zach (Nicholas Art) and Jude (Aaron Hart), while trying to find her husband. Harley and Mallet joined forces to track down Gus and Alan. Harley freaked out when signs pointed to Gus dying, and she leaned on her ex-husband for support. Gus, meanwhile, was alive in a snowy wilderness with Alan.

2007

Brought some changes to the Aitoro/Cooper clan--namely the arrival of Harley's teenage daughter Daisy and Gus's newly found teenaged son Rafe. The arrival of the couple's former significant others put a strain on the marriage and when Gus saw Harley in a kiss with Daisy's father, Dylan, he snapped and beat Dylan to a pulp. Hearing the commotion, a scared Jude called 911. When the police arrived, Harley told Jude that he did the right thing and that the adults were in the wrong for fighting. Unfortunately the Aitoro marriage seemed unable to withstand the arrival of their respective exes and Gus moved out before that fall. Gus assured Zach and Jude that he would be a part of their lives no matter what and by the end of the year, Gus and Harley divorced.

In 2008, a new man entered Harley's life --Cyrus Foley. Rick was not at all happy about this relationship and warned Harley that if she continued to see Cyrus, he would seek custody of Jude. Harley though convinced Rick that his anger was misplaced: he wasn’t angry about Foley, he was upset that Alan could take Beth and their new baby away. Despite voicing his displeasure, Rick allowed Cyrus to move into Harley’s house. In addition to adjusting to this new man, Zach and Jude had to adjust to a change in living conditions. Harley had quit the police force and money became extremely tight when she took out a second mortgage on her house. In fact, money was so tight that for weeks, dinners consisted of noodle soup. As if all this change wasn't enough, Zach and Jude were saddened to learn that Gus died in an accident. In honor of their beloved stepfather, the boys created a memory book filled with pictures and stories about Gus to give to Rafe since he hadn't known Gus as long as they did.

YouTube - GL GusH Only Scenes 3/31/08

__________________

Kimber

Ships: Dylan/Kelly, Spike/Buffy, Angel/Buffy, Damon/Elena, Cullen/Lily, James Bond/Vesper Lynd, Captain Hook/Emma Swan, Tony Stark/Pepper Potts, Dante/Lulu, Danny/Michelle, Tony/Marah, Sonny/Claudia, Danny/Samantha, Tyler/Caroline, Tuck/Lauren, Rafe/Sami, Batman/Catwoman

Last edited by DefLeppardFan; 06-24-2008 at 07:44 PM