From the New York Times bestselling author of the Hugo and Nebula Award-winning science fiction classic Ender’s Game, Orson Scott Card’s Shadow Quintet is the story of Ender Wiggin’s friend and fellow military genius, the one called Bean.

Bean’s past was a battle just to survive. He used his tactical genius to gain acceptance and safety as part of a children’s gang. Bean’s success brought him to the attention of Earth’s military academy, people scouring the planet for leaders, tacticians, generals to save Earth from the threat of alien invasion. Bean was sent into orbit, to the Battle School. And there he met Ender, becoming his right hand, his strategist, and his friend.

The Shadow Quintet features five novels of Bean’s space opera adventures.

This e-book bundle includes Ender’s Shadow, Shadow of the Hegemon, Shadow Puppets, Shadow of the Giant, and Shadows in Flight.

At the Publisher's request, this title is being sold without Digital Rights Management Software (DRM) applied.

About the Author

Orson Scott Card is best known for his science fiction novel Ender's Game and its many sequels that expand the Ender Universe into the far future and the near past. Those books are organized into The Ender Saga, the five books that chronicle the life of Ender Wiggin; the Shadow Series, that follows on the novel Ender's Shadow and are set on Earth; and the Formic Wars series, written with co-author Aaron Johnston, that tells of the terrible first contact between humans and the alien "Buggers".

Card has been a working writer since the 1970s. Beginning with dozens of plays and musical comedies produced in the 1960s and 70s, Card's first published fiction appeared in 1977--the short story "Gert Fram" in the July issue of The Ensign, and the novelette version of "Ender's Game" in the August issue of Analog.

The novel-length version of Ender's Game, published in 1984 and continuously in print since then, became the basis of the 2013 film, starring Asa Butterfield, Harrison Ford, Ben Kingsley, Hailee Steinfeld, Viola Davis, and Abigail Breslin.

Card was born in Washington state, and grew up in California, Arizona, and Utah. He served a mission for the LDS Church in Brazil in the early 1970s. Besides his writing, he runs occasional writers' workshops and directs plays. He frequently teaches writing and literature courses at Southern Virginia University.

He is the author many sci-fi and fantasy novels, including the American frontier fantasy series "The Tales of Alvin Maker" (beginning with Seventh Son), as well as stand-alone science fiction and fantasy novels like Pastwatch and Hart's Hope. He has collaborated with his daughter Emily Card on a manga series, Laddertop. He has also written contemporary thrillers like Empire and historical novels like the monumental Saints and the religious novels Sarah and Rachel and Leah. Card's recent work includes the Mithermages books (Lost Gate, Gate Thief), contemporary magical fantasy for readers both young and old.

Card lives in Greensboro, North Carolina, with his wife, Kristine Allen Card. He and Kristine are the parents of five children and several grandchildren.

Title: The Shadow Quintet : Ender's Shadow, Shadow of the Hegemon, Shadow Puppets, Shadow of the Giant, and Shadows in Flight

Author(s): Orson Scott Card

ISBN: 9780765376831

Copyright 2013

Release Date: September 24, 2013

Publisher: Tor Publishing Group

Countries: United States, Canada | Learn more about available countries

Language: English

Format: mobi,ePub | Learn More about our supported formats

Dragonmount is a proud provider of DRM-free eBooks. By purchasing any eBook from our store, you are not only helping support our website, but you are helping small businesses thrive in a market traditionally dominated by large companies. Learn more in our eBook FAQ.