Shadow Of The Hegemon: Book 2 of The Shadow Saga by Orson Scott Card

Orson Scott Card's award-winning Ender series is a genuine classic of science fiction. With ENDER'S SHADOW, the first book in the Shadow Saga, he took the series into fascinating new territory. For Ender Wiggin was not the only young recruit to be trained at Battle School. Ender Wiggin and his fellow pupils at Battle School have defeated the alien forces in an extraordinary military operation. Ender's destiny among the stars awaits him, but for his young army it is time to return to earth. One by one, however, they are disappearing. Earth faces a new danger, only this time the enemy is much closer to home. Look out for more information on this and other books on the Orbit website at www.orbitbooks.co.uk

Orson Scott Card keeps returning to his first published story Ender's Game (1977). He expanded it into the acclaimed 1985 novel Ender's Game, winning Hugo and Nebula awards and spawning several sequels. More recently, Ender's Shadow reworked the original tale of precocious boy soldier Ender saving the world from alien hordes at terrible personal cost, as told from the different, colder viewpoint of his even younger lieutenant Bean. Now Ender has been sent to the stars as too dangerously charismatic a military leader to keep on Earth. Without the common alien threat, our global alliance is disintegrating. Ender's top strategists like Bean are in demand by would-be conquering countrie Four strange, tortured teenagers dominate the book. Ender's brilliant but twisted brother Peter is already manipulating international politics as respected political pundit Locke, hoping to become world ruler or Hegemon. He needs the genetically enhance Shadow of the Hegemon lacks glittering SF hardware and seems almost old-fashioned after the planet-busting supertechnology of Ender's Game. What makes it compulsive reading is Card's uncannily sure handling of character, especially flawed characters and t David Langford, AMAZON.CO.UK 'Haunting, compulsive, urgently readable...Storytelling genius' INTERZONE