Orson Scott Card Books In Order

Book links take you to Amazon. As an Amazon Associate I earn money from qualifying purchases.

Publication Order of Ender Saga Books

with Aaron Johnston

Chronological Order of Ender Saga Books

with Aaron Johnston

Publication Order of Ender's Shadow Books

Publication Order of Ender Saga Graphic Novels

Publication Order of Ender Saga Collections

Publication Order of Ender Saga Non-Fiction Books

Publication Order of Empire Books

Publication Order of Extinct Books

Publication Order of Fleet School Books

Publication Order of Homecoming Saga Books

Publication Order of Laddertop Books

with Emily Janice Card

Publication Order of Maps in a Mirror Books

Publication Order of Mayflower Trilogy Books

with Kathryn H. Kidd

Publication Order of Micropowers Books

Publication Order of Mither Mages Books

Publication Order of Pastwatch Books

Publication Order of Pathfinder Books

Publication Order of The Side-Step Trilogy Books

Publication Order of Tales Of Alvin Maker Books

Publication Order of Women Of Genesis Books

Publication Order of Worthing Books

Publication Order of Standalone Novels

Publication Order of Short Stories/Novellas

Publication Order of Short Story Collections

Publication Order of Graphic Novels

Publication Order of Non-Fiction Books

Publication Order of Elements of Fiction Writing Books

Publication Order of Oz Reimagined Books

Publication Order of Legends Books

Publication Order of Ender Saga Short Stories/Novellas Books

Publication Order of L. Ron Hubbard Presents: Writers of the Future Books

Publication Order of Anthologies

About Orson Scott Card:

Orson Scott Card is an American novelist, public speaker, critic and columnist. He writes in different genre but he is especially known for his many forensic fictions. He has won several awards including the Nebula and Hugo Awards for his books Ender’s Game and the Speaker for the Dead. He has written a lot of books under different pseudonyms which include the names Frederick Bliss, P.Q. Gump, Byron Walley, Brian Green, Dinah Kirkham and Noam D. Pellume. In one interview he was quoted saying “ I was trying to establish separate identity in the marketplace ” which is his main reason for carrying different pseudonyms. Currently, he is writing and co-producing a film based on his books and he is also an English professor at Southern Virginia University.

The Early Life Of Orson Scott Card

The son of Willard and Peggy Card, Orson Scott Card is the third of the six children. He is born in Richland Washington in August 24, 1951 but he grew up in various places which include Santa Clara in California, Mesa, Arizona and Orem, Utah. Before he wrote books, he first served as a missionary for the Latter Day Saints (LDS) Church in Brazil. He also graduated from Brigham Young University as well as at the University of Utah before he took his PhD at the University in Notre Dame.

Fiction Genre

Orson Scott Card started his writing career as a poet while he was studying in Brigham Young University. Upon returning from his LDS Mission in the country of Brazil, he established the Utah Valley Repertory Theatre Company which produced plays in an outdoor amphitheater near the psychiatric hospital in Provo. While running his company, he also became a part-time proofreader in BYU Press before he applied as a fulltime copy editor.

While working in BYU, he developed the story for the Ender’s Game which he submitted to different publications which was bought by Ben Boya in the year 1977. However, in 1979, he was employed as an assistant editor in a magazine called Ensign and while working for the magazine, he produced Gert Farm under the penname Byron Walley. While working in Ensign, he received novel contracts for his books A Planet Called Treason and Hot Sleep before he left the company to become a fulltime freelancer.

While studying for his doctor’s degree at the University of Notre Dame, the 1980’s depression has caused him to leave his freelancing stint and find a job as a book editor in Compute! Magazine in North Carolina in the year 1983 until he got another novel contract to make the Alvin Maker trilogy which is part of his American frontier fantasy series.

Other Genre

Although Orson Scott Card is known for his fictions, he has also delved into different genres. While writing his fictional novels, he also wrote alongside other novels under different genre. He wrote horror and fantasy novels which titles include the Lost Boys, Enchantment and Treasure Box. On the other hand, he also worked with the novelization of films and comic books including the James Cameron film entitled The Abyss and the Ultimate Iron Man.

Orson Scott Card also proven his versatility as a writer as he provided the dialogs to different video games which titles include The Dig, The Secret of Monkey Island and Loom which became popular video games during the early 90s. Due to his high religious influence, he also wrote books that center around the women in the Bible. His book The Women of Genesis has turned into a series which explores the lives of the Biblical women whose titles were also named after them Sarah, Rebecah and Rachel and Leah.

Due to his strong religious influence, Orson Scott Card has also written screenplays for biblical short animation films including the Prodigal Son, Journey to the Promised Land and Abinadi and King Noah under NEST Family Entertainment.

The Ender’s Game

The Ender’s Game has got to be one of the most successful books written by Orson Scott Car. The book first appeared in Analog Magazine and has a sequel entitled the Speaker for the Dead. The book is all about the story of Ender Wiggin who is made as the commander of a fictional Dragon Army which is an institution designed to make young children into commanders to fight against the alien race attacking the earth. The story is all about succeeding from life struggles and heroism. Due to its popularity, this book has been adapted into a film and Card fans all over the world will get to see the full length Hollywood film starred by Asa Butterfield, Hailee Steinfeld and Harrison Ford to name a few this coming November 2013.

The Lost Boys

As mentioned earlier, Orson Scott Card has written horror novels and one of the most notable works under this genre is the Lost Boys. Written in the year 1992, this horror novel revolves around the story of Step Fletcher who moved with his family in a quite North Carolina town. As soon as his family moves in, weird things started to happen in the house including seeing apparitions of lost souls. The story incorporates he element of greed and murder which gives the entire story a chilling revelation to the readers.

Orson Scott Card Today

In the year 2011, he suffered from mild stroke and he was hospitalized. He is making full recovery today but his stroke caused him impairment on his left hand which made it difficult for him to write his books. Before his stroke episode, Orson Scott Card is involved in teaching fiction writing to young writers. In fact, Card runs a yearly week long class called “ Literary Boot Camp ” for aspiring writers. On the other hand, he also served as one of the judges in the competition Writers of the Future which is a story writing contest for science fiction and fantasy. Currently, Card and his wife Kristine lives in Greensboro, North Carolina where he is recuperating from his stroke. Surprisingly, his current hometown in North Carolina is used as the setting of his many fictions including the Lost Boys.

Book Series In Order » Authors » Orson Scott Card

5 Responses to “Orson Scott Card”