Dries van Agt, the Christian Democrat prime minister of the Netherlands from 1977 to 1982, has died by euthanasia, "hand in hand" with his wife, according to the human rights organization he founded. Both were 93 years old. The news was made public on Friday by the Rights Forum, which said the couple died on Monday and would be buried in a private ceremony in the eastern city of Nijmegen.

"He died hand in hand with his beloved wife Eugenie van Agt-Krekelberg, the support and anchor with whom he was together for more than 70 years and whom he always referred to as 'my daughter'." said in a statement. Both had been in poor health for a long time. In 2019, Van Agt suffered a brain hemorrhage while giving a speech at a Palestinian memorial event and never fully recovered.

A Christian Democrat from the traditional Dutch side, Van Agt became increasingly progressive after leaving politics, eventually leaving his party in 2017 over ideological differences with the centre-right Christian Democratic Appeal's approach to Israel and the Palestinians.

Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte, who referred to Van Agt as his "great-great-grandfather in office", spoke highly of the former politician.

"With his florid and unique language, his clear convictions and his wonderful presentation, Dries van Agt gave color and substance to Dutch politics at a time of polarization and party renewal," Rutte said in a statement.

The Dutch royal family also praised him. "He took administrative responsibility at a turbulent time and managed to inspire many with his wonderful personality and colorful style," King Willem-Alexander, Queen Maxima and Princess Beatrix said in a joint statement. Van Agt was known for his archaic references and grandiose language, as well as his passion for cycling. He was forced to leave this hobby in 2019 after a slump.

Together with the right-wing Liberal Party, the Christian Democratic Appeal governed the Netherlands with Van Agt as prime minister from 1977 to 1981. After the election, he became prime minister again, forming a coalition with the Labor Party and the center Democrats, a government that lasted for a year. After a visit to Israel in 1999, he became increasingly vocal about his support for the Palestinian people. He referred to his travel experience as a "conversion". In 2009, he founded the Rights Forum, which advocates for a "fair and consistent Dutch and European policy regarding the Palestine/Israel issue," according to the non-profit organization. He is survived by his three children.

To join the group "AOL” just click: Join Group and your request will be approved immediately.

Balkanweb Group