In the fierce battlefield in the midst of the harsh weather conditions, Wu Qian Li and Wu Wan Li, two brothers soldier including the brave Chinese soldiers must fight together and find a way to cope with the invasion of US forces.

James Bond has left active service. His peace is short-lived when Felix Leiter, an old friend from the CIA, turns up asking for help, leading Bond onto the trail of a mysterious villain armed with dangerous new technology.

A major crime occurs in Tokyo when detectives Tang Ren and Qin Feng are invited to investigate the crime. A battle between the strongest detectives in Asia is about to break out with bursts of laughter.

The epic next chapter in the cinematic Monsterverse pits two of the greatest icons in motion picture history against each other--the fearsome Godzilla and the mighty Kong--with humanity caught in the balance.

A noble family becomes embroiled in a war for control over the galaxy's most valuable asset while its heir becomes troubled by visions of a dark future.

When Guy, a bank teller, learns that he is a non-player character in a bloodthirsty, open-world video game, he goes on to become the hero of the story and takes the responsibility of saving the world.

Following the events at home, the Abbott family now face the terrors of the outside world. Forced to venture into the unknown, they realize the creatures that hunt by sound are not the only threats lurking beyond the sand path.

Included as the third installment of "National Day Celebration" trilogy with My People, My Country (2019) and My People, My Homeland (2020), My Country, My Parents focuses on four Chinese families in four different eras. Combined with 4 stories, through the perspective of "home" and "country", representing several generations of our predecessors' dedication and sacrifice. The whole movie bring back the audiences to the collective memories of our country, as well as the ordinary and great parental affection between every generation.

Bong is a hardline cop with a long history of success, but his past comes back to haunt him when a sting is attacked by a group led by his former protégé, a man set on destroying everyone who ever wronged him.

When a single mom and her two kids arrive in a small town, they begin to discover their connection to the original Ghostbusters and the secret legacy their grandfather left behind.

A group of doctors at a hospital in Wuhan, China are the first in the world to deal with a new disease, COVID-19.