"Billie Jean" is a song by Michael Jackson, released as the sixth track from the Thriller album. It was released as a single on January 2, 1983, serving as the second single from the album. "Billie Jean" was written solely by Jackson who also co-produced it with Quincy Jones. This song is considered the most iconic and known song released by the King of Pop, thanks to its timelessness and the introduction of the Moonwalk dance. The single was so successful that it received numerous honors and sealed Jackson's status as an international pop icon.

The long version was released as the 12" extended version of the "Billie Jean" single. In it, the intro and outro are longer, with the track ending with ad-libs: "You know you ain't (Not my lover) / You know you can't (Not my lover)", which would eventually go on to be re-used for live performances of the song. This was also originally going to be the "Billie Jean" featured on the album, however it had to be cut due to limitations of a 12" LP record at the time. It was released on streaming services through Thriller 25 (Apple Music only) and Thriller 40.[1]

The 1981 demo of the track was released on Thriller: Special Edition. It features Jackson mumbling and saying nonsensical words. The iconic drums are also replaced here by the LinnDrum.[2]

Background[]

Backstory[]

There's two stories surrounding "Billie Jean's" origins.

According to Michael's biographer, J. Randy Tabaorelli, "Billie Jean" was inspired by letters Jackson received from a woman claiming he was the father of one of her twins back in 1981. Jackson had never met the woman and ignored it, after being use to receiving many letters as such. However, she continued to send letters stating that she loved him and wanted to be with him. Some of the letters got so disturbing to him to the extent that he suffered continuous nightmares about her. Eventually, Jackson received a parcel envelope containing a photograph of the fan, a gun, and a letter instructing him to kill himself at a particular time. The fan would do the same after she had killed "their" baby, so they could be together in the next life. To her disappointment, Jackson had the photograph framed and hung above the dining room table of their family home. He would later discovered that the fan had been sent to a psychiatric hospital.

According to Michael himself however, the song wasn't inspired by anyone he dealt with personally, but rather his brothers.

"There never was a real "Billie Jean". The girl in the song is a composite of people my brothers have been plagued with over the years. I could never understand how these girls could say they were carrying someone's child when it wasn't true."

— Michael for his book Moonwalk, 1988

Production[]

The song was mixed 91 times by audio engineer Bruce Swedien. Ultimately, the second mix made was chosen to be the final one.

Originally, this song was actually disliked by Quincy who wanted it removed from the track list. He felt it was too weak, he disliked the intro and wanted to change the title to "Not My Lover". Jackson reportedly didn't speak to Jones for days after a dispute regarding credits for producing the song.

Music video[]

"Billie Jean's" music video features Jackson dancing on the street and being chased by a photographer. It was directed by Irish filmmaker Steve Barron. and Filmed in November 1982.

The clip was initially refused to be played on MTV, as according to them, the video didn't fit their standards. However, after Walter Yetnikoff, then-president of CBS Records, told the executives he will go public with MTV's stance on racial discrimination, the network relented.

"I said to MTV, 'I'm pulling everything we have off the air, all our product. I'm not going to give you any more videos. And I'm going to go public and fucking tell them about the fact you don't want to play music by a black guy."

— Walter Yetnikoff for Blender, October 2005[3]

The music video premiered on March 10, 1983, and was one of the first music videos by a black artist to be played regularly by MTV. It also helped Thriller sell 10 million more copies.

Live performances[]

Michael Jackson performed "Billie Jean" on all of his tours, starting with the Jacksons' Victory tour. Michael performed to the song for the last time during the This Is It rehearsals on June 6, 2009, few weeks before his passing.

For each live performance, Jackson wore a sparkly black jacket, a single white glove, white socks and a fedora.

"The glove was just – I thought one was cooler than two. I love to accent movement. The eye goes to where the white is – you know, the glove. And the feet, if you’re dancing, you can put an exclamation point on your movement if it has a bit of light on it. So I wore the white socks. And for the design of the jacket, I would sit with the people who made the clothes and tell them where I wanted a button or a buckle or a design. [...]"

— Jackson on the outfit[4]

Motown 25: Yesterday, Today, Forever[]

One of the first and most iconic performances of "Billie Jean" happened on May 16, 1983, when the Jacksons made an appearance at the Motown 25: Yesterday, Today, Forever television special. Michael initially declined performing with his brothers, as at the time he wanted to distance himself from the band and Motown and rather focus on his solo work. He reconsidered the offer after he discussed it with Berry Gordy (founder of Motown and Rockwell's father). Jackson agreed only if he's allowed to perform "Billie Jean".

Some of Jackson's most iconic dance moves debuted during the performance as well, such as moonwalk (although not created by him) or the toe stand. These became Michael's signature dance moves.

The special was watched by 50 million people and got Jackson an Emmy nomination.[5]

Despite the show's success, Michael was actually very dissatisfied with the performance. After getting off stage, he cried due to being unhappy with his spin and toe stand as he wanted it to last longer than it actually did. The artist gradually improved at doing the moves with years going by.

Charts[]

"Billie Jean" reached number one in multiple countries around the world. The song had topped the Billboard Hot 100 and the Billboard Hot Black Singles, also having become the fastest charting song performed by Jackson since the Jackson 5's "ABC", "The Love You Save" and "I'll Be There" in 1970.

The track had charted so well in fact, that it not only became Michael's best-selling solo single, but it boosted sales of Thriller, helping it become the best-selling album of all time.

Awards and nominations[]

"Billie Jean" became one of the best selling singles in 1983 and even worldwide. The honors include 2 Grammy Awards, one American Music Award, and even an introduction into the Music Video Producers Hall of Fame. The song topped both the U.S. and U.K. charts simultaneously.

In other countries, "Billie Jean" topped the charts of Spain and Switzerland, reached the top 10 in Austria, Italy, New Zealand, Norway, and Sweden and peaked at #45 in France. Considered to be one of the most revolutionary songs in history, "Billie Jean" was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) in 1989.

2008 Remix[]

"Billie Jean 2008" is a remix of Michael Jackson's song "Billie Jean", released as the fifteenth track on Thriller 25. The rework got made with Kanye West in 2007 who also provides vocals for the bridge. Gone are the original drums and iconic bass, and the production is more reminiscent of that on West's 2007 album, Graduation.

Lyrics[]

Gallery[]

"Look deep within yourself, and you'll find something amazing."

To view the Billie Jean gallery, click here.

Trivia[]

"Billie Jean" was famously used for two Pepsi commercials from 1984 Michael starred in. In both of the adverts, a remix of the song was featured, titled "Pepsi Generation".[7] The collaboration between Jackson and Pepsi would continue for many years to come.

After every time Michael would perform "Billie Jean" live, he would throw his fedora to the audience. The hats were signed by him and featured a special message, e.g. "all my love".[8]

Michael sang the overdub vocals for "Billie Jean" through a six-foot-long cardboard tube.

During the recording sessions for "We Are the World", Jackson came up to Daryl Hall (of Hall & Oates), and told him "Hey, man, I hope you're okay with that. You know, I stole 'No Can Do' for 'Billie Jean'."[9]

References[]