On February 25, 2017 Billie Mae Jackson passed away after a long courageous battle with breast cancer.

Billie Mae was born on May 3, 1933 at the family home in St. Ignatius to Henry and Molly David. Growing up during the depression and with a family of 17 siblings, life was at times, full of tough times and the bare necessities, Billie still held fond memories of her childhood. Billie’s first job was at the bakery in town where she worked through her high school years. She graduated from RHS in 1951. Billie married her high school sweetheart Lynn E. Jackson on June 10, 1951.

They settled into their first home on the Jackson homestead near Big Bend on the Flathead River. With the arrival of Valorie, Mark, and Dianna respectively, they decided to move the family and ranch operation to Round Butte in the spring of 1956. With the upgrade of indoor plumbing and running water, life was good. After the move to Round Butte, Jeannie was born and completed the family. To help support the family, Billie went to work at Grott’s Chicken Farm for a part time job. Opportunity for full time work took her to Moody’s Market, working for Leonard Moody for several years. Then in December of 1969, opportunity knocked again to purchase their own business; a fast food restaurant called Larry’s Drive In, which they renamed Lynn’s Drive In; Billie handled the daily business and despite Lynn’s unexpected death in 1976, she remained dedicated to the business with her strong work ethic. She was a fair, honest boss, always thrifty, enjoyed the time serving her customers, sparring with the employees, many who became longtime friends. She remained “Gramma Billie” to former employees, neighborhood kids, and many, many others. She continued to run the family business until she sold it in 1985, as it still remains in the family today. She retired.

Six months later, needing something to do, Billie Mae opened Lynn’s II in St. Ignatius in February 1986. 25 years later, she retired, again.

Billie loved traveling and visited many countries including Taiwan, Japan, Germany, & America Samoa, to name a few. A highlight in her later years was a trip to New Yok City in 2011 with her bowling team and most recently to Las Vegas. She was a long time bowler on Thursday night league, a member of the Wednesday Night Book Club, member of Round Butte Women’s Club and a Ronan Jayceen. Her other interests included dancing, singing in plays and the church choir, and watching parades. St. Patty’s Day being her favorite. Billie was a devoted lifetime member of the St. Paul Lutheran Church in Ronan. After her retirement, Billie spent time at home with her many grandchildren and great grandchildren who frequently stopped by to visit her at home (swimming pool!).

We would like to thank Dr. Thomas and the nurses at the St. Pats Cancer Center for the wonderful care and thoughtfulness they’ve shown mom. We would also like to thank The Retreat staff in Polson for the special care they gave to her.

Billie Mae was preceded in death by her husband Lynn and a great-grandson Axle Streitz in 2008.

She is survived by her children Valorie (Tom) Bartel, Mark (Chris) Jackson, Dianna (Joe) Smith, and Jeannie Jackson. Grandchildren and Great-Grandchildren, Kirk (Salinas) Bartel, Garrett, Trevor, Raela, Cody, Creighton, Carson; Karlissa Lynn Allen (Tracy VanNess), Chase, Tyson, Mason, Emma Lynn; Kari Mae (Jarred) Burland, Rhylee Lynn, Trenton, Layton, Axton; Colette (Dale) Roo, Tori, Trae; Jami (BJ) Schall, Austin, Arinna, Aiden; Jace Smith (Charla), Ryder; Jana Lynn (Jake) Streitz, Sydnee, Gunner; Jackie Jo Smith, Tucker, Ruger. Siblings Freda Francis, Clarkston WA, Ruth Ann Gregg, San Carlos CA, Willie (Karen) David Clancy MT. Special Nephew Jerry Hamel, Dixon; brother-in-law and sister-in-law Lloyd and Sally Jackson, Pablo as well as numerous nieces and nephews.

Services will be held Saturday March 4 th , 11am at Christian Missionary Alliance Church (Terrace Lake Community Church) due to renovations being done at St. Paul Lutheran Church.

Donations (in lieu) of flowers can be made to the Ronan Bread Basket.