Any love here for the Undertones? There don't seem to be many threads about them despite the fact that many people regard Teenage Kicks as one of the finest singles ever made, at least here in the UK.

That song, famously John Peel's all time favourite record, over shadows all of their other output, even though they made many other fine singles.

Get Over You, Jimmy Jimmy, My Perfect Cousin, Wednesday Week, It's Going To Happen and particularly You've got My Number are all perfect pop records.

The Undertones were one of my favourite groups in my teenage years. What I liked about them was that you could relate to them directly. The Pistols, Clash etc were cool rock stars but the Undertones looked like ordinary teenagers - all you needed was a roll neck jumper, ankle swinging jeans and a pair of Doctor Martens shoes to look like them. They sung about stuff we all knew about - teenage frustration and infatuation. They even had a song about Mars Bars!

So anybody else here a fan?

Just in case there is somebody reading this who hasn't heard Teenage Kicks here it is....

(I count myself lucky to have a copy of the original Good Vibrations issue of this. I have the white cover which I think is the most common colour. Does anybody know if this is true or how many copies were pressed?)

Great band. Only saw them live once, circa 1982.

Possibly my favourite intro ever:

First saw them in 1979 in NYC opening up for the Clash. Nothing stood out at the time,

In 2004, I was in Amsterdam looking for a show to see and went to see them at a small venue, They were great love and I went through the catalog of records when I got home to NYC two weeks later. I lucked out because they were playing a rare NYC gig when I got home,

Since then, I have been waiting to see them again and will be flying from Florida to NYC to see them at LPR on 5/22. So many great songs.

My favorite thing about them is their clothes.

I think all four albums are good to excellent. What's also very worthwhile is the limited edition version of singles collection "All Wrapped Up" which contains a bonus record collecting the corresponding b-sides. Most of them are as good as a-sides.

Undertones without Feargal S.? Never was especially interested in them and haven't heard a single note. I mean.... he didn't write anything still I think he's important. His solo stuff on the other hand; never could stand "A Good Heart".