Comedian Chelsea Handler has a notable dating history. She famously dated the CEO of Comcast Entertainment Group, Ted Harbert; rapper 50 Cent; hotelier André Balazs; and even celebrity chef Bobby Flay (via Distractify). While each of these men had marriage potential, Handler has maintained over the years that she's not the marrying type. Earlier this month she held a Q&A on her Instagram, where a follower asked her if she regrets never getting married or having children (via TMZ). The "Chelsea Lately" host revealed she's, "Never felt more confident and secure in my life decision-making skills, in remaining childless and alone, than I have during this pandemic."

Advertisement

That doesn't mean she isn't open to love, though. Handler was recently spotted cozying up to comedian Jo Koy after he threw the first pitch at Dodger Stadium. Since the pair were spotted together, Handler has taken to Instagram to reveal that she's fallen deeply in love.

On Monday, September 20, Chelsea Handler shared a photo of herself looking reflective on her Instagram. The comedian captioned her post with a life update and encouraging message for her followers. She began, "Just sitting here in Mallorca thinking about how grateful I am to have so many people that I love in my life, to live the life I do, and to be going on tour doing what I love." Handler then delighted her fans with the revelation that she met someone wonderful. She closed, "I'm finally in love, with the best kind of guy there is. There is hope for everyone! That kind of stuff."

Advertisement

While she doesn't name the amazing guy, her recent outings with fellow comic Jo Koy suggest he is the mystery man. During an interview with TMZ, Koy gushed about Handler and the day they went to the Dodgers game. He said, "How beautiful did she look that day? Me and Chelsea, she's amazing." Though he was also reluctant to confirm their suspected relationship, he continued, "I've known Chelsea for a long, long time I mean a long time, like years ago and we've always been great friends. We, uh, I don't know how to answer [whether we're dating]."

Regardless of whether or not the pair goes public with their rumored relationship, it's clear that they're both very happy at the moment.