The world of celebrity coupling has always been one of the most precarious places. While some iconic celebrity couples have stood the test of time, others have burned hot and flamed out. For instance, Jo Koy and Chelsea Handler were among the cutest celebrity couples ever. However, their breakup was met with a collective gasp of "oh no" across social media platforms.

Jo Koy and Chelsea Handler are an American former celebrity couple. Even though the couple was known for their career in the entertainment sector, they rose to prominence after going public with their union. What seemed like couple goals to many people was short-lived because they only dated for less than a year before going on their separate ways.

Who are Jo Koy and Chelsea Handler?

Joseph Glenn Herbert Sr, popularly known as Jo Koy is a stand-up comedian. He is recognized as a frequent guest on the E! late-night show Chelsea Lately. He has also appeared in Netflix and Comedy Central specials, such as:

Don't Make Him Angry

Live from Seattle

In His Elements

Live from the LA Forum

Apart from comedy stand-ups, Jo has also appeared in the following films and television shows:

2013 – Family Tools

2019 – Anastasia: Once Upon a Time

2020 – Mr Iglesias

2022 – Reindeer in Here

2022 – Easter Sunday

Chelsea Joy Handler is an American comedian, actress, producer, writer, and television host. She hosted the late-night show Chelsea Lately From 2007 to 2014. In January 2016, she released a documentary series on Netflix called Chelsea Does. The star has appeared in the following films and TV shows:

2011 – The Plotter

2004 – The Bernie Mac Show

2006 – National Lampoon Presents Cattle Call

2006 – The Chelsea Handler Show

2012 to 2013 – Love You, Mean It with Whitney Cummings

2013 – Call Me Crazy: A Five Film

2022 – Love You, Mean It with Whitney Cummings

Jo Koy and Chelsea Handler's dating timeline

Chelsea Handler and Jo Koy dated for 11 months before going their separate ways. The lovely duo was a majority's favourite despite the short-lived union. Here is everything you need to know about their dating timeline.

First meeting

How did Jo Koy and Chelsea Handler meet? The two first met on the set of Handler’s E! late-night show, Chelsea Lately, where Jo was a frequent guest. Then, the duo was introduced to each other by American actor and comedian Jon Lovitz.

Jo Koy and Chelsea Handler worked together on the Chelsea Lately television show for more than seven years, from 2007 to 2014. Jo appeared as a guest on the round table on more than 100 episodes throughout Chelsea Lately’s seven seasons

Dating rumours and confirmed romance

Jo Koy and Handler's dating rumours started in 2021. The rumours were sparked after Handler frequently appeared in Koy's Instagram videos. Jo described Chelsea as absolute chaos in one of their videos together. On one occasion, the comedian shared a video documenting the duo's shopping trip.

Later, the couple offered more information confirming that they were an item. During one of their interviews, Jo revealed that Handler made the first move which was positively reciprocated. He stated:

She basically asked me to kiss her.

Chelsea didn't deny the statement but further offered her side of the story, which confirmed their relationship status. She added:

I said, 'I think you have a crush on me, and if you do, you should do something about it and see what happens.'

Officiating the relationship on Instagram

When did Jo Koy and Chelsea Handler make their relationship official? The couple made the union official on Instagram in September 2021. Chelsea shared two posts of herself and Jo. In one of the pictures, the duo shared a cosy pose with Handler's arm around Jo's shoulder, while in the second photo, the duo shared a sweet kiss.

The photos were captioned:

He is on tour; I am on tour; sometimes we tour together.

The couple further discussed their relationship on Handler's podcast. She revealed the occurrences leading to them becoming close-tight.

I was just not in touch with myself to understand; I knew I liked talking with you and having you in my life because you're positive and upbeat.

In December 2021, Jo and Chelsea made their red-carpet debut during the People’s Choice Awards ceremony. Later, in 2022, the couple attended the Grammy Awards together. Chelsea was super-elated to be accompanied by Jo on her first Grammy nomination.

Jo Koy and Chelsea Handler breakup

Are Jo Koy and Chelsea Handler together? No, the duo called it quits after close to a year of dating. Chelsea opened up about their breakup in a lengthy Instagram post, stating:

We have decided to take a break from our relationship right now. Many of you were invested in our love, and I wanted to express how much that meant to both of us. This is not an ending. It's another beginning, and it's a comfort to know that I am still loved and love this man the way the sun loves the moon, and the moon loves the sun.

She did not hesitate to express her appreciation for Jo Koy, noting that their love changed her forever. In addition, she said that Jo was one of her greatest blessings in life and that he renewed her faith in men.

Jo Koy also stated that even after the breakup, the duo remained good friends and will remain each other's companions.

Jo Koy and Chelsea Handler's fast facts

Are Jo Koy and Chelsea Handler together? No, Jo Koy and Chelsea Handler broke up in mid-2022 after being together for nearly a year.

What happened with Chelsea Handler and Jo Koy? Chelsea Handler and Jo Koy decided to end their relationship.

Why did Jo Koy and Chelsea split? Jo Koy and Chelsea split after failing to agree on some behaviours, as revealed by Chelsea Handler.

Who is Jo Koy married to? Jo Koy is not married to anyone as of 2023. However, before dating Chelsea, he married Angie King, but they divorced in 2013.

Do Jo Koy and Chelsea Handler have a baby? Unfortunately, Jo Koy and Chelsea Handler don't have a baby. Chelsea Handler is childless, while Jo Koy has a son, Joseph Herbert Jr, with ex-partner Angie King.

Was Jo Koy married to Chelsea Handler? No. Jo Koy and Chelsea Handler were not married. However, they dated for close to a year.

How did Jo Koy and Chelsea Handler meet? Jo Koy and Chelsea Handler first met while Jo appeared as a guest on Chelsea Lately.

Jo Koy and Chelsea Handler are a former American celebrity couple. The duo stayed close friends for years before moving their union to a dating level. Unfortunately, despite the years of friendship, the relationship was short-lived.

Tuko.co.ke shared an article about Ski Bri and Adin Ross. Ski Bri is a model and social media influencer, while Adin is a famous Twitch streamer and YouTube content creator. While many ladies have appeared in Adin’s streams, people believe the duo has a special connection.

Adin Ross and Ski Bri dating rumours started after she began appearing in Adin’s stream. In one of the streams, the duo were seen getting cosy during a question-and-answer session heightening the rumours. However, the duo isn’t dating and has never been in a relationship.

Source: TUKO.co.ke