The Intuit Foundation is the employee gift-matching arm of the bookkeeping and tax filing software company Intuit. The foundation utilizes the donor-advised fund, American Online Giving Foundation, to disperse matching funds and does not accept grant solicitations or make any other grants.

Intuit also administers a Super PAC, the Intuit 21st Century Leadership Fund PAC, and the Intuit Financial Freedom Foundation that is focused on donating tax filing software and other financial planning resources.

Founding and History

The Intuit Foundation received tax-exempt status in 2002. In 2004 the foundation matched employee charitable donations up to $1,000 per year for eligible charities. Eligible charities did not include faith-based organizations that discriminated in services; schools that promoted a specific religious viewpoint; or political, fraternal, and labor organizations. As of 2021, the foundation matches employee donations up to $5,000 per person per fiscal year. Information regarding eligible charities is not publicly available.

Finances

In the fiscal year ending on July 31, 2020, the Intuit Foundation derived $4,145,809 from contributions and grants . The foundation had $3,3709,379 in expenses, of which $3,401,706 was paid out in grants and contributions. At the end of the fiscal year the foundation had $943,354 in assets, all of which were held in cash.

Issue Areas

The Intuit Foundation does not have an issue area portfolio or accept grant solicitations. The sole direct recipient of funding is the American Online Giving Foundation, a donor-advised fund. This funding matches employee charitable donations, so employees of Intuit determine where the funding ultimately goes.

As of guidelines published in 2004, the foundation will not match contributions to schools if they promote a specific religious viewpoint; any religious organization that discriminates in the delivery of social services; or political, fraternal, or labor organizations.

Partners

The Foundation does not directly contribute to any charitable organizations. Rather, donations are made to the American Online Giving Foundation, a charitable giving aggregations service that specializes in creating donor-advised funds for large corporations and their employees.

Leadership

Laure Fennel is the president of the Intuit Foundation. She has been employed at Intuit for many years, including a 14-year stint as general counsel. In 2018 she became the chief people and places officer.