Do you know why the question of- how much Sanaya Irani charges for one Instagram post is so much on the rage among brands? Well! Her portrayals as Gunjan in Mile Jab Hum Tum, Parvati in Rangrasiya, and Khushi in Iss Pyaar Ko Kya Naam Du are to name a few that define her unshaken presence in the industry.

Certainly, the years she has been giving her efforts primarily in the Indian Television Industry are enough to support her worth & brand value now. Sanaya Irani is a well-recognized face & of course name to consciously say that she is a popular screen star.

Read here about Sanaya Irani TV shows, personal life, films, wiki, biography, baby, husband, marriage, web series, Instagram charges, religion, affairs, etc.

Sanaya Irani’s Wiki, Personal Life, Biography, Parents, Siblings, and more

San or Sanaya Irani was born on 17th September 1983 in Mumbai, Maharashtra, India with the king of zodiacs- Virgo. Certainly, there is not much information known about her parents, father, mother, sister, brother, or any other such essential pieces of information assistants.

However, the little known about her birth facts is that she belongs to a Zoroastrian (Irani) family. Indeed, for her schooling, she attained her early education at a hostel in Ooty.

Moreover, completed her graduation at Sydenham College, Mumbai, Maharashtra. Also, for part of her master’s, she wanted to grow with MBA however, choose acting as her career.

Sanaya Irani’s Marriage, Affair, Boyfriends, and more

Sanaya married actor Mohit Sehgal on 25th January 2016 in Goa. Indeed, Mohit has been her only boyfriend with whom she had an affair on sets of Mile Jab Hum Tum.

Certainly, on the last day 19th November 2010) of the shoot of the show, Sanaya made it all public with her announcement of being in a relationship with Mohit Sehgal. Worth mentioning, they both got engaged in 2015, December.

Sanaya Irani’s Career, Film Debut, TV Debut, TV Shows, Instagram Charges, and more

Irani gave her first shot through her portfolio shoot with now actor & then photographer- Boman Irani. Sanaya Irani made her film debut through the movie- Fanaa in 2006 with the role of Mehbooba.

Indeed, the following time in the same year, she did ads & TV commercials with Indian film stars like Shahrukh Khan & Kareena Kapoor Khan, before heading to the Indian Television Industry.

Further, she made her TV debut through Tumko Dekha by Jagjit Singh. Certainly, due to her birth in a different community, she faced a lot of practical struggles in giving her Hindi vocals however, mastered it over time.

Worth Mentioning, Irani has appeared in shows like Jhalak Dikhla Jaa (first runner-up), Iss Pyaar Ko Kya Naam Du, Nach Baliye, Welcome-Baazi Mehmaan Nawazi Ki, Rangrasiya, and Box Cricket League 2 are to name a few.

Now, with her successful presence as a well-known & dignified actress & model in the industry, she gathered a lot of fans following. Moreover, she has a fanbase of 3M on Instagram & the charges for her one Instagram post are-

Instagram story- 70k- 80k

Instagram reel- 1- 2lacs

Instagram static- 50k- 60k

Instagram carousel- 60k- 70k

Facts/Trivia about Sanaya Irani

She has been mentioned in the 50 sexiest women list in 2012- Eastern Eye

In 2014, she was 10th in the astern Eye

In 2014, Rediff mentioned her top 10 best TV actress

She had an interest to become a fashion/interior designer