In “Mephisto,” a movie that takes place in Germany

during the rise of Nazism, there are many insults, but the most wounding is

simply the word “actor”! It is screamed at the film’s hero by his

sponsor, a Nazi general who is in charge of cultural affairs. We stare into the

actor’s face, but are unable to determine what he is thinking, or what he is

feeling. Maybe that is what makes him a great actor and an ignoble human being.

The actor is played by Klaus Maria Brandauer, in a performance

of electrifying power; he makes us intensely fascinated by his character while

keeping us on the outside — until we discover there is no inside. He plays an

actor named Hendrik Hoefgen, but even that’s not quite right; his real name is

“Heinz” until he upgrades it. (“My name is not my name,” he

says to himself, “because I am an actor.”) Hoefgen bitterly reveals

early on that what he hates most about himself is that he is a “provincial

actor.” Eventually he will become Germany’s most famous and admired actor,

and the head of its State Theater, but that progression is in fact a descent

into hell.

We

should begin by noting how particularly “Mephisto” (1981) makes its

details vivid: The look and feel of the theater, the rise of the Nazi Party

from the 1920s through the 1930s, the Berlin social life that was itself a

stage. The film’s Hungarian director, Istvan Szabo, demonstrates that the Nazi

uniforms themselves seemed to transform some people into Nazis, just as

costumes and makeup can make some actors into other people. The uniforms are

deliberately fetishistic; to wear them is to subjugate yourself to the system

that designed them. And we sense the sadomasochistic undertones that helped

seduce a ruling class into a system of evil.

The

film opens in Hamburg, where Hoefgen is involved in a small-time theater scene

that is later described as communist, bourgeois, decadent — everything but

National Socialist. Consumed with ambition, he throws himself into his work

with abandon. During a meeting to discuss the props for one production, he

hears the words “lamppost” and flies into a manic fury, declaring

that the lamppost, and the exploited worker woman who stands beneath it,

symbolize all that is rotten with Germany. He leaps from the stage into the

auditorium, screaming that the lampposts will not be confined to the stage but

will extend into the orchestra! — the dress circle! the entire theater! — as

their revolutionary spirit unites actors and audience. The others look at him

with astonishment.

Of

course this is all acting, posturing, calling attention to himself. Hoefgen as

played by Brandauer has not a moment’s self-doubt as an actor, although as a

human being, he is nothing but doubt, fear and abnegation. He is ruled by

ambition. His first wife is the daughter of a powerful man. When the man falls

from grace, the wife is divorced. His early friends are left wing; later he

drops them, forgets them or tries to shield a few from the Nazis as a gesture

toward his abandoned ideals. On the day of Hitler’s election, a left-wing friend

asks him to join a protest movement in the theater. He can’t accept, and he

can’t refuse: “I’d rather stay with the reserves.” In fact, his early

beliefs are the same as his later ones; he goes from the far left to the far

right without the slightest difficulty, because he never believed anything in

the first place.

Having

not seen “Mephisto” since the early 1980s, I came back to it again

thinking it was an anti-Nazi film. Not entirely. The Nazis are simply …

opportunists. Hoefgen wants to be famous, rich and admired. He purrs at praise

like a cat given cream. He can discuss with himself the rights and wrongs of

his situation, but it is a strategic discussion, not a moral one. All of his

romances and marriages are designed to further his career, except one, which

begins in Hamburg and continues unbroken into his Berlin days as the favorite

actor of the Reich. This is his affair with Juliette (Karin Boyd), who had a

German father and an African mother, and as a black woman, violates all the

twisted Nazi theories of racial purity.

It

bothers Hoefgen not at all that he is both a Nazi puppet and a black woman’s

partner because his feelings for Juliette are not love — and not even lust, I

think, but a certain enjoyment of the way she understands him. She has his

number. They can never be seen together in public, but in her boudoir, she

freely insults him. He is such a bad actor, she says, that he can’t even drink

a beer like a man who wants to drink a beer. And later: “Sometimes your

cold, cheating eyes are those of a sad child.” How does he respond to

that? Almost as if it is a compliment. He looks in a mirror to see if it is

true!

The

key to Hoefgen’s rise is the cultural czar of the Reich, referred to only as

the General (Rolf Hoppe). He is oddly attracted to Hoefgen, and sees to it that

the actor’s leftist past is erased, he gets the best roles, he rises to lead

the State Theater. The General is well into middle age, well-fed, warm, with a

pleasing smile and a feminine seductiveness when he pays compliments. All until

his brutal speech that ends with the word “actor!” Hoppe’s

performance is the ideal counterpoint to Brandauer’s; the actor plays every

role to please, and the Nazi pleases only himself, whatever it may seem.

Hoefgen’s

great role is Mephistopheles, the devil. In a mask of stark white makeup, he

tempts Dr. Faustus in the classic German drama by Goethe. “My

Mephisto,” the General calls Hoefgen fondly, over and over again. It is a

rich irony, since the General is in fact playing the Mephistopheles role and

throwing the world at Hoefgen’s feet. Szabo illustrates this contrast in a

remarkable scene. Between acts of “Faust,” Hoefgen is asked to visit

the General’s box in the theater. He does, in full makeup and costume. Below,

the theatergoers turn and look up as the satanic figure with his red-lined cape

hovers smilingly over the Nazi in full dress uniform. Szabo ends this interlude

with a shot, held just long enough, showing the entire audience standing

transfixed. They have witnessed the devil calling on the state.

In

the energy they bring to the film, Brandauer and Szabo have made a mighty

statement, but it is as much about acting, I think, as Nazism. In Hoefgen, we

see an empty man, standing for nothing. This doesn’t even bother him. In Paris

as a spokesman for Nazi cultural affairs, he reunites with Juliette, who begs

him to defect to the West. Later, on the street, he breathes the air of France

with that smug contented smile and says to himself, “What could I do here?

Freedom? What for?” Then he descends into the black pit of the Metro.

The

lineage behind the story is interesting. Szabo adapted a satirical novel by

Klaus Mann (son of Thomas), whose mother was a Jew and whose German citizenship

was stripped away in 1933; he later became an American citizen. His book was

said to be inspired by his brother-in-law Gustaf Grundgens, an actor and Nazi

collaborator. Szabo himself (born 1938) is a leading Hungarian director; his

credits include “Confidence” (1980), “Colonel Retl” (1985)

and such English-language films as “Sunshine” (1999) and “Being

Julia” (2004). “Mephisto” won the Oscar for best foreign film of

1981, and richly deserved it.

As

a physical production, the film is breathtaking. Szabo makes the General’s

office a throne surrounded by empty space. He creates elegant party scenes at

which the connected people gossip about one another; they climax with a

spectacular celebration at the Grunewald hunting lodge. Huge swastikas turn

ordinary buildings into fearful ones. The mechanism by which some people are

exiled and others “disappear” is condensed into brief, fearful

automobile rides. No effort is made to depict Hitler or German militarism or

large-scale persecution of the Jews; all that takes place offstage, considering

that the stage is Hoefgen’s life. And Szabo ends the film with a visual

masterstroke in which Hoefgen is able at last to have the limelight all to

himself.