Departing city MP Amanda Solloway says helping to save Derby County from liquidation is the proudest achievement in her political career. Ms Solloway is now no longer the Derby North MP having lost the seat to Labour’s Catherine Atkinson at last week’s General Election.

Ms Atkinson, who won with more than 18,600 votes to her name, started work as a new MP on Monday (July 8) - fully marking the end of Ms Solloway's term in office, which began in 2019. The Conservative politician released a statement on Monday evening saying serving as MP for Derby North was “one of the greatest honours” and thanked everyone for all the support she received over the years.

She told her followers on social media that her defeat was “not the end but a new beginning” and she would continue to fight to make Derby North a better place.

Join us on WhatsApp to get the latest news straight to your phone

Ms Solloway said: “Though the results of this recent election were not what I had hoped for, I remain incredibly optimistic about the future of our community. Your support, kindness and engagement have been a constant source of inspiration for me.

“I am deeply grateful for the trust you placed in me over these years. This is not the end, but a new beginning.”

In the run-up to the General Election, Ms Solloway released a video in which she said helping save Derby County from going bust was her most important task as MP.

Ms Solloway was involved in frequent discussions with the club’s administrators Quantuma, political figures, council leaders and the English Football League after the Rams went into administration in 2021. The subsequent points deduction and another for breaching financial rules meant the club suffered relegation into the third tier of English football for the first time since the 1980s.

But at several stages, fears escalated as to whether the club would survive after numerous deals with potential buyers collapsed. Ms Solloway joined thousands of fans in January 2022 when a march was held from Derby city centre to Pride Park Stadium prior to a home match against Birmingham City.

In July 2022 – nine months after the Rams were placed in administration - it was announced that local businessman David Clowes had purchased both Pride Park Stadium and the football club to save it from possible liquidation.

Ms Solloway said: “If you ask me the single most important thing to me, it was saving Derby County. I can honestly hold my head up high and say I really helped do this.

“I facilitated this to happen and it’s impacted on, I would say, nearly every single person in Derby because we saved this fantastic family, community football club. If there is nothing else I achieve in my life, really being part of saving Derby County Football Club is just a goosebumpy moment.”