Amanda Solloway, MP for Derby North, has been confirmed as the new Science Minster in a BEIS and UKRI press release .

Prof John Womersley, Director-General of European Spallation Source, said:

“I do hope that the kind-of, sort-of, not-quite announcement of Amanda Solloway’s appointment as Science Minister is just a communications misstep, and doesn’t indicate that she’s kind-of, sort-of, not-quite empowered in the post. The role of science minister is too important, and too critical right now, for this to be anything other than an important, visible, decision making role. I hope she sits at Cabinet, as many of her predecessors have done.”

Prof Sir Robert Lechler, President of the Academy of Medical Sciences (AMS), said:

“I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the new Science Minister, Amanda Solloway MP, into what is surely one of the best roles within Government.

“It is an extremely exciting and important time for UK science, with many reasons to be optimistic. This Government has already demonstrated its commitment to supporting science, research and innovation. Not least through pledging to double R&D funding and launching a new visa route to attract talented researchers to the UK. These commitments are extremely welcome. However, there is still some uncertainty ahead, not least our relationship with the EU’s next research programme, Horizon Europe, something that the sector is almost unanimously in support of participating in.

“Ms Solloway now has an extraordinary opportunity to deliver on this Government’s commitment to invest 2.4% of GDP in R&D. As she gets to work on these objectives, I hope that she will take the time to engage with and understand the needs of the sector. I also urge Ms Solloway to work closely with the new Minister for Universities, Michelle Donelan MP in the Department for Education, to understand how the UK’s strength in science is totally entwined with our world-leading universities.

“I very much look forward to working closely with Ms Solloway and supporting her in her new capacity.”

Prof Dame Anne Glover, President, The Royal Society of Edinburgh, said:

“This is a critical time for UK science, research and innovation. As Scotland’s National Academy, the Royal Society of Edinburgh (RSE) looks forward to working with Amanda Solloway MP, the newly appointed Science Minister. The Minister has a crucial role in shaping the UK’s future relationship with the EU and international partners in key areas including research, innovation and migration. The RSE is clear that longstanding participation in EU Framework Programmes has greatly benefitted and strengthened UK science and research. Securing direct and full UK participation in Horizon Europe should be a key priority alongside building wider international collaborations. The RSE is well placed to harness and showcase the collective effort and excellence of the Scottish science and research community in contributing to the strength of the UK science base.”

Prof Martin Rees, Astronomer Royal, Fellow of Trinity College Cambridge, University of Cambridge, said:

“This is the fourth change in the holder of this post in little over a year.

“Let’s hope that Amanda Solloway stays long enough to get up-to-speed on a challenging and diverse brief.”

Dr Daniel Rathbone, Assistant Director, Campaign for Science and Engineering (CaSE), said:

Commenting on Amanda Solloway MP’s appointment as Science Minister in the Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy (BEIS)

“We’re delighted to welcome Amanda Solloway as the new Science Minister. The Prime Minister’s ambition to boost investment in science and innovation forms a critical part of two flagship agendas, to “level-up” the regions and to be a “global Britain”. Science and engineering has the potential to drive economic growth and world-leading innovation throughout the next decade and beyond. Taking advantage of this opportunity will require the new Science Minister to be a strong and independent voice for science and engineering in Government. We look forward to working with the Minister to ensure the UK has the people, the funding and the policies for science and engineering to thrive.”

Commenting on Michelle Donelan MP’s appointment as Universities Minister in the Department of Education

“We look forward to working with the Minister to ensure that universities continue to play a crucial role in the UKs research environment. They will be critical to achieving the Government’s goal of a significant increase in research intensity. It will be crucial to ensure the political interface between academic and industrial research remains strong and that impacts on the whole science economy are considered in university decisions, such as teaching and research funding.”

Note: the last time that the Universities and Science briefs were held separately was 2008-10 when David Lammy MP was Minister for Higher Education and Lord Drayson was Science Minister. However, at that time both Science and Universities were the responsibility of the same department (Department for Innovation, Universities and Skills until June 2009 and Department for Business, Innovation and Skills from June 2009)

*BEIS and UKRI press release confirming Amanda Solloway as science minister:

https://www.gov.uk/government/news/worlds-first-timing-centre-to-protect-uk-from-risk-of-satellite-failure

Declared interests

The nature of this story means everyone quoted above could be perceived to have a stake in it. As such, our policy is not to ask for interests to be declared – instead, they are implicit in each person’s affiliation.