Casa Lleó i Morera, by architect Lluís Domènech I Montaner, is located on Passeig de Gràcia 35, in the Eixample district of Barcelona. The building sits on the corner of Carrer del Consell de Cent. It is one of the three important buildings of Barcelona’s Illa de la Discòrdia (Block of Discord), next to Casa Batlló by Antoni Gaudí and Casa Amatller by Josep Puig i Cadafalch.

In 1902 Francesca Morera i Ortiz assigned Lluís Domènech i Montaner to remodel the Casa Rocamora, built in 1864. She died before the work was finished in 1906, and the building was named after her son, Albert Lleó i Morera.

Lluís Domènech i Montaner, Gaudí’s professor, was one of the leading proponents of Modernist architecture. Other buildings in Barcelona by Domènech i Montaner include the L’Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Casa Fuster, Palau de la Música Catalana and the Castillo de los Tres Dragones (Castle of the Three Dragons) in Parc de la Ciutadella.

Modernist decorative arts in the interior include stained glass, mosaics, sculpture, woodwork, metal works and sgraffito.

🎟️ Skip the line and save money on top attractions like Park Güell and La Sagrada Família with the Barcelona Pass

Lluís Domènech i Montaner along with decorator Gaspar Homar lead a large team of artists and craftsmen.

Lluís Bru and Mario Maragliano created the mosaic work, Eusebi Arnau made the sculptures, Antoni Serra i Fiter made the ceramics, and Gaspar Homar designed the decoration and the furniture.

Antoni Rigalt i Blanch made the stained-glass windows including the largest work representing the tree of life, in the rear of the house.

The pinnacles and the tempietto at the top of the building were badly damaged by machine guns during the Spanish civil war and have since been restored.

The Núñez i Navarro Group acquired Casa Lleó i Morera in 2006. Other historic restoration projects undertaken by the Núñez i Navarro Group include Hotel 1898 and La Rotonda on Avinguda Tibidabo.

Casa Lleó i Morera

Address: Passeig de Gràcia, 35, 08007 Barcelona