The Film Noir Odyssey

Writer: Art Cohn and Guy Endore

Story: Guy Endore

Director: Felix E. Feist

Cast: Steve Cochran, Ruth Roman, Lurene Tuttle

Cinematography: Robert Burks

Music: Daniele Amfitheatrof

Studio: Warner Bros.

Release: August 8, 1951

Here is a film noir with more on its mind than just guns, dames and playing dirty. It’s just as concerned with the humanity of its main characters as it is the fact that they are on the run from the law. It’s quite telling that this is a rare situation where lovers on the run earn their happy ending by becoming better people, as opposed to being brought down by a cacophony of bullets.

Steve Cochran stars as Bill, newly released from prison after being incarcerated at 13 for killing his father. He wanders the streets, overwhelmed by this world, and finds himself in a paid dance hall spinning Cay (Ruth Roman) around the floor. Having never even kissed a girl, he has a lot of trouble articulating that he’s attracted to her, but before she can fully push him away, her married boyfriend (who is a cop) shows up and causes a big fight, with Cay shooting him to death while an unconscious Bill lays nearby. The two are soon on the run from the law and awkwardly falling in love with one another, finally finding peace on a lettuce farm out West, though the specter of the shooting threatens to break their happiness at any moment.

The first fifteen minutes or so could serve as its own engaging short film. Screenwriters Art Cohn (“The Tall Target”) and Guy Endore (“Johnny Allegro”) take their time setting up Bill’s character and leaning into how unmoored he is out in the real world for the first time in almost two decades. He walks around, seeming dazed, going to a diner and ordering three pieces of pie and a beer to wash it down… something a thirteen year old thinks he would do if he were an adult. He believes he makes a friend, until that “friend” writes an expose about him in the local newspaper with a big photo on the front page… ensuring he would never find peace or anonymity in that town. This section of the movie is kind of incredible in how much it pays attention to details of Bill being lost in time, and when we see the newspaper headline & photo, our hearts sink for him.

Once the mechanics of the genre click into place, the screenwriters and director Felix E. Feist (“The Devil Thumbs a Ride”) find some fresh situations to mine for suspense and fun. The most notable of these is when Bill and Cay abandon their vehicle and conspire to break into one of the cars being towed on one of those giant trucks transporting new vehicles to dealerships. There’s a great bit outside a diner where they struggle to find the right key to get into one of the cars before the driver comes out from getting his coffee which is quite tense.

From there, the movie blatantly copies another noir called “Shockproof” (released two years prior), with them finding love and redemption by doing good work in the fields. And by “blatantly copies,” I mean I actually looked up whether or not this film is a remake of the other because the storylines are so close in that section. But whereas I hated (hated!) “Shockproof,” I was fully engaged by this section of “Tomorrow is Another Day.” I did this because the filmmakers had done the work in creating two complex characters you want to root for, and who deserve this. I did it because Cay became a better person who admitted that she was the one who killed her boyfriend, even though she had been lying to Bill for months because she panicked in the moment. I did it because of Bill’s smile when he learned Cay was pregnant. Though the happy ending is a little out of the clear blue (turns out the boyfriend told the police it was self-defense before dying, and the magazine article that outs Bill was published before the police could comment on it), I went with it simply because I genuinely wanted these two crazy kids to work things out.

I also have to commend the writers for turning the family who ultimately turns Bill and Cay in into actual characters and not just greedy assholes. They are genuine friends with our main characters, and don’t want to betray them… until outside circumstances escalate things to the point of no return.

Cochran is quite wonderful as Bill, engaging with sympathy but never losing a layer of danger that makes you believe he could be pushed into violence once again. He nails the scene where he talks about killing his father, and the aforementioned opening where he is becoming acclimated to life out of prison is gangbusters. Roman is fine as well, but I wish there had been someone with more energy and chemistry with Cochran… maybe someone like Ida Lupino? I’ve now seen Roman in a fair few films noir and I’ve come to the sad conclusion that the best she can pull off is “pretty good,” which is a shame. The supporting cast are all sterling.

Feist isn’t one of those directors who is considered anywhere near the top tier of noir, but he turns in excellent work here, and does great work with cinematographer Robert Burks (“The Wrong Man”), who gives the entire affair a nice sheen of darkness where necessary.

I liked “Tomorrow Is Another Day” way more than I thought I would. The worst thing about it is really that terrible, terrible title, which makes you think this is either a sequel to “Gone With the Wind” or a rip-off. It’s worth seeking this one out.