IT is an irony not lost on some local officials and residents that the plot of Alan Alda's new movie, ''Sweet Liberty,'' revolves around the effect a film company has on the daily life of a small town.

The production will be shot this summer at several East End locations, principally the villages of Sag Harbor and Southampton. Mr. Alda, who owns a home in Bridgehampton, wrote the script and will direct the picture. He also will act in it along with Michael Caine, Michelle Pfeiffer, Bob Hoskins and Lillian Gish.

The story takes place in a small Southern town where Mr. Alda is a history professor. He has written a novel about the American Revolution that has become a best seller and been sold to the movies. After the film company arrives in the area, the professor is disturbed at how his novel is being sensationalized and the disruption created in the town.

For the last month, representatives of Mr. Alda have been trying to complete arrangements with local officials for the shooting of the movie, which will begin in early June and run until the end of August. Because this period coincides with the height of the East End tourist season, when crowds and traffic congestion are at their peak, some of the proposed arrangements have not been greeted with enthusiasm.

''Almost all the film will be shot on location,'' said Mark Caine, a publicist for Universal Pictures, which is producing the movie. ''A big production problem we have is not wanting to give away specific locations. It will be hard to keep things moving and organized.''

According to Mr. Caine, Mr. Alda chose the East End because the film can be made cheaper. The distance between locations will be shorter, which means that the cost of moving heavy film-making equipment will be reduced, and many of the technicians operating out of New York City will be within reach.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.