Sonia Agarwal (born 28 March 1982) is an Indian actress. Having predominantly acted in Tamil films, she is probably best known for her performances in blockbuster films such as Kaadhal Kondein (2003), 7G Rainbow Colony (2004) and Pudhupettai (2006) directed by her former husband Selvaraghavan.

Personal life

Sonia married Selvaraghavan, a director in Tamil cinema, in December 2006. The couple were divorced in 2010.

Career

During her school days, Sonia got an offer to act in a serial on Zee TV. She then made her film debut with the 2002 Telugu film Nee Premakai, in which she did a small role, after which she acted in a Kannada film Chandu opposite Sudeep.

Subsequently, she stepped into the Tamil film industry, appearing in the drama film Kaadhal Kondein, directed by Selvaraghavan. Featuring his brother Dhanush, the film became a huge success and she was widely appreciated for her performance as Divya in the film, which brought her to limelight and fetched her several awards, including the ITFA Best New Actress Award. Afterwards, she acted alongside actors Silambarasan and Vijay in the films Kovil and Madhurey, respectively. In 2004, the controversial Tamil drama film 7G Rainbow Colony, directed by Selvaraghavan again, got released, which went on to become a blockbuster at the box office. After appearing in the films Oru Kalluriyin Kathai and Oru Naal Oru Kanavu in 2005, both of which failed to perform at the box office, she got roles in the films Thiruttu Payale and Pudhupettai. The former, directed by Susi Ganesan, became a highly successful film, whilst the latter, another Selvaraghavan film, received universal critical acclaim.

She stopped acting after her marriage. After getting divorced, she made a re-entry, essaying a supporting role in the multi-starrer Vaanam, following which she signed up for four projects--three in Tamil and one in Malayalam--in quick succession. Her Karu Pazhaniappan-directed film Sadhurangam, opposite Srikanth once again, got released in 2011 and Oru Nadigayin Vakku Moolam, a heroine-oriented feature in early 2012. Her forthcoming films include Poi Sollathedi and Achchamenn.

Galleries of Sonia Agarwal