In this page of Tamil Cinema, we are going to see about the Tamil actress Sonia Agarwal who is one of the leading Taml actresses. I have taken the sub categories of this article to explain Profile of Sonia Agarwal, Biography of Sonia Agarwal, Complete Filmography, Filmy career of her etc.,

Profile and Personnel details of Tamil actress Sonia Agarwal:

Sonia Agarwal, the name which can not be forgotten by the youngsters who were tenant in the years, 2003. Because, the Tamil movies of Sonia Agarwal, Kadhal Konden, 7G Rainbow Colony got released in those days and she was shown as a next door girl in those movies and got a place in the Tamil Cinema audience mind as one of the dream girls is not an exclaiming word to explain about.

Birth year of Tamil actress Sonia Agarwal is 1982 and the date of birth of her is 28 March 1982, so the present age of Sonia Agarwal is 30.

Birth place of Sonia Agarwal is Chandigarh, India.

Name of spouse of Sonia Agarwal is Selvaraghavan and she is a divorcee with him.

Tamil actress Sonia Agarwal’s marriage with the Tamil cinema director Selva Raghavan and her divorce with him after 3 years from her marriage was one of the talks of Tamilnadu in the year 2009. The divorce of Sonia Agarwal with Selvaraghavan was a mutual consent.

Filmography of Sonia Agarwal:

Even though Sonia Agarwal got famous from her movie, Kadhal Konden, she got introduced in another language movie. The debut movie of Sonia Agarwal is Nee Premakai which is a Telugu movie in the year 2002. Then Sonia acted in a Kannada language movie namely Chandu. Then she acted in her very first Tamil movie, Kaadhal Konden, pairing with Tamil actor Dhanush. In the movie Kadhal Konden, Sonia Agarwal acted under the direction of her ex- husband Selvaraghavan who is the elder brother of the hero of that movie Dhanush. In this movie, Sonia Agarwal acted as a college girl who is loved by a co student and getting kidnapped due to that love. On the other hand, the role of Sonia Agarwal itself loves another guy in the same class. The climax of Kadhal Konden was with thrill and excitement. Additionally, Sonia Agarwal had a major role in that movie that the whole story of the movie just stretched by keeping her role as core. For the acting performance of Sonia Agarwal in the Tamil movie Kaadhal Konden, she was given ITFA Best new actress Award.

After Kadhal Konden, Sonia Agarwal went back to Telugu movie industry with the movie, Dham in the same year. Then Sonia Agarwal acted in a Tamil movie namely Success in the same year. After the movie Success, Sonia acted in the movie, Kovil. In the movie Kovil, the combination of Tamil actor STR Simbu and Sonia Agarwal happened under the direction of, Tamil director Hari.

In the next year 2004, Sonia Agarwal acted in number of movies. In that year, Sonia acted in the Tamil movie Madhurey, pairing with one of the leading actors of Tamil cinema, Illayathalapathy Vijay. Eventhough Sonia Agarwal was one of the two heroins of the movie Madhurey, her role was with strong scenes. Then Sonia acted under the direction of her ex – husband Selva Ragavan for the second time in the movie 7G Rainbow Colony. The movie 7G Rainbow Colony was a great block buster hit movie in that year. In the movie 7g Rainbow Colony, the role of Sonia Agarwal was the main role in that movie even equal to the role of the hero of that movie Ravi Krishna.

After the great exposure and recognition in the movie 7G Rainbow Colony, Sonia Agarwal acted in the Tamil movie Oru Kallooriyin Kanavu pairing with Tamil actor Arya in the year 2005. The video songs of this movie are hit. Then Sonia acted in the movie thiruttu Payale in the year 2006. In the movie, Sonia agarwal paired with Tamil actor Jeevan. In this movie also, Sonia Agarwal’s role had a scope. After Thiruttu Payale, Sonia acted again under the direction of Selva Ragavan for the 3rd time in the Tamil movie Pudhupettai pairing with Tamil actor Dhanush. In this movie, Sonia acted as one of the two main actresses. The other actress of Pudhupettai is Tamil actress Sneha. The acting performance of Sonia Agarwal in the movie Pudhupettai was great. After the project of Pudupettai Sonia Agarwal got married with Tamil director Selvaragavan. After the marriage of Tamil actress Sonia Agarwal, she got out off the cinema industries and lived the married life with Selva Raagavan for about 4 years.

After getting divorce in the year 2010, Sonia Agarwal started trying to coming back in the cinema industry again for an year. In the year 2011, Sonia Agarwal acted in the Tamil movie Vaanam as a side actress. Then in the same year, the movie of Sonia Agarwal in which she acted before 5 years got released in the year 2011 namely Sadhurangam, paired with Tamil actor Shri Kanth.

Then she acted in the movie Oru Nadigaiyin Vaakkumoolam, in which the total story of the movie looks like framed only keeping the role of Sonia Agarwal in mind. That much importance was given for the role of Sonia Agarwal in that movie.

Upcoming movies of Tamil hot actress Sonia Agarwal:

The upcoming movies of Sonia Agarwal are,

Madha Pitha Guru

Poi Solladhedee

Graha Nayakan which is a Malayalam language movie

And