At the heart of Virginia, Richmond is a popular location for locals as well as couples coming home to celebrate their wedding. We have everything from elegant ballrooms to beautiful gardens, elegant rooftops, rustic farms, and more! Below is a list of my favorite 30+ Richmond wedding venues.

Best Outdoor Ceremony Venues in Richmond

1. Quirk Hotel Richmond (Rooftop, Courtyard)

Enjoy Richmond from above with a Quirk Hotel wedding and their rooftop ceremony. The skyline provides such a gorgeous backdrop for your ceremony and portraits. There are also so many photogenic locations throughout the venue, from the courtyard to the lobby. So for your cocktail hour and reception, or in case of rain on your wedding day, you’ve still got lots of great spaces to choose from. This venue holds up to 100 guests. As a hotel, they offer 75 rooms and suites, so you and your guests can enjoy the whole weekend together.

2. Virginia House (Gardens)

For the perfect blend of natural beauty and historic elegance, look no further than the Virginia House. This venue is nestled away just outside of the city and sits on a hillside north of the James River. Approaching the venue, you’ll find an elegant English Tudor style manor decorated with beautifully curated English and Spanish antiques. Behind the estate sits nearly 8 acres of gardens and grounds. The outdoor ceremony location at the Gardens can accommodate up to 250 guests. The House is also a great indoor ceremony location for up to 150 guests, or simply an additional area for your guests to explore during cocktail hour.

3. Upper Shirley Vineyards (Ceremony Lawn)

Looking to escape the city and relax along the James River? Upper Shirley Vineyards offers a one of a kind experience with luscious lawns, bike trails, and in-house made wine and catering. The outdoor Ceremony Lawn location accommodates up to 300 guests. Located just 30 minutes from Richmond, this venue is a great option for you and your guests to enjoy a weekend in the country without going far at all.

4. Historic Mankin Mansion (English Gardens)

The Historic Mankin Mansion, often called just Mankin Mansion for short, is located just east of the city. Enjoy an outdoor ceremony beneath the 100 year old Sycamore tree in their English Gardens with up to 200 guests. They also have an indoor Gallery ceremony site, which is a great back-up location. Cocktail hours can be held outdoors around the Estate Grounds or in their climate-controlled Pavilion Tent, which is where receptions are typically held.

5. Avonlea Farms (Wedding Tree, Lakeside, Rolling Fields)

There’s so much possibility at Avonlea Farms, which actually boasts a roster of 5 different ceremony and reception sites across 64 acres as well as two getting ready suites. Outdoor ceremony locations are the Wedding Tree, Lakeside, and Rolling Fields. Receptions are most commonly held at the Greenhouse and Pavilion, which is also a great back-up ceremony option. The venue includes golf carts and coordinate attendants for you, so it’s very easy to get between all areas of the venue. You can easily celebrate with up to 150 guests under the Greenhouse and Pavillion, and even more at their outdoor areas.

6. Dover Hall (Reflecting Pool, Bluestone Terrace, Two-Tiered Garden, and more)

This luxurious estate will make you feel like you’ve stepped away to the English countryside. The English Tudor style manor sits on over 55 acres and can host your day from getting ready to reception. Some of the most popular outdoor ceremony options are the Reflecting Pool, Bluestone Terrace, and Two-Tiered Garden, giving you options to celebrate with up to 400 people. Additional options for smaller ceremonies include the Rose Garden and Cobblestone Courtyard, not to mention the stunning indoor Ballroom location.

7. Mill at Fine Creek (Mill Stone Ruins, Pergola, Creekside)

Another great all-inclusive option just outside of Richmond is the rustic but modern Mill at Fine Creek located in Powhatan. They offer 13 guest cottages, so you can enjoy the whole weekend with your crew. And even if you don’t stay the weekend, two getting ready suites on site mean you can enjoy the entire day on-site. There are three outdoor ceremony locations, each with unique views and vibes: Mill Stone Ruins, Pergola, and Creekside. Receptions are held in the main room, which is also a great back-up location in case of rain.

Best Indoor Ceremony Venues in Richmond

Since many of our favorite outdoor ceremony venues have gorgeous indoor ceremony locations as well, you may see quite a few repeats below. They’re definitely worth the double mention though! Having photographed 200+ weddings, I’m familiar with most venues in the area. So if you have any questions about any particular venue, feel free to send me a message!

1. The Jefferson Hotel (Empire Ballroom, Rotunda, and more)

Looking for a venue with classic and elegant elements for your wedding? Look no further than the Jefferson Hotel. The overall feeling of luxury and black tie elegance won’t be lost here, offering private ballrooms, incredible attention to detail, and a show-stopping staircase perfect for an epic grand entrance. The Empire Ballroom holds up to 200 guests for ceremony and reception. For larger celebrations, the Rotunda can hold up to 450, and smaller spaces are available as well for intimate weddings.

2. Science Museum of Richmond (Rotunda, Thalheimer Pavillion, and more)

Couples thinking about a Science Museum of Virginia wedding have lots of indoor ceremony options. The most iconic is the Rotunda, which features a 10-story dome and can host up to 250 people for a seated dinner or up to 500 for a stand-up reception. The largest space is the Thalheimer Pavillion, which can host up to 500 for a seated dinner. Additional options include the RF&P Forum, Dome Theater, Dewey Gottwald Center, and Garner Pavilion. The possibilities are endless for weddings of any size at the Science Museum.

3. Historic Mankin Mansion (The Gallery)

Indoor Historic Mankin Mansion wedding ceremonies are held in the newly renovated Vintage European Gallery. The space is already decorated so elegantly couples don’t have to do much if anything at all for their ceremony to have an elegant backdrop. Like their outdoor ceremony site, the Gallery can hold up to 200 guests. Cocktail hours are typically held outdoors around the Estate Grounds, with reception in their climate-controlled Pavilion Tent.

4. Dover Hall (Ballroom)

Another elegant and timeless venue option, Dover Hall’s grand Ballroom is perfect for your indoor Richmond wedding ceremony. The room features floor to ceiling windows, wooden floors, velvet red curtains, elegant wrought-iron chandeliers and more stunning architectural & decor details. You can enjoy your entire wedding weekend on site by renting out rooms of the estate, or simply enjoy the spacious getting suites for you and your partner. No matter the weather or time of year, you’ve got great options for both indoor and outdoor celebrations alike with your Dover Hall Wedding.

5. John Marshall Ballrooms (The Marshall Ballroom, The Virginia Ballroom)

The John Marshall Ballrooms have been around since 1929 and are perfect for couples looking for a quintessential Richmond venue. The Marshall Ballroom is naturally lit with 30’ windows and a set of gorgeous vintage chandeliers. This room can host up to 150 guests. For larger celebrations, the Virginia Ballroom can host up to 350 guests. My favorite feature of the Virginia

Ballroom is the wrap-around balcony, which gives your photographer and guests unique vantage points during your celebration.

6. The Renaissance (The Roosevelt Ballroom, The Adams Room)

Another standout Richmond ballroom wedding venue is The Renaissance. They offer two options for saying, “I do.” The Roosevelt Ballroom holds up to 250 people seated and up to 500 people for a stand-up reception. For smaller celebrations, the Adams Room is a great option. Included at this Richmond wedding venue are an experienced catering, full-service bar, and wedding planner to make your planning that much easier.

Richmond Hotel & Ballroom Venues

The Jefferson Hotel

John Marshall Ballrooms

The Renaissance – Richmond

Estate at River Run

Dover Hall (click here to see a blog post)

The Omni Richmond

Richmond Marriott

Hilton Downtown Richmond

Hilton Short Pump Richmond

Best of Beautiful Architecture and Gardens

More Outdoor Venues

The Barns of Kanak

Avonlea Farms

Oakdale RVA

Boathouse at Sunday Park

The Boathouse at Rocketts Landing

The Mill at Fine Creek

Adaline Acres

The Estate at Independence

Seven Springs

The Virginia Cliffe Inn

Maymont (click here to see a blog post)

Lewis Ginter Botanical Gardens

Historic & Brick Richmond Wedding Venues

Historic Mankin Mansion (click here to see a blog post)

Estate at River Run

Mill at Fine Creek

Hofheimer Building

Linden Row

Bolling-Haxall House

The Foundry

The Loft at Steamer Co. 5

Madison at the Mill

Havana 59

Urban Venues in Richmond City

Common House Richmond

Science Museum of Richmond (click here to see a blog post)

The Boathouse at Rocketts Landing

Virginia Museum of Fine Arts (VMFA)

Virginia Museum of History & Culture

Hippodrome Theater

Altria Theater

Richmond Rooftop Ceremony Venues

Quirk Hotel Richmond (click here to see a blog post)

Common House Richmond

Hofheimer Building

Havana 59

I hope this list gives you a helpful start to your Richmond wedding venue search! I know this exciting step in the wedding planning process can be daunting, but you’ll know in your gut when you’ve found the perfect one. You got this!

For more Richmond wedding planning resources, visit my Richmond Wedding Photographer page.