Editor’s note: This is one in a series of re-reviews of restaurants reviewed by The Times-Dispatch’s previous restaurant critic.

For lots of Richmonders, a daytrip to wine country has traditionally meant heading for parts west (Charlottesville and the mountains), north (Northern Virginia) or east (Northern Neck).

Now there’s another option for those who want to stick close to home: Upper Shirley Vineyards, just a 30-minute drive from the city down state Route 5.

Upper Shirley Vineyards, which specializes in award-winning wines, provides stunning views, dream weddings, vineyard horse rides and bike tours along a historic path. Turns out it specializes in food, too, with cuisine that’s beautifully prepared and equal to the allure of the place in every way.

Married-couple Tayloe and Suzy Dameron own the vineyards, which opened in early 2016 on about 100 acres. They wisely partnered with prominent vintner Michael Shaps on the wine half of their operation and chef Carlisle Bannister on the food half. The latter has crafted a menu that changes with the seasons while always emphasizing fresh, local ingredients and expressing his Southern heritage.

On a recent Sunday afternoon, I arrived at the Upper Shirley Vineyards restaurant with my dining partner, Shirley. (It had to be done.) We were greeted warmly and shown to a table inside a large white building resembling a riverfront cottage.

We started with the Grilled Salmon Niçoise ($16), made with fresh vegetables from local farms. The grilled salmon served atop the greens had an appealing crunch, while the whole-grain Dijon vinaigrette dressing the salad had an ideal balance of tangy and bright flavors.

You’d expect the fruit in the Summer Fruit Salad ($8) to be amazing, and it was. The blackberries, blueberries and watermelon were perfectly ripe and fresh, complemented with red onion, fresh mint and Richmond-based Ames’ Hot Southern Honey. But the star ingredient was the slightly tangy and impossibly creamy feta cheese from Valbreso Feta, a French cheesemaker.

As lovely as the cakes in the Crab Cake entrée ($24) were, in this dish, too, the standout was a supporting player: the simple succotash of sweet corn, lima beans and Hanover tomatoes mingling with a fantastic classic rémoulade. The two cakes resting on the succotash were light and elegant, made with quality crabmeat and only enough filler to bind the cakes together.

The petit verdot-marinated Angus flank steak in the Steak Frites entrée ($18) came with crispy french fries and vinaigrette-dressed fresh greens. The steak was pure comfort food and cooked to a perfect medium-rare. It was also peppered with gristle. (Surprising, yes, but considering the quality of every dish that came before and after, I have to believe it was a fluke.)

Glazed Donut Bread Pudding ($7) — actually made with glazed doughnuts — was the perfect way to end the meal. It arrived warm with a vanilla and bourbon crème anglaise and a drizzle of chocolate ganache.

Top to bottom, the staff at Upper Shirley Vineyards was friendly and welcoming. The service was skilled and personable but occasionally slow — not surprising since the place was overflowing with diners. The Damerons lent a gracious presence, mingling with guests throughout the dining room, as did executive chef Bannister.

The dining experience at Upper Shirley Vineyards is something special, indeed. I plan to visit again soon and suggest you do the same.