Murray's Pub Landlord character sprang up in the late '90s: a confrontational beer-swilling, loudmouth, xenophobic parody, a warrior for "common sense" and plain-speaking.

He's a resolutely patriotic Brit: "If we had no rules where would we be? France! If we had too many rules where would we be? Germany!"

He's here with his show One Man, One Guvnor: 20 Years at the Lager Top, one of the first of many British faces appearing on this year's Just For Laughs program. On Tuesday night, he pitches it perfectly.

He's a welcome face from home for the Brits, but he also comments enough on Australian life to strike an empathetic bond with the audience through an understanding straddling life in both nations – and enough to appeal to the Aussies in the crowd.

A large part of his act is bantering with the audience, and his talents as a veteran are on clear display. Displaying an admirable skill for remembering a dozen or so audience members' names – "beautiful British name" he remarks each time – he deftly seizes on the foibles of his victims, mocking jobs, relationships, and for one poor elderly chap, his age.

For most of the show, he's bearing a pint of beer which tends to get spilt as he vigorously steams through his points. His look hasn't changed in 20 years: it's always a shirt and tie and maroon jacket. Murray has a spritely, boyish charm about him despite his tough exterior, he's rather like an imp trapped in a nightclub bouncer's body.

Amid all the pontificating and setting the world to rights are some hugely valid points. He takes on Islamophobia, mocking mindless hysteria by discussing the threat of halal beer.

Most sobering of all is his assessment of the finance industry. He lucidly runs through the ludicrous acts of folly that make up the structure of the business that led to the financial crisis. It's clearly a topic he is passionate about and why not, as he points out, when it's impacted so many, wiping out pensions and the economies of entire nations, and when the worst we could do is forget about it all.

Murray seems to thoroughly relish his crowd and the 400-seater Playhouse is a good, intimate venue for his show. It's like a big pub on this particular night and there's no mistaking who's the Guvnor.