FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: March 21, 2024

Contact: Shriti Bhandari

Ascend Rehab Services, Inc.

socialmedia@ascendrehabinc.com

Ascend Acquires A.C.T.S.

Union City, CA: Ascend Rehab Services, Inc. has acquired Augmentative Communication & Technology Services (A.C.T.S.), a local San Francisco-based company specializing in providing Pediatric (and Young Adults) AAC and AT services.

“The acquisition of A.C.T.S. aligns perfectly with Ascend’s mission and goals, allowing us to grow and make a difference for many more families in the Bay Area,” said Rakesh Shah, COO at Ascend. “A.C.T.S. is known to provide the best AAC and AT services and they work with many school districts in San Francisco City, the Peninsula, and across East Bay. Additionally, A.C.T.S. specialists also serve EI families through all Bay Area Regional Centers (RCEB, GGRC, and SARC) for AAC/AT.”

Founded in 1980 by Dr. Marilyn J. Buzolich, a renowned SLP, A.C.T.S. has dedicated 44 years in the Greater Bay Area providing School-based AAC/AT services and EI-based AAC/AT. Dr. Buzolich is also known for developing AAC programs and services for Bay Area school districts and mentoring over 40 SLPs in the AAC Specialty. She has presented at State, National and International conferences, and has numerous publications under her name.

“We first met Marilyn in 2020 when she hosted a webinar for the School Team Professional Development Day, and many know her as a pioneer in AAC/AT in the Bay Area,” said Swati Shah, Founder and CEO of Ascend. “We were impressed and awed by the extensive knowledge she provided.”

“The founders of Ascend are a wonderful fit for A.C.T.S. because they share our passion to provide exemplary services,” said Dr. Marilyn Buzolich. “They care about their clients, families and community, and they value their employees. I felt an instant connection the second I met them and was impressed with their business and marketing acumen, their dedication to this community, and their passion for team culture and personal development. I am really excited for their infusion of inspiration and organizational know-how.”

Ascend’s goal is to integrate A.C.T.S. seamlessly into the company, using the strengths of both organizations to deliver greater value to the clients, families and children. Dr. Buzolich will support, train, assist, and strengthen Ascend’s AAC/AT work/presence by bringing her exceptional knowledge along with all the veterans on her team. “I have no doubt that Ascend is committed to supporting and helping A.C.T.S. grow and continue to succeed,” she said. “There will be greater opportunities and support for our staff, and the clients we serve continue to be top priority.”

“The immense knowledge Marilyn and her team bring to Ascend will help us reach more families and children in need of these services,” said Swati Shah. “We are thrilled about this new chapter for Ascend as we embark on this journey together with A.C.T.S.”