Shares of Ascend Communications shot up more than 7 percent on Monday on speculation that Lucent Technologies may acquire the networking equipment vendor within the next week.

An article in The Financial Times Monday valued the prospective transaction at more than US$16 billion and said an announcement by Lucent (LU) could come as early as Wednesday.

Ascend specializes in making routers and carrier-class switches to carry voice and data through large corporate and public telecom networks. Acquiring Ascend (ASND) would give Lucent a competitive edge in the field of data networking. Lucent and its main rival Cisco Systems (CSCO) are racing to create a single networking device that can route computer data, telephone calls, and video through global telecommunications networks.

Officials at Lucent and Ascend wouldn't comment on the speculation. Ascend shares closed up $5.25 at $76.69, while Lucent fell $2.38 to $112.88.

Stephen Koffler, a networking analyst with Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette, said there's a "better than 50 percent chance" of Lucent buying Ascend.

"The real question is how, if at all, this changes the competitive dynamics of the industry" Koffler said. Cisco actually could benefit from a huge Lucent transaction, because digesting such a deal would occupy Lucent management's resources for about a year-and-a-half. Cisco would become the "stable vendor" in potential customers' minds, Koffler said.

Lucent, the world's biggest maker of telecommunications equipment, has set a goal of increasing market clout in data networking. But the company hasn't laid out specific acquisition targets, said spokesman John Skalko.

At least one analyst said Ascend appears like a good fit for Lucent, which would gain market share as well as technological expertise through an acquisition.

Valued at about $16 billion, Ascend is worth about one-tenth of Lucent, which has a $148-billion stock market value. The Alameda, California-based company has about 2,500 employees, compared to Lucent's staff of about 134,000. In 1997, the last year for which complete data is available, Ascend had revenue of $1.17 billion, compared with Lucent's 1997 sales of $30.1 billion.