Has your once-hefty dad dropped two pants sizes? Has Mom stopped cooking and keeping fruits and vegetables in the house? Do you have an older family member who seems to constantly get sick?

Those can all be signs or symptoms of malnutrition.

AARP Membership— $12 for your first year when you sign up for Automatic Renewal

Get instant access to members-only products and hundreds of discounts, a free second membership, and a subscription to AARP the Magazine.

Join Now

Malnutrition happens when the body doesn’t get the right balance of foods to stay healthy. In older adults, the most common type is undernutrition, which happens when the body isn’t getting enough of the calories, protein or other nutrients it needs to function.

About 1 in 4 older adults in the United States is malnourished or at risk of malnutrition, according to a 2023 study published in BMC Medicine.

Malnutrition myths and consequences

Even if you consume plenty of calories, you can still suffer from malnutrition if you don’t eat enough healthy foods like fruits, vegetables, whole grains and protein, says Angel Planells, a Seattle-based registered dietitian and a spokesperson for the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics.

“A person can be obese and have malnutrition,” Planells says. “A lot of us think that a hefty person could not be malnourished. But if they are eating poorly, or if they’re not getting enough fruits and vegetables or not enough fiber, their bodies aren’t functioning optimally.”

Malnutrition is especially common among older adults in nursing homes and hospitals. One study found that about a third of well-nourished patients who enter the hospital become malnourished during their stay.

People suffering from malnutrition have higher rates of bone fractures, are more likely to experience prolonged hospitalization, and have less successful treatment outcomes. Malnutrition also increases the risk of death.

What increases the risk for malnutrition?

Older adults are at higher risk of malnutrition for several reasons:

Weakened senses. As you age, your sense of hunger and thirst weakens, which can decrease appetite.

Side effects of medication. Older adults are more likely to have conditions or be on medications linked to low appetite , or that have gastrointestinal side effects such as nausea and vomiting.

Difficulty chewing. Tooth decay and other dental issues can make chewing a challenge, and some older adults have trouble swallowing.

Isolation. Depression, social isolation and limited mobility are also factors.

8 signs and symptoms of malnutrition

The symptoms of malnutrition aren’t always obvious, experts say, but spotting them and intervening early is critical. Here are some malnutrition signs and symptoms to look out for:

1. Unintentional weight loss. Malnutrition is typically diagnosed if someone has unintentionally lost 5 to 10 percent of their body weight over three to six months, or if their BMI (body mass index) drops to 18.5 or below, Planells says. (Use AARP’s BMI calculator.)

If persuading your loved one to hop on a scale is challenging, look for other signs of significant weight loss , such as loose clothing, rings, watches or dentures.

You can also look for changes in their facial structure, Planells says. The loss of muscle and fat in their face can create a sharper or more angular jawline, more prominent cheekbones , and sunken eyes or temples.

2. Lack of interest in eating or drinking. If a family member has stopped cooking, is skipping meals or shows no interest in their favorite foods, those can all be red flags for malnutrition, says Maureen Andreassi, M.D., an internal medicine physician at Novant Health Senior Care in Matthews, North Carolina.

“If you’re eating with a person and they eat half of what they normally eat, that should trigger a discussion,” Andreassi says. “You can ask questions like, ‘Are you getting full too soon? Are you having trouble swallowing?’”

If your loved one is in the hospital or a nursing home, Andreassi suggests checking their tray after meals to see what they’re eating — and how much. “If nothing is eaten except one bite out of dessert and one bite out of mashed potatoes, that’s when you need to worry,” she says.

3. Empty fridge and cupboards. If your loved one still lives independently at home, discre etly check the fridge and cabinets when you visit, suggests Elizabeth Landsverk, M.D., a geriatrician in San Francisco and author of Living in the Moment: A Guide to Overcoming Challenges and Finding Moments of Joy in Alzheimer's Disease and Other Dementias.

“If there isn’t any food in the fridge or it’s old and moldy, and it doesn’t look like they are making a lot of food, that’s a sign they need more help,” Landsverk says.

4. Changes in hair, skin and nails. Some of the earliest symptoms of malnutrition — even before weight loss becomes apparent — affect skin, hair and nails, according to a n article in the journal Nursing.

Nails will stop growing and may “look odd -shaped, be very brittle and crack a lot,” Planells says. Hair may thin and lose its shine; some people also start losing hair.

Malnutrition also changes the skin, making it dry, flaky and less elastic. In addition, skin will bruise and tear easily. “They might bump against a table — to me or you it’s nothing — but for them it might create a really bad bruise,” Planells says. “There45’s increased skin breakdown, in general. Someone who is in bed for a day, their skin might break down and they get bedsores.”

5. Frequent, prolonged infections. If your loved one gets frequent colds or urinary tract infections, that, too, can be a symptom of malnutrition. “People who are more malnourished won’t mount an immune response to infections as well,” Landsverk says. It also takes longer for them to recover if they are ill, she says.

6. Delayed wound healing. A malnourished person’s weakened immune system also leads to slower wound healing, whether it’s a surgical incision or a pressure ulcer that developed from staying in one position for too long.

In studies that compare healing rates after surgery, malnourished patients are twice as likely to have a delay in wound healing compared to those who are well-nourished.

7. Decreased grip strength. Does the older adult in your life struggle to open jars, hold utensils or carry groceries? Studies show decreased handgrip strength is a predictor of low nutritional status, because of the muscle loss and weakness resulting when someone doesn’t get enough nutrients.

The connection is so strong that doctors and dietitians often check grip strength when they’re screening someone for malnutrition, Andreassi says.

8. Weakness, fatigue and confusion. Malnutrition can make your loved one feel tired and weak, and they may start to struggle with mobility and the activities of daily living. Malnutrition is also linked to confusion and brain fog. Even in children, malnutrition is linked to poor cognition. (Here are foods that can boost brain health.)

What’s the fastest way to correct malnutrition?

If you suspect someone you love has malnutrition, your first step is to involve their health care provider. A clinician can diagnose malnutrition through a physical exam, blood tests and other assessments to understand the extent and specific nature of the nutritional deficiencies, Landsverk says.

Treating malnutrition depends largely on what’s causing the problem, experts say. Here are some steps that can help:

Work with a specialist. A registered dietitian or certified nutritionist can create a nutrition plan and suggest strategies that work with your loved one’s budget, abilities and preferences. (Medicare may even help cover it.) They may recommend a nutritional supplement like Ensure or Boost to provide extra protein and calories.

Review their medications. Ask a doctor, pharmacist or geriatrician to review your loved one’s medications for side effects that affect appetite or nutrient absorption, Andreassi suggests. Even if their prescriptions can’t be changed, she says, switching the time of day they’re taken or reducing the dosage can also be helpful.

Eat multiple meals. Encourage your loved one to eat small amounts throughout the day rather than two or three heavy meals. Incorporate healthy fats, whole milk dairy products and plenty of protein, Planells says. Keep nutrient-dense snacks such as nuts, trail mix, cheese, yogurt and dried fruit within easy reach. And fill the pantry with some easy -to -prepare foods.

Make every sip count. Replace water with higher-calorie drinks like whole milk, smoothies, protein drinks and 100 percent fruit juice. “Everything that goes in their mouth, we want it to count,” Planells says.

Fortify their foods. Add healthy oils, butter, whole milk or other foods high in calories to what they’re already eating, Landsverk suggests. A sprinkle of cheese, nuts or seeds can provide another calorie boost.

Consider help with cost. For a fee, many companies will deliver groceries or healthy, easy-to-prepare meals to your door. Or if affordability is an issue, see if they qualify for SNAP (the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program). (A 2022 AARP study found that only 30 percent of those who qualify for SNAP applied.) Or reach out to community organizations such as Meals on Wheels that deliver low- or no-cost meals to people who meet income requirements , or who can’t shop or cook for themselves.

Switch to softer foods. If your loved one is having trouble chewing or swallowing, help them transition to a mostly chopped and soft diet. Encourage soft foods such as meat loaf, eggs, fish and yogurt, and grind up other foods with a food processor.

Schedule social meals. Encourage your family member to set a regular meal schedule and to eat with family or friends as often as possible. “If you are at a table with people you like and having conversation, you’re more likely to eat than if you’re by yourself,” Landsverk says.