“What’s happening hometown?” Red Hot Chili Peppers vocalist Anthony Kiedis asked the loud and rowdy fans after ripping through “Can’t Stop” during the band’s first of three sold-out shows at the Staples Center in Los Angeles Tuesday night.

He playfully asked bassist Flea where he’d be sleeping that night.

“My house in Los Feliz,” he replied to a cheering crowd. “We’re so happy to be here. Damn, I love Los Angeles.”

The group, which formed in L.A. in the early ‘80s, didn’t disappoint its most loyal devotees. After exhausting so much energy during its nearly two-hour set Tuesday night it’s hard to believe that they’re going to be doing it again tonight and Friday at Staples Center. Flea seemed confident that fueling up on burritos from some of his favorite local spots and feeding off of the massive amount of energy coming from the audience would coast them through it.

Out in support of its 11th studio album, “The Getaway,” which dropped last June, a few new tracks were peppered into the set list including the title track, the single “Dark Necessities,” the fun sing-a-long “Go Robot” and it slipped “Goodbye Angels” into the encore.

For the most part it was a fast paced, hit-filled set delivered by a well-oiled machine with very few noticeable technical or musical flubs. The older material such as “Suck My Kiss,” “Under the Bridge,” “Scar Tissue,” “Californication,” “By the Way,” “Parallel Universe” and “Right on Time” mixed in well with the newer material from “Tell Me Baby” and “The Adventures of Rain Dance Maggie” to all of the songs from the new record. Of course the band saved “Give It Away” for its finale.

The music and the performance were definitely solid, but the real star of the evening was the epic light show provided by hundreds of small cylinder shaped color-changing lights that were dropped on cables from high up in the rafters to sometimes just a couple of feet above the heads of the audience and band. Each light moved independently and throughout the set they were choreographed to be lowered and lifted in a variety of mesmerizing shapes and patterns that left those hitting up the weed-filled vape pens seriously tripping out.

In 2015, rock band Muse brought some synchronized drones into Staples Center for its tour, but RHCP might have outdone them with this spectacular display of light and imagery that at the start of the show just looked like a ginormous ’80s Lite Brite glued to the ceiling.

Opener Trombone Shorty and New Orleans Avenue was an excellent choice to pump up the crowd. The 31-year-old trombone virtuoso showcased his skills by playing a blend of metal, R&B, pop, rock and even punk rock music.

As he wailed along on the trombone and trumpet, his stellar backing band followed him through instrumental versions of songs like Rage Against the Machine’s “Bulls on Parade” and Green Day’s “Brain Stew.” There was also plenty of original material as well, with Shorty displaying his vocal range on songs like “The Craziest Thing” and “One Night Only.”