Ministry of Interior;

Garnison: El Aouina

History

6th September 1956: Signature of the decree giving birth to the National Guard

(click on the picture to enlarge)

The Tunisian National Guard was created in 1956 by Taïeb Mehiri, the interior minister appointed by Habib Bourguiba, and replaces the French national gendarmerie who returns to France after Tunisia’s independence. It is then headed by Tijani Ktari.

On 3 October 1956, custody became a fully independent force for the protection of territory and borders.

Missions

It serves both as a defense against external threats and as a security force against internal threats.

The National Security Guard are usually responsible for security in rural and non-urban areas.

The Tunisian National Guard occupied around 87 percent of the Tunisian Territory and 58 percent of the total population.

It has a lot of missions like:

Keeping order and public security.

Protecting people and their properties.

Protecting land and maritime borders.

Supervising the law of navigation and fishing.

Supervising road traffic.

Exercising judicial and administrative police.

Controling explosives.

Taking over criminal and investigative expertise.

Stopping crime, arresting criminals and applying judiciary investigation.

Helping with the execution of sentences and administrative procedures.

Collecting intelligence in political, economic, social and cultural fields.

Composition

The Tunisian National Guard contain 05 General Directions which are:

The General Inspection.

The General Direction Of Public Security.

The General Direction Of Public Maintain.

The General Direction Of Borders.

The General Direction Of Common interests.

It contain also 06 individual Directions which works directly with the General Director:

Direction Of Research and Investigation.

Direction Of Anti-Terrorism.

Direction Of Studies, Strategic plan and International Cooperation.

The Special Unit.

The Central Secretariat.

The Central Operations Room.

Missions of each General Direction:

GENERAL INSPECTORATE:

Taking over administrative investigation.

Controling financial management.

Handling and running inspections over all units.

Observing and analysing central and regional inspections.

GENERAL DIRECTION OF COMMON INTEREST:

Managing recruitment exams for officers and non-commissioned officers.

Managing basic and continuous training.

Managing human ressources.

Providing social and cultural care for the personnel of the National Guard.

Managing the budget of the National Guard.

Observing the management of equipment and infrastructure.

GENERAL DIRECTION OF PUBLIC SECURITY:

Providing public security and preventing crime.

Dealing with judiciary and administrative police.

Providing tourists security.

Controling explosives.

Observing and enforcing traffic laws.

There are 21 districts, and 52 regional sectors:

GENERAL DIRECTION OF BORDERS:

Providing the necessary plans for the security of frontiers and maritime borders.

Coordinating all kinds of intervention among frontiers and maritime borders stakeholders.

Preserving maritime wealth.

Fighting pollution.

Protecting frontiers and maritime borders.

Fighting border crossing and smuggling.

Enforcing laws related to fishing, hunting and navigation.

Participating in Search and rescue operations and protecting environment.

Providing logistics for terrestrial and maritime frontiers.

GENERAL DIRECTION OF INTERVENTION:

Keeping public order.

Providing support for other units to enforce general order.

Protecting vital national installations.

Fighting terrorism.

Participating in planes and ships protection.

The international cooperation

Bilateral cooperation:

Algeria, China, Türkiye, England, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Qatar, Morocco, Netherlands, Portugal, United States, Spain, Saudi Arabia.

Multilateral cooperation:

THE NATIONAL GUARD EMBLEMS:

The emblem of the Tunisian National Guard that you can find in it our symbol: Redemption for the Homeland.

The General Command in The Headquarter Of The Tunisian National Guard

General Direction of Order Maintain

General Direction of Public Security

Direction of Training

General Direction of Borders

Direction of Special Units

Direction of Armored Units

Direction of Aviation Brigade

Direction of Road Guard

Mutual of National Guard Staff

THE MAIN ACTIVITIES OF NATIONAL GUARD FROM ITS BEGINING

« This is due to the fact that the vast majority of the National Guard were not the new era of struggle and steadfastness and compliance, but they were those who fought fighting and were known to sacrifice and self-denial because they were in the line of popular resistance that was selected from the heart of the people in the circumstances of the national struggle.»

National Guard Homecoming in all adversities.

The leader HABIB BOURGUIBA Ramada – August 1962

The last bastion of French gendarmerie occupied by the National Guard in the house of BourguibaAmong the strongholds abandoned by the French occupation army in the state of Bizerte is the center of the house of Bourguiba, in which the patriots tasted during the liberation struggle the colors of torture, injustice and exhaustion.The men of the National Guard have a historical relationship – historians will not forget – in this stronghold, as it is a bitter struggle and a link of jihad in order to rid the country of the grip of the angry colonizer. This relationship is what happened to the person who was then commander of Mahjoub bin Ali in this stronghold of the abuse of the gendarmerie agents in the black days and then in the drop of their grip on one of the nights created by destiny and God wanted to have an impact in the course of the national struggle in the north-east and the mountains to be A gang faces the injustice of gendarmerie and the occupation army.

On March 20, the day of the National Independence Day at 9 am, the Bourguiba Center was inaugurated by the National Guard Commander and the Governor of Bizerte, Nasser Ben Jaafar, the last center in the Tunisian Republic occupied by the National Guard.

National Guard wire is an armed civilian preventive and repressive force with regard to the land borders and by maintaining public order and to protect the security of individuals and property in general.Protection of land and sea borders, traffic and road and road safety, monitoring ,public security ,the examination of crimes and research in their circumstances ,conducting judicial research as required by legal procedures and to do all the tasks required by these tasks of art within the scope of criminal tests and security investigations ,assist in the implementation of judicial decisions and administrative arrangements and to inquire about all aspects of economic, social and cultural life and tourism security by monitoring explosive and dangerous materials and mobilization, recruitment and intervention with the first and second incremental level in the entire territory of the Republic.

The Tunisian National Guard after the independence

We can watch here the first patrols managed by the Tunisian National Guard using camel to protect

the borders and to maintain order in all the territory.

Actually:

Competent all over the national territory, in towns as well as in the countryside. It cover 85% of the territory and more than 55% of the Citizen.

Missions:

– Judicial missions: The Tunisian National Guard putting in place highly skilled professionals in terms of criminal investigation, and developing its capacity in terms of forensics. We are concentrated on finding information, the modern means of data processing, the training of personnel in judicial matters and in the investigation techniques.

– Administrative missions: It is based on the surveillance of the areas where the Gendarmerie is in charge of public security, particularly through contacts with the population and to learn officers and sub-officers how to conduct to protect the properties andto be near to people to know more there problems and to help them in a better condition (comunity policing).

– Military missions: It consists on the big work that the Tunisian National Guard do with the millitary units

to protect the borders by doing daily patrols and ambushes to protect the territory from terrorism and

the organized crimes.

The Tunisian National Guard officers contribute also in peacekeeping missions

especially in Africa (Mali,Central Africa,Darfur,Congo..).

Territorial National Guard: It first responsability is to keep order in all the territory and the conbtibution to the general public security.

It contains:

Territorial unit: It is divised into regions, companies and brigades.

The Region:

It is an intermediate between the general command and the territorial units.

We find under each region between 02 and 04 companies and units from the maritime national guard.

The region commander is the representative of the general commander in his region, he command all the operations in his region with the immediate coordination with the general commander.

He collaborates with the judicial, administrative and military authorities in the region.

In addition to his staff the region commander has:

-brigade of municipal national guard,

-brigade of intervention Anti-terrorism,

-brigade of Transfer of detainees,

-brigade of Transfer of explosive.

The company:

It depend directly to the regional commander,and contain number of brigades commanded by officers.

The commander of the company works in the field and supervise the work between the brigades and command also weekly a security compaign.

We can find in each company between 04 and 05 brigade.

The brigade:

It is a unit composed of posts commanded by an officer who supervise thge work of each post.

We can find in each company between 04 and 05 brigade like :

-brigade of public security.

-brigade of investigation.

-brigade of road safety.

-brigade of public road…

The Mobile National Guard:

It is located in major cities and it is composed of squadrons and platoons.

The main mission is:

-Keeping public order.

-Providing support for other units to enforce general order.

-Protecting vital national installations.

-Fighting terrorism.

-Participating in planes and ships protection.

The Air National Guard Unit:

It secure the land and maritime borders in coordination with borders brigade and units and intervent in the public security road and address the crises.

They exercise all the attributions assigned to them by the laws and regulations.

The Special unit of the National Guard:

Is an elite force of the National Guard of Tunisia, specialized in the implementation of special operations such as the resistance of terrorism and the release of hostages in addition to the monitoring and raid behind enemy lines.

The competent unit of the General Administration of the National Guard shall follow the core of the National Guard’s special units. The Unit shall carry out the tasks entrusted to it by the governmental authorities of the Ministry of the Interior. In addition to its functions, especially in recent years, the unit is involved in the implementation of plans and strategies to combat and suppress terrorism within the national territory. In addition, the Unit is involved in several training missions outside the country, in cooperation with the Delta Force and special forces from European countries.

Signed in 1980 by the Tunisian leadership during the era of Habib Bourguiba under the supervision of American experts in the scope of Tunisian-American cooperation, especially the US Global Program to Combat Terrorism in the world. After the meeting of the parties (the American and Tunisian), which consists of leaders of the security services of the National Security and National Guard and after several discussions and issues, the US team decided to assign the General Directorate of the National Guard of this unit, which entered the advanced training and difficult to require high fitness and intellectual presence superior to carry out special tasks Tough and high-risk.

The National Guard Unit was called in 1985 by the EKO Cobra Einsatzkommando-Cobra to participate in international matches in several international teams. Following the matches, the competent unit met and left a remarkable impact on the success of the most powerful international teams such as ECO COBRA GSG9, GIGN, DELTA FORCE and other teams and ranked fourth in these matches.It also ranked the first specialized unit in the Arab, African and sixth world after the United States, Russia, Britain, France in international matches in Austria.

In 1986, after a meeting between the leaders of the Tunisian Ministry of the Interior represented by the Minister of the Interior and the leadership of the General Directorate of the National Guard and ordered this division in that period, which was called ‘Talai’ (USGN unit) today, and on the other the US military commander rank of the General Commander of the General Supervisor and Executive Director (Treaty and Agreement on the Formation of a Special Anti-Terrorism Task Force), which was evaluated by the American side and decided five years later to include them in the internationally recognized special forces. The unit has also been repeatedly assigned by US and European military experts as one of the world’s most valuable units.

In 1985, a team of elite national guard unit was sent to the city of Ain Dharam in northwestern Tunisia to supervise the formation of the first joint session. Of national security, which now claims to be the Anti-Terrorist Task Force (BAT).

The land borders units:

The Tunisian national guard is the first responsable of the protection of the borders in coordination with the millitary units and the main responsability is :

-Providing the necessary plans for the security of frontiers borders.

-Coordinating all kinds of intervention among frontiers borders stakeholders.

-Protecting frontiers borders.

-Fighting border crossing and smuggling.

-Enforcing laws releted hunting and navigation.

-Providing logistics for terrestrial and maritime frontiers.

We can note also that the land borders units have a bi grole in prevention against terrorism and the organized crime and were able to fight this kind of crimes and arrest and destroy a lot of terrorists after the revolution who wanted to across borders and do terrorist attacks.

The maritime borders units:

The tunisian national guard is also the first responsable of protecting the maritime borders and the main responsability is :

-Providing the necessary plans for the security of maritime borders .

-Coordinating all kinds of intervention among maritime borders stakeholders.

-Preserving maritime wealth.

-Fighting pollution.

-Protecting maritime borders.

-Fighting border crossing and smuggling.

-Enforcing laws releted to fishing and navigation.

-Participating in Search and rescue operations and protecting environment.

-Providing logistics for maritime frontiers.

Sport Activities:

Sport is very important in the National Guard Force, not only because it is synonymous with military life, but also because it plays an important role in the fitness, culture and spirit of sacrifice associated with its members.

The Tunisian National Guard members participates in national sporting competitions with top quality athletes.

Recruitment and training:

In search for reaching the highest level of professionalism and recognition, the best training courses in cooperation with a lot of foreign countries are given in the training ideology of Tunisian National Guard Forces.

During their career, officers and sub-officers get both career courses, and specialist training to meet the (operational) requirements for the next function.