AKA Arno Allan Penzias

Born: 26-Apr-1933

Birthplace: Munich, Bavaria, Germany

Gender: Male

Religion: Jewish

Race or Ethnicity: White

Sexual orientation: Straight

Occupation: Astronomer

Party Affiliation: Democratic

Nationality: United States

Executive summary: Detected primordial radiation

Military service: US Army Signal Corps (radar officer, 1954-57)

Arno Penzias was testing a directional radio antenna intended for satellite communications in 1964 when he noticed an unusual pattern in the background static. At first Penzias and his colleague at Bell Laboratories, Robert Woodrow Wilson, assumed that they had encountered interference caused from terrestrial broadcasts or even bird droppings on their equipment, but analysis showed that the microwave radiation was coming uniformly from all directions.

In consultation with physicist Robert H. Dicke, they came to understand that this stable pattern must be residual cosmic background radiation, a lingering aftereffect of the "big bang" that created the universe many billions of years ago. Their discovery of cosmic microwave background radiation is considered among the 20th century's most important findings in astrophysics, earning Penzias and Wilson the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1978. Penzias also conducted important research in interstellar chemistry, analyzing millimeter-wave radiation from space to determine the chemical content of molecules in the vast space between stars.

He was born in Germany, but Jewish, when that was grounds for extermination. His family fled to England in 1938 and settled in America, where his parents worked at menial jobs and he attended City College of New York, because that school offered free tuition when he could not afford to pay. In Stockholm to receive his Nobel honors, Penzias says he took great pleasure in seeking out every German reporter he could find, to tell them the story of his childhood escape from the Nazi government.

Father: Karl Penzias (carpenter)

Mother: Justine Eisenreich Penzias (factory worker)

Brother: Gunther

Wife: Anne

High School: Brooklyn Technical High School, Brooklyn, NY

University: BS Physics, City College of New York (1954)

University: MA Physics, Columbia University (1958)

University: PhD Physics, Columbia University (1962)

Scholar: Astrophysical Sciences, Princeton University (1972-82)

Nobel Prize for Physics 1978 (with Robert Woodrow Wilson and Pyotr Kapitsa)

Henry Draper Medal 1977 (with Robert Woodrow Wilson)

Lucent Spokesman and Scientific Advisor (1997-)

Bell Laboratories VP Research (1981-97)

Bell Laboratories Executive Director of Research (1979-81)

Bell Laboratories Director of Research (1976-79)

Bell Laboratories Director, Radio Physics Research Department (1972-76)

Bell Laboratories Research Staff (1962-72)

Member of the Board of Arthur D. Little

Member of the Board of Duracell

Member of the Board of WarpSpeed Communications

American Academy of Arts and Sciences

American Physical Society

Committee of Concerned Scientitsts

Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee

Democratic National Committee

Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee

Exploratorium

Federation of American Scientists Board of Sponsors

Friends of Joe Lieberman

Gephardt for President

Gore 2000

International Astronomical Union

IEEE 1990

International Union of Radio Science

National Academy of Engineering

National Academy of Sciences

Obama for America

PAC For a Change

Naturalized US Citizen 1946

German Ancestry

Jewish Ancestry

Polish Ancestry

Official Website:

http://www.bell-labs.com/user/apenzias/

Author of books:

Ideas and Information (1989)

Digital Harmony: Business, Technology and Life After Paperwork (1996)

New!

NNDB MAPPER Create a map starting with Arno Penzias

Requires Flash 7+ and Javascript.

Do you know something we don't?

Submit a correction or make a comment about this profile