With 'Hangin' Around,' Josh Abbott Band have released a fun and easygoing song that's just an all-around good time. The lyrics flow seamlessly, and the sound is as smooth as honey -- no doubt this is a track that will have fans listening on repeat.

'Hangin' Around' is all about having a good time. And according to Josh Abbott and his boys, all that's needed for a good time is the right girl. There doesn't have to be a party to go to. There doesn't have to be any strings attached. There doesn't even need to be a good reason -- if she's there, that's all that matters.

"I'm hanging around if you're hanging around / If you're staying at home, if you're painting the town / If you're wanting to talk, you can give me a call / Or if you really don't feel like talking at all," the Texas native sings.

In 'Hangin' Around,' the band -- comprised of Josh Abbott, Austin Davis, Preston Wait, Edward Villanueva, James Hertless and Caleb Keeter -- have infused a hearty dose of pop into their country sound. Part of their 'Tuesday Night EP' released on Sept. 23, this single is more focused on having fun than it is about sticking to one traditional type of music. And according to Abbott, that's intentional.

"Coming into this album, I definitely wanted to focus on fun," explains the singer. “It’s just such a fun song. I’m over at my house, kind of bored. You’re over at your house, kind of bored. If you wanna hang out, I’m OK with that."

Ultimately, although 'Hangin' Around' might not be the most inventive song to come from the Josh Abbott Band, it will certainly get listeners feeling good and ready to make any night a night to have some fun. And who can't get behind a message like that?

Why Fans Will Love It: With Josh Abbott Band's signature harmonies and an awesome feel-good vibe, 'Hangin' Around' will have listeners looking for any opportunity to play this catchy tune.

Key Lyrics: "I'm hanging around if you're hanging around / If you're staying at home, if you're painting the town / If you're wanting to talk, you can give me a call / Or if you really don't feel like talking at all / If you're drinking a beer, I'm drinking a beer / Just get in a cab and get over here / If you want some fun, if you're needing a buzz / We've got all night, baby if you're up or hanging around / Oh, I'm hanging around."

Did You Know? With six members in one band, you might think that the Josh Abbott Band had a hard time agreeing on their next single. But every single member of the band fell in love with 'Hangin' Around' when they heard it, making its fun-loving, easygoing vibe the perfect choice for their first single off the 'Tuesday Night' EP.

Listen to Josh Abbott Band, 'Hangin' Around'