This is not an official page for

Spoetzl Brewery

Breweriana, Collectibles, Ephemera and Memories

View Larger Map Also see the BIG VISIT MAP 603 E. Brewery St., Shiner, TX

I have visited Spoetzl Brewery,

in Shiner, Lavaca County, Texas, USA.

Brewery/Brewpub Location Map

Follow this link for a map of all the breweries and brewpubs I have visited.

Reason for Visit: I have family that live in the area, and this was a nice diversion one afternoon when we were all looking for something fun to do.

Exterior Photograph: The exterior of the Spoetzl brewery is quite impressive and rather industrial in appearance. This brewery has quick a remarkable output compared to many of the others features on these pages. We approached the gleaming white walls, American flag waving above the structure, under wide-open Texas skies. Shiner is a pretty small town so the brewery is definitely a big deal here. Interior Photograph: Spoetzl has a tasting room at the end of their tour so you can try out their entire product line. Logically, it's decorated in a German beerhall motif. You can linger here basically as long as you like. We collected all of the promotional material on this page as a result of the tour. Front of Coaster.

"Shiner BOCK

BREWED WITH AN ATTITUDE"

Back of Coaster.

"SPOETZL

We invite you to visit our little brewery nestled in the small town of Shiner. We're the last independent brewery in Texas and you can see how we handcraft every beer, one brew at a time. For more information about our handcrafted beers..."

Front of Coaster.

"The Reward of Fine Brewing

KOSMOS RESERVE LAGER

From The Little Brewery in Shiner"

Back of Coaster.

"Bavarian brewmaster Kosmos Spoetzl first came to Shiner, Texas in the early 1900's. Soon, folks all around Shiner were enjoying Shiner Premium and Shiner Bock beer from his Spoetzl Brewery. And now, in the tradition of Kosmos Spoetzl's brewing excellence, the Spoetzl Brewery brings you Kosmos Reserve Lager. A flavorful beer, Kosmos Reserve Lager is a 100% malt brew with a unique balance of flavors, foam retention, and deep golden color. Its selected hops offer just the right blend of body, flavor, and up-front character. Try Kosmos Reserve Lager for yourself and enjoy. The Reward of Fine Brewing."

Front of Coaster.

"Shiner

HONEY WHEAT

Hefeweizen"

Back of Coaster.

"Catch the BUZZ"

Glassware: The Spoetzl Brewery pint glass for Shiner Bock features the familiar logo and motto.

Sample list of beers produced by Spoetzl Brewery

Shiner Bock

Shiner Hefeweizen

Shiner Dunkelweizen

Shiner Kolsch

Shiner Blonde

Shiner Light

Items featured on these breweriana pages are personal souvenirs of my visits to these locations, and an expression of the events and travels leading to their collection. They are not for sale or for trade.

More on Howder's Site