MAP OF THE VICINITY OF COUNCIL BLUFFS

This map, or diagram, has been prepared from the plats of surveys made in 1851-1852 by the United States Government, and from other sources of information deemed reliable. It shows the west two-thirds of each of the townships 74 and 75, range 43, and all of each of the fractional townships 74 and 75, range 44,

All points laid down thereon, except Camp of Mormon Battalion, Hart's Trapping Station. Caldwell's Village, and Omega Landing — 1843, are fixed in accordance with the records of the General Land Office. The locations of the Old Blockhouse and Caldwell's Village have been indicated from records found in the Indian Bureau and War Department, and various concurrent sources of information. The locations of the Omega Landing and Hart's Trapping Station are shown as supposed to be from historical writings found to have bearing in relation thereto. The Camp of the Mormon Battalion is shown to be located as indicated upon information by Rev. Henry De Long, and by writings of Colonel Thomas L. Kane and others made at the time. The authorities are more fully described in the text of the book.

SKETCH MAP OF POTTAWATTAMIE COUNTRY

The Sketch Map from which this diagram is taken — slightly larger than this copy — was made at or near Council Bluffs in 1837 by Dr. Edwin James, the first Sub-Agent in charge of the Pottawattamie Indians in Iowa, to accompany the first official report (August 11, 1837,) submitted by him to General William Clark, Superintendent

of Indian Affairs at St. Louis, and was by the latter forwarded to the Secretary of War, then in charge of Indian Affairs, with a letter dated September 20, 1837.

It will be remembered that at the time the sketch map was made no survey of any character had been made of the country to which the map relates; that Dr. James made the drawing entirely from his own observation and from information derived from trappers and others who had partially explored the region. Taking into considera- tion these facts the map is wonderfully accurate.

The original of this map is in the office of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Washington, D. C. (Pottawattamie File "C"). Notice the name "Welch's Creek" applied to what is now called Pigeon. It was named "Indian Knob Creek" by Lewis and Clark, and is shown on Nicollet's map of 1843 as "Gopher Creek."

THE OLD BLOCKHOUSE, FORT AND MISSION

(Picture by George Simon.)

This is a reproduction of an illustration accompanying an article by Hon. D. C. Bloomer, published in Annals of Iowa in 1896 (3d Series, Volume 2, page 594), the cut having been made from a painting said to have been done by George Simons, from memory.

THE OLD BLOCKHOUSE

(Supposititious Picture)

By this picture attempt is made to depict the old blockhouse as it probably appeared when completed by Captain D. B. Moore in 1837, together with the blunt nose of bluff whereon it stood. No portholes are shown because there was no reason why any should have been originally provided. United States troops did not ordinarily employ cannon in the control of the Indians at that early day, and it is not probable that the same were furnished the Pottawattamies for their protection. The building was a simple hewn-log structure, twenty-four feet square, without openings on the north and west sides except loopholes for small-arms fire. After it came into the possession of the Jesuit missionaries small windows were cut in those sides which were afterward taken by some to have been portholes for cannon fire.

The folly of such belief is apparent upon consideration of the size and character of the building, and what would probably have happened to the occupants had a large gun been fired from the inside. No frontier blockhouse, even at the largest of the government military posts, appears to have been constructed with a view to firing cannon from within. When cannon were provided for such posts they were usually mounted outside the buildings in bastions especially designed for the purpose.

A STREET SCENE IN COUNCIL BLUFFS

This is a picture of the Phoenix Block, north side of Broadway at the corner of what was originally Hyde, subsequently Madison, now North First Street. It was one among the first brick business buildings erected in the city. At the extreme right is seen the weatherboarded side of the old log store of CoRNELros Voorhis, a portion of the sign being shown.

The "prairie schooner" is drawn by a typical Mormon team — three yoke of oxen and one of cows. In the foreground is a calf. The emigration authorities of the Church of Latter Day Saints required that each team should comprise not less than three yoke of cattle, one of which must be cows. The owner of the team here depicted more

than fulfilled the terms prescribed. It will be observed that, in addition to the full team, he has an additional bovine of some description on the off-side of one of the pairs in the team.

The drawing from which the cut here shown was produced is from a photograph now in the possession of Mrs. L. S. Hills, of Salt Lake City, Utah, whose husband (Lewis S. Hills) was the last democratic Register of the United States Land Office at Council Bluffs, and who emigrated to Salt Lake in 1861, where he died, July 21, 1915.