October 26, 2018

Welcome to the Siebel Institute of Technology website. This website is owned and operated by Siebel Institute of Technology (“Siebel”) and the following User Terms and Conditions govern your access to and use of Siebel’s website. By accessing or using this website and the information, courses, resources, services, products, and tools we provide (the “Services”) you acknowledge that you have read and understood these User Terms and Conditions and that you agree to comply with and be bound by them .If you do not agree with these User Terms and Conditions, you should not access or use this website nor the Services.

Siebel may need to update these User Terms and Conditions as it adds new features or new functionality to this website. Therefore, Siebel reserves the right to update or revise these User Terms and Conditions, at any time and without prior notice by posting the revised User Terms and Conditions on this website. Your continued use of this website after such revisions will imply that you have given your consent to the revised User Terms and Conditions. Siebel also reserves the right to discontinue this website.

Responsible use and conduct

By visiting this website and accessing the Services, you also agree to use the Services only for the purposes permitted by:

these User Terms and Conditions , and

applicable laws, regulations and generally accepted online good practices or guidelines.

You also understand and agree that:

In order to access the Services, you may be required to provide certain personal data about yourself (such as identification, contact details, etc.) as part of the registration process, or as part of your ability to use the Services. You agree that any information you provide will always be accurate, correct, and up to date.

You are responsible for maintaining the confidentiality of any login information associated with any account you use to access the Services. Accordingly, you are responsible for all activities that occur under your account/s.

You are not authorized to access (or attempt to access) any of our Services by any means other than through the means we provide. You specifically agree not to access (or attempt to access) any of our Services through any automated, unethical or unconventional means.

You are not authorized to engage in any activity that disrupts or interferes with the Services, including the servers and/or networks to which the Services are located or connected.

You are not authorized to copy, duplicate, reproduce, sell, trade, or resell the Services.

You are solely responsible for any prejudice, loss, or damage that Siebel may incur or suffer as a result of any unauthorized activities conducted by you.

Siebel may provide various open communication tools on its website, such as blog comments, blog posts, public chat, forums, message boards, newsgroups, product ratings and reviews, various social media services, etc. As Siebel does not pre-screen or monitor the content posted by users of these various communication tools (“User Content”), if you decide to use these tools to submit any type of User Content to our website, it is your responsibility to use these tools in a responsible and ethical manner.

Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, you will not upload, post, share, or otherwise distribute on this website any User Content that:

Is illegal, threatening, defamatory, abusive, harassing, degrading, intimidating, fraudulent, deceptive, invasive, racist, or contains any type of suggestive or inappropriate language;

Infringes on any trademark, patent, trade secret, copyright, or other proprietary right of any party;

Contains any type of unauthorized or unsolicited advertising;

Impersonates any person or entity, including any of Siebel’s employees or representatives;

involves the sending or posting of any advertising or promotional material.

Siebel has the right, in its entire discretion, to remove any User Content that it feels does not comply with these User Terms and Conditions, including any User Content that it feels is otherwise offensive, harmful, objectionable, inaccurate, or violates any 3rd party copyrights or trademarks. Siebel is not responsible for any delay or failure in removing such User Content. If you post User Content that Siebel chooses to remove, you hereby consent to such removal as well as to waive any claim against Siebel.

Siebel does not assume any liability for any User Content posted by you or any other 3rd party users of its website. By providing any User Content on the website, you grant to Siebel and its affiliates and service providers, and each of their and Siebel’s respective licensees, successors, and assigns the right to use, reproduce, modify, perform, display, distribute, and otherwise disclose to third parties any such material for any purpose. This right however, only refers and applies to content posted via open communication tools on this website and does not refer to information or personal data that is provided as part of the registration process, necessary in order to use our Services. All information and personal data provided by you as part of the registration process is covered by our privacy policy.

You represent and warrant that you own or control all rights in and to any User Content that you submit/upload, and that you have the right to grant the license above to us and our affiliates and service providers, and each of their and our respective licensees, successors and assigns.

You indemnify and hold harmless Siebel and its parent company and affiliates, and their directors, officers, managers, employees, donors, agents, and licensors, from and against all claims, losses, expenses, damages and costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, resulting from or alleged to result from any violation of these User Terms and Conditions, from the failure to fulfill any obligations relating to your account by you or any other person using your account, from your use of the website, including, but not limited to, your User Content, any use of the website's content, services and products other than as expressly authorized in these User Terms and Conditions or your use of any information obtained from the website. Siebel reserves the right to take over the exclusive defense of any claim for which it is entitled to indemnification under these User Terms and Conditions. In such event, you shall provide Siebel with such cooperation as is reasonably requested by Siebel.

Privacy

Your privacy is very important to us, which is why we've created a separate Privacy Policy in order to explain in detail how we collect, manage, process, secure, and store your personal data. Our privacy policy is included under the scope of these User Terms and Conditions. To read our privacy policy in its entirety, please visit http://.com/policies/privacy/. By using the website you acknowledge that you have read the Privacy Policy and that you agree to its terms. As detailed in the Privacy Policy, Siebel may disclose information that we collect from you or about you or your activities under certain circumstances, including to comply with any court order, law, or legal process, including to respond to any government or regulatory request.

Links to other websites

If the website contains links to other sites and resources provided by third parties, these links are provided for your convenience only. This includes links contained in advertisements, including banner advertisements and sponsored links. We have no control over the contents of those sites or resources, and accept no responsibility for them or for any loss or damage that may arise from your use of them. If you decide to access any of the third party websites linked to this website, you do so entirely at your own risk and subject to the terms and conditions of use and privacy policies for such websites.

Disclaimer of warranties

Siebel will use reasonable efforts to provide up-to-date and accurate information on and via this website, but emphasizes that the content of the website and the Services are provided “as is “and “as available”, without warranty of any kind. To the fullest extent permitted by law, Siebel, its subsidiaries, affiliates and their respective directors expressly disclaim all representations and warranties of any kind, whether express or implied, as to: i) the accuracy, currency, completeness and/or merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose of the Services and any information provided on or via this website ii) on title and non-infringement iii) the security of the website and its systems or that the website is free from viruses or other harmful components, or iv) that the use of this website will be uninterrupted or error free. Siebel controls and maintains this website from the state of Illinois, USA and makes no representation that the information provided on or via this website is appropriate or permitted for use in other countries. If you use this website from other countries, you are responsible for compliance with applicable local and national laws. Furthermore, you understand and agree that: v) any content downloaded or otherwise obtained through the use of the Services is done at your own discretion and risk, and that you are solely responsible for any damage to your computer or other devices for any loss of data that may result from the download of such content and, vi) no information or advice, whether expressed, implied, oral or written, obtained by you from Siebel or through any of the Services shall create any warranty, guarantee, or conditions of any kind, except for those expressly outlined in these User Terms and Conditions.

Limitation of liability

In no event shall Siebel, its subsidiaries or affiliates, or their respective directors or employees be liable to you or to any third party for any direct, indirect, special, incidental, consequential, punitive or exemplary damages, including but not limited to financial losses, loss of profits, loss of goodwill, loss of data, loss of image (even if Siebel was advised of the possibility thereof) arising out or in connection with (i) the information and Services made available on or via this website ( ii) the use of or the inability to use this website (iii) any defects, viruses, or other malfunctions caused to any equipment and other software in connection with the access or use of this website, (iv) the interception, modification or misuse of information transmitted to Siebel by you or transmitted to you by Siebel or (vii) the downloading or use of any software made available through this website.

It is possible that some jurisdictions do not allow exclusions or limitations of liability. Accordingly, some of the aforementioned limitations might not apply to you.

Intellectual property

All intellectual property rights including copyrights, trademarks and patent, in the content of this website and this website itself including all functionality, contents, features, texts, graphics and logos, other than User Content contributions that you own, is owned by Siebel its affiliates or subsidiaries or have been licensed to it. Other than for the limited purpose of using the website for its intended use, you may not copy, download, modify, create derivative works of, publish, distribute, license, transmit, publicly display, sell or reproduce any of the content contained on this website (other than User Content contributions that you own) in any form without the prior written consent of Siebel. Nothing on this website can be construed as the granting of a license or a right in or to any trademark, patent or any other intellectual property right of Siebel. However, you may print out and/or download the information contained on this website for your own personal use. No right, title, or interest in or to the website or any content on the website is transferred to you, and all rights not expressly granted are reserved by Siebel. Any use of the website not expressly permitted by these User Terms and Conditions is a breach of these User Terms and Conditions and may violate copyright, trademark, and other laws.

Reporting Claims of Copyright Infringement

We take claims of copyright infringement seriously. We will respond to notices of alleged copyright infringement that comply with applicable law. If you believe any materials accessible on or from this website infringe your copyright, you may request removal of those materials (or access to them) from the website by submitting written notification to our copyright agent designated below. In accordance with the Online Copyright Infringement Liability Limitation Act of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (17 U.S.C. § 512) ("DMCA"), the written notice (the "DMCA Notice") must include substantially the following:

Your physical or electronic signature.

Identification of the copyrighted work you believe to have been infringed or, if the claim involves multiple works on the Website, a representative list of such works.

Identification of the material you believe to be infringing in a sufficiently precise manner to allow us to locate that material.

Adequate information by which we can contact you (including your name, postal address, telephone number, and, if available, email address).

A statement that you have a good faith belief that use of the copyrighted material is not authorized by the copyright owner, its agent, or the law.

A statement that the information in the written notice is accurate.

A statement, under penalty of perjury, that you are authorized to act on behalf of the copyright owner.

Our designated copyright agent to receive DMCA Notices is:

Roberto Blanc

Director of Marketing

Siebel Institute of Technology

322 South Green Street

Suite 100

Chicago, Illinois, 60607

+1-(514) 906-9902

copyright@siebelinstitute.com

If you fail to comply with all of the requirements of Section 512(c)(3) of the DMCA, your DMCA Notice may not be effective.

Please be aware that if you knowingly materially misrepresent that material or activity on the Website is infringing your copyright, you may be held liable for damages (including costs and attorneys' fees) under Section 512(f) of the DMCA.

Counter-Notification Procedures

If you believe that material you posted on the Website was removed or access to it was disabled by mistake or misidentification, you may file a counter-notification with us (a "Counter-Notice") by submitting written notification to our copyright agent designated [above/below]. Pursuant to the DMCA, the Counter-Notice must include substantially the following:

Your physical or electronic signature.

An identification of the material that has been removed or to which access has been disabled and the location at which the material appeared before it was removed or access disabled.

Adequate information by which we can contact you (including your name, postal address, telephone number, and, if available, email address).

A statement under penalty of perjury by you that you have a good faith belief that the material identified above was removed or disabled as a result of a mistake or misidentification of the material to be removed or disabled.

A statement that you will consent to the jurisdiction of the Federal District Court for the judicial district in which your address is located (or if you reside outside the United States for any judicial district in which the Website may be found) and that you will accept service from the person (or an agent of that person) who provided the Website with the complaint at issue.

Our designated agent to receive Counter-Notices is the same agent as is mentioned above.

The DMCA allows us to restore the removed content if the party filing the original DMCA Notice does not file a court action against you within ten business days of receiving the copy of your Counter-Notice.

Please be aware that if you knowingly materially misrepresent that material or activity on the Website was removed or disabled by mistake or misidentification, you may be held liable for damages (including costs and attorneys' fees) under Section 512(f) of the DMCA.

Termination of use

You agree that Siebel may, at its entire discretion, suspend or terminate your access to all or part of our website and the Services with or without notice and for no reason or for any reason, including, without limitation, breach of these User Terms and Conditions. Any suspected illegal, fraudulent or abusive activity may be grounds for terminating your relationship and may be referred to appropriate law enforcement authorities. Upon suspension or termination, your right to use the Services will immediately cease, and Siebel reserves the right to remove or delete any information that you may have on file with us, including any account or login information.

Governing laws

This website may be accessed from different countries around the world. As each of these countries has laws that may differ from those of the state of Illinois, by accessing this website you agree that the laws of the state of Illinois and applicable federal laws of the United States of America shall apply to all matters arising from or relating to these User Terms and Conditions or the use and content of this website, including the purchase of any of the Services through this website, without regards to their conflict of law provisions. Furthermore, any action to enforce these User Terms and Conditions shall be brought in the US federal or state courts. You hereby agree to the exclusive jurisdiction of such courts, and waive any jurisdictional, venue, or inconvenient forum objections to such courts.

Waiver and severability

No waiver of by Siebel of any term or condition set forth in these User Terms and Conditions shall be deemed a further or continuing waiver of such term or condition or a waiver of any other term or condition, and any failure of Siebel to assert a right or provision under these User Terms and Conditions shall not constitute a waiver of such right or provision.

If any provision of these User Terms and Conditions is held by a court or other tribunal of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, illegal or unenforceable for any reason, such provision shall be eliminated or limited to the minimum extent such that the remaining provisions of the User Terms and Conditions will continue in full force and effect.

Contact information

If you have any questions or comments about these User Terms and Conditions and the Services as outlined above, you can contact us at: