Siebel Systems, Inc,, a provider of multichannel business applications software, today announced that Toyota Financial Services (TFS), a subsidiary of Toyota Motor Corp., has selected the Siebel Automotive Captive Finance suite of products as part of a strategic upgrade of its core consumer receivables applications.

TFS is the finance and insurance brand for Toyota in the United States, offering retail auto financing and leasing through Toyota Motor Credit Corp. (TMCC) and extended service contracts through Toyota Motor Insurance Services (TMIS). This initiative supports TFS plans for diversification, growth, and profitability, according to the company.

Siebel Automotive Captive Finance will replace a mainframe-based contact center application to increase efficiency and productivity for the 1,200 customer service representatives in TFS's three customer service centers. These customer service representatives serve more than 2.1 million customers in the United States.

"Our team selected Siebel Automotive Captive Finance based on the breadth of functionality designed specifically for captive finance as well as the built-in best practices and the ability of Universal Application Network (UAN) to integrate business processes across our many different applications," said Shaun Coyne, TFS vice president and chief information officer. "Another important factor in our decision was Siebel's commitment to a partnership that will help us achieve our aggressive goals for cost reduction and performance improvement."

The Siebel application will interface with more than 60 existing systems to provide a comprehensive view of customer relationships. Customer service representatives will have a single user interface for all customer interactions backed by rules and processes, so they can deliver prompt and accurate resolution for all account service transactions, according to Siebel.

Through Siebel, all employees will be able to interact with the various applications that serve as systems of record for lease, loan, collections, and payment activity. Representatives will be able to capture details of inbound and outbound customer interactions, drive fulfilment of requests for information, and capture input to initiate account service transactions. Information captured through customer interactions will be combined with data from other operational systems to support decision-making and drive continuous improvement.

"We are a focused organization that promotes high performance and superior customer service," Coyne said. "Siebel Systems shows a solid understanding of our business and provides a foundation of best practices that will maximize the productivity of our employees and ensure consistent satisfaction of our customers."

About Siebel Systems

Siebel Systems, Inc. is a provider of business applications software designed to enable corporations to sell to, market to, and serve customers across multiple channels and lines of business.

With more than 3,500 customer deployments worldwide, Siebel Systems provides organizations with a set of industry-specific best practices, CRM applications, analytics products, and business processes, designed to empower them to consistently deliver superior customer experiences and establish more profitable customer relationships.

Siebel Systems' sales and service facilities are located in more than 30 countries.