NetSuite Adds Business Insight by the Dashboard Light

Do business owners and executives know more about what’s going on in Hollywood and Washington, D.C. than they…

Siebel Takes Telephones Out of the Call Center

Customer relationship management software provider Siebel Systems announced Tuesday its decision to acquire hosted telephony provider Ineto Services…

Salesforce.com’s In-Office Appearance

Salesforce.com users who logged on Friday morning might have noticed a new link. Clicking on it automatically added…

Case Study: Market Central

By Jeff Goldman Market Central was initially created as the contact center for Gibraltar Publishing, and was spun…

EC Halts Oracle/PeopleSoft Inquiry

Oracle will wait longer than expected to hear whether its bid for PeopleSoft is acceptable. The European Commission…

KANA Customers Connected at the Hipbone

Bolstering its technology portfolio and customer list, CRM vendor KANA said Monday it would acquire Hipbone for an…

FrontRange’s GoldMine 6.5

FrontRange Solutions announced the immediate availability of GoldMine 6.5 — the latest version the software maker’s award-winning customer…

Salesforce.com Plans IPO

In what may be the second-most anticipated initial public offering by a technology company this year, San Francisco-based…

NetSuite Adds Customization Features

NetSuite, maker of Oracle’s Small Business Suite, this week countered a common criticism of hosted applications by launching…

Microsoft CRM 1.2 Targets Other MS Apps

Microsoft is about to unleash an upgrade to its year-old customer relationship management (CRM) software with enhancements that…

Siebel Adds Customer Support Module to CRM OnDemand Suite

Enterprise software provider Siebel Systems Inc. on Tuesday announced a customer support module to Siebel CRM OnDemand–UpShot Edition.…

RightNow Joins Anti-spam Coalition, Expands Global Operations

Bozeman, Mont.-based customer service and support (CSS) solution provider RightNow Technologies on Monday announced that it has joined…

Pivotal Rejects Chinadotcom Bid

Toronto-based CRM provider Pivotal Corp. on Wednesday rejected a takeover bid from a Chinadotcom Corp. subsidiary because it…

SAP Gets to the Core of CRM

Customer relationship management (CRM) software has been around for years and has become a staple of many large…

Salesnet’s ASP CRM Now OEM?

Online CRM provider Salesnet today unveiled its OEM Partner program and “application syndication” strategy, which allows technology partners…

Oracle, PeopleSoft Slide on Fate of Takeover

Investor reaction was mixed Tuesday a day after Oracle said it might have to drop its $7.3 billion…

New Salesforce.com Lineup Targets On-Demand

Looking to expand its “software- as-service model” into the more lucrative “on-demand” space, salesforce.com Monday took the wraps…

With Salesnet, Increasing Sales Is a Piece of Cake

Nobody ever said growing a small business was easy. After all, a small business owner needs to focus…

Grand Central Adds salesforce.com CEO to Board

Web-based business process integration (BPI) service provider Grand Central Communications Inc. added to its board of directors Wednesday,…

Free CRM for Everyone!

There may be no such thing as a free lunch, but, by golly, there is free customer relationship…

Competitors Fire Back at Siebel…Again

Following last week’s announcement by Siebel Systems that it will acquire hosted CRM provider UpShot, competitors fired the…

NetSuite Debuts Down Under

Continuing a global expansion that began earlier this month in the UK, NetSuite Inc. on Tuesday brought its…

Siebel Acquires Two in CRM Push

Software maker Siebel Systems is going on the acquisition trail in its bid to broaden its appeal and…

Salesnet Gives CRM Integration a Twist

Customer Relationship Management (CRM) Application Service Provider Salesnet likens its service to a global positioning system (GPS) for…

NetSuite Arrives in UK

NetSuite Inc on Thursday set up shop in the United Kingdom, unveiling localized versions of its NetSuite and…

Siebel Makes Smarter Easier

With the Tuesday release of Siebel Enterprise Analytic Platform 7.7, customers now have an easier time making the…

Salesforce.com Takes a Simpler Approach to Voice-enablement

Most software companies look at a problem and see a technology solution. Salesforce.com has taken a different approach…

Siebel Misses the Mark with Hosted Offering

Yesterday’s long-rumored announcement by Siebel Systems and IBM Corp. that Siebel was jumping into the hosted CRM space…

Siebel, IBM Take CRM On Demand

In a sign that on-demand computing is starting to vault from theory into the applications realm, IBM said…

Salesnet Offers a Small Business Express Lane to CRM

Like many software and service vendors, Boston-based CRM provider Salesnet.com sees an opportunity to help small businesses implement…

Study: CRM, SRM Key to Operational Excellence

While using point solutions to tackle tactical business problems is a pervasive trend these days among budget-strapped IT…

BEA, Salesforce.com Join ‘s’ Forces

In a partnership that should enable enterprises to build composite applications without incurring additional expense, Salesforce.com announced this…

RightNow CEO Foresees End of Software Dinosaurs

Hosted customer service and support (CSS) solutions provider RightNow Technologies is a company with a clear mission: to…

Salesforce.com Teams to Tie CRM to the Call Center

Providing your customers with fast, reliable and personalized service is becoming a hallmark of good business practices in…

PeopleSoft Showcases New Tools, Integration Plans

For the past couple months, most of the coverage of PeopleSoft , has been about the highly-publicized attempts…

CRM: Building Bridges Between Customers and SMBs

Customer relationship management (CRM) not just an application, it’s a way to network with your customers in an…

Businesses Feel at Home With Hosted CRM

Hosted CRM applications continue to gain market acceptance, according to a new report by Aberdeen Group, a Boston-based…

Get to Know Your Customers Individually

Online survey vendors and software have made it increasingly easy and inexpensive for marketers to conduct their own…

Sun, Siebel Retain Close Ties

Two Silicon Valley-based mainstays inked a deal Monday that helps bolster each other’s core software platforms. Sun Microsystems…

Salesforce.com Cleans Up its Karma

The path to enlightenment took a hard stop at humility this week for Salesforce.com after the hosted applications…

Settled Siebel Suit Triggers Corporate Governance

Enterprise applications maker Siebel Systems settled a class-action lawsuit Tuesday for $900,000 and took steps to make sure…

RightNow Reveals Top Customer Service Trends

Hosted customer service and support solutions provider RightNow Technologies today concluded its annual service summit, and the nearly…

A New Player Emerges in Chat-Based CRM

A slew of large enterprises have integrated instant messaging and chat into their online customer relationship management solutions…

Onyx Gains Ground in Asia

Bellevue, Wash.-based customer relationship management (CRM) provider Onyx Software Corp. on Monday announced new customer and partner deals…

CRM Analytics Offers Challenges and Opportunities

For many CIOs, the benefits of CRM analytics are still unproven, leaving many IT executives to wonder, do…

UpShot Adds a Dashboard, Notes Integration

In a move designed to target Fortune 1000 companies, Web-based customer relationship management (CRM) vendor UpShot Corp. announced…

Siebel Systems Airs 2Q Struggles, Restructures

With confusion swirling around the enterprise applications space caused by Oracle and PeopleSoft’s battle for the No. 2…

Moderate, Steady CRM Growth Through 2006

Corporations will continue to make efforts to please their customers, as research from Aberdeen Group forecasts worldwide CRM…

PeopleSoft Beats Estimates in Early 2Q Results

PeopleSoft surprised the industry Wednesday when it said preliminary results for the second quarter beat the average Wall…