Siebel Systems Inc yesterday announced a partnership with Dun & Bradstreet to deliver Siebel’s front office software suite integrated with D&B’s business content and data. The new module, called Siebel D&B Integration Solution, will be offered as an add-on to Siebel version 99.5, released earlier this year. It will enable Siebel users to gain access to D&B’s market data, providing up-to-date information on over 26 million organizations around the world, from within Siebel’s sales, marketing and customer service applications. John Barlett, Siebel’s director of products, said the integration of business content along with D&B’s Duns number – which provides a unique code for every company – will enable its customers to improve the quality of their sales and marketing leads ten fold.

Typically, he said, Siebel customers can use the company’s software to generate marketing leads and campaigns, but the data is very static. A salesperson will only have the name of the contact (not his or her title), and the name of the organization, but nothing about the company’s history. But by linking into D&B’s data, that lead becomes much more useful. Immediately, he or she gains access to all types of additional information about the business; its financials, its size, its number of locations and importantly, Barlett said, its subsidiaries and affiliates. It could be that the initial lead is a small company that’s not suitable, he said, but using the D&B data, it could turn out that company number one is owned by a large multinational business that you would want to deal with. Companies can opt to license a certain amount of D&B data and have it integrated into their Siebel applications and updated when the new information becomes available or they can have a permanent link between their Siebel software and the D&B web site and download data when they need it, on a subscription basis.

Bartlett said that Siebel already had a partnership with D&B, to enable users to its Siebel Sales.com website to access D&B data and download sales leads. He said the two companies decided to further the alliance after numerous requests from customers for deeper integration. Siebel will also offer D&B’s data rationalization services. Under that offering, D&B takes all the disparate information a company has on each of its customers, consolidates it into one manageable data set and updates it to include the most recent information.