1. B2B MARKETING Siebel System: Anatomy of a Sale Part 1 Aakash Shah 124101 Ameya Arudhkar 124013 Anant Lodha 124105 Atul Dodia 124107 Chirag Patel 124108

2. Founded in 1993 to address the growing need of organization of all sizes to acquire, retain and better serve the customers Revenue of $2 Billion with 8000 Employees World leader in the software for CRM with 50 % market share Fastest growing application software company in history Pioneers of Employee relationship management systems More than 200 Products with 139 direct sales offices in 40 countries around the world

3. Gregg Carman job was to serve financial services clients in the New England region FleetBoston, largest client of Siebel which is 9th largest financial bank in United States FleetBoston acquired the discount stockbroker Quick & Reilly Carman was negotiating a deal of $ 2.1 million sales to Quick & Reilly After it is acquired by FleetBoston, the difficult situation on part of Gregg Carman was whether to stand by Quick & Reilly or bow to FleetBoston’s Wishes

4.  Tom Siebel articulated two goals: to build a high-technology company focused entirely on customer satisfaction, and build a company with enduring value.  Company’s vision is went out to customer and spoke to potential customers and understand their needs before building them products they talked to Cisco, sun, Clorox, Unisys.  By 2001 Siebel assessed that there had been a significant change in the way firms thought about software decisions.  Independent research studies founded that Siebel’s customers achieved a return on their CRM investment within 9.6 months. Further, these customers achieved: 1)an increased of over 20% in their customers satisfaction levels, 2)an increased of over 19% in their employees productivity levels, 3)an increase of 16% in customer retention.

5.  Partnership were crucial to Siebel Systems go-to-market strategy.  Unlike its competitors, Siebel Systems did not attempt to capture value from all components of a CRM implementation –that is, implementation services, hardware, and software– but rather from only the software component.  By August 2001 Siebel System had 729 partners classified and resourced by go-to-market importance.  Because a large proportion of the success of a client’s software implementation was contingent on the performance of a alliance partners, sales had to work closely with the alliance organizations during and after the sales process to achieve 100% customer satisfaction.

6. CUSTOMER SATISFACTION PROFESSIONALISM EXIBHIT 1 PROFESSIONAL COURTESY BIAS FOR ACTION

7. THE PROJECT TEAM BUYING CENTRE SENIOR MANAGEMENT  Carman referred to the project team as “my coach”  And for the senior management , “my executive manager”  Carman's spokes about the methodologies cannot make a salesperson out of someone off the street  But they can make a good sales person much more effective

8. POWER OF METHODOLOGIES BY FORCING YOU TO ANSWER A NUMBER OF QUESTIONS ABOUT THE CUSTOMER NOT MISSING ANY IMPORTANT INFORMATION THAT COULD POTENTIALLY AFFECT THE SALE

9.  Two people from Quick & Reilly approached the booth of Siebel System  Siebel System are going to talk about merger with the Quick & Reilly.  Carman had two options – 1. Formed the impression that she was a knowledgeable customers who understands the complexity. 2. He was not comfortable directly comparing his firm & a competitor until he knew the client well.

10. How should Carman respond to the invitation to tell the Quick and Reilly executives what he thought of Oracle? Caraman response was appropriate as he has not introduced the client to his product, hence comparing it already with a competitor known to customer might not give good image about Siebel systems By suggesting Catty to look for Oracle, Caravan is not just trying to sell his product instead helping customer to find the right solution for their problem

11. What feature of this particular interaction influence your opinion?  Cathy had no prior knowledge of the Siebel Systems  Oracle is one of the Siebel’s leading competitors and a bigger brand

12. Should he ask for Budget? Should he ask directly or should he suppress his curiosity and leave it to the prospect to bring up information about the size and timing of the opportunity? Caravan should ask for the budget and the number of user of the -system because this information is pre-requisite for processing the deal further Asking specific questions would help Carman in evaluating requirements and needs of customers in better way that would help him in explaining the product accordingly, thus increasing the chances of making the deal

13.  If he asks for information, how will he use it?  Siebel’s superiority over competitors’ products  Right product specification for customer and suggestions about customization

14. Evaluate Carman’s interaction with the customer up to this point. Is he doing a good job? Caravan tried to gather information from Cathy to get their requirement and also gave demo of Siebel Systems as to give broad ideas of what they are capable of delivering

15.  How effective Seibel System’s approach? Siebel system approach is effective to large extent as it considers customers to be on top and focuses on delivering complete solution to them with customization as required They not only concentrate on the sale of the software, however they work with customer in implementation and use of the solution and ensure that customer derives the benefit out of the system