SAN MATEO, and LA JOLLA, Calif.—June 6, 2005— Siebel Systems, Inc. (NASDAQ: SEBL), the leading provider of customer-facing solutions, and Telephony@Work, Inc., the market leader in carrier class contact center technology, today announced that Telephony@Work’s CallCenterAnywhere solution is part of Siebel Systems’ Contact On Demand technology platform which is a pre-built contact center solution available today as part of Siebel CRM OnDemand Release 7. Siebel’s Contact OnDemand is a hosted contact center enabling both enterprises and small and medium-size businesses (SMBs) to easily manage multichannel customer communications across voice, voicemail, e-mail and Web communications without the need to install anything on premises.

Siebel and Telephony@Work have been working closely during the past several months to leverage Telephony@Work’s Web services-based software architecture and embed CallCenterAnywhere IP contact center technology into Siebel’s CRM OnDemand Release 7. This partnership provides companies with the industry’s first hosted contact center solution available as a pre-built and fully integrated option within a hosted CRM solution.

“Siebel Systems’ decision to offer multimedia communications technology on a hosted basis required an in depth evaluation of several multi-channel providers with carrier-class capabilities. Based on this analysis we are pleased to announce today our partnership with Telephony@Work to help us provide this important capability,” said Mike Betzer, Vice President of Contact OnDemand in Siebel’s OnDemand and SMB Division. “With Telephony@Work’s CallCenterAnywhere product, we are providing solutions for our customers ‘on demand’ with scalability that would have been otherwise impossible with retrofitted traditional solutions. For example, Siebel CRM OnDemand offers our customers the ability to unify geographically dispersed organizations as well as entire supply chains and ecosystems. Together with Telephony@Work, we are ensuring that any organization, regardless of scale, can deliver world-class customer service to their customers on a cost-effective basis with no premises-based software or hardware required.”

Telephony@Work’s CallCenterAnywhere technology is designed to address the unique requirements of hosted services providers. It addresses all of the scalability, reliability, disaster recovery, and network security issues specific to the delivery of hosted services. CallCenterAnywhere Service Provider Edition enables contact center technology to be centralized and shared across independent businesses while preserving local autonomy for individual companies, sites or groups of sites.

“We are very pleased to be working together with Siebel to deliver business critical benefits to their customers,” says Eli Borodow, CEO of Telephony@Work. “Telephony@Work’s multi-tenant CallCenterAnywhere solution is integrated-by-design to enable all contact center technologies to be centralized in Siebel’s network and shared across their base of subscriber companies; while at the same time delivering absolute autonomy and data security for those subscriber companies. Siebel’s solution uniquely enables all contact center business processes, routing rules and workflows to be modified on demand by subscriber managers, ultimately maximizing customers’ productivity and revenues because they can now effectively react to changing business conditions by optimizing their routing rules and workflows in real-time.”

About Telephony@Work

Telephony@Work, Inc. is the worldwide leader in adaptive IP contact center technology for enterprises and service providers. Its award-winning CallCenterAnywhere solution is deployed in both single and multi-site contact centers across the spectrum of Fortune-class companies, government and in mission-critical service provider networks. The company’s multi-tenant CallCenterAnywhere platform is a comprehensive multimedia IP contact center solution that enables contact center technology to be centralized and shared across independent businesses while preserving local autonomy for individual companies, sites or groups of sites. It also enables all technology-driven contact center business processes and workflows to be modified on demand across all communications channels, empowering companies to optimize application performance in real-time in response to changing business conditions. For additional information on CallCenterAnywhere, please visit Telephony@Work on the Web at or contact us at (858) 410-1600.

About Siebel CRM OnDemand

Siebel CRM OnDemand is a hosted CRM offering delivered over the Web and accessible from an Internet browser at a fixed price per user per month. Customers can deploy Siebel CRM OnDemand quickly, easily, and affordably without any up-front IT investments. Hosted by IBM, Siebel CRM OnDemand delivers complete sales, marketing, and service functionality; built-in customer analytics; virtual call center technology; embedded best practices; and world-class hosting services and support. Siebel CRM OnDemand is now available for purchase. For more information, visit