Imre Kertész, the first Hungarian winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature, died on March 31, 2016, aged 86.

Kertész, the author of The Holocaust as Culture, A Breath-long Silence, While the Fire Squad is Reloading Their Guns and A Language in Exile, lived a remarkable life, having survived not only Nazi camps as a teenager but also the years of Stalinist dictatorship in his homeland immediately after World War II.

"I wrote about the Holocaust because it was a unique experience, I had to live through such a defining experience of the 20th century, and I survived it. But I wrote novels, not Holocaust literature," Kertész told German newspaper Die Zeit in 2009. The winner of the 2002 Nobel Prize said had always been particularly interested in "what happens to language and people among totalitarian dictatorships".

30 great opening lines in literature

Kertész was born into a Jewish family in 1929 in Budapest. He was sent to the Auschwitz death camp aged 14 and then to Buchenwald. Returning to Hungary, he was fired from his job as a journalist in 1951 after the paper he worked for was turned into a propaganda organ of the Communist regime. He decided he wanted to become a writer but it took him 13 years to write his first book, Fatelessness, as he struggled to find "a structure, a frame in which words can come to life".

He started translating into Hungarian German works – including Nietzsche and Wittgenstein – and did not publish another novel until Fiasco in the late Eighties.

In 2001 he moved to Berlin where he lived with his wife, until he returned to Hungary in 2013 because of illness. Kertész said he was never particularly appreciated in his homeland, telling the Guardian in 2012: "Remember the unleashing of violence when I won the Nobel prize – people were angry to see me become the only Hungarian Nobel when I was not glorifying 'Hungarian-ness'. After my novel Someone Other, I was attacked because of my dark portrayal of the country. Some even wondered if I was a real Hungarian writer ..."

When he won literature's most prestigious prize, the Nobel Committee praised "writing that upholds fragile experience of the individual against the barbaric arbitrariness of history".