UTV is the ITV region covering Northern Ireland, ITV subsidiary and the former on-air name of the free-to-air public broadcast television channel serving the area. It is run by ITV plc and is responsible for the regional news service and other programmes made principally for the area.

Life Is Sweet is a 1990 British comedy-drama film directed by Mike Leigh, starring Alison Steadman, Jim Broadbent, Claire Skinner, Jane Horrocks and Timothy Spall. Leigh's third cinematic film, it was his most commercially successful title at the time of release. A tragi-comic story, it follows the fortunes of a working-class North London family over a few weeks one summer.

Peter Jeffrey was an English character actor. Starting his performing career on stage, he would later have many roles in television and film.

Jigsaw was an English pop rock band best known for their 1975 hit "Sky High". The band was fronted by the singer-songwriter duo of Clive Scott and Des Dyer for most of its life. Following Scott's death in 2009, it has been the platform for Dyer's solo work.

Allan Stewart is a Scottish entertainer, known for his appearances in pantomime, who has performed at the Royal Variety Performance. His son, David Stewart is a songwriter known for his work with the band, BTS while his daughter Kate is a singer.

The Crowning Touch is a 1959 British comedy film directed by David Eady and starring Ted Ray, Irene Handl and Greta Gynt.

Red Monarch is a 1983 British television film starring Colin Blakely as Joseph Stalin. It is directed by Jack Gold and features David Suchet as Lavrentiy Beria and David Threlfall as Stalin's son Vasily.

Hayford Hobbs was a leading British film actor of the silent era and later became a film director. He was born in London, England, in 1891. He made his first screen appearance in the 1915 film The Third Generation and appeared in his last film High Treason in 1929. The following year he directed his first film, a documentary about London.

Lorna Yabsley is a British former actress, photographer and author, who pioneered the "reportage" style of wedding photography during the early 1990s.

Pop Go The 60s! was a one-off, 75-minute TV special originally broadcast in colour on 31 December 1969, to celebrate the major pop hits of the 1960s. The show was a co-production between the United Kingdom's BBC and West Germany's ZDF broadcasters. The latter showed it on 18 January 1970 under the title "Schlag auf Schlagers". Although a co-production, it was primarily produced by the BBC and recorded at the BBC's Television Centre in London, in late 1969, featuring largely only British pop acts and hits.

Fast and Loose is a 1954 British comedy film directed by Gordon Parry and starring Stanley Holloway, Kay Kendall and Brian Reece. The film was shot at Pinewood Studios near London with sets designed by the art director John Howell. It was based on the play A Cuckoo in the Nest by Ben Travers, the first of his Aldwych farces, which had previously been adapted as a 1933 film of the same title.

Falling in Love Again is a 1980 American romantic comedy film directed by Steven Paul and starring Elliott Gould and Susannah York.

Crime Is Our Business is a 2008 French comedy mystery film directed by Pascal Thomas and starring Catherine Frot, André Dussollier and Claude Rich. It is based on the 1957 Agatha Christie novel 4.50 from Paddington.

John Reynders was a British musician and composer who worked on the film scores of a number of films.

The Bandit of Zhobe is a 1959 British CinemaScope adventure film directed by John Gilling and starring Victor Mature, Anne Aubrey and Anthony Newley. In British India a bandit goes on a rampage in the mistaken belief that the British have killed his family, which later proves to not be the case. It was produced by Albert Broccoli for Warwick Films and features extensive use of footage from Gilling's previous Zarak.

Mon petit doigt m'a dit... is a 2005 French comedy mystery film based on the 1968 novel By the Pricking of My Thumbs by Agatha Christie. It was directed by Pascal Thomas and stars Catherine Frot and André Dussollier.

The Colleen Bawn is a 1924 British silent drama film directed by W. P. Kellino and starring Henry Victor, Colette Brettel and Stewart Rome. It is an adaptation of the 1860 Irish play The Colleen Bawn by Dion Boucicault.

Donald Bisset, was an English actor. He also wrote stories for children which he mostly illustrated himself. They have been translated into 16 languages.

This is a summary of 1945 in music in the United Kingdom.