Very unsympathetic characters

The book really held my attention. But I can't say I liked the main characters at all. I found myself getting angry with the two main antagonist, and wishing they would just die. In fact, I became so negative, I realized I had to give the book a high rating.

The author should right a sequel.

Good Sci-Fi fix for the audiobook junky

I came across this book while I was in withdraw after the conclusion of another series I had just completed. I am usually disappointed with the non-series books because of lack of character development but this book was alright. It basically stuck to one story line and I found myself hating a few of the characters, so mission accomplished on the characters. It also had plenty of the "what if's" regarding technology advancements and even when the story started dealing with time travel (or time displacement), it didn't break the rules (you know what I'm talking about).

The one thing that was a bit annoying was the lack of a pause or break from the narrator between scene changes in the book. I had to rewind the book a few times when several years passed in what seemed like one sentence. "Just take a breath!"

Good filler book, you won't be disappointed.

Pushing Ice moved me

If you could sum up Pushing Ice in three words, what would they be?

Survival Success Mystery

What did you like best about this story?

The ending and how futile it felt but with the sense of a grand accomplishment and achievement that you never really got to see.

What does John Lee bring to the story that you wouldn’t experience if you just read the book?

A wonderful depth of character and personality. The lead characters are female and i was really impressed that John was able to make them sound feminine and not like high pitched pressies. He did a wonderful job of relaying the mood of the story through his tone and giving a level of reverence to the story that just made it a really amazing listen.

Was this a book you wanted to listen to all in one sitting?

OMG YES!!!

Any additional comments?

This is a story that covers a very rarely talked about idea that readers i have read try and stay away from. It really hit home for me because i was so entrenched in the story by the end that i was crying while listening. The hopelessness and futility was incredible, but that knowing of the accomplishment and what was started was a wonderful counterpoint.

A lovely first colony in the stars story

Is there anything you would change about this book?

The story needs less about the grudge between the 2 leading female characters and more on all the other difficulties they had to over come living on a mechanical moon-ship and later rebuilding it on the wall of the alien structure.

What was your reaction to the ending? (No spoilers please!)

I would like to see a sequel.

What does John Lee bring to the story that you wouldn’t experience if you just read the book?

It kept me in a good pace with the story. But as always I wish there would be at least one female reader to read for the female characters' voice. It always strike me a bit strange to listen to the opposite gender try to sound like the other gender in a book.

Was Pushing Ice worth the listening time?

It has a very unique scenario to other alien encounter stories. The thoughts on why the disguised moon was built that it being a lure to attract different intelligent beings across the vase universe to travel to a central structure, a region in the universe so that they could mingle and interact is intriguing.

Any additional comments?

Please consider hiring a 2nd reader always for books which have lots of dialogs between opposite gender leading characters.

Excellent narrator

This book was a pleasure to listen to. The narrator did an excellent job with the many different characters. The book was so well written that it brought the settings and characters to life. I felt an emotional response to certain characters, which is a sign of a very good writer. I like many genres, but I don't often enjoy stories about aliens and other worlds unless the the story is compelling and well written. I thoroughly enjoyed this book, although the ending left just a little to be desired. On the whole it was a great listen and I recommend this book.