SCOTT, Herbert

1938 - 2018

It is with heavy hearts that the family of Herbert Scott announce his passing on March 18, 2018.

Herbert is survived by his loving family: spouse of 60 years, Aileen; children: Rhonda (Tim) Scott-Dakin, Rebecca (Wayne) Krauskopf, Darren (Lisa), Shannon, Jason (Lindsay); ten grandchildren; 12 great- grandchildren; two sisters: Darlene Buchanan, Hazel (Ray) Belisle, as well as numerous relatives and friends.

He was predeceased by his parents; three brothers: Arthur, Alvin and George, as well as relatives and friends.

A prayer service will be held on Friday, March 23, 2018 at 7:00 p.m. at Connelly-McKinley Funeral Home, St. Albert Chapel, 9 Muir Drive.

A Funeral Mass will be held on Saturday, March 24, 2018 at 1:00 p.m. at the St. Albert Catholic Church, 7 St. Vital Ave. Interment to follow at St. Albert Parish Cemetery.

In lieu of flowers, memorial donations may be made to the Heart and Stroke Foundation, or the Diabetes Association.

To send condolences, please visit .

Published online March 21, 2018

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of HerbertHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of Herbert

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree