PRINCE GEORGE — Herbert Fleming Scott Jr., 93, of Prince George, passed away on Wednesday, Aug. 8, 2018, after years of service to his country and county.

He was a World War II veteran serving in the U.S. Navy.

He returned to his home in Prince George continuing that service as a charter member of the Prince George Volunteer Fire Department. Company 1 originated in 1957 with the volunteer work of concerned citizens like Scott with the support of the Prince George Ruritan Club. Scott, who was featured in a 2016 article about the upcoming Fire and EMS museum said those residents recognized the need for fire protection in the county, and they worked tirelessly converting the old jail into a fire station, where the museum that will feature Scott’s contributions will be located.

Prince George Regional Heritage Museum Director Carol Bowman remembers Scott sharing “some great stories,” about the early days of firefighting.

“In this museum, we will be talking about the early efforts firefighting in this county, and it was no small effort. Mr. Scott and all of those guys gave their time and effort, and they didn’t even have proper equipment to fight a fire.”

She continued talking about some of the challenges faced in getting a station up and running with a phone tree coordinated by the wives of the volunteer firefighters.

“Think about it — these guys didn’t have the gear they have today. It’s quite remarkable really. It was a remarkable process, and we are going to highlight that in the museum.”

Bowman hopes to have the museum operational by 2019 and proceeds from the Beefsteak Raid steak dinner set for Sept. 19, will be going to that project.

Board of Supervisors Vice Chairman Donald Hunter said Scott was a mentor and a leader. “He did so much for fire services here and because of his and others we now have the Fire and EMS services today.” Hunter said. “He was also a leader in the church, a church elder and I really looked up to him.”

In fact, Hunter consulted Scott before deciding to run for the District 2 seat he now holds. “He was one of the first people I called and asked what he thought,” Hunter, who is the deputy emergency management coordinator, noted.

Scott, who Hunter said was known as Scotty to some, H.F. to many, Fleming and Mr. Scott, was someone Hunter looked up to as a father figure after his dad passed away in 1981. Hunter’s father, Robert “Duck” Hunter, was also a charter member of the Prince George Volunteer Fire Department.

Scott also served on the Industrial Development Authority for Prince George County.

He graduated valedictorian of Disputanta High School and went on to graduate from Virginia Polytechnic Institute, now Virginia Tech, with a bachelor’s degree in Chemistry.

He retired from Allied Signal (Honeywell) after 25 plus years, where he was the originator of two patents. After retiring from Allied Signal, Scott worked for Prince George Electric where he had served for 29 years and was currently the vice chairman of the Board.

An avid hunter and fisherman, Scott founded the Marl Hill Hunt Club.

Scott had been a member of Gregory Memorial Presbyterian Church for over 70 years, where a funeral service was held on Monday.

He is survived by his wife of 69 years, Elizabeth Allin Scott; two daughters, Linda E. Scott and Rebecca S. Smith and husband, Thomas R. Smith Jr.