Cardinal Ambrozic Catholic Secondary School What to Expect on the Ontario Literacy Test March 31 2011

The Ontario Literacy Test • The successful completion of the Literacy test is a requirement for graduation.

What your child needs for the test: • Pens and Pencils • Hi-lighters • A positive attitude • Practice with test activities and questions. • A good night’s sleep • A good breakfast!

What is the purpose of the test? • The OSSLT assesses student literacy on concepts covered in Ontario curriculum to the end of Grade 9. • The test includes reading selections and writing tasks. Basic grammar and punctuation is also part of the test questions.

What is on the test? • Two test booklets and one answer sheet • 2.5 hours of testing…75 minutes per booklet • Your child will receive an individual report in June indicating whether he or she is successful or unsuccessful.

What is a passing grade? • A passing grade is 300 out of 400 possible marks. • Many of the students who are unsuccessful receive 290 or 295.

My child has an IEP or IPRC..what accommodations are available? • Students with an IEP or IPRC will receive accommodations. This may include double the time, a Kurzwell or audio version of the test, or a scribe.

READING WRITING Ontario Secondary School Literacy Test The performance task. The performance task. • Informational Selections • (brochures, textbook excerpts, advertisements, articles, reports) • Selections with Graphical Features • (charts, diagrams, maps, graphs) • Narrative Selection • News report • report • Short Six Line Response • Series of Paragraphs Expressing an Opinion

Reading Selections

…Reading • Real Life Narrative -Gives an account of a significant time in an individual’s life. • Graphic Text -Presents ideas and information with the help of graphic features, life diagrams, charts, timetables, maps or tables.

Selections with Graphical Features

Graphic Text

Reading • Informational (225-250 words) -Presents ideas and information on a topic. • News Report -Presents information in the form of a news story. • Dialogue -Presents a conversation between two or more people.

The Types of Questions • Multiple Choice • Constructed Response • Constructed Response with Explanation

QuestionType Description Format 1 Format 2 Multiple Choice The three question types on the OSSLT. The answer to the question requires a complete sentence. The answer completes a statement. Constructed Response The answer is a six line response. Constructed Response with Explanation The answer requires an explanation (six line response).

Reading Questions • Multiple Choice -Select the best or most correct answer from a list of four responses. • Open Response -Construct a response based on the reading selection. Use the six lines provided.

Writing

Writing • News Report • Series of paragraphs expressing an opinion • Short Writing Task • Multiple Choice Grammar

News Report • Task: Write a news report based on the headline and picture below. You will have to make up the facts and information, answering some or all of the following questions: Who? What? Where? When? Why? How? • Purpose and • Audience: to report on an event for the readers of a newspaper • Length: The lined space provided for your written work indicates the appropriate length of the writing expected.

Students receive only the picture and the headline Computers are faulted for lower literacy scores!

Guest speaker’s messageinspires students

Writing a Series of Paragraphs • Task: Write a series of paragraphs (a minimum of three) expressing an opinion on the topic below. Develop your main idea with supporting details (proof, facts, examples, etc.) • Purpose and • Audience: an adult who is interested in your opinion • Topic: Is it a good idea to have a part-time job before graduating from high school? • Length: The lined space provided for your written work indicates the approximate length of the writing expected.

Series of Paragraphs • Write a minimum of three paragraphs expressing opinions. Develop your main idea with supporting details. Give proof, facts or examples. • E.g. Is it important for teenagers to pay attention to world news?

Short Writing Task Write in complete sentences an answer which will show your knowledge and writing skills. Base your answer on personal experience. Use the six lines provided. e.g.. What was your favourite childhood game? Explain why you liked it.

Grammar • There will be multiple choice questions based on basic grammar skills like punctuation, sentence combining, capitalization, and verb tenses. • Choose the most correct answer.

USE YOUR OWN IDEAS TO SUPPORT YOUR ANSWER. • Use your prior knowledge and experience of the selection to develop the main idea of the answer. Give proof to support your ideas.

What if I am unsuccessful? • Students who are unsuccessful in grade 10 have the opportunity to write the test again in grade 11. Grade 12 students may take the literacy course in their grade 12 year to fulfill the literacy requirement.

Ambrozic Literacy Team

Good Luck on the Test! • Students can try practice tests on the ILC website posted on the school website under library services, on the Dufferin Peel website or at: www.eqao.com.

When will I get my results? How will I know what my mark is? • Results are sent to the school from the ministry in June. Students will get a report card. If successful, the mark will not be given. • If unsuccessful, the mark out of 400 will be stated. On the back of the report, suggestions for improvement will be given. A passing mark on the test is 300 out of 400.