Cardinal Ambrozic Catholic Secondary School Brampton

Cardinal Ambrozic Catholic Secondary School is a highly rated Catholic high school situated in the CastleBrooke area of northeast Brampton, Ontario. It offers schooling for grades 9-12, and is a member of the Dufferin-Peel Catholic District School Board.

There are currently approximately 1450 students registered at Cardinal Ambrozic. As with most Catholic high schools, students here are required to wear uniforms while attending classes.

Cardinal Ambrozic CSS was founded in 2009, and it is considered one of the better high schools in Peel Region.

Who was Cardinal Ambrozic?

Aloysius Matthew Ambrozic (1930 – 2011) was a Roman Catholic cardinal and Archbishop of Toronto.

Ambrozic was born in 1930 near Gabrje in the Kingdom of Yugoslavia (modern-day Slovenia), one of seven children.

In May 1945, he and his family fled to Austria, after which he completed high school in Ljubljana and various refugee camps. The family immigrated to Canada in September 1948, where he studied at St. Augustine’s Seminary and was ordained a priest in Toronto on 4 June 1955.

He served as a priest in Port Colborne, Ontario, and later taught at St. Augustine’s Seminary in Toronto.

Ambrozic became an auxiliary Bishop in 1976, and became the Archbishop of Toronto in 1990.

He was made a Cardinal by Pope John Paul II on 21 February 1998.

Specialized Courses

Cardinal Ambrozic Catholic Secondary School offers a wide assortment of academic courses for students. Special focus is given to two Specialist High Skills Major (SHSM) programs – Non-Profit, and Sports.

The Dual Credits (DC) Program is also offered. Dual Credits provides grade 11 and 12 students with an opportunity to earn both college and non-compulsory secondary credits at the same time. Credits earned count towards a students’ Ontario Secondary School Diploma (OSSD), and towards a postsecondary certificate, diploma, degree, or a Certificate of Apprenticeship.

Ambrozic offers a Core French curriculum, as well as an extensive English as a Second Language (ESL) program.

The school also offers an Ontario Youth Apprenticeship Program (OYAP) for skilled trades.

Further reading: list of specialized high school programs in Ontario.

Elementary and middle schools that feed Cardinal Ambrozic Secondary include:

Father Francis McSpiritt Catholic

Holy Spirit Catholic

Our Lady of Lourdes Catholic

St. André Bessette Catholic

St. Patrick

Address and Contact Information

Address: 10 Castle Oaks Crossing

Brampton, ON. L6P 3A2

Phone number: 905-913-2989

Email: CardinalAmbrozicInfo@dpcdsb.org

Website: https://www.dpcdsb.org/ambro/

School Board: Dufferin-Peel Catholic District School Board

School Type: Separate High School

Academic Calendar: Semesters

School Size: students: 1450

Religious Affiliation: Christian-Catholic

Foundation Year: 2009

School Uniform: YES

Language of Instruction: English

Gender: Coeducational

Walk Score

This is a car-dependent neghbourhood.

School Facilities

As a recently constructed school, Cardinal Ambrozic CSS offers an excellent variety of modern classrooms and work areas for students. The school also features numerous drama and art rooms, various areas for its music department, a large gymnasium, a fitness centre, plus athletic fields and computer study areas.

Sports

Cardinal Ambrozic Secondary School is a member of the Region of Peel Secondary Schools Athletic Association (ROPSSAA). The school offers a good assortment of individual and team sports (River Hawks), including the following:

Badminton

Baseball

Basketball

Cricket

Cross Country

Flag Football

Football

Golf

Hockey

Slo-Pitch

Soccer

Track & Field

Ultimate Frisbee

Volleyball

Extracurricular Clubs and Organizations

This school has a wide assortment of extracurricular activities that can enrich the high school experience for many students.

Anime and Manga Club

BESU

B.R.A.V.E.

Chaplaincy Team

Chess Club

Choir

Computer Club

Dance Club

Dance Teams

Debate Club

DECA

Drama Club

Eco Team

English Clinic

Business Club

Game Development Club

Homework Club

HOSA

Math Club

Muslim Student Alliance

Peer Mentors

Senior Concert Band

Ski & Snowboard Club

Student Government

Yearbook Club

Cardinal Ambrozic Secondary School Ranking

This Catholic high school has consistently scored highly in the Fraser Institute’s annual ranking. This year’s score was 7.5 out of a possible 10, and the school is tied for 130th place out of 739 high schools in the province of Ontario. Compare school rankings.

School and Nearby Amenities

The school is in a suburban area, and is situated at the corner of Castle Oaks Crossing and The Gore Road. There are a few retail spots along The Gore Road, but by and large, this is an upscale residential area with larger homes and manicured lawns.

Boundary Map

click map to enlarge

Cardinal Ambrozic SS boundaries cover a large catchment area extending from Mayfield Road in the north, to Queen St. E. in the south, with Airport Road on its western edge. and Highway 5 marking its eastern boundary.

IMPORTANT DISCLAIMER: Not all boundaries are included. We make every effort to ensure that school and district boundary data is up-to-date. It’s important to note, however, that these are approximations and are for general informational purposes only. To verify exact boundaries or school locations, contact your school board.

Conclusion

Cardinal Ambrozic Catholic Secondary School is one of the best ranking high schools in Brampton, and it has an excellent reputation.

It has a great northeast Brampton location, a generous offering of athletic and extra-curricular programs, and it has good rankings in the Fraser Institute grading system.

Next: Chinguacousy Secondary School

Brampton school rankings