View waymark gallery

John B. Denton - Denton, TX

Posted by: QuarrellaDeVil

N 33° 12.889 W 097° 07.972

14S E 674008 N 3676654

A 1936 Texas Centennial Marker is at the final resting place of John B. Denton on the courthouse square in the city bearing his name, and it notes that he was killed in an 1841 "Indian fight."

Waymark Code: WM14XWY

Location: Texas, United States

Published By: bluesnote

Views: 0

John Bunyan Denton didn't live to see the county or the city that bear his name. A slab of concrete with "Jno. B. Denton" covers the grave, which is protected by a fence. The Centennial Marker serves as a headstone, and it reads:

Born in Tennessee

July 26, 1806, came to Texas in January, 1836

As a Methodist circuit rider

Killed in the Village Creek Indian Fight

May 24, 1841

In what is now Tarrant County

Named for Gen. Edward H. Tarrant

Who commanded the volunteers

Denton City and County were named for the

Pioneer lawyer, preacher, soldier

Of that name

Denton was killed in what is now Arlington, TX. He was originally buried near the mouth of Oliver Creek, near its confluence with Denton Creek (in today's Denton County), but was disinterred some years later by John S. Chisum and reburied on Chisum's ranch near Bolivar, TX. In 1901, Denton was disturbed one final time, as his remains were brought to the courthouse square and placed to rest.

Type of Death Listed: Killed by somethingCause of death inscription on headstone: Killed in the Indian Creek Village FightWebsite (if available): [Web Link]

Visit Instructions:

When posting a visit to an unusual grave, please include the minimum of one picture of your visit as proof that you were there in the flesh.

Although not required, please include your personal experience of this location.

Search for...

Geocaching.com Google Map

Google Maps

MapQuest

Bing Maps

Nearest Waymarks

Nearest Graves Mentioning a Cause of Death

Nearest Geocaches

Create a scavenger hunt using this waymark as the center point