John Barnard Denton (July 28, 1806 – May 22, 1841, also shown in secondary references as John Bunard Denton and John Bunyan Denton) was a Methodist Episcopal Church minister, lawyer, soldier, and political candidate for whom both Denton County, Texas and the city of Denton, Texas were named. He converted to Methodism soon after meeting his future wife, Mary Greenlee Stewart, who also taught him how to read and write. He underwent a conversion the following year, joined the Methodist Episcopal Church, and for ten years served in Arkansas and southern Missouri as an itinerant minister. In the fall of 1836 or early in 1837, in company with a fellow preacher, Littleton Fowler, Denton crossed the Red River into Texas. Because of the inadequate income afforded him and his growing family by the ministry, he began the study of law. Six months later he was licensed to practice and entered into partnership with John B. Craig at Clarksville.

Denton served in the military, as a captain in a company commanded by Col. Edward H. Tarrant. On May 22, 1841, the unit attacked the Indians of Keechi Village in the battle of Village Creek, about six miles east of the site of Fort Worth. Denton, who, according to one account, was himself immediately in charge of the attacking force, was instantly killed by a bullet that hit his chest as he raised his rifle to fire. His body was brought back on horseback and buried in an unmarked grave on the east bank of Oliver Creek, near its confluence with a stream now called Denton Creek. Twenty years later John S. Chisum disinterred the remains and buried them in a wooden box in the corner of the yard of his home on Clear Creek, near Bolivar. In 1901 the Pioneer Association of Denton County, after diligent search and thorough identification, again removed the remains and buried them with appropriate ceremonies in the southeast corner of the Denton County Courthouse lawn.

Denton is now buried in his namesake county and city, on the southeast corner of the lawn of the Denton County Courthouse-on-the-Square.

John B. Denton was a Methodist Episcopal Church minister, lawyer, soldier, and political candidate for whom both Denton County, Texas and the city of Denton, Texas were named. He converted to Methodism soon after meeting his future wife, Mary Greenlee Stewart, who also taught him how to read and write. He later became a captain and was known for his battles against Native Americans. He died in 1841 after an attack on a " (Keechi ) Indians village" in adjacent Tarrant County in the Present day town of Kennedale Texas. Several battles where fought on Village creek that day from the present day dam of Alington Lake to the eastern edge of the towns of Kennedale and Everman City limits.

Denton is now buried in his namesake county and city, on the southeast corner of the lawn of the Denton County Courthouse-on-the-Square.

History Notes

John Bunard Denton was born on 27 Jul 1806 in Tennessee. He died on 24 May 1841 in battle with Indians. He was buried in 1901 on the Courthouse Lawn in Denton, Texas . (His third burial site.) John Bunard Denton was a noted Methodist minister of the Texas frontier of 1836, orator, Indian fighter and lawyer. He was a member of Stephen F. Austin's first settlement in what was then Mexico and later Texas. Both the city and county of Denton in Texas are named after John Bunard Denton.

He and his wife were converted shortly after their marriage and joined the Methodist church and in 1826 he entered the ministry as a Methodist circuit rider and for ten years followed that profession in Northern Arkansas. and Southern Missouri. Littleton Fowler and John B. Denton crossed the Red River and entered Texas in the early part of January, 1836, and thereafter, John B. Denton became a loyal and consistent Texan. He was admitted to the bar at Clarksville and formed partnership with John B. Craig, also a Methodist minister, which partnership continued until his untimely death. Craig being an older man attended to the office while John B. Denton traveled over the district looking after their legal business and occasionally preaching. And in 1838, while attending court at Ft. Warren, he preached at the home of old Mother Dugan, the first sermon in either Fannin or Grayson county. In 1840, he was candidate for Congress from that district but was defeated by Robert Potter.

It is said that he had the best library in Clarksville, Texas, at that time and that be was one of the most accomplished speakers and orators of his day and time, and that in his death was lost to Texas one of its brightest minds. He was universally beloved and respected, where he was known, especially so in Clarksville, and his death was the occasion for profound sorrow and regret in that little city, to the extent that it made impressions upon the minds of the children of that town that lasted for many years. Dr. Pat B.Clark, though a small boy, remembered in the early morning of the cries and screams that awoke the citizens of that town when the first courier arrived with the sad news that the Indians had killed Captain Denton. Mrs. J. Wilson, whose two uncles were present at his death, was able in 1900 to write an account of the death of John B. Denton that corresponded fairly well with the official report in the war archives at Austin found some years afterward.

John Chisum whose father was a member of Tarrant's expedition, had been told so often of the death of John B. Denton that in 1861 when his cowboys reported the finding of a body upon a high bank on the north side of a creek in Denton County, he became convinced that it was the body of the martyred Methodist preacher. Several members of the Tarrant Expedition, at that time, were residing in Denton County, and sending for them they viewed the spot and from the blanket, the imprints of which were still to be found in the dirt; from a tin cup and other accouterments found with the bones, the gold teeth, which had been detailed to him by his father, satisfied Chisum (of Chisum Trail named after) and his associates that they bad at last found the body of John B. Denton. Captain Denton, along with Henry Stout served as aides to General Tarrant (the Texas county was named after).