Demi Moore is turning heads and making waves with her flirty new friendship with Joe Jonas. The 61-year-old actress, who dazzled at the Cannes Film Festival with her stunning red-carpet appearances, has struck up an intriguing bond with the 34-year-old singer.

The pair reportedly met while both were in the South of France last month, and insiders have been buzzing about their newfound camaraderie. "Demi and Joe have struck up a friendship. They have mutual friends and they bonded," a well-placed source shared, highlighting their connection after being seen having lunch together at an exclusive hotel in Antibes, France.

Despite some insiders hinting at a potential romantic angle, sources close to the duo are quick to dismiss any such rumors. Moore, whose new horror film, "The Substance," created quite the buzz at Cannes, has been making headlines not just for her work but also for her lively social life.

Demi has made the most of her stay in France

During the festival, Moore hosted the amfAR gala, where Joe made a surprise appearance onstage with his brother Nick. While Nick was scheduled to perform, it was Joe's addition for DNCE's hit "Cake by the Ocean" that truly got the crowd going. Demi was even spotted dancing with Oscar winner Michelle Yeoh during the performance, adding to the night's excitement.

Following the event, Moore was seen dining with Joe, his brother Kevin, and supermodel Heidi Klum. Sources reveal that Joe is also friends with Moore's stylist Brad Goreski and her manager Jason Weinberg, which has further cemented their friendship.

This new friendship comes on the heels of Joe's breakup with model Stormi Bree after five months of dating. Joe has been busy working on his solo album and sharing photos from his luxurious vacation at the One&Only Portonovi resort in Montenegro. Meanwhile, Moore was recently spotted in Vienna, Austria, at Cartier's High Jewelry masquerade ball.

Demi and Joe are single

Joe and his ex-wife, actress Sophie Turner, called off their three-year marriage last September and have been navigating a complex custody battle for their daughters, Willa, 3, and Delphine, 1. Despite the drama, Turner recently told British Vogue that she and Joe are "doing the best [they] can" for their daughters.

Demi Moore, a mom of three and grandmother to her daughter Rumer's baby girl, Louetta, has largely been single since her divorce from Ashton Kutcher in 2011. She remains close to her second husband, Bruce Willis, who is battling frontotemporal dementia. Rumer recently shared that her dad is doing well and loves spending time with his granddaughter.