In a year of dramatic changes for the medium-format sector, Schneider Kreuznach, Phase One, and Mamiya Digital Imaging, collectively allowing their survival instinct to kick in, have announced they’re joining forces on creating new lenses for digital cameras. The cooperative effort literally spans the globe, with the three companies headquartered in Germany, Switzerland, and Japan, respectively.

The first fruits of this partnership are a trio of new lenses for the Phase One 645DF and Mamiya 645DF, the 55mm f/2.8, 80mm f/2.8, and 110mm f/2.8 leaf shutter lenses. They are expected to ship in the last quarter of 2009, and it looks like they will ship with the Phase One brand name (although it’s possible they will be available under all three brand names simultaneously).

For details, read the joint press release:

Schneider Kreuznach, Phase One, Mamiya Digital Imaging Cooperate to Drive Innovations in Medium Format Digital Lenses

Expanding Range of Lens Options for Pro Photographers

BAD KREUZNACH, Germany, COPENHAGEN and TOKYO, Sept. 28, 2009 — Schneider Kreuznach, Phase One A/S and Mamiya Digital Imaging, Ltd. today announced that they are collaborating on design, development, manufacturing, and delivery of superior quality, precision digital lenses for the medium format camera systems used by the world’s most discriminating professional photographers.

“Our vision of offering photographers freedom to choose from what is best in photographic equipment is at the heart of our cooperation with Schneider Kreuznach,” said Henrik Håkonsson, President and CEO of Phase One. “We are committed to sharing expertise in digital imaging technology with the world’s most respected companies to push the limits of excellence for photographers.”

“We are pleased to contribute our optical expertise within a very creative group,” said Dr. Josef Staub, Managing Director of Schneider Kreuznach. “As we pioneer advancements in optical lens design, the photographic market can look forward to new, extraordinary lenses.”

“Successful teamwork has already resulted in the world’s most open medium format camera platform,” said Toshio Midorikawa, President of Mamiya Digital Imaging. “Now we take another step, as we share our manufacturing expertise with Schneider Kreuznach’s optical design talents to benefit the world’s photographers.”

The first results of this collaboration are the 55mm, 80mm and 110mm leaf shutter lenses designed for the Phase One 645DF and Mamiya 645DF cameras. The lenses can be ordered now and will start shipping Q4, 2009.

About Mamiya Digital Imaging

Mamiya Digital Imaging is the digital successor to the reputable Mamiya brand, an innovative company fresh with enthusiasm and dedicated to continuing a legacy of excellence. Mamiya has consistently been a fore-runner in medium format camera design, and Mamiya lenses, manufactured following a tradition of precision and quality, are celebrated world-wide. For the Professional Photographer, it is the ultimate brand in photographic equipment.

Mamiya Digital Imaging is headquartered in Tokyo with two factories in Japan, and has distributors in more than 100 countries.

For more information about products, visit the Mamiya homepage on www.mamiya.co.jp

About Phase One

Phase One is the world’s leader in open-platform based medium format camera systems and solutions. Phase One medium format cameras, digital backs and lenses are designed to deliver superior quality image capture and investment value. Phase One Capture One software helps streamline capture and post-production processes for both medium format and DSLR cameras. Phase One products are known for their quality, flexibility and speed enabling pro photographers shooting in a wide range of formats to achieve their creative visions without compromise.

Phase One is an employee-owned company based in Copenhagen with offices in New York, London, Tokyo, Cologne and Shanghai.

For more information about the products, visit the Phase One Web site on www.phaseone.com.