Overview:

Written and directed by Woody Allen

Starring Owen Wilson and Rachel McAdams

Midnight in Paris is a difficult film to peg inside of a genre, for it is a romantic comedy and historical fantasy all at once. Written and directed by Woody Allen, the movie centres around Gil Pender (played by Owen Wilson), a young and successful screenwriter who must come to terms with the fact his own dreams and goals run contrary to that of his materialistic-minded fiancee, Inez (Rachel McAdams). While vacationing in Paris before his wedding—a city that represents the pinnacle of true artistic achievement for Gil—the young romantic finds himself picked up at the stroke of midnight by famous writers in an antique car, where he is transported back in time to 1920s era France. This journey into the past represents Gil’s “Golden-Age”, but he comes to learn that even the most beautiful illusions may not hold the key to happiness.

To begin our study of the film, it is important you first acquaint yourselves with some historical background of Modernism, the city of Paris, and the Lost Generation of artists. You will conduct some basic research into these elements, which are central to your understanding of the movie’s characters, plot and themes. The discussion questions will conclude your study of the film, and ultimately be submitted for evaluation.

Assignment #1: Research & Precis

Select ONE of the writers, artists or topics referred to in the film from the list below. Conduct research in the library and/or Internet and write a short precis on this topic to present to the class. If it is an artist, be sure to give biographical information and describe his or her work. For visual artists, provide examples of their work.

A brief history of the City of Paris concentrating on its role as a center for the arts

The Lost Generation of American writers who lived in Paris in the 1920s

Scott Fitzgerald

Zelda Fitzgerald

Ernest Hemingway

Gertrude Stein

Pablo Picasso

Salvador Dali

La Bélle Epoque

Jean Cocteau

S.Eliot

Luis Bunuel

Man Ray

Cole Porter

Auguste Rodin

ToulouseLautrec

Edgar Degas

Here are some key elements for the content of your presentation, outside of judicious choices for design, layout, transition, etc.:

Title Slide (“Wow” us!)

Biographical details (or general details about the period, thing, etc.)

Key life moments

Important works (with examples)

A quotation

Other interesting “fun” facts

Death

Contribution towards Modernism movement

Your presentation will be assessed with the “Multi-media Rubric” found here:

https://cche20he.wordpress.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/multimedia-presentation-rubric.pdf

Assignment #2: Discussion Questions

Respond to the following questions in formal paragraph style. Your answers will be evaluated using the attached rubric.

What is the difference between the world that Gil Pender inhabits in the present and the world that he sees in his midnight travels back in time? How do these differences relate to the theme of the movie?

Nostalgia is a sentimental longing for the past. In this film Gil Pender is nostalgic for the Paris of the 1920s. Paul, the man who has a relationship with Gil’s fiancé, is also quite knowledgeable about the past. Gil calls Paul a “pedantic pseudo-intellectual”. Paul, obviously with Gil in mind, has the following to say about nostalgia:

PAUL: You know, nostalgia is denial. Denial of the painful present.

INEZ: Oh, Gil is a complete romantic. He would be more than happy living in a complete state of perpetual denial.

PAUL: And the name of this fallacy is called “golden-aged thinking.” INEZ: Touche.

PAUL: The erroneous notion that a different time period is better than the one one’s living in. It’s a ;law in the romantic imagination of those people who ;ind it dif;icult to cope with the present.

By the end of the movie, Gil’s view of the 1920s has changed to some extent. He talks about a dream that he lived in the past when there were no antibiotics, dishwashers, or 911. What is Woody Allen trying to tell us about the uses of the past?

What factors in Gil’s present life make him feel dissatisfied and drawn to the Paris of the 1920s? What seems to be so attractive about the life Gil sees in Paris when he travels backwards in time?

Why does Adriana, with Gil in tow, arrive in La Belle Epoque of the 1890s when she travels back in time? It’s the same reason that the detective found himself in the 18th century!

The theme of a story is the general idea or insight about life expressed by the author. It is a universal and meaningful concept that emerges from the characters’ actions and from the outcomes of conflicts described in the story. Theme is often thought of as the lesson that the author is trying to teach the reader or audience. More than one theme can be included in a work of fiction; however, there is usually one primary theme that ties together all of the elements of a story.

What is the ultimate message of this movie? Do you agree or disagree with it?

What did you like best about the movie? Why? What did you like least about the film? Why?

Did anything that happened in this movie remind you of something that has occurred in your own life or that you have seen occur to others? Describe the scene and your own connection to the film.

If a psychologist were to look at the actions of Gil Pender what do you think the psychologist would say about that character? Describe specific statements or actions that you think the psychologist would be interested in and the conclusions that you think the psychologist would draw from those statements or actions.

Which character did you [admire, hate, love, pity] the most? What was it about that character that caused you to have that reaction?