All the Indonesian games are being shown live on television in that badminton-crazy country. General Agus is hopeful that the streets of Jakarta will be free of trouble in the next few days with the public staying at home and watching their sporting heroes win glory for the country.

'I hope we can win. It will lift the morale and the spirit of our people back home,' said General Agus.

Last time Indonesia won the Thomas and Uber Cup competitions - two years ago right here in Hong Kong - it was estimated that over 70 per cent of the 200 million population were watching.

Apart from General Agus, it is highly probable that President Suharto will also be praying for some distraction.

And what better way to take your mind of politics than some shuttle diplomacy.

Timothy Fok will be praying that his luck will change by Sunday.

Last week, Hong Kong's Mr Sport felt what it is like to taste the bitter pill of defeat when the SAR's bid to join the Asian Football Confederation (AFC) executive committee ended in failure.

Hong Kong were among 15 countries vying for a place in the nine-member AFC exco but badly lost out, even coming behind such lightweight Asian footballing nations like Brunei and Singapore.

Fok was disappointed. But he put on a brave face saying that at least Hong Kong's independence status had once again been highlighted and enshrined in the presence of the rest of Asia.

Fok will now be hoping that the AFC elections are not a forerunner of things to come on Sunday - when the local Legislative Council elections are held.

The president of Hong Kong's Amateur Sports Federation and Olympic Committee is running as an independent candidate against the Democratic Party's Wu Chi-wai for the functional constituency of Sports, Performing Arts, Culture and Publication.

We tip Mr Sport to win this race.

How did Bob Brown get a black eye? It has all the makings of a classic whodunit title. And to make it more intriguing, the Hong Kong Rugby Football Union has cast its cloak of secrecy over how its assistant director of coaching received a stunning shiner that would be the envy of any pugilist.

Putting on our investigative caps and taking a long pull on our pipes, we can reveal some clues.

It happened last Saturday at the Aberdeen Stadium, in the break between the Hong Kong Dragons v China curtain-raiser and the Pac Rim encounter.

One moment Brown was spotted patrolling the touchlines and the next moment he had sprouted an injury that usually is the result of an upper-cut to the block.

'I slipped and fell down', was Brown's answer when we solicitously inquired. Hmmm! He really must have fallen on his face.

Quote of the week goes to Aberdeen's David Cockerton, who during the United States versus Hong Kong rugby game (which took place after Brown's bout) came on the tannoy and said: 'Would the owner of the dog - the canine variety - please remove it from the stadium.' Howard Wells, former chief executive of the Hong Kong Sports Development Board, has got itchy feet.

The current top gun of the UK Sports Council is believed to be gunning for the CEO's job at English football club Watford, who have just clinched the Second Division championship.

We can just picture Wells and Elton John singing 'don't let the sun go down on me . . .'