Lanzano had been plying his trade with USD Gavorrana 1930 in the fourth tier of Italian football before Paolo Di Canio came calling recently, and the lure of a chance to establish himself in this country was overwhelming.

The 20-year-old goalkeeper may not possess much knowledge of the English language, but the excitement was evident as he expressed through a translator what it means to be part of the Di Canio revolution at the County Ground.

“It’s been a great emotion for me to come to England because it’s always been my dream to play in English football,” he said.

“Now that I’m here I see all the facilities, the County Ground and I’m here to show what I can do.

“I’m not nervous, I am very proud and I am ready for the challenge. I am looking forward to the start of the season.”

The move from the modest surroundings of Gavorrana’s Stadio Romeo Malservisi, capacity 2,000, to SN1 has been eye-opening for Lanzano.

The stopper may be only young, but he is well-drilled in the nitty gritty of lower league football albeit in his native land.

However, the Swindon set-up is a step beyond anything Lanzano has ever experienced.

“Yes, it’s very different,” he said.

“The whole environment, the club, the stadium and the facilities are all very different to what was in Italy.

“In Italy the fourth league is a very good level but the clubs are not so important like Swindon Town.

“There is not the tradition, there is not the same ambition. It is a very important moment for me to be here.”

A primary factor in his decision to fly overseas to further his career, Lanzano said, is the fact Di Canio is in charge in Wiltshire.

Like Alberto Comazzi, Lanzano was thrilled to receive interest from the former West Ham forward and he cannot wait to settle into the Italian’s new regime.

But Lanzano insisted he will not struggle with the culture, game or language changes he is soon to experience, claiming he has enough to forge a solid reputation in League Two.

“I was very excited to meet Paolo for the first time because he is a legend in Italy and in England too,” he said.

“When we first met I was very excited and I am very happy to be coached by such a person.

“The main difference is in Italy football is more tactical and more technical and in England it is more physical.

“It is easier in England to get used to the physical side of things.

“I think I can do well here.”