FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

February 27, 2024

Trone Earns ‘A’ Rating on National Parks Action Fund 2024 Congressional Scorecard

WASHINGTON, D.C. — Today, the National Parks Action Fund announced that Congressman David Trone (D-MD) earned an ‘A’ rating – scoring 100% – on the organization’s 2024 Congressional Scorecard. The scorecard affirms Trone’s longstanding commitment to protecting and enhancing America’s national parks and public lands in Congress.

The National Parks Action Fund tracks the most impactful national parks legislation in each Congress and assigns members ‘A’-’F’ scores based on their votes. The organization’s latest scorecard is centered on key votes concerning park funding, oil and gas development in and near parks, protections for wildlife, and preserving important park protection laws. Sadly, there was a 4% decline in House of Representatives Members receiving an ‘A’ and a 6% increase in Members receiving an ‘F’ since 2022.

“For too long, our national parks and public lands – and the species living within them – have faced threats from development and pollution. Americans from coast to coast cherish these irreplaceable resources and want to protect them for future generations, myself included, which is why I’m committed to standing up for our environment,” said Congressman Trone. “I’m honored to receive an ‘A’ rating from the National Parks Action Fund, and I will continue to work in Congress to take action against climate change and preserve our environment for our children and grandchildren. Our future depends on it.”

The 2024 Congressional Scorecard is based on Members of the 118th Congress’ votes on:

Protecting Big Cypress National Preserve in Florida from harmful oil and gas drilling

Allowing excessive, noisy air tours in national parks

Jeopardizing the survival of endangered species

Undoing protections around Chaco Culture National Historical Park in New Mexico

Preventing funding for National Park Service workforce development

Weakening the future of conservation under the Antiquities Act

Cutting funding for the National Park Service

Congressman David Trone was elected to the House of Representatives in November 2018 to serve the 6th District of Maryland, which includes all or part of Montgomery, Frederick, Washington, Allegany, and Garrett Counties. Trone serves on the Appropriations, Budget, and Joint Economic Committees. In Congress, Trone is fighting to make progress on issues that matter to Marylanders.

Follow Congressman Trone at @RepDavidTrone for updates on Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram.

###