Former Clark County School Board member Mary Beth Scow eked out a 91-vote victory Tuesday night over State Sen. David Parks to claim the Democratic nomination for the Clark County Commission seat being vacated by Rory Reid.

With all 127 precincts reporting, Scow had 3,004 votes, or 33.7 percent, compared with Parks’ 2,913 votes, or 32.7 percent. Scow will face Republican Douglas Bell, Libertarian Timothy Hagen and Independent Delano Hadarly in the November run-off.

Scow topped a field of five candidates in the race to succeed Reid, who gave up the seat to seek the Democratic nomination for governor.

“I’m thankful to the voters who responded to my message,” Scow said. “I really want to be a hard-working commissioner.”

One of the more surprising results Tuesday was the defeat of longtime Clark County Constable Robert “Bobby G” Gronauer in the Democratic primary. Gronauer a retired Las Vegas police offer in his 41st year in law enforcement, had been constable since 1994.

The winner of the primary was former state assemblyman John Bonaventura, who will face Republican Peter Gariano in the November run-off.

Bonaventura collected 18,741 votes, or 42.8 percent, to Gronauer’s 16,666 votes, or 38 percent. A third candidate, Antonio Holmes, collected 19 percent.

In Senate District 9, incumbent Republican State Sen. Dennis Nolan lost to political upstart Elizabeth Halseth, who will face Democrat Benny Yerushalmi in the November election.

Halseth collected 9,197 votes, or 57.2 percent, compared to Nolan’s 6,873 votes, or 42.7 percent.

In Democratic primary for Senate District 7, Assemblyman Mark Manendo beat Assemblywoman Kathy McClain for the open seat. Manendo, who collected 4,403 votes, or 57.4 percent, topped McClain’s 3,269 votes, or 42.6 percent.

Manendo will face Republican Anthony Wright in the run-off.

Clark County Sheriff Doug Gillespie had 69.9 percent of the vote and will face second place finisher Laurie Bisch in the run-off. Bisch, an officer with the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department, had 14.3 percent of the vote. The total field was six candidates.

Primary unkind to Clark County incumbents (11:13 p.m.)

Several Clark County incumbents were headed toward losses in their re-election campaigns Tuesday, including longtime Las Vegas Constable Robert “Bobby G” Gronauer.

Also, Republican State Sen. Dennis Nolan was losing his bid for re-election to his Clark County Senate District 9 seat Tuesday night to political upstart Elizabeth Halseth.

With about 95 percent of precincts reporting in Clark County, Gronauer trailed John Bonaventura by 2,000 votes in the Democratic primary.

In Senate District 9, where 98 percent of the precincts had reported, Nolan trailed Halseth by almost 3,000 votes. Halseth will face Democrat Benny Yerushalmi in the November election.

Clark County Sheriff Doug Gillespie had 70 percent of the vote with 95 percent of the precincts, and will face second place finisher Laurie Bisch in the run-off. Bisch, an officer with the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department, had 14.3 percent of the vote.

Also with 95 percent of the precincts reporting, the race to succeed Clark County Commissioner Rory Reid in District G was too close to call between Democrats David Parks and Mary Beth Scow. Scow, a former member of the Clark County School Board, had 2,964 votes, or 33.6 percent, while Parks, a state senator, had 2,886 votes, or 32.7 percent.

Gov. Jim Gibbons concedes GOP primary election to Sandoval (9:24)

Gov. Jim Gibbons conceded the election on Tuesday night, saying he will support Republican primary gubernatorial winner Brian Sandoval in the general election.

Speaking at the Governor’s Mansion in Carson City, Gibbons said he will strive for a smooth transition to a new administration, whether it is Sandoval or the Democratic nominee, Rory Reid.

He also said he will work with the candidate who wins the general election in formulating a state budget for the next two years.

Gibbons praised his campaign staff.

He also said he has enjoyed the past four years as Nevada’s governor and he has no regrets.

During a speech at the historic home at the Garden Shop Nursery in Reno, Sandoval, who stepped down from a lifetime appointment as a federal judge, thanked his family and campaign supporters.

He also acknowledged Gibbons and former North Las Vegas Mayor Mike Montandon, his main primary opponents.

“Tonight, I am more convinced than ever I made the right decision,” Sandoval said of leaving the judicial job to run for governor.

Of Gibbons and Montandon, he said: “Both of them are to be applauded for their years of public service to Nevada.”

Sandoval beats Gibbons in GOP gubernatorial race (9:07 p.m.)

Former federal judge Brian Sandoval ended the governorship of Jim Gibbons on Tuesday night.

Statewide news outlets called the race for Republican challenger Sandoval, a former Nevada attorney general and state assemblyman, soon after early voting results were released.

For the first time in Nevada history, a sitting governor lost his re-election bid in the party primary. Gibbons, who was elected in 2006, will now be a lame-duck governor through November.

On the Democratic side, Clark County Commission Chairman Rory Reid was quickly declared the winner of his primary against one challenger and headed toward the November runoff with Sandoval.

In the Democratic primary for lieutenant governor, Reno Councilwoman Jessica Sferrazza held a large lead over three challengers in a race for the right to face incumbent Republican Lt. Gov. Brian Krolicki, who was declared the winner after early votes were tabulated.

Manendo leads McClain for State Senate District 7 seat (8:17 p.m.)

Early voting in Clark County showed Democratic Assemblyman Mark Manendo leading fellow Democratic Assemblywoman Kathy McClain by more than 11 percent in the race for the open State Senate District 7 seat.

The assembly colleagues, who have run a heated and sometimes nasty campaign, were term limited out of the State Legislature.

Manendo had 55.8 percent of the early vote to McClain’s 44.2 percent.

In another heated State Senate race, Republican incumbent Dennis Nolan was trailing challenger Elizabeth Halseth in the race to keep his District 9 seat. Halseth has 55.4 percent to Nolan’s 44.6 percent of the early vote.

It didn’t take long for the Associated Press to declare Sen. Harry Reid and Clark County Commissioner Rory Reid the winners in their respective Democratic primaries.

The elder Reid is seeking his fifth term in the U.S. Senate while the younger Reid gave up his commission seat to run for Governor.

Sandoval has big lead over Gibbons in early voting (8:04 p.m.)

Early voting totals for Elko and Mineral Counties gave former federal judge Brian Sandoval a commanding lead over incumbent Gov. Jim Gibbons in the race for the Republican nomination for governor.

Sandoval, a former Nevada attorney general and state assemblyman, had 55.4 percent of the votes before Tuesday. Gibbons had 29.6 percent with the rest going to other candidates or none of these candidates.

If Sandoval, who lives in Reno, is successful, he and tens of thousands of other Nevada Republicans will have derailed Gibbons’ re-election bid in the party primary, which would be a first in state history.

In the Democratic primary for lieutenant governor, Reno Councilwoman Jessica Sferrazza held a large lead over three challengers in a race for the right to face either incumbent Lt. Gov. Brian Krolicki or challenger Barbara Lee Woollen. Krolicki was leading Woollen with 72 percent, in the early vote.

Few disruptions at Nevada polling places (6:18 p.m.)

Turnout may have been slow statewide, but polling places were not without their share of events.

According to Secretary of State Ross Miller's Twitter feed, fire alarms went off twice at Elaine Wynn Elementary School, which halted voting. Both times, however, voting quickly resumed.

Also, a fight reportedly broke out in the gym at the Dula Recreation Center, not the polling area. Voting went on uninterrupted.

At about 2 p.m., Miller tweeted that "turnout (was) slow but steady in most counties; rurals report heavy election day turnout."

Contact reporter Howard Stutz at hstutz@reviewjournal.com or 702-477-3871.

Republician primary: A race to the finish

Political Eye Blog

VOTING TODAY

LIVE COVERAGE AT LVRJ.COM

• Polls are open 7 a.m. - 7 p.m.

• Find your polling location:

Clark County Election Dept.

• Candidate questionnaires:

www.lvrj.com/politics/ candidates

• Official election results:

www.silverstate2010.com