Queer icon Fletcher just released her debut full-length album Girl of My Dreams and fans could not be more elated. The album picks up right where her 2019 EP you ruined new york city for me left off. Fletcher had two years to navigate her thoughts and feelings since that EP, and her journey is evident in the progression of tracks on Girl of My Dreams. Through raw honesty and a nostalgic pop sound, Fletcher guides us through the nuances of heartbreak and the cultivation of self-love. This album feels like her diary and we feel honored to listen to it — and dance! Lots of dancing!

Let's break it down track-by-track!

1. "Sting"

It’s a pop track, your honor. What a way to start off the album! “Sting” is sure to have your hips grooving even while you’re holding back tears. It’s an exploration of Fletcher’s life after a break-up, where she seems to be trying to convince herself of two different things. She’s moved on, but seeing that person out still stings. Also, maybe things could work again, maybe? Fletcher hooks the listener with a catchy chorus and heartfelt lyrics. Anyone who has been through a break-up will resonate with the chaos of these feelings.

Favorite Lyrics: “All love, whenever I hear your name / Don’t you wish it worked, and we were on again?”

2. "Guess We Lied…"

Fans will enjoy this callback to “If you’re gonna lie”, a track from Fletcher’s 2019 EP you ruined new york city for me. That song told the story of wanting to be with someone even if they didn’t feel the same way, even if it wasn’t healthy. “Guess We Lied” is the aftermath of that relationship, and it’s just as painful. The upbeat tempo is in stark contrast to Fletcher’s brutal lyrical honesty. She ultimately realizes that her ex is a stranger again, even though they once vowed to "stay close".

Favorite lyrics: “Do you ever get the feeling / We’re a real deep cut that’s never healing…”

3. "Birthday Girl"

Fletcher’s birthday is March 19, but that’s also an ex’s b-day. In a break from the previous poppy tracks, “Birthday Girl” is a slowed down, contemplative listen. When they first met, Fletcher and this other person felt like the universe was connecting them to each other, and back then it felt special. Fletcher’s birthday is just a reminder of this person now. Her vulnerability peeks through when she admits to not being the right partner for them, and that she’s still learning how to live with their permanent connection.

Favorite Lyrics: “Birthday girl, do you think of me? / Do you wish you didn’t but you have to? / Like I have to?”

4. "Becky’s So Hot"

Fletcher can’t even be mad that her ex has moved on, because Becky, her ex’s new partner? Yeah, she’s really hot, and Fletcher is jealous that she’s not with Becky. In this sexy pop number, Fletcher recounts how she stalked Becky online and is in awe of how "fire emoji" she is. Check out the steamy music video starring Bella Thorne.

Favorite Lyrics: "Are you in love like we were? / If I were you, I’d probably keep her…"

5. "Better Version"

Oof, right in the feels. Fletcher shares yet another thoughtful reflection on a past relationship. She was there during this person’s worst moments, and she supported them and motivated them to be better in both their career and relationships. But now that their relationship has ended, Fletcher doesn’t get to reap the benefits of that person’s growth. This is another stripped back song where Fletcher’s honesty makes you feel like you’re reading her diary.

Favorite Lyrics: "I fixed your heart, but mine still hurts / And now some other person / Is gonna get the better version of you…"

6. "Conversations"

Track 6 greets us with a bass guitar strumming a staccato rhythm. "Conversations" is about the way Fletcher obsesses over things in her head. Late at night, she’s kept awake by the incessant worries and impulses that scream inside her head. So, it’s only fitting that she belts the chorus with some explosive vocals!

Favorite lyrics: "Now it’s 3am looking at the ceiling / Existential crisis mode / All alone feeling all my feelings…"

7. "Serial Heartbreaker"

Heavy reverb means you're in for an addictive dance track. One of the shortest songs on the album, "Serial Heartbreaker" is Fletcher’s reaction to past mistakes. She admits to being bad at break-ups and even referring to herself in third person at times, seemingly distancing herself from blame. She craves intimacy, is quick to fall in love, but is just as quick to cut things off. Fletcher follows this by singing that she likes her alone time.

Favorite Lyrics: "So many questions / That’s too many for me / So many lessons / So many girl of my dreams..."

8. "Her Body is Bible"

"Her Body is Bible" is a feel-good declaration of love, reminiscent of 2010’s pop music. Fans familiar with Marina and the Diamonds or early Katy Perry will especially enjoy this one. Fletcher met someone that made her forget about past heartbreak, and like a baptism, she is washed clean in the purity of their love. Fletcher is ready to worship this woman and embrace the freedom of falling in love again.

Favorite Lyrics: "It’s just a feeling, feeling / It’s like an ocean wave / And she’s the freedom, freedom…"

9. "I Think I’m Growing?"

At under two minutes, this is a short glimpse into Fletcher’s 2020 experience. She wasn’t able to leave her apartment during quarantine and instead was forced to spend time with herself. It was a painful, non-linear journey. She didn’t realize how co-dependent she was or how much resentment she was carrying around with her. Sifting through all of her trauma made her grow…? At this point in the album, Fletcher is uncertain of her journey but hopeful of her future.

Favorite Lyrics: "I don’t know where, where I’m going / But I think I’m growing / Yeah, I think I’m growing…"

10. "Girl of My Dreams"

With smooth vocals and rapturious melodies, the album's title track is another step in Fletcher’s self-love journey. She recounts past relationships -- a boy with green eyes, a woman in NYC. They left her more lost than when they found her. Fletcher sings about wanting something deeper, longer-lasting than what she’s had. What will make her happy? Should she get a tattoo or dye her hair? Fletcher is ready to fall in love with herself and see who she truly is without the expectations and weight of others’ perceptions. At the end of the day, the person with you forever is yourself. So be the girl (or guy) of your dreams.

Favorite Lyric: "Now I lay me down to sleep / I pray that I’m the one I keep / If I fall before I wake, I know that I will catch me…"

11. "Holiday"

In this dreamy tune, Fletcher takes us along as she escapes into the privacy of her mind. In the wake of the public’s new expectations of her, she did some soul-searching. Now she’s able to be at peace with her inner self, and it feels like she’s on holiday sipping lemonade and watching the waves rush out. We love an unbothered queen. This song’s warmth and mellow vibes will make you feel like you’re on the beach drinking a glass of chardonnay as the sun sets.

Favorite Lyrics: "Not talkin Bali, Hawaii, I got a private island / Inside my mind found a fantasy, my own paradise…"

12. "I Love You, Bitch"

In a recent interview with 103.5 KTU radio, Fletcher revealed "I Love You, Bitch" was inspired by a self help podcast she discovered during the pandemic. Listeners were encouraged to look in the mirror everyday and say “I love you, [insert name],” and although Fletcher found it incredibly cheesy to do, she discovered a version of herself came through in the phrase "I love you, bitch." "I still have that written on my mirror, to this day,” Fletcher shared. The track begins with a laundry list of Fletcher’s flaws, and her inability to love herself, even though she freely says it to fans. When the chorus finally interrupts her list, we get the sense that she’s looking in the mirror, trying to cut through all the mental noise.

Favorite Lyrics: "'Cause I've said it / To everyone, everyone, everyone, everyone else / Like, 'Oh, my God' / And I've meant it / To everyone, everyone, everyone but myself…"

13. "For Cari"

It’s nostalgic, acoustic, and raw. "For Cari" is for the woman behind the persona of Fletcher: Cari Elise Fletcher. She’s tired of doing things for everyone else, becoming what they want her to be. This song is a letter to herself saying, "hey, I know you’re still in there and I’ve got you." Fletcher hasn’t forgotten where she came from, and she doesn’t want to. Her past is part of her, and so is Cari. The melodies build to a climax that feels cathartic as you finally reach the song’s (and the album's) closing.

Favorite lyrics: "Everybody tryna make me someone else / Making me feel like I’m not good enough / It’s got me kinda twisted like I don’t know myself… I’m a bad bitch and nothing can scare me / This one’s for Cari..."

What's your favorite track from Girl of My Dreams?