Mentor Graphics raised its unsolicited takeover offer for Quickturn Design Systems from to US$14 cash per share, or about $253 million, to match a competing offer from rival engineering software competitor Cadence Design Systems.

Mentor (MENT), based in Wilsonville, Oregon, said it's seeking 2.1 million Quickturn shares. Mentor already owns 591,500 Quickturn shares (QKTN) and said the additional stock would give it a 14.9 percent ownership stake in the company -- the maximum amount that can be acquired without triggering Quickturn's anti-takeover defenses, or poison pill.

Both companies publish computer programs that let electrical engineers design and test semiconductor circuits on workstations.

The Mentor bid comes on the heels of an acquisition offer from Cadence, another design software firm friendly to Quickturn. On 9 December, Cadence (CDN) offered to buy Quickturn for $14 a share, an offer that Quickturn accepted.

Mentor's filed a lawsuit on 15 December against Quickturn in Delaware Chancery Court, charging that Quickturn directors breached fiduciary duties. Mentor also is asking the court to block Cadence's offer.

Donald Trump and Silicon Valley's Billionaire Elegy

Venture capitalists Ben Horowitz and Marc Andreessen claim the tech industry, California, and the country are doomed if we don’t embrace the former president.

RealPage Says Rental Pricing Tech Is Misunderstood, but Landlords Aren’t So Sure

The software company has pushed back hard against claims that its algorithms helped make rent in the US too damn high. Property owners and managers aren't entirely convinced.

Apple, Nvidia, Anthropic Used Thousands of Swiped YouTube Videos to Train AI

Creators claim their videos were used without their knowledge.

OpenAI Slashes the Cost of Using Its AI With a ‘Mini’ Model

With competing models—including many free ones—flooding the market, OpenAI is announcing a cheaper way to use its AI.

How to Get Rich From Peeping Inside People’s Fridges

Forget the S&P 500. Look at the ice cream. This investor visits homes around the world to see where diets—and economies—will go next.