BRACKNELL, United Kingdom--(BUSINESS WIRE)--July 18, 2001-- Quickturn, a Cadence company (NYSE:CDN - news), announced today that ARM (LSE:ARM)(Nasdaq:ARMHY), the industry's leading provider of 16/32-bit embedded RISC processor solutions, has selected the Quickturn MercuryPlus(TM) verification system to verify the ARM926EJ-S(TM) core.

ARM chose the market-leading MercuryPlus system to ensure its design team had the necessary emulation tool to thoroughly -- and quickly -- verify the new core's complex design.

``We selected the Quickturn system after careful evaluation,'' said Simon Segars, vice president of Engineering at ARM. ``With MercuryPlus, we can boot real-time operating systems and applications on our industry-leading processors, which allows us to perform more in-depth verification earlier in the design cycle. The unique 512MB memory card on the MercuryPlus was also very useful, as it allowed us to easily verify designs incorporating large amounts of memory.''

Gary Wilkins, vice president of Quickturn Europe, said, ``ARM continues to deliver industry-leading RISC microprocessor solutions, so it's only fitting the company chose Quickturn's industry-leading technology to verify the ARM926EJ-S core. ARM clearly understands the return on investment companies enjoy by getting their high-quality products to market quickly.''

The ARM926EJ-S core will be integrated into a wide variety of Java-technology enabled-devices, such as web-enabled PDAs, smart phones, set-top boxes, and in-car information solutions.

About MercuryPlus

The MercuryPlus in-circuit emulator is designed to deliver the verification capabilities most important to today's design teams: fast design compilation, high debugging productivity, and high capacity. The centerpiece of the MercuryPlus emulation system is a new technology based on custom field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) optimized for emulation. Higher performance and capacity have resulted from a shift from standard FPGAs to a silicon architecture optimized for emulation. The new MercuryPlus architecture was designed to be highly scalable for increased capacity, to incorporate special on-board debugging logic, and to provide for much higher speed and predictable interconnection routing as compared with commercial FPGAs. These advantages combine to create a system that can enable a significantly faster turn-around time and increased designer productivity.

Pricing and Availability

The MercuryPlus emulation system is available today. For information on product pricing and availability, in the UK call +44 (0) 1344 866544, in North America call 408-914-6000. For additional product information visit the Quickturn web site at www.quickturn.com or send email to info@quickturn.com.

About ARM

ARM is the industry's leading provider of 16/32-bit embedded RISC microprocessor solutions. The company licenses its high-performance, low-cost, power-efficient RISC processors, peripherals, and system-on-chip designs to leading international electronics companies. ARM also provides comprehensive support required in developing a complete system. ARM's microprocessor cores are rapidly becoming the volume RISC standard in such markets as portable communications, hand-held computing, multimedia digital consumer and embedded solutions. More information on ARM is available at www.arm.com.

About Quickturn

Quickturn, a Cadence® company, is the leading provider of high-performance verification solutions and Time-to-Market Engineering (TtME(TM)) services for the design and verification of complex IC and electronic systems. Developers of high-performance computing, multimedia, graphics, and communications systems use Quickturn products and services. For more information, visit the Quickturn Web site at www.quickturn.com, call 408-914-6000, or send email to info@quickturn.com.

About Cadence

Cadence is the largest supplier of electronic design automation products, methodology services, and design services used to accelerate and manage the design of semiconductors, computer systems, networking and telecommunications equipment, consumer electronics, and a variety of other electronics-based products. With approximately 5,700 employees and 2000 revenues of approximately $1.3 billion, Cadence has sales offices, design centers, and research facilities around the world. The company is headquartered in San Jose, Calif., and traded on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol CDN. More information about the company, its products, and services is available at www.cadence.com.

Note to Editors: Cadence and the Cadence logo are registered trademarks and Quickturn, CoBALT Ultra, CoBALTPlus, Quest II Environment, QuickCycles, SpeedBridge, and TtME are trademarks of Cadence Design Systems, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.

ARM is a registered trademark of ARM Limited. ARM926EJ-S is a trademark of ARM Limited. All other brands or product names are the property of their respective holders. ``ARM'' is used to represent ARM Holdings plc (LSE: ARM and Nasdaq: ARMHY); its operating company ARM Limited; and the regional subsidiaries ARM, INC.; ARM KK; ARM Korea Ltd.; ARM Taiwan.

Contact:

Quickturn, A Cadence Company

Kristin Boucher, 408/914-6635

kristin@quickturn.com

or

Cadence Design Systems Ltd

Helen Petts, +44 (0) 1344 865 305

hpetts@cadence.com

or

Armstrong Kendall, Inc.

Bill Toelke, 503/672-4692

bill@akipr.com