Alternatives to Allegro Design Authoring

Cadence Design Systems

Best Allegro Design Authoring Alternatives in 2024

Find the top alternatives to Allegro Design Authoring currently available. Compare ratings, reviews, pricing, and features of Allegro Design Authoring alternatives in 2024. Slashdot lists the best Allegro Design Authoring alternatives on the market that offer competing products that are similar to Allegro Design Authoring. Sort through Allegro Design Authoring alternatives below to make the best choice for your needs

1

OrCAD X

Cadence Design Systems

18 Ratings

OrCAD® X is a unified PCB design software platform. It offers significant improvements to ease of use, performance and automation. Our product suite includes applications for schematic, PCB layout, simulation and data management. OrCAD X Capture, a schematic design solution for electrical circuit creation and documentation, is one of OrCAD's most popular products. PSpice®, our virtual SPICE simulation engine integrated into Capture, allows you to prototype and verify your designs using industry-leading native analog, mixed signal, and advanced analysis engines. OrCAD X Presto and OrCAD X PCB editor are two PCB layout tools that allow designers to easily collaborate between ECAD/MCAD teams and build better PCBs faster. OrCAD X Presto is our new, simplified interface for novice designers, electrical engineers and PCB designers focused on quick turn PCB designs.

2

Altium Designer

Altium

642 Ratings

Altium Designer® offers a unified design environment backed by over 35 years of innovation and development. From schematic to PCB layout and interactive differential pair routing, to design documentation and a seamless ECAD/MCAD integration, Altium Designer empowers engineers with a single view of every aspect of the PCB design process. By accessing all design tools in one place, engineers can complete their entire design process within the same intuitive environment and deliver high-quality products quickly. Features of Altium Designer include stackup planning, anonymous sharing, data management, 3D visualization, multi-board assembly, documentation, output configuration, and more. With the addition of Altium 365, users can choose between accessing the program online and on-premises.

3

PathWave Advanced Design System (ADS)

Keysight Technologies

PathWave ADS provides integrated design guidance via templates to make it easier to get started. It is easy to find the part that you need with the extensive component libraries. Automatic sync allows you to visualize the physical layout and create schematic designs. Data allows teams to visualize whether their designs are meeting specifications. PathWave ADS's data display and analytics capabilities produce graphs, charts and diagrams that will give you design confidence. With wizards, templates, and design guides, you can quickly accelerate your design. The entire design flow includes schematic, layout and circuit. As frequency and speed increase on printed circuit boards (PCBs), signal and power integrity become more important. Electronic device failures can be caused by transmission line effects. To simulate the board accurately, it is necessary to model vias, traces, and interconnects.

4

Allegro Design Publisher

Cadence Design Systems

This industry-first PCB design and verification process has achieved "Fit For Purpose – Tool Confidence Level 1" (TCL1) certification. This allows you to meet strict ISO 26262 automotive safety standards. This flow covers everything, from design authoring through simulation to physical realization and verification with the PSpice®, Allegro and OrCAD®. The integrated environment of high-performance layout editing, simulation, design entry tools, and design authoring provides an integrated environment for designers to validate safety specifications against individual circuit specifications. This allows them to design confidently. Download the functional safety documentation kits via cadence online support for more information about the safety manuals, tool confident analysis documents and compliance reports from TUV SUD. Allows users to control the content. Allows you to share designs with anyone who can read PDFs.

5

PathWave RFIC Design

Keysight Technologies

Beyond traditional RF simulation, design, analyze, verify radio frequency integrated circuits. Design and verification can be done with confidence using both nonlinear and steady-state solvers. Complex RFICs can be validated faster using wireless standard libraries. Verification of IC specifications via RF simulation must be done before taping out an RFIC. Simulators can simulate the effects of layout parasitics, complex modulated signal, and digital control circuitry. PathWave RFIC Design allows you to simulate in both frequency and time domains and can bring your designs to Cadence Virtuoso. Simulate components on silicon chips accurately. Optimize designs using sweeps and load-pull analysis. Incorporate RF designs into the Cadence Virtuoso environment. Performance can be increased with Monte Carlo and yield analysis. Safe operating area warnings simplify debugging. Use the most recent foundry technology right away.

6

Allegro PSpice

Cadence Design Systems

The Allegro PSpice System Designer uses core Cadence PSpice technology to provide fast and accurate simulations. This package provides utilities for sensitivity analysis and goal-based multiparameter optimization, component stress, reliability analysis, and Monte Carlo analysis to estimate yield. Parametric plotter analyzes interdependence between parameters and converts simulation data to meaningful results. Allegro Design Entry HDL can be used to generate schematics that can be used to drive PCB layout. This will reduce design time and eliminate redrawing errors. It has a large collection of models and behavioral modeling techniques that make it easy to refine the analog/digital interface. Analog and mixed-signal designs can be analysed quickly and accurately. PSpice technology is used at the core to perform fast and accurate simulations.

7

Allegro X PCB Designer

Cadence Design Systems

The Cadence Allegro Design Platform is the best solution to navigate modern electronic complexity and support your diverse PCB needs. It is a full-stack platform that provides a highly integrated and scalable environment for multi-board system design. Allegro X Design Platform allows your global teams to collaborate effectively and simultaneously in order to minimize project risk, lower production costs and ensure design compliance. Electrical engineers and PCB design professionals can make data-driven decision with integrated analysis workflows and constraints, reducing turnaround time and ensuring product reliability and first pass success.

8

Autodesk EAGLE

Autodesk

$60 per month

EAGLE (electronic design automation) software allows printed circuit board (PCB), designers to seamlessly connect schematic diagrams and component placement. It also includes comprehensive library content. EAGLE offers a variety of PCB layout tools that will help you bring your design to life. Drag and drop reusable blocks between your projects. To ensure your schematic stays on track, validate your design using a complete set electronic rule checks. All changes are automatically synchronized between your layout and schematic, so you can concentrate on the creative process. You can control your design flow and avoid any unexpected surprises by using fully customizable PCB design rules. You can rest assured that your next design will be completed with worry-free libraries. Our growing catalog allows you to find and place parts dynamically.

9

Allegro X System Capture

Cadence Design Systems

Cadence®, Allegro®, Design Entry Capture and Capture Component Information System (CIS), are simple-to-use and highly effective solutions for schematic design. They support both flat and hierarchical designs, from the simplest to most complex. Seamless bi-directional integration with Allegro PCB enables data synchronization and cross-probing/placing between the schematic and the board design. Allegro Design Entry Capture or Capture CIS allow designers to back-annotate layout modifications, make gate/pin switches, and change component names and values from schematic to board design using the feedback process. It can also export netlists in many formats and has a large library for schematic symbols. Allegro Design Entry Capture Capture CIS and Allegro Design Entry Capture CIS combine the schematic design application with the additional capabilities of a CIS.

10

Multisim

NI

Multisim™, a software that integrates industry-standard spice simulation with an interactive schematic environment, allows you to instantly visualize and analyze electronic circuit behavior. Its intuitive interface allows teachers to reinforce circuit theory and improve theory retention throughout their engineering curriculum. Multisim™, which adds powerful circuit simulation and analysis into the design flow, helps researchers and designers decrease iterations and save development costs. Multisim™, for Education, is circuit teaching software for power electronics courses and labs. Multisim™, provides engineers with the SPICE simulation and analysis tools and PCB design tools to quickly iterate on designs, improve prototype performance, and speed up prototyping.

11

DipTrace

DipTrace

$75 per license

PCB Layout is a high level engineering tool for board design. It features smart manual routing of high speed and differential signals, shape based autorouter and advanced verification. It also has wide import/export capabilities. The design requirements are defined by net class rules, class-to class rules, and the specific settings by object types for each layer or class. DipTrace's design process includes real-time DRC. This allows for quick reporting of errors before they are made. The board can be viewed in 3D, and exported for mechanical CAD modeling. The final product will be of highest quality thanks to the design rule check. This includes detailed detailing, net connectivity verification, comparing to the source schematic, and an in-depth description. DipTrace is a single environment that allows for direct circuit-to board converting, updating from schematic, back annotation, and more. Nets can be divided into net classes using custom settings and rules that vary from class to class. Via styles can be used to organize through and blind/buried vias.

12

Ultiboard

NI

$ 2,816

Ultiboard is a software for designing and layout printed circuit boards. It integrates seamlessly with Multisim, allowing for faster prototyping. Ultiboard software allows for efficient PCB layout and routing in a configurable environment. It allows you to place copper and parts with manual precision, defining critical board elements. You can quickly create a design using its automated functionality. You can easily manage, control, and create any board layout using the advanced spreadsheet view, toolbox, or design wizards. Integration with Multisim software is seamless. This allows for easy schematic transfer to the PCB. Forward and backward annotations allow for design iteration management. Export industry-standard file formats like Gerber and DXF are available to complete the design flow, from schematic to layout. Our software-connected, tailored approach is designed to help you engineer the next step.

13

CircuitStudio

Altium

$495 per license 1 Rating

You can quickly design advanced board layouts using interactive routing and the intelligent SitusTM Autorouting technology. With Native 3D™, PCB editing and STEP support, you can collaborate effortlessly with your mechanical design team. Advanced electronics can be accurately simulated and shipped using integrated XSPICE digital and analog simulations. With hierarchical schematic capture and constraint-driven PCB layout technology, you can quickly transform your ideas into reality. With an intuitive interface and customizable workflow, you can instantly get started on your next design project. Altium designer and EAGLE compatibility allow you to access your entire design history. With real-time availability and pricing data from hundreds of suppliers, you will never miss another deadline. With the Circuitstudio content library, you can quickly create custom parts.

14

FloWare

FlowCAD

FloWare is a collection of useful enhancements that increase productivity in CAD Flow, PCB Design with OrCAD or Allegro. These enhancements were created to meet specific customer needs in the areas of Setup, Display and Edit, Draft, Shapes. Check/Review, Documentation. Installation of FloWare modules requires no technical knowledge. The wizard guides you through the FloWare installation process. The tool bar shows the menu structure that PCB Editor recognizes. You can choose from the available modules to increase your PCB design productivity. The license is sent by email and is valid at the location of your company. Each module contains detailed documentation.

15

CADSTAR

eCADSTAR

CADSTAR is a well-known desktop PCB design with thousands of satisfied customers worldwide. CADSTAR is powerful, affordable, and accessible. It will meet all your design needs and budget. Local resellers provide support and training to assist you in integration and consulting to maximize your return on your investment. Zuken's CADSTAR PCB design software is ideal for small and medium-sized design teams. It also appeals to individuals and companies with multiple locations. CADSTAR is a complete PCB design software environment, from the initial concept to product realization. Engineers can easily design, visualize, implement, and verify their designs with a single suite of applications. Schematic capture with constraint planner and placement. Automatic and constraint-driven interactive PCB layout & routing.

16

Ansys Exalto

Ansys

Ansys Exalto, a post-LVS RLCk extractor software solution, allows IC designers to capture unknown crosstalk between different blocks in their design hierarchy. It extracts lumped-element parasitics from the design hierarchy and generates an accurate model for electrical and magnetic coupling. Exalto interfaces well with most LVS tools, and can be used in conjunction with the RC extraction tool you choose. Ansys Exalto post LVS RLCk extraction allows IC designers to accurately predict electromagnetic and substrate-coupling effects for signoff on circuits previously "too large to analyze." The extracted models can be back-annotated to any schematic or netlist and support all circuit simulators. Modern silicon systems have seen a rise in RF and high speed circuits. This has made electromagnetic coupling a first-order effect that must be accurately modelled to ensure silicon success.

17

PathWave EM Design

Keysight Technologies

The Electromagnetic simulation (EM) gives you insight before physical prototyping. You can customize EM simulations to increase speed and accuracy. Integrate EM analysis into your circuit simulations. EM simulations can take several hours to run. Integrating your EM simulation software and PathWave circuit design software can reduce import and export times. To maximize efficiency, integrate EM analysis and circuit simulations. 3D EM solid modeling environment to create arbitrary 3D objects or import existing 3D models from other CAD settings. Prerequisite to prepare a 3D geometry for 3DEM simulation. This includes defining ports, boundary conditions, and material properties. 3D EM solid modeling and Finite Difference Time Domain simulator. Compliance testing for Specific Absorption Rates (SAR) or Hearing Aid Compatibility.

18

Flux

Flux

$7 per user per month

Real-time collaboration, a simple simulator and forkable community content make it easier to build hardware more efficiently. Modern sharing, permissions and an easy-to use version control system allow you to harness collective intelligence. We believe in open-source. Flux's ever-growing library of schematics and parts makes it easy to get started quickly. Finally, a programmable simulation that doesn't require a PHD. You can view your schematic online before you start building. Flux is the place to go for great hardware projects, no matter if you're designing hardware for the next Mars mission or a simple circuit board. Flux is a browser-based, end-to-end electronic design platform that breaks down all barriers. Flux is doing something new and we're doing it in a unique way. It's called building openly. Join our community of makers, engineers, and entrepreneurs who are passionately interested in improving hardware design tools.

19

Sigrity SystemSI

Cadence Design Systems

This tool can be used to explore end-to-end signal or power topologies. It also allows you to perform signal-integrity and transient power-integrity analysis together. Also, you can include complex interconnect models and connect them to a single driver/receiver/discreet symbol that automatically replicates the circuit for each of the ports on the interconnect model. This solution targets source-synchronous parallel interfaces, such as DDRx memory designs. You can start with models that are quickly generated, connected, and pre-layout capabilities (including via wizard). As the design becomes more refined, you can swap in more detailed models to reflect actual hardware behavior. Concurrent simulation accounts the effects of conductor and dielectric losses, reflections and inter-symbol interferences (ISI), crosstalk and simultaneous switching noise.

20

eCADSTAR

Zuken

$3,995 one-time payment

Today's companies are faced with complex design challenges as well as tight budgets. eCADSTAR is much more than a PCB layout software. It includes simulation, 3D MCAD integration and wire harness support. All built on the most recent technology to provide enterprise-level performance at a reasonable cost. eCADSTAR's intuitive UI makes it a compelling choice for designers. eCADSTAR's design capabilities can be leveraged to simplify and accelerate your design process. The digitally connected library, intuitive schematic capture and tools to accelerate PCB Layout Engineering allow engineers to spend less time manipulating the tool, and more time doing what they love: innovating creative solutions for today’s technological challenges. The test plan is one of the most tedious parts of the design process. Without adequate upfront simulation, validation can be expensive in both time and money. eCADSTAR's capabilities for Spice simulation and SI/PI analysis deliver test cycle time reductions.

21

DesignSpark PCB

DesignSpark

1 Rating

Our DesignSpark PCB is free and can help you explore more design options for your company, which will lead to greater innovation. This software's core features include a powerful software engine that allows you to create schematics and design layouts for PCB boards. Our free design tools and resources will help you bring your best ideas to life, from initial conception through production. Our complete suite can seamlessly integrate into your existing design workflow, whether you need a single tool or a variety of technical information. There are no restrictions on the size of your schematic or the number of sheets you can use in your design. You can use as many layers as necessary for your next PCB design. There are no restrictions on the number or number of connections and no limit on the number of nodes or pads. Your maximum size PCB is 1m X1m.

22

SiLogy

SiLogy

Our next-generation platform enables chip developers and verification engineers design and debug 10x quicker. Verilator allows you to run thousands of parallel tests at the touch of a button. Share test results and waveforms seamlessly with anyone in your company, tag coworkers on signals and track test and regression errors. Verilator is used to distribute test runs and Dockerized simulation binaries across our compute cluster. We collect the log files, results, and optionally rerun failed tests to generate waveforms. Docker allows us to ensure that our test runs are consistent, reproducible and repeatable. SiLogy increases chip developer productivity by enabling faster debugging and design times. Before SiLogy the only way to debug a failing test was by copying lines from logs, debugging using waveforms on local machines, or rerunning simulations that could take days to run.

23

CircuitMaker

Altium

2 Ratings

CircuitMaker is more than an Altium EDA software tool. It's a community of creative people, sharing design content, and working together to create circuits and electronic products for a better tomorrow. You need tools that don't limit your creativity or hold you back from turning great ideas into products. CircuitMaker gives you all the power to create high-quality schematics and Printed Circuit Boards. There are no artificial limitations on board area or layer count. It's also free. CircuitMaker is a place where you can find great reference designs and promote and rate other projects. You can even create teams to collaborate on design projects. We believe you deserve better tools to help you turn your great ideas into reality. CircuitMaker was born. CircuitMaker is not only a community for electronic design content but also Schematic and PCB design software.

24

PCB Artist

Advanced Circuits

Online PCB design software that is professional-grade and offers free technical support. PCB artist features include multi-page schematics, Netlist import, and more. Advanced circuits' online PCB software is easy to use and is the best free PCB layout software. Our PCB design software is a big reason why our customers love doing business with Advanced Circuits. We help you design printed circuit boards correctly, which will save you time and money.

25

MPLAB Analog Designer

Microchip Technology

You can either choose an existing power solution, or you can create a new design. You will also find schematics and component lists. You can view or modify your selection and export the design files to MPLAB® Mindi™, Analog Simulator, for analysis and verification. Need help calculating your signal-chain noise budget? The signal chain signal to noise calculator tool allows you to perform a complete analysis of your signal chains. It is intuitive, flexible, and easy to use. The interface is simple and requires very little data inputs. Integrated design generators are used to create new power designs and refine existing designs. It is easy to switch from selecting the power solution to verifying the design. No software download is required to use the online signal chain signal-to noise calculator.

26

Quilter

Quilter

Engineers from the most innovative electronics companies in the world build with Quilter. Quilter is compatible with all of your existing libraries and designs. All completed designs will be returned in the original file format that was submitted for inspection, modification and export. Use your ECAD software of choice (currently Altium, KiCAD) to design your schematic. Upload your schematics and empty board files. Quilter automatically detects the relationships between parts. Define any design restrictions for your board. We compare tolerances with top fab houses. Quilter examines dozens and dozens of candidates, validating that all designs pass DRCs. Review candidates, choose your favorite and download board files to fabricate and test. Quilter is more human-like than an autorouter. Quilter is a PCB design tool that manages all aspects, including routing traces and placing components. It also manages board stackups and generates custom pours.

27

Sigrity PowerDC

Cadence Design Systems

Cadence®, Sigrity™ PowerDC™, technology provides reliable DC analysis for signoffs of IC packages and PCB designs. This includes electrical/thermal cosimulation to maximize accuracy. PowerDC technology quickly detects areas of excessive IR drop and areas of high current density and thermal hotspots, minimizing your design's chance of failure. Automated setup of DC simulations using PowerTree™ data (source/sink définitions) captured at the schematic phase of the design process. Identifies highly resistive routing neck downs that are difficult to locate and determines which one of thousands will fail under stress. Determines whether it is possible to reduce the plane layers without increasing thermal reliability risk or DC. With a unique block-diagram results view and a variety of visualization options, this article considers what-if improvements.

28

MPLAB Mindi Analog Simulator

Microchip Technology

The MPLAB®, Mindi™, Analog Simulator reduces design time and design risks by simulating analog circuits before hardware prototyping. The simulation tool uses a SIMetrix/SIMPLIS simulation platform, which allows for the use of SPICE and piecewise linear modeling. This simulation environment can be used to simulate a wide range of simulation requirements. This simulation interface can be paired with Microchip's proprietary model files to model specific Microchip components as well as generic circuit devices. This simulation tool runs locally on your computer. The simulation tool is free to download and does not require an Internet connection. Also, the simulation run time does not depend on remote servers. The simulation results are fast and accurate. The simulation tool can be run directly on your PC.

29

XJTAG DFT Assistant

Altium

The speed at which your product goes to manufacturing will depend on how testable your design is. Unfortunately, testing at the physical stage can't catch common mistakes that can lead to costly delays. XJTAG®, DFT Assistant integrates directly into your Altium Designer unified designer environment, running Design For Tests (DFT) checks directly on the schematic diagram. You can easily confirm that the scan chains are connected to each JTAG enabled device in your design and that each signal has been correctly connected and terminated. XJTAG®, DFT Assistant checks your JTAG-enabled devices before you finalize your layout. XJTAG®, Chain Checker helps you identify common errors and alerts you early to avoid any potential problems that could affect JTAG testing.

30

AllSpice

AllSpice

AllSpice accelerates your time to market. It allows modern revision control and collaboration for native digital designs. Transform those three-hour-long, in person, and difficult-to-schedule meetings to digital, asynchronous review sessions. Run your design reviews like a pull request. Automate your review packages. Automate your review packages by creating PCB, schematic, or BOM redlines that highlight your design changes. It's like a software diff but for circuits and not code. Never make the same mistake twice. To remind you and your team what to do next, create checklists and templates that automatically populate for new design reviews. Better design reviews are key to agile hardware development. You can submit design updates and get feedback by sharing them with others. Give people outside of your team, such as mechanical or firmware engineers, a browser view of your designs.

31

Ansys HFSS

Ansys

Multipurpose, full-wave 3D electromagnetic (EM), simulation software for designing, simulating and optimizing high-frequency electronic products, such as antennas, components and interconnects. Ansys HFSS 3D electromagnetic (EM), simulation software is used to design and simulate high-frequency electronic products, such as antennas and antenna arrays, RF and microwave components, high speed interconnects and filters, connectors and IC packages. Ansys HFSS software is used by engineers around the world to design high-frequency, fast electronics for communication systems, advanced driver assistance system (ADAS), satellites, IoT products, and other areas. Engineers can address complex EMI, RF, microwave, IC and PCB problems with HFSS's unmatched capability. Ansys HFSS simulation suite includes a wide range of solvers that can be used to solve diverse electromagnetic problems.

32

PathWave RF Synthesis

Keysight Technologies

With powerful optimization tools and fast simulation, analyze RF and microwave systems. Automatic circuit synthesis technology allows you to explore performance trade-offs. PathWaveRF Synthesis (Genesys), provides basic functionality that is suitable for all RF and microwave circuit board and subsystem designers. PathWave Circuit Design allows you to identify RF design mistakes that are not obvious from spreadsheet calculations. This entry-level environment includes circuit, system and electromagnetic simulators. It will give you confidence in your design reviews prior to hardware realization. You can see your matching network being synthesized and optimized in just a few mouse clicks. Transfer the design to PathWave Advanced Designer System (ADS), and it will be included in a more complicated design.

33

Ansys VeloceRF

Ansys

Ansys VeloceRF reduces the design cycle by significantly reducing the time required to synthesize complex spiral devices and T lines. It takes just a few seconds for an inductor or transformer to be compiled, and only a few minutes to model it and analyze it. It integrates with the leading EDA platforms to generate ready-to-tape layouts. Ansys VeloceRF allows for the creation of devices with tight packing. Analyzing the coupling between any number of inductive device before detailed layout will reduce design dimensions and reduce or eliminate guard rings. The die size can be affected by inductor size and inductor-to–inductor crosstalk. Ansys VeloceRF allows you to design smaller devices by using optimization criteria and geometry constraints. It also calculates the coupling between any number of inductors, to better optimize silicon real-estate and inductor circuit context.

34

Ansys Pharos

Ansys

Pharos combines Ansys’ unparalleled EM engine power with a proprietary circuit simulation engine to perform coupling analysis. It also provides a ranking of potential EM-crosstalk aggressors per victim. Designers can identify the most vulnerable nets to help them make design decisions that will manage EM crosstalk and reduce risk. Pharos combines an unparalleled extraction engine power with a built in simulation engine to perform EM analysis. It also ranks potential EM crosstalk aggressors per victim network. This allows designers to concentrate on the most important nets in the design. It is difficult, if not impossible to identify all EM crosstalk vulnerable victim/aggressor net pair due to increasing design complexity and the wide range of magnetic field interference.

35

SOLIDWORKS PCB

SOLIDWORKS

SOLIDWORKS PCB allows you to design Printed Circuit Boards (PCBs), quickly and with the unique collaboration between electrical design teams. It provides a clear advantage in areas where ECAD-MCAD collaboration can be crucial for the overall success of electronic product development. Single board rigid-flex PCB design is possible by defining rigid-flex regions, layers and stack thicknesses. To ensure correct layout, the rigid-flex layer stack regions are defined using bend lines and angles. SOLIDWORKS PDM-based design software and the SOLIDWORKS PDM Connector allow you to manage your project, design files, and documentation. Securely store and index design data to make it easy to find, eliminate data loss and version control concerns, and collaborate from multiple locations. Unmatched ECAD/MCAD integration and collaboration with SOLIDWORKS, which unifies design data.

36

Autodesk Fusion 360

Autodesk

$495 per year

Fusion 360 brings together design, engineering, electronics and manufacturing in one software platform. Get integrated CAD, CAM, CAE & PCB on a single development platform. EAGLE Premium, HSMWorks and Team Participant are also included. You also have access to consumptive services such as cloud simulation, generative design, and cloud rendering. A comprehensive range of modeling tools is available to help you design products. You can ensure the form, fit and function of your products using a variety of analysis methods. You can create and edit sketches using sketch constraints, dimensions, as well as a powerful suite if sketch tools. Edit and repair imported geometry from non native file formats. You can make design changes without worrying too much about time-based features. Edit complex parametric surfaces to repair, patch or design geometry. You can create history-based features such as extrude, revolve and loft that are updated with design changes.

37

SOLIDWORKS Electrical Schematic

SolidWorks

SOLIDWORKS®, Electrical Schematics packages are standalone, easy to use, electrical design tools that allow you to efficiently create electrical interconnections for complex electric systems. SOLIDWORKS Electrical Schematic's intuitive interface automates complex tasks such as terminal drawings and cross-referencing. It speeds up product development by reducing repetitive tasks involved in developing electrical schematics. SOLIDWORKS Electrical Schematic Standard allows for rapid development of embedded electrical systems. Common re-usable materials are made possible by the availability of symbols and manufacturer information. SOLIDWORKS Electric Schematic Professional SOLIDWORKS Electronic Schematic Professional is a set of collaborative schematic design tools that enable rapid development of embedded electrical system.

38

Ansys RaptorH

Ansys

Ansys RaptorH electromagnetic modeling software can model power grids, full custom blocs, spiral inductors and clock trees. High-speed distributed processing allows for accurate, silicon-proven RLCk and S-parameter models. RaptorH is capable of analysing partial and unfinished layouts in the design phase. It makes it easy to use either RaptorX, the silicon-optimized RaptorX engines for silicon structures, or the general purpose HFSS engine. Ansys RaptorH extracts electromagnetic model at the pre-LVS stage to allow for arbitrary routing and layout. This includes planes (solid and perforated), spiral inductors and MiM/MoM capacitators - with automatic setting boundary conditions. The GUI allows for point-and-click net selection as well as what-if analyses. RaptorH can be used to create analyses using either the HFSS engine or the Raptor engine. It is supported by all major silicon findries.

39

Aptean Cimnet ERP

Aptean

Aptean Cimnet is designed to empower printed circuit boards (PCB) manufacturers by automating and streamlining processes, reducing costs, and improving bottom line results. PCB manufacturing processes and engineering require specialized functionality you can't get from a generic ERP. Cimnet offers targeted engineering and manufacturing features that are tailored to the PCB industry's unique workflow and challenges. These industry-specific tools are integrated into a suite of business management software that drives efficiency and visibility in your quoting and inventory management, production and financial processes, as well as supply chain management. Cimnet integrates seamlessly with CAM (computer-aided manufacture) and preCAM products. In today's competitive market, your ability to respond quickly to customer demands is critical.

40

Ansys PathFinder

Ansys

Ansys PathFinder SC is a high-capacity software that helps you plan, verify, and sign-off IP designs and full-chip SoC designs to ensure integrity and robustness against Electrostatic discharge (ESD). Ansys PathFinder SC identifies and isolates design issues that could lead to chip failure due to ESD events such as charged-device model, human body model (HBM), and other ESD events. Its cloud-native, high-capacity architecture can host thousands of compute cores to provide fast turnaround on full-chip chips. Major foundries have certified PathFinder-SC for current density checks and ESD sign off. The integrated data modeling, extraction, and transient simulation engine of PathFinder-SC is a complete solution for ESD verification. The single-pass model can read industry-standard designs, set up ESD rules, extract the RCs for power networks, and perform ESD simulations to analyze root cause and provide feedback.

41

ZenitPCB

ZenitPCB

1 Rating

ZenitPCB Layout allows you to create professional printed circuit boards (PCB). It is an easy-to-use CAD program that allows you to quickly realize your projects. ZenitPCB Layout can be used for personal or semi-professional purposes. It is limited to 800 pins. This is the boundary between hobby and professional work. ZenitPCB Layout allows you to create your project from either the schematic capture or the layout. ZenitPCB Layout can create a printed circuit board that is both singleside and doubleside. It works with the rules of each project or the general net class. Here are some pcb features. ZenitPCB GerberView allows you to view the gerbers created and gives you more control over the project.

42

ExpressPCB Plus

ExpressPCB

ExpressPCB is pleased to announce several enhancements to ExpressPCB Plus software. We offer peace of mind when it comes to validating your design from schematic to layout before manufacturing. ExpressPCB Plus allows you to link the ExpressSCH schematic netlist to the ExpressPCB Plus PCB layout. To assist with board layout, a "Net Connection” tool was added to allow users highlight connected pads in a net using the linked schematic. Validates the ExpressPCB Plus layout to ensure it is equivalent to the ExpressSCH schematic list. Reports errors for missing or additional components, pins or other design elements. Users can highlight errors and zoom in to pinpoint them. Users can correct errors and validate edits with one tool. Export capability for errors in Microsoft Excel format.

43

PCBWeb

PCBWeb

You can use both the keyboard and mouse to navigate around the layout and schematic of PCBWeb Designer. To zoom in or out of the area you are interested in, use the scroll wheel, page-up or page-down keys. To adjust your zoom level to match your design, click on the icon at the lower right of your application or press your home button. You can pan PCBWeb designer by pressing the right-mouse button and moving your mouse. To pan the display area, you can also use the scroll bars at the bottom and sides of the application. PCBWeb Designer includes a fully integrated component catalogue that allows you to search, filter, and place parts with both a footprint and a symbol.

44

KiCad EDA

KiCad EDA

1 Rating

The schematic editor allows you to create unlimited designs. There are no paywalls for unlocking features. A built-in schematic editor and an official library of schematic symbols will help you quickly get started with your designs. Professional PCB layouts can be made with up to 32 copper layers. KiCad now includes a push-and-pull router that can route differential pairs and adjust trace lengths interactively. KiCad also includes a 3D viewer that you can use to view your design in an interactive canvas. To inspect details that are difficult or impossible to see in a 2D view, you can rotate and pan around. Multiple rendering options make it possible to change the board's aesthetic or hide and show certain features. The schematic capture in KiCad is fast and efficient. It also includes all the tools necessary to do so. The interface is focused on productivity. As large designs can be broken into hierarchical subsheets, there are no limits to their complexity.

45

Ansys Path FX

Ansys

Ansys Path FX lets you calculate timing with variation on a full SoC without any shortcuts. Its unique cell modeling allows SPICE accuracy timing for any voltage and variation condition using a single library. Path FX is fully threaded, distributed and can scale up to thousands of CPUs. Ansys Path FX's path based timing analysis can account for all contributors to delay or constraints across multiple process, voltages, temperature corners, and scenarios. It can also simulate and identify every clock path in your design. Today's biggest challenges in chip design are to limit power consumption using lower supply voltages, and manage the complexity of advanced silicon processing at 7nm or below.

46

Pad2Pad

Pad2Pad

Do not complicate the process by using multiple vendors to obtain finished boards. Pad2Pad can manufacture and assemble PCBs for your business. Use our free PCB design software to design, price, and order your PCBs. You can also get an instant quote by uploading your gerber files to place your order. Pad2Pad is the complete solution for designing, manufacturing, and assembling custom circuit boards. Pad2Pad can seamlessly move your design from concept to production, whether you are an inventor looking for a single PCB or a business looking to manufacture 100,000 boards. The PCB manufacturing industry is built on circuit testing and high-quality production standards.

47

Sigrity OptimizePI

Cadence Design Systems

Cadence®, Sigrity™, OptimizePI™, technology performs a complete AC frequency analysis on boards and IC packages to ensure high performance at both the system and component levels. It supports both pre-layout and post-layout studies and quickly pinpoints the best placement locations and decap selections to meet your power-delivery networks (PDN) requirements at the lowest cost. Sigrity OptimizePI technology uses proven Cadence hybrid electromagnetic circuit analysis technology and the unique Sigrity optimization engines to quickly pinpoint the best decap selections or placement locations.

48

CR-8000 Design Force

ZUKEN

Design Force is a revolutionary innovation in electrical design. It allows you to break down the boundaries of your electrical design process. The process of designing a product is becoming more complex. This often involves technologies that are difficult or impossible to use ECAD tools to address. Design Force allows design teams to access system-level design information as early as the planning and conceptual phases. This allows them to layout each product board while simultaneously considering the entire system view. Design Force uses the most current industry hardware and software. Users can design in a native 3D environment. This allows them to achieve optimal performance by using native 64-bit, multithreading, multicore processors. Design Force is compatible with multiple client-server implementations. You can also work from your corporate cloud.

49

DFMStream

DownStream

3D visualization and documentation help to minimize manufacturing defects and production delays. DFMStream®, a comprehensive yet simple-to-use tool suite, is designed to assist engineers and designers in analyzing, verifying, and optimizing a PCB design for manufacturing success. It can check design and manufacturing rules on PCB designs databases, Gerber, and NC data at any point during the PCB designing cycle. DFMStream encourages collaboration between engineer/designer/fabricator. Even if a PCB design passes the standard design rule verification in the PCBCAD system, it is possible for critical flaws to be overlooked that could slow down the transition to manufacturing or assembly. Often, flaws are discovered before production begins when the design data is being processed for manufacturing or assembly. These flaws can lead to costly delays in time to market. Designs are then updated and reprocessed in order to fix issues found in pre-production.

50

Sigrity PowerSI

Cadence Design Systems

Cadence®, Sigrity™, PowerSI®, technology is designed to help you address increasingly difficult issues such as simultaneous switching noise, signal co-coupling and target voltage levels. It provides fast, precise, and detailed electrical analysis for complete IC packages and PCBs. It can be used pre-layout for power- and signalintegrity guidelines. Post-layout it can also be used to verify performance and improve designs without the need for a prototype. Sigrity PowerSI electromagnetic field solver technology allows you to quickly perform a wide range of studies. You can identify trace and via coupling problems, power/ground fluctuations due to simultaneously switching outputs, as well as design regions that are below or above voltage targets. PowerSI technology allows you to extract frequency-dependent network parameter models, and visualize complex spatial relationships.

Relevant Categories