EDINBURGH, Scotland----Oct. 23, 2000--Quickturn, a company of Cadence® Design Systems, Inc. (NYSE:CDN), and Simutech today announced support for the ARM7TDMI on Simutech's eValab(TM) Platform and the Quickturn Rapid Prototyping System (RPS(TM)) solution through each company's common CoreBoard(TM) architecture.

The release of the ARM7TDMI CoreBoard is an important industry step to support cost-effective design-in of semiconductor intellectual property (SIP) and to speed time-to-market of system-on-chip (SoC) designs. The CoreBoard will enable end-users to reduce the risk of intellectual property (IP) and architecture selection, build prototype silicon platforms, and provide an environment to integrate and verify the hardware and software of an SoC in a system context.

Features of ARM7TDMI Evaluation and Verification

The availability of the custom ARM7TDMI CoreBoard supports a standard form factor for IP re-use, a remote environment for hardware and software evaluation, and a complete in-system verification environment for platform-based SoC designs. Leveraging a common CoreBoard standard allows any core running in the Simutech eValab system to be plug-and-play compatible with the Quickturn RPS solution. Quickturn and Simutech have optimized the ARM7TDMI CoreBoard and development environment to deliver:

Productive software development and debugging with the ARM multi-in-circuit emulation (multi-ICE) software and Joint Test Action Group (JTAG) connection

In-system software IP evaluation and selection over the internet for ARM7 compatible software and peripherals

High-performance architectural and full-functional verification of ARM-based designs

``By expanding our product families to include the ARM7TDMI CoreBoard we are providing the largest SoC customer base with the ability to leverage Simutech's IP evaluation and SoC verification technologies in an optimal way,'' commented Steve Glaser, vice president of marketing at Simutech. ``Our close working relationship with Quickturn gives our customers access to a very experienced team, and value-added hardware and software co-development and verification environments, that can bring ARM-based designs to market three to five months faster.''

``Simutech's and Quickturn's ability to support ARM's architecture via the prototyping systems eValab and the modular architecture of the RPS solution is a step forward in ARM's quest for continued leadership,'' stated Chris Jones, product manager, PrimeCell Peripherals at ARM. ``The plug-and-play capabilities of the CoreBoard will enable ARM-powered product designers to evaluate architectures and peripheral choices early in the design cycle. It is essential to our customers' success that they have the ability to verify the hardware and software components to a high degree of confidence right through to product release.''

``The development of the ARM7TDMI CoreBoard further strengthens the working relationship between ARM and Quickturn,'' commented George Zafiropoulos, vice president of marketing at Quickturn. ``The ability to apply our experience in application-specific verification environments for wireless, networking and multimedia design using embedded processors, will benefit both existing and new customers.''

Price and Availability

The ARM7TDMI CoreBoard is available for shipment from Quickturn. Pricing for the CoreBoard begins at $10,500 (U.S. list price). For more information on product pricing and availability, please contact Quickturn at 408/914-6000. For pricing and availability outside of North America, contact a local Quickturn office or distributor.

About Simutech

Simutech's mission is to enable IP reuse, IP e-commerce, and rapid SoC development. Its customers include leading electronics systems, semiconductor, and IP companies. Simutech's products enable web based technical component evaluation, hardware-software co-development, and full SoC verification. For more information about Simutech, please visit http://www.simutech.com.

About Quickturn

Quickturn, a Cadence® company, is the leading provider of high-performance verification solutions and Time-to-Market Engineering (TtME(TM)) services for the design and verification of complex IC and electronic systems. Quickturn products are used by developers of high-performance computing, multimedia, graphics, and communications systems. For more information, visit the Quickturn web site at http://www.quickturn.com, call 408/914-6000, or send email to info@quickturn.com.

About Cadence

Cadence is the largest supplier of electronic design automation products, methodology services, and design services used to accelerate and manage the design of semiconductors, computer systems, networking and telecommunications equipment, consumer electronics, and a variety of other electronics-based products. With approximately 5,100 employees and 1999 annual revenue of $1.1 billion, Cadence has sales offices, design centers, and research facilities located around the world. The company is headquartered in San Jose, Calif. and traded on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol CDN. For more information visit http://www.cadence.com.

Note to Editors: Cadence and the Cadence logo are registered trademarks and Quickturn, RPS, and TtME are trademarks of Cadence Design Systems, Inc. Simutech and eValab are trademarks of Simutech. Other trademarks are property of their respective owners.

Contact:

Quickturn

Sanjay Sawant, 408/914-6580

ssawant@quickturn.com

or

Simutech

Steve Glaser, 408/573-6736

steve.glaser@simutech.com

or

KaiLi Communications

Leslie Cumming, 503/274-2604

leslie_cumming@msn.com

or

Armstrong Kendall, Inc.

Laura Garrett, 503/672-4690

laura@akipr.com

Previous Page