1970 - 1979

Hercules In New York

Stay Hungry

Pumping Iron

The Villain

1980 - 1989

The Jayne Mansfield Story

Conan The Barbarian

Conan The Destroyer

The Terminator

Red Sonja

Commando

Raw Deal

Predator

The Running Man

Red Heat

Twins

1990 - 1999

Total Recall

Kindergarten Cop

Terminator 2: Judgment Day

Last Action Hero

True Lies

Junior

Eraser

Jingle All The Way

Batman & Robin

End Of Days

2000 - 2009

The 6th Day

Collateral Damage

Terminator 3: Rise Of The Machines

Around The World In 80 Days

2010 - 2019

The Expendables

The Expendables 2

The Last Stand

Escape Plan

Sabotage

The Expendables 3

Maggie

Terminator Genisys

Aftermath

Killing Gunther

Journey To China: The Mystery Of Iron Mask

Terminator 6

Unknown

Triplets

The Legend Of Conan

Blanco

More

Missing Movies

Links

Hercules In New York (1970)

Hercules in New York is a 1970 low-budget fantasy comedy film directed by Arthur Allan Seidelman and written by Aubrey Wisberg, who also served as producer. It is notable for being the first feature film to star a then-unknown Arnold Schwarzenegger, who was about 22 years old when the film was produced. It is further notable for being one of the films that Schwarzenegger admits regretting having appeared in.

Starring: Arnold Strong "Mr. Universe", Arnold Stang, Deborah Loomis, James Karen, Ernest Graves, Tanny McDonald, Taina Elg, Michael Lipton, George Bartenieff, Rudy Bond, Mark Tendler, Dennis Tinerino, Richard Herd

DVD | IMDb (3.2) | Wikipedia

Stay Hungry (1976)

Stay Hungry is a 1976 American comedy-drama film by director Bob Rafelson from a screenplay by Charles Gaines (adapted from his 1972 novel of the same name).

The story centers on a young Birmingham, Alabama, scion, played by Jeff Bridges, who gets involved in a shady real-estate deal. In order to close the deal, he needs to buy a gym building to complete a multi-parcel lot. When he visits the gym, however, he finds himself romantically interested in the receptionist (Sally Field) and drawn to the carefree lifestyle of the Austrian body builder "Joe Santo" (Arnold Schwarzenegger) who is training there for the Mr. Universe competition.

Schwarzenegger won a Golden Globe for "Best Acting Debut in a Motion Picture" for his portrayal of Joe Santo in Stay Hungry. Technically, it was not his debut role, since he had played Hercules (as "Arnold Strong") in the 1969 film Hercules in New York and a hitman in Robert Altman's 1973 film The Long Goodbye. It was, however, the first time his voice had been heard on film as Hercules was dubbed and the hitman character was deaf and mute.

Starring: Jeff Bridges, Sally Field, Arnold Schwarzenegger

N/A | IMDb (5.7) | Wikipedia

Pumping Iron (1977)

Pumping Iron is a 1977 docudrama about the world of professional bodybuilding, with a focus on the 1975 IFBB Mr. Universe and 1975 Mr. Olympia competitions. Directed by George Butler and Robert Fiore and edited by Geof Bartz and Larry Silk, it is inspired by a book of the same name by Butler and Charles Gaines, and nominally centers on the competition between Arnold Schwarzenegger and one of his primary competitors for the title of Mr. Olympia, Lou Ferrigno. The film also features segments on bodybuilders Franco Columbu and Mike Katz, in addition to appearances by Ken Waller, Ed Corney, Serge Nubret, and other famous bodybuilders of the era.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Lou Ferrigno, Franco Columbu, Mike Katz, Ken Waller, Ed Corney, Serge Nubret

DVD | IMDb (7.4) | Wikipedia

The Villain (Cactus Jack) (1979)

The Villain is a 1979 American film. A parody blend of western films and Warner Bros.' Wile E. Coyote cartoon situations, it was directed by Hal Needham and starred Kirk Douglas, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Ann-Margret, Paul Lynde, Foster Brooks, Strother Martin, Ruth Buzzi, Jack Elam, and Mel Tillis.

Its title when released in the UK and in Australia was Cactus Jack.

Starring: Kirk Douglas, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Ann-Margret, Paul Lynde, Foster Brooks, Strother Martin, Ruth Buzzi, Jack Elam, Mel Tillis

DVD | IMDb (5.4) | Wikipedia

The Jayne Mansfield Story (1980)

The Jayne Mansfield Story is a 1980 television film directed by Dick Lowry, starring Loni Anderson as the sex goddess, and Arnold Schwarzenegger as her body builder husband; based on the life of Jayne Mansfield. The film was originally titled Jayne Mansfield: A Symbol of the '50's. The script is based on the book Jayne Mansfield and the American Fifties by Martha Saxton.

It originally aired on CBS on October 29, 1980.

The film is listed in Golden Raspberry Award founder John Wilson's book The Official Razzie Movie Guide as one of The 100 Most Enjoyably Bad Movies Ever Made.

Starring: Loni Anderson, Arnold Schwarzenegger

DVD | IMDb (5.2) | Wikipedia

Conan The Barbarian (1982)

Conan the Barbarian is a 1982 American fantasy adventure film directed and co-written by John Milius. It is based on stories by Robert E. Howard, a pulp-fiction writer of the 1930s, about the adventures of the eponymous character in a fictional prehistoric world of dark magic and savagery. The film stars Arnold Schwarzenegger and James Earl Jones, and tells the story of a young barbarian (Schwarzenegger), who seeks vengeance for the death of his parents at the hands of Thulsa Doom (Jones), the leader of a snake cult. Buzz Feitshans and Raffaella De Laurentiis produced the film for her father Dino De Laurentiis, with Edward R. Pressman as an executive producer. Basil Poledouris composed the music.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, James Earl Jones, Sandahl Bergman, Ben Davidson, Gerry Lopez, Mako, William Smith, Max von Sydow

DVD | IMDb (6.9) | Wikipedia

Conan The Destroyer (1984)

Conan the Destroyer is a 1984 American sword and sorcery/adventure film directed by Richard Fleischer, starring Arnold Schwarzenegger and Mako Iwamatsu reprising their roles as Conan and Akiro the wizard, respectively. The cast also includes Grace Jones, Wilt Chamberlain, Tracey Walter, and Olivia d'Abo. It is the sequel to Conan the Barbarian.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Grace Jones, Wilt Chamberlain, Mako, Tracey Walter, Olivia d'Abo, Sarah Douglas

DVD | IMDb (5.9) | Wikipedia

The Terminator (1984)

The Terminator is a 1984 American science-fiction action film directed by James Cameron. It stars Arnold Schwarzenegger as the Terminator, a cyborg assassin sent back in time from 2029 to 1984 to kill Sarah Connor (Linda Hamilton), whose son will one day become a savior against machines in a post-apocalyptic future. Michael Biehn plays Kyle Reese, a soldier from the future sent back in time to protect Connor. The screenplay is credited to Cameron, along with producer Gale Anne Hurd. Executive producers John Daly and Derek Gibson of Hemdale Film Corporation were instrumental in the film's financing and production.

The Terminator topped the US box office for two weeks and helped launch Cameron's film career and solidify Schwarzenegger's. It received critical acclaim, with many praising its pacing, action scenes and Schwarzenegger's performance. Its success led to a franchise consisting of four sequels (Terminator 2: Judgment Day, Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines, Terminator Salvation and Terminator Genisys), a television series, comic books, novels and video games. In 2008, The Terminator was selected by the Library of Congress for preservation in the National Film Registry, being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Michael Biehn, Linda Hamilton, Paul Winfield

DVD+R | IMDb (8.0) | Wikipedia

Red Sonja (1985)

Red Sonja is a 1985 Dutch-American sword and sorcery action film directed by Richard Fleischer. The film introduces Brigitte Nielsen as the title character with Arnold Schwarzenegger, Sandahl Bergman, Ronald Lacey, Ernie Reyes, Jr., Paul L. Smith and Pat Roach in supporting roles. The film features the sword-wielding Marvel Comics character Red Sonja, created by Roy Thomas, who first appeared in Marvel's Conan the Barbarian series (#23) in 1973. The film's character of Red Sonja was based on Red Sonya of Rogatino, a character created by Robert E. Howard appearing in his short story "The Shadow of the Vulture" (1934). The film acknowledges that it was "based on the character created by Robert E. Howard" in the introductory credits.

Starring: Brigitte Nielsen, Sandahl Bergman, Paul Smith, Ronald Lacey, Arnold Schwarzenegger

DVD | IMDb (5.0) | Wikipedia

Commando (1985)

Commando is a 1985 American action film directed by Mark L. Lester, and starring Arnold Schwarzenegger and Rae Dawn Chong. The film was released in the United States on October 4, 1985.

The film was nominated for a Saturn Award for Best Special Effects but lost to Back to the Future. The film's score was provided by James Horner. A critical and commercial success, Commando was the 7th highest-grossing R-rated movie of 1985 worldwide, and the 25th highest-grossing overall.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Rae Dawn Chong, Alyssa Milano, Vernon Wells

DVD | IMDb (6.7) | Wikipedia

Raw Deal (1986)

Raw Deal is 1986 American action film directed by John Irvin, starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Kathryn Harrold, Darren McGavin and Sam Wanamaker. The film was released in the United States on June 6, 1986. The film tells the story of an elderly and embittered high-ranking FBI chief, Harry Shannon, who wants to get revenge against a Mafia organization and sends a former FBI agent and now small-town sheriff Mark Kaminsky to destroy the organization from the inside.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Kathryn Harrold, Darren McGavin, Sam Wanamaker, Paul Shenar, Steven Hill, Ed Lauter

Blu-Ray | IMDb (5.5) | Wikipedia

Predator (1987)

Predator is a 1987 American science-fiction action horror film directed by John McTiernan. It stars Arnold Schwarzenegger as the leader of an elite special forces team which is on a mission to rescue hostages from guerrilla held territory in Val Verde in Central America's Northern Triangle. Kevin Peter Hall co-stars as the titular antagonist, a technologically advanced form of extraterrestrial life secretly stalking and hunting the team. Predator was written by brothers Jim and John Thomas in 1985, under the working title of Hunter. Filming began in April 1986 and creature effects were devised by Stan Winston.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Carl Weathers

DVD | IMDb (7.8) | Wikipedia

The Running Man (1987)

The Running Man is a 1987 American science fiction action film directed by Paul Michael Glaser and starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, María Conchita Alonso, Richard Dawson, Jesse Ventura, and Jim Brown. It is very loosely based on the 1982 novel of the same name written by Stephen King and published under the pseudonym Richard Bachman. The film's story, set in a dystopian United States between 2017 and 2019, is about a television show called "The Running Man", where convicted criminal "runners" must escape death at the hands of professional killers.

Original director Andrew Davis was fired one week into filming and replaced by Glaser. Schwarzenegger has stated this was a "terrible decision", as Glaser "shot the movie like it was a television show, losing all the deeper themes". Schwarzenegger believes this hurt the movie. Paula Abdul is credited with the choreography of the Running Man dance troupe.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, María Conchita Alonso, Yaphet Kotto, Richard Dawson

DVD | IMDb (6.7) | Wikipedia

Red Heat (1988)

Red Heat is a 1988 American buddy cop action film directed by Walter Hill. The film stars Arnold Schwarzenegger, as Moscow narc Ivan Danko, and James Belushi, as Chicago detective Art Ridzik. Finding themselves on the same case, Danko and Ridzik work as partners to catch a cunning and deadly Soviet Georgian drug kingpin, Viktor Rostavili (Ed O'Ross), who also happens to be the killer of Danko's previous partner back in Soviet Russia.

The film was released with the tagline "Moscow's toughest detective. Chicago's craziest cop. There's only one thing more dangerous than making them mad: making them partners." It was the first American film given permission to shoot in Moscow's Red Square—however, most of the scenes set in the Soviet Union (with the exceptions of the establishing shots under the main titles and the final lengthy shot in Red Square behind the end credits) were actually shot in Hungary. Schwarzenegger was paid a salary of $8 million for his role in the film.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, James Belushi, Peter Boyle, Ed O'Ross

Blu-Ray | IMDb (6.0) | Wikipedia

Twins (1988)

Twins is a 1988 American buddy film produced and directed by Ivan Reitman about unlikely twins (played by Arnold Schwarzenegger and Danny DeVito) who were separated at birth. The core of the film is the contrast between DeVito's streetwise persona matched with Schwarzenegger's intellectual persona.

The original music score was composed by Georges Delerue and Randy Edelman (Edelman would score three more films for the director, whereas this was Delerue's only work for him).

The film was a commercial success, earning $11 million on its opening weekend, and going on to gross $216 million worldwide. Instead of taking their usual salaries for the film, Schwarzenegger and DeVito both agreed with the studio to take 20% of the film's box office returns; this resulted in them receiving the biggest paychecks of their movie careers.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Danny DeVito, Kelly Preston, Chloe Webb, Bonnie Bartlett, Tony Jay

DVD | IMDb (6.0) | Wikipedia

Total Recall (1990)

Total Recall is a 1990 American science-fiction action film directed by Paul Verhoeven, starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Rachel Ticotin, Sharon Stone, Ronny Cox, and Michael Ironside. The film is loosely based on the Philip K. Dick short story "We Can Remember It for You Wholesale". It tells the story of a construction worker who is having troubling dreams about Mars and a mysterious woman there. It was written by Ronald Shusett, Dan O'Bannon, Jon Povill, and Gary Goldman, and won a Special Achievement Academy Award for its visual effects. The original score composed by Jerry Goldsmith won the BMI Film Music Award.

With a budget of $50–65 million, Total Recall was one of the most expensive films made at the time of its release, although estimates of its production budget vary and whether it ever actually held the record is not certain.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Rachel Ticotin, Sharon Stone, Michael Ironside, Ronny Cox

DVD | IMDb (7.5) | Wikipedia

Kindergarten Cop (1990)

Kindergarten Cop is a 1990 American comedy film, released to cinemas in the United States on December 21, 1990, directed by Ivan Reitman, distributed by Universal Pictures. Arnold Schwarzenegger stars as John Kimble, a tough police detective working undercover as a kindergarten teacher to apprehend the vicious drug dealer Cullen Crisp (Richard Tyson) before Crisp can get to his former wife and son.

While undercover, Kimble discovers his passion for teaching and considers changing his profession to become an educator. Pamela Reed plays his partner, Phoebe O'Hara, and Penelope Ann Miller plays Joyce, the teacher who becomes his love interest. The original music score was composed by Randy Edelman. The film was released in the United Kingdom on February 1, 1991, and topped the country's box office that weekend.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Penelope Ann Miller, Pamela Reed, Linda Hunt, Richard Tyson, Carroll Baker

DVD | IMDb (6.1) | Wikipedia

Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991)

Terminator 2: Judgment Day (also referred to as Terminator 2 or T2) is a 1991 American science-fiction action film co-written, produced and directed by James Cameron. The film stars Arnold Schwarzenegger, Linda Hamilton, and Robert Patrick, with Edward Furlong also in its principal cast as John Connor. It is the sequel to the 1984 film The Terminator, and the second installment in the Terminator franchise. Terminator 2 follows Sarah Connor (Hamilton) and her ten-year-old son John (Furlong) as they are pursued by a new, more advanced Terminator, the liquid metal, shapeshifting T-1000 (Patrick), sent back in time to kill John Connor and prevent him from becoming the leader of the human resistance. A second, less advanced Terminator (Schwarzenegger) is also sent back in time to protect John.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Linda Hamilton, Robert Patrick, Edward Furlong

DVD | IMDb (8.5) | Wikipedia

Last Action Hero (1993)

Last Action Hero is a 1993 American fantasy action-comedy film directed and produced by John McTiernan. It is a satire of the action genre and associated clichés, containing several parodies of action films in the form of films within the film. The film stars Arnold Schwarzenegger as Jack Slater, a Los Angeles police detective within the Jack Slater action film franchise. Austin O'Brien co-stars as a boy magically transported into the Slater universe. Schwarzenegger also served as the film's executive producer and plays himself as the actor portraying Jack Slater, and Charles Dance plays an assassin who escapes from the Slater world into the real world.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, F. Murray Abraham, Art Carney, Charles Dance, Frank McRae, Tom Noonan, Robert Prosky, Anthony Quinn, Mercedes Ruehl, Austin O'Brien

DVD | IMDb (6.3) | Wikipedia

True Lies (1994)

True Lies is a 1994 American action film written, co-produced and directed by James Cameron, starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jamie Lee Curtis, Tom Arnold, Art Malik, Tia Carrere, Bill Paxton, Eliza Dushku, Grant Heslov and Charlton Heston. It is a remake of the 1991 French comedy film La Totale! The film follows U.S. government agent Harry Tasker (Schwarzenegger), who balances his life as a spy with his familial duties.

True Lies was the first Lightstorm Entertainment project to be distributed under Cameron's multimillion-dollar production deal with 20th Century Fox, as well as the first major production for the visual effects company Digital Domain, which was co-founded by Cameron.

For her performance, Curtis won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy and the Saturn Award for Best Actress, while Cameron won the Saturn Award for Best Director. The film ultimately grossed $378 million worldwide at the box-office and was also nominated at the Academy Awards and BAFTAs in the Best Visual Effect category, and also for seven Saturn Awards.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jamie Lee Curtis, Tom Arnold, Art Malik, Bill Paxton, Tia Carrere

DVD | IMDb (7.2) | Wikipedia

Junior (1994)

Junior is a 1994 American comedy film directed and produced by Ivan Reitman, and starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Danny DeVito and Emma Thompson. The film was released in the United States on November 23, 1994. The film follows Alex Hesse, an Austrian-American scientist who agrees to undergo a male pregnancy as part of a scientific experiment.

Despite the film's lukewarm reception, Schwarzenegger and Thompson received Golden Globe nominations for their performances. The film's theme song, Patty Smyth's "Look What Love Has Done" was also recognized, going on to be nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Song. It is also Schwarzenegger's third collaboration with DeVito, following 1988's Twins and preceding 1993's Last Action Hero, and second with Pamela Reed after 1990's Kindergarten Cop.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Danny DeVito, Emma Thompson, Frank Langella, Pamela Reed

DVD | IMDb (4.6) | Wikipedia

Eraser (1996)

Eraser is a 1996 American action thriller film directed by Chuck Russell, starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, James Caan, James Coburn, Robert Pastorelli and Vanessa L. Williams. The film follows a U.S Marshal of WITSEC who protects a senior operative testifying about an illegal arms deal and is forced to fight his former allies when one of the players is revealed to be a mole inside WITSEC.

The film was a commercial success with grossing over $242 million against a budget of $100 million. It received mixed reviews from critics, but praised Schwarzenegger's performance, the action sequences and the visual effects. It was released in the United States on June 21, 1996 and was nominated for the Academy Award for Sound Effects Editing in 1997.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, James Caan, Vanessa Williams, James Coburn, Robert Pastorelli

DVD | IMDb (6.1) | Wikipedia

Jingle All The Way (1996)

Jingle All the Way is a 1996 American Christmas comedy film directed by Brian Levant and starring Arnold Schwarzenegger and Sinbad, with Phil Hartman, Rita Wilson, Jake Lloyd, James Belushi and Robert Conrad. The plot focuses on two rival fathers, workaholic Howard Langston (Schwarzenegger) and stressed out postal worker Myron Larabee (Sinbad), both desperately trying to get a Turbo-Man action figure for their respective sons on a last minute shopping spree on Christmas Eve.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Sinbad, Phil Hartman, Rita Wilson, Jake Lloyd, Curtis Armstrong, Robert Conrad, Jim Belushi

DVD | IMDb (5.5) | Wikipedia

Batman & Robin (1997)

Batman & Robin is a 1997 American superhero film based on the DC Comics characters Batman and Robin. It is the fourth and final installment of Warner Bros.' initial Batman film series. The film was directed by Joel Schumacher and written by Akiva Goldsman. It stars Arnold Schwarzenegger, George Clooney, Chris O'Donnell, Alicia Silverstone, and Uma Thurman. Batman & Robin tells the story of Batman and Robin as they attempt to prevent Mr. Freeze and Poison Ivy from freezing all mankind to death and repopulating the earth with mutant plants, while at the same time struggling to keep their partnership together. It is also to date the only live-action film appearance of Batgirl, who helps the title characters fight the villains.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, George Clooney, Chris O'Donnell, Uma Thurman, Alicia Silverstone, Michael Gough, Pat Hingle, Elle Macpherson

N/A | IMDb (3.7) | Wikipedia

End Of Days (1999)

End of Days is a 1999 American fantasy action horror thriller film directed by Peter Hyams and starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Gabriel Byrne, Robin Tunney, Kevin Pollak, Rod Steiger, CCH Pounder, and Udo Kier. The film follows former New York Police Department detective Jericho Cane (Schwarzenegger) after he saves a banker (Byrne) from an assassin, finds himself embroiled in a religious conflict, and must protect an innocent young woman (Tunney) who is chosen by evil forces to conceive the Antichrist with Satan.

The film was released by Universal Pictures on November 24, 1999. It has grossed $66.9 million in North America and $145.1 million elsewhere, for a worldwide total of $212 million. The film received mainly negative reviews.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Gabriel Byrne, Kevin Pollak, Robin Tunney, Rod Steiger

DVD | IMDb (5.7) | Wikipedia

The 6th Day (2000)

The 6th Day is a 2000 American science fiction action film directed by Roger Spottiswoode and starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Tony Goldwyn, Michael Rapaport and Robert Duvall. In the film, a family man of the future is illegally cloned by accident as part of a vast conspiracy involving a shady billionaire businessman, and is thrust into a struggle to clear his name and protect his family from the conspirators who seek to keep the cloning a secret. The title refers to the Judeo-Christian Genesis creation narrative, where God created mankind on the sixth day.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Michael Rapaport, Tony Goldwyn, Michael Rooker, Sarah Wynter, Robert Duvall

DVD | IMDb (5.9) | Wikipedia

Collateral Damage (2002)

Collateral Damage is a 2002 American action film directed by Andrew Davis, starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Elias Koteas, Francesca Neri, Cliff Curtis, John Leguizamo and John Turturro. The film was released in the United States on February 8, 2002.

The film tells the story of Los Angeles firefighter, Gordon Brewer (Arnold Schwarzenegger), who seeks to avenge his son and wife's death at the hands of a guerrilla commando, by traveling to Colombia and facing his family's killers. The original script for the film had the same plotline but would have addressed American policy in the Middle East by taking place in Libya; director Davis and his screenwriters chose Colombia as the new location because it had not been used as extensively and touched on a current geopolitical conflict area. Noted anti-war activist Stan Goff was hired as a consultant but later described the film as horrible and stated that taking on the job was the worst mistake he had ever made.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Elias Koteas, Francesca Neri, Cliff Curtis, John Leguizamo, John Turturro

DVD | IMDb (5.5) | Wikipedia

Terminator 3: Rise Of The Machines (2003)

Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines (also referred to as Terminator 3 or T3) is a 2003 American science-fiction action film directed by Jonathan Mostow and starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Nick Stahl, Claire Danes, David Andrews and Kristanna Loken. It is the third installment in the Terminator film series, following Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991) and The Terminator (1984). It does not involve James Cameron, who directed and wrote the first two films. It grossed over $434 million worldwide, and is the third-highest-grossing film of the franchise (after the 2015 film Terminator Genisys).

After Skynet failed to kill Sarah Connor before her son John Connor (Stahl) was born, and also failed to kill John Connor as a child, Skynet now sends another Terminator back in time, the T-X (Loken), in an attempt to wipe out as many Human Resistance officers as possible. This includes John Connor's future wife, Kate Brewster (Danes), but not John himself as his whereabouts are unknown to Skynet. John's life is placed in danger when the T-X finds him while pursuing Kate. The Resistance has also sent their own Terminator (Schwarzenegger) back to protect the T-X's targets. The film was followed by another sequel in 2009 entitled Terminator Salvation.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Nick Stahl, Claire Danes, David Andrews, Kristanna Loken

DVD | IMDb (6.3) | Wikipedia

Around The World In 80 Days (2004)

Around the World in 80 Days is a 2004 American action adventure comedy film based on Jules Verne's novel of the same name. It stars Jackie Chan, Steve Coogan and Cécile de France. The film is set in 19th-century Britain and centers on Phileas Fogg (Steve Coogan), here reimagined as an eccentric inventor, and his efforts to circumnavigate the globe in 80 days. During the trip, he is accompanied by his Chinese valet, Passepartout (Jackie Chan). For comedic reasons, the film intentionally deviated wildly from the novel and included a number of anachronistic elements. With production costs of about $110 million and estimated marketing costs of $30 million, it earned $24 million at the U.S. box office and $72 million worldwide, making it a box office flop. It was Arnold Schwarzenegger's last film before he took a hiatus from acting to become Governor of California until 2010's The Expendables.

Starring: Jackie Chan, Steve Coogan, Cécile de France, Jim Broadbent, Ian McNeice, Karen Joy Morris, Arnold Schwarzenegger

DVD | IMDb (5.8) | Wikipedia

The Expendables (2010)

The Expendables is a 2010 American ensemble action film written by David Callaham and Sylvester Stallone, and directed by Stallone, who also starred in the lead role. The film co-stars Jason Statham, Jet Li, Dolph Lundgren, Randy Couture, Terry Crews, Steve Austin and Mickey Rourke. The film was released in the United States on August 13, 2010. It is the first installment in The Expendables film series. This was Dolph Lundgren's first theatrically released film since 1995's Johnny Mnemonic, and Steve Austin's last theatrical release film until 2013's Grown Ups 2.

The film is about a group of elite mercenaries tasked with a mission to overthrow a Latin American dictator whom they soon discover to be a mere puppet controlled by a ruthless ex-CIA agent. It pays tribute to the blockbuster action films of the late 1980s and early 1990s. It was distributed by Lionsgate.

The Expendables received mixed reviews, praising the action scenes, but criticizing the lack of story. However, it was commercially successful, opening at number one at the box office in the United States, the United Kingdom, China and India, and grossed a total of $274 million worldwide. A sequel, The Expendables 2, was released on August 17, 2012, and another sequel, The Expendables 3, was released on August 15, 2014.

Starring: Sylvester Stallone, Jason Statham, Jet Li, Dolph Lundgren, Eric Roberts, Randy Couture, Steve Austin, David Zayas, Giselle Itié, Terry Crews, Mickey Rourke, Arnold Schwarzenegger

Blu-Ray | IMDb (6.5) | Wikipedia

The Expendables 2 (2012)

The Expendables 2 is a 2012 American action film directed by Simon West, written by Richard Wenk and Sylvester Stallone and based on a story by Ken Kaufman, David Agosto and Wenk. Brian Tyler returned to score the film. It is the sequel to the 2010 action film The Expendables, and stars Sylvester Stallone, Jason Statham, Jet Li, Dolph Lundgren, Chuck Norris, Terry Crews, Randy Couture, Liam Hemsworth, Jean-Claude Van Damme, Bruce Willis, and Arnold Schwarzenegger. The story follows the mercenary group known as "the Expendables" as they undertake a seemingly simple mission which evolves into a quest for revenge against rival mercenary Jean Vilain, who murdered one of their own and threatens the world with a deadly weapon. It is the second installment in The Expendables film series.

Starring: Sylvester Stallone, Jason Statham, Jet Li, Dolph Lundgren, Chuck Norris, Terry Crews, Randy Couture, Liam Hemsworth, Jean-Claude Van Damme, Bruce Willis, Arnold Schwarzenegger

Blu-Ray | IMDb (6.6) | Wikipedia

The Last Stand (2013)

The Last Stand is a 2013 American action film directed by South Korean film director Kim Jee-woon in his American directorial debut. The film stars Arnold Schwarzenegger, Johnny Knoxville, Forest Whitaker, Jaimie Alexander and Rodrigo Santoro and was written by Andrew Knauer. This was Arnold Schwarzenegger's first lead acting role since Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines in 2003. The film focuses on a tough small town sheriff and his deputies who must stop a dangerous drug lord from escaping to Mexico in a modified sports car.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Johnny Knoxville, Forest Whitaker, Rodrigo Santoro, Jaimie Alexander, Luis Guzmán, Eduardo Noriega, Peter Stormare, Zach Gilford, Genesis Rodriguez

DVD | IMDb (6.4) | Wikipedia

Escape Plan (2013)

Escape Plan (formerly known as Exit Plan and The Tomb) is a 2013 American action thriller film starring Sylvester Stallone and Arnold Schwarzenegger, and co-starring Jim Caviezel, 50 Cent, Vinnie Jones, Vincent D'Onofrio and Amy Ryan. Directed by Swedish filmmaker Mikael Håfström, and written by Miles Chapman and Jason Keller (under the anagram pen-name 'Arnell Jesko'). The first film to pair up action film icons Stallone and Schwarzenegger as co-leads, it follows Stallone's character Ray Breslin, a structural engineer who is incarcerated in the world's most secret and secure prison, aided in his escape by fellow inmate Emil Rottmayer (Schwarzenegger).

Starring: Sylvester Stallone, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jim Caviezel, Curtis "50 Cent" Jackson, Sam Neill, Vinnie Jones, Vincent D'Onofrio, Amy Ryan

DVD | IMDb (6.7) | Wikipedia

Sabotage (2014)

Sabotage is a 2014 American action thriller film co-written and directed by David Ayer and starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Sam Worthington, Olivia Williams, Mireille Enos and Terrence Howard. The film was released in the United States on March 28, 2014.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Sam Worthington, Olivia Williams, Terrence Howard, Joe Manganiello, Harold Perrineau, Martin Donovan, Max Martini, Josh Holloway, Mireille Enos

DVD | IMDb (5.7) | Wikipedia

The Expendables 3 (2014)

The Expendables 3 is a 2014 American action film directed by Patrick Hughes and written by Creighton Rothenberger, Katrin Benedikt and Sylvester Stallone. It is the third installment in The Expendables film series and the sequel to The Expendables (2010) and The Expendables 2 (2012). The film features an ensemble cast including Jet Li, Sylvester Stallone, Jason Statham, Antonio Banderas, Wesley Snipes, Dolph Lundgren, Kelsey Grammer, Randy Couture, Terry Crews, Kellan Lutz, Ronda Rousey, Glen Powell, Victor Ortiz, Mel Gibson, Harrison Ford and Arnold Schwarzenegger. The story follows the mercenary group known as "The Expendables" as they come into conflict with ruthless arms dealer Conrad Stonebanks, the Expendables' co-founder, who is determined to destroy the team. Released theatrically on August 15, 2014 by Lionsgate, it is the first film in the Expendables series not to be rated R by the Motion Picture Association of America. It is instead rated PG-13, a decision that upset many fans. Also, it is the first film of the franchise that runs more than two hours. The film grossed $214 million worldwide on a $90 million budget.

Starring: Jet Li, Sylvester Stallone, Jason Statham, Antonio Banderas, Wesley Snipes, Dolph Lundgren, Kelsey Grammer, Randy Couture, Terry Crews, Kellan Lutz, Ronda Rousey, Glen Powell, Victor Ortiz, Mel Gibson, Harrison Ford, Arnold Schwarzenegger

Blu-Ray | IMDb (6.1) | Wikipedia

Maggie (2015)

Maggie is a 2015 post-apocalyptic horror drama film directed by Henry Hobson, in his directorial debut, written by John Scott 3, and starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Abigail Breslin and Joely Richardson. Maggie is a dramatic departure for Schwarzenegger, who is better known for his action film roles.

The film was originally set to have its world premiere at the 2014 Toronto International Film Festival, but Lionsgate bought the American distribution rights and pulled the film out of the festival's roster. It instead premiered at the 2015 Tribeca Film Festival on April 23, 2015, as part of their lineup, followed by a limited theatrical release and simultaneous VOD release on May 8, 2015.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Abigail Breslin, Joely Richardson

DVD | IMDb (5.6) | Wikipedia

Terminator Genisys (2015)

Terminator Genisys is a 2015 American science fiction film directed by Alan Taylor and written by Laeta Kalogridis and Patrick Lussier. The fifth installment in the Terminator franchise, it serves as a soft reboot to the film series, using the plot element of time travel to erase the events of the previous films of the franchise from the series' continuity. It stars Arnold Schwarzenegger, who reprises his role as the eponymous character, Jason Clarke, Emilia Clarke and Jai Courtney. The plot follows soldier Kyle Reese in the war against Skynet; Kyle is sent from the year 2029 to 1984 by John Connor, leader of the Human Resistance, to protect Connor's mother Sarah. When Kyle arrives in the past, he discovers that the timeline has been altered and Sarah has been raised by a reprogrammed Terminator.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jason Clarke, Emilia Clarke, Jai Courtney, J. K. Simmons, Dayo Okeniyi, Matt Smith, Courtney B. Vance, Lee Byung-hun

DVD | IMDb (6.5) | Wikipedia

Aftermath (2017)

Aftermath (originally titled 478) is a 2017 American drama thriller film directed by Elliott Lester and written by Javier Gullón. The film stars Arnold Schwarzenegger, Scoot McNairy, Maggie Grace and Martin Donovan. The film was released on April 7, 2017 by Lionsgate Premiere. The film is based on the Überlingen mid-air collision though the names, places and incidents were changed.

Starring: Arnold Schwarzenegger, Scoot McNairy, Maggie Grace, Martin Donovan

Blu-Ray | IMDb (5.7) | Wikipedia

Killing Gunther (2017)

Killing Gunther is an American action comedy film written and directed by Taran Killam, in his directorial debut. Arnold Schwarzenegger stars as the titular Gunther alongside Killam, Killam's wife Cobie Smulders, and Bobby Moynihan. It was released on video on demand on September 22, 2017, before being given a limited theatrical release on October 20, 2017 by Saban Films.

Starring: Taran Killam, Bobby Moynihan, Hannah Simone, Cobie Smulders, Arnold Schwarzenegger

N/A | IMDb (4.7) | Wikipedia

Journey To China: The Mystery Of Iron Mask (Viy 2) (2019)

Viy 2: Journey to China (Russian: Вий 2 alternately known as Journey to China: The Mystery of Iron Mask) is an upcoming Russo-Chinese fantasy adventure film. It is the sequel to Viy, the 2014 cinema hit loosely based on the Nikolai Gogol story Viy.

Starring: Jackie Chan, Jason Flemyng, Rutger Hauer, Charles Dance, Arnold Schwarzenegger

N/A | IMDb | Wikipedia

Terminator 6 (2019)

N/A | IMDb | Wikipedia

Triplets (pre-production)

N/A | IMDb | Wikipedia

The Legend Of Conan (announced)

N/A | IMDb | Wikipedia

Blanco (announced)

N/A | IMDb | Wikipedia

More

Missing movies

Stay Hungry

Arnold Schwarzenegger on IMDb

Arnold Schwarzenegger on Wikipedia

Template:ArnoldTOC