Biography

Discography

Lyrics

News Archive

Urapopstar Forums

URAPS Daily

News

September 3, 2004

Sorry about the lack of updates, we've been quite busy lately. We spent 2 weeks at the end of August attending and supervising the Colony Earth Youth Science Camp, and helped several junior high school students build their own space shuttle replica, which was actually launched into space successfully.

"Colony Earth" has opened today, and for every 1500 tickets sold, a free prize will be given out. Prizes include "Colony Earth" movie posters, Dr. C and the Predicates CD's, and much more.

Our new single, "Satellite", is released this Monday. With every purchase of the CD, if you insert the CD into your computer CD-ROM drive, you will get an exclusive download track! This digital B-side is to the same tune as "Satellite", but from the perspective of the people on Earth, which isn't really explored in "Colony Earth".

At the recent URAPS Awards, Dr. C and the Predicates won the award for Best Rock act. Largely believed to be a dark horse pick for the category, they were astonished to have won such an award.July 16, 2004

Dr. C and the Predicates will be doing various scientific experiments with junior high school students, and possibly assisting them in building a miniature space shuttle, as part of volunteer work at a space camp for junior high school students.

This space camp is sponsored by the movie "Colony Earth", for which Dr. C and the Predicates will be doing the theme song for, so when they were encountered by the space camp, they accepted.

"We've always had a passion for science like this... it's fastinating how the space shuttle works, and we're interested in showing the younger people exactly how they can make their own space shuttles!"

The space camp is set to take place in the middle of August, shortly before the release of their new single, "Satellite", on September 6th.

In chart happenings, "Lyin' In The Sun" has dropped to #17 in the singles charts, after 4 weeks in the top 10. It has now shipped 243,673 copies to date, and is expected to go platinum next week.

Dr. C's duet with Lizzie, "I Made It Hard For You To Love Me", was released this week. Midweek figures widely suggest that this collaboration will likely enter the top 20 on this week's singles chart.

June 23, 2004

The single for "Lyin' In The Sun" recently climbed to #3 in the singles chart after debuting at #6 the previous week. It is currently 599 units away from being certified silver.

In other news, some plot details of the film which Dr. C and the Predicates will be doing the theme song for have been revealed. The film will be about a private investigator who gets called to a mysterious warehouse. Unbeknownst to him, it's actually a secret hideout for a local cult, trying to lure him into their ranks. He then spends time as a prisoner taken into outer space; then his colleagues search for clues, fighting cultists as they go on to recruit more earthlings to increase their numbers.

The soundtrack will be available in September, along with the first single which will be written and performed by Dr. C and the Predicates.

June 4, 2004

Dr. C and the Predicates are preparing for the release of their next single, "Lyin' In The Sun", next Monday. After the hospitalization of one of their members due to a collapsed lung, they've decided to take it easy this weekend and go to the beach, much like in the video for their latest single. They've been rumoured to have an exclusive jam session where they could premiere a brand new track or two.

In other news, they have a new tour vehicle, a repainted ambulance with their single cover painted on the side, and an advertisement for the single with its release date.

May 7, 2004

The latest Dr. C and the Predicates single, "Faceless Crowd/So Sad, So Lonely" was recently certified Gold for selling in excess of 200,000 copies in its first 4 weeks on sale. This week, it fell 6-18 in the singles chart, after spending its first 2 weeks at #3.

Their album, "World Tour 2003-04 Volume 2", was also a big seller, entering the albums chart at #3, and has sold 171,961 copies in its first 3 weeks on sale.

Dr. C and the Predicates recently visited Emma Button and her newborn baby. Dr. C himself is the baby's father, but due to his already packed schedule, will be leaving the baby in Emma's care.

Dr. C has also announced his first work outside his band, it's a collaboration with new up and coming singer Lizzie on her second single "I Made It Hard For You to Love Me".

April 9, 2004

Dr. C and the Predicates released their newest single, "Faceless Crowd/So Sad, So Lonely" this week. Early predictions based on midweek figures have stated that they are likely to get their first ever top 5 hit on this week's charts.

In other news, Dr. C recently broke his hand after a lengthy autograph session. Despite this, he still vows that they will still be doing the Spring Fling show outside their home for a free audience this Easter Sunday. When he gets the cast off his hand, which has been signed by various celebrities at the premiere of their new reality show, which aired this week, he will auction it off for an as-yet-undetermined charity.

The new album, "World Tour 2003-04 Volume 2", is released this Monday, April 12th. In addition to the posted tracklisting, a hidden track has been revealed, called "Lyin' In The Sun".

March 17, 2004

Dr. C and the Predicates recently moved to the UK after their world tour wrapped up. They had a little trouble getting used to driving on the left (which can be hard for Americans to master), and almost got into an accident, but they're fine now.

Their reality show has entered post-production, and will air in April, around the same time as their new album, "World Tour 2003-04 Volume 2" is released. It will include footage of Dr. C and the Predicates on several dates of their world tour.

In chart news, their duet with Emma Button, "The Love Was Lost", is currently #26 in its 4th week in the charts. It peaked at #7 on February 29th after debuting at #21 the previous week.