of COURSE you do! But what are the chances of you hitting it big in the real world? Very small, you know. What about the unreal world? Have you ever heard of the game where you can create your own popstar? It's called URAPOPSTAR, and on this game you can write the songs for your popstar, make their cover art, and PROMOTE them! All of this work is not for nothing, this site even allows it's member to vote for singles being released, and they are put into a realistic chart!

How do you play?

1) Find a model! I've used Emma Bunton for my act!

2) Find or Write A Song To Release: my song I wrote, "Give It Up" hit the #8 spot!

3) PROMOTE!: Make up promotional topics in the promo forum! Also, take notice of who's promoting and who is not! It's important!

4) Release An Album: There's not a set number of songs you have to have, or a maximum!

5) VOTE; Go to the main website to vote for the acts you think have done the best job promoting their singles! This is the simulation for 'buying' the singles!

Other Things To Do;

1) Join a record label! This is not required, but it's nice to have the support of your label behind you!

2) Want to talk about real life? There's a life forum to talk about everything outside the game!

3) Got some extra songs you dont want to use? Share them in the songwriting forum?

4) Feeling uninspired to write, but need a song? People share unused songs in the songwriting forum!

5) I know a lot of you here have your own personal charts, well they have a forum for that, too!

There's also a lot more to this game then just the items listed above! There are mock award shows, TRL, Idol shows, download charts, airplay charts, and everything imaginable! I've had so much fun playing this game over the years, I know you will too!

Are you unsure if the model you want to use is actually being used by someone else? There's a topic in the forum that lists all the acts and their models, so don't fret if you're unsure!

To join, simply go to the Official Home Site (listed below).. currently each PR (what the owners of acts are referred to) is allowed only two acts, but for beginners, that is enough. There are times they will allow you to sign up more, but you just have to be patient!

So, are you ready for this fantastic fantasy site?

Official Home Site; http://www.urapopstar.co.uk

Forums to Promote On; http://s4.invisionfree.com/urapopstar

Enjoy, and have fun!

If you need any help signing up, feel absolutely FREE to PM and ask me. The more members there, the better!