This event has already occurred

November 9, 2013

Location: The Streaming Cafe

Address: 596 Leon Ave, Kelowna, BC V1Y 9S3

Time: 7:00 PM

America/Vancouver The Royal Oui Live at The Streaming Cafe The Royal Oui is married couple Adrienne Pierce and Ari Shine’s new band. Close harmonies evoke Fleetwood Mac and Fleet Foxes in songs that would fit on playlists with Civil Wars and Wilco. Their successful solo careers include dozens of TV placements on shows like Grey’s Anatomy, direct support for artists like Ray Lamontagne and Chris Shiflett (Foo Fighters), making the 2013 Grammy ballot and showcases at SXSW, NXNE and festivals worldwide. The Royal Oui recently signed with Vancouver label - File Under Music (Blackie and The Rodeo Kings, Dan Magnan) and have also released their EP "Forecast" October 8th. The full length album comes out February 11th. They were recently featured in Rolling Stone and American Songwriter. American Songwriter premiered their new single in their Best New Music section and had this to say: "Ari Shine and Adrienne Pierce have been recording music for years, working separately as solo artists before carving out The Royal Oui’s hazy, swooning sound together. The EP is called Forecast. And things are looking bright." -American Songwriter The Streaming Cafe 596 Leon Ave, Kelowna, BC V1Y 9S3 events@kelownanow.com

The Royal Oui is married couple Adrienne Pierce and Ari Shine’s new band. Close harmonies evoke Fleetwood Mac and Fleet Foxes in songs that would fit on playlists with Civil Wars and Wilco. Their successful solo careers include dozens of TV placements on shows like Grey’s Anatomy, direct support for artists like Ray Lamontagne and Chris Shiflett (Foo Fighters), making the 2013 Grammy ballot and showcases at SXSW, NXNE and festivals worldwide.

The Royal Oui recently signed with Vancouver label - File Under Music (Blackie and The Rodeo Kings, Dan Magnan) and have also released their EP "Forecast" October 8th. The full length album comes out February 11th.

They were recently featured in Rolling Stone and American Songwriter.

American Songwriter premiered their new single in their Best New Music section and had this to say:

"Ari Shine and Adrienne Pierce have been recording music for years, working separately as solo artists before carving out The Royal Oui’s hazy, swooning sound together. The EP is called Forecast. And things are looking bright."

-American Songwriter

Updating Stories