Mar 30, 2006 4:45pm EST

Thursday Mar 30, 2006 6:35pm EST (updated)By Stephen M. Silverman

CREDIT: JON KOPALOFF / FILMMAGIC

Former Friends star Matt LeBlanc, 38, and his wife, Melissa, 41, are divorcing, the couple announced Thursday.

"Melissa and Matt LeBlanc have decided to end their marriage of three years," the actor's rep, Joe Libonati, said in a statement. "The dissolution is amicable. They remain devoted parents and friends. For the sake of their family, they ask that their privacy be respected at this time."

According to legal documents filed by LeBlanc, the actor is seeking “dissolution of marriage” based on “irreconcilable differences.” He lists the couple's date of separation at Jan. 1, 2006, and requests joint legal custody of their 2-year-old daughter, Marina.

Melissa, a former model, has two other children from a previous marriage.

The pair were originally introduced in 1997 by actor Lou Diamond Phillips and his wife, Kelly. After a five-year engagement, Matt and Melissa were married on May 3, 2003, in Hawaii in front of 75 guests that included former costars Jennifer Aniston, Courteney Cox and Lisa Kudrow.

At the time of their marriage, a friend of the couple's told PEOPLE that they seemed perfectly suited. "They're really sweet together," said the friend. "He loves her and she loves him. It's very real."

From people.com

rachyroo said:

Ok, this is going to sound strange but I had a feeling this might happen after Jen and Brad split. Call me crazy but I always thought there may be a chance Jen and Matt would get togther in real life at some point.

I know I'm a nutter!

You're not the only one

BohemianBeauty22 said:

Who would have thought? With the way celebrity marriages are going these days, this doesn't surprise me. None of them do anymore. I feel for their child though that they have together.

If they're responsible people it'll work out just fine. It's hard to tell from their sexual conduct if they're responsible from other respects.

here's Ted's take so far:

http://www.eonline.com/Gossip/Awful/Daily2006/060403.html

Got some Playboy Mansion antics below for ya, but first, wanted to let you know Matt LeBlanc's marriage demise is eerily similar to that of Matty's Friends costar Jennifer Aniston's. Timing-wise, that is.

Both starry unions (his to Melissa McKnight, hers to a dude named Brad Pitt) ended far before anyone in the public had a notion as to what might be derailing at home.

"[LeBlanc's] marriage ended so long ago," piped a Friends comrade, supertight both personally and professionally. "Just like with Brad and Jennifer--we all knew about this long before the public did. It's been a done deal for ages."

Maybe M.L.'s Joey travails took center stage with the couple, instead of their marriage? I doubt it. Obviously, the Friends crew is well aware of being so obsessively scrutinized they go overboard on the public-declaration biz, or lack thereof.

Personally, I think M.L. and M2 were doomed from the start--they're very different. More on that la-tuh in the week, because quite frankly, I feel it my due to inform you nosy folk about a Nashville duo who's also quite reluctant to let people know how they really feel...