The following History Remixed page is under construction.

Please do not edit or alter this article in any way while this template is active. All unauthorized edits may be reverted on the admin's discretion. Propose any changes to the talk page.

Tomiichi Murayama (村山 富市, Murayama Tomiichi, born 3 March 1924) is a Japanese politician who served as President of Japan from 1993 until his resignation in 1997. He led the Japanese Socialist Party, and was responsible for changing its name to the Social Democratic Party of Japan in 1996. Upon becoming President, he was Japan's first socialist leader in nearly thirty years since 1960. He is most remembered today for his speech "On the occasion of the 50th anniversary of the War's end", in which he publicly apologised for Japan's past rule and aggression. [UNDER PROGRESS]

[UNDER PROGRESS] In 1993 presidential election, Tomiichi Murayama campaigned as a candidate of the opposition Japan Socialist Party, which had been out of power in the bloodless 1960 coup d'état, and was elected to the presidency, defeating the incumbent Toshiki Kaifu of the Liberal DemocratIc Party.

During his first term of his presidency, Murayama began enact an series of major reforms, with most notable one was the restoration of citizenship of formerly deposed Imperial Family members, including the former Emperor Takahito. The restoration of such citizenship rights allowed the Imperial Family to once again become active in Japanese society since the 1946 republic referendum after almost 50 years of it's exile. Murayama also pursed policies to aim at promoting economic growth, job creation, and social spending, as well as he pursued a number of liberalization policies, including privatization of some state-owned companies, deregulation, and tax reforms, despite the protests from elements of the governing coalition. In 1996, Murayama was re-elected to his second term, beating LDP candidate, former prime minister Ryutaro Hashimoto in a closely contested election.

During his second term, [UNDER PROGRESS].