By Yi Whan-woo

Former Japanese Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama will attend a roundtable discussion today hosted by the Northeast Asian History Foundation in Seoul.

Murayama, 90, is known for his 1995 apology for the Japanese colonial occupation from 1910-1945. His statement of remorse was critically acclaimed and welcomed in Korea.

At the Northeast Asian History Foundation's office in Seodaemun-gu, he will deliver a keynote speech before the discussion aimed at finding possible solutions to improve the souring Korea-Japan relations.

The participants will also discuss differences between Murayama's Cabinet (1994-1996) and the incumbent Tokyo government under conservative Prime Minister Shinzo Abe.

The meeting will run from 9:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m.

Thirteen history and diplomatic experts from Korean and Japan are scheduled to attend. They will include Yun Duk-min, chancellor of the Korea National Diplomatic Academy; Kang Chang-il; a main opposition New Politics Alliance for Democracy lawmaker and also a member of South Korea-Japan Parliamentarians' League; Lee Dong-kwan, former senior presidential secretary for public affairs; and Haruki Wada, an professor emeritus at the University of Tokyo.

The discussion comes amid strained relations between Seoul and Tokyo in the wake of historical disputes between the two countries.

In June, Korea slammed the Japanese government for its attempt to undermine the credibility of the Kono Statement.

Named after the former Japanese prime minister in 1993, Yohei Kono, the statement apologizes for forcing women, mostly Koreans, into sexual slavery in military brothels during World War II and their colonial rule.

Both the Kono Statement and Murayama's broader comments in 1995, which offer Japan's self-reflection and apology for the damage and suffering his country inflicted upon its Asian neighbors, have been key elements for improving Korea-Japan relations, according to Korean officials.

The Northeast Asian History Foundation, under the Ministry of Education, deals with historical issues in the region including territorial disputes between Seoul and Tokyo over Dokdo, Korea's easternmost islets.