Source:Xinhua Published: 2014-2-13 0:33:02

Former Japanese prime minister Tomiichi Murayama, known for his apology for past wartime atrocities while in office, said Wednesday that incumbent Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has no choice but to honor the Murayama Statement.

"All previous prime ministers of Japan said that they inherit the Murayama Statement. Abe also stated once that he inherits the statement. I believe there has been no falsehood in that pledge," Murayama said during his lecture to South Korean lawmakers at parliamentary headquarters.

Murayama made an official apology via the famous "Murayama Statement" in 1995, when he was in office, for Japan's past atrocities and war of aggression during its colonial rule of Asian nations.

Murayama said he was assured of Abe's acceptance of the apology because he cannot deny Japan's invasion in the past, noting that anyone who denies the Murayama Statement should resign from his cabinet post.

Touching on Abe's push for collective self-defense right, Murayama said that Japan declared its abandonment of waging a war through the pacifist Constitution, which prevented the Japanese Self-defense Forces from falling into a war.

The 91-year-old stressed that the constitution must be protected in any event, saying that there were many Japanese people who share his thoughts.

He added that it will contribute to the national interests of Japan, while benefiting South Korea and China, and peace and prosperity in the region.

Japan must squarely face up to its history and apologize for it, Murayama said, noting that Seoul and Tokyo must establish a future-oriented relationship based on Japan repenting its past brutalities.

Ties between South Korea and Japan have been strained since Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe took office in late 2012. In December last year, Abe visited the controversial Yasukuni Shrine, a symbol of Japan's militaristic past as it enshrines 14 World War II class-A war criminals.

The ongoing historical and territorial disputes between the two countries stemmed from Japan's colonial rule of South Korea from 1910 to 1945. Issues include comfort women as well as the territorial dispute over the islets off South Korea's east coast known as Dokdo in South Korea and Takeshima in Japan.

Xinhua