Bryan Forbes was one of the most charming people I have ever interviewed, and our meeting remains one of my most cherished.

It was in August 2004, for a weekly column that we used to run in the paper called Filmmakers on Film, in which a director would talk to us about a movie that they had found particularly influential or plain impressive. (His choice, tellingly, was Wolfgang Peterson’s unflashy, humane, grippingly claustrophobic 1982 submarine drama Das Boot.)

It was the sort of interview that could, if necessary, have been conducted by telephone. And yet, although he had nothing whatsoever to promote, Forbes – then 78 – sweetly insisted on my coming down to visit him in Carshalton Beeches in Surrey, on my being picked up from the station, and on not only having lunch with him (and, at the start, his wife, the British actress Nanette Newman) but on spending most of the afternoon with him.

In terms of his manner, Forbes might all too easily have been grand. He was, after all, the Rada-trained actor who, in his second and more prominent career as a director, had made such fondly remembered British classics as 1961’s Whistle Down the Wind (in which three children come to believe that the escaped convict hiding in their barn is Jesus) and 1974’s pivotal feminist horror-story Stepford Wives (which starred his wife, Nanette Newman – how to forget her immortal, stuck-record line, “I’ll just die if I don’t get that recipe!”). He was also largely responsible for 1970’s bittersweet and ever-enchanting The Railway Children, as well as having directed the John Barry-scored double of 1964’s Seance on a Wet Afternoon and 1965’s King Rat and some 15 other pictures.

Bryan Forbes and his bride actress Nanette Newman (PA)

But the veteran filmmaker wasn’t grand, not one bit – in fact, he could not have been a more engaging or generous lunch date, nor he and Newman more cutely and easily affectionate with each other. It was an exquisitely warm, still, late-summer’s day, and we sat for several hours on the terrace outside his and Newman’s house as he shared not only his thoughts on Das Boot, but also his anecdotes from decades of filmmaking.

I remember Forbes talking about the different demands of filming men and women, discussing his preference for “character” in films in favour of “turning cars over”, and expressing his frustration at 2003’s limp blockbuster The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen’s having more or less appropriated the title of his superior 1960 heist caper The League of Gentlemen (which he wrote, and in which he also starred).

I also remember him describing the Stepford Wives shoot as – literally - the hottest he had ever been on. He made the film at the height of what, it turns out, was a particularly ferocious New England summer, and, after days of standing around in elegant weatherboard houses dripping with sweat, he and the crew decided that there was only one thing for it: they made the rest of the movie in their Speedos. (As it happpened, the heat on the day when I actually met Forbes, the very American size of his grounds and the sun dappling the ground beneath the tall willows – combined with Newman, still beautiful, casually but immaculately dressed, serenely bringing out a mountain of delicious food before heading off to meet friends – lent an entirely superficial but nonetheless delicious dash of Stepford to the proceedings.)

After lunch, Forbes took me on a tour of the grounds and of their Kew Gardens-like variety of flora, quizzing me all the while about my own profession. Eventually, with the warmest of handshakes, he saw me back into the car, but not before handing me copies of his novels The Rewrite Man and The Memory of all That, the latter with the inscription, “To Mark, with every good wish, Bryan Forbes”. They are among my most prized possessions.