This is just a heads up for anyone interested in the great British counterculture band Quintessence (on Island Records 1969-71 and RCA 1971-73) that a new 2CD set of studio outtakes and unreleased compositions is released by Hux Records (UK) on May 27th.

Quintessence were a huge live attraction in Britain and Europe between 1969-72, in their original six-piece incarnation: Phil 'Shiva' Jones (vocals, keys), Raja Ram (flute), Dave 'Maha Dev' Codling (rhythm guitar), Allan Mostert (lead guitar), Shambhu (bass), Jake Milton (drums). Members came together in London's Notting Hill Gate area in April 1969, originally from England, USA, Australia, Canada and Mauritius. they were signed in a bidding war to Island six weeks after forming, and for two or three years received huge coverage in UK music papers and several TV appearances (plus appearances in the 1971 'Glastonbury Fayre' film and the European edit of the 'Stamping Ground' film from Kralingen Festival in Holland).

That last point is telling, for the group never made it to the USA, despite an offer to play Carnegie Hall. The band (under Raja Ram's leadership) made a couple of errors in turning down a US distribution deal personally arranged by Island MD Chris Blackwell and in not being in a hurry to tour America and build on their huge live appeal. Raja Ram sacked outstanding vocalist Phil Jones in June 1972, and the band essentially collapsed within months as a commercial force, while Phil never found another vehicle for his world-class vocal talent (he had previously fronted a minor-hit-making Australian group Phil Jones & the Unknown Blues in 1967-68, and had made a couple of solo singles before emigrating to Britain). Phil now lives in Woodstock, NY. Nevertheless, that may explain why Quintessence are probably barely known in the US today - although Jim Morrison was known to be a fan back in the day.

I had the pleasure of overseeing this project (as a labour of love) for Hux Records. I'm not financially involved in the project, or with Hux Records, a cottage industry label), so I hope Steve & the admins don't mind me posting this info!

The material selected came from 16 multi-track reels and 7 1/4 mixdown reels licensed from Universal, digitised at Abbey Road Studios and mixed by IFTA (Irish Film & Television Awards) award-winning sound engineer and producer Cormac O'Kane (and myself) at Red Box Studios, Belfast. Cormac has substantial 20-year credentials as a TV house band MD for RTE and BBC, TV and adverts theme/incidental music composer, multi-instrumentalist, producer of live music TV shows (for which he won his IFTA), producer of artists in the pop, rock, jazz and folk field, and mastering/audio restoration engineer on various projects including the Pentangle box set on Santuary/Universal, the Vincent Crane anthology on Universal, and various vintage British folk releases plus previous vintage Quintessence 1970-71 live recordings on Hux. Cormac pepared a 5.1 mix of one of the tracks from the Quintessence studio multis, which was fabulous, but on this occasion it was not possible to release a 5.1 version of the album.

What we do have is as follows: (Note: EVERYTHING bar disc 2 track 1 is a totally new 2016 mix. Quintessence were a six-piece but some of the tracks feature four- or five-piece incarnations.)

DISC 1:

Notting Hill Gate (5.39) – unabridged version of previously released take

Brahman (5.35) – take 4, Led Zep-esque four-piece Quintessence with incendiary ‘Stairway’-like guitar solo from Allan Mostert. Coincidentally, Zeppelin were recording parts of LZ IV upstairs at Island’s Basing Street studios at the time Quin were downstairs recording parts of third LP ‘Dive Deep’.

Sea of Immortality (5.39) – unabridged version of previously released take

Epitaph For Tomorrow (11.38) – extraordinary epic early take with a sublime Grateful Dead-esque instrumental jam with both guitars (Allan and Dave) and Phil’s often overlooked Hammond organ playing melding telepathically

Only Love (7.09) – take 3, flute-less live-in-studio take with stunning interaction between all five musicians involved and some of Phil’s most breath-taking, perfectly-pitched baritone-to-falsetto vocals

Spirits From Another Time (1.20) – totally unreleased song, harpsichord, guitar and vocals from Phil that are redolent of an Andrew Lloyd Webber musical (but in a good way) - a hitherto unknown string to his bow

Untitled Guitar (2.30) – moody Allan Mostert composition from the same reel as ‘Spirits…’

Hari Om (3.14) – previously only known from a 40 second excerpt faded in and out on the post-Island RCA LP ‘Self’, this is a very unusual Quin track: multiple backwards percussion parts, multiple interlocking funk guitar parts, mesmeric ‘Hari Om’ chanting from Phil

Body (5.41) – one of the missing tracks from the March 1970 St Pancras concert, and the only one found thus far on multi-track. This is Phil’s favourite from the album – HUGE energy, crowd interaction, and blistering guitar from Allan

DISC 2:

Sea of Immortality (1970 alt) (5.28) – the only track sourced from a period mix-down, this is the 1970 alternate take that must have been in the running for release at the time: a wildly different but equally fabulous guitar solo from Allan

Tree of Life (6.31) – the sole take of a totally unknown song, recorded by a four piece Quin (bass, drums, guitar, vocal), mid-tempo, similar in feel to ‘Pearl & Bird’, boosted by a wholly in keeping new 2016 lead guitar part from Dave

You Never Stay The Same (6.30) – new mix of the version released on the 1972 RCA LP ‘Self’, with rare lead vocal from Dave, featuring a wealth of wonderful hitherto unheard parts, including fabulous late-period Beatle-esque backing vocal arrangements from unidentified girl singers plus Phil

Only Love (Take 2) (7.52) – possibly the source of the first minute and a half of the released version of ‘Only Love’ (which was created in 1970 by John Barham using tape splicing, and excising any guitar soloing), this features the full six-piece and runs almost out of control at the end, dissolving in laughter. The five-piece ‘Take 3’ on Disc 1 should arguably have been released at the time, but this version has wonderful warmth and richness through the additional presence of Raja Ram’s flute. Both versions deserve to be on this outtakes set.

Marwa (3.06) – an extraordinary John Barham composition, based on a six-note Indian raga. Never released at the time, it’s a fully completed, full 16-track slice of bliss with Phil on spectacular form and multiple harps, tablas, piano, flute, etc. Barham revisited the raga for a piano solo on his 1973 Elektra duo album with fellow George Harrison collaborator Ashish Khan.

Wonders of the Universe (3.35) – new mix of the version released on 1972 RAC LP ‘Self’, featuring future Chumbawamba musician Simon Lanzon on exquisite piano

Maha Mantra (6.00) – a session glimpsed in the BBC TV documentary ‘New Horizons’, only a minute and a half was used on the band’s second LP, but the full, richly atmospheric chantathon led by Phil and featuring band guru Swami-Ji plus the band’s spiritual camp followers is featured here. It begins spontaneously out of nowhere, preceded by wonderful (retained) chaotic studio chatter between producer John Barham, Phil, Raja Ram and Swami-Ji wondering if the tapes are on and what sections are going to be included in the chant

Untitled Harpsichord (1.58) – possibly Simon Lanzon again, a mystery neo-baroque harpsichord piece recorded at the ‘Spirits From Another time’ session, a marginal inclusion but like the lost theme music to a vintage Hammer horror, with harpsichord lid creepily slammed shut at the end

Sunlit Kitchens (3.24) – a unique recording of charismatic band manager/poet Stanley Barr intoning his stoned poetry over ‘Hari Om’, for possible inclusion on a band LP. Definitely of its time, but hugely evocative of it. Phil asked for both this and the unadorned (and differently mixed) ‘Hari Om’ to be included.

Twilight Zones (5.58) – a brilliant Hendrix Experience-like three-piece early instrumental take of Quintessence second-album classic ‘Twilight Zones’ (presumably recorded with a Phil Jones guide vocal that has not survived). Phil Jones has recorded a brilliant new 2016 double vocal (unison and harmonies) for it. His falsetto, amazingly, is unchanged in tone and power from 1970.

Move Into The Light (3.55) – take 13 of many takes (over two reels, of which we had only the first) of this never-played-onstage Quintessence 1969 B-side, featuring Simon Lanzon guesting on piano. As with ‘Twilight Zones’, there must have been a Phil Jones guide vocal that has not survived, but this take was regarded as the best thus far by producer John Barham, heard chatting from the control room afterwards. Again, Phil added a wonderful new 2016 double vocal. This time, age dictated that we digitally lower the track by one semi-tone to allow it, but it’s a beautiful performance of an underappreciated song, and the lyrics really stand here as never before.

The set isn't available, as far as I'm aware, on US online retail sites, but it's appeared today on two UK-based sites, Amazon UK and Spin CDs:

Spirits From Another Time 1969-1971 by Quintessence: Amazon.co.uk: Music »

Spirits From Another Time 1969-1971 (2CD) »