This is an original, near mint condition The Subhumans "The Subhumans" E.P. It was issued by Quintessence Records, Vancouver, B.C., Canada in 1979. The album jacket is in excellent condition, no rips, tears or split seams. The bottom right corner has been cut by the record company to mark this E.P. as a promotional copy. The labels are white Quintessence Records. There are no stickers or writing on the labels. It has had one owner, a former record company executive who has had it filed away since it was released.This E.P. plays at 45 rpm.

Label - Quintessence - QEP 1202

Track Listings : 1- Death Was Too Kind/2- F**k You/3-Inquistion Day/4- Slave To My Dick

Don't miss this opportunity to add this rare Subhumans E.P.to your collection. Item will ship in a sturdy cardboard box with packing.

SHIPPING INSTRUCTIONS

Please Read Before Bidding

If You Do Not Agree With The Shipping Charges DO NOT BID

I am shipping from Canada. Please note that Canadian postal rates are much higher than many other countries. I will combine shipping costs on multiple items. Payment is expected within five days of the end of the auction. I accept PayPal payments

.

Winning Bidders please wait until I send you an invoice or you could be charged the wrong shipping amount by e-bay.

American & International Buyers

Buyer agrees to pay shipping costs of $12.00 to American addresses; $22.00 elsewhere for air mail-small packet.

If this item sells for over $100.00 it must be shipped via Xpresspost/Expedited mail, which has a tracking number and full insurance. Depending on where you live, and the value of the item, the cost for this service could be an extra $40.00 on top of the regular price. An exact cost will be determined at the end of the auction.

Custom forms will state the full value of the item in order for full insurance coverage. Because of past problems in shipping expensive items there are no exceptions to the above.

Canadian Buyers

Please contact me with your address for a shipping quote. When you view the shipping charges on my e-bay page the American & International shipping amounts appear. This is not the amount you will be charged. The cost depends on where you live in Canada. Please note that some locations are more expensive than shipping to the U.S.