Albert Fabricius lost his parents at an early age and was raised by relatives in Leipzig and Quedlinburg. He studied medicine, theology, and philology until 1693 when he moved to the home of relatives in Bergedorf. In the next year he was invited to Hamburg by the theologian Johann Friedrich Mayer (1650-1712) to serve as secretary and librarian. Introduced at court to the learned men and their research, Fabricius determined to devote himself to scholarship and earned a doctorate in theology. Following his appointment to the Gymnasium, he resolved to remain in Hamburg for the rest of his life and declined to work at a university. Hamburg was at that time, in Wilamowitz’s words, “undoubtedly the most cultured city of Germany.” There were numerous theological arguments raging at the time, but Fabricius dedicated himself to the collection of biographical and bibliographical encyclopedias of both Greece and Rome, the Middle Ages, and his own time. Bibliotheca Latina (1697) ran to many editions and a famous revision by his mentee J.A. Ernesti (1797-81). His Bibliotheca Graeca, like its companion volume, established textual apparatus, authenticity of authorship, and history of manuscripts and editions with indices. Wilamowitz said of these works, “The amount of learning he crammed into his Bibliotheca Graeca and Bibliotheca Latina is positively uncanny;…Everything is concise, clear and well arranged. Fabricius was familiar with the scholars of every age and their works, and so far from confining himself to antiquity Christian and pagan, he paid due regard to the Byzantines, on whom he brought together a body of material which is none the less valuable for having been left unused.” These works established Fabricius as a major classical scholar and remained standard throughout Europe in many editions and translations for nearly a century. He freely maintained correspondence with scholars across Europe and made his large personal library available to them.

He revised many notable editions by previous scholars, including Sextus Empiricus and Chalcidius’s commentary on Plato’s Timaeus and made the editio princeps of Hippolytus of Rome. His son-in law H.S. Reimarus (1694-1768) completed his edition of Dio Cassius and G.E. Lessing (1729-81), greatly influenced by the Hamburg group, published fragments of Fabricius’s “Apologia,” a critique of Lutheranism, as Fragmente des Wolfenbüttelschen Ungenannten in 1774.

On a tight spiritual leash during the life of his father-in-law, Johann Schultze (1643-1709), rector of the Gelehrtenschule in Hamburg, Fabricius reserved his most virulent attacks on church teaching until after his death. Using terms associated with the Enlightenment and a philological method he contributed significant arguments for the reconciliation of religious dogma with the teachings of the church. His religious writings, including his editions of the apocryphal Gospels and Acts of the Apostles as well as the Church Fathers, an overview of the entire Luther literature (Centifolium Lutheranum, Hamburg 1728-1730), an annotated bibliography of Christian apologetics (Delectus argumentorum…) and a history of the missions of the church (Salutaris lux…) employed challenged existing church dogma. Eventually his theology led him to the field of physicotheology and works on hydrotheology and pyrotheology in the attempt to reconcile the physical and spiritual worlds.