This edition is published by PICKLE PARTNERS PUBLISHING—www.pp-publishing.com

To join our mailing list for new titles or for issues with our books – picklepublishing@gmail.com

Or on Facebook

Text originally published in 1893-1894 under the same title.

© Pickle Partners Publishing 2016, all rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted by any means, electrical, mechanical or otherwise without the written permission of the copyright holder.

Publisher’s Note

Although in most cases we have retained the Author’s original spelling and grammar to authentically reproduce the work of the Author and the original intent of such material, some additional notes and clarifications have been added for the modern reader’s benefit.

We have also made every effort to include all maps and illustrations of the original edition the limitations of formatting do not allow of including larger maps, we will upload as many of these maps as possible.

HISTORY OF THE CONSULATE AND THE EMPIRE OF FRANCE UNDER NAPOLEON

BY

LOUIS ADOLPHE THIERS

TRANSLATED, WITH THE SANCTION AND APPROVAL OF THE AUTHOR, BY

D. FORBES CAMPBELL AND JOHN STEBBING

With Twenty-Eight Steel plates

VOL. I.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Contents

TABLE OF CONTENTS 4

AUTHOR’S PREFACE. 15

PLATES IN VOL. I. 29

BOOK I.—CONSTITUTION OF THE YEAR VIII. 33

The Provisional Consuls enter upon their Functions—Division of Duties between Sieyès and General Bonaparte—The General secures for himself the Administration of Affairs, and leaves the Digesting of the new Constitution to Sieyès—State of France in Brumaire, Year VIII.—Disorder in the Administration of the Finances—Extreme Destitution of the Armies—Disturbances in La Vendée—Agitation of the Revolutionary Party in some of the Cities of the South—First Efforts of the Provisional Consuls to restore Order in the different Departments of the Government—Appointment of Cambacérès to the Ministry of Justice, Laplace to the Ministry of the Interior, Fouché to the Ministry of the Police, Talleyrand to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Berthier to the Ministry of War, Forfait to the Ministry of the Marine, Gaudin to the Ministry of the Finances—First Financial Measures—Suppression of the Progressive Forced Loan—Institution of the Agency of Direct Contributions, and immediate preparation of the Assessments left in Arrear for several Years—Creation of Bonds of the Receivers-general—Confidence begins to be Restored; the Bankers of Paris lend the Government the first Funds that it has need of—Relief sent to the Armies—Political Acts of the Provisional Consuls—Repeal of the Law of Hostages; Release of the Priests in Confinement, and of the Persons shipwrecked off Calais—Parleys with the Chiefs of the Royalist Party—Suspension of Arms in La Vendée concluded with Messrs. de Bourmont, d’Autichamp, and de Châtillon—Commencement of Relations with Foreign Cabinets—State of Europe—England and Austria bent on continuing the War—Paul I., irritated against his Allies, is disposed to withdraw from the Coalition, and to accede to the System of Neutrality adopted by Prussia—Importance of Prussia at that Moment—General Bonaparte sends his Aide-de-Camp, Duroc, to Berlin—Rumours of Peace—Sensible Improvement in the material and moral State of France, in consequence of the first Acts of the Provisional Consuls—The Subject of the Constitution begins to be taken up—Plan of Sieyès long before Projected and Matured—Lists of Notables, the Conservative Senate, the Legislative Body, the Tribunate, the Grand Elector—Disagreement between Sieyès and Bonaparte relative to the Organisation of the Executive Power—Danger of a Rupture between those two Personages—They are reconciled through the Mediation of Friends—The Grand Elector superseded by Three Consuls—Adoption of the Constitution of the Year VIII., and the Commencement of its Operation fixed for the 4th of Nivôse 33

BOOK II.—INTERNAL GOVERNMENT. 83

Definitive Establishment of the Consular Government—Composition of the Senate, of the Legislative Body, of the Tribunate, and of the Council of State (Conseil d’Etat)—The First Consul’s Manifesto to the Powers of Europe—Public Offers of Peace made to England and to Austria—Proclamation addressed to La Vendée—Opening of the first Session—Germs of Opposition in the Tribunate—Speeches of the Tribunes Duveyrier and Benjamin Constant—A considerable Majority approves the Measures of the Consuls—Numerous Laws for the Organisation of Public Bodies—Institution of Préfectures and of Sub-Préfectures—Creation of Tribunals of First Instance, and of Appeal—The List of Emigrants closed and discontinued—Restoration of the Right to dispose of Property by Will—Law relating to Income and Expenditure—The Bank of France—Sequel of Negotiations with European Powers—Refusal of England to entertain the Proposals of Peace—Warm Debate on this Subject in the British Parliament—The Refusal of Austria couched in milder, but not less firm Terms than that of England—Necessity for recommencing Hostilities—On the Rejection of his Overtures by the Belligerent Powers, the First Consul endeavours to propitiate Prussia, and frankly explains his Views—He strives to bring the War in La Vendée to a close before commencing the Campaign of 1800—Position of Parties in La Vendée—Proceedings of the Abbé Bernier—Peace of Montfaucon—Messrs. d’Autichamp, de Châtillon, de Bourmont, and Georges Cadoudal proceed to Paris and see the First Consul—M. de Frotté is shot—Final Submission of La Vendée—Troops are put in March for the Frontiers—The Session of the Year VIII. closes in Quiet—Police Regulations in regard to the Press—Funeral Ceremony on the Occasion of the Death of Washington The First Consul takes up his Abode at the Palace of the Tuileries 83

BOOK III.—ULM AND GENOA. 134

Preparations for War—Forces of the Coalition in 1800—Army of Baron Melas in Liguria; of Marshal Kray in Swabia—Plan of the Campaign of the Austrians—Importance of Switzerland in this War—Plan of General Bonaparte—He forms the Resolution to make use of Switzerland, in order to debouch on the Flank of Kray, and in the Rear of Melas—The Part which he destines for Moreau, and that which he destines for Himself—Creation of the Army of Reserve—Instructions to Masséna—Commencement of Hostilities—Melas attacks the Army of Liguria on the Apennines, and divides it into two Halves, one of which is driven back towards the Var, the other upon Genoa—Description of Genoa—Masséna, blocked up in Genoa, prepares for an obstinate Resistance—Heroic Combats of Masséna—The First Consul urges Moreau to commence Operations in Germany, that he may be able to succour Masséna the sooner—Passage of the Rhine at four Points—Moreau succeeds in concentrating three out of four Corps, and falls upon the Austrians at Engen and Stockach—Battles of Engen and Möskirch—Retreat of the Austrians upon the Danube—St. Cyr’s engagement at Biberach—Kray posts himself in the entrenched Camp of Ulm—Moreau manoeuvres to dislodge him—False Movements of Moreau; but not productive of any disastrous Result—Moreau definitively shuts up Kray in Ulm, and takes a strong Position in Advance of Augsburg, to wait the Result of Events in Italy—Summary of Moreau’s Operations—Character of that General 134

BOOK IV.—MARENGO. 188

Impatience of the First Consul for News from Germany—On receiving Intelligence of Moreau’s Success, he resolves to set out for Italy—Extreme Distress of the Garrison of Genoa—Fortitude of Masséna—The First Consul hastens to his Relief and to execute the Plan of crossing the High Alps—Departure of the First Consul; his sham Visit to Dijon; his Arrival at Martigny, in the Valais—Choice of the St. Bernard for crossing the Great Chain—Means devised for forwarding the Artillery, the Ammunition, the Provisions, and the whole of the Matériel—Commencement of the Passage—Inexpressible Difficulties surmounted by the Enthusiasm of the Troops—Unexpected Obstacle of Fort de Bard—Surprise and Mortification of the Army at the Sight of that Fort, deemed at first Impregnable—The Infantry and the Cavalry make a Circuit and avoid the Obstacle—The Artillery drawn on by Hand under the Fire of the Fort—Ivrea taken—The Army deploys on the Plains of Piedmont before the Austrians are aware of its Existence and its March—Simultaneous Passage of the St. Gothard by the Detachment from Germany—Plan of General Bonaparte, when once in Lombardy—He determines to proceed to Milan, to rally the Troops from Germany, and to envelop Melas—The long Illusions of Melas suddenly destroyed—Mortification of that old General—His Orders for Evacuating the Banks of the Var and the Environs of Genoa—Last Extremities of Masséna—The absolute Impossibility of feeding the Soldiers and the Inhabitants of Genoa compels him to Surrender—Honourable Capitulation—The Austrians, having taken Genoa, concentrate themselves in Piedmont—Importance of the Route from Alexandria to Piacenza—Eagerness of both Armies to occupy Piacenza—The French arrive there first—Position of La Stradella chosen by the First Consul for enveloping Melas—Halt of some Days in that Position—Conceiving that the Austrians have Escaped him, the First Consul goes in Quest of them, and falls in with them unexpectedly in the Plain of Marengo—Battle of Marengo, lost and regained—Happy Inspiration of Desaix, and his Death—Grief of the First Consul—Despair of the Austrians, and Convention of Alexandria, by which they give up Italy and all its Fortresses to the French Army—The First Consul is employed for some Days at Milan in settling the Affairs of Italy—Conclave at Venice, and Elevation of Pius VII. to the Papacy—Return of the First Consul to Paris—Enthusiasm excited by his Presence—Operations on the Danube—Passage of that River below Ulm—Victory of Hochstett—Moreau conquers all Bavaria as far as the Inn—Armistice in Germany as well as in Italy—Commencement of Negotiations for Peace—Arrival of M. St. Julien, sent by the Emperor of Germany to Paris—Fête of the 14th of July at the Invalides 188

BOOK V.—HELIOPOLIS. 250

State of Egypt after the Departure of General Bonaparte—Profound Grief of the Army: its Desire to return to France—Kléber excites, instead of repressing, that Feeling—His Report on the State of the Colony—This Report, destined for the Directory, is received by the First Consul—Falsehoods with which it is filled—Great Resources of the Colony, and Facility of securing it to France—Kléber, influenced by the feeling which he had encouraged, is induced to treat with the Turks and the English—Culpable Convention of El-Arisch, stipulating the Evacuation of Egypt—Refusal of the English to execute that Convention: they calculate upon obliging the French Army to lay down its Arms-Noble Indignation of Kléber—Rupture of the Armistice and Battle of Heliopolis—Dispersion of the Turks—Kléber pursues them to the Frontiers of Syria—The Vizir’s Camp taken—New Distribution of the Army in Lower Egypt—Return of Kléber to Cairo, to reduce that City, which had risen in his Rear—His skilful Temporising—Having collected his Means, he attacks and retakes Cairo—General Submission—Alliance with Murad Bey—Kléber, who thought it impossible to keep Egypt when subdued, reconquers it in thirty-five Days from the Turkish Forces and the revolted Egyptians—His Faults gloriously repaired—Emotion of the Mussulman Populations on learning that Egypt is in the Hands of the Infidels—A Fanatic travels from Palestine to Cairo to assassinate Kléber—Lamentable Death of the latter, and its Consequences for the Colony—Present Tranquillity—Kléber and Desaix both killed on the same Day—Characters and Lives of those two Warriors 250

BOOK VI.—ARMISTICE. 281

Vast Preparations for Succouring the Army in Egypt—Arrival of M. de St. Julien at Paris—Impatience of the French Cabinet to treat with him—Notwithstanding the Insufficiency of M. de St. Julien’s Powers, Talleyrand induces him to sign preliminary Articles of Peace—M. de St. Julien signs and sets out with Duroc for Vienna—State of Prussia and Russia—Clever Expedient of the First Consul in regard to the Emperor Paul—He sends back to him six thousand Prisoners without Ransom, and offers him the Island of Malta—Enthusiasm of Paul I. for General Bonaparte, and Mission of M. de Sprengporten to Paris—New League of the Neutral Powers—The four great Questions of Maritime Law—Reconciliation with the Holy See—The Court of Spain, and its Intimacy with the First Consul—Sketch of the internal State of that Court—General Berthier sent to Madrid—This Representative of the First Consul negotiates a Treaty with Charles IV. by which Tuscany would fall to the House of Parma, and Louisiana to France—Erection of the Kingdom of Etruria—France reinstates herself in the Favour of the European Powers—Arrival of M. de St. Julien at Vienna—Astonishment of his Court when apprised of the Preliminary Articles signed without Powers—Embarrassment of the Cabinet of Vienna, which had engaged not to treat without England—Disavowal of M. de St. Julien—Attempt at a joint Negotiation, comprehending England and Austria—For the Admission of England into the Negotiation, the First Consul requires a Naval Armistice, which would enable him to succour Egypt—England refuses, not to treat, but to grant the proposed Armistice—The First Consul then insists on a direct and immediate Negotiation with Austria, or the Resumption of Hostilities—Manner in which he has Profited by the Suspension of Arms to put the French Armies on a formidable Footing Alarm of the Austrians, and cession of the Fortresses of Philipsburg, Ulm, and Ingolstadt, to obtain a Prolongation of the Continental Armistice—Convention of Hohenlinden, granting a fresh Suspension of Arms for forty-five Days—Appointment of M. de Cobentzel as Envoy to the Congress of Lunéville—Festival of the 1st of Vendémiaire—Removal of Turenne’s remains to the Invalides—The First Consul devotes the Leisure left him by the Interruption of Hostilities in attending to the internal Administration—Success of his Financial Measures—Prosperity of the Bank of France—Payment of the Stockholders in Cash—Repair of the Roads—Return of the Priests—Difficulties respecting the Celebration of Sunday and Decadi—New Measures in regard to the Emigrants—Posture of Parties—Their Dispositions towards the First Consul—The Revolutionists and the Royalists—Policy of the Government towards them—Conflicting Influences about the First Consul—Parts acted by Messrs. Fouché, de Talleyrand, and Cambacérès—The Bonaparte Family—Letters of Louis XVIII. to the First Consul, and Answer to that Prince—Plot of Ceracchi and Aréna—Public Sensation created by the Discovery of this Plot—Imprudent Friends of the First Consul wish to make a Handle of it to raise him too soon to the Supreme Power—Pamphlet written in that Spirit by M. de Fontanes—Necessity for Disavowing that Pamphlet—Lucien Bonaparte removed from the Ministry of the Interior, and sent to Spain 281

BOOK VII.—HOHENLINDEN. 344

Peace with the United States and with the Barbary Regencies—Meeting of the Congress of Lunéville—M. de Cobentzel declines a separate Negotiation, and insists at least on the Presence of an English Plenipotentiary, to mask the real Negotiation between Austria and France—The First Consul, with a view to hasten the Conclusion, orders the Renewal of Hostilities—Plan of the Winter Campaign—Moreau is directed to cross the Inn, and to March for Vienna—Macdonald, with a second Army of Reserve, has Orders to pass from the Grisons into the Tyrol—Brune, with eighty thousand Men, is destined to force the Adige and the Mincio—Plan of the young Archduke John, appointed Generalissimo of the Austrian Armies—His Plan for turning Moreau miscarries through defective Execution—He halts by the way, and purposes to attack Moreau in the Forest of Hohenlinden—Admirable Manoeuvre of Moreau’s executed in a superior Manner by Richepanse—Memorable Battle of Hohenlinden—Important Results of that Battle—Passage of the Inn, the Salza, the Traun, and the Enns—Armistice of Steyer—Austria promises to sign the Peace immediately—Operations in the Alps and in Italy—Macdonald crosses the Splugen, despite the Perils and Hardships of Winter—His Arrival in the Italian Tyrol—Dispositions of Brune for crossing the Mincio at two Points—Defect in those Dispositions—General Dupont attempts a first Passage at Pozzolo, and draws upon himself alone the Main Body of the Austrian Army—The Mincio is forced after a useless Effusion of Blood—Passage of the Mincio and the Adige—Fortunate Escape of General Laudon in consequence of a Falsehood—The Austrians, being Beaten, propose an Armistice in Italy—Signature of that Armistice at Treviso—Renewal of Negotiations at Lunéville—The Principle of a separate Peace admitted by M. de Cobentzel—The First Consul requires Austria to pay the Expenses of this second Campaign, and imposes harder Conditions than in M. de St. Julien’s Preliminaries—He fixes, as his Ultimatum, the Boundary of the Rhine in Germany, the Boundary of the Adige in Italy—Courageous Resistance of M. de Cobentzel—This Resistance, though honourable, causes Austria to lose valuable Time—While the Negotiations are pending at Lunéville, the Emperor Paul, to whom the First Consul has ceded the Island of Malta, claims it from the English, who refuse it—Rage of Paul I.—He invites the King of Sweden to St. Petersburg, and renews the League of 1780—Declaration of the Neutrals—Rupture of all the Northern Powers with Great Britain—The First Consul avails himself of it to force harder Terms upon Austria—He insists, not only upon the Boundary of the Adige, but also on the Expulsion of all the Princes of the House of Austria from Italy—The Grand Duke of Tuscany and the Duke of Modena are to be removed to Germany—M. de Cobentzel at length gives way, and, with Joseph Bonaparte, signs the celebrated Peace of Lunéville, on the 9th of February 1801—France obtains for the second Time the Boundary of the Rhine, throughout its whole Length, and is left almost Mistress of Italy—Austria is thrust back beyond the Adige—The Cisalpine Republic is to include the Milanese, Mantua, the Duchy of Modena, and the Legations—Tuscany destined for the House of Parma, with the Title of Kingdom of Etruria—The Principle of the Secularisations laid down for Germany—Important Results obtained by the First Consul in the course of Fifteen Months 345

BOOK VIII.—INFERNAL MACHINE. 384

Plots against the Life of the First Consul—Carbon, St. Réjant, and Limoëlan, three Agents of Georges, form a plan for destroying the First Consul by the Explosion of a Barrel of Gunpowder—Choice of the Rue St. Nicaise, and of the 3rd Nivôse for the Execution of this Crime—The First Consul saved by the Dexterity of his Coachman—Sensation produced—The Crime attributed to the Revolutionists, and to the Indulgence shown them by Fouché, the Minister—Animosity of the new Courtiers against that Minister—His Silence and Coolness—He discovers Part of the Truth and makes it known; but Measures are nevertheless taken against the Revolutionists—Irritation of the First Consul—Project of an arbitrary Measure—Deliberation on this Subject in the Council of State—After long Discussions, a Resolution is adopted for transporting a certain Number of Revolutionists without Trial—Some Resistance, but very faint, made to this arbitrary Act—Discussion whether it shall take place by a Law, or by a spontaneous Measure of the Government, referred only to the Senate, for the sake of Constitutionality—The latter Course adopted—Transportation decreed against one hundred and thirty alleged Terrorists—Fouché, who knew them to be innocent of the Attempt of the 3rd Nivôse, consents, nevertheless, to the Measure which proscribes them—Discovery of the real Authors of the Infernal Machine—Execution of Carbon and St. Réjant—Unjust Condemnation of Topino Lebrun, Aréna, &c.—Session of the Year IX.—Fresh Manifestations of Opposition in the Tribunate—Institution of Special Tribunals for the Suppression of Robbery on the Highroads—Financial Statement of Ways and Means for the Years VI., VII., and VIII.—Budget of the Year IX.—Definitive Adjustment of the Public Debt—Rejection by the Tribunate, and Adoption by the Legislative Body, of this Plan of Finance—Sentiments of the First Consul—Continuation of his administrative Labours—Roads—Canal of St. Quentin—Bridges over the Seine—Works at the Simplon—The Monks of the Great St. Bernard established at the Simplon and at Mont Cenis 384

BOOK IX.—NEUTRAL POWERS. 411

Sequel of the Negotiations with the Powers of Europe—Treaty with the Court of Naples—Exclusion of the English from the Ports of the Two Sicilies, and Engagement entered into by the Neapolitan Government to receive a French Division at Otranto—Spain pledges herself to coerce the Portuguese, to put an End to the English Trade on the Coasts of Portugal—Vast Naval Projects of the First Consul, for combining the Naval Forces of Spain, Holland, and France, to enable them to act in Concert—Means contemplated to assist Egypt—Admiral Ganteaume, at the Head of a Division, leaves Brest during a Gale of Wind, and proceeds to the Straits of Gibraltar on his Way to the Mouth of the Nile—General Coalition of all the Maritime Nations against England—Preparations of the Neutral Powers in the Baltic—Warlike Ardour of Paul I.—Distress in England—She is visited by a frightful Famine—Her Financial and Commercial Position before, and since the War—Her Income and Expenditure both doubled—Unpopularity of Mr. Pitt—His Differences with George III., and Retirement from Office—The Addington Administration—England, in spite of her Embarrassments, faces the Storm, and despatches Admirals Nelson and Parker to the Baltic, to break up the Confederacy of the Neutral Powers—Plan conceived by Nelson and Parker—They determine upon forcing the Passage of the Sound—The Swedish Coast being badly defended, the English Fleet passes the Sound almost without Difficulty, and appears before Copenhagen—Nelson’s views are to attack the Danes, before proceeding to the Baltic—Description of the Position of Copenhagen, and Measures adopted to defend this important Maritime Position—Nelson executes a bold Manoeuvre, and succeeds in Anchoring in the King’s Channel, Broadside on to the Danish Fleet—Bloody Engagement—Gallantry of the Danes, and Danger of Nelson—He sends a Flag of Truce to the Crown Prince of Denmark, and thereby obtains the Advantage of a Victory—Suspension of Hostilities for Fourteen Weeks, during which the Death of Paul I. becomes known—Events which have taken place in Russia—Exasperation of the Russian Nobility against the Emperor Paul, and their Resolution to get rid of this Prince by any Means, even by Crime—Count Pahlen—His Character and Projects—His Conduct towards the Grand Duke Alexander—The Scheme of a forced Abdication made to conceal their Project of Assassination—Frightful Scene at the Palace (Michael) on the Night of the 23rd of March—Tragical Death of Paul I.—Accession of Alexander—The Confederacy of the Neutral Powers dissolved by the Death of the Emperor Paul—Virtual Armistice in the Baltic—The First Consul endeavours, by offering Hanover to Prussia, to retain her in the League of the Neutrals—England, satisfied with having broken up this Confederacy by the Battle of Copenhagen, and with being rid of Paul I., seeks to improve the Opportunity offered, by treating with France, and redeeming the Errors of Mr. Pitt—The Addington Administration Proposes Peace to the First Consult through the Medium of M. Otto—This Proposal accepted, and Opening of Negotiations between France and England at London—Peace becomes general, both by Sea and Land—Progress of France since the 18th Brumaire 411

REQUEST FROM THE PUBLISHER 453

THE ITALIAN CAMPAIGNS 454

Europe, The Italian Campaigns, 1796 - Strategic Situation 454

Northern Italy, 1796 - Seizing Central Position, 10 - 14 April 456

Northern Italy, 1796 - Using Interior Lines, 15 - 23 April 457

Northern Italy, 1796 - Pursuit to the Po, 24 April - 8 May, and Exploitation to Cerona, 9 May - 1 June 458

Lake Garda and Vicinity, 1796 - Wurmser's Advance & Bonaparte's Pursuit, 1-13 September 460

Lake Garda and Vicinity, 1796 - Mobile Defense, 1-12 November 461

Lake Garda and Vicinity, 1796 - Bonaparte Forces The Decision, 14-17 November 462

Lake Garda and Vicinity, 1797 - Rivoli Model of Interior Lines, 7-14 January 463

THE EGYPTIAN CAMPAIGNS 464

Europe, 1798 - The Egyptian Campaigns, Strategic Overview, 1798 - 1799 464

THE MARENGO CAMPAIGN 466

Northern Italy, 1800 - The Marengo Campaign, Strategic Envelopment and Battle of Marengo 466

The Marengo Campaign, 1800 - Situation Late April 468

The Marengo Campaign, 1800 - Situation 14 May 469

The Marengo Campaign, 1800 - Situation 5 June and Movements Since 27 May 470

The Marengo Campaign, 1800 - Situation Late 13 June and Initial Movements 14 June 472

The Marengo Campaign, 1800 - Situation About 1000, 14 June 473

The Marengo Campaign, 1800 - Situation Shortly Before 1400, 14 June and Movements up to 1500 474

THE EXPANSION OF FRANCE 475

Europe, 1801 - The Expansion of France, Territorial Gains 475

Europe, 1803 - The Expansion of France, Restructuring Germany 477

Europe, 1805 - The Expansion Of France, Redeployment of the Grande Army 478

THE ULM CAMPAIGN 479

Central Europe, 1805 - The Invasion of Bavaria, Situation, 2 - 25 September 479

Central Europe, 1805 - French Strategic Envelopment, Situation, 26 September- 9 October 481

Central Europe, 1805 - The Engagements Around Ulm, Situation, 7 - 9 October 482

Central Europe, 1805 - The Engagements Around Ulm, Situation, 9 - 11 October 483

Central Europe, 1805 - The Engagements Around Ulm, Situation, 11 - 14 October 484

THE AUSTERLITZ CAMPAIGN 485

Central Europe, 1805 - Pursuit to Vienna, Situation, 26 October - 1 November 485

Central Europe, 1805 - General Situation, 25 November 487

Europe, 1805 - Strategic Situation, 25 November 488

The Battle of Austerlitz, 1805 - Situation, 1800 hours, 1 December 489

The Battle of Austerlitz, 1805 - Situation, 0900 hours, 2 December 490

The Battle of Austerlitz, 1805 - Situation, 1400 hours, 2 December 491

THE EXPANSION OF THE EMPIRE 492

Europe, 1806 - The Expansion of the Empire, September and Territorial Changes Since December 1805 492

THE JENA CAMPAIGN 494

Central Europe, 1806 - Situation, 6 October and Deployment of Opposing Armies 494

Central Europe, 1806 - Situation, Noon 10 October and Movements Since 8 October 496

Central Europe, 1806 - Situation, 1800 12 October and Movements Since 10 October 497

Jena and Vicinity, 1806 Base Map with Contours 498

Jena and Vicinity, 1806 - Battles of Jena and Auerstädt, Situation at Midnight, 13 October 499

Jena and Vicinity, 1806 - Battles of Jena and Auerstädt, 1000 hours- 14 October 500

Jena and Vicinity, 1806 - Battles of Jena and Auerstädt, 1400 hours- 14 October 501

Central Europe, 1806 - Pursuit to the Oder, 15 - October - 1 November 502

THE EYLAU AND FRIEDLAND CAMPAIGNS 503

Europe, 1807 - East Prussia, The Eylau and Friedland Campaigns 503

The Battle of Eylau, 1807 - Situation Early, 8 February 505

The Battle of Eylau, 1807 - Situation About 1600, 8 February 506

The Battle of Friedland, 1807 - Situation Shortly After 1700, 14 June 507

The Battle of Friedland, 1807 - Situation About 1800, 14 June 508

The Battle of Friedland, 1807 - Situation About 1900, 14 June 509

THE TREATY OF TILSIT AND THE CONTINENTAL SYSTEM 510

Europe, 1807 - The Treaty of Tilsit and the Continental System - Naval Ground Actions in 1807 510

DEFENDING THE GRANDE EMPIRE 512

Europe, 1808 - Defending the Grande Empire, Strategic Situation July and the Continental System 512

THE CAMPAIGN IN SPAIN 514

Iberian Peninsula, 1808 - June- 21 - August 1808 514

Iberian Peninsula, 1808 - October 1808 - 20 January 1809 516

DEFENDING THE GRANDE EMPIRE 517

Europe, 1809 - Defending the Grande Empire, Strategic Situation 1 February 517

THE DANUBE CAMPAIGN 519

Central Europe, 1809 - Situation, 15 April and Deployment of Opposing Forces 519

Ratisbon and Vicinity, 1809 - Situation Noon, 19 April and Movements Since 17 April 521

Ratisbon and Vicinity, 1809 - Situation, Midnight 21 - 22 April and Movements Since 19 April 522

Southern Germany, 1809 - Situation, 0800 22 May and Movements Since 22 April 523

Southern Germany, 1809 - Situation, 1030 6 July and Movements Since 22 May 524

Ratisbon, Battle of Abensberg, 1809 - Situation About 1000, 20 April 525

Ratisbon, Situation About Midnight, 1809 21-22 April and Main Routes of Retreat 526

Ratisbon, 1809 = Battle of Eggmuhl, Situation About 1500, 22 April 527

Ratisbon To Wagram, 1809 - Situation 13 May and Movements of Opposing Forces 528

The Battle of Aspern-Essling (1st Day), 1809 - Situation About 1500, 21 May 529

The Battle of Aspern-Essling (2nd Day), 1809 - Situation About 0730, 22 May 530

Wagram, 1809 - Situation Late 4 July 531

The Battle of Wagram (1st Day). 1809 - Situation About 1400, 5 July. Crossing of the Danube 532

The Battle of Wagram (2nd Day, 1809 - Situation About 1030, 6 July 533

The Battle of Wagram (2nd Day), 1809 - Situation About 1300, 6 July 534

THE WAR IN THE PENINSULA 535

Iberian Peninsula, 1809 -1814 - Strategic Overview To Include Major Actions and Defensive Works 535

THE NAPOLEON FAMILY SYSTEM 536

Europe, 1810, Napoleon's Family System 536

DEFENDING THE GRANDE EMPIRE 538

Europe, 1812, Defending the Grand Empire 538

THE RUSSIAN CAMPAIGN 540

Eastern Europe, 1812 - Situation, 1 July and Movements Since 1 June 540

Eastern Europe, 1812 - Situation, 24 July and Movements Since 1 July 542

Eastern Europe, 1812 - Situation, 14 August and Movements Since 24 July 543

Eastern Europe, 1812 - Situation, 27 August 1812 544

The Battle of Borodino, 1812 - Situation 0630, 7 September 545

The Battle of Borodino, 1812 - Situation 0930, 7 September 546

The Battle of Borodino, 1812 - Situation 1600, 7 September 547

Eastern Europe, 1812 - Situation, 4 October 548

Eastern Europe, Situation, 18 October - 5 December 1812 549

Germany, 1813 - Situation, The Defense of the Elbe, 1813 550

THE LEIPZIG CAMPAIGN 551

Europe, 1813 - Situation 17 March 551

Germany, 1813 - Napoleon's Spring Counteroffensive 553

Germany, 1813 - Situation At The End of the Armistice, 16 August 554

Germany, 1813 - Situation, 26 August and Movements Since the Armistice 555

Germany, 1813 - Situation, 6 September and Movements Since 26 August 556

Germany, 1813 - Situation, 2 October and Major Movements Since 26 September 557

Germany, 1813 - Situation, 9 October and Movements Since 2 October 558

Germany, 1813 - Situation, 13 October and Movements Since 9 October 559

THE CAMPAIGN IN FRANCE 560

Western Europe, 1814 - Situation 1 January and 10 February 560

THE WATERLOO CAMPAIGN 562

Northwestern Europe, 1815 - Situation 1 June and Deployment of Opposing Forces 562

Brussels and Vicinity, 1815 - Situation, 0700 16 June 1 and Movements Since 1 June 564

Quatre-Bras and Ligny, 1815 - The Battles of Ligny and Quatre-Bras, Situation at Noon on 16 June 565

Quatre-Bras and Ligny, 1815 - Situation at 2000 on 16 June 566

Brussels and Vicinity, 1815 - Situation, Midnight 17-18 June and Movements Since 16 June 567

Waterloo and Vicinity, 1815 - The Battle of Waterloo, Situation 1000 Hours, 18 June 568

Brussels and Vicinity, 1815 - Situation, 1000 hours 18 June 569

Waterloo Battlefield, 1815 - Situation, 1600 hours 18 June 570

Waterloo Battlefield, 1815 - Situation, 1930 hours 18 June 571

EUROPE 1810 - 1815 572

Europe, 1810 - Under Napoleon 572

Europe, 1815 - Under the Monarchs 574

AUTHOR’S PREFACE.

AFTER fifteen years of assiduous work I have completed my History of the Consulate and the Empire, which I began in 1840. Of these fifteen years, I have not suffered one to go by (always excepting that which political events compelled me to pass out of France) without consecrating the whole of my time and energies to the difficult task I had undertaken. I agree that the work might have been accomplished more quickly, but such is my veneration for the mission of history, that the fear of stating an inaccurate fact fills me with a feeling akin to shame. When such a doubt assails me, I have no peace until I have discovered proof of the fact which is the subject of my doubts; I seek it unremittingly, never resting until I have found it or until I am convinced that proof is non-existent. In which case, reduced to taking my position as in a jury-box, I speak according to my innermost conviction, but ever with the greatest fear of self-deception; for I think nothing to be more reprehensible, when one has voluntarily undertaken the mission of informing others of the truth concerning great events in history, than to disguise it through feebleness, to misrepresent it through passion, or to suppose, only, through indolence, and thus, whether knowingly or not, to lie to one’s own generation and those to come.

It is under the influence of such scruples that I have read, reread, and annotated with my own hand, the numberless documents contained in the State Archives, the thirty thousand letters which compose Napoleon’s personal correspondence, the letters, no less numerous, of his ministers, his generals, his aides-de-camp, and even those of his police agents; in fact, the greater portion of the MS. Memoirs in the possession of private families. I must say, under every Government (and I have seen three successive ones since I first started my work) I have met with the same facilities, the same generosity in providing me with the documents I required; and under the nephew of Napoleon I was not refused access to the secrets of Imperial policy, any more than under the Republic, or the régime of Constitutional Royalty. It is thus that I consider myself to have seized and reproduced, not that conventional truth so often arrived at by contemporaneous generations, and by them transmitted to future ones as authentic, but that absolute truth of facts themselves, only to be found in documents of State, and above all in the correspondence of exalted personages. I have at times devoted a whole year to the preparation of a volume which has taken me but a couple of months to write; and thus have kept the public waiting for a work to which they have been good enough to attach a certain amount of importance.

I ought perhaps to observe that to the above scruple has been added my taste for investigating to the very utmost what were the agents which, in one of the most excited periods of the history of humanity, acted so potently upon men, money, and events. Secrets of administration, of finance, war, diplomacy have attracted, detained, captivated me, and it has seemed to me that this distinctly technical portion of history has deserved at least as much attention from serious minds as did the dramatic portion. To my mind, praise or blame awarded to great operations is but vain declamation, if it do not rest upon a dispassionate statement, clear and positive, of the manner in which the said operations have been carried out. To fall into ecstasies, for instance, about the passage of the Alps, and, by way of exciting the enthusiasm of others, to pile on words—mass the rocks, heap up the snow—is, in my eyes, but puerile and even annoying to the reader. The one legitimate, earnest manner in which to excite interest and admiration alike is to observe an exact and complete statement of things as they occurred. The distance to go in crossing such and such mountains, the number of cannon and the quantity of stores which had to be transported along unbeaten roads, up prodigious heights, along terrific precipices where animals were useless, and where man alone could preserve his courage and will; to relate all this simply, giving all necessary particulars, weeding out unimportant details,—this to my mind is the proper way to describe an undertaking such as the passage of the Saint-Bernard, for instance. When, after some such clear and precise statement of facts, an exclamation perchance escapes the lips of the narrator, it goes straight to the heart of the reader, because it has probably already occurred to him, and is thus only an echo of his own admiration. This explains the bulky proportions of this history, and the length of time I have spent in writing it. It also leads me to express upon history, and the method of writing it, a few ideas inspired by long practice in the art, and by a profound respect for its great dignity.

I know nothing in the sphere of the human mind more exalted than is poetry of the first order; but it will not be denied that there are epochs more suited to its appreciation than to its production. For instance, I do not think there was ever a period in which Homer and Dante have been so profoundly appreciated as in our own times, at once so emotional and so erudite. And yet, although we have had our distinguished poets and painters, our age has not gone near to producing the naïve and energetic poetry of thirteenth century Florence or of primitive Greece. Societies have their different ages as have individuals, and each age has its own occupations. I have always considered history to be the occupation, not exclusively, but more especially, adapted to our period. We have not lost appreciation for great actions, at any rate,—if we had, this nineteenth century would have given it back to us,—and we have acquired the experience which allows us to recognise and criticise them. Hence, from early youth I have devoted myself with confidence to historical research, convinced that by so doing I was taking up the work especially adapted to my own times. I have devoted thirty years of my life to the writing of history, and I can affirm that, even when taking my part in the affairs of public life, I, so to say, in no wise dissociated myself from my art. When, in the presence of tottering thrones, in the midst of assemblies thrilled by the voice of powerful statesmen, or menaced by the multitude, I had a moment for reflection, I did not see before me such and such a passing individual bearing the name of some contemporaneous person, but the undying figures of all times and of all places, who in Athens, Rome, or Florence had previously acted in like manner. I was at once less irritated and less troubled, because less surprised, as I felt I was assisting, not at the scene of a day which passes, but at the eternal scene appointed by God when He placed man in society with passions noble or base, low or generous; man ever like himself, ever variable, ever actuated by laws as profound as they are immutable.

My life then, I may say, has been one long study of history, and, with the exception of those times of violent action which stupefy, in which the rushing torrent of events carries one away with it, making it impossible to see its magnitude, I have almost always taken note of what has been passing around me, and, comparing it with previous events, have found its points of difference or resemblance. Such deliberate comparison is, I think, the true preparation of the mind for the rendering of that epic of history which is not to be condemned for want of colour because it is positive and exact; for your real man, be he Alexander, Hannibal, Caesar, Charlemagne, or Napoleon, is as replete with poetry, although of a different nature, as is the man of fiction, whether he be an Achilles, an Aeneas, a Roland, or a Renaud.

The careful observation of men and events, or, as painters call it, the observation of nature, does not suffice; it needs a certain gift in order to be able to write history well. What is that gift? Is it mind, imagination, critical power, the art of composition, the talent of painting? I reply, that it would be highly desirable to be possessed of every one of these gifts, and that every history in which only one of them is apparent, is an appreciable work, greatly to be valued by future generations. I say that there is not one only, but there are twenty different methods of writing history; it may be written in the style of Thucydides, Xenophon, Polybius, Livy, Sallust, Caesar, Tacitus, Comines, Guicciardini, Macchiavelli, Saint-Simon, Frederick the Great, or Napoleon, and be superlatively written, although very differently. I would desire nothing better of Providence than to have acquitted myself as the least eminent of these historians, in order to feel certain that I had done well, and that I should leave behind me a memento of my ephemeral existence. Each of them has his own salient characteristic: one narrates with au eloquence that carries the reader along with it; another is inconsequent, progressing by leaps and bounds, but, in passing, sketches in a few strokes figures which are never effaced from the memory; while yet another, less eloquent or less of a word-painter, but more calm and reticent, searches with an eye which nothing escapes the depths of human events, illuminating them with a brilliancy which endures for ever. Whichever be their method, I repeat, it is good. And yet, withal, is there not one essential quality, preferable to every other, which should distinguish the historian, and constitute his true superiority? So I think; and without circumlocution I say that, in my opinion, this quality is intelligence.

I use the word here in its ordinary acceptation, and, applying it to subjects most diverse, will endeavour to make my meaning plain. One often observes in a child, a workman, or a statesman, something which one does not at once qualify by the name of wit, because it is devoid of brilliance, but which one calls intelligence, because the person endowed with it is able at once to grasp the meaning of what is said to him; sees, understands with half a word, if a child, what is being taught him—if a workman, the work given him to execute—if a statesman, events, their causes and consequences; reads character, the proclivities of the men he has to deal with, the conduct to be expected from them, and is neither surprised nor embarrassed by what may take place, although it may cause him sorrow. This is what is understood by intelligence, and for all practical purposes this simple quality, which makes no show, is of greater utility in life than all the gifts of mind, genius excepted, which, after all, is but intelligence with the addition of brilliancy, power, breadth, and readiness.

It is this quality, applied to the great objects of history, which is, to my mind, the essential quality of the narrator, and which, if there, brings in its train all the others, provided that to nature’s gift be joined experience, born of practical knowledge. With that which I call intelligence a man sifts the true from the false; he does not suffer himself to be deceived by the vain traditions or the false reports of history, he exercises his own critical judgment; thoroughly grasping the characters of the men and their times, he exaggerates nothing, neither magnifies nor diminishes aught, gives to each his true characteristics, brushing aside the tinsel—most meretricious of all the ornamentations of history. He paints in true colours, enters into the secret springs of actions, himself understanding, and enabling others to understand, how they came about. Diplomacy, administration, war, the navy, these varied subjects are all brought within scope of the comprehension of most people, because the writer has known how to seize upon the aspect most intelligible to the ordinary mind; and having thus possessed himself of command of all the numerous elements which compose a vast recital, the order in which they should be presented comes of itself in the chain of events; for he who has known how to seize the mysterious link which connects them, and the manner in which one has been engendered by the other, has discovered the best, because the most natural, order of narration; and, moreover, if he be not made of ice, in recording those grand scenes in the life of nations, he warms to his subject, making event succeed event with fire and fluency. He leaves to the stream of time its flow, its force, nay, its grace, never forcing its action, nor changing any of its outlines; and, last and supreme attribute, he is just, because there is nothing which calms, which allays the passions, like a profound knowledge of mankind. I will not say that it divests a man of all severity, for that would be a misfortune; but when one knows humanity and its weaknesses, when one knows what leads and dominates it, without hating evil or loving good the less, one is more indulgent to the man who has succumbed to the thousand temptations to which humanity is exposed; one reverences none the less ardently the man who, amid every debasing allurement, has kept his heart up to the level of the good, the great, and the beautiful. Intelligence then, to my mind, is that happy faculty which teaches the historian to separate the true from the false, to paint men justly, to elucidate the secrets of politics and of war, to narrate events in harmonious order, to be equitable—in a word, to be a truthful narrator.

Dare I say it? Almost without art, the far-seeing mind I am imagining has but to allow itself to yield to that need of utterance which sometimes possesses us, leading us to relate to others events which have affected us, and he may produce a chef d’œuvre. Among the many examples I could cite, I will ask permission to select two, those of Guicciardini and of Frederick the Great.

Guicciardini had never intended to take to literary work, and had served no apprenticeship to the art. His whole life had been spent in diplomacy and administration, and on one or two occasions he had served in the army. But he had one of the most discerning minds the world has ever seen, above all in political affairs. His temperament was somewhat sad, both naturally and from satiety of pleasure. Not knowing how to occupy his leisure upon his retirement from public life, he set himself to writing the annals of his times, a portion of which had passed before his own eyes, and he did it with a fulness of narration, a vigour of description, and a depth of judgment, which cause his history to rank among the finest monuments of the human intellect. His style is long-winded, confused, sometimes heavy, yet it is the gait of an active man, even though he be encumbered with awkward limbs. He has a thorough insight into human nature, and his sketches of the men of his time are undying, because true, simple, and vigorous. To these merits he unites the disappointed, morose tone of a man wearied with the innumerable mistakes and miseries he has witnessed—too morose to my idea, for history should remain calm and serene, not distressful; portraying therein, as with the sombre severity of Tacitus, the sadness of the upright man.

Frederick the Great, who was never sad, was a passionate admirer of letters, and his love of letters is assuredly one of the noblest traits of his character, sustaining him, as it did, more than once in desperate situations, when his fortunes seemed on the very point of being wrecked. On the night of a lost battle he would console himself by writing bad verses; not bad as to idea, for at every instant one meets deep thought, ingenious or striking, but bad in form, needing revision as to harmony and grace. Thought without art goes for nothing in poetry. Nor was form all that was needed by Frederick the Great for the composition of books; having hitherto merely made literature a recreation, not an art, he had never extended his labours beyond a short poem, a pamphlet, or an address: thus the art of book-making was as unknown to him as was that of writing correctly. And yet this man, in the history he has bequeathed to us of his family and his reign, bringing to light the subtle webs of his diplomacy, the profound combinations of his military genius; retracing, as he does, the vicissitudes of a career of close upon fifty years, the unspeakable variations of politics in an age when women governed states, while philosophers governed minds; in fine, the perpetual alternations of a war in which, as often vanquished as victorious, but ever covered with glory, he saw himself at every instant on the verge of succumbing to the hatred of three women and under the weight of three great states,—this remarkable man has given, in bad French and in a style of his own, a picture simple, animated, and almost wholly true of this curious epoch, great through him alone and a few French writers. This bad writer writes well enough, composes unscientifically but with order and interest, sketches character with masterly hand, and would be an important judge, had he the equity and dignity of one who judges. But, uniting to the licence of the times his own unbridled spirit; despising those kings whom he had humiliated, their generals whom he had vanquished, their ministers whom he had deceived; caring only for the society of men of letters, whose vanity, however, often afforded him a subject of laughter; liking to make himself and others appear worse than they really were; intemperate, cynical;—he has given to history a slanderous tone, while at the same time he has immortalised his own work by stamping it with the mark of the most profound intelligence and the rarest good sense the world has ever seen.

I do not speak of Cæsar, because he was one of the finest writers of his age; nor of Napoleon, who became one; but the two examples I have given will suffice to explain my meaning, and to prove that whoever possesses a clear insight into men and things, has the true genius of history. But, it will be objected, is art nothing and intelligence everything? Anyone who is simply possessed of this power of comprehension, can he compose, paint, relate, according to the conditions of the true historian? I should be ready to reply yes, were it not necessary to put some reservation on this unqualified assertion. Comprehension is almost, but not quite, everything. To it must be superadded a certain knowledge of composition, of painting, of arranging the colours, diffusing the light; a certain talent for writing, too, is necessary, for language must be the medium, whether it be Greek, Latin, Italian, or French, in which the world’s vicissitudes are to be recounted. And I admit that to intelligence must be added experience and calculation, that is to say, art.

Thus, man being a finite being, it becomes almost necessary that his mind should be made infinite. The events you have to set before him may be passing in a thousand and one places; not only in France, if the scene of your history be France, but in Germany, Russia, Spain, America, India; and yet you who relate, and he who reads, can only be in one place at a time. Frederick the Great was fighting in Bohemia, while at the same time fighting was going on in Thüringia, Westphalia, and Poland. Upon the field of battle, where he directs the whole plan of action, he is fighting in the left wing, but fighting is also going on in the right wing, in the centre, everywhere. Even when one has clearly grasped the general chain which unites events, it needs a certain art to take the reader from place to place, and to knit up the thread of secondary facts which have had to be neglected for those of greater importance. The writer must hie to the right, to the left, to the rear, without losing sight of the main scene, without letting the action languish, at the same time without omitting anything, for every omission constitutes a fault, not alone against material exactitude, but against moral veracity, because it rarely happens that a neglected fact, be it great or small, is not wanted to complete the whole context whether as to cause or effect. And withal the reader, that finite being who hears all and ever aspires to the infinite, who is so eager to know all, yet is so destitute of patience to learn,—the reader must be taken into consideration. I must know everything, he must be spared all effort of attention: such is the writer—such the reader—such the world in general.

Thus a certain dramatic art becomes necessary, demanding experience, thought, science, and a sense of proportion. Nor is that all. The historian must be a word-painter; he must understand the art of description; he must be able to seize in an individual the salient characteristic which distinguishes him, in an event the most picturesque circumstances connected with it; he must know how to lay on colour with proportion, with fitting gradation, and not be too lavish with it, so as to have none to spare for the parts which require to be more highly coloured. Finally, as the implement with which all this is accomplished is language, the historian should know how to express himself with that elegance and gravity of diction which befits great as well as small things, enabling the one to be told with loftiness, the others with ease, precision, and lucidity. This is all art, I admit, and art of a very high order. It is therefore necessary to add to the perfect understanding of facts a certain habit of handling and disposing them, of describing them in their slightest details in an order which is learned yet easy, noble yet simple; to penetrate everywhere, to be at home in the sanguinary battlefield as much as in the cabinets of diplomacy or in the boudoir, where State secrets may often be discovered, as much as in the dirty streets where wild and foolish demagogues are raging.

But while admitting that art should go hand-in-hand with intelligence to form the perfect historian, I should like to say why intelligence, as I have defined it, succeeds better than any other faculty, in this complicated art. Of all the productions of the mind of man, the purest, most chaste, and severe, at once the most sublime and the most humble, is history. This proud Muse, far-seeing and modest, needs, above all things, to be clothed in unaffected raiment. Art is indispensable, but if art be too lavishly employed, if it be detected, all truth and dignity disappear, for this noble and simple being has essayed to deceive, and from this time forth all confidence in her is lost. Exaggerate the terror in a tragic scene, or the laughter in a comic one; in an epic, ode, or idyll magnify or embellish the characters; make your heroes always intrepid, your shepherdesses always pretty,—in a word, use deception, however slight, in these arts, which are all called the art of fiction,—and no one can feign illusion any longer, for everyone has been placed on his guard. I would here counsel authors of fiction to remain truthful, though they are exempt from being exact. But in history, to lie from the foundation, in form and colour, is intolerable! History does not say, I am fiction; it says, I am the truth. Imagine any wise serious-minded father, loved and honoured by his children, who, desiring to instruct them, should call them together, and say,—I am going to relate to you what I, and my father and my grandfather before me, have done towards building up the fortunes and dignity of our house. I shall tell you their good actions, their faults, their errors, everything, in fact, to enlighten and instruct you and put you in the path of well-being and of honour. The children are all assembled; they listen in religious silence. Now, can you understand such a father embellishing his statements, consciously altering them, and thus giving to the children who are so dear to him a false idea of the business, the pleasures, and the sorrows of life?

History is this father instructing his children. After such a definition, can you understand its being made pretentious, exaggerated, coloured, or declamatory? I submit to everything in the way of art; but when it comes to history the slightest pretentiousness revolts me. In composition, drama, portraits, style, history should be truthful, simple, unvarnished. Which is best adapted, among the various types of intellect, to preserve to it these essential qualities? Evidently the profoundly intelligent mind, which sees things as they are, sees them impartially, and writes them down as it sees them. A perfect understanding of things brings out their natural beauties, causing them to be so balanced that to add or to take away from them would be alike repugnant, the sole aim being to attain the perfection of art by reproducing them as they are. Perhaps I may be permitted to make a comparison in order to bring out my meaning more clearly.

Raphael painted fancy pictures, principally of the Holy Family, and portraits. The greatest critics differ as to whether the Holy Families or the portraits are the better, without being able to arrive at any decision. I will not say that in time the critics come to prefer the portraits, for he would be very bold who would venture to judge between these divine works: but in the course of time they certainly come to acknowledge no inferiority between them, and the most celebrated Madonna of Raphael is not prized above his simplest portrait; the poetry of the one does not efface the noble realism of the other. But how did even Raphael succeed in producing that remarkable portrait of Leo X., one of the most perfect works ever executed by the hand of man?{1} When painting a Holy Virgin, this great genius sought in the treasures of his imagination the most chaste lineaments he knew, purifying them still more, and adding to them the grace which was innate in his soul, and thus evolved one of those exquisite heads which once seen is never forgotten. But when painting a portrait, he renounced all combining, purifying, inventive processes. In the countenance of the old prince of the Church, with red and swollen nose, sensual lineaments, small but piercing eyes, he saw nothing ugly or repulsive. Seeking nature, he could admire it in its reality, was careful to alter nothing, to put into it nothing of his own but perfect correctness of drawing, truth of colour, skilful adjustment of light—qualities he had observed in nature; for even in ugliness she is ever correct in drawing, beautiful in colouring, striking in effects of light.

History is portraiture, as the Madonnas of Raphael are poetry. As one examines a portrait of Raphael, struck with the nature in it and the beauty of its perfect reality, so does one become a great historian by strictly confining oneself to facts, observing, contemplating them as the painter contemplates nature, admiring it even in an ugly countenance, seeking his effects alone in the perfect truth of his reproduction.

History has its picturesque side just as painting has, and the picturesque is in man, and in events accurately and profoundly observed. For instance, open a history of France, take Henri IV., Louis XIII., Louis XIV., Louis XV.; take their ministers, their mistresses, their confessors, Richelieu, Mazarin, Louvois, Colbert, Choiseul, Mesdames de Montespan, de Maintenon, de Pompadour, Letellier, Fleury, Dubois; from these powerful, graceful, feeble, or uncomely personages turn to the heroes—the fiery Condé, the wise Turenne, light-hearted Villars, as posterity designates them; from these subordinate heroes pass on to the ruling ones, Frederick the Great and Napoleon: contemplate these figures as portraits, suspended in the Louvre of history, see them as they are, with their grandeur and their misery, their charm and their repulsiveness! Do you not feel the same kind of thrill, when you behold these figures such as God has created them, as you do when you come across a portrait of Raphael, of Titian, or of Velasquez? Do you not feel how under their true characteristics, sometimes sublime, sometimes eccentric, sometimes coarse, there lies the picturesque beauty of nature? Is there not in Henri IV., with his great mind, his chivalrous calculating courage, his gracefulness, goodness of heart, cunning, and sensual appetites; in Louis XIII., with his awkward timidity, his courage, his submission, his revolt against the mighty minister to whom he owes the glory of his reign; in Louis XIV., with his vanity, his good sense, his greatness; in Louis XV., with his egotism, which dazed without blinding him; in Richelieu, with his pitiless spirit; in Mazarin, with his patience and depth; in Condé, with his ardour illuminated by intelligence; in Turenne, with his bold prudence; in Villars, with his talent for seizing opportunities; in Frederick, with his arrogant spirit; in Napoleon, with that Titanic genius which would fain have scaled the heavens,—is there not in one and all an historic beauty which it would be a crime to touch, a crime to add or take away a single trait? What is needed to portray them? To understand them. Once understood, one has but one desire, to study them carefully and reproduce them as they are, and after having studied them, to study them again, in order to make sure that one has not neglected any single line written on the countenance by misfortune, time, or passion,