DÔNALL Ô LUANAIGH

Although regarded by many as the champion of the emerging nations of Europe (such as Italy and Poland) in their struggle against the imperial powers, Louis Napoleon, Emperor of the French, showed his regard for in the course of a speech for the opening of the new session of the French Chambers on 14 February 1867.

He declared that his country's «connexion with England becomes daily more intimate by the similarity of our policy and the multiplicity of our commercial relations» (1).

A month later, the veteran French statesman Adolphe Thiers (no of the Emperor) attacked the French regime's «policy of » describing it as « little more than a chimera ». He went on to say that. . . « if it [this policy] were accepted as the inflexible law for the reorganisation of the Continent there was not a single state that could maintain its present limits. .. France of her own free will made Italy, and by so doing weakened Austria, without pacifying Europe, and without gaining a single ally. . . turned away in disgust from Continental politics...» (2).

When the Fenian rebellion broke out in Ireland in March 1867, French career diplomats in Dublin, Belfast, and some English and Scottish cities compiled detailed reports on the events for transmission to the Foreign in Paris.

Georges Livio (3), the Consul in Dublin, wrote on 6 March that the Fenian prisoners, captured after the affair at Tallaght, had been escorted to Dublin by troops, who were pursued by jeering and stone-throwing crowds (4).

Two days later, he reported that peace again reigned in the Irish capital (where the main topic of conversation was the Vice-Regal Ball), while an insurrection was taking place in the Munster counties of Clare, Limerick, and Tipperary. Sporadic attacks on troops were the order of the day « in this unhappy country» (5). Dublin Corporation had voted a loyal address. Conservative members of the Corporation wished to demonstrate their loyalty. The Liberals, on the other hand, while calling for the repression of the insurrection, sought redressment, by constitutional means, of the grievances which had led to the unrest (6).

ÉTUDES IRLANDAISES, n° XV-2, Décembre 1990, 105-112.