They were wed for three years, splitting in 2011.

And Ashlee Simpson and Peter Wentz showcased their amicable relationship six years on as they stepped out in Los Angeles with their adorable children on Thursday.

Ashlee, 32, looked glamorous and leggy in denim hotpants as she strolled down the street with daughter Jagger, who turns two next month.

Scroll down for video

Beautiful blonde Ashlee wore her platinum locks swept up into a chic chignon and covered her blue eyes with large cat eye shades,

The double denim ensemble was completed with a baggy denim jacket which Ashlee threw on over a strappy black vest top, revealing a hint of cleavage.

The tiny shorts showed off her endless toned legs and she toted a black studded bag.

The Pieces of Me singer accessorised with a couple of sparkling necklaces and pair of pink furry sliders.

The mother daughter pair looked close as Ashlee lovingly toted Jagger on her hip.

The adorable little girl, who she shares with husband Evan Ross, looked cute as a button in a pretty pink dress and leopard print moccasins.

Her chocolate locks were worn in an adorable side parting and she clutched onto a dummy and giraffe toy.

Fall Out Boy bassist Pete, 38, rocked a casual cool ensemble of a dove grey t-shirt silver shorts and white sneakers as he walked along with son Saint, two.

The handsome star showed off his muscular frame and many tattoos in his summer outfit.

He also rocked a distinguished beard and shielded his eyes from the sun with a grey baseball cap.

Keeping hydrated he sipped on a cooling ice tea while carrying a bottle of OJ for his little one.

Adorable Saint looked cute with his shaggy brown locks. He wore a white t-shirt and beige shorts paired with black loafers.

Rocker Pete shares Saint with long-term partner Meagan Camper, who he has been in a relationship with since 2011.

Ashlee and Pete also share son Bronx, eight.

Ashlee, the younger sister of pop singer turned fashion mogul Jessica Simpson, 36, is married to actor and son of diva Diana Ross, Evan Ross.

The couple tied the knot on the grounds of Evan's mother sprawling Connecticut estate on August 30, 2014

Ashlee recently revealed that this year will see the release of her first new album since her third, Bittersweet World, was released back in 2008.

In fact, she and Evan are 'working on an album together,' as she revealed to Us Weekly in a joint interview with her husband in December.

'We’re doing this album together and then we’ll go off and do our own,' she explained, having expressed excitement at the fact 'we can tour together'.