Pete Wentz and Girlfriend Welcome a Baby Boy

It's another boy for a Fall Out Boy! The band's bassist, Pete Wentz, and his girlfriend Meagan Camper welcomed a son on Wednesday, People reports. More of the craziest celebrity baby names The couple named their new addition...

Ashlee Simpson Engaged to Diana Ross' Son Evan Ross

Ashlee Simpson will be heading down the aisle for the second time. The 29-year-old singer is engaged to Diana Ross' son Evan Ross, the couple announced on Twitter Monday. Check out our complete Golden Gloes coverage "The love...

Poll: Which Celebrity Breakup Shocked You the Most?

Demi Moore&nbsp;and Ashton Kutcher. Kim Kardashian and Kris Humphries. Jennifer Lopez and Marc Anthony. Maria Shriver and Arnold Schwarzenegger. Those are just some of the celebrity couples who called it quits in 2011 &mdash; and we still have a month left to go.Look back at our list of some of the year's biggest splits, and tell us which breakup surprised you the most.

Ashlee Simpson-Wentz Debuts a Platinum Blond Pixie Cut

Ashlee Simpson-Wentz has jumped on the pixie cut bandwagon.After promising to "try and sneak a pic to post" of his wife's new platinum blond, cropped 'do on Twitter on Sunday, Pete Wentz made good on his word Tuesday, tweeting a photo of Simpson-Wentz and their 1-year-old son, Bronx.Check out Ashlee Simpson-Wentz's old hairstyles"Yah fam ...

Pete Wentz to Play Himself on Californication

Mr. Ashlee Simpson, aka Fall Out Boy bass player Pete Wentz, is making the TV rounds these days. Besides his new gig hosting FNMTV on MTV, OK! Magazine reports the spiky-haired king of guyliner will be playing himself on an upcoming episode of Showtime's Californication.No word on the plot line, or how much screen time the rocker will have, but we know Ashlee will be watching with bells on! Will you be watching Pete "Fall Out" on Californication? &#151; Erin FoxRelated&#149; Use Our Online Video Guide to Watch Californication&#149; Californication DVD Release Party