Date of Birth

5 June 1979, Wilmette, Illinois, USA

Birth Name

Peter Lewis Kingston Wentz III

Nickname

Petah

Pete

Petey

Peter Pan

Pistol Pete

Peterpanda

Pete! At The Disco

Peter Panda

Tampa Bay Tommy

Height

5' 7" (1.70 m)

MINI BIOGRAPHY

Peter Lewis Kingston Wentz III was born on June 5, 1979 in Wilmette, Illinois. He is the bassist and primary lyricist for the Chicago-based band Fall Out Boy. Pete grew up in the Chicago hardcore punk scene, and was in several bands before Fall Out Boy, including Firstborn, Arma Angelus, 7 Angels of the Apocalypse / Culture of Violence, Extinction, Forever Ended Today, and Yellow Road Priest. He grew up with band member Joseph Trohman. Fall Out Boy is the 4th band that Pete Wentz and Andy Hurley have done together.

Wentz has written a book entitled The Boy With the Thorn In His Side, which is a story based on nightmares he had as a child. It is named after a song by The Smiths. He has another book titled "Rainy Day Kids," which was scheduled to be released February 14th, 2006, but has been postponed because he was unsatisfied with some of the material. In addition, Wentz is currently writing another book, alternating chapters with William Beckett of The Academy Is....

Wentz has a company called Clandestine Industries, which distributes books and, more notably, clothing, among other things. Additionally, he owns his own imprint of Fueled By Ramen, Decaydance Records, which has signed on several bands, including: Panic! At The Disco, October Fall, Gym Class Heroes and The Hush Soundand Lifetime . He also has a film production company called Bartskull Films, which has released the DVD "Release the Bats", a film about Peter, his friends both in and outside of Fall Out Boy, and many Decaydance/Fueled By Ramen bands.

IMDb Mini Biography By: bex

Spouse

Ashlee Simpson-Wentz (17 May 2008 - present) 1 child

Trade Mark

Hoodies

Trivia

He owns Clandestine Industries.

He wrote a book called The Boy With a Thorn in His Side.

He wrote all the songs on "From Under The Cork Tree".

Owns his own record label, Decaydance Records.

Was an all-state soccer player.

Plays bass guitar.

The eldest of three children. Has a younger brother and a younger sister.

Plays the piano.

Has two dogs - Hemingway (an English Bulldog) and Rigby.

[April 2008] Announced engagement to Ashlee Simpson-Wentz.

Brother-in-law of Jessica Simpson.

Married girlfriend Ashlee Simpson-Wentz on May 17, 2008 in an intimate ceremony at her parents' home in Los Angeles.

[May 2008] Is expecting his first child with wife Ashlee Simpson-Wentz.

On November 20, 2008 Pete and wife Ashlee welcomed a baby boy, Bronx Mowgli Wentz who weighed 7lbs 11oz, and was 20.5 inches long.

Peter Lewis Kingston "Pete" Wentz III is an American musician, best known for being the bassist for the American rock band Fall Out Boy.