Company: Shoot Software Corporation

Headquarters: Atlanta, GA

Type of Business: Corporate Engagement Solutions

Status: Current

Fund: Hawthorne Capital

Shoot Software Corporation is a pioneering enterprise software company, revolutionizing the way Human Resources (HR) and Information Technology (IT) executives engage and empower their workforce. Our cutting-edge tool is designed for modern workplaces, blending seamless remote and in-office work experiences. At the core of our service is a commitment to enhancing team member engagement, measurement, and focus, especially in sensitive industries handling Personal Health Information (PHI) and Personally Identifiable Information (PII).

Company: Navini Networks, Inc.

Founders: Wu-Fu Chen & Guanghan Xu

Headquarters: Richardson, TX

Website: www.navini.com

Type of Business: Wi-MAX Infrastructure Provider

Status: Acquired by Cisco Systems, Inc. - NASDAQ:CSCO

Fund: Arcapita Ventures I Limited

Navini Networks provides portable, plug-n-play broadband wireless access solutions in the United States. Its pre-Mobile WiMAX solutions include The Ripwave MX product line comprising Ripwave MX portable products, such as base stations, modems, radio frequency combiners, and element management systems. Navini Networks, Inc. also provides Smart WiMAX, a mobile WiMAX with beamformed MIMO and smart beamforming technology for the broadband wireless market to deliver personal broadband to the mass market.

Company: Fidelis SeniorCare, Inc.

Headquarters: Schaumburg, IL

Website: www.fidelissc.com

Type of Business: Healthcare Services for Medicare Beneficiaries

Status: Active

Fund: Arcapita Ventures I Limited

Fidelis provides expert clinical care and care coordination services to dual-eligible beneficiaries through its SecureHome clinics. Fidelis SeniorCare operates as a Medicare Advantage Plan ("Fidelis SecureCare") or as a trusted partner to Medicare Advantage Plans, in Michigan and Washington.

Company: CardioMEMS, Inc.

Founder: Jay Yadav

Headquarters: Atlanta, GA

Website: www.sjm.com/cardiomems

Type of Business: Medical Device

Status: Acquired by St. Jude Medical - NYSE:STJ

Fund: Arcapita Ventures I Limited

CardioMEMS, Inc. is a medical device company focused on the application of Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) technology to create innovative devices for the diagnosis, treatment and management of chronic diseases. CardioMEMS is developing an implantable wireless sensor targeted for the Congestive Heart Failure (CHF) market.

Company: Prenova, Inc.

Headquarters: Atlanta, GA

Website: www.prenova.com

Type of Business: Energy Management Software

Status: Acquired by Ecova, Inc. - NYSE: AVA

Fund: Arcapita Ventures I Limited

Outsourced energy management services to large, multi-site enterprises in retail, manufacturing, hospitality and other vertical markets. Prenova has over 45,000 commercial and industrial buildings under management with 7,500 buildings connected on a real-time basis for a range of services. Real-time operations are served from a state-of-the-art network operations center in Atlanta leveraging SaaS technology, enabling clients to monitor and control energy consumption within their own portfolio of buildings across an array of disparate energy management systems.