Roger Dorf, retired vice president and general manager of Cisco Systems’ broadband wireless business unit, will be the commencement speaker at Missouri University of Science and Technology during ceremonies Saturday, Dec. 19.

Missouri S&T Commencement begins at 11 a.m. in the Gale Bullman Multi-Purpose Building. Approximately 600 students will receive degrees. Dorf will receive an honorary doctorate.

Dorf earned a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering from Missouri S&T in 1965. He also earned a master’s degree at Boston University. Dorf has more than 40 years of professional experience in executive and engineering leadership. He was president and CEO of Navini Networks until 2007, when it was acquired by Cisco Systems. He retired from Cisco earlier this year.

Previously, Dorf held the position of CEO of Celite Systems, based in Austin, Texas. Prior to joining Celite, he was vice president and general manager of Nortel Network’s Broadband Access Business Unit (formerly Promatory). During his busy career, Dorf has served as CEO of Synch Research, president of AT&T Network Systems Caribbean and Latin America, chief operating officer of AT&T Paradyne and vice president of customer support for Cullinet Software. He also held several senior management positions at IBM.

Dorf has served as an outside director of CTI Argentina, Educate the Children Foundation, Amplifynet Inc., Apta Software, Gearworks Inc., and as chairman of the U.S. section of the Brazil/U.S. Business Council. He is currently on the board of the National Chamber Foundation of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, serving on the executive and audit committee. He also serves on the Dean’s Advisory Council for Boston University’s College of Engineering.

At S&T, Dorf has served on the Corporate Development Council and the Alumni Association Board of Directors. He is a member and past president of S&T’s Academy of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineers. He currently serves on the Advancing Excellence Campaign Steering Committee and is the vice president for the Board of Trustees.

Dorf and his wife Sandy live in Austin, Texas. They have three children and six grandchildren.