SIMULIA’s simulation applications allow designers and engineers to accelerate the process of evaluating the performance, reliability and safety of materials and products very early in the design and development process, often reducing and even eliminating the need for physical prototypes. Not only is simulation used in the development of a broad range of products, including cell phones, cars, planes, shoes, medical devices and wind turbines, simulation applications also are used by scientists to analyze the potential of earthquakes, evaluate the potential for extracting oil deposits and to study the behavior of the human body.

Realistic, digital simulation reveals things that, historically, could not be seen or measured. It helps predict impacts that have not yet happened. Simulation is the key to a deeper understanding of the world.

Dassault Systèmes’ digital healthcare solutions show that SIMULIA’s simulation capabilities are now available to a much broader audience and span the entire innovation cycle. CIMdata believes Dassault Systèmes is a leader in providing simulation to the digital healthcare industry.

Their SIMULIA brand’s simulation capabilities, combined with the 3DEXPERIENCE platform, provide a good foundation for enabling digital twin capabilities. With its comprehensive simulation capabilities in multiscale and multiphysics, Dassault Systèmes’ SIMULIA brand has the foundational elements to execute such predictive simulation and support the enablement of the digital twin—the 3DEXPERIENCE Twin.

Source : CIMdata Commentary “Dassault Systèmes’ SIMULIA Analyst Event 2018: New Highlights in Simulating Product, Nature and Life” from May 2, 2018

Dassault Systèmes provides robust and proven end-to-end industrial processes based on digital models built with multi-scale, multidisciplinary and connected simulation applications. SIMULIA’s capabilities predict the realistic behavior of electromagnetism, fluids, materials, structures and vibro-acoustics.

As an integral part of the 3DEXPERIENCE platform, SIMULIA applications facilitate innovation at all stages of the product life cycle to help customers achieve their sustainability objectives. Research and development departments can reduce physical testing phases, increase product quality and bring products to market faster by using virtual worlds, which are always available for digital testing.