PROVIDENCE, R.I.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Recognizing Rhode Island’s most accomplished IT practitioners and entrepreneurs, Tech Collective announced the 2012 Tech10 award recipients.

Tech10 is the first awards program of its kind in Rhode Island to honor the talents and achievements of rising technology practitioners and innovators and in the process identify the future technology influencers and leaders of our state.

The recipients of this year’s Tech10 awards have excelled in their practice, demonstrated a passion for helping others to succeed in life and business, and are pioneering in their technological and career achievements. The Tech10 award recipients are: (In alphabetical order)

Denise Arruda-FM Global

Stephanie Castilla- Highlander Institute

Joshua Cliff- Atrion Networking Corporation

David Esposito- FM Global

John Florez- Drupal Connect

Tim Gaulin- Clear Channel Providence

Kevin Longo- OSHEAN

Kathleen Malin- The Rhode Island Foundation

Glenn Morin- Blue Cross Blue Shield of Rhode Island

Carl Wooten- Vertical Performance Partners

Tech10 award recipients will be honored at the Tech10 Celebration on May 17, 2012 from 6:00 – 8:00 p.m. at the Point Street Dueling Pianos in Providence, R.I. Guests will enjoy the show after the ceremony. One of the Tech10 award recipients will additionally be recognized for outstanding accomplishments in overall Achievement.

The Tech10 awards program is presented by Tech Collective, Rhode Island’s Information Technology and Bioscience Industry Association. Recipients were chosen by this year’s Tech10 Judging Panel based on nomination and application submissions. This year’s Judging Panel included: (no specific order)

Jason Albuquerque – Director of Information Technology, Town of North Kingstown -2011 Tech10 winner

Phil Carlucci – IT Director – Legislative Data Systems, State of Rhode Island

Andy Cutler – Partner, Cutler and Company

Heather Hartman – Care New England Health System -2011 Tech10 winner

Ann Marie Harrington – President and Founder, Embolden

Cheryl Lawrence – Director of Information Systems, Home & Hospice Care of Rhode Island - 2011 Tech10 winner

Kevin Rota, Chief Information Officer, SIMULIA

“It’s not just the tech industry that is growing, it is technology that is growing industry, Rhode Island must embrace this and take an active part to identify and nurture our current and future talents,” said Kathie Shields, executive director of Tech Collective. “Talent, such as that exhibited by this year’s Tech10 award recipients, will be one of the key factors in attracting technology companies to Rhode Island and fostering overall industry success. Tech Collective congratulates each of this year’s Tech10 award honorees.”

To learn more about the Tech10 Awards or attend the Tech10 Red Carpet Celebration event, visit www.tech-collective.org or www.tech10awards.com.

About Tech Collective: