From sporting stars to authors our county has raised and educated some of Britain's most famous faces.

Here are some of the famous people to have been educated at schools in High Wycombe:

E. L. James

(Andrew Matthews/PA)

Best known for being the author of the sexy novel series Fifty Shades of Grey, E.L James was educated in High Wycombe.

Born in London the best-selling author grew up in Bucks and attended the independent Pipers Corner School and later studied at Wycombe High School.

She was named by Time Magazine in 2012 as one of the 100 most influential people. The same year she also won two National Book Awards.

Lucinda Dryzek

Lucinda Dryzek attended Wycombe High School in the 00s and is best known for playing Katy Riley in the BBC sitcom Life of Riley and Jasmine Burrows in BBC medical drama Holby City.

The actress has been in numerous TV shows including Outnumbered, Midsomer Murders and The Twilight Zone where she played the character of Katherine Langford.

Jimmy Carr

(Peter Byrne/PA)

One of the nation's most-loved comedians also attended a school in High Wycombe.

He spent most of his early life in Farnham Common, South Bucks, where he attended Farnham Common School, followed by Burnham Grammar School.

He completed sixth form at the Royal Grammar School in High Wycombe, where he says his academic potential was identified and nurtured.

He is the panel host for 8 Out of 10 Cats, 8 Out of 10 Cats Does Countdown and also The Big Fat Quiz of the Year.

Matt Dawson

(Mike Egerton/PA)

Retired England rugby union player Matt Dawson MBE played scrum half for Northampton Saints and then London Wasps.

Since retiring, Dawson has become a team captain on A Question of Sport besides appearing on various reality shows and is a commentator and presenter on BBC Radio 5 Live's rugby programme.

Born in Birkenhead, Dawson was raised in Bucks and attended the Royal Grammar School. While in school he excelled in cricket and football before deciding to concentrate on rugby.

Ian Dury

Lots of famous faces passed through the corridors of the Royal Grammar School in High Wycombe.

Previous student Ian Dury rose to fame during the late 1970s, during the punk and new wave era of rock music. He was the lead singer of Ian Dury and the Blockheads and before that of Kilburn and the High Roads.

Some of his best known songs include Hit Me With Your Rhythm Stick and Reasons to be Cheerful.

Do you remember any of these famous faces at your school? Let us know in the comments.