With its adroit travesty on politics, its pleasant tunes and its effervescent quality, "Stand Up and Cheer," the pictorial attraction now sojourning at the Radio City Music Hall, often comes close to a conception of what a modern Gilbert and Sullivan opus might be. It is true that there are several intrusive numbers which have little to do with the bright pivotal idea, but they have the virtue of being good entertainment.Will Rogers and Philip Klein are responsible for the story outline, which met with the approval of Winfield Sheehan, production head of the Fox studios, who chose to have "Stand Up and Cheer" the first picture to bear his name as producer. That veteran word-juggler, Ralph Spence, contributed the witty dialogue, and Lew Brown and Jay Gorney supplied the music and lyrics.Warner Baxter is in his element here as Lawrence Cromwell, a stage producer who is called to Washington by the President to take over the newly formed Cabinet post of Secretary of Amusements. Cromwell is no shrinking violet, being obstinate when it comes to his opinions. If he tells a girl she is pretty, she must be, for, as he explains to Mary Adams (Madge Evans), one of his dozen assistant secretaries, she is definitely in Class 10 A in his beauty catalogue. So Miss Adams has to apologize for denying that she is beautiful.Once in his Washington office. Cromwell proceeds to busy himself by ordering dozens of jazz bands, grosses of chorus girls, "one sixth of a dozen of masters of ceremony" and dozens of blues singers, torch singers and a quarter of a dozen boop-boop-a-doop warblers.It is a case of bringing smiles to the faces of the nation, causing them to forget the past economic depression. One of the first songs is "I'm Laughin'," which is rendered by a variety of persons, from riveters on skyscrapers to white wings on the roadway. Other musical numbers are "We're Out of the Red,' "Stand Up and Cheer." "Broadway's Gone Hill-Billy," "Baby Take a Bow," "This Is Our Last Night Together" and "She's Way Up Thar."Among those who share in rendering these ballads are John Boles, Sylvia Froos, Stepin Fetchit, Nick Foran and a delightful child named Shirley Temple.Apparently the Secretary of Amusements gets on the nerves of a Senatorial committee and two members are named to call upon Cromwell. They look perfectly serious, but subsequently they turn out to be "Senators" Mitchell and Durant, who, while waiting in Cromwell's office, gradually develop the art of knockabout clowning. One of them is eager to have his colleague support him in calling for a reduction on the tariff on haywire, and they continue discussing more or less weighty questions while they are slapping each other's faces or rolling around the room in an acrobatic fashion.Even a penguin has been corralled for this film. It is funny enough to say that this stranger from the Antarctic goes waddling around a room wearing a hat and a coat. But think how ludicrous it is when the bird, talking with the familiar husky hot-cha voice, tells Stepin Fetchit that he is Jimmy Durante, shrunk and slightly changed. The penguin receives an opportunity to plunge into a tank containing a variety of fish. Stepin Fetchit also dives into the tank, seeking to pacify the bird edition of Durante who wants a halibut.Every musical film must have its romance and this one is no exception. Cromwell becomes enamored of the lovely Mary Adams, who is in charge of the children's entertainment, an angle of the department which the head does not consider of great importance, but he eventually discovers now wrong he is.The jollity of the film increases as it develops. Cromwell may have his disappointments, but in the end there are flashes of hosts of persons filled with the joie de vivre. It looks as if all Hollywood had taken part in this summing up of "Stand Up and Cheer."Mr. Baxter is excellent. Miss Evans is charming, James Dunn, Arthur Byron and Nigel Bruce are excellent in their rôles.The stage items at the Radio City Music Hall include "Impresario Spring," with scenes called "Arrival of Spring," "Spring's Melody," "Spring's Salon" and "The Rainbow." Those who appear in this presentation are Lucille Page, Caroline Andrews, Margaret Daum, Dora Rinehart Arschansky, the Rockettes and the ballet corps.

STAND UP AND CHEER, based on a story outline by Will Rogers and Philip Klein; music by Lew Brown and Jay Gorney, with lyrics by Mr. Brown; directed by Hamilton MacFadden; a Fox production. At the Radio City Music Hall.Lawrence Cromwell . . . . . Warner BaxterMary Adams . . . . . Madge EvansJimmy Dugan . . . . . James DunnSylvia Froos . . . . . Sylvia FroosJohn Boles . . . . . John BolesJohn Harly . . . . . Arthur ByronShirley Dugan . . . . . Shirley TempleSecretary to President . . . . . Ralph MorganBoy Scout . . . . . Jimmy DallasAunt Jemima . . . . . Aunt JemimaSenators Danforth and short . . . . . Mitchell and DurantNick Foran . . . . . Nick ForanDinwiddie . . . . . Nigel BruceStepin Fetchit . . . . . Stepin Fetchit