Admission is free at Alianza Dominicana Cultural Center and doors open at 6:30.

Admission is suggested donation $10 at National Jazz Museum in Harlem.

Yasser Tejeda is an award-winning Dominican composer, guitarist, vocalist, and producer who

coined “Afro Dominican Roots Fusion.” According to the Chicago Reader, Yasser’s “elegantly

polished compositions contain a fascinating, delicate interplay of past and present…underlined

by raw, ancestral music meant to move bodies and bring about communion,” while Juan Luis

Guerra, the most influential Dominican artist in the world, praised his mission calling it a

“marvelous example of what’s happening with Dominican music.”

Tejeda released his third studio album, La Madrugá, in 2023. His latest single, “Todo Va a

Marchar,” premiered at New Sounds with Jon Schaefer calling it “an upbeat song driven by the

rolling and incisive guitar sounds that seem to come from classic 70s Afropop.” Musically,

Yasser’s inspiration for the concept of La Madrugá awoke while listening to traditional chants,

genres, and styles that were either developed or adopted as traditions from the Dominican

Republic’s African ancestry. His goal was to implement centennial Dominican traditions like Los

Congos del Espíritu Santo de Villa Mella, La Sarandunga de Baní, La Salve de San Cristóbal,

etc., unto the experimental fusion of merengue, jazz, and rock.

His catalog includes two previous albums, Kijombo (2019) and Mezclansa (2009), and an

acoustic EP, Interior. Mezclansa was dubbed one of the “100 essential recordings of Dominican

music” by the Dominican National Association of Art Writers (Acroarte). His second album,

Kijombo, received six awards from the Dominican Republic’s Premios Indie, including Best

Album. Yasser’s versatility as a guitarist has also landed him features on praised albums and

recordings with artists like Vicente García, the Flor de Toloache Band feat. Miguel, Sotomayor,

and Alex Ferreira, just to mention a few. He’s also a veteran touring musician, having traveled the

world with Latin Grammy-winner Prince Royce.

Yasser hopes to incite an awakening while inspiring new generations to explore, promote, and

uplift their roots.

Jazz Power Initiative first launched its Intergenerational Jazz Power Jam series in 2017 in partnership with, and presented at, the National Jazz Museum in Harlem, hosted and led by Managing and Artistic Director, pianist Eli Yamin (aka “Dr. E”). The first house band also showcased emerging jazz stars, including saxophonist Lakecia Benjamin, and bassist Endea Owens.

Over the past six years, thousands of audience members have witnessed more than 100 professional artists, with over 250 “jammers” participating. These include over the past three years our Community Artists-In-Residence: vocalist Antoinette Montague (2022); percussionist and bandleader Annette A. Aguilar (2023), and trumpeter, composer, and bandleader, Steven Oquendo (2024); as well as performances by composer/vibraphonist Nikara Warren, tuba player Bob Stewart, violinist Curtis Stewart, clarinetist Evan Christopher, vocalists Charenee Wade and Catherine Russell, saxophonists Claire Daly, Jon Irabagon and Knoel Scott, percussionist Chembo Corniel, trombonist Ray Anderson, trumpeters James Zollar, Mark McGowan, EJ Allen, bassists Lonnie Plaxico, Elias Bailey, Melissa Slocum and Jennifer Vincent, and dancer/choreographers Mickey Davidson, Max Pollak, Shireen Dickson, and Kim Holmes, as well as students from LaGuardia High School Jazz Band directed by Kevin Blancq, All City High School Latin Ensemble directed by Alberto Toro and Steven Oquendo, and Harlem Samba directed by Dr. Dana Monteiro.

Dr. Eli Yamin, JPI’s Managing and Artistic Director, notes: “The Intergenerational Jazz Power Jam is a heap of fun for jazz fans and anybody you know who might be moved by the sound of surprise, renewed by the feeling of soul and embraced by a diverse community of people who love music!”

Intergenerational Jazz Power Jam is produced by Jazz Power Initiative, a non-profit, 501 (c) (3) organization founded in 2003, is made possible in part by the New York City Department of Cultural Affairs in partnership with the City Council; the New York State Council on the Arts with the support of the Office of the Governor and the New York State Legislature; the Howard Gilman Foundation; the Hispanic Federation; the National Jazz Museum in Harlem; Alianza Dominicana Cultural Center with Catholic Charities Archdiocese of New York and the New York City Department of Youth & Community Development; the Upper Manhattan Empowerment Zone; the Lower Manhattan Cultural Council, and individual donors.