This post is also available in: Spanish

The Embassy of the Dominican Republic in the United Arab Emirates recently celebrated the 170th Anniversary of the Dominican Republic’s Independence, as well as the 5th Anniversary of the establishment of the Embassy in the United Arab Emirates. The occasion was commemorated with a reception organized under the Patronage of H.H. Sheikh Nahyan Bin Mubarak Al Nahyan, Minister of Culture, Youth and Community Development of the U.A.E., and took place on the 2nd of March, 2014, at the Emirates Palace, Abu Dhabi. His Excellency Humaid Mohammed Al Qatami, Minister of Education of the UAE, was also present as a guest of honor, in addition to Ambassadors, Heads of Governmental Authorities, Dominicans living in the UAE and a select group of guests. During the opening of the event, H.E. Clara Martínez Thedy de Safa, Ambassador of the Dominican Republic to the United Arab Emirates and a Casa de Campo villa owner, expressed in her speech the historic facts that lead to the Dominican Republic’s Independence on February 27, 1844. Within which she highlighted the great visionary and liberal thinker, Juan Pablo Duarte who was the main inspiration of the independence movement and who is considered today the architect and Founding Father of the Dominican Republic. The Ambassador added that Duarte’s legacy still inspires the Dominican people to follow his example of honesty, determination and democracy. Furthermore, the Ambassador spoke about the ties of friendship and cooperation between the Dominican Republic and the United Arab Emirates and presented a brief description of the Dominican Republic emphasizing key statistics relating to tourism in the Dominican Republic, as well as the strengthen economy. For the occasion, the Embassy presented an art exhibition entitled “Art from the Dominican Republic,” presented by two very talented Dominican artists: Inés Tolentino and Soraya Abu Naba’a. The Embasssy was also honored to introduce the most gifted saxophonist of the Dominican Republic, Sandy Gabriel, who played Dominican rhythms through the night. To complete the celebration the Embassy presented a group of dancers who performed several iconic Dominican Melodies and the guests enjoyed a taste of traditional Dominican food, as well as a cigar tasting.

Soraya Abu Naba’a Ahead of her visit to Abu Dhabi, we were lucky enough to meet Soraya here in Casa de Campo at a private dinner hosted at the Casa de Campo villa of Claudio Silvestri, president and CEO of Casa de Campo. Charming, beautiful and talented, here we bring you the biography and artworks of Soraya Abu Naba’a: Soraya was born on August 23, 1985 in Melbourne, Florida to a Palestinian father and a mother of Lebanese descent born in the Dominican Republic. She spent her childhood life in Santo Domingo . Starting at the age of 8 years old, she began taking drawing and art classes. When she was 16, she spent the summer in Paris spending most of her time in museums and attending Parsons University for intensive drawing classes. Searching for more areas in which to develop her creativity, she took more drawing, painting and art history classes as well as introduction to fashion design courses at the Altos de Chavón School in Santo Domingo. She took an advanced drawing course focusing on the human anatomy in the Altos de Chavón School in Romana in 2006. Ms. Naba’a has been part of the Paris American Academy for 3 years, having earned a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree. In 2008, she took a sculpture course in the Accademia di Arti, in Florence, Italy. Since 2009 she has painted between Santo Domingo and Miami. Traveling has had a huge impact in her visual language, even though her work is mainly abstract, she has translated the human figure into an abstract element, where the concept of time, space and emotions converge. She has developed her on code to depict what she sees through the relationship of lines, colors and shapes. In a few years she has had over forty exhibits including collectives and solo exhibits in cities like Santo Domingo, Miami, Paris, Trinidad & Tobago, San Juan, Shanghai, and Amman. Her art works are found in private collections around the world in cities like Ft Lauderdale, Miami, Santo Domingo, Istanbul, Amman, Lutry, Toronto, among others. She has appeared in numerous magazines and newspapers, nationally and internationally. Selected GROUP SHOWS

2014 “Mnemonics”, Emirates Palace, Abu Dhabi, UAE

2013 27th Visual Arts Biennale, Modern Art Museum, Santo Domingo, D.R.

2012 XXIV Contest E. León Jimenes, Santiago, D.R.

2011 Contemporary, Modern and Latin American Auction, Gary Nader Fine Art Gallery, Miami, FL, USA

2011 “The Grand Show” Gary Nader Fine Art Gallery, Miami, FL, USA

2011 “Pinta” Art Fair, Manhattan, NY, USA

Selected SOLO SHOWS

2013 “Parallel reality”, Gary Nader Fine Art Gallery, Miami, USA

2012 “Multiverse”, Gary Nader Fine Art Gallery, Miami, Fl, USA

2010 “Into the Deep”, Royal Houses Museum, Sto.Dgo., Dom. Rep.

2010 “Scars in the sand”, The Sanctuary Hotel, Cap Cana, Dom. Rep.

www.sorayaabunabaa.com

Related