Camden and the Last Years, 1875-1892

A timeline from Walt Whitman’s residency in Camden, New Jersey, to his death and memorial, including his lecturing on Abraham Lincoln, publication of an edition of Leaves of Grass in 1881 and a “death-bed” edition in 1891-92, censorship battles, and his final decade writing poetry, sharing reminiscences, and associating with family and friends.

Timeline

1875 Feb.

Suffered a second, less catastrophic, stroke, affecting his previously functional right side.

1875 Spring

Worked on a new book, to be called Two Rivulets. Compiled other content from his experience and observations of the Civil War in Washington, Memoranda During the War.

1875 Nov.

Returned to Washington and tried to be reinstated in his job, but was unsuccessful. George and Louisa Whitman named their newborn son Walter. He died while still an infant in July 1876, and their next child was stillborn.

1875 Nov. 17

Attended dedication of Edgar Allan Poe memorial in Baltimore, a lone supporter among American literati.

1876

The 1876 edition of Leaves of Grass published. The book was a reworking of the 1871-72 edition, without "Passage to India." British friends started an English subscription list to support sales of the new edition in England. Critics meanwhile lambasted Whitman’s poetry in the Saturday Review (London), New York Tribune, and other periodicals. Continued to build his personal friendship base in the Camden-Philadelphia-New York area.

1876 June

Visited by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow in Camden. Began taking extended visits to the Stafford family farm on the outskirts of Camden, staying with Harry Stafford, who remained a lifelong friend. Received emotional support and engaged in self-directed rehabilitative physical therapy in the nearby creek. The visits to the family continued for years, into 1884, and were credited with improvement in health.

1876 Sept.

Anne Gilchrist moved from England to Philadelphia with three adult children, Beatrice, Herbert, and Grace. Having established prior acquaintance by correspondence, close friendship was quickly forged with the Gilchrist family. The Gilchrists stayed in America until June 1879.

1877 Jan.

Participated in program honoring Thomas Paine at Lincoln Hall, Philadelphia.

1877 May

John Burroughs published Birds and Poets, including a chapter on Whitman.

1877 Dec.

Attended writer, poet, and playwright Joaquin Miller’s The Danites of the Sierras in Philadelphia in the company of Miller.

1878

Scribner’s Monthly editor Richard Watson Gilder and John Burroughs launched the idea that Whitman should deliver a lecture on the death of Abraham Lincoln and the meaning of Lincoln to the nation. Began to be treated by Dr. S. Weir Mitchell in Philadelphia. Mitchell diagnosed his paralysis as the result of lasting damage from his earlier stroke.

1878, June

Attended the funeral of William Cullen Bryant in New York. Visited John H. Johnston in the city and John and Ursula Burroughs in the Catskills.

1879

Deemed a sculpted bust of himself by William Sidney Morse disappointing. In the following years, additional busts were made by Morse and other sculptors.

1879 April 14

In New York, gave his first lecture on the death of Abraham Lincoln. Continued to give a version of the Lincoln lecture in different cities until 1890, as benefits organized by his admirers and friends, usually performed near the anniversary of the Lincoln assassination. The lecture included a description adapted from Peter Doyle’s eyewitness account of the night at Ford’s Theater, and was followed by the reading or recitation of Whitman poems.

1879 Sept-Oct.

Traveled to visit brother Jefferson (Jeff) Whitman in St. Louis. Went on to Kansas and Denver, Colorado, enthused by the West.

1879 Dec.

Became extremely ill and feared dying. Unfit to continue in his travels, convalesced at Jeff’s home in St. Louis.

1880

Developed friendships with Dr. Richard Maurice Bucke, the orator Robert Ingersoll, artist Percy Ives, and William Sloane Kennedy of the Saturday Evening Post.

1880, Apr. 15

Gave Lincoln lecture in Philadelphia.

1880 June-Oct.

Traveled with Bucke to Ontario, Canada, by train, via Niagara Falls, New York. Bucke, the attending physician at the Asylum for the Insane in London, Ontario, began work on a Whitman biography. Time in Canada included trips to many historic sites, cities, and natural areas. Peter Doyle met Whitman at Niagara Falls for the return trip to Philadelphia-Camden.

1880 Nov.

R. Worthington publishers in New York sold unauthorized copies of Leaves of Grass printed from the 1860 plates, purchased in 1881—a long-term consequence of the bankruptcy of Thayer & Eldridge.

1881 Mar. 23

Edward Whitman boarded out, for a fee, for caretaking by a family in Glen Mills, Pennsylvania. He was later placed at an asylum in New Jersey.

1881 Apr.-May

Gave Lincoln lecture in Boston on April 15; stayed at the Revere House. Visited Longfellow the next day, and on the next, sculptor Truman Howe Bartlett made a plaster cast of his hand (later bronzed in Paris). Saw publisher James T. Fields and other Boston literary acquaintances, and made arrangements with James R. Osgood for a new Boston edition of Leaves of Grass.

1881 July

Vacationed with Richard Bucke at Long Island, New York.

1881 Aug.

Visited old acquaintances and friends in New York City. Traveled to Boston to oversee the Osgood printing of Leaves of Grass.

1881 Sept.

Received news of the suicide of Beatrice Gilchrist, his favorite of Anne Gilchrist’s children. Visited Concord, Massachusetts, and was feted at a reception by old Transcendentalist supporters A. Bronson Alcott and Ralph Waldo Emerson. Louisa May Alcott also attended. Visited the graves of Nathaniel Hawthorne and Henry David Thoreau, and went to Walden Pond. Back in Boston, spent time with friends Joaquin Miller and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, and met Henry James and Oliver Wendell Holmes.

1881 Nov.

The sixth, 1881, edition of Leaves of Grass published in Boston. The edition included twenty new poems. Some previously published poems were revised or regrouped, and some poem titles were changed.

1882 Jan.

Oscar Wilde visited in Camden.

1882 Mar.

In response to continued criticism of sexual content in Leaves of Grass, Osgood recommended selective censorship of Whitman poems.

1882 Mar.24

Longfellow died.

1882 Apr.26

Emerson died.

1882 May

Suppression of Leaves of Grass by Massachusetts Attorney General George Marston led to reconciliation with estranged friend William Douglas O’Connor. O’Connor lobbied in protest in Washington against censorship. Oscar Wilde visited again in Camden.

1882 May-June

Published pieces on Emerson and on Poe. Followed in December by an essay on Robert Burns.

1882 June

Negotiated with Rees Welsh & Co. in Philadelphia to become publishers for Leaves of Grass and Specimen Days.

1882 July

O’Connor and Robert Ingersoll reported a successful ruling by the U.S. Postmaster General that Leaves of Grass may be distributed through the mail, reversing the state-level stance of Massachusetts. Rees Welsh & Co. released 1,000 copies of Leaves, which sold out almost immediately, quickly followed by sale of five more runs.

1882 Sept.

Specimen Days was published. It included previously published Whitman publications Democratic Vistas, Memoranda During the War, and Two Rivulets as well as other autobiographical writing, post-Civil War articles and essays, and material drawn from notes and diaries.

1882 Nov.

David Mckay bought the Rees Welsh booklist and became the publisher of Whitman’s publications.

1883 June

Biography Walt Whitman published by Bucke.

1884 Feb.

Published “An Indian Bureau Reminiscence” in Baldwin’s Magazine, New York.

1884 Mar.

Moved to a house he purchased with cash at 328 Mickle Street, Camden, New Jersey. This was his home for the rest of his life.

1884 June

Peter Doyle and Edward Carpenter paid separate visits to the new Whitman home. Attended the wedding of Harry Stafford to Eva Westcott, in Camden.

1885 Feb.

Mary Davis became Whitman’s housekeeper in Camden. Her foster son, Warren “Warry” Fritzinger, soon became one of Whitman’s nurse-caretakers.

1885 Sept.

Received a horse and buggy as a gift funded by donations from several celebrity friends. Organized by Thomas Donaldson, contributors included Mark Twain (Samuel Clemens), Oliver Wendell Holmes, the actor Edwin Booth, and John Greenleaf Whittier. Later in the year William Duckett was hired as driver. The gift greatly increased Whitman’s mobility and ability to visit friends.

1885 Sept. 24

After suffering a series of falls during the year, had another non-catastrophic stroke and temporarily lost eyesight. In old age, suffered vision loss due to strokes and also became far-sighted.

1885 Oct.

Consulted an ophthalmologist on the advice of his physician Dr. William Osler, the Canadian founder of Johns Hopkins Medical University and a friend of Dr. Richard Bucke.

1885 Nov. 30

Received word of Anne Gilchrist’s death due to breast cancer via correspondence from her son Herbert Gilchrist.

1886

Delivered Lincoln lecture in February and March, the second time at the Chestnut Street Opera House in Philadelphia. Gave the lecture again in New Jersey in May.

1886 May

Received money raised as a gift from William Rossetti, Henry James, Robert Louis Stevenson, Edward Carpenter, John Addington Symonds and other admirers and friends.

1887 Jan.

Friends attempted to win a Congressional pension for Whitman, based on his hospital service during the Civil War.

1887 Apr. 14

Delivered Lincoln lecture at Madison Square Theater in New York. An illustrious group of philanthropists, literary greats, and artists attended, to some sensation.

1887 c. June

Sculptor William Sidney Mount made a new bust of Whitman.

1887 Oct. 18

Saw William O’Connor for the final time. O’Connor was severely ill, and he visited Whitman on his way back to Washington, after traveling north for attempted treatment.

1887 Nov.- Dec.

Spent holidays in Camden with the family of attorney and friend Thomas Biggs Harned. Harned’s wife, Augusta Anna Traubel, was Horace Traubel’s sister.

1887-1888

Philadelphia artist and friend Thomas Eakins painted a portrait of Whitman.

1888

Friend and long-time Camden resident Horace Traubel began near-daily visits and made a record of conversations with Whitman. Traubel first met and became friends with Whitman as a teenager. His accounts of their discussions about Whitman’s life and beliefs were later published as a nine-volume study, Walt Whitman in Camden. Six of the volumes were produced after Traubel’s 1919 death.

1888

Published poems on commission in the New York Herald.

1888 June 3-4

Suffered a series of strokes; in serious condition under medical care and confined at home, with regular nursing that lasted until his death.

1888 June 15

Visited by Peter Doyle.

1888 Aug.

Paid for his mentally disabled brother Edward (“Eddie”) to move into a small private room at an insane asylum in New Jersey. Had paid Eddie’s board and care for years.

1888 ca. Sept.

Published November Boughs.

1888 ca. Nov.

Published Complete Poems and Prose of Walt Whitman, 1855-1888. He was aided in its compilation by Horace Traubel.

1889 Jan.-Feb.

Oscar Wilde and William Dean Howells published positive reviews of November Boughs.

1889 May 9

William O’Connor died in Washington, D.C.

1889 May

Having sold his horse and carriage due to escalating difficulties in mobility, accepted a gift of a wheel chair from friends.

1889 May 31

Though very weak, attended birthday celebration in his honor in Philadelphia, in his wheel chair.

1889 Oct.

Housekeeper Mary Davis’s foster son, Warren (Warry) Fritzinger, became his regular nurse-caretaker.

1889 Dec.

Charlie Eldridge married Emily Louisa Brown in San Francisco.

1889-1890

Worked on Good-Bye My Fancy.

1890 Nov. 28

Thomas Jefferson (“Jeff”) Whitman died in St. Louis, from pneumonia.

1890 Dec.

Horace Traubel began publication of The Conservator.

1891 Jan.

Eakins portrait of Whitman exhibited at Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts.

1891 May 28

Horace Traubel married Anne Montgomerie in Whitman’s home on Mickle Street.

1891

Good-Bye My Fancy published.

1891 Dec.

Seriously ill with lung congestion. Suffered a fall. Revised his will. The bulk of his estate was dedicated to support his brother Eddie; specific sums were designated for Mary Davis, Susan Stafford, and his sisters Hannah and Mary; a gold watch to Harry Stafford and his silver watch to Peter Doyle. This will was revised again in January, with the gold watch to go to Horace Traubel and the silver to Harry Stafford.

1891 Dec.

Completed the “death-bed” edition of Leaves of Grass. Published in 1892.

1892. Mar. 22

Ellen O’Connor wed businessman Albert Calder in Providence, Rhode Island. A few days later Whitman was informed that the wedding had taken place.

1892 Mar. 26

Died at approximately 6:30 p.m., bedridden at home on Mickle Street. Mary Davis, Warry Fritzinger, Horace Traubel, Thomas Harned and an attending physician were present. His last words were “Shift, Warry” asking Fritzinger to help him move his body to a better position in bed.

1892 Mar.

Autopsy performed and death mask made. Papers gathered for distribution to his three designated literary executors: Thomas Harned, Horace Traubel, and Richard Bucke.

1892 Mar. 30

Viewing at Mickle Street home drew a long line of people stretching down the street, including working people of Camden, who came on their lunch hour. Funeral service in Harleigh Cemetery. Robert Ingersoll delivered eulogy. Peter Doyle attended the funeral and left, alone.

1892

Louisa Whitman and Edward Whitman died. George Whitman lived until 1901. He and Louisa Whitman, parents Louisa and Walter Whitman, brother Edward, and sister Hannah were eventualy interned with Walt Whitman in the Harleigh Cemetery vault Whitman designed. Disciple Horace Traubel was buried nearby in 1919.