“I respect albums you have to listen to 10 times to get into it, but that’s not our band.” –Sara Quin

It’s a dance the twins have been working on since they were “latchkey kids” (as Sara puts it) growing up in a suburb north of Calgary, Alberta. Their parents divorced when the twins were five, and the girls shuttled back and forth between homes and learned to rely on each other. By their teens, Tegan and Sara were drinking, smoking pot, and sometimes dropping acid during the school day. But they also studied classical piano, taught themselves guitar and became immersed in Calgary’s punk scene. The sisters signed a record deal when they were 18 and soon put out their official debut, This Business of Art, a folky growl of an album that took cues from Liz Phair and Ani DiFranco.

As the sisters voyaged through their musical personae, they also had to navigate tricky issues in their personal lives. Both Tegan and Sara identify as queer. They’ve always been open about their sexuality, and their rabid fan base celebrates their candor. The Quins even took Rolling Stone to task for calling the band a “Canadian lesbian duo” in reference to their Oscar-nominated song “Everything Is Awesome,” which the twins recorded with the Lonely Island. Sara posted a rejoinder on Twitter: “Lesbian Canadian duo @teganandsara is honored to be included w/heterosexual trio @thelonelyisland.”

“There are moments we are still excited to educate people, and then there are times where you just have to put your emotional earmuffs on,” Sara says. “We could be on social media fighting with people every second of every day if we wanted to.” Tegan says the duo make pop as a political act: They want to be the first queer women to dominate the charts. “I want pop radio because there are no other queer women there,” she says.

Editor’s picks

The sisters recently decided to take a cue from Beyoncé and make a music video for every song on Love You to Death. “Our version of Lemonade is more condensed,” Sara jokes. “But we are definitely in full pop mode.”