Donald Collins is entering his junior season for the Gaels. The versatile outfielder is slated to patrol the wide open spaces of centerfield at Louis Guisto Field this season. In 2010, Collins had a breakout season, playing 50 games and starting 38. The speedster hit .288, going 40-for-139 with five doubles, one triple and two home runs. He scored 18 runs and knocked in 18, while going 6-for-7 in stolen base attempts.

Head coach Jedd Soto raved about Collins and the terrific second half of last season and fall he has had, "Donald really came on the second half of last year. He was just so tough to get out. He's got a lot of speed, a very good defender. Donald had an exceptional summer in Bend, Oregon; I think he was one of the top-five hitters in batting average in that league. This fall, we just couldn't get him out."

This summer while playing for the Bend Elks in the West Coast League, Collins was a terror. He hit .316, which was tied for 11th in the West Coast League, while clubbing nine doubles, two triples and two home runs. On the base paths he was even more of a threat, he tallied nine stolen bases in 10 attempts.

The native of Fairfax, Calif., looks to be a part of one of the fastest and possibly best defensive outfields the Gaels have had under Coach Soto's tenure.

1. Why did you choose Saint Mary's College?

It was because of the coaches. They made me feel really welcome and a part of something when I was being recruited. Also, Saint Mary's being a private college made it more appealing.

2. Is there any team/game you are looking forward to playing?

I am looking forward to playing Oregon in our first away series and UC Irvine at home. I'm looking forward to Oregon because they are a big Pac-10 school with a Nike sponsorship. They are a traditional power-house in sports. I am looking forward to UC Irvine because I wanted to go there to play baseball and a lot of my friends go there.

3. Is there any other position you would like to play?

It would probably be pitcher.

4. If your coach asked you to speak to a recruit, what is the one thing that makes SMC baseball different than another college?

The brotherhood on the team is one of the best aspects of Saint Mary's baseball. I have friends that play at other schools and their teams do not seem to be as close as ours.

5. What's the funniest memory you have while playing at SMC?

My freshman year at Sam Houston State in Texas we were up by a lot and coach decided to put me in. It was my first college at bat and it felt 90 degrees and humid. My batting gloves were incredibly sweaty and I went to take a warm up swing and my bat flew out of my hands and hit the backstop in front of the stands. All of the fans began to laugh at me.

6. If you could play for one MLB team what team would that be?

The San Francisco Giants because I grew up in the Bay Area.

7. Who got you interested in baseball?

My dad

8. What's the first baseball memory you have?

I was playing T-ball and didn't quite know the rules yet. It was my first at bat, I hit the ball and got thrown out at first but I still continued to run around all of the bases.

9. What gets you pumped up before a game? Any rituals or superstitions?

I have a few rituals. I always listen to same songs before going out onto the field. I always put tape around my wrists at the same time and same way every time. I always button my jersey from bottom to top and the leave top button open. Also, I usually always have an Amp'd energy drink before a game.

10. Who is your all time favorite player?

Willey Mays

11. What's your major?

Kinesiology-Human Health & Performance

12. What's the hardest part of being a student athlete?

It would be time management with classes. I don't start homework till late at night and by then I am usually extremely tired.