In Collins' senior season of 1979-80, Washington State went 22-6 and earned the program's first trip to the NCAA Tournament since 1941. Collins was unstoppable. He led the Pac-10 in both scoring (23.1 points per game) and steals (76). He was named Pac-10 Player of the Year, and earned second-team Associated Press All-America honors when only five players each were picked to the first and second teams.

“I’ve never seen a player who could go from the top of the key to the basket as fast as he did. It was just an explosion,” remembers former WSU SID Rod Commons.

George Raveling said Collins "nearly was impossible" to stop when he received the ball on the baseline, and former WSU teammate James Donaldson told Cougfan.com in 2011 that Collins' uncanny ability to get up and down the court makes him a slam dunk choice for best small forward on the all-time Cougar team.

Collins earned first- or second-team all-conference honors three-straight seasons.

But as a true freshman in 1976-77, Collins said, he became so homesick he called his mom repeatedly to tell her he was heading back to Toledo. She always told him "no problem," but he’d have to get a job, Collins says with a big laugh about deciding to stay on scholie and see how things worked out.

“It was a cultural shock,” said Collins. “I came from an African American community and school and to come out to Washington State, a (large) school and predominantly white at the time -- it was a culture shock. But the people were wonderful. And they embraced me from day one.”

For perspective on the exalted place Collins holds in the hearts of the crimson faithful who are now graying around the ears, we turned to WSU graduate and CF.C Luxury Suites charter member Kelly Stopher.

"I was in high school in Spokane when Don was playing at WSU," said Stopher, who was a standout forward at Lewis and Clark High. "Back then, you didn’t get eight games per night on TV and the local college players were bigger than life. Don Collins was bigger than bigger than life. Quickness, leaping ability, shooting, dribbling, rebounding – he was a five-tool player. The only comparison I could make in the past 20 years would be Kyle Weaver except stronger, faster, more powerful, and a much better scorer and defender.

"Collins was explosive. The only Cougar player I would even mention in the same sentence relative to absolute talent is Guy Williams. Both were human highlight films, played above the rim and could blow by defenders off the dribble. I’d be hard pressed to come up with a better Cougar basketball player than Don Collins. Just a spectacular player at all facets of the game. His performance against UCLA at Beasley (in 1980) is the greatest single individual performance I’ve ever seen by a Cougar hoops player."

Collins poured in 31 that day as the Cougs defeated UCLA for the first time since 1966. More than 12,000 vocal fans were in Beasley Coliseum to watch it.

Terry Kelly, a standout Cougar guard who arrived at WSU in the same recruiting class as Collins, was asked in 2011 where he'd rank Collins among WSU's all-time greats.

"It's hard for me to come up with someone as impactful as Don," said Kelly, who began following the Cougs as a youngster in Spokane. "He was big enough and quick enough to defend anyone. There's no way the 1980 team gets to the NCAA Tournament without him."

Collins set 13 single-season and career WSU records. Today, four decades after playing his last game for the Cougs, Collins still holds the top mark in season scoring average (23.1) and holds a trifecta for steals with WSU's career, season and one-game records.

His 1,026 career points in conference games ranks third in Pac-12 history, behind only Oregon’s Ron Lee at 1,078 and UCLA’s Lew Alcindor (Kareem Abdul-Jabbar) at 1,050.

“I had some wonderful teammates, and the fan base was phenomenal. But I give all the glory to George, honestly,” said Collins.

Raveling, he says, was the best coach he ever had in a career in which he played for such notables as Hubie Brown, Gene Shue, Bill Musselman and Henry Bibby.

“He made it OK for me to come to WSU ... He always told me he’d give me a chance to play and that’s all I wanted. And it worked out … He taught me well. I had technique but he fine-tuned me -- and he worked with me. He was very patient and all praise goes to him,” said Collins.

Coming out of Scott High in Toledo, Collins was co-Mr. Basketball Ohio along with good friend Kelvin Ransey. Both had offers to Ohio State but the Buckeyes told the 6-6 Collins they intended him to be more of a rebounder and Ransey a scorer. That was enough to convince Collins to sign with Florida State. But when the Seminoles landed on probation, Collins said the NCAA gave him the green light to reopen his college search.

"My high school coach, Ben Williams, was friends with Coach Raveling. He (Williams) went to my house and talked with my mom about why Washington State -- which I didn't know anything about -- would be a good spot. She agreed. He then drove, with a bag of clothes, straight to the playground, picked me up, drove to the airport and put me on a plane out West. He stayed at the airport and watched us take off."

The coach knew what he was doing.

"On my visit, Kenny Jones, Harold Rhodes, all the guys (on the Cougars) just embraced me. Plus Stuart House had committed -- 6-11, averaging 39 and 19 a game. I thought, 'the two of us can do something together.'"

Collins’ No. 1 memory of his time at Washington State was when Raveling gave him the proverbial keys to the offense.

“We were built around House but my junior year, George told me he was going to put the ball in my hands and follow me to the end. That was the best thing that ever happened to me."

The "second-best memory of my time at Washington State" was sweeping the Los Angeles schools in Pullman his senior season, the win over UCLA marking WSU's first against the Bruins since 1966. "We beat USC and UCLA that weekend and you’d have thought we won the national championship,” Collins says with glee.

Collins was selected in the first round, at No. 18 overall, by the Atlanta Hawks in the 1980 draft and played about half the season before being traded to Washington, where he joined a cast of stars including Elvin Hayes, Wes Unseld, Greg Ballard, Kevin Porter, Kevin Grevey, Mitch Kupchak, Rick Mahorn and Bob Dandridge

For the season, with both Atlanta and Washington, Collins averaged 11.5 points and 2.3 assists per game but his minutes were notably fewer in Washington. He averaged double digits in scoring in each of the next two seasons but his minutes didn't grow much and he chafed. Matters didn't improve with a trade to Golden State.

"At the time I had an attitude problem because I wasn't playing as much as I thought I should," Collins says matter-of-factly. "My attitude caused problems and that's what happened to my career. The NBA didn't put up with bad attitudes then."

After four seasons in the league he would play just 16 more NBA games over the next three years. He would instead star in the shadows of the pro game, winning two MVP awards and three titles in the Continental Basketball League before collecting another three MVP awards and three titles in France.

A back injury in 1989-90 permanently altered his game but he played long enough overseas that, he notes, his two oldest daughters became nearly fluent in French.

Commons, himself a member of the WSU Athletics Hall of Fame, believes strongly that it's time for Collins to be inducted into the WSU Hall. Why Collins isn't enshrined already apparently is due to the combination of him being hard to find over the years, and plain old inertia.

“I’ve argued for years he should be in there, and I think it’s very possible now,” Commons tells CF.C.

For his part, Collins says he would love to be inducted into the WSU Hall of Fame, and not only for himself.

“I would love -- really love -- to come back for a bit just like Coach (Raveling) did. And I would love for my three daughters and my six grandkids to experience it. They don't know anything really about what granddad did at Washington State,” said Collins.

Life in general is "wonderful," Collins says. "I'm as happy as I've been in a long time. My kids are healthy and my grandkids are healthy."

As for the Cougs, Collins says he closely follows WSU basketball and football, and believes the hoops team is on the rise under coach Kyle Smith.

RELATED STORIES:

Norton Barnhill personified WSU's move into basketball's modern era

1980 NCAA Tourney loss still painful for WSU's Terry Kelly