Follow me on Twitter: @ankurologie

Hometown: Edison, NJ

Undergrad: Rutgers University

Hobbies: cricket, foreign cinema, upper body exercises

Specialty Interests/Career Plan: Minimally Invasive Surgery/Endourology; Invent medical devices for urology patients

Why Yale? Yale is a remarkable urology residency program in the northeast that provides excellent training in all of the subspecialties of urology. The program is designed to make you become the best possible urologist you can be. The residents in the residency program are down-to-earth, fun-loving, and a motivated group of individuals. This allows us to get residency work done in a relatively stress-free and enjoyable environment.

Why New Haven? New Haven is a blend of an urban city along with a residential town, allowing you to feel comfortable without becoming overwhelmed. It brings the convenience of a city along with the calmness and familiarity of a town. From all the places I have lived, New Haven has the best food scene I have experienced. Cost of living is very affordable. The culture and history of the undergraduate campus adds an extra flair to the place. If you drive 10 minutes in one direction, you’ll reach amazing hikes, while driving 10 minutes in the opposite direction will bring coastal beaches.

Random fact: I like to dance Bollywood.

Hometown: Owensboro, Kentucky

Undergrad: University of Kentucky (Go Cats!)

Hobbies: golf, hiking, traveling with my wife, playing cards, financial literacy

Specialty Interests/Career Plan: Complex stone disease and BPH management

Why Yale? Yale Urology has a unique blend of excellent clinical volume, multiple training sites, a wide array of opportunities for clinical research, and a supportive training environment. I am most proud of our resident culture. We support and look out for each other. The attendings here are also very approachable. As someone who had never lived outside of their home state (Kentucky), I quickly felt at home here at Yale and am very thankful for the opportunity to train here.

Why New Haven? New Haven is an awesome place to live during residency training. First, the city is affordable. The restaurant scene is great for a city of its size. From Yale museums to events put on by the city of New Haven, there is always something to do. Additionally, the city is very close to Boston and NYC. Whether you take the train or drive by car, it is easy to make a weekend trip to multiple locations on the Northeastern seaboard.

What would you be doing if not urology? Consulting

Random fact: I am learning to play the banjo.

Hometown: Roslyn, NY

Undergrad: NYU

Hobbies: avid binge watcher, anime, gym

Specialty Interests/Career Plan: Urologic Oncology

Why Yale? Yale provided the sense of family and community I was looking for in a program.

Why New Haven? New Haven has that New England charm, while not being super far from NYC. I’ve never lived outside of NY, and New Haven was perfect because it’s not far from all my friends and family.

What would you be doing if not urology? Research

Random fact: I’m naturally nocturnal and drink 3 Bang energy drinks a day.

Hometown: Sacramento, CA

Undergrad: UC Berkeley

Hobbies: Hiking, rock climbing, scuba diving, ultimate frisbee, anime, mixology, travel

Specialty Interests/Career Plan: Currently considering general urology or andrology; also plan to stay involved in the healthcare innovation space

Why Yale?: Great mix of clinical settings, excellent surgical volume (robotic vs open vs endoscopic), early operative experience, all subspecialties well-represented

Why New Haven?: Having lived in California most of my life, New Haven initially took some getting used to — but the abundance and diversity of food options, eclectic neighborhoods, bustling college-town feel, and proximity to NYC/Boston have made it a wonderful place to call home.

What would you be doing if not urology?: Adventure photography, writing a travel/food column for the NYT, working at a digital health startup

Random fact: I once visited the Icelandic Phallological Museum

Hometown: Cheshire, Connecticut

Undergrad: University of Connecticut

Hobbies: Culinary arts, hiking, running/cycling, traveling to new places (mainly for food)

Specialty Interests/Career Plan: I have a very open mind when thinking about urologic subspecialties, however, currently I am interested in pediatric and reconstructive urology.

Why Yale? Yale Urology covers the full breadth of urology offering residents experience in all sub-specialties of urology. Over the years, Yale Urology has consistently matched residents into various fellowships and private practice jobs throughout the country giving me confidence that I can truly pursue any route that interests me. In addition, mentorship and research opportunities are available in abundance. The emphasis placed on work-life balance by faculty and the residency overall is yet another reason why I chose to join the Yale Urology family.

Why New Haven? Growing up just 20 minutes north of New Haven, I have always loved the many apizza options. However, as I explore New Haven more during residency I am realizing how much more the city has to offer. The food scene is ever-growing, the music and theater offerings are numerous, and the local hikes and outdoor activities are endless.

What would you be doing if not urology? Chef-owner of a farm to table restaurant

Random fact: I was the personal chef for the Bush family.

Hometown: Princeton, NJ

Undergrad: Washington University in St. Louis

Hobbies: Cooking, Brewing, Squash (the sport, not the vegetable), Backpacking

Specialty Interests/Career Plan: Andrology/Infertility – I’m looking for an academic career in the long run.

Why Yale? While doing my sub-I, I was struck by how welcoming and educational the entire program was, from interns to attendings. There is an excellent diversity of cases and attending specialties, and excellent autonomy, particularly as compared to other northeast programs.

Why New Haven? New Haven is a small city that punches way above its weight culturally and in the culinary world. There are cool museums, excellent restaurants (and new ones opening regularly), and good concerts. The downtown is easily walkable. With our salaries and the cost of living, you can easily enjoy all those things too.

On top of that, New York is a quick train ride from downtown, Boston a quick Amtrak ride. You can be in Vermont, New Hampshire, or large cities easily enough for a quick weekend trip, and with the New Haven airport (10 minutes from downtown) you can easily go anywhere on the east coast.

What would you be doing if not urology? Honestly, if I wasn’t a doctor, I’d probably want to be a chef.

Random fact: I lived in China for a year before I decided to switch my career track to medicine.

Hometown: Ibadan, Nigeria

Undergrad: Philander Smith College (tiny HBCU in Little Rock, Arkansas)

Hobbies: Sleeping, traveling, reading, furniture assembly, anything involving food

Specialty Interests/Career Plan: Pediatrics, Reconstructive, General urology

Why Yale? My first experience with Yale Urology was during my surgery clerkship rotation. I was amazed by the warmth, kindness, and mutual respect between faculty, residents, and staff. I laughed the most I had ever laughed in medical school during that rotation. As a resident, I truly enjoy spending time with my co-residents, we all support each other. The surgical training here is top notch, we get early exposure to every sub-specialty in urology. I am confident that I will be a well-rounded urologist at the end of my training here.

Why New Haven? I have lived in several cities, and New Haven is my favorite so far. It’s a small town with a lot of charm. There hasn’t been anything I wanted to do that I haven’t been able to do here. The proximity to major cities and New England tourist attractions is also a major plus. I have been pleasantly surprised by how much I’ve loved having 4 seasons, fall and spring seasons are gorgeous here!

New Haven: I’m excited about all the new food spots opening up in and around New Haven and exploring New England as much as residency schedule allows.

What would you be doing if not urology? Air hostess

Random fact: I have never touched a cat

Hometown: Basking Ridge, NJ

Undergrad: Bowdoin College

Medical School: Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School

Hobbies: Yoga, hiking, cycling, birding/bird photography, cooking

Specialty Interests/Career Plan: Pediatric Urology, Endourology

What do you look forward to about Yale Urology and New Haven? I’m looking forward to learning from and working with my co-residents, gaining experience across all of the subspecialties in urology, and exploring New Haven – so many great restaurants I can’t wait to try!

What would you be doing if not urology? Peloton instructor

Random fact: I spent most of my time growing up training as a ballet dancer

Hometown: Union City, CA (Bay Area)

Undergrad: Brown University

Medical School: Yale School of Medicine

Hobbies: Baking, Gardening, Fishing, DIYing, Thrifting, Amateur Pickleball, Theater Enthusiast

Specialty Interests/Career Plan: I LOVE blasting kidney stones, otherwise mostly undifferentiated.

What do you look forward to about Yale Urology and New Haven?

Yale Urology is a family where everyone is looking out for each other. I’m looking forward to being challenged, learning, and thriving together. New Haven isn't just an escape from big city prices; it's a community that is easy to fall in love with. There are many gems to explore in New Haven, especially when it comes to food!

What would you be doing if not urology? Marine biologist

Random fact: My brother and I once auditioned a dance routine for the elementary school talent show. We were rejected.