Well-positioned for a world of growth.

The New Haven region is home to Yale University, Quinnipiac University, Albertus Magnus College, the University of New Haven, Southern Connecticut State University and Gateway Community College, making it a hub for both talented, highly educated workers and entrepreneurs alike. Within and beyond the city itself, the growing corporate base of the region has a flourishing biotech industry, high-tech aerospace and medical manufacturing and a technology cluster. View the current Visitors & Relocation Guide now.

Access a highly educated workforce.

With eight colleges and universities, including the internationally renowned Yale University, education is an economic driver for the region, delivering a total impact of over $2 billion annually. While our higher education institutions develop (and attract) talented, educated workers, we are also building unique workspaces and amenities to foster collaboration and success.

Enjoy a walkable, bike-friendly downtown.

Excellent signage makes it is easy for visitors and residents alike to explore downtown New Haven on foot or on two wheels. Now, in addition to being consistently recognized as one of the great walkable cities in the U.S., New Haven is now also a Silver-level “Bicycle-Friendly Community,” according to the League of American Bicyclists.

Claim a prime spot on the eastern seaboard.

Not far from Long Island Sound, and at the hub of the busiest transportation systems on the U.S. east coast, New Haven shares its namesake region with over a dozen distinctive, inviting Connecticut towns: Bethany, Branford, East Haven, Guilford, Hamden, Madison, Meriden, Milford, North Branford, North Haven, Orange, Wallingford, West Haven and Woodbridge.

Lead the bioscience revolution.

Anchored by scientific research at Yale and Yale New Haven Health System, the region’s bioscience cluster includes both large pharmaceutical companies and small startups, developing today’s most advanced drugs, therapies and medical devices. Recent success stories include: Arvinas, RallyBio, Kleo Pharmaceuticals and BioHaven.

Connect to a vibrant arts scene.

New Haven County offers dozens of unique and fascinating museums, as well as theater at the Shubert, Long Wharf and the Yale Rep, among others.

Feel at home in our livable cities and towns.

Beyond New Haven, towns like Meriden, Hamden and Cheshire offer award winning school systems, a great quality of life, and recreational activities galore.

Get anywhere from here.

The Greater New Haven region is well-positioned to serve all transportation needs. Our area is located within reach of two major interstates (I-91 and I-95), a major rail hub (Amtrak, Metro-North, the New Haven-Hartford-Springfield Line and Shore Line East), Connecticut’s largest deepwater port and an expanding airport (Tweed New Haven Regional Airport).