Ward Kimball, who has died aged 88, was an animator who made a significant contribution to many of Walt Disney's films, including Pinocchio, Dumbo, and Cinderella.

Over the next 37 years, Kimball progressed from apprentice animator to supervising animator to director and producer, working on most of Walt Disney's animated films and many Disney television features. He came to be known as one of Disney's "Nine Old Men" - the term Disney used to describe the veteran animators who had stayed with the studio through thick and thin, and whose opinions were of the greatest value.

But his major breakthrough came in 1940 when Disney felt something was missing from the first Pinocchio script. Disney wanted to develop the unnamed cricket (who had appeared briefly in the original 1880 Pinocchio story by Callodi) into a more important ingredient in the film. He called upon Ward Kimball to create the character.

Disney was so taken by Kimball's Jiminy Cricket that he ordered the script to be completely rewritten to bring on all the lines and scenes he needed to make Jiminy the co-star of the film.

From then on, Kimball's future with the Disney Studio was assured. His list of credits included The Five Crows for Dumbo (1941), Panchito in The Three Caballeros (1945), the Peter and the Wolf segment of Make Mine Music (1946), the two mice and their arch-foe Lucifer the Cat, for Cinderella (1950), the Mad Hatter's Tea Party and the Cheshire Cat for the Disney version of Alice in Wonderland (1951).

He was often - wrongly - credited with having devised the appearance of Captain Hook for Peter Pan (1953), but the Indian Chief in the film was all his own work.

In the mid-1950s, Kimball left the animated features department to supervise the weekly Disney television show. He collaborated with Wernher von Braun and other rocket experts on the Tomorrowland segments of the programme. The team was called upon to produce "science factual" (as opposed to science fiction) films to educate and enlighten America's youth with regard to space travel.

When the first of these films, Man in Space, was first screened in 1955, President Dwight D Eisenhower telephoned Disney to express his admiration and asked for a print of the film.

The two follow-ups, Man on the Moon (1955) and Mars and Beyond (1957) were equally successful. Consequently, Kimball and von Braun were largely responsible for setting up the "Tomorrowland" exhibition at California's newly opened Disneyland amusement park.

Disneyland offered Kimball a part-time outlet for yet another of his talents; he directed the Firehouse Five - a Dixieland band originally formed as lunchtime recreation at the studio - which became a popular attraction at Disneyland, much to Kimball's delight.

Still working on the Disney television programme in 1969, Kimball brought out a half-hour featurette entitled It's Tough to be a Bird. This irreverent look at flight, incorporating cut-out animation and live action, won him a second Academy Award.

Before retiring from the Disney Studio on August 31 1973, Kimball contributed the engaging cartoon sequence for Disney's Bedknobs and Broomsticks. For all of his many contributions to Disney's films over the years, Kimball didn't receive film credits - Disney aggressively refused to allow his animators to take credit for their own inventions.

But Kimball had a special relationship with Disney. In 1938, Kimball had purchased a full-sized 1881 passenger train which he restored at his two-acre home at San Gabriel, California.

After a visit to Kimball's railway in 1944, Disney set to work on his own scale model train. The two then visited the Chicago Railroad Fair and Disney returned to California planning to build a miniature railway to carry passengers through Disneyland.