Niger is a landlocked nation located in Africa’s Sahel region and borders Algeria and Libya to the north, Nigeria to the south, and Mali and Chad to the west and east. While nearly 80 percent of the country overlaps with the desert of the Sahara, the economy remains one of the poorest and least developed in the world reliant on subsistence farming, mineral extraction, and commodity exports. Despite recent gains in the previous decade to overcome the complex challenges facing the country, regional instability from militant jihadist expansion and the military involvement in political governance have contributed to a deteriorating posture. Niger is positioned in the Sahel’s tri-border region with neighboring Mali and Burkina Faso sharing an approximate 1448 km (900 mi) border where militant jihadist activity continues to pose a serious challenge to the security situation in the region.

Several regions in Niger continue to pose a serious challenge to travel including Tillaberi, Diffa, Agadez and other remote areas due to increased risk from armed banditry, terrorism, and kidnapping. Traveling within the country can be extremely dangerous due to hazardous road conditions and a risk from highway banditry and carjackings. Border regions increases these risks. In the capital of Niamey, political activists and strike-related activity are likely to stage demonstrations with little-to-no warning. Organized crime syndicates continue to pose a challenge for local police forces due to entrenched black market syndicates, narcotics trafficking, theft, residential and commercial burglary, human trafficking, and armed assault. The presence of heavily armed security forces in Niamey, especially around sensitive government areas, have become a common sight.

Despite the group's reduced capabilities and loss of territory in recent years, Boko Haram continues to pose an enduring threat in southeastern Niger, characterized by sporadic attacks on military and civilian targets. The country has also suffered an increasing terrorist threat from transnational groups operating in the wider Sahel region in recent years, with sporadic attacks in the southwest near the porous borders with Mali and Burkina Faso. Both violent and petty crime is relatively common across the country, and foreign nationals are often targeted due to their perceived relative wealth. Protests, generally driven by socio-economic and political grievances, occur with some frequency in Niger and are often met with a heavy-handed response from security forces.

There are no major aviation concerns, and security measures at the main Niamey International Airport are generally assessed as adequate.

Overland travel represents one of the main risks for foreign travelers in Niger, due to poor road conditions and erratic driving by many local motorists.

Niger has a low electrification rate and limited production capacity, resulting in unreliable supplies even in the main urban centers. Niger has a low internet penetration rate, with availability largely limited to Niamey and a few major cities.