10 years ago, the 2012 Olympics were well underway and Dorset played a starring role. The Weymouth and Portland area hosted the first of many sailing events for the Games. The Weymouth and Portland National Sailing Academy at Osprey Quay was chosen to host the sailing events of both the Olympic and Paralympic Games.

Bunting and decorations went up across Weymouth and Portland, residents volunteered to be Gamemakers, unique houses were built on Officers Field to host the athletes and staff and a number of roads were built and upgraded to help the area withstand the footfall of visitors, athletes and increased traffic on the roads.

Sailing at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London was held over two weeks between July 29 and August 11, 2012 at Weymouth and Portland National Sailing Academy on Portland. Watched by crowds across the coast, there were ten events which 380 competitors from 63 nations battled it out for medals.

READ MORE - London 2012 10 years on: How Portland and Weymouth have benefited after hosting sailing events

It was the scene where Sir Ben Ainslie became the most successful sailor in Olympic history with Gold in the Finn class, Hannah Mills and Saskia Clark won their first Silver medals, and Luke Patience, Stuart Bithell and Nick Dempsey also won Silver medals in the Star and RS:X classes.

15 Team GB sailors received a hero's welcome as thousands of people lined the streets of Weymouth and Portland for an open-top bus parade. A commemorative sculpture at Nothe Gardens has been unveiled at a community event on Friday (August 5) where Ann Weaving, Mayor of Weymouth, met ambassadors and torch bearers from London 2012 and recalled their memories of London 2012.

The sculpture features numbers and symbols inspired by the number of participants in the Games and the five medals won by Team GB in the sailing events. Portland stone has also been used to create six waves, representing six continents.

We have raided our archives for the best photos from the time as we continue to remember the Olympics in Dorset 10 years later

Got a story or issue for us to investigate? Email us at news.dorsetlive@reachplc.com to share your pictures, stories and information.

You can stay up-to-date on the top news near you with Dorset Live's FREE newsletters – enter your email address at the top of the page or sign up to our newsletters.

READ NEXT: