The modern pentathlon, an Olympic event which combines running, swimming, equestrian, shooting, and fencing, has just received a major update. The 2012 Summer Olympics will be the first Games where laser guns will be used in the shooting phase of the event, replacing the air pistols.

The modern pentathlon has been a part of the Olympic Games since 1912. Yet over the past several years, the sport has waned in popularity, is seemingly dated, and recently was on the verge of being removed from the Olympic Games. Somehow it was spared (at the expense of baseball and women’s softball) and will be allowed to remain through 2012. The hope is that by replacing the air pistols with laser guns, this adjustment will show Olympic officials that the sport is working on modernizing itself and changing with the times. Is this possibly the first time that I am in disagreement with Pierre de Coubertin? Modern pentathlon was added as an Olympic event by Coubertin, who wished to create an all-around event that included the skills required of a 19th-Century soldier. Somehow this idea seems incredibly dated by today’s standards, does it not? Not even a laser gun replacing the air pistol seems to help shed its antiquated feel.

I usually hold high respect for events which have been in the Olympics for decades. I am a person who is often resistant to change. I’m also in great awe of Coubertin, founder of the Modern-Day Olympics. In the case of modern pentathlon, however, I think it’s time that this event be removed from Olympic competition. Given the large number of events already in the Summer Games and with more being added every few years, why not weed out those which seem irrelevant? In an age where hand-held devices are commonplace and instant replay is (for the most part) accepted, how is that an event incorporating the skills of a 19th-Century soldier is still being competed? I’m sorry, Monsieur de Coubertin, but I respectfully disagree with you on this matter.

Swifter, Higher, Stronger.