Phoenix School of Law, a private law school located in downtown Phoenix, is pleased to announce its new name: Arizona Summit Law School. The new name highlights the ambition and drive of the students, faculty and staff at Arizona Summit Law School, collaborating to accomplish more, and ascend toward their personal “Summit.” This concept exemplifies the school’s mission of delivering student outcomes, preparing graduates for successful careers and improving diversity within the legal community.

The American Bar Association-accredited law school, which opened in January 2005, offers traditional and non-traditional law students the opportunity to succeed through its student-focused curriculum and highly engaged faculty. The practice-ready curriculum equips graduates with the practical skills and ethical instruction, leadership, management and interpersonal skills necessary for career success. Arizona Summit Law School accommodates students’ diverse needs with options, including full-time and part-time day and evening classes; trimester schedule for graduation in two years; and individualized bar-pass instruction through learning diagnostics and mentoring; and experiential learning opportunities via externships, internships and clinics.

“We look beyond test scores by taking the time to get to know our students’ ambition and work ethic as factors to grant admission,” stated Arizona Summit Law School Dean Shirley Mays. “The new name highlights our commitment to the success of our students who come from diverse backgrounds and stages in life and provides a supportive academic environment where civic-minded leaders and community advocates are nurtured,” she added.

“A core value of our institution is the pursuit of continuous personal improvement, an attribute that we share with our students,” stated Scott Thompson, president of Arizona Summit Law School. “When we began discussing a name change more than a year ago, alumni, faculty, staff and stakeholders agreed this differentiating characteristic should be incorporated into our name and brand identity,” he added.