Pythagoras was the first person to really influence the founding of Calculus. He was an Ionian greek philosopher, mathematician, and has been credited as the founder of the movement called Pythagoreanism. Keep in mind he was born in 570 BC and died in 495 BC, so yeah, he’s kind of old. Most of the information about Pythagoras was written down centuries after he lived, so very little reliable information is known about him. He was born on the island of Samos, and traveled the world, visiting Egypt and Greece, and possibly India, and in 520 BC he returned Samos. Around 530 BC, he moves to Croton, in Magna Graecia, and there he established some kind of school or guild.

Anaximander was the first astronomer during his time. Anaximander believed that water was not the try reality. He thought if water was one true reality then the other 3 elements would be wiped out by it. Anaximander believed the ultimate reality is The Boundless. The boundless does not have a problem with opposing anything, which makes the boundless in everything. He believed the ultimate reality was unobservable and unspecific. So he determined the ultimate reality as unlimited or boundless. Anaximander also thought air was the life principle, air held all things together. Pythagoras was also a Pre- Socratic Philsopher from 570 BCE, he also had a different thinking of the ultimate reality. There is not a lot of imforamtion on Pythagoreas because he did not write anything about himself or about his beliefs. He may be known as the mand of science or a preacher of mystic of doctrines. Not much is known about about him but sources say he was from Samos. Pythagoreas was known as the greatest scientist during his time. He was Anaximanders disciple and followed his teacher teachings, He learns about aastrnomy from Anaxnimander and developed formulas like the pythagoreantherom. What he believed to be the ultimate reality was numbers. He believed reality is expressed in mathematical formulas. He tried to get away from the elements of physical life and only use numbers. In present day there are many laws that

Archimedes, born on the island of Sicily in the city of Syracuse around 287 B.C, he was the son of Phidias. Phidias was believed to be an astronomer due to Archimedes referencing him in his work. No one is sure who Archimedes mother is, or how many siblings he had. Most of his early life is a bit of blank. It is believed that Archimedes was a close relative of King Hiero II. Archimedes spent his life furthering his education. He spent most of his life in Syracuse but would eventually travel to Egypt to study in Alexandria,

Pythagoras contributed to our understanding of triangles, angles, areas, proportion, polygons, and polyhedra. Pythagoras also related music to mathematics so that's why he is also credited with the discovery that the intervals between the harmonious musical notes always have whole number ratios. For instance, playing half a length of a guitar string gives the same note as the open string, but an octave higher; a third of a length gives a different, but harmonious note; etc. He had long played the seven string lyre, and learned how harmonious the vibrating strings sounded when the lengths of the strings were proportional to whole numbers, such as 3:2, 2:1, 4:3. But Pythagoras intelligence not only came from him but with the help of his followers, so yeah it wasn't all truly all his work but he was for sure a good mathematician. Furthermore, in conclusion I feel like Pythagoras was an amazing mathematician for sure and his followers as well because though they did not get the credit for it they also were a great

Pythagoras, who was born in Samos, never documented his ideas. Many interpret his views through others that knew him. Like Socrates, Pythagoras is perceived by the writings of his peers. The lack of certain authority creates an error in determining Pythagoras’ views and life. Most historians believe that he was born near 570 BC and the origin of his name is a topic of discussion. Igor Surikov, an author of a recently published biography of Pythagoras states that, “Pythagoras is a common Greek name” and “typically have some meaning that one can transfer to other languages” (Sudakov). “Pyth” means knowledge gained through questioning and “Agor” stood for public speaking; therefore, Pythagoras is loosely translated to “the man who talks about what he learned’.

There are many great philosophers in this world. Some of which are extremely well known and almost everyone knows their names like Socrates, Plato Aristotle Locke and so very many more. Pythagoras is a less known philosopher who had a lot of discoveries while leading a life in a secretive manner. He was an enigma and the leader of a religious sect cult who believed the universe to consist solely of whole numbers and their ratios. Pythagoras said "Do not talk a little on many subjects, but much on a few." Has one ever wondered where did he learn his vast knowledge of mathematics and religious aspects leading to the Pythagorean cult, or what was all of his discoveries besides

Mathematics has always been described as the purest science and considered as one of the most important aspects in many countries around the world, especially developed countries. Theoretically, the most significant requirements for a life of a mathematician is the mathematical ability. Nevertheless, very few women get involve in this field, which creates a myth, and slowly develops into a stereotype in society, that women are naturally not good at math. However, many people would be surprised, that “the world’s greatest living mathematician for a time was a women” (Deakin 13). Hypatia of Alexandria was, indeed, a physically beautiful woman who used her talent and intelligence to defy the stereotypes against

Hypatia’s most well-known improvements to science and astronomy include her re-inventing of the hydrometer and charting of the stars. In mathematics, she is most notable for her contributions to working on different conic sections.Simply by dividing cones in different ways on a plane, she was able to develop the idea of different graphs and shapes such as parabolas, ellipses, and hyperbolas. Her understanding of the conic sections lead her to be one of the key contributors to the invention of the astrolabe as well (Morrow 1998). Christianity became extremely popular in Alexandria during the time when Hypatia lived there along with many riots breaking out. She was a pagan and known for defending science against any form of religion. She was mercilessly killed by an angry mob who accused her of religious turmoil. Although she died a horrible death of being stripped of her skin and limbs, her legacy lived and still lives. Mathematics was thriving in Athens, so that is where her students eagerly fled to. Although, many of her works that were stored in the library of Alexandria were destroyed by an Arab invasion. Hypatia is an important symbol for many generations and will always be considered to be the first woman in mathematics.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Euclid of Alexandria was born in about 325 BC. He is the most prominent mathematician of antiquity best known for his dissertation on mathematics. He was able to create “The Elements” which included the composition of many other famous mathematicians together. He began exploring math because he felt that he needed to compile certain things and fix certain postulates and theorems. His book included, many of Eudoxus’ theorems, he perfected many of Theaetetus's theorems also. Much of Euclid’s background is very vague and unknown. It is unreliable to say whether some things about him are true, there are two types of extra information stated that scientists do not know

Euclid Of Alexandria may be the best-known mathematician of the world, he is best known for his work on mathematics The Elements. The fact that his work has survived so long, 2000 years in fact, is a tribute to his mathematical genius, however very little of him is known. Three theories abound as to the true nature of this historical figure. Not all historians agree that Euclid was in fact a historical figure, some argue that the school in Alexandria took up the name Euclid to publish their works. But the more accepted theories are that Euclid was in fact a real historical figure who may have been the leader of a team of mathematicians.