Michael Jackson and all of his siblings were born in the small town of Gary, Indiana. Gary is about 30 miles southeast of Chicago. Many of the buildings that were there when Michael was born are still standing today and look much like they did throughout the 1960s, when Michael lived in Gary. You may look at the photos below and not see much beauty — but beauty is in the eye of the beholder and the beauty contained within these buildings is a beauty of history, a subject that was fond to Michael’s heart, too. It is an amazing ability to essentially go back in time when Michael was a little boy and see the things he saw, walk where he once walked, and in some way feel what he once felt.

1. The Jackson Home

2300 W Jackson Street

This is where it all began. Michael lived here the first decade of his life. It is a small house, so tiny it’s hard to imagine 11 members of the Jackson family living there. It sits on a corner lot, located on a one-way street. Until 2009 the house didn’t really stand out among other buildings on the street, but the renewed interest in Michael Jackson’s history led to it being renovated and surrounded by a fence. Now you can’t go up to the front door or peek in the windows anymore. A memorial for Michael has been installed in front of the house.

2. Garnett Elementary School

2131 Jackson Street

Follow Michael’s footsteps from the house to Garnett Elementary School that he attended with some of his siblings. This school is just two blocks away. It is in this school he sang “Climb Ev’ry Moutain” with his mother, father and grandfather (Joseph’s father) in attendance. It is said that Michael’s performance brought even his stoic grandfather to tears. The school was closed, then reopened as an adult education center called Martin Luther King, Jr. Academy. In 2001, it was closed again, but appeared to be reopened as of March, 2010 as Images of Hope, Inc.

3. Little League Park

directly across the street from the former Garnett Elementary School

This is where some of Michael’s siblings, including Jermaine and Tito, likely played baseball. The fields are still used by the children in the neighborhood.

4. Roosevelt High School

730 W 25th Avenue

Michael’s older siblings attended Roosevelt High School, and the school is still open today. Michael wasn’t a student there, but he did perform on local talent shows held in the school. The Jackson Brothers won the first prize there in 1966. In “Moonwalk”, his autobiography, Michael talks about the competition:

“We won the citywide talent show when I was eight with our version of the Temptations’ song “My Girl.” The contest was held just a few blocks away at Roosevelt High. From Jermaine’s opening bass notes and Tito’s first guitar licks to all of us singing the chorus, we had people on their feet for the whole song. Jermaine and I traded verses while Marlon and Jackie spun like tops. It was a wonderful feeling for all of us to pass that trophy, our biggest yet, back and forth between us. Eventually it was propped on the front seat like a baby and we drove home with Dad telling us, ‘When you do it like you did tonight they can’t not give it to you.'”

5. West Side High School

West 9th Street and Gerry Street

Michael and his brothers gave a concert here in 1971, after having signed with Motown and relocated to California.

6. Steeltown Records

West 10th Avenue and Taney Street

The private house of Gordon Keith, owner of Steeltown Records, is located at the corner of West 10th Avenue and Taney Street. This is where some of the earliest, if not first “official” Jackson 5 recordings took place. Gordon Keith and the Jacksons engaged a contract in 1967, which allowed them to release their first 45, “Big Boy”. Their presence in Steeltown ended shortly after – in 1969, they were signed by Motown.

Please note that this house is still a residence and respect the privacy of the occupants.

7. Mr. Lucky’s Lounge

1100 Grant Street

Not far from the Jackson house, on the corner of West 11th Avenue and Grant Street, there is a red brick building with covered windows. A black and white sign indicates “Mr Lucky’s Liquor,” and the next door is marked as “Mr Lucky’s Lounge.” This is where Michael and his brother received their first paying gig as the Jackson 5. The place was the venue for shows and comic strip, and when the Jacksons played there, the place was full. Michael later reminiscenced about the nights at Mr. Lucky’s:

“We even had some fun… on one number, the Joe Tex song “Skinny Legs and All.” We’d start the song and somewhere in the middle I’d go out into the audience, crawl under the tables, and pull up the ladies’ skirts to look under. People would throw money as I scurried by, and when I began to dance, I’d scoop up all the dollars and coins that had hit the floor earlier and push them into the pockets of my jacket.”

Nowadays the lounge is closed because of the fire that happened a few years ago and destroyed the roof and a part of the second floor. The owner is selling stage bricks to everyone who wants to own a part of history.

8. Horace Mann High School

524 Garfield Street

Horace Mann High School is reported to have housed the only contest in which the Jackson 5 lost. The school appears to be vacant now.

9. (St. Mary’s) Mercy Hospital

555 Polk Street (original address 540 Tyler Street)

This is where Michael and his siblings were born. The building is now vacant. It was built in 1907, originally with 20 beds. In 1993, it had 300 beds. The hospital was typically referred to “Mercy Hospital” though it was officially St. Mary’s Mercy Hospital, with a subsequent name to St. Mary’s Medical Center in 1974. Above is a recent photo and a post card of the hospital and its appearance in 1921. The buildings look somewhat different, but do share some similarities, too.

10. Palace Theater

791 Broadway

The Jackson 5 never performed at the Palace Theatre — the marquee simply honors them. The building is vacant with a fake ticket attendant in the window.

11. Sears

813 Broadway

Katherine, Michael’s mother, worked at Sears in the late 1950s/early 1960s. The building appears to be vacant but looks exactly as it did when the store first opened. The second photo provided by Sears Archives was taken when the store opened in 1947.

12. Gilroy Stadium

301 W 30th Avenue

The Jackson 5 performed and won an annual talent search contest here. The stadium is no longer in use, but still remains for now.

U.S. Steel

1 North Broadway, Gary, IN

This is the steel mill where Michael’s father, Joseph’s, worked as a crane operator. Be careful, the territory is watched by the the police and photographing is prohibited there.

Places to eventually locate in Gary

Salvation Army

address unknown, appears to have been 2427 Broadway or 1401 Madison Street

Katherine and the children would buy items, usually clothing, from this store. Michael loved it for its bargain prices. 🙂

San Remo’s Restaurant

Industrial Highway near the Gary/Chicago Airport

It has been said the Jackson 5 performed here for a high school prom in 1968.

Candy Store

address unknown

Michael enjoyed buying candy which he then used to arrange his own make-shift candy store in the neighborhood.

Outside Gary

Regal Theater

1641 East 79th Street, Chicago, IL 60619

Michael and his brothers performed at the Regal Theater located in South Chicago.