On a recent Saturday morning, a quiet block in Gary stirred to life. Cars rolled up to a modest house on the corner of 2300 Jackson Street. One by one, people turned down the one-way street, parked, and stepped out to capture the moment with photos and videos.

License plates told a story of their own. Nebraska. California. Hawaii. Ohio.

More than 50 years have passed since the Jacksons last lived here. Fifteen years have gone by since Michael Jackson left this world. Yet, this remains a beacon for fans worldwide. It is a pilgrimage site, drawing visitors from across the globe to honor the King of Pop’s legacy. The house, which isn’t occupied, is owned by the Jackson family.

For the people of Gary and fans worldwide, this small house on Jackson Street is a powerful reminder of Jackson’s legacy. It is a place that harbors the early memories of Michael, bridging the past and present and keeping his spirit alive. It is the place where little Michael first called home.

“Let’s face it, when this city touts itself on famous people or what Gary, Indiana is, it’s always Michael Jackson to start the conversation,” said Chuck Hughes, president and CEO of the Gary Chamber of Commerce.

This sentiment is widely shared within the community.

“Michael Jackson is Gary, and Gary is Michael Jackson,” said Marlon Parker, who was born and raised in Gary.

“Whenever I go anywhere and tell people I’m from Gary, they say, ‘Oh, isn’t that where Michael Jackson is from?’ We can’t escape his shadow, and we don’t want to. The greatest musician is from our city—that’s something to embrace.”

As Michael Jackson recalled, “The house on Jackson Street was bursting with music,” he wrote in his autobiography, “Moonwalk: A Memoir.”

“Our bedroom and living room began to look like a music store,” he wrote.

At the corner of Jackson Street, Michael and the Jacksons honed their skills, traveling throughout the city to participate in talent shows.

They performed in competitions at Roosevelt High School, won a talent search at Gilroy Stadium, and secured their first regular paid gig at Mr. Lucky’s on the 1100 block of Grant Street. At Mr. Lucky’s, they performed “five sets a night, six nights a week,” playing between “bad comedians, cocktail organists, and strippers.”

Jackson would go from performing at Mr. Lucky’s to dominating stages worldwide, selling millions of records, and becoming one of the most iconic musicians of all time.

However, Jackson’s legacy is not without controversy. In 1993, Jackson was accused of child sexual abuse, a case that was settled out of court without any admission of guilt. In 2003, he faced further allegations and was charged with multiple counts of child molestation, but the trial ended in his acquittal on all charges. In 2019, 10 years after his death, the release of the documentary Leaving Neverland detailed new accusations.

Though Jackson denied the allegations against him until his death, these controversies have divided public opinion, turning some fans against him. Yet, Jackson’s influence remains strong.

His life and music has been celebrated in MJ the Musical on Broadway, which opened in 2022 and in a documentary released the same year about the making of Thriller, the best-selling album of all time. And fans continue to flock to the Jackson family home from far and wide to connect with Michael Jackson’s Gary roots.

Fans like Shino Yanagawa, decked out in a white and blue Aaliyah T-shirt, who brought her friends Hiro and Arata from Tokyo. Their trip included stops in Chicago, Detroit, and Cincinnati, but the Jackson family home was a must-see.

“We are from Tokyo, so this is kind of nowhere,” Shino said. “To come from this small town, wow. It’s really overwhelming right now.” She added, “Michael was my first crush. Literally, I was in love with him!”

Similarly, Adele Allison, from Toronto, stopped by the Jackson home on her way to Chicago. Wearing a black Tupac T-shirt, she recalled, “Growing up, I listened to Michael Jackson a lot. The Jackson 5 movie was my favorite as a kid. I remember we were allowed to stay up late to watch it.”

Curtis and Celeste Humphrey, a husband and wife duo from Fort Lauderdale, Florida, made time during their trip to Michigan to visit the home and commemorate the famous family.

“This is where it all started,” Celeste said, gazing at the home. Curtis added, “Watching him as I was a young kid, you know, growing up with him, seeing Janet on Good Times …watching him growing up, we wanted to make a memorable thing to come by and see the home.”

For Michelle Smith, commemorating the anniversary of Michael Jackson’s death, the visit was deeply emotional. She teared up as she reflected on how the Jacksons have been there for her during major life moments.

“The Jacksons have been a huge part of my life,” she said.

“Janet’s albums coincide with big moments in my life. The ’97 album helped me get through my grandmother’s passing. The Jacksons are almost like family to me.”

Originally from Michigan, Smith had just seen Janet in concert in Chicago. While peering past the fenced home up close and personal, Smith said she could feel the energy of the place. “It’s probably from watching the miniseries on TV 30 years ago, but I can almost see them here.”

Bianca Sanchez and her wife didn’t expect to stumble upon the Jackson family home on their way to Chicago Pride, but fate had a pit stop in mind for the Michael Jackson super fan. After accidentally taking a wrong exit, she found herself at the Jackson’s home.

“My heart did a flutter, and I knew I had to stop.” Sanchez, with seven tattoos dedicated to the King of Pop, said, “I’ve been to the gates of Neverland. I’ve been to Forest Lawn, and I’ve been here, and the energy here itself is just something you can’t describe.”

As a professional photographer who toured with a Michael Jackson tribute band, she appreciates the community it brings.

“It’s a day to mourn, but it’s also a day to be around Michael people.”

On Tuesday, the 15th anniversary of Jackson’s death, some fans still braved thunderstorms to come pay their respects. Most motorists drove by the house to get a glimpse of his childhood home and didn’t leave their vehicles as thunder, lightning, and heavy rain poured down.

But Jenny Bischoff of North Carolina said she wanted a closer look.

“I couldn’t miss my chance to see this,” said Bischoff, holding an umbrella. Bischoff, who was visiting family in Indiana, said she grew up loving Michael’s music.

“I think we did the ‘Thriller’ dance three times at my wedding,” she said.