GARY, Ind. — More than a hundred people gathered outside of Michael Jackson’s boyhood home in Gary, Ind., Thursday night, mourning the death of the King of Pop in the city where he first rose to fame.

Mourners placed flowers and stuffed animals on the doorstep of the humble, one-story home in the 2300 block of Jackson Street, where Jackson and his brothers grew up and formed the Jackson 5.

David Fossett, a cousin of the Jacksons who said he has been taking care of the home, said the extended Jackson family was still reeling from the news.

“I thought it was a loss,” Fossett said.

As Gary residents mourned the passing of their most famous resident, the sadness was tinged for some with a lingering disappointment that Jackson had not been more publicly appreciative of his upbringing in Gary.

“Some of us have mixed feelings,” said Dionne Smith, who lives in the neighborhood. “He was from Gary, and we would have liked some recognition as his hometown.”

“But most of us in Gary aspire to move on and make something of ourselves, so we don’t really hold that against him,” Smith said.

Earlier Thursday evening, public officials from the northwest Indiana city paid their own tributes to Jackson, who died this afternoon Los Angeles after going into cardiac arrest at the age of 50.

“Our hearts are full of tears tonight for the world’s greatest entertainer,” said Gary Mayor Rudy Clay.

Although Jackson rarely visited Gary later in his life, Clay said Jackson would always remain a part of the city.

“Wherever a person from Gary, Ind., went in the world, people would say: ’That’s Michael Jackson’s home town.’ So Michael helped Gary just by being from Gary,” Clay said.

“His heart was always in Gary, Ind., no matter where his physical body was,” Clay said.

Scott King, who preceded Clay as Gary mayor from 1995 to 2006, remembered giving Jackson the key to the city in 2003, his last time visiting his hometown

“He was very sincere and, surprisingly, very down to earth,” King said.

A group of Gary children staged a performance at the city’s minor league baseball stadium in Jackson’s honor, and King said he was struck by the singer’s interest in the event.

“He was sitting next to me, and under his breath he was giving instruction to the acts,” King said. “It wasn’t like he was being mean about it, he was just giving constructive criticism. He was an artist and he was very into being at this event and being part of it.”

Gordon Keith, who first signed the Jackson 5 to his Gary-based Steeltown Records label in 1967, said he was saddened to hear about the singer’s death despite a long history of legal battles with him and his family.

“It’s a very sad occasion for sure,” Keith said. “Nobody has held things against Michael, we’re sorry that we lost him. We knew it was a lot of pressure on him from a lot of people, especially his own family.”

Keith said he remembered being floored by Michael when he first heard him sing and saw him dance as the Jackson 5 auditioned for him in their Gary living room.

As he watched the band set up, Keith remembers being impressed by Jackson jumping flat-footed over his brother Tito’s guitar cord.

“I’m remembering him still as the good little kid, a fresh boy. You know, running up and down with a smile on his face, a super kid really,” Keith said.

“I couldn’t understand why the big guys in the record business didn’t recognize they were dealing with a unique, super individual,” Keith said. “But even superkids can’t survive under a whole lot of pressure.”

Keith, who still lives in Gary, said the city will always remember Jackson as a favored son.

“We take pride that Michael is as talented as he is, and so the pride is that by him being so good, he certainly put Gary on the entertainment map,” Keith said. “He did quite a bit to make the world feel good, so people could forget about the toils of the world and just enjoy themselves. Michael gave us that.”

___

Visit the Chicago Tribune on the Internet at http://www.chicagotribune.com/