Julian Torres would see his friends in the Bronx more often if only it were easy to ride his bike over from northern Manhattan.

It is not. The one time he tried, he went wheel-to-wheel with cars crossing the Harlem River on the squat, aging Madison Avenue Bridge, which does not have a separate bike lane. Drivers honked at him to get out of the way. He was unnerved.

“It doesn’t seem far, but actually it is far,” said Mr. Torres, 17, who lives near the foot of the bridge in East Harlem. “It’s a hassle.”

Now New York City officials want to make this crossing, and many others nearby, more welcoming to cyclists and pedestrians, in an effort to strengthen ties between historically underserved communities in northern Manhattan and the Bronx that are divided by the winding Harlem River. On Friday, the Transportation Department unveiled an ambitious plan that addresses all 13 Harlem River crossings, which are often overlooked but serve as crucial neighborhood connections for those who live and work around them.

The plan calls for installing dedicated bike lanes on six of those crossings — the Madison Avenue, 145th Street, Macombs Dam, Washington, University Heights and Broadway bridges — and converting a seventh, the Third Avenue Bridge, into a pedestrian-only passage by diverting cyclists to other bridges (cars will remain). In addition, it proposes a host of design and safety improvements to the streets leading to and from all 13 bridges, including adding new bike lanes and crosswalks, widening sidewalks and carving out more pedestrian areas.

“New York City is a city of islands, so crossing rivers and bodies of water is one of the major transportation challenges,” said the city’s transportation commissioner, Polly Trottenberg. “The rivers are physical barriers between boroughs and communities, and the bridges are vital connections. They should be accessible to all.”

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.