From Long Island-Queens (to park in garage):

Take the Long Island Expressway to the Midtown Tunnel. Make a right onto 3rd Avenue (you are now heading north). Turn left onto 95th Street. Turn right onto Madison Avenue. Turn right onto 94th street. The parking garage is on 94th Street between Madison and Park Avenues. To walk to office, turn left out of parking garage, cross Madison Avenue and walk towards 5th Avenue. You will see the Park ahead. The office entrance is on 94th Street, close to 5th Avenue, on the left side, with 2 boxwood plants on either side of the door.

Alternate: Take the Northern State Parkway West to the Triboro (RFK) Bridge. Take the FDR Drive South to 96th Street exit. Stay on 96th Street, heading west. Turn left on Park Avenue, turn right on 93rd Street, then right onto Madison Avenue and right on 94th Street. The parking garage is on 94th Street between Madison and Park Avenues. To walk to office, turn left out of parking garage, cross Madison Avenue and walk towards 5th Avenue. You will see the Park ahead. The office entrance is on 94th Street, close to 5th Avenue, on the left side, with 2 boxwood plants on either side of the door.

From New Jersey:

Take the George Washington Bridge upper level. Stay in the lane that is one over from the furthest on the right. Take the Harlem River Drive exit. You will pass under the apartment buildings before you see this exit. Follow the Harlem River Drive exit around; you will onto the Harlem River Drive. Continue South on Harlem River Drive; the Harlem River Drive becomes the FDR Drive. Take the FDR Drive South to 96th Street exit. Exit at 96th Street and turn right onto 96th Street. Turn left on Park Avenue, turn right on 93rd Street, then right onto Madison Avenue and right on 94th Street. The parking garage is on 94th Street between Madison and Park Avenues. To walk to office, turn left out of parking garage, cross Madison Avenue and walk towards 5th Avenue. You will see the Park ahead. The office entrance is on 94th Street, close to 5th Avenue, on the left side, with 2 boxwood plants on either side of the door.