​

​​​​​​​THE BLUE HORSE REPERTORY COMPANY is a new and innovative professional theatre company, dedicated to continuing the vision of the late actor, Leo Burmester and founded by his wife Lora Lee Ecobelli and actress/director, Peggity Price. Blue Horse Rep is an inclusive collage of professional actors, writers and musicians dedicated to the development of new work, the performance of classics and educational and outreach programs.

Blue Horse Rep is strongly committed to our local citizens in the Hudson Valley and will always strive to insure and support quality theatre in the Hudson Valley, Capital District and beyond.

Find us on Facebook

​Artistic Directors Lora Lee Ecobelli and Peggity Price.

Blue Horse Repertory Company Acting School

The Blue Horse Repertory Company Acting School offers professional classes for adults at Arts On The Lake in Kent, NY and at The Theatre Institute at Sage College, in Troy, NY. Scene study and technique classes are taught by Lora Lee Ecobelli. Private coaching is also available.

Find us on Facebook

​DISCOVER THE ACTOR INSIDE

Instructor: Lora Lee Ecobelli

This class will focus on building a solid foundation in the art of acting. Students will concentrate on monologues, character work and scene study. Ms. Ecobelli uses a unique mixture of creative exercises, theatre games and improvisation to build confidence and access emotions. Students learn how to work organically and honestly by mastering their technique in a supportive, creative and fun environment. Here the focus will be on the development of your own unique voice as well as working collectively in a ensemble. Learn to challenge yourself and expand your natural abilities.

Using diverse material from classic and contemporary playwrights, students will track a character's journey through a scene and learn how action and behavior shape characterization. Learn how to to create truly memorable characters by developing distinct physical and emotional personalities. Explore script analysis on a deeper level with a sharper understanding of subtext, metaphor and plot. Audition and cold reading skills will also be offered. Rehearsal with a scene partner outside of class is required. The class will culminate in an open workshop production at the end of each 8 week session.