When a book takes on a life of its own, it surpasses or overrides the original intent of its writing. That’s what actor Lora Lee Ecobelli, and her brother, Tom, found when they started putting together “Laurina’s Kitchen,” a cookbook and memoir of their grandmother, a successful restaurateur for almost 50 years in the Capital region. “We actually intended the book to be a kickstarter perk for family and friends on a film we’re working on,” said Ecobelli, who lives in Saugerties. Tom, an actor, writer and comedian, lives in Los Angeles. “Despite the distance, he’s my closest friend and writing partner,” she added. “We wrote the screenplay and put the cookbook together over the phone or by email. “We were going to do a little ‘e-thing,'” Ecobelli said. “But, when we posted a version on Facebook, we got responses from all over the country, from people who grew up in the area, or who knew my grandmother, or had fond memories of the restaurant, or worked at the restaurant. “That’s when the book took on a life of its own,” Ecobelli said. The book, which took about four months to write, was published by Circle Square Press of Voorheesville and released in late summer, she added. Ecobelli said her grandfather, Donato, had had a dreadful experience in Hoboken with The Black Hand, now known as the Mafia. Black Hand members tossed a Molotov cocktail through the window of his little shop and burned it to the ground. Donato was superstitious, so when her grandparents scrapped together enough money to buy a rundown tavern in Ballston Spa, called the Tam O’Shanter Inn, he kept the name and just added Ecobelli’s to the title. The whole family went to work, according to Ecobelli. Her grandfather tended bar, her father, Ralph, home from World War II, did whatever needed to be done, as did his sister, Clem, and her husband, Tonye. “And, Laurina cooked meals for the family in the tiny back kitchen,” Ecobelli said. The family shared its meals with tavern customers, she said, and it wasn’t long before word spread about the wonderful meals at Ecobelli’s. Soon, the tiny tavern was filled to capacity every night. The Ecobellis had no choice but to expand into a full-scale restaurant, she said. Her parents sold the restaurant in 1979. All the recipes have been handed down through the generations, Ecobelli said. “We also included some that family members had adapted,” she said. The black-and-white photos came from old menus the family had kept or former customers contributed when word went out about the book. “Of course, my grandmother never wrote anything down,” Ecobelli said, so it was a challenge to convert the recipes for contemporary use. “We all learned to cook at her side, so we knew them all by heart. But, once I wrote down the recipes, I had to test them all in my kitchen before they went into the book.” Ecobelli said not only does she use the recipes, but her three children, Alana, Adira and Adam, cook and also use them. All three are musicians and now live in Brooklyn within a block of one another, she added. “That’s kids for you,” Ecobelli said, laughing. “You raise them in the country and as soon as they grow up,” she snapped her fingers, “they’re off to the city!” The book is selling really well, according to Ecobelli. It’s available at Amazon, Barnes & Noble online and the publisher’s website,

www.SquareCirclePress.com

. The “back story” to “Laurina’s Kitchen,” however, is much darker, but just as fascinating. Lora Lee and Tom have completed the screenplay and cast the major roles for “Chickadee,” the story of their grandmother as a young girl, who was the subject of a major case, a law-setting sexual abuse trial in 1923. “Just before she died in 1981, our grandmother gave Tom and me a handwritten journal about her childhood,” Ecobelli said. “She told us it was important for other children to hear her story. Since we’re actors, she made us promise to ‘do something’ with it.” She said her brother transcribed the journal. Then, they both read it — and were stunned. “I knew my grandmother as a loving, joyful, generous and successful restaurateur,” Ecobelli said, “not as the subject of a landmark child sexual abuse trial.” Ecobelli said not long after her great grandparents, Michelina and Salvatore Inzinna, came to live in Hoboken, N.J., he died, leaving his widow penniless. “For an immigrant woman, with no skills, this was an utter disaster,” she said. “Michelina had no choice but to put her two girls, Laurina and Minnie, two years older, in the Mother Cabrini Catholic Orphanage in Hoboken.” The two girls lived there for almost 10 years. “They were among the happiest of her childhood,” Ecobelli said. “The nuns were extraordinarily kind and loving.” Ecobelli said after Laurina’s death, she found her checkbook. “Every year, she made donations to the orphanage. That’s how important it was in her life,” she said. Eventually, Laurina’s mother married “Pietro (not his real name),” a seemingly charming and ambitious man, who obtained a job upstate as a groundskeeper on a farm. The two girls rejoined their mother and the family moved upstate. “The textile mills were in full operation then,” Ecobelli said. “My great-grandmother and the two girls went to work in the mills.” Child labor laws were on the books, but not enforced, she added. Ecobelli said an important subplot is the racism of the early 20th century against immigrants and its effects on families, adding that Laurina’s stepfather declined into gambling and alcoholism. Worst of all, he sexually abused her. At age 12, she was pregnant with his child. “And,” Ecobelli said, “this little girl had the courage to go to the authorities and have him arrested.” The trial was notorious for the times, according to Ecobelli, who said she read the transcript of the trial and the testimony of 12-year-old Laurina was chilling. “Newspapers from all over the country reported on the trial,” she said. “One account said as Laurina approached the bench to testify, her eyes met those of her stepfather and she fainted.” “But, she went back! She went back and testified!” Ecobelli added. “And, she won! She won! That doesn’t happen even today!” Pietro was convicted and sentenced to serve 20 years in Clinton Correctional Facility, the state prison in Dannemora. He later contracted tuberculosis, was released and died not long after, she said. Laurina’s child, as was the practice at the time, was raised as her sister. “It was years before we knew the true story,” Ecobelli said. After her brother transcribed the journal, she said, she developed it into a one-woman play that she presented off-Broadway to some success. It was her now-deceased husband, actor Leo Burmester, however, who gave the screenplay its push to becoming a film. Ecobelli said he sent a copy of the screenplay to his friend, actor Chris Cooper, to review. Both had met at Actors Theater in Louisville, Ky., years before. Ecobelli said the major roles are set with actors Cooper, Ellen Burstyn, Julie Kavner and Raul Bova. Arthur Allen Sieldman will direct. “We’re working on completing the fundraising and hope to start filming next year,” Ecobelli said, adding that most filming will take place close to or in the actual locations where the events happened. The most astonishing aspect of her grandmother’s life, Ecobelli said, is that she had one. “She endured a terrible childhood, sexual abuse and that trial. But, somewhere deep inside, she found the courage to live, be joyful and share that joy.” Asked about the film title, Ecobelli smiled and said, “That was a song Laurina sang to us as children. Whenever we were tired, she sang us that song. It’s one of my best memories of her.” Further information on the book or the film may be obtained at

www.ChickadeeTheMovie.com

.