Ed note: For those who knew him, Leo was a quite a guy. To me, he was a good friend and neighbor and an asset to our community. An actor, a poet, a song writer, and an artist, he was one of the earliest supporters of Arts on the Lake and last performed in Kent as Scrooge in a dramatic reading of "A Christmas Carol" this past December. My deepest sympathies go out to Lora Lee, Colette and Daniel. This obituary is from the Louisville (Ky) Courier-Journal. It was in Louisville that Leo got his start. JmG

Leo as Scrooge in Arts on the Lake's

reading of "A Christmas Carol"

Photo by Cris Casaburi

Actor Leo Burmester, 62, dies

Louisville native could 'fill a stage'

By Paula Burba

pbu...@courier-journal.com

The Courier-Journal

Actor Leo Burmester, whose natural stage presence and vivacity led him from Louisville to success on Broadway and in Hollywood, has died. He was 62.

Burmester died Thursday evening at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital in New York, according to Actors Theatre of Louisville, where Burmester had starred in several world-premiere plays.

"The world seems a lot more passive now that I know he's not in it," retired Actors Theatre director Jon Jory said yesterday. "His size and spirit could really fill a stage."

Though he rarely received top billing, Burmester worked with many of the most revered names in Hollywood.

"I'm a big, Germanic-Irish-looking guy, and they don't cast people like that in the Tom Cruise roles," Burmester told The Courier-Journal in 1993, explaining his frequent casting as "a cop or a tough guy."

In his 1980 film debut, he worked with Al Pacino in William Friedkin's "Cruising." He starred as Catfish in James Cameron's 1989 underwater epic "The Abyss" with Ed Harris, and played the loyal deputy Red in 1993's "A Perfect World," directed by and starring Clint Eastwood.

Among his many other film credits were appearances in Martin Scorsese's "The Last Temptation of Christ," James L. Brooks' "Broadcast News" and Alan Alda's "Sweet Liberty."

Onstage one of his most acclaimed roles was in the one-man, off-Broadway play "Rattlesnake in a Cooler," written by Frank South. It was film director Robert Altman's first attempt at directing theater in 1980.

"Bob gave me more confidence in myself as an actor than anyone. He made me feel smart about myself," Burmester said of Altman in 1981.

"But I cannot ever, ever, ever deny Jon Jory, the man who helped me most, who gave me the chance to work with Susan Kingsley," Burmester said, referring to what he considered his biggest break in acting -- a role in the 1977 world premiere in Louisville of Marsha Norman's "Getting Out." He played a pimp named Carl.

He also appeared in the subsequent New York production.

"He was a joyous, rowdy guy who grew into a compassionate, loving man whose skills as an actor just grew deeper all the time," Norman wrote in an e-mail yesterday.

"I remember at the opening night party for 'Getting Out,' he picked up Joe Morton and carried him around the bar upside down, laughing the whole time like it was nothing. "

Burmester's last performance at Actors Theatre was in another Norman play, "Trudy Blue," in 1995. In the same season, he also starred in Jane Martin's "Middle-Aged White Guys."

Burmester debuted on Broadway in James McClure's "Lone Star," which also premiered in Louisville and later opened in New York.

But the most recognized role Burmester originated was that of Thenardier in the 1987 original Broadway production of "Les Miserables" -- one of the longest-running productions in Broadway history. Its celebrated director, Trevor Nunn, reportedly found Burmester's Kentucky roots fascinating.

"Now, where is it you're from?" Nunn reportedly once asked Burmester, who was introducing a reporter from Louisville in New York.

"You know I'm from Kentucky," Burmester responded, grinning.

"Yes," Nunn said, "but I just wanted to hear you say it again, with that note of pride in your voice."

Burmester's most recent appearance was in the off-Broadway revival of "The Fantasticks."

Born in Louisville, Burmester grew up in the Germantown neighborhood. His mother died when he was 10, and his father when he was 16. He was raised by his aunt, Helen Mueller.

After graduating from St. Xavier High School, he earned a bachelor's degree at Western Kentucky University. He earned a master's degree in fine arts from the University of Denver. While he studied, Burmester also acted in regional and community theater.

He once tried teaching at Kentucky Wesleyan, but said the academic setting made him feel "like a fish out of water. … I hated committees. They never seemed to come to any conclusions. And one day I just stopped going to faculty meetings."

At one point, he sold all of his possessions, purchased a motorcycle and surrendered to wanderlust.

"Leo sort of rode up on a motorcycle one day and our relationship sort of started from there," Jory recalled.

"He had this wonderful energy, an intuitive sense of acting," Jory said, noting that he thought Burmester had never taken an acting lesson.

For the past 25 years, Burmester had lived in upstate New York, his son, Daniel Burmester, said yesterday.

In addition to his son, Burmester is survived by his wife, Lora Lee Ecobelli, and daughter, Collete "Cammie" Burmester.

Family members are still making arrangements, but Daniel Burmester said they will honor one thing his father wanted "his whole life." Some of his ashes will be pressed into clay pigeons and taken to an Eastern Kentucky farm, where friends will shoot skeet with them.

The younger Burmester said a portion of his father's ashes also will be sprinkled in Louisville, which "held a very dear place in his heart."