On Thursday, March 21st the Mentor Independence Region DEI & Workplace Mentoring Summit Presented by TD Bank was held at Independence Blue Cross. The goal of the DEI & Workplace Mentoring Summit was to highlight leaders in the field of Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion and the ways that workplace mentoring supports organizations in achieving their DEI goals. We believe mentoring is ubiquitous in its power to support the advancement of people with historically marginalized identities advance and help them be successful in the workplace, thereby directly supporting DEI efforts. During the event, Subaru of America was honored with the Distinguished Excellence in Workplace Mentoring award.

This year, the Summit focused on several topics including fair chance hiring, Generation Z and new ways of working, and promoting people with diverse abilities. The summit elevated innovative ideas and empowered future leaders with engaging speakers and panel discussions.

Thank you to our 2024 speakers:

Shiba Russell, evening anchor of FOX 29 News (Event Emcee)

Rev. Dr. Lorina Marshall-Blake, President, IBX Foundation and VP of Community Affairs, IBX

Rob Curley, Regional President Metro Pennsylvania and New Jersey, TD Bank

Marcus Allen, CEO, Big Brothers Big Sisters Independence

Marilyn Candeloro, Director of Education and Career Development, Solar States

Jack Drummond, Director of Restorative Practices, UPenn PSM

Abigail Ellis, Executive Director, MENTOR IR

Jay Jordan, Co-Founder, The Center for Social Good

Vicki Landers, Founder & Director, Disability Pride PA

Kimberly McGlonn, Founder, Grant BLVD

Dr. Eric Mitchell, PhD, Owner/Director of Neurodiversity Consultants LLC

Julia Parrick, Graphic Design and Marketing Associate, Independent Lodging Congress

Trina Sanyal, Associate producer, Mighty Picnic

Patricia Thomas-Laroche, CEO, Cameron & Associates 8

Pascale Vallee, Quality Assurance Manager, Liberty Resources

Adrian Verueco, Partner & Chief Financial Officer of myCIO Wealth Partners

Hillary Wool, Partner, Boston Consulting Group

To view photos from the event, click here.