Sara & Grzegorz

We would gladly replace the rating of "very good" with "excellent" but there is no such scale.❤️ If you are wondering which photographer to choose for this special day or session, we recommend Tomasz with a clear conscience. Revelation is not enough to say. Ingenuity and great shots are definitely his assets. A photographer with whom you can freely talk and arrange everything. He will take such pictures that the only problem will be a choice of photos to be framed as one would like to wallpaper the whole house with them. We had our session in Venice so apart from nice "setting up for photos" he was a guide for us... It was nice to listen how passionately he talks about this place. Interesting and intelligent man who in crisis situations keeps cool head and can even sew a wedding dress ????. Fabulous time. Thank you for the wonderful photos and amazing memories. ????

Linn & Stian

My wife and I got married in Warzawa in June and chose to be photographed by Tomasz. It was a pleasure to get to know this wonderful nice man. We were guided through several areas of the city and heard many stories on the road - in addition to taking many great pictures. We are incredibly pleased with the result and left with a unique experience that has been framed on images by a highly skilled and professional photographer. Thank you, Tomek. We can certainly recommend Tomasz's services to all!

With best regards Linn & Stian.

Klaudia & Mateusz

After the very first conversation with Mr. Tom, I knew that he would be the best photographer for my son and daughter-in-law's wedding. The photo session was one of the gifts, so I took care of the first arrangements.

Tomasz had a great contact with the bride and groom from the very beginning, he got to know their needs, he got close enough that during the session they behaved as if he was photographing their friend. You couldn't see any stress, they were smiling and posing very nicely. They treated the outdoor photos like fun. As a result, the bride and groom have fantastic photos in their white dress and sneakers 😊

Mr. Tomasz arrived a day earlier to analyze and look at the surroundings. We had a chance to get to know each other better and prepare for the whole ceremony.

He took a lot of pictures from which we couldn't choose a predetermined number. All of them were very nice and unique. In every picture something is happening. I have an impression that these photos are "alive". Each one will be a nice memory.

During the entire ceremony Mr. Tomek was almost invisible. He did not set anyone up. Nobody improvised. He caught amazing moments and captured them on paper.

I highly recommend Mr. Tomek!

If you haven't chosen a photographer yet, don't hesitate. Mr. Tomek is a photographer with great experience and unique, warm and composed approach to the newlyweds and all the guests.

Justyna & Adam

I have always wanted to have a souvenir of my wedding in the form of beautiful pictures without a film that nobody watches later anyway. And Tomek made this dream come true. We have beautiful photos, which everyone is delighted to see and say that they look like from the best magazine. And that is how we felt during the session - as if we were the most important people in the world and our photos were to be the most beautiful and adorn the covers of the best wedding or fashion magazines. Tomek knows how to capture the beauty of moments and people, even in moments when it seems that there are no conditions for a session. On our wedding day there was supposed to be a session in the meadow with a horse in the sunshine and blue sky. And it was cold and very cloudy. I thought that nothing will come out of the pictures, but when I saw the effect, my jaw literally dropped. The pictures looked great and no one could believe that they were taken on an ordinary meadow behind a stable. What is more, Tomek knows how to take a picture of a horse in such a way as to bring out all its beauty, and during our session he photographed this animal for the first time. There are not many photographers in the country who can do that, which proves Tomek's enormous talent and his ability to find his way in any conditions. To sum up. If anyone of you dreams about a beautiful souvenir from this most important day in your life, choosing Tomek will make one of the best decisions in your life and later, looking at the photos, he will admit that he could not have made a better choice. I wholeheartedly recommend.

Paula & Sergiu

We wholeheartedly and with a clear conscience recommend Tom 😊 We are delighted with the photos he took during our wedding and reception. We received perfectly captured, natural and original frames full of emotions, which we wanted so much. Together with the highest quality photoproducts, which we received very quickly after the wedding, they will be a wonderful souvenir for us. Tomek is a talented professional who works with passion and commitment. He was perfectly prepared from the beginning and was very discreet and tactful during our ceremony, making us all feel at ease. He is also a nice, open and cultured man, so cooperation with him is a pleasure.

We are happy that it was him who accompanied us on such an important day and we highly recommend him to everyone!

Ania & Mateusz

From the very first words we exchanged with Tomek, we knew that he would be the one to capture this special day for us. Already during the first conversation, Tomek made a very positive impression on us, which led to the fact that we decided to cooperate.

She is a very communicative and flexible person, able to find a solution for the most unusual situations. She advises and provides help. She can perfectly capture every moment and even in not very favorable weather conditions, conjure up a beautiful session

I must add that we were not the easiest couple to work with - and Tomek had angelic patience with us ;)

If you want to relieve yourself of stress on the wedding day and feel at ease in front of the camera - we recommend Tomek with a clear conscience :)!