Every now and then I came up with some interesting and promising announcements of the new album of Budzy and Corpse Skull. Now that "Mor" has seen the light of day, I can scribble something myself.

But how to properly treat the album, about which the author himself says: "This album is a big surprise, also for me. "? Does Tomek Budzyński himself not know what he has just committed? Or is it the other way around and he knew perfectly well in which direction he was going, but not fully realizing that the whole thing would gain strength and get such a shocking result? "I'm surprised myself that something so strong came out… "

The first album of the project Budzy i Trupia Skull was released in 2004. Entitled "Remarks of Józef Baka" it contained strong, punk rock music to the eighteenth-century turpistic texts of the Baroque poet and Jesuit, Fr. Jozef Baka. For almost ten years, Tomasz Budzyński, a member of such groups as Armia or 2Tm2, managed to take part in several projects and record two solo albums. As you can see, he finally found time for friends under the sign of the Skull Corpse. The new album, with a bizarre name "Mor" is a gloomy, suspenseful until the last moment compilation of as many as sixteen premiere songs, full of deep neologisms recognized (I think not only by me) as haunted Budzynski. To which genre of music should "Mor" belong?

"… It is a very authentic expression. That's how I imagine cool music, that's how I hear it… I think we came up with something of our own, I'm at such an age that I don't have to look at others. We wanted to squeeze the maximum out of this genre, which was very difficult, because in music the limits of extremes are maximally widened and we were looking for the best forms of expression for our playing."

– Tom explains. For the more insightful: the word "chad" is music that ranges from noise, through hardcore to grind and crusta. I hope I helped. Returning to the climate of the album.. Its only purpose is to evoke a specific feeling in the listener – panic fear. Consisting of single, unrelated words, the lyrics cause confusion, introducing total chaos into the listener's head. The effect has been enhanced by frequent acceleration and slowing down of the pace of raw guitars. At the same time, the best thing is that the project Budzy and Trupia Skull is still an ordinary band using absolutely no modern quirks, consisting of guitar, bass and drums.

To sum up, despite the above positive opinion, "Mor" is definitely an overrated position. In the light of all these promising announcements, it is at least average. Honestly, I was expecting something different… However, it was enough to forget about what you had read before, gain a slight distance, listen to the whole thing patiently, a few times, and now say that this is a really good album.