Cliché parallels are often drawn between the world of music and nature. This March, though, such comparisons couldn't be more fitting. Following a relatively quiet winter, an early arrival of spring promises to breathe new ilfe into the concert circuit. While the big-ticket events, such as Next Fest and the highly anticipated Era Jazzu concert, are slated for April, March certainly won't be lacking in excitement. Music enthusiasts won't be left twiddling their thumbs or feeling shortchanged. It looks like only a packed schedule or tight budget might stop them from enjoying these phenomenal attractions.

One of the most awaited events on the calendar is the upcoming concert featuring the Matylda/Łukasiewicz duo, set to take place at Kinoteatr Apollo on 17 March at 6 p.m. Matylda Damięcka, an actress, graphic designer, and singer, will join forces with Radek Łukasiewicz, a familiar face to music lovers, having performed with bands like Pustki, Ballady i Romanse, and Bisz/Radex. He is also a leader of Polskie Znaki, whose album dropped in 2022. Their musical collaboration sparked during the making of this album. Their debut singles released as a duo, i.e. "Matka", "Zamknąć", and "Mężczyźni", made waves last year. Just two days ahead of their Poznań show, the duo is releasing their highly anticipated debut album.

March in Poznań is shaping up to feature scores of both established and up-and-coming artists hitting the concert stage. Among the lineup are big names such as Natalia Nykiel, Daria Zawiałow, Miętha, Happysad, Błażej Król, Agnieszka Chylińska and the ever-welcome duo Fisz and Emade.

Classic rock fans won't want to miss the Armia concert at the Blue Note on 2 March at 7 p.m. Led by Tomasz Budzyński, the band is celebrating their 40th anniversary this year and plans to mark the occasion with a live performance featuring tracks from their iconic debut album.

Artists will also pay homage to the rich history of Polish blues and rock in a concert honouring the legacy of Ryszard Riedel (Aula Artis, 12 March, 7:30 p.m.), the legendary Dżem vocalist who passed away three decades ago. His son, Sebastian Riedel, known for his work with the band Cree, will sing and present his father's repertoire in an acoustic format, drawing inspiration from the final albums that the legendary vocalist collaborated on with the band, "Dżem Akustycznie" and "Akustycznie - suplement", recorded in February and March 1994.

Also gracing Poznań's stage in March are Illusion, Hunter and IRA. Meanwhile, the one-day Punk Fest festival (2progi, 22 March, 5 p.m.) will feature TZN Xenna, Sex Bomba, Fort BS, Ga-Ga, Zielone Żabki and more.

Aficionados of the ultimate in classical music hardly need encouragement to attend the upcoming Amadeus orchestra concert (AMU Auditorium, 3 March, 6 p.m.). Conducted by Anna Duczmal-Mróz and featuring pianist Peter Jablonski, the orchestra will perform compositions by Francesco Geminiani, Franz Anton Hoffmeister and Bela Bartók.

In the upcoming weeks, those inclined towards slightly lighter and more vocal tunes will have a treat with performances from Stare Dobre Małżeństwo, Hanna Banaszak, Małgorzata Ostrowska, Bajm, Ewa Błaszczyk. Joining the lineup will be Piotr Rubik with choir and orchestra, delivering three performances in one day at the Earth Hall on Poznań International Fair grounds on 16 March at 1pm, 4pm and 7pm.

March in Poznań will additionally showcase great jazz performers spanning a wide range of aesthetics and generations, from the most established of them all, Jan Ptaszyn Wróblewski, to the recently debuting Blue Jazz Orchestra from Poznań. The lineup goes on, featuring the legendary jazz-rock group Laboratorium, a fixture on musical stages for half a century, and the pianist Ilona Damięcka, who is more than a generation younger and prefers all-acoustic stylings. Alongside her band, Damięcka will join Mateusz Smoczyński with tracks from her latest album "Hope" in the JazZamek series in the Grand Hall of the Zamek (Castle) Cultural Centre on 15 March at 8 p.m. Don't miss a concert by the renowned Mexican drummer Antonio Sanchez, who has composed the soundtrack of the acclaimed film Birdman, and who is known for his collaboration with Pat Metheny.

There is plenty in store for fans of folk and traditional music. Do not miss out on a fado night with Pedro Moutinho held as part of the Siesta series. Also, make sure to catch the Laboratorium Pieśni band, and, with March bringing St. Patrick's Day, get ready for lively concerts of Irish music featuring, among others, the Beltaine band at Pod Minogą on 3 March at 6 p.m. Beltaine draws on Irish and Breton influences to create his own unique and original musical vision.

March is set to delight fans of classical music as well as various genres of rock, jazz, and pop. Whether you are a fan of big stars or on the lookout for emerging talents, there is something for you to enjoy.

Tomasz Janas

translation: Krzysztof Kotkowski

© Wydawnictwo Miejskie Posnania 2024