C. WRIGHT MILLS

An American Utopian

C. WRIGHT MILLS

An American Utopian

Irving Louis Horowitz

THE FREE PRESS

A Division of Macmillan, Inc.

NEW YORK

Collier Macmillan Publishers

LONDON

Copyright © 1983 by The Free Press

A Division of Macmillan, Inc.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted

in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including

photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system,

without permission in writing from the Publisher.

The Free Press

A Division of Macmillan, Inc.

866 Third Avenue, New York, N. Y. 10022

www.SimonandSchuster.com

Collier Macmillan Canada, Inc.

First Free Press Paperback Edition 1984

Printed in the United States of America

printing number paperback

1 2 34 5 6 7 8 9 10

printing number hardcover

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Horowitz, Irving Louis.

C. Wright Mills: an American utopia

Includes index.

1. Mills, C. Wright (Charles Wright), 1916-1962-

Biography.

I. Title.

HM22.U6M427 1983 301′.092′4[B]83-5619

ISBN 0-02-914970-3

ISBN 0-02-915010-8 pbk.

eISBN 978-1-4391-0-624-2

God bless the children,

especially

Joshua, Jeremy, Emma, and Zoë

Contents

Preface

1. Introduction to an American Utopian

I. Settings

2. Texas Cosmopolitanism

3. Ishmael in North Star Country

4. Pacifism in Wartime Washington

5. Marginality in Morningside Heights

II. Sources

6. Pragmatism and the Revolt Against Formalism

7. From the Sociology of Knowledge to the Knowledge of Sociology

8. The Protestant Weber and the Spirit of American Sociology

9. Plain Folks and Marxist Dragons

III. Substances

10. Proletarian Power and the American Dream Machine

11. White Collar, Gray Flannel, and the Rise of Professionalism

12. Trinity of Power

13. The Causes of C. Wright Mills

14. Postscript to Utopia: History and the Fourth Epoch

Index

Preface

BIOGRAPHERS USUALLY COMPLAIN about the tedious nature of their efforts—and not without considerable justification. The amount of work required to gather even minimum information is great, and as Samuel Johnson observed: The incidents which give excellence to biography are of a volatile, and evanescent kind such as soon escape the memory. The tendency therefore to reinterpret events from fragments, to force one’s way through a confused jungle, as Lord Keynes would have it, is irresistible. The hard work comes in assembling information gathered from the many people who have been involved with the person who is the subject of the biography.

In the case of my work on C. Wright Mills, the burdens were made less onerous by the support colleagues provided. Johnson’s concerns that time would cool the passions of those who had been involved with the biographical subject and lead to much impartiality and little intelligence were not borne out. Here one must be blunt and plain-spoken: my greatest difficulty was getting people who knew Mills to speak about him in a calm and reasoned manner. Although more than twenty-one years have passed since his death, and much more time than that has elapsed since people actually knew, saw, or corresponded with him, the sense of his presence was so imminent that old arguments were often rekindled rather than dampened at the mention of his name.

These problems acknowledged, I have tried to contact every living person who has firsthand information on Mills. Clearly, I have fallen short of this goal. Still, by referencing people mentioned in his correspondence, a powerful cross-section of opinion has been obtained. I must apologize for the inevitable omissions. Whether they were favorably or negatively predisposed to Mills, people have for the most part responded fully and enthusiastically to any questions I put to them, even those on embarrassing and difficult issues. So, without further ado, and to express my deepest appreciation, I list the following people and thank them for their help.

From the first, or Texas, phase: David L. Miller, Clarence E. Ayres, Carl M. Rosenquist, Ronnie Dugger. From the second, or Wisconsin, phase: Donald Bogue, Merle Curti, David Mechanic, Eliseo Vivas, Don Martindale, Alan C. Kerckhoff. From the third, or Washington, D.C./ Maryland, phase: Richard Hofstadter, Herbert Blumer, George H. Callcott. From the fourth, and quite lengthy, Columbia phase: Daniel Bell, Robert King Merton, William J. Goode, Jacques Barzun, Seymour Martin Lipset, Helen Merrill Lynd, Alvin W. Gouldner, Rose K. Goldsen, Meyer Schapiro. There was, in effect, a fifth period, covering people and events quite beyond the Columbia connections, when Mills became deeply enmeshed in world events. For help in dealing with this period I am grateful to Gino Germani, Tom Bottomore, David Riesman, Richard H. Rovere, William Appleman Williams, Theodore Abel, Pablo Gonzalez Casanova. It is, I believe, appropriate to mention that many of the people who gave me advice and information on Mills knew him across academic and even geographic boundaries; hence the five phases listed here are only intended to emphasize the core period of interaction.

Other people, who transcend such categorization, gave of themselves and imparted to me their knowledge of Mills’s work without constraint; sometimes they even shared memoirs and other works in progress. First and foremost is Wilson Record, whose lengthy taped discussions with me about Mills remain a veritable gold mine of information, especially about Mills in his early years. Kenneth W. Wheeler, of Rutgers University, shared observations on the Texas milieu, and his comments on the organization of the manuscript as a whole were most supportive. In fact, it was his stimulating intervention that forced me to complete the manuscript at a critical juncture. Mary E. Curtis again proved to be an invaluable support and assistant. She helped me think through problems chapter by chapter and helped with the editing page by page. She good-naturedly shared in the toughest work of all. Hopefully, the opinions registered by each of these three former southerners are adequately represented in this work. I believe that they felt the calling of this book, the social need for it, and helped transform what began as a self-imposed duty into a labor of love.

My editor at The Free Press, Joyce Seltzer, faced the less than enviable task of making sure that the staccato efforts of more than two decades were unified and synchronized by the final version. She also fought hard for a clarity in presentation and a fairness in analysis, which, alas, I was not uniformly able to achieve. Still, it was her insistence on a consistent narrative thread that made me think through anew the problem of sociological biography in general and the problem of C. Wright Mills in particular.

Princeton, New Jersey

September 1, 1982

1 Introduction to an American

Utopian

Isaac Bashevis Singer, Short Friday and Other Stories

Sometimes a soul is sent down from Heaven which has to fulfill its mission in a hurry.

A CURIOUS FACT about social science biographies is how few of them there are; even more surprising is how few good biographies have been written about leading American sociological figures. There are, of course, some extraordinary books on European intellectual figures: Marianne Weber’s biography of her husband Max,1 even Lukes’s austere treatment of Emile Durkheim,2 the venerable classic biography of Karl Marx by Franz Mehring,3 and several outstanding intellectual biographies of LePlay,4 LeBon,5 Sorel,6 Scheler,7 and Gobineau.8 Interestingly enough, in only a few of these cases have the biographies been written by other social scientists. More often, they have been written by widows, historians, and professional biographers. Even the fine memoir by Margaret Mead on Ruth Benedict is more in the nature of a personal reflection than a professional assessment.9 The question thus becomes: Why do so few biographies exist about the major shapers of American social science?

The most significant factor appears to be the absence of a tradition of writing biographies on sociological figures. Biography, as a tradition, is closer to literature and politics than to the exact or inexact sciences. People whose habit of mind is the literary tradition tend to write biographies on literary figures they have known or by whom they have been influenced. Thus we have large numbers of biographies on poets and novelists, oftentimes multiple efforts on the same person. Such biographies make for good reading; they are the product of a literary grace that has not gone into the manufacture and installation of a parallel tradition in sociology.

There is also the extremely powerful reluctance to appear as a follower, or an epigone, or an emulator of anyone else in social science. The tradition of individualism, or at least the appearance of uniqueness, is particularly powerful in American sociology. In point of fact, slavish imitation is nowhere greater than in social science. Witness the repeated, often exaggerated references to a select few names who wield high amounts of professional power during their careers. With their deaths comes a sharp decline in being referenced.* It may be not exactly a fear of following, but a fear of being found out as a follower, that inhibits sociological biographies. In a field as yet insecure as to its lineage, parentage, and even its future—as is sociology—there will always be a great dispute as to who warrants biographical treatment, and in turn, who should be the biographer.

In American sociology there has been an emphasis on strict methodological and empirical requirements, but without any corresponding discoveries or explanations found in the physical and biological sciences. The field does not easily lend itself to biographies, since a sense of unique achievement based on discovering the new is rarely found. John Madge came closest to communicating this impulse to empiricism in his work The Origins of Scientific Sociology—but his efforts were less biographical than methodological.10 So much sociology depends on the reinterpretation of inherited theories, or the application of such doctrines to new situations, that the sense of discovery is somewhat muffled. Few reputations depend on actual discovery. Thomas Edison, Henry Ford, and Andrew Carnegie made discoveries, at least of a technological sort. Newton or Einstein can be said to have discovered fundamental theories and laws of nature in motion. But it is hard to claim a sociological equivalent of the discovery of an electric light bulb. Certainly, a general theory of social structure having the same simple elegance as Newton’s laws of motion or Einstein’s laws of relativity remains as elusive as it did in Comte’s time. In the face of practical achievements in the engineering and physical sciences, the lack of celebration of even eminent social scientists is entirely understandable.

American sociology after the Second World War, in particular, doggedly entered the path of professionalization, refusing to acknowledge individual or occupational explorations that strayed too far afield from disciplinary horizons. Whatever else professionalism has produced, it has created a sense of commonality rather than personalities in American sociology: a focus on the facts rather than on an individual who identified events. The growth and development of professionalism has tended to make the field less individualistic or idiosyncratic. Organization men, rather than scientific or cultural giants, have emerged as central. Professionalism, whatever its blessings to the membership-elect, requires a high sense of organization and a necessary intellectual accommodation in the face of organizational responsibilities.

One would also have to add that in some respects sociology lacks a consensus about who the important figures are. Mills, for instance, was quite willing to describe Auguste Comte as both derivative and superficial; but there are those who have spoken (and written) about Mills in a similar fashion. Although there is a feeling that within the classic tradition, basically the European tradition, we know who the important figures are, the closer we come to American shores, and to contemporary sociology, the less apparent is any corresponding agreement about what constitutes real talent.

Because of the preceding reasons, or simply as an accident of the field itself, sociologists rarely are public figures. They tend to be identified by the tasks set for them, rather than those set by them; and they have a sense of reserve befitting scholarly research activity. Biographies, however, generally concern a public figure, or a quasi-public figure. One wants to read a book about someone who is at least distantly and vaguely identified by public achievement and public accountability, rather than by a professional job well done. As a result, the number of possible candidates for biographical treatment is instantly reduced to a select few. Becoming a public figure entails an enormous risk for the sociological professional. It is axiomatic that the more popular a sociological figure becomes, the more unprofessional he or she correspondingly has become. Thus, the price of public fame may often be professional isolation. This is itself a considerable deterrent in seeking wider public acclaim, and an even greater deterrent to becoming a subject for biography.

Writing biography is a creative act distinct from doing sociology. It is one thing to share a theorem, or a piece of new research data, or a survey technique, and give attribution to or even celebrate their discoverer. But to write an extended biography is quite another thing. It involves one in a world of persons and personalities, intimacies and privacies, private correspondence as well as public lectures, personal recollections as well as scholarly monographs, deeply felt passions as well as carefully stated reasons. The living polarities which I encountered in this work enhance my respect for the art of biography. It is an independent craft not usually undertaken by one sociologist writing about another sociologist.

These reservations and trepidations stated, it was, and remains, my feeling that C. Wright Mills is a worthy subject for biography. To begin with, Mills was an imposing physical specimen by any standards. He was tall (about six feet two inches); he spoke in a thundering drawl that marked him as a native American even if one did not identify his Texas origins; he smoked much, laughed easily, and angered many—although more often over abstract ideas than personalities. In fact, he heartily disdained professional shoptalk as gossip. His carefully cultivated populist image notwithstanding, he remained throughout his career a hopeless academic, down to the pipe. He argued for the sake of scoring points, accepted eccentricities just within the boundaries of prevailing taste, and believed in the life of the mind even if he spiked metaphors with slang and curse-words. Mills presented himself as someone for whom mannerisms excluded manners, civic concerns excluded polite behavior, and personal style excluded conventional dress.

His personal demeanor was carefully contained to fit the outer limits of deviant academic thinkers (especially those who aspired to importance beyond university settings) but not to transcend university boundaries. He was the model Schumpeterian professor: an individual whose well-modulated levels of deviance were in perfect accord with cosmopolitan university settings. He well appreciated the fact that society creates a university environment precisely because it lacks other methods of receiving criticism without risking damage to the social order. This special set of circumstances gave Mills a sense of ease and intimacy with certain people if they perceived his manipulation of deviance as a device to stretch professional discourse to its limit. It was clear that the contradictions which Mills wore on his sleeves like a badge of honor were the essence of the man.

Mills was a strong character. He disguised his faults by admitting to even worse faults. He responded to others’ claims that his behavior was boorish by behaving even more outlandishly. Critics were disarmed when he admitted to worse character flaws than he in fact possessed. It was a strategy dictated by his belief that the vocabulary of motives is nearly infinite, and hence the ability of any individual to make appropriate responses to others’ interpretations is limited.

Mills’s quite personal style led to a near-unanimous negative consensus about him. However much those who knew him firsthand differed about the quality of his work, they were unanimous about his personality. Of the many people I met, talked with, and corresponded with, very few mustered positive sentiments toward Mills. That in itself should occasion some pause. Anyone who, in effect, announces with Gide I am the last great immoralist is precisely the sort of individual for whom the moral situation is central, and his own moral demeanor critical. Thus, Mills never denied charges that he was a sexual athlete, a paramour at times and a lover on other occasions. Quite the contrary, like Benjamin Disraeli before him, Mills simply exaggerated all reports to the point of disbelief.

This style of self-deprecation, this higher form on one-upmanship, creates difficulties for the biographer, which I have by no means resolved. My own approach has been to minimize the significance of these personal elements, to ignore rather than affirm or deny their importance. The justification for this approach, apart from a deep belief that often apocryphal stories add little to our fund of information on Mills, is that they may actually detract from our sense of Mills as social scientist, political actor, and American utopian.

Support for this approach, albeit of an indirect sort, is that Mills only infrequently mentioned any of his three wives, Freya, Ruth, or Yaroslava. They seemed to enter into his consciousness only at the work level. Early in his career, Mills’s correspondence does provide some insight into how the troubles in his first marriage impinged upon his intellectual output. But invariably he mentions external impediments rather than organic inspiration. It is true that his second wife, Ruth, is mentioned at times as a co-worker and junior partner. And it is probably true that Mills was happier with Yara than with his previous two wives, but the problematic nature of that final marriage is not discussed in his correspondence. In the main, Mills’s personal relationships with his wives and friends were not part of his public or professional world. He had a keen disdain for gossip, for those who converted private ills into public discourse. Insofar as possible, I have respected these feelings in the making of this book.

Because he tended to engage in self-glorification through self-deprecation, Mills gives any interpreter trouble. For example, he often boasts in his correspondence of his opposition to military service, implying that he hustled a permanent deferment status. In fact, as he let slip in person, he was medically diagnosed as having high blood pressure as early as 1942, his first full year at the University of Maryland. This is one of many cases where not only his critics must be taken in small doses, but he himself must be taken with a grain of salt. He did not so much fend off criticism as incorporate it as part of his mystique.

C. Wright Mills was born in Waco, Texas, on August 28, 1916. He died in Nyack, New York, on March 20, 1962. In his forty-five years he packed in a career worthy of the best, in both quantity and quality. If he wrote things in a hurry, if he accelerated the pace of personal events dangerously, it may have been due in no small measure to his awareness that he might have a short life. Certainly, from the time he was twentyfive, and received the first medical report that he had a heart condition, to his fourth and fatal heart attack twenty years later, Mills worked at a fevered pace; he was a man in search of his destiny.

Mills’s religious life included a youth as a choirboy in the Catholic church of Waco, a lifelong resentment of Christianity, appeals to the clergy to oppose rearmament, and a funeral in a marvelously nondenominational church called Columbia University Chapel. His personal life included three wives and three children—one by each wife. He offered pious pleas about the sanctity of marriage to those living out of wedded bliss while making self-aggrandizing claims to having more women in one month than Don Juan could boast in a lifetime. His was a life of assault on the bastions of power and the notions of power, counterbalanced by work for the War Plants Administration during the Second World War and, later on, lectures to many senior military academics. Mills’s style was individualist, flamboyant, and antiauthoritarian; but he found no difficulty in taking a post as director of the Labor Research Division at the Bureau of Applied Social Research. He was generous to intellectual opponents, but punitive to personal associates.

These contradictions and many more are the stuff of everyday mortals. They serve to enhance a sense of wonderment at Mills’s significant intellectual accomplishments. No other figure in American social science until Margaret Mead developed such a powerful appeal to the public conscience, or at least the educated public of the day. Like Jean-Jacques Rousseau before him and countless other figures since, he was emotionally a gnarled bundle of twine and intellectually a beacon of rational judgment. life is contradiction, only death is resolution. Mills did not progress far enough with the former to reach the sort of synthesis characteristic of the mature, the old, or even the genius. But it must also be said that if a touch of immortality nibbed off on Mills, it was not because he sought a dialogue with angels, but because he was immersed in the everyday dialogue of people and institutions. This biography is, in short, not so much about a great man as it is about a man who understood the parameters of greatness.

Utopianism is a notoriously ambiguous concept—made so by its dual nature. On one hand, individuals like Plato, More, Campanella, and Bellamy are defined as utopian because they spent much effort in fashioning a more or less precise image of future social and political structures. On the other hand, there are those individuals whom Marx had in mind when criticizing utopian socialism, such as Saint-Simon, Fourier, and Babeuf, aptly named the prophets of Paris. These thinkers were much less concerned with locating the secular garden of Eden than with ridding mankind of the scourges of oppression associated with civilization. It was the process rather than the outcome which fascinated these scientific utopians. Mills shared much in common with this latter vision. His statements about a higher civilization were cloudy, brought secondhand from utilitarian and pragmatic views of a rational world order. His statements about social development, to the contrary, rested on the belief that the data of one age leads inexorably to the eruption of all contradictions within it, and hence already contains the materials for a movement to a higher epoch. Mills was too exacting a student of the classical sociological tradition, with its dire warnings against utopianism, to fall easy prey to asserting a complete model of a good society. Besides, he was too out of sympathy with model building to strike such a pose. Still, in the broad sense that he continued, against all odds, to believe that social theory must contain a moral edge, and that such an edge was locked into the primal belief that change in human beings can be for the better and not just random, the utopian spirit is deeply embedded in Mills’s work. Indeed, as his work became more strident, losing sight of the distinction between analytical research and journalistic blandishment, the turn toward the utopian became ever more manifest in his writings. Immanuel Wallerstein, in his notice on Mills in the International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, nicely appreciated this element. In a basic sense, Mills was a utopian reformer. He thought that knowledge properly used could bring about the good society, and that if the good society was not yet here, it was primarily the fault of men of knowledge.11

American, too, is a word which requires some justification for its use in the title of this book. Mills was so vociferous in his opposition to specific government policies and social mores that one might be tempted to claim that he was more anti-American than American. Yet that would place far too narrow a construction on what it means to be an American. Testing the outer limits of civility no less than of ideology is an ingrained tradition from Samuel Adams to William James to Randolph Bourne. Testing the American grain may mean—and often has—taking on the giants of industry and the leaders of intellect. Mills was definitely of such a persuasion, but it would be ingenuous to see Mills’s Americanism as a simpleminded negativism. He had an unyielding commitment to speaking directly to his fellow-citizens. In his near-total incomprehension of foreign cultures and languages, in his insistence on a broad style of do-it-yourself clothing design and housing construction, and in the thousand smaller ways from swagger to sentiment, Mills emerged as a quintessential American. Without unduly belaboring the point, it is entirely warranted to sec Mills as an American utopian: a sociologist for whom morality was a centerpiece, a political theorist for whom the sensuous feel of events was a necessary way of avoiding the twin European curses of grand theorizing and abstracted empiricism. As long as America was worth reforming, it was the new Utopia rather than the old Atlantis. The European world was tired, even exhausted, a past; the underdeveloped Third World was angry, a possibility, a future. But America was the present; and Mills liked living in the present, even if he spent his waking hours and sleepless nights fashioning a vaguely better future.

I have tried to write a sociological biography. By that I mean that the volume is clearly divided into three sections corresponding to three distinct perspectives. The first section traces Mills’s progress through academic milieus in chronological order. I have long held that professionals who work at universities must be studied within that context, or their intellectual development will make little sense. By charting Mills’s movements from Texas to Wisconsin, to Maryland/Washington, and to Columbia/New York, I have also been able to illumine the varieties of his sociological experience.

The second section of the work is written in the history-of-ideas tradition, in which the major intellectual influences on Mills’s career, including Karl Mannheim, William James, John Dewey, Max Weber, and Karl Marx, are explained, not so much in any serial order—the movement of ideas is epiphenomenal and not sequential—as in a sequence meant to establish an intellectual and emotional context for understanding Mills. Mills wrestled deeply throughout his life to locate himself in a social science and philosophical galaxy. Interpreting how well he achieved his goals, by borrowing from the ideas of others to create his own new mix, is the burden of this central section of the book.

The third and final section addresses directly the major works Mills produced. Here it will be seen that, in my judgment, the central core of his contribution was less the style of sociological performance than the substance: the analysis of social and political stratification in the United States. I deal with Mills’s later, more pamphleteering efforts less for the ideological statements he made there than for his desperate attempt to move beyond an American into a global vision.

Both the opening and closing chapters address the issue of utopianism directly. Anyone attempting to bite the world whole, rather than be content with chewing at one small piece, represents, by that effort, something of a utopian. However, it was not simply his holistic vision but his movement among philosophical, sociological, political, and cultural themes that stamped him as a utopian. The boundaries of intellectual space were made to yield to the outer limits of big pictures and even bigger visions. The private person and the historical epoch were part of the same fabric, and that fabric was made up of an admixture of scientific evidence, ideological sensation, and utopian imperative.

There are doubtless other, simpler ways of organizing such a volume. And just as plainly there might be other points of emphasis. There could have been greater attention to Mills’s indebtedness to Veblen, more study of his trips to England, a further appreciation of his contributions to the profession of sociology. To this I can only respond in the words of Marianne Weber concerning her own efforts to chronicle Max Weber’s life: Was ich nicht mache, machen andere. Which simply means: What I fail to do, others will.

REFERENCES

1 Marianne Weber. Max Weber: A Biography, translated by Harry Zohn. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1975.

2 Steven Lukes. Emile Durkheim: His Life and Work. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1972.

3 Franz Mehring. Karl Marx: The Story of His LIfe, translated by Edward Fitzgerald. London : John Lane/The Bodley Head, 1936.

4 Michael Z. Brooke. LePlay: Engineer and Social Scientist. The Life and Work of Frederick LePlay. London: Longman Group, 1970.

5 Robert A. Nye. The Origins of Crowd Psychology: Gustave LeBon and the Crisis of Mass Democracy in the Third Republic. London and Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, 1975.

6 John L. Stanley. The Sociology of Virtue: The Political and Social Theories of Georges Sorel. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1981.

7 Jean Raphael Staude. MaxScheler: 1874-1928. New York: The Free Press/ Macmillan, 1967.

8 Michael D. Biddiss. Father of Racist Ideology: The Social and Political Thought of Count Gobineau. New York: Wey bright &Talley, 1970.

9 Margaret Mead. An Anthropologist at Work: Writing of Ruth Benedict. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1959.

10 John Madge. The Origins of Scientific Sociology. New York: The Free Press/Macmillan, 1962.

11 Immanuel Wallerstein. C. Wright Mills. In International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences vol. 10. New York: The Macmillan Co. and The Free Press, 1968, p. 364.

* I am grateful to my colleague David Mechanic for this observation as it pertains to Howard Becker. Having gone to Wisconsin during the transition period, he observed first how everything from course outlines to deference behavior changed with Becker’s death.

PART I

Settings

2 Texas Cosmopolitanism

Ronnie Dugger, Our Invaded Universities: Form, Reform, and New Starts

A university is a city for the freedom of the mind, full of homes for thinking, shops for finding truth, and meeting rooms with windows. A university is a place for Emerson’s man thinking and for woman thinking too. A university is a city of the people working together within our own and all of nature to make our freedom and our structures with our ideas. A university is a city of sunlight streaming into the naked minds of the citizens. A university is a place of reflection in the universe of mystery. A university is a city of the human kind that is worthy of the universe. A university is a universal city. And what is a state university? It is the same.

A UNIVERSITY IS a special institution. Although it is linked to industry, the military, or the polity, it retains a peculiar resilience which keeps it from becoming captive to other agencies of power. Partially, this is because the university is concerned with knowledge, and knowledge does not respect boundaries invented by politicians or enforced by militarists. A university is also a source and not just a reflection of power.

The University of Texas ranks as a major institution. Texas historians emphasize local or parochial events so often that it is tempting to think of that university as simply a provincial outpost of the Lone Star State and overlook the national, even international, context in which it operates. During Mills’s student years at Texas, between 1935 and 1939, the university sought and achieved its wide-ranging reputation, bringing in first-ranking scholars in many fields. In a sense Mills’s mentors were more attuned to events in Chicago, Ohio, or Wisconsin, where they had taken their degrees, than to local events.

Texas has so often been entombed in its past by the rest of the United States, however, that even Texans sometimes put on their broad-brimmed Stetsons and reenact parochial cowboys-versus-Indians scenarios. Mills never really escaped his birthplace, certainly not in the minds of his commentators. More than once, and even by associates, he was described as a Texas cowpuncher who headed north via pony express to carry the message of radical sociology. There are several myths involved; one is small-scale and personal. Mills never rode a horse and never cared to, and except for two lecture engagements he never even returned to Texas once he left for the University of Wisconsin. The larger myth concerns Texas itself. Even the crudest demographic information reveals that Texas has been one of the most rapidly urbanizing and industrializing (as well as one of the most culturally diverse) states in this country during the twentieth century. The Hollywood dream factory perpetrated the notion that Texans have not yet given up the horse and saddle for the automobile. This was as inaccurate in the 1930s as it is in the 1980s.

Mills himself was typical of the new Texan: His parents were pious, middle-class, Irish-English in background. His father, Charles, was an insurance broker in Waco, where Mills was born; and his mother, Frances, was a housewife. His background was rooted in the smaller, frontier cities of Texas. From Waco, the Mills family moved to Dallas, where they remained during his high school career. From there, in succession, they moved from Fort Worth to Sherman to San Antonio and, finally, to Austin in 1939. In addition to his city upbringing Mills was typical of the new Texan in that he went to Dallas Technical High School in anticipation of a career as an engineer. Beyond required courses in civics and history, Mills took no social studies courses. His areas of concentration in high school, beyond the standard majors, were algebra (two years), physics (one year), and mechanical drawing (four years). In these early years Mills was clearly an urbanized youngster, being prepared by his parents for a practical career in a rapidly industrializing environment.

Mills’s interest in a technical career did not cease when he left for college. Like so many other young people experiencing the aftershock of the Great Depression, his concern with making a living prevailed over any articulated intellectual instincts. He first went to Texas Agricultural and Mechanical College. He managed to get A’s or B’s in just about all of his courses, including general zoology and inorganic chemistry. His poorest area, oddly enough, was physical education. Everyone managed to confuse his size with physical prowess. He was constantly being goaded to try out for football, basketball, and wrestling. Apparently, most students at Texas A & M were first and foremost athletes, and only secondarily students. The year at Texas A & M was a fiasco. Apparently Mills did join the wrestling team, and was promptly accused of needlessly injuring another student during a match. His punishment was that no one was to speak to him.1 Just how apocryphal this story is remains to be established, since other classmates raised some doubt that he ever wrestled at all.2 But one item is certain: that he soon transferred out of Texas A & M and into the University of Texas.

The University of Texas was, for Mills at least, a veritable oasis surrounded by an educational desert, exemplified by Texas Agricultural and Mechanical. Like many youngsters of his background and financial circumstances, his sense of college and university choices was circumscribed by state boundaries. Preferential tuition rates for state residents reinforced this spirit of insularity. Texas was large and buoyant enough to create a self-image approaching national rather than state proportions. The collapse of Mills’s engineering ambitions, or simply the feeling that Texas A & M was not what he wanted, inevitably meant a move to Austin and the state university, the pinnacle of student ambitions.

The University of Texas was an exciting place to be during the 1935-1939 period: a school in turmoil and transition in sheer size and numbers, as well as in political orientation. The modern history of higher education in the South begins only in the second or third decade of the twentieth century. What provided particular impetus to higher education in Texas during this period was the legislative provisos which channeled the tax revenues from petroleum sales largely into the state educational system. The unique contribution of the University of Texas to this break with conservatism was the development of strong departments of graduate instruction in both the physical and social sciences. Mills benefited greatly by this unique break with gentlemanly collegiate tradition in southern education—a tradition that emphasized teaching to the exclusion of research.3 However, despite this growth of Texas education during the period Mills went to college, other aspects of southern education in the mid-1930s, as outlined by Howard Odum, were scarcely inviting:

It is not: only that the region has no university of the first ranking, but it lacks college and university scholars and administrators of topmost distinction, measured by the usual standards of achievement and recognition … it lacks a reasonable number of endowed institutions sufficiently free from state or church dominance to function independently in the best manner of university standards and sufficiently well endowed to set the pace for other regional universities and to keep interregional and national influences and participation constantly on the scene…. The region has no educational administrative leaders who participate freely in the nation’s councils of learning or who have access to its larger sources of endowment and support.4

If the lack of independent and vigorous universities was a problem in southern education generally, problems in Texas were compounded by a state Board of Regents more politicized and powerful than in nearly any other state of the union. The history of the University of Texas in the thirties, and every subsequent decade, can be summarized as a struggle between the Board of Regents, controlled by state industrial and political leaders, and a faculty with national aspirations and radical inclinations that rarely got much administrative support; the latter was enfeebled by the Board of Regents and the diffuse political forces responsive to its wishes. Texas, after all, is the only state in the union which enacted legislation, with only one dissenting vote, that no infidel, atheist, or agnostic be employed in any capacity in the University of Texas, and … no person who does not believe in God as the Supreme Being and the Ruler of the Universe shall hereafter be employed. If this proclamation was more often violated than enforced, the fact is that it remains a painful reminder of the legacy of a rural South and, just as much, of an anti-Darwinian intellectual environment dominated by religious fundamentalism. A description of the university proffered anonymously in 1937 and repeated by Ronnie Dugger summarizes the general feeling toward the university among both its outcasts and its proudest sons and daughters.

The University of Texas is in many ways a microcosm of the state—a vast, amorphous, gelatinous sort of institution, where skeptical professors of philosophy and cynical workers in the sciences rub elbows with Baptists who believe that a smoking hell lies three miles underneath their brogans. It is populated, yearly, by some six thousand bewildered boys and girls who are far less interested in the chase after the Higher Learning than in the pursuit of their own adolescent amours. Plucked from the bayous, the buckbrush, and the bulrushes of this far-flung commonwealth and dispatched to the Pierian Spring, they decline almost unanimously to drink of the founts of learning. They would rather see a football game. They would rather go to a movie. They would rather make passes at their girl friends.5

The passions concerning the Univesity of Texas have hardly lessened over time; only slight changes in the mores of the state’s residents are discernible. In a recent article by Alan Grob, a professor from Rice University (also very much in Texas), in the official publication of the American Association of University Professors, Texas is described as follows:

Higher education in America is strewn with incidents of political interference and violations of academic freedom much like those that have occurred at the University of Texas, and we must be vigilant both to prevent such intrusions and to resist them when they do take place. But if it is our duty to be vigilant, it is also our duty to be honest and fair. Though episodes resembling those at the University of Texas have occurred elsewhere, no comparable institution, that is, a major state university with significant academic credentials, can lay claim to a history of regental misgovernment and intellectual oppression remotely approximating that of the University of Texas.6

Grob goes on to shrewdly observe that the University of Texas should not be compared with Ivy League schools because such comparisons make little sense. Even excluding factors such as regional late starts and cultural differences, any effort to compare Austin, Texas, with Cambridge, Massachusetts, would falter because of structural differences between public and private universities. Comparisons of Texas with other state universities are more convincing, and at the same time more damaging.

The question is not why the University of Texas is so unlike Harvard or Columbia in its history, but why it is so unlike Wisconsin or Washington. Some thirty years after the regents of the University of Wisconsin had proclaimed as an article of their academic faith and, more important, had established as a guide to their academic practice and principle that the great state University of Wisconsin should ever encourage that continual and fearless sifting and winnowing by which alone the truth can be found, the regents of the University of Texas were implementing … an impromptu inquisition conducted to ferret out the suspect religious opinions of the dean of the college of arts and sciences.7

Yet, after all just criticisms are registered, the University of Texas was and remains an exciting institution. It is a center for research on everything from cancer to Latin America; it is a university that continues to boast a remarkable group of faculty members despite, rather than because of, boards of governors and state regents.

The period when Mills was at the university corresponded with the high point of New Deal sentiments and passions. The progressive governor of Texas, Jimmy Allred, changed the complexion of the Board of Regents and in so doing the structure of the school. The governor was himself both a rich oilman and a New Deal Democrat supportive of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, and like the president, he was conservative in personal matters. He managed to find a Texas-born-and-bred intellectual, Homer Price Rainey, born in Red River County, to appoint as university president. This in itself helped to allay conservative fears, since East Texas traditionally has been viewed as southern whereas West Texas is identified with the American West. Rainey was trained in education at the University of Chicago. He, in turn, appointed as his associate Chester Rowell, who had served him on the American Youth Commission in Washington, D.C. Rowell introduced ideas which must have been as shocking to Texas conservatives as anything heard before or since, including an attack on totalitarianism and a defense of the unfettered search for truth. He steadily emphasized that the anti-intellectual compulsions of Nazism did violence to the spirit of freedom and ended by closing every field of inquiry deemed dangerous to the regime.

Rainey’s positions derived their energies from the New Deal. He set the tone for a struggle in the late 1930s in Texas that ultimately resulted in political turmoil. Mills heard liberal doctrine derived almost directly from the New Deal, and intellectually from the pragmatist movement as it found its way to Chicago and back down to Texas. Here is Rainey speaking at his inaugural:

We are making, or are about to make, here in Texas, a momentous decision. The regents have set out to take literally the requirements for a university of the first class. But the people would decide whether it would be allowed to run free. It is their wish to remove as far as practicable all hampering restrictions. Do not keep too close a control. Provide freedom of action and the university could be great.9

The faculty boasted some extraordinary people, including one of the great historians of American civilization, Walter Prescott Webb. Jess Walker graced the School of Law. Henry Sheldon, Clarence E. Ayres, and Wendell Gordon gave Texas a first-rate institutional economics department. Carl M. Rosenquist and Warner E. Gettys in sociology provided a range of courses from survey research to ethnography. David L. Miller and George Gentry in philosophy also provided a strong base in social theory. The strength of the social science departments thoroughly aroused and alarmed the Texas Liberty Leaguers and Christian