Liechtenstein is a Tier I nation in Europe sandwiched between Switzerland and Austria. Liechtenstein is hardly ever invaded so it is good to play as, but when you invade a country like Switzerland you will be noticed and probably be attacked by France or Germany. However, following a specific strategy, you may be able to have some fun as Liechtenstein.

Background[]

The following is taken from Wikipedia which is licensed under CC-BY-SA 3.0. You can view the article it was taken from here.

Liechtenstein is a small landlocked country located in Central Europe. It is one of the smallest countries in the world, with an area of about 160 square kilometers (62 square miles) and a population of around 38,000 people. Liechtenstein is situated between Switzerland to the west and Austria to the east.

Liechtenstein is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary democracy. The country is ruled by the princely family of Liechtenstein, headed by Prince Hans-Adam II, who has been in power since 1989. The prince has limited executive powers, and the country is governed by a democratically elected parliament.

Liechtenstein is a member of the United Nations and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) but is not part of the European Union. The official language is German, and the currency is the Swiss franc, as Liechtenstein has a customs and monetary union with Switzerland.

Base Statistics[]

Economy[]

Liechtenstein starts off with $127,708 of income. $102,419 from tax and $25,289 from resources.

Resources[]

Resources of Liechtenstein Tungsten +0.37

Military[]

Liechtenstein produces a base +295 manpower and has a starting manpower capacity of 60,000.

Base Manpower Capacity of Liechtenstein per Conscription Law Disarmed

[1% RP] Volunteer

[2% RP] Limited

[5% RP] Extensive

[10% RP] Required

[25% RP] 60,000 60,000 60,000 60,000 60,000

Geography[]

Terrain[]

Liechtenstein is in the middle of the Alps (Mountains), but has almost no land, so it is easy to conquer, yet hard to move through. If you are playing as Switzerland and are conquering Liechtenstein, it is recommended that you convert all your manpower to soldiers, as it is a buffed-up AI country.

Biomes[]

Liechtenstein also gets an extra, occasional, defense bonus to its home guard, that being Mild Winter. This, however, only appears during December-January, and the nation is in the normal biome for the rest of the year.

Cities[]

Liechtenstein has only 1 city, Vaduz, which is the capital of Liechtenstein.

Formables[]

Liechtenstein has two formables: the European Union & the Holy Roman Empire. To form these, look at the strategy section which goes more in-depth for them.

Strategies[]

Playing Normally[]

If Switzerland and Austria are AI: Justify on both, declare first on Austria then produce a lot of infantry (as much as you can) and bait them into your entrenched army before Germany takes it. After that, do the same strategy for Switzerland. By now, 2 things will happen. Germany takes you out, or you can continue expanding and take over the Benelux ( Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg) and the Czech Republic and then form the Holy Roman Empire.

If they're both players: It's best to stay neutral and ally many nations that are not planning to have formable that includes Liechtenstein, Otherwise the fate of Liechtenstein will be conquered by many nations such as Germany, Switzerland and Italy.

Specifically Forming the Holy Roman Empire[]

To start, begin heavily industrializing. It is recommended you do electronics until you gain more cities. Also, you'll want to develop Vaduz heavily, this will benefit your play through in the future. Like the game strategies above, you will first want to invade Austria. This is because they have few cities and Germany usually takes them first. Try to ally Germany and befriend them for now. If they decline, you'd be better allying someone like Poland or France. If one of these alliances is successful, you'll want to fortify most of your country (Especially your Alpine cities.) You will also want to build steel & motor factories (or you could buy those, either way) so that you can make tanks later onward. Other than that, get lots of artillery, taking advantage of the mountains. If the German problem is handled or they invaded the Czech Republic and are going to invade you soon; invade Switzerland. Switzerland is much more mountainous than Austria, so they specifically will be harder for German tanks or infantry. Wait until Switzerland integrates and fortify a lot of their cities.

If Germany Invades[]

Make sure your capital is heavily guarded and that you have allies coming to your side in the war. (i.e.: France, the United Kingdom, maybe even Russia. You'll want to make sure you are heavily fortified and have enough tanks stationed in the alps to attack whatever they send there. You'll mainly want to hope your allies are able to defeat Germany, because it's unlikely you will be able to do it on your own. If Germany is out of the way (if they white peaced or their land got split. The split in particular will be a problem in the long run. There may be a chance that Germany is AI or allied you, follow the next steps.

Onwards to Forming the Holy Roman Empire[]

Let's say, Germany was your ally or maybe you successfully split Germany. The next step you'll want to do is invade Slovenia. Slovenia is weak and easy to take judging by how advanced you now are. Make sure it is not taken by Italy, if it is, try negotiations right now, since chances are if Italy owns Slovenia, they own most of the Balkans. You won't be ready for a war with Italy just yet, so you'll want to try to peacefully negotiate Slovenia. If Italy is AI, that is great, you'll just have to have a lot of soldiers. If you do end up taking out Italy, that will be great for your nation in the future. But say Yugoslavia is formed and they own Slovenia, what you'll want to do is basically the same thing. Next, invade the Czech Republic if no one has taken them. However, chances are Poland may have invaded them to form Zapadoslavia. If Poland was your ally that helped split Germany, or maybe if Poland was your ally and Germany was your ally as well, you'll want to negotiate with them saying something like "Can you give me Czechia and then I'll give it back to you after I form HRE?" or something like that. If they say yes, you're good to go. If they say no, well good luck. Assume they said yes, this will leave you with the Benelux region and Germany.

If Germany Was Split[]

if you and some other powers split Germany, it is important that you maybe focus on getting colonies. Since you invaded Slovenia or maybe even Italy, you'll want to take some time off to colonize, this will get your economy and resources to upgrade. It will also keep you busy until the server slowly dies down enough for you to break ties with some of the nations that split Germany with you. If they don't leave, then that is not a problem, if you continue invading, let's say Africa, you'll eventually be able to keep up with them power-wise. Eventually, you will need to break ties with them and fight them, as it cannot be predicted which one's split Germany with you, I can only assume you know how to fight them. In the long run, you may be able to defeat them based on whatever strategy you used. If this is so, simply invading the Benelux, and you'll be done.

If You Were Allied to Germany[]

Say, there was no war, and you and Germany became allies. Follow a similar strategy to the one explained above and gradually wait until the game dies down. This will have alliances die down as well, so that you won't be in a really big war. If Germany stays in game, it is likely because they are trying to form the German Empire, or trying to expand into Europe . If this is the case, you'll simply have to colonize Northern Africa or the Middle East until they do. Usually, once they form it, they tend to leave the game. At this point, you will be powerful enough to take them on. You won't have to worry too much about their colonies, as they may declare independence once you capture Berlin. It may take a bit for (say Cameroon), so you might be better off going down there to take one. After the war is over, you will simply need to invade the Benelux region and you will be done.

The EU Strategy (just an outline)

Form the HRE as Liechtenstein first, then you should be strong enough to conquer the remaining countries. If you have a problem with France or Italy, always “isolate them, flank them and then spank them while sniping their capital or square cities”.

NOTE: THIS IS NOT A VERY WELL-DEVELOPED STRATEGY, THIS IS JUST AN OUTLINE.

Threats[]

Liechtenstein is usually taken over really early on in the game unless Liechtenstein is a player in that case, they were taken over around the mid game. The threats listed below are countries that will do as such:

France and Germany need you for the Frankish Empire, or may just generally wish to expand into you.

Austria needs you to form the Holy Roman Empire.

Italy needs you for the Roman Empire.

Any Europe countries wanting to unite from the European Union.

Trivia[]

Liechtenstein is the 6th smallest country in the world with an area of only 61.78 square miles, or around 160.01 square kilometers.

Liechtenstein is one of two doubly landlocked countries in the world, being surrounded by landlocked countries, the only other one being Uzbeskistan.

Liechtenstein is one of the only 1-city nations (not exactly a city-state) that produces resources.

It is the only surviving part of the Holy Roman Empire. *There is a common rumor that during the Austro-Prussian War, Liechtenstein had 80 soldiers and came out of it with 81. This is likely because someone from either Austria or Italy joined their military. This fact, however, is heavily debated to be true or not, and it is most likely misinterpreted. The most likely case is that a lieutenant of the Austrian Kaiserjäger accompanied the Liechtensteiner army home as a military liaison, as the army cooperated with the Kaiserjäger during the war.

It is possible to rent the entirety of Liechtenstein.

The Russian Empire was offered Alaska to Liechtenstein before the Czar sold it to America in 1867.

Alaska, incidentally, is about 11,000 times larger than Liechtenstein and 4,600 miles away. The principality had the money but decided to pass on the deal; otherwise, Alaskans might be speaking German today and sending their income taxes to Vaduz instead of Washington.