-THREE, the centenary year of Karl Marx's death, is over. The faithful gathered, universities held seminars and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization arranged a December round table in Paris. Books poured off the presses but excited no one. Yet the faithful, one would have thought, had much on their side. When the greatest thinker in the history of socialism (the competition is not very great, but Marx was) died in London in March 1883, 11 people attended his funeral. Today, half the population of the world is led or governed in his name. In the first months of 1983, the world was still in recession. The international financial system was under severe strain; what Marx called ''the reserve army of the unemployed'' had grown to 30 million in Western developed countries. ''Bourgeois'' civilization and the power of private property were under attack internally and externally - if not by the working classes, then by teachers, minorities, women, environmentalists, pacifists, former colonial subjects and the poor everywhere. Conservative reaction there may be, at least at the ideological level - but bourgeois civilization, the world of self-confident liberal individualism, is dying, if not dead. We stand on the threshold of a new era which is not that envisioned by Marx and which has found no student or forecaster of Marx's stature.

In short, Marx Year 1983 was a remarkably muted and uninspiring event. In 1967, celebrating the centenary of the publication of the first volume of Marx's ''Capital,'' the faithful still saw Marx as an authority for our time. In 1983, they did not. Commemorations stretching from Moscow to Peking and from Berlin to Havana and Ho Chi Minh City attracted the same enthusiasm, personal commitment and public response (and had the same intellectual depth) as the Queen of England's Christmas address.

In Communist countries, leaders and led have other problems and they know it. The legitimizing function of Marxism is dead in the Soviet Union and China as much as in Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Poland. A Marxist philosopher who is one of Senegal's leading economic administrators explained at the UNESCO round table that Marx's thought was historically very important, but that Marx, like most Europeans of his time, knew nothing about Africa and got it all wrong. Syria's propagandist, A. Makdisi, the Minister of Culture (a characteristic UNESCO choice of participant in an academic round table on Marx?) explained that the class struggle today is between the developing world and the developed, and that it is a cultural as much as an economic struggle in which Syria, or rather the (ultimately indivisible?) Arab nation, plays a special part. The French ex-Communist Roger Garaudy, expelled from the party and a convert to Islam, attended the round table as an observer for the World Islamic League. It was he who discovered in the 60's that the proletariat was not the majority of mankind and that it was dwindling in size. Perhaps he has found the Arabs a better bet in the historical stakes.

The ''Colloque Karl Marx'' held at the Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales in Paris a week earlier had attracted some very formidable Marx scholars, though fewer Marxists. In style, seriousness and contemporary bite, it could have been a symposium on Adam Smith, Hegel or Ricardo.

Much the same might be said of the recent crop of books. Marx has become an academic industry. It is dominated intellectually by those who began writ Eugene Kamenka is the head of the history of ideas unit at the Australian National University in Canberra and editor of ''The Portable Karl Marx.'' ing on him before he was popular and still treat him respectfully but critically. And it is dominated quantitatively by the products of, and now teachers in, the vastly expanded education system at its lower levels - writers who lack style, confidence and a base outside contemporary trendiness for their thinking. Most of the important recent books on Marx had come out well before 1983. There were Marxist-humanist interpretations in the 50's and 60's. The attempt by the followers of Louis Althusser to save Marx for a refurbished Stalinism came in the 60's and 70's and the more analytic studies of particular issues in Marx - his politics, his materialist interpretation of history, his attitudes toward nationalism - also were done in the 70's. Now is the era of ''Marx and . . .'' - law, anthropology, sociology, classics, esthetics, you name it.

Perhaps the most useful book of 1983 was ''A Dictionary of Marxist Thought,'' edited by Tom Bottomore, (Harvard University Press), which works its way from ''Abstract Labor'' to ''Young Hegelians'' (a shoddy contribution from David McLellan, who has done better) and from ''Theodor Adorno'' to ''Leon Trotsky.'' Some entries - ''Alienation,'' ''Historical Materialism,'' ''Austro-Marxism,'' for instance - are very good; some are bad and some, like the entry on ''Marxism in Eastern Europe,'' talk nonsense (Polish Solidarity is treated as an example of ''post-Marxism''). The most exciting recent book (or the one I admired most) since G. A. Cohen's ''Karl Marx's Theory of History: A Defence,'' (1977) was Frank Parkin's ''Marxism and Class Theory: A Bourgeois Critique'' (Columbia University Press). Incisive and devastating, it recognizes Marx's greatness but brings out the inadequacies of his analysis and vision of the future. Mr. McLellan's ''Marx: The First Hundred Years'' (St. Martin's Press) has good contributors but is not exciting. David Felix's ''Marx as a Politician'' (Southern Illinois University Press) has more to offer, though I do not care for its style (Mr. Felix speaks of Marx's ''burst of brassy lyric'') or many of its interpretations.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.