Mirage News

Mirage News

Death of Karl Marx

On 14 March 1883, the father of Socialism and Communism, Karl Heinrich Marx, died in London. His thought and societal cancer lives on, sadly and dangerously, in many people, political parties and countries today.

Marx's most infamous contributions to political thought and literature were:

The Communist Manifesto, his 1848 political pamphlet written with fellow traveller, Friedrich Engels, and commissioned by the Communist League just as the revolutions of 1848 across Europe began to erupt, and

Das Kapital, his three-volume book (the first and most influential in 1867) critiquing then political economy and capitalism dominated by the eminent classicists of Smith, Say, Ricardo and Mill.

Marx theorised that capitalism exploited workers who should rise up across national boundaries and overthrow the "unjust and corrupt" system to deliver socialism (temporary state ownership and control of everything) and ultimately communism (where the workers would own and receive control of what the state would relinquish to them). History shows time and again that the "interim step" of socialism and central planning fails and that the leaders of big socialist states never relinquish their love and grip of complete power over property, capital, knowledge, discourse, thought and the workers (proletariat or "little people").

Yet Marxists and their thought marches on, with more recent and virulent strains like Fabian socialism (est. 1884) and cultural Marxism (est. 1919, but particularly prevalent since the 1960s) afflicting the West today. The cultural Marxist strain atomises and gaslights societies into a diverse and confused cluster of "oppressed identities" via identity politics to divide and conquer – to break down order, functionality, knowledge, traditions and established ties so that a ruling class can assume power.

Marx's flawed and destructive ideology has caused tragic revolution, death, starvation, dysfunction, ruin and misery over the last century – yet it still flourishes in left-wing political parties like the Greens and global organisations like the United Nations.

Mark this anniversary of the death of the world's original Marxist – the Father of Socialism and Communism – by:

watching these clips on Karl Marx, the enduring attraction of Marxism (especially in today's young) and its flaws and fallacies

reading further on Marx, his theories and legacy

reflecting on the tragedy and disappointment that every Marxist regime delivers relative to the utopianparadise always promised

reminding your family, friends and young, idealistic minds about the dangers and lures of all forms of Marxism

building bridges with others today and taking a stand against Marxist "divide and conquer" tactics, and/or

sharing this Action Plan post on social media with family, friends and those less aware (or in need of reminding) of the ravages and misery of Marxism over the last 100 years.

/Public Release. This material from the originating organization/author(s) might be of the point-in-time nature, and edited for clarity, style and length. Mirage.News does not take institutional positions or sides, and all views, positions, and conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the author(s).View in full here.