CANTON Wm. McKinley Presidential Library & Museum has strengthened its longtime bond with Arnold Funeral Home.

Their shared legacy stretches through 120 years of history.

McKinley museum honors in its name the mission to preserve the memory of William McKinley, the nation's 25th president, who was slain in 1901 by anarchist Leon Czolgosz. Arnold Funeral Home handled the local arrangements for McKinley's final services after his assassination.

Now, McKinley museum has added Arnold Funeral Home as an institutional member of the museum's board of trustees. The seat is one of six on the board reserved for businesses with a long history in Canton, according to the museum.

John Arnold Jr. will serve as the funeral home's first representative on the board. He called the appointment to the board an honor.

"It's a privilege to carry out the legacy of our founder," the new board member said, stressing the funeral home's lengthy impact on the community. "We have served several families in the Canton area for four or five generations, which is remarkable for a local business."

Museum Executive Director Kimberly Kenney noted the history of Arnold Funeral Home reaches back through five generations of family ownership and more than a century of service to the community.

"John is joining the Museum Board at a pivotal time for us," she explained. "In these challenging times, the Museum continues to struggle with lower-than-expected attendance and membership renewals. But we are using this time to make plans for our future. John brings a fresh perspective, and we are really looking forward to working with him."

Kenney's personal connection to McKinley

The late Christopher Kenney, Kimberly Kenney's husband and education director at McKinley museum before his death late in 2019, strengthened the ties between the presidential library and the historically significant funeral home.

When Kenney was researching his 2006 book, "The McKinley Monument: A Tribute to a Fallen President," one of a pair of volumes he wrote about McKinley, the historian went to the funeral home to learn about the connection to the business.

"They got out 'Book One' to show him the page for McKinley's 'Record of Funeral,' " recalled a media release sent out by the museum last week. "They also shared a second page, dated October 11, 1907, which showed what was done when the President, his wife, Ida, and their two young daughters were removed from West Lawn Cemetery and placed in the recently completed Monument."

As a result of that connection, Kimberly Kenney chose Arnold to handle arrangements for her husband a little more than a year ago.

"In addition to researching McKinley for two books, Chris portrayed President McKinley as a first-person interpreter, so I knew Arnold was the right choice," the executive director said. "The great-great-grandson of the man who handled McKinley's arrangements met with me, which was very special. Everything was perfect, and they made a very difficult time in my life so much easier for me."

Recalling Arnold Funeral Home's history

A posting placed on the museum's Facebook page cited information from the funeral home's website in profiling the business and its founder.

"Its founder, J.L. Arnold, emigrated from Bavaria in 1882 at the age of 17, after serving as an apprentice in furniture building," the online post said. "The early funeral industry evolved from furniture making, because in addition to building household furniture, they often built wooden coffins."

The posting noted that Arnold settled in Cincinnati initially, then moved to Canton in 1888.

"He purchased the undertaking and furniture establishment owned by the Shearer Brothers," the post continued. "In 1899 he formed a partnership with H.D. McCrea, and eventually sold out the furniture side of his business to focus exclusively on funerals."

According to the posting, Arnold not only was the founder of his funeral business, but also was "one of the organizers of the Citizen's Building & Loan Company, which is part of the Huntington Bank today."

"He served as both president and secretary on the Ohio State Board of Embalming Examiners, receiving appointments from three governors," the museum's Facebook profile said. "He also was a member of the Canton Board of Health and one of the original organizers of the Canton Chamber of Commerce."

Through The Generations

A history at the funeral home's website continues the company's growth through subsequent generations.

Carl P. Arnold, the founder's son, who served in World War I, joined his father in the business and served as president of the funeral home for 20 years until his death in 1961.

Herman A. Arnold, Carl Arnold's brother, served as secretary-treasurer.

According to a 2018 article by Patricia Faulhaber printed in the Repository's weekly sister publication The Suburbanite, John C. Arnold took over the reins of the business after his father's death in 1961, and guided it until his own passing in 1993, when his son John L. Arnold, the representative of the fourth generation of family members, became the company's president.

John Arnold Jr. joined his father in the family business in January 2018, the Suburbanite reported, becoming the fifth generation of Arnolds helping to operate the 130-plus-year-old business, which the newspaper noted has locations in Canton and Hartville.

Impact Of Appointment

"We are always looking to be impactful in the community in a variety of ways," said John Arnold Sr. following the announcement of his son's appointment to the museum board. "And since this is tied to our heritage, it means so much more to us than it would to many others.

"We're proud to be able to carry on the traditions that were started in the 1800s. We were chosen to handle the President's arrangements simply because he and my great-grandfather were friends."

During good times, J.L. Arnold and McKinley both were founding members of the Congress Lake Club, the family explains.

Sadder days in the relationship of the two men were illustrated by the "Record of Funeral" for McKinley that was shown to Christopher Kenney during his research.

The document, dated Sept. 1901, was prepared on the order of Wm. R. Day, the slain president's friend and former cabinet member. The document listed the date of death as Sept. 14, 1901, in Buffalo, as a result of a "Gun Shot Wound." A second document shown to Kenney was an invoice, dated Oct. 11, 1907, listing the costs — $1,446 — for moving the body of McKinley and those of his family members from a vault in West Lawn Cemetery into the newly completed McKinley National Memorial.

According to the first document, the funeral ceremony itself was set for 1 p.m. Sept. 19, 1901, at First M.E. (Methodist) Church. It would be officiated, the document noted, by the church's pastor, the Rev. C.E. Manchester, whose eulogy, praised one historical account, "paid an eloquent tribute" to the slain leader.

Decades later, historian E.T. Heald documented details of the funeral in "The McKinley Era," the second book of his multi-volume history "The Stark County Story."

"At the church President (Theodore) Roosevelt occupied the front pew," Heald wrote. "Back of him sat 40 U.S. Senators and 120 Representatives. Then came governors of States. The interior was a scene of solemn grandeur with hundreds of floral pieces —some from abroad."