"In obedience to the will of the people, and in their presence, by the authority vested in me by this oath, I assume the arduous and responsible duties of president of the United States, relying upon the support of my countrymen and invoking the guidance of Almighty God."

Those were the words, spoken by President William McKinley shortly after he was sworn in as the 25th president on March 4, 1897, with which the nation's new chief executive began his first inaugural address.

It is worth noting on the 125th anniversary of the historic occasion, that in his speech the devout McKinley abundantly called upon God for his blessing and guidance. He sought the assistance in his duties from the diety to which, only moments before with his hand on the Bible, he had made faithful promises as he swore his oath of office.

More: Monday After: McKinley offered his nation's holiday thanks

More: Wreath-laying marks President McKinley's birthday

"Our faith teaches that there is no safer reliance than upon the God of our fathers," McKinley continued in his inaugural address, "who has so singularly favored the American people in every national trial, and who will not forsake us so long as we obey His commandments and walk humbly in His footsteps."

It was with God's assurance that McKinley calmly had walked from his home on Market Avenue N to the First Methodist Church downtown and attended his final Sunday service as a "private citizen," reported the Evening Repository on Monday, March 1, 1897.

"In the invocation Rev. Dr. Manchester prayed for divine blessing upon the incoming president and his advisers and for the success of the administration."

McKinley departs Canton for Washington

McKinley departed Canton on Monday evening, taking a train to Washington after a parade had escorted him from his home to the city's railroad station, sending him on his way "to be inaugurated Thursday as chief executive of the United States."

"The closing scenes of the past remarkable and history-making twelve months were such as may never be witnessed again," the Repository observed. "Is it any wonder that handkerchiefs were used for another purpose than waving to the man his neighbors, friends and well-wishers love so well? Not only were women seen to weep as the president-elect and his wife passed along the street from their home...but there was a suspicious and furtive movement of strong mens' hands to their eyes."

McKinley "stood upon the rear platform of the car in which he was to ride to Washington," and spoke briefly to "neighbors and friends and fellow citizens" who saw him off at the station.

"Nothing could give be greater pleasure than this farewell greeting – this evidence of your friendship and sympathy, your good will, and, I am sure, the prayers of all the people with whom I have lived so long, and whose confidence and esteem are dearer to me than any other earthly honors," he said. "To all of us the future is as a sealed book, but if I can by official act, or administration, or utterance in any degree add to the prosperity of our beloved country and comfort and well being of our splendid citizenship, I will devote the best and most unselfish efforts of my life."

During the ride to Washington, McKinley no doubt took time to lose himself in thought about the campaign that had preceded his inauguration day.

In his book, "The Triumph of William McKinley: Why the Election of 1896 Still Matters," political strategist Karl Rove said that MicKinley's campaign provides lessons either party could use today to end an era of a 50-50 nation and gain the edge.

"The election of William McKinley in 1896 and the subsequent political realignment his victory and presidency brought about were not foreordained," Rove wrote. "They occurred because McKinley tackled big issues as matters of principle. He drew sharp distinctions while treating his opponents and voters with respect. And he aimed to unit a divided country, reignite the economy, and reinvigorate his party.

"In one of the most remarkable and consequential elections in the nation's history, concluded Rove, "William McKinley succeeded in forging an impressive victory that made him the president of the United States as one century neared its end and a new one – the American century – was about to begin."

Washington began to bustle

Train cars full of Cantonians followed the president to the nation's capital. They brought with them a heady optimism, despite the dreariness of the day before the event.

"The day before the inauguration opened moist and warm and by 10 o'clock a slow steady drizzle had set in that cast discouragement on the visitor but gave hope for the great day tomorrow," reported an article in the Evening Repository on Wednesday March 3, 1897. "Today's downfall gave promise that the wet weather would end before tomorrow morning."

Hotels had started to fill up early in the inaugural week.

"The president-elect retired at a late hour last night and rose at an early hour," the Repository told its readers. "But in his short sleep he had found much rest and recuperation. When he appeared at his breakfast table about 8 o'clock he looked the picture of health and strength."

The president dined with his wife and mother, briefly engaging in conversation with friends but few others, until duties of his status as president-elect took priority.

"At ten minutes past 11 o'clock Mr. McKinley went to pay his official visit to President Cleveland at the White House," the Repository reported. "There was a double file of policemen at the F Street entrance of the hotel, probably to prevent a crush of people rushing after the president-elect, for the hotel was crowded."

Bold headlines and colorful stories in the Repository the next day set the scene for the inauguration and introduced McKinley as the new chief executive.

"HE IS NOW THE NATION'S PRESIDENT," said one headline, before another reported how "A Vast Multitude Witnesses the Imposing Ceremonies of the Day."

The city was patriotically alive with decorations, the newspaper noted.

"The citizens had spent money with a liberal hand to beautify their houses, and with the aid of the thousands of flags of every kind loaned by the national government, Pennsylvania Avenue, the great artery of the city, was turned into a rainbow of bright color, in which Old Glory predominated," an Associated Press article reported. "The line of march of the parade was longer than usual – full four miles, in fact – made so to ease the pressure of spectators upon the line in the central section of the city."

Seats were "in great demand" for the parade, some selling for as high as $80. People came by the thousands to the Capitol building to view the inauguration itself.

It was "an impressive yet beautifully simple ceremony," the newspaper said, a ritual during which McKinley put his hand on a bible, "bent his head over the Sacred Book and took the solemn oath which bound him for four long years to watch over and guard the welfare of the American people."

Faced great responsibility

After McKinley was sworn in as president, the new president delivered his inaugural address, outlining the burdensome tasks he faced for the American people during his term.

"The responsibilities of the high trust to which I have been called – always of grave importance–are augmented by the prevailing business conditions, entailing idleness upon willing labor and loss to useful enterprises. The country is suffering from industrial disturbances from which speedy recovery must be had."

The nation's financial system "needs some revision," he said. Tariffs needed to be adjusted to open up new markets. Public expenditures needed to be brought back in line.

"The government should not be permitted to run behind or increase its debt in times like the present."

And, the country had to be unified to accomplish these goals and a multitude of others, McKinley said.

Historian Robert W. Merry, author of "President McKinley: Architect of the American Century," believes McKinley, who would be assassinated in Buffalo in 1901, achieved much of what he set out to do in little more than a single term, despite "missteps" pointed to by his detractors. And in doing so he became what some historians have labeled "the first modern president."

In his book, Merry called McKinley "a man of prudence, character, compassion, competence, patriotism, and subtle force who presided over momentous times in American history."

Reach Gary at gary.brown.rep@gmail.com.

On Twitter: @gbrownREP