A collaboration between Walsh University and Wm. McKinley Presidential Library & Museum has changed the way people with an interest in local history can look at the life of President William McKinley's life in Canton.

The self-guided historical tour "A Walk with the President," which was designed by McKinley museum staff in 1997 and has for more than two decades has allowed participants to use a brochure to follow in the footsteps of McKinley to nearly a dozen stops, has been turned into a virtual stroll. The tour can be taken from the comfort of your own home.

Information provided through a mobile app is presented in text, photographs, images of artifacts and videos. The virtual tour — called a "Vamonde Adventure" — can be activated by downloading the free Vamonde mobile app on a cell phone. Or it can be reached on a laptop or other device by visiting Vamonde.com and searching for "A Walk with the President."

A marketing video created by McKinley museum through the collaboration, which explains the virtual tour's creation and gives historical overviews of sites included in the tour, can be accessed at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fd4ks_YeDxA&feature=youtu.be

Included on the virtual tour are "stops" at a dozen sites that have historical connections to McKinley: McKinley National Memorial, Saxton McKinley House, Stark County Courthouse, Christ Presbyterian Church, Crossroads United Methodist Church, Salvation Army, the Huntington Bank Plaza, Canton Classic Car Museum, Stark County District Library Main Branch, The Canton Repository, Wm. McKinley Presidential Library & Museum, and the Werts Receiving Vault in West Lawn Cemetery.

To those choosing between taking a virtual tour and stepping off "The Walk" for real, McKinley museum archivist Mark Holland offers the same advice he gives visitors to the museum when he hands them a brochure for "A Walk with the President."

"I tell people that if you have time to go on the tour, by all means take the walk," said Holland. "But, if you don't have the time, its fun to just look at the brochure, or now the images and information at the app."

Beginning a collaboration

Kimberly Kenney, executive director of McKinley museum researched the app and Mark Holland worked with Walsh staff and students to build "A Walk with the President" content for it.

Lee Horrisberger, associate professor at Walsh, enlisted students from her communications class to work on the project, so the community could be made more aware of the walk and so it would become more accessible through technology.

"My class and I were looking for a service-learning experience," said Horrisberger, who explained that such service learning, "takes classroom knowledge and teaching and applies it to a community partner's problem."

Students involved in the project were Alexis Fleishman, Spencer Heffernan, Joshua Smith, Nico Antezana, Alana Watkins, Jalen Gibson, and Hamed Alwusaydi.

"The seven students divided into teams for video, public relations and marketing, and graphic design," said Horrisberger. "Accompanied by Holland, the class and I took a couple of field trips downtown to learn more about President McKinley's history. We were able to shoot, edit and publish video clips that will extend content along the 'Walk.'"

Holland noted much of the content used online came from the archives at the museum in the Ramsayer Research Library, as well as historical archives at the various sites. For example, Ramsayer library volunteers Tom and Rochelle Haas worked as a team to come up with background information at sites.

"Tom did the research and Rochelle wrote the narrative and I created the movie that went with the narration for the Repository," explained Holland, using the newspaper as an example.

Holland noted, without funding, a lot of sweat equity went into the project.

"The students put in a lot of work," he said. "We had a great partnership with Walsh."

Horrisberger noted her students spent the initial part of the semester working on campus, gathering information, ans developing videos. After the coronavirus shut down campuses, students continued to work on the project through online conferencing.

One of those students, Alana Watkins, worked on public relations and marketing for the project.

"My partner, Nico (Antezana), and I were responsible for advertising the 'Walk' with the public in Stark County," recalled Watkins, noting that plans for table tents and posters at local businesses changed to creating a virtual event, including the video that now is displayed by the museum on YouTube.

At the sites

Watkins provided the voice-over narration for the Saxton House and McKinley Block in that video.

Representatives of some of the sites, including Museum Director Char Lautzenheiser at Canton Classic Car Museum, Pastor Don Ackerman at Crossroads United Methodist Church, and Court Administrator Dwaine Hemphill at Stark County Courthouse, appear in videos for the virtual tour and the promotional video. Their words help to underscore the historical significance of each site in McKinley's life.

"The Saxton McKinley House is part of the First Ladies' National Historic Site and it is the ancestral home of Ida Saxton McKinley," explained Michelle Gullion, archivist and curator for the First Ladies' Library. "For most of their married life, this was where the McKinleys called home whenever they were residing in Canton. They lived on the third floor along with Ida's sister's family, Mary and Marshall Barber and their seven children."

For The Future

Horrisberger also noted the contribution the mobile app will make in helping to educate the public about McKinley's place in local history.

"Through the 'Walk with the President' project, people who take the walk begin to understand the influence of president and Mrs. McKinley on Stark County history," said Horrisberger.

As the virtual tour is expanded, Holland said he hopes it will serve as encouragement to individuals to get out and actually walk where President McKinley stepped.

"It's still under construction," said Holland, who said additional sites, such as the Spanish-American War relic in Westbrook Park, will be added to the tour in the future. "It's probably something that never will be done. We're constantly learning things. We'll continually increase the content."