Rita M. (Walsh) LaBrecque, age 93, a longtime resident of Lowell, MA passed away peacefully on June 8, 2024 at her home in Salem NH with family by her side.

She was born in Andover to the late Harold C. and Cecile (St. Pierre) Walsh and was a graduate of Lawrence High School.

She loved to read, enjoyed playing bingo, taking trips to the casinos, and watching Young And the Restless. But was happiest taking care of her grandchildren and great children.

Prior to her retirement, she was employed by the Internal Revenue Service for many years.

Rita is survived by her loving children: Maureen Thibault and her husband Richard of Salem NH, Michael LaBrecque of Billerica, Mark LaBrecque, and Robin McKinley and her husband John of Schertz TX; as well as thirteen grandchildren, Christopher (Lisa) David, Melissa (Bill) Smerdon, Kelly (Gerry) Marshall, Jennifer (Edward) Lynch, Michael LaBrecque, Aaron (Keely) LaBrecque, Kenneth (Janka) LaBrecque, Shannon (Collin) Bland, Kelcie (Jason) Peirce, Samuel (Ashley) LaBrecque, Laura LaBrecque, Jason McKinley and partner Ewelina, and Kaleigh McKinley and spouse Andrew Morris; and eighteen great- grandchildren.

She also leaves two sisters; Joan Hillerby of Salem NH and Margaret Landry of Haverhill; and three brothers, Joseph Walsh and his spouse Dorothy of Covington LA, George Walsh of Methuen, and John Walsh and his spouse Marilyn of Manchester NH; and many nieces and nephews.

She was also the mother of the late Carol David and Gary LaBrecque, sister of the late Patricia Hinchcliffe, Charles Walsh, William, Walsh, Richard Walsh and niece of the late Florence (St. Pierre) Herlihy.

Relatives and friends will be received at the TYNGSBOROUGH FUNERAL HOME 4 Cassaway Dr., Tyngsborough, on Friday, June 14, from 10 a.m. to 12 noon, followed by a Funeral Home Service at 12 noon. Her Committal Service will take place in Fairview Cemetery, North Chelmsford. In lieu of flowers, a donation may be made to St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital at https://www.stjude.org/

To send flowers to the family or plant a tree in memory of Rita M. (Walsh) LaBrecque, please visit our floral store.