The United States of America (USA) is a federal constitutional republic located on the North American continent, between the Pacific and Atlantic oceans.

History[]

Pre-Chimeran War[]

In 1898, the United States was close to declaring war against Spain in response to the American public's reactions to the sinking of the USS Maine and sympathies towards Cuban independence. Conflict was averted by President William McKinley, who pressured Spain to grant independence to Cuba.[1] As a result, America had been slowly accepting a policy of international isolationism which furthermore resulted in the failure of Woodrow Wilson's attempt to convince Congress to declare war on Germany during the Great War in 1917.[1] After the end of the Great War, the U.S. was not represented during the signing of the Treaty of Versailles and the ratification of the European Trade Organization.[1]

In the following post-war era, America steadily grew into a more prosperous and stronger nation after President Herbert Hoover vetoed the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act and avoiding an economic depression.[1] By the 1930s, discoveries of unearthly artifacts were found scattered throughout America in which it led to the U.S. government becoming aware of the existence of the Chimera. In response, the government constructed a large number of military bases and research facilities to study the findings, which led to the creation of the Special Research Projects Administration. The increase on scientific research skyrocketed, creating a massive brain drain of the country's universities but leading to several scientific breakthroughs, including the world's first digital computer and improvements to Nikola Tesla's Vertical Take-Off and Landing designs.

Under the Roosevelt administration, the U.S. loosened its isolationist policies, and establishing a close diplomatic relationship between America and Europe. However, this act attracted dissatisfactions from American conservatives and isolationists. In December 1938, staunch isolationist Senator Robert Taft challenged President Roosevelt over the U.S. Navy's build-up of secure shipping lanes across the Atlantic and its relationship with the United European Defense, in which Taft viewed the administration's policy as a first step towards international political involvement and military endeavor.[1] Taft however, being a lackluster public speaker, failed to inspire a following, except for a young Junior Senator from Montana, Noah Grace.[1][2]

By August 1940, Noah Grace entered the presidential race on the Republican ticket against Roosevelt. By framing Roosevelt as a war monger and imperialist, Grace won the public's support and became the 33rd President of the United States.[2] Taking advantage of the strong isolationist tendencies of the population, Grace turned America into an isolationist state and severed diplomatic ties to the UED. However, Grace allowed the military buildup to continue after becoming aware of the Chimera's existence and leading to the development of the world's first nuclear weapon in June 1944, to solely defend America from the alien threat and refusing to support Europe's imminent war against the Chimera.[1]

Grace amassed growing political power and popular support from the American public and allowing him to surpass his two terms in office. Both the Democratic and Republican Parties failed to pass a constitutional amendment in limiting the president to a maximum of two terms, as Grace was reelected to an unprecedented third term with America's lowest turnout of votes in 70 years in 1949 owing to the subtle crackdown on dissent.[1] Despite of Grace's popular public reception, some of the American public began to perceive Grace to be a tyrant and their discontent led to the formation of the Alliance for American Autonomy, a militant isolationist organization which strongly sought for the end of the Grace administration.[1]

Chimeran War[]

In December 1949 the Chimera invaded Europe. In response, the U.S. government sealed its borders and controlled and censored all media outlets coming in from Europe and the outside world, in an effort to keep the American public unaware of the Chimeran threat to avoid mass panic, and even furthering their ignorance by creating false reports of an "influenza epidemic" in Europe. However, the AAA were able to distribute to the public evidence of the Chimera's existence in the following months. Although the U.S. did not officially join the Chimeran War, it nevertheless prepared for the coming conflict by fortifying the country. By January 1950, the government finally agreed to lend military support after analyzing the Chimera's devastation in Eastern Europe. In the same year, the Department of War and the SRPA initiated Project Abraham with the goal of seeking a cure for the Chimeran virus, which later led to the creation of the Sentinels.

In July 1951, a U.S. military task force was sent to liberate Chimera-controlled Britain in exchange for a captured Angel claimed by the British in Operation Deliverance. However, the operation became a dismal defeat for American forces, who were totally unprepared for open warfare against the Chimera. On July 14, joint American and British forces managed to successfully liberate Britain in the Battle of London by destroying the London Tower, which in turn destroyed the Chimeran tower network buried throughout Britain, thus eliminating the Chimera in the United Kingdom and becoming a major turning point for humanity.[3]

Despite Britain's liberation, the Chimera remained a worldwide threat. Inevitably, on August 14, 1951, New England fell to a series of Spire attacks and became America's first Gray Zone and the beginning of the Chimera's invasion of America.[2][4][5] The attack on New England, combined with the AAA's underground press, opened up the public eye to the threat of the Chimera. In response to the Spire attacks, the Grace administration approved the construction of the Liberty Defense Perimeter, a fortified safe zone in the American heartland. A month later, Chicago and the Upper Midwest fell to the Chimera, and following within the next year, parts of the American southeast and Northern California, specifically in Orick fell as well.[6][7][8][9]

The results of the invasion produced millions of displaced refugees fleeing from the conquered regions and placed in protection camps, and further straining food supplies due in part to the Chimera's weather changing technology affecting America's farmlands. This led to Grace, believing that America would not survive against the Chimera, to secretly plan a truce with the Chimera which would have allowed the United States to be spared from the Chimeran onslaught at the expense of the rest of the world.[10] However, Grace's attempt in the negotiations were foiled by the Sentinel Nathan Hale, who killed the president.[11] The negotiations and circumstances surrounding Grace's death were quickly covered up by the government, and the public were falsely informed of Grace having died from an "undisclosed illness", and leaving Vice President Harvey McCullen to succeed Grace.[12]

Under McCullen's presidency, many of Graces's policies were reversed and McCullen improved America's war efforts against the Chimera such as repealing Grace's immigration ban to bolster falling troop numbers[13], initiating "Operation Aloha"[14], and seeing the final construction of the LDP to be ensured for every civilian to be admitted in the safe zone.

Ultimately by May 15, 1953, the Chimeran Fleet launched a full-scale assault on America from both its coastlines in which 60% of the U.S. armed forces were killed in the first 72 hours of the assault. Despite the relative safety of the LDP, the Chimera inevitably breached the safe zone on May 28, causing the deaths of over 63 million people, including President McCullen and his cabinet.[15] Following the breach, General Douglas MacArthur became temporary leader of the U.S. government, and the seat of government and approximately two or three million survivors were relocated to Baton Rouge, Louisiana; and approximately seven million other remaining survivors were scattered throughout the United States.[16]

After Operation Black Eden, what remained of the United States fell under Chimeran occupation, with the military falling into disarray owing to its disastrous assault on the New York tower, leading to the isolation of surviving military forces scattered and leaderless across the nation.[17] With the collapse of the federal government, American citizens were reduced to scavengers and guerrilla fighters, forced into hiding to escape from the Chimera's genocide. Despite this catastrophe, resistance groups continued fighting back in limited numbers. However, with the Chimeran numerical superiority, many groups instead opted to hide from the established Chimeran Death Squads.[17]

Four years after the downfall of the United States, however, the resistance against the Chimera changed in humanity's favor. In 1957, former Sentinel Joseph Capelli traveled to the New York tower in a desperate effort to destroy it and seal the wormhole. Through incredible odds, Capelli succeeded in his mission in which the Chimera were left leaderless and began to slowly die out after 1957, with the remnants of the United States beginning to slowly recover after the extinction of the Chimera on Earth.[17]

Government[]

The American government is a federal constitutional republic similar to its real-life counterpart. However, the government grew increasingly authoritarian under the reign of Noah Grace. During the outbreak of the Chimeran War, civil rights and liberties were gradually curtailed as the government enforced censorship of the media to prevent knowledge of the Chimera going public, and public dissidents were silenced in the name of national security.[18]

President Grace had an unlimited term in office, with his growing influence and power discouraging politicians from limiting his term. There were two Congressional acts that allowed the Grace administration to overrule certain constitutional liberties and rights: the War Powers Act of 1946 which allows the president to control and mobilize the U.S. armed forces without Congress's permission, and the Executive Protection Act of 1950 which enables the president to have unlimited authority to ensure the safety of America.[19]

Federal agencies such as the Domestic Security Agency (DSA) were tasked to scrutinize and silence suspected dissidents and agitators who opposed the Grace administration. Overall, the Grace administration was criticized by some as being "corrupt" and even totalitarian in nature.

Following the sudden spire attack on Washington, D.C., the American seat of government was relocated to Denver, located within the Liberty Defense Perimeter.[20][21]

After Grace died under unknown circumstances, his successor Harvey McCullen reformed and reversed all of Grace's policies. After the Chimeran fleet invaded the United States and breaching the LDP, the remnants of the U.S. government was again relocated to Baton Rouge, Louisiana with General Douglas MacArthur becoming temporary leader of the U.S. following the death of McCullen. After MacArthur was killed in Phoenix, what remain of the government was no more.

Propaganda and Censorship[]

The government was aware the existence of the Chimera in the 1930s and had suppressed knowledge of their existence from the public in order to prevent panic. Following the outbreak of the Chimeran War, the Grace administration executed a prolong media blackout by taking complete control of the American media and news outlet, and completely censored all information of the war and the Chimera. To ensure the public's ignorance, the Office of Perception Protection and Guidance was created to produce a series of programs for television and radio that spoke of an "influenza epidemic" in Europe. The explanation of an influenza epidemic quickly raised public support for the increased border protection (and subsequently the passing of an immigration ban) and allowing all independent broadcasting to be replaced with government propaganda as President Grace's Evening Conversation radio program became an even greater national comfort and refuge from the flood of news on the airwaves.

The blatant censorship and misinformation campaign would later prove its undoing for the U.S. military when it first intervened in the liberation of Britain, as the lower ranking soldiers that were arriving to Britain had absolutely no idea of what they would be fighting against, which lead to the catastrophic outcome of Operation Deliverance. The censorship also led to a negative backlash from some American citizens, especially members of the Alliance for American Autonomy, who decried it as infringement on the First Amendment. The AAA defied the censorship and published their investigations on government secrets in their newsletter America First - America Only such as the Chimera, Project Abraham and the Fall of Europe. This lasted until the AAA's offices were raided on December 15, 1950.

The media blackout continued until the Chimera attacked the state of New York (initially covered up as a plague outbreak), and it became impossible to contain the truth of the Chimeran threat from the public. By late 1951, American propaganda and censorship refocused its effort in providing confidence in American morale in the nation's war against the Chimera such as fabricating successful battles against the Chimera.[22] However, the censorship did not reveal the horrific truth of the Chimeran conversion process and supplemented that Spire attacks only releases Spinners and Crawlers to lay eggs inside their human victims.[23]

Military[]

Main article: United States Armed Forces

The U.S. budget was mostly spent on military research and development. As such, the army had advanced technology such as the VTOL U/AV-17 Hawk. The U.S. military played a reclusive role in world events until their intervention in Operation Deliverance.

The U.S. military is also highly regarded for its vast array of weaponry, including energy weapons and sophisticated alterations on more human weaponry, although many of these weapons are reverse engineered from captured Chimeran weapons.

SRPA[]

Main article: Special Research Projects Administration

The Special Research Projects Administration (SRPA) was created in 1934 and tasked with developing advanced weapons and technologies to eliminate the Chimera. This ranged from attempting to find a cure for the Chimeran virus through Project Abraham, which resulted in the creation of the Sentinels, to creating new weapons and armor such as the highly enriched nuclear fission bomb used in Operation Black Eden.

Trivia[]

The current number of the states in the United States as of 1953 is 48, since, in real life, Alaska and Hawaii earned their statehood on January 3 and August 21, 1959, respectively. Furthermore, the "colonization" of Hawaii during Operation Aloha gives further evidence that certain isolationist elements in the political government during 1898 opposed the annexation of Hawaii as a territory, thus the Hawaiian Islands never became a military and naval outpost nor became fully populated with American citizens.

In one of President McCullen's speeches he says there are 130 million Americans, but at most only 80 million were killed during the fall of the LDP leaving a 50-million-person gap. But it is possible that some 50 million people were killed during the Chimera's attack on the nation's coastlines or on a minor reason that some Americans, such as Freedom First, who didn't register because they thought that the government were trying to take away their identities.

It can be inferred that the policy of segregation either never took hold in this alternate history of the country, or was quickly repealed by the government, largely as men like Benjamin Warner fought in the armed forces.