Palo Alto Networks has reached an agreement to purchase Talon Cyber Security for an estimated price of $600-700 million, according to The Information.

This is technology M&A deal number 301 that MSSP Alert and sister site ChannelE2E have covered so far in 2023.

Palo Alto Networks, founded in 2005, is based in Santa Clara, California. The company has 14,553 associated members listed on LinkedIn. Palo Alto Networks' areas of expertise include cloud security, next-generation firewalls and secure access service edge (SASE).

Talon, founded in 2021, is based in Tel Aviv-Yafo, Israel. The company has 151 associated members listed on LinkedIn. Talon's areas of expertise include web application and data security.

Talon Helps Palo Alto Networks Customers Secure Their Devices

Palo Alto Networks will incorporate Talon's Enterprise Browser technology into its Prisma SASE solution, the company stated. In doing so, Prisma SASE customers can use Enterprise Browser to securely access their applications from any device.

Furthermore, Enterprise Browser provides Prisma SASE customers with visibility and control over their work-related SaaS and web activity across their devices. As such, Prisma SASE and Enterprise Browser together will "transform how organizations navigate the challenges of today's modern and connected digital environments," Palo Alto Networks GM Anand Oswal said.

A Closer Look at Talon's Enterprise Browser

Enterprise Browser is designed for the "future of work," Talon indicated. Organizations can use Enterprise Browser to maintain policy-based controls over their web applications and data. They can also save money in comparison to using virtual desktop infrastructure and laptops and provide workers from around the world with secure access to apps and data.

Key features of Enterprise Browser include:

Talon offers a partner program that allows technology providers to incorporate Enterprise Browser into their portfolios. To date, Talon has partnered with CrowdStrike, Microsoft and other technology and cybersecurity companies.

Palo Alto Networks Expands Globally

The Talon acquisition underscores Palo Alto Networks' "continued belief in the strength of the Israeli cybersecurity ecosystem," Palo Alto Networks Chief Product Officer Lee Klarich noted. It also highlights the business' commitment to expanding its team in Israel.