Hewlett-Packard Co. (Palo Alto, CA) and CoCreate Software Inc. (Fort Collins, CO) have launched an initiative to offer secure collaboration across global design chains over the Internet. CoCreate, a developer of real-time collaborative design software, is a software subsidiary of Hewlett-Packard.

Under the agreement, HP's technical computing sales force will directly sell CoCreate's OneSpace software as a turnkey collaboration solution. The system enables global customers to deploy enterprise-wide collaboration solutions.

Although OneSpace is designed for discrete manufacturing companies, it provides a glimpse of things to come in collaborative product development and manufacturing.

OneSpace creates a "virtual conference room" that enables companies to outsource and discuss core product-development activities to certified partners over the Web. The software enables partners to design, modify, assess, and test designs, regardless of the originating CAD system.

HP notes that certified CoCreate engineering e-services partners already deliver contract engineering and manufacturing services to customers over the Web. The new HP-CoCreate initiative will extend custom-tailored hardware platform bundles to these CoCreate e-services partners and their OEMs.

"Collaborative engineering is fast becoming the center of the product-development process," says CoCreate Shared Engineering Div. VP/GM Doug Johnson. "This joint initiative will benefit our mutual customers by allowing them to tap into the vast resources in the supply chain. The result will be better products -- sent to market faster."

The system will use HP Praesidium e-security software to create a network of trusted Web-server platforms, Web access and authorization managers, extranet virtual private networks (VPNs), and firewalls.

"Manufacturing companies today face the unrelenting demands of bringing innovative, new products to market ahead of the competition," says HP Technical Computing Div. marketing manager Bruce Toal. "Few manufacturers can do it alone. Many rely upon a myriad of partners and suppliers to develop and produce the final product."

The combination of OneSpace and HP's Praesidium security software "offer an unmatched environment for secure collaboration across the entire design supply chain," says Toal.