Nenad Zimonjic has opened up on his mentorship role with Novak Djokovic as the world No. 1 weighs up whether he will hire a new coach or go alone. The Serb split with Goran Ivanisevic in March and Zimonjic was later seen accompanying him at practice sessions and the Monte-Carlo Masters. But no official decision has been made on whether the retired doubles champion will join his team full-time.

Djokovic’s team looks unrecognisable compared to what it was just 18 months ago. The 24-time Grand Slam champion has changed up his agents, physio and fitness trainer and, most notably, parted ways with his coach of five years.

The 36-year-old announced his shock split with Ivanisevic two months ago, with the pair deciding to end their partnership after having a conversation in Miami. Djokovic has not yet officially hired a replacement coach and isn’t sure whether he will, but he has been seen working with Zimonjic.

An eight-time Grand Slam champion in doubles, Zimonjic has now addressed his partnership with Djokovic and explained how it came about. “Novak asked me, Can you be there for the training sessions, for the matches? Because I know him very well,” he said during an appearance on the Majstorija TV show.

But the retired doubles star hinted that their work together may already be coming to an end as he spoke in the past tense when referring to their brief stint. He added: “On the other hand, he is someone who has tremendous respect for me and knows how much I know. I'm glad that I was able to help, and it was a great experience for me.”

Zimonjic’s comments come after Djokovic admitted that he was still deciding whether he would attempt to coach himself. “I am considering that as well, whether I should or shouldn’t have the coach,” he recently told The Guardian.

“I had a really good time with Nenad Zimonjic as my coach the last three weeks so we’re talking about continuing and seeing. Let’s see, I’m going to make the decision in the next period.”

Djokovic is set to compete in the upcoming Italian Open, where it remains to be seen whether Zimonjic or another face will join him, or if he will work alone. His former coach Ivanisevic has already approved of a more permanent partnership between Djokovic and Zimonjic.

“Ziki and I are great friends, we talk to each other every day. He doesn't need a better man than him. They know each other very well, the culture is the same, Ziki was his selector, he knows his soul, and he needs a man who knows him well. I'm glad they're doing well, I'll be the one cheering them on,” he told Sportal.