A MOMENT IN OKLAHOMA HISTORY: He was born in Sacred Heart, Oklahoma, and attended an Indian girls’ school. He suffered severe wounds when he stepped on a German landmine in France in World War II. When he returned home to Oklahoma, he was trained as a journalist and met his future wife at OU. At his death, they had been married 60 years. He pecked around on a typewriter as a reporter until his wife gave him the confidence to complete a novel. He became one of the nation’s best-selling authors who has sold millions of books in eight languages. TONY HILLERMAN was born in 1925 in Sacred Heart, founded in 1879 as a Catholic Mission in Pottawatomie County. It is now a ghost town. His father was a farmer and shopkeeper. Sacred Heart was on the edge of the Citizen Potawatomi reservation and Tony had to attend St. Mary’s, a Catholic girls’ school. In 1943, Hillerman enlisted in the US Army and was sent to France. He was a mortarman and in 1945 stepped on a land mine, losing part of his heel, and badly injuring his leg. He was awarded a Purple Heart, Silver Star, and Bronze Star. After the war, he attended journalism school at the University of Oklahoma. There he met Marie Unzner, a microbiology student. They were married in 1948, the same year Hillerman graduated from OU. For nearly 20 years, he worked at newspapers. In his spare time, he began writing a novel. The family was happy living in Santa Fe, New Mexico, where he was editor of the SANTA FE NEW MEXICAN, the state capital daily. Marie told him, “As long as you’re working as a journalist, you won’t get the novel finished.” She thought they should move to Albuquerque, and he seek a master’s degree at the University of New Mexico (UNM). He did. While teaching journalism at UNM, he finished THE BLESSING WAY in 1970. It featured Navajo detective Joe Leaphorn. He later introduced Jim Chee, also a Navajo. He energized the stories by having the two cops work together. Hillerman’s first book on the NEW YORK TIMES best-seller list was SKINWALKERS in 1986. After that, all of his nearly 30 more books were on the list. Two of the books were made into movies…SKINWAKERS and A THIEF IN TIME. On Tuesday nights he played poker with Jim Belshaw and other friends. Belshaw said, “Here we had this man who was one of the best-selling authors in the world. If you didn’t know who he was, you would never know that.” When Hillerman died at age 83 in 2008, the NEW YORK TIMES said Hillerman was “a former newspaperman whose evocative mystery novels set among the Navajos of the Southwest took the American detective story in new directions and made him a best-selling author.” Hillerman’s daughter, Anne Hillerman, who is continuing her father’s Navajo police novels, said of her father, “Dad didn’t allow much mythology to be built around him. He was the same guy in 2008 when he died as he was in the 1940s when he started in journalism.” BOB BURKE, Constitutional Lawyer and Author