Our lease is up, and although there are great incentives and lowered rent amounts all over Seattle right now due to Covid, we have chosen to stay here. That should tell you how exceptional our experience has been with Foundation Group.

I have lived in an apartment building managed by the Foundation Group for close to four years now and have been extremely pleased with their responsiveness, fairness and how clean and safe they keep the premises.

In the two times I’ve had maintenance requests (both unrelated issues), Jade responded quickly and completely rectified the problems. He’s a consummate professional and his quality of work is testament to his character. As a tenant, this makes a huge difference. Thanks!

Jade did good work. He was upfront about everything when the issue turned out to be bigger than expected and after his fixes, he even checked back with me to make sure the issues were resolved. This guy is professional.

We did not know of Foundation Group before Issac contacted us … listing an apartment property we owned in Yakima, WA. Issac and his team proved to be honest and professional in their efforts to bring the buyer and us together through the listing and analysis period. The result was a win-win for all parties, and we were able to move our investment to a property closer to home so we can continue to keep our hands in the day-to-day management of the property. We would recommend Foundation Group to other investors like ourselves.

I visit the property on a regular basis and many tenants know me by name. While on premise I ask how are we treating you? I most always get praise on how well the building is operated.

I have known Erich for several years and he helped me in a bunch of ways. He helped me acquire my last property and is always curious if I need anything. Recently, I changed management of my buildings to the Foundation Group and I owe it to his advice … and have seen my management expenses change for the better. Michael and John are available for me as property managers. Kate has been awesome for helping my transition. Thank you Foundation Group.

We live in The Villas townhome community in Woodinville, managed by the Foundation Group. Since taking over management, they have invested in automating everything from payments to maintenance requests to account profiles and more, allowing just about everything to be done via PC, Tablet or Mobile Phone. They are friendly, responsive, professional and, in these days of COVID, very safety conscious. Just a top notch team and exceptional property all the way around.

I just got done living in a unit managed by Foundation Group, specifically Michael, and I couldn’t have enjoyed it more. Maintenance gets done on time, questions answered quickly and accurately, anything that my roommate and I needed, it got done. If I ever need to rent again, I will be talking to Michael first.

I worked with Erich Bubbel at the Foundation Group … my experience has been really wonderful. He is not only very knowledgeable on multi-families, but Erich truly cares about my success and goes above and beyond to help, solve, add value, provide resources. I don’t normally write reviews, but taking the time to write this is a small way of saying thanks for all that Erich has helped me with. Would highly recommend!

The tenants know I am the owner and they have my cell phone number with instructions to call me if the management is not responsive. In 2 years, I have had 2 tenant calls that are not worth commenting on.

A few weeks ago I noticed water coming out from under my washer. I submitted a maintenance request and … soon after I received a call scheduling the day and time the service people would be at my door. I could not have been more impressed and grateful at the immediate attention I received from everyone involved and the clear concise communication. The service was excellent from start to finish! Thank you so much to the amazing Foundation Group and everyone who is a part of it!!

As residents for 10 years, we love living here and have experienced the service of multiple property management companies. Your company is the first to give us a gift, just because. Much appreciated.

Every time we have needed assistance with something, they have been right on it. And the people they send out are always friendly, professional and helpful.

I’m a former resident of The Villas in Woodinville, which is a stunning property. This review is specifically for the property management firm for their above and beyond service. Michael Kahn has done an excellent job at elevating the property and resident experience since the firm took over. I would highly recommend having the Foundation Group manage your property – they take excellent care of the property and residents!