Mission

Seattle Foundation ignites powerful, rewarding philanthropy to make Greater Seattle a stronger, more vibrant community for all. We strive to create a thriving region of shared prosperity, belonging, and justice, where all individuals and communities have equitable access and outcomes, regardless of race, place or identity.

Description

Seattle Foundation's Fund for Inclusive Recovery is a new pooled fund that will invest in Black, Indigenous, People of Color (BIPOC) leaders, organizations, and communities most impacted by the pandemic and systemic racism. The Fund will create a pathway to an inclusive recovery for the Greater Seattle region. Founded on the belief that we all do better when we all do better, these targeted resources will help our community emerge from this crisis as a stronger, more unified region.

The Fund for Inclusive Recovery will reflect and elevate the voices and perspectives of community members who are at the center of challenges and know the solutions best. We have worked with a Community Advisory Group of 22 local, mostly BIPOC leaders to identify investments that will build organizations' capacity. These investments will provide flexible, sustained funding for organizations, boost grassroots organizations and leaders, support or create a community-determined fund, and offer working capital for chronically under-resourced organizations. The Fund will also invest in efforts to further expand the civic participation of BIPOC communities and amplify their power.

A pooled fund provides an opportunity to coordinate investments, reduces application fatigue for grantees, and demonstrates that philanthropy is listening to community partners. Our goal is to raise $50 million for the Fund for Inclusive Recovery over the next five years. Smart, strategic philanthropy will lead to greater equity, opportunity, and vibrant communities for all.

With over $1 billion in assets Seattle Foundation partners with people who want to strategically invest- locally, nationally and internationally - to make our community a stronger and more vibrant for all. We activate the heart and science of philanthropy, providing deep community insights, powerful civic leadership, effective philanthropic advising and judicious stewardship of assets to enable people to be smart, effective philanthropists.

Learn more about Seattle Foundation's work with philanthropists and community partners at www.seattlefoundation.org.