Table of Contents

Valis II/Table of Contents

Genre(s)PlatformModesSingle player

Links

This guide is for the TurboGrafx-CD version. For the Japanese computer versions, see Mugen Senshi Valis II.

Valis II (ヴァリスII, Valis II ) is a platform game developed and released by Telenet Japan originally for TurboGrafx-CD. It is the second title in the Valis video game series. It is distinct from Mugen Senshi Valis II, a version of the game that was developed separately for popular Japanese home computers. Both were developed in parallel, but this version was release a few weeks before the computer version. An SD style remake was released on the Japanese Mega Drive as SD Valis and for the North American Genesis as Syd of Valis.

Like the other titles of the series, Valis II is a side-scrolling platform game. It requires the player to navigate through two-dimensional levels, battling enemies, jumping from ledge to ledge, and running until the player faces a boss at the end of each level. The Valis sword fires projectiles, and various items can drop from defeated enemies which change the nature of Yuko's weapon, or grant her limited power ups. Despite details of the gameplay varying between the versions, all versions do share several similar features with both Castlevania II: Simon's Quest, and Castlevania III: Dracula's Curse as well. A mobile remake added new stages and alternate costumes and weapons.

North American box art

North American title screen

Japanese title screen

Game screenshot

Story[edit | edit source]

Since Mugen Senshi Valis, Yuko returned to her life as an ordinary school girl, but recently she is plagued by nightmares, and once again monsters start invading the city. Vecanti is under siege by a new warlord, the cyborg Megas, who seeks to eradicate all remaining followers of Rogles. In their despair, Rogles’ followers try to snatch the Valis sword from Yuko, but soon she is also confronted with Megas, who is revealed as Rogles’ older brother. It is ultimately revealed that Yuko is really the daughter of Valia, but was sent to earth in fear of a later conflict for succession with her twin sister, princess Valna.

Table of Contents