Julieta Cardinali was born in Buenos Aires, Argentina, and first appeared on the boob tube before she even had boobs, at age thirteen. Don't worry though, once she matured she made sure to show her bueno pair-es. As a youngin, Julieta was part of the very successful kid’s program Xuxa throughout the ‘90s. At nineteen, she abandoned the kiddie stuff and found herself in a bunch of telenovelas like Montana rusa, otra vuelta, Como Pan caliente, and Ojitos verdes, until she landed the role of Celina Villanueva in Endless Summer. But just when it looked like we were going to have to deal with the endless bummer of not seeing her naked, it was on the big screen that her big talent was finally revealed. A Night with Sabrina Love (2000) is the story of a downtrodden dude who wins the chance for a night with his favorite porn star, only to face all sorts of cockblocking roadblocks on his way to claim the grand prize. Don't feel too bad for the guy, since he ends up getting to play an erotic Romeo-a to Julieta at one point in the film. Yes, in the movie's best scene he's having an adult beverage poolside when Julieta takes her top off and keeps talking to him as he chokes on his drink. How anyone can keep their mind on the course of conversation with those conversation pieces exposed is beyond Mr. Skin. We saw her in a bra and panties in the mountain bunker survival drama El Nominado (2003). Then Miss Cardinali did some TV like Soy tu Fan and Cain y Abel, while still doing movies like Reading by Justino (2013) and Lose del suelo (2015), before she gave us the last look at her body in White Coffin (2016). Unfortunately, while we do get a glimpse of her boobs, its while Julieta's character is dead and lying on an autopsy table. While she's been married to The Lake House (2006) director Alejandro Agresti, Los Piojos member Andres Ciro Martinez and Argentinean rock icon Andres Calamaro, Julieta has kept working rather than become a sexy housewife. These days Juliana is playing Diego's wife Claudia in the Argentinean soccer biopic Maradona: Blessed Dream (2021). We've already been blessed by some nudity, but we're still dreaming of more. Keeping Julieta clothed is a Cardinali sin!