I've read that Spider-Man Unlimited is the unofficial sequel to the 1990's Spider-Man series. I can, in a way, see that. There's a gap between the two series, but it can be done. I wonder, since the 1990's ending on a bit of an unresolved note, could Spider-Man Unlimited actually be a sequel series, or is it all just speculation?

More because Spider-Man Unlimited was on the same network (Fox) as the 90's Spider-Man just a few years after the 90's one ended. Storywise the 90's version follows the comics and the Unlimited version was completely different (AFAIK) from anything any Spider-Man incarnation had ever done.

Spider Man Unlimited takes place some time after Spider Man finds Mary Jane. At that point MJ knew Spidey was Peter and somehow Venom and Carnage became allied with each other.

The first episode features the same musical cues as the Spider Man series in the scenes that takes place before he went to the alternate dimension.

Mister Intensity

Not to mention in one of the eps (I forget which one), we are treated to a flashback to when Peter first came into contact with the Venom symbiote, and we are specifically shown the shuttle crash on the New York bridge which was only seen in the 90s Spidey show (not the comics).

Jon

Actually, there was a Wizard magazine that had a short blurb from the directors of Spider-Man Unlimited. I think I remember them saying that the show takes place some time in between the "Six Forgotten Warriors" arc and "The Secret Wars" arc. They also planned to have Spider-Man eventually find his way back to Earth by rebuilding the space shuttle.

It's pretty surprising, too, since that would mean the Mary Jane seen with Peter in the show's pilot is actualy the fake MJ.

Now THAT I was not expecting. I believe it could be after, but not in the middle. Very interesting... then the question is brought up... why not have Spider-Man keep that awsome suit when he got back to earth? Ah well...

Actually, I wasn't that far off. I just found the issue (Wizard #97, page 78).

"[Spider-Man] Unlimited" fits into continuity during the time Mary Jane and Peter were engaged [in Spider-Man, the Animated Series].

So I guess it was anytime after the last Mysterio episode (I can't remember the name of the episode,-it was where that crazy robot-woman kidnapped MJ), where Peter proposed to Mary Jane, but before "The Wedding". It would be interesting to see how Spider-Man lost the nono-tech costume.

Hmm....it wouldn't take that as complete gospel as the series seems to fit better if you place it almost directly after the Spider-Man TAS finale. This could be very well true though if after Peter found MJ (which Maddam Web promised at the end of the animated series) they decided to get married.

Geez.....there is so much stuff to cover between the two animated series that I wished someone at Marvel would finally decide to answer all of the questions that were left over from the end of TAS to the beginning of Unlimited.

-Joe!