An English name, Jasmine, comes from the Old French, Arabic, and Persian word ‘yasamin,’ referring to the jasmine flower. It means “gift from God.” This delicate and aromatic flower bloomed in the jasmine plant, a source of exotic fragrance in warmer climates. The scented oils derived from the flower were used to make perfume throughout the Persian Empire.

What Does Jasmine Mean?

Jasmine is an English feminine name from the Old Persian ‘yasamin,’ meaning ‘present’ or ‘offering.’ Yasmin is the name of the flowering plant of the olive genus. Exuding a heady and seductive scent that entices and delights the senses, this fragrant flower stands as a symbol of ‘elegance,’ ‘grace,’ and ‘love.’

Origin

Derived from Persian origin, Jasmine entered the English language through Old French. The traditional name invokes an image of a small star-shaped white flower that suggests innocence and purity, which blossomed with the floral name fashion in the West around 1900 and remained a popular name for girls for a long time. Jasmine burst into popularity after the release of Disney’s Aladdin in 1992 featuring Princess Jasmine. It propagates a garden of spelling variations like Jazmin, Yasmin, Yasmine, and Jessamine that may be trendier options for the modern generation.

Gender

Female

Pronunciation

Jazz-min

Jaz-min (English)

Zhas-Meen (French)

J(a)s-min

Jas-mine

Syllables

2 syllable

Length/Letter

7 letters

Name Variations/Spellings

Jasmine name variations have the youthful and refined appeal as the original name. Other Jasmine spellings that help to re-create the bond with nature and be thankful for God’s gracious gift are:

Name Origin Jazmaine American Yasmene Persian Jazmima American Ismenia Persian Jaslyn Persian Jasmina Persian Jasmin Finnish Yasmin Hebrew Jazmin Hungarian Jasmina Serbian Jasmina Slovene Yasmina Spanish Yasemin Turkish Gelsomina Italian Jasmina Bosnian

How Popular Is the Name Jasmine?

The Jasmine name has been used in the US since 1906, with over 2,53,682 girls given the name in the past 200 years. According to Social Security Administration data, Jasmine entered popular use in 1973. As a baby name, Jasmine became the most popular in 1989, when its usage went up by 142.24%. During this year, 9,549 baby girls were named Jasmine in the USA that year. From 1986 to 2008, the Jasmine baby name ranking was among the 100 most popular names for American girls, after which it started to wilt. After that, the Jasmine popularity ranking steadily declined over the years but managed to remain in the top 150. The most popular the name ever grew to was 0.323%; in 2020 alone, more than 12,000 girls were named Jasmine. The Jasmine name, or one of its variants, remains popular in the Arab World, Turkey, Brazil, Israel, Hungary, Belgium, and Argentina.

Interest in Jasmine – Worldwide

trends.embed.renderExploreWidget(“TIMESERIES”, {“comparisonItem”:[{“keyword”:”Jasmine”,”geo”:””,”time”:”2011-01-01 2021-10-07″}],”category”:0,”property”:””}, {“exploreQuery”:”date=2011-01-01%202021-10-07&q=Jasmine”,”guestPath”:”https://trends.google.com:443/trends/embed/”});

Jasmine’s name has recorded a search interest of over 40 over four years, reaching 100 in January 2014. The search value in the popularity index dipped to just 38 in November 2012.

Interest in Jasmine – US

trends.embed.renderExploreWidget(“TIMESERIES”, {“comparisonItem”:[{“keyword”:”Jasmine”,”geo”:”US”,”time”:”2011-01-01 2021-10-07″}],”category”:0,”property”:””}, {“exploreQuery”:”date=2011-01-01%202021-10-07&geo=US&q=Jasmine”,”guestPath”:”https://trends.google.com:443/trends/embed/”});

Over the last three years, Jasmine’s name has recorded consistent search popularity of over 50, reaching 100 in August 2013. The lowest search popularity on the popularity scale was recorded in November 2012 at 53.

Popularity of the name Jasmine

URL: https://www.ssa.gov/cgi-bin/babyname.cgi

Where Is the Name Most Searched?

Search trends of Jasmine Worldwide

trends.embed.renderExploreWidget(“GEO_MAP”, {“comparisonItem”:[{“keyword”:”Jasmine”,”geo”:””,”time”:”2011-01-01 2021-10-07″}],”category”:0,”property”:””}, {“exploreQuery”:”date=2011-01-01%202021-10-07&q=Jasmine”,”guestPath”:”https://trends.google.com:443/trends/embed/”});

Search trends reflect the highest interest for the name Jasmine in Singapore in the last ten years, followed by countries like United Kingdom, Australia, United States, and Ireland. As Arabic culture had a strong influence on the local Malay culture of Singapore through its religion, a name like Jasmine, with its meaning as a gift from the Almighty, makes it a popular name in Singapore.

Search trends of Jasmine in the US

trends.embed.renderExploreWidget(“GEO_MAP”, {“comparisonItem”:[{“keyword”:”Jasmine”,”geo”:”US”,”time”:”2011-01-01 2021-10-07″}],”category”:0,”property”:””}, {“exploreQuery”:”date=2011-01-01%202021-10-07&geo=US&q=Jasmine”,”guestPath”:”https://trends.google.com:443/trends/embed/”});

Among the sub-regions of the US, Hawaii leads in terms of the most searched city over the last ten years. Nevada, California, Louisiana, and Georgia make it to the top 5 cities of the US, where search trends for Jasmine have been recorded to be the highest.

Middle Names That Go With Jasmine

Choosing a middle name that sounds good and has meaning can be a true test to ensure you’ve found the perfect name. Some of the best double names with Jasmine that may create a nice-sounding first name-middle name pairing:

Willow Skyla Amelia Elsie Pearl Rosalie Alice Cora Bethany Olivia Delilah Annabella Amy Joanne Elizabeth Valentina Mirabelle Adele Adair Margaret Leona Hope Miranda Georgina

Famous People Named Jasmine

Great personalities create an indelible imprint on the minds of parents looking for a name that would set their children apart. Here are some of the famous people called Jasmine who may inspire your children to follow in their footsteps:

Celebrity Name Profession/Famous For Jasmine Tookes American Model Jasmine Cephas-Jones Actress, Singer Jasmine Thompson British Singer Jasmine Guy American Actress Jasmine Lennard British Model Jasmine Flore American Model Jasmine Trinca Italian Actress Jasmine Armfield British Actress Jasmine Flury Swiss Alpine Skier Jasmine Sokko Singaporean Electronic Music Singer Jasmine Denise Richards Canadian Actress and Singer Jasmine Murray American Singer

Similar Names & Last Names

Baby names like Jasmine bear the familiarity of the name with a different spelling. Family names for Jasmine can be passed down through generations and shared with close members of the family. Here are some of the other names for Jasmine that are modified options for new parents:

Other Baby Names Suitable Family Names Jazmyn Jones Jasmyn Miller Jazmin Williams Jazmyne Lopez Belle Johnson Heather Martin Chloe Wilson Selena Moore Autumn Harris Lavender Lewis Azalea Young

Names That Sound Like Jasmine

Names that rhyme with Jasmine can have a theme and a special connection with one another. Here are some names that have a pleasing phonetic relation with Jasmine:

Jaime Jemima Jana Jean Janina Jeanine Jania Jenna Joanne JaHanna Johanna Jasone Jin Jassma Janine Jas Jackson Jasonna Jennie Jasha

Sibling Names Related to Jasmine

Sibling names, matching in syllables and style, feel like a natural addition to the family, despite differences among the siblings. Here are some of the best sibling names that go with Jasmine and help strengthen the connection between them:

Sister Names for Jasmine Brother Names for Jasmine Jade Kevin Jessica Dominic Natalie Benjamin Isabella Adrian Destiny Dylan Lily Cameron Violet Nathan Liam Matthew Iris Caleb Elijah David Ava Brandon

Nicknames for Jasmine

Parents often fondly address their children by nicknames creatively chosen based on their distinct character traits. Here are some of the funniest, silly, and wacky nicknames for the name Jasmine that may add a touch of humor to their personalities.

Jazzmine Jaz Jasmin Jas Jessamine Jazzie Jam Jay Jabz JJ Jem Jess Taz Minnie Jazu Mazzy Jazeline Mina Jay-Z Chaz Jazelle Sassy

A nature-inspired girls’ name like Jasmine combines its unique tropical smell and pretty blossoms with the vivid imagery of a dainty girl to develop an appreciation for the beauty of nature. Despite its rise and fall in popularity in recent years, Jasmine continues to be a favorite name among parents whose aroma refuses to fade.

Sources/References