Reneé Rapp is going back to high school. The Sex Lives of College Girls actress will star in Paramount+’s movie adaptation of Tina Fey’s Mean Girls musical as Regina George, a role she previously played on Broadway.

Also dancing their way down the halls of North Shore High are Angourie Rice (Mare of Easttown) as Cady, originally played by Lindsay Lohan in the 2004 movie upon which the musical is based; Auli’i Cravalho (Moana) as Janis, originally played by Lizzy Caplan; and Jaquel Spivey (Broadway’s A Strange Loop) as Damien, originally played by Daniel Franzese. Rapp’s role was originally played by Rachel McAdams.

More from TVLine

The Game Recap: Tasha Mack and Colonel Go to War, Rick Fox and Tee Tee Return -- Grade the Season 2 Premiere

1923's Helen Mirren Previews 'Storm Clouds Gathering' Around the Duttons in New Yellowstone Prequel -- Watch

Star Trek: Picard Season 3: A Well-Aged Worf Reunites With His Old Captain Jean-Luc -- 2023 FIRST LOOK

Watch Rapp’s performance of “Someone Gets Hurt” from the 2020 Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade below:

Key characters yet to be cast include Gretchen and Karen, Regina’s fellow Plastics; Aaron, the object of Cady and Regina’s affections; and Ms. Norbury, who is absolutely not a drug pusher — despite what you might have read.

Lorne Michaels will produce with Fey, who wrote both the film and the book for the Broadway musical and is writing the movie’s script. The movie will feature music by Jeff Richmond and lyrics by Nell Benjamin. Samantha Jayne and Arturo Perez Jr. will direct.

Mean Girls… the musical… the movie is slated to premiere on Paramount+.

Your thoughts on the Mean Girls movie-musical’s cast thus far? Drop ’em in a comment below.

Best of TVLine

TV Roles Recast: 25+ Times a Show Changed Actors Midstream (and Why)

Stars Who Almost Played Other TV Roles — on Grey's Anatomy, NCIS, Lost, Gilmore Girls, Friends and Other Shows

TV Stars Almost Cast in Other Roles

Get more from TVLine.com: Follow us on Twitter, Facebook, Newsletter