Y ou may be back at school, but Disney has a way to help you hold on to the spirit of summer just a little while longer.

Tonight, Hongkongers can finally see the highly anticipated musical drama Camp Rock. With 8.9 million viewers tuning in for its premiere in US, Camp Rock is the second highest rated Disney Channel Original Movie behind High School Musical 2 and is set to take Asia by storm.

Starring the full set of teen heartthrobs The Jonas Brothers and future stars Demi Lovato, Alyson Stoner (Cheaper by the Dozen), Anna Maria Perez de Tagle (Hannah Montana), Meaghan Jette Martin and Jasmine Richards, Camp Rock tells a modern Cinderella tale of self-acceptance.

Mitchie (Demi Lovato) is an aspiring musician who accompanies her caterer mother to the prestigious - and hugely expensive - Camp Rock to help out in the kitchen and attend some classes. The camp is full of snobby girls, and Mitchie has to fabricate a web of lies to fit in.

Shane (Joe Jonas) is the arrogant lead singer of a pop band. To rid him of his bad attitude and reputation, his band force him to teach at Camp Rock. When he overhears Mitchie singing, Shane remembers why he fell in love with music and is determined to find the girl with the bewitching voice.

Camp Rock is set to a soundtrack of catchy reggae, hip hop and pop rock numbers and explores the gamut of teen struggles, from friendships, misunderstandings, lies and accusations, to mean girls, fights and romance.

First seen in Barney and Friends, Demi has appeared in various Disney Channel productions. But starring next to the hottest band in the US is beyond anything she ever expected. Overwhelmed by her lucky turn, she cried when listening to the playback of This is Me, her duet with Joe.

'I was so excited to hear his voice,' the 16-year-old says.

The movie was filmed at a remote location in Toronto, so the young cast had to find ways to get to know each other and amuse themselves.

'We had dance parties,' says Demi. 'We made up cheesy dances and [ran] around outside.'

But despite being in such close proximity to some of the most desirable teen stars, fans will be relieved that it was only friendship, not romance, that blossomed. When filming a romantic scene, the two stars' minds were on very different subjects to their characters.

'I was looking into Joe's eyeballs, what I thought was 'Wow, I really need to fix my hair,' says Demi.

And Joe was equally unmoved by his cute co-star: 'I was hungry. It was breakfast time and the catering smelled so good. I wanted some Canadian bacon!'

The popularity of the film means more episodes are sure to follow. Rumour has it that Camp Rock 2 is already in pre-production, but due to the tight schedules of Demi and The Jonas brothers, the principal cast are not expected to return to filming until next spring.

But to give you a glimpse of the sequel: 'bonus brother' Frankie Jonas, 8, is set to make a special appearance.

Camp Rock shows tonight at 7.30pm on the Disney Channel