Kenneth Brian Edmonds (born April 10, 1959), better known by his stage name Babyface, is an American singer, songwriter, and record producer. He has written and produced over 26 number-one R&B hits throughout his career and has won 13 Grammy Awards. He was ranked number 20 on NME’s 50 of The Greatest Producers Ever list.

Edmonds later met funk performer Bootsy Collins, who tagged him “Babyface” because of his youthful look. He also performed in the group Manchild (which had a 1977 hit “Especially for You” with band member Daryl Simmons) as a guitarist. He played keyboards and guitar in the light-funk and R&B group the Deele (which also included drummer Antonio “L.A.” Reid, with whom he would later form a successful writing and producing partnership). One of his first major credits as a songwriter for outside artists came when he wrote the tune “Slow Jam” for the R&B band Midnight Star in 1983. The tune was on Midnight Star’s 1983 double-platinum No Parking on the Dance Floor album. Babyface remained in the Deele until 1988, when both he and Reid left the group.

His album Playlist consists of eight cover songs and two original works. It was released on September 18, 2007. It was the first album on the newly re-launched Mercury Records label.

On February 4, 2014, he released a Grammy Award-winning duet album with Toni Braxton titled Love, Marriage & Divorce on Motown Records.

Kenneth Edmonds was born on April 10, 1959, in Indianapolis, Indiana, to Marvin and Barbara Edmonds. Barbara was a pharmaceutical plant manager. Edmonds, who is the fifth of six brothers (including future After 7 band members Melvin and Kevon Edmonds, the latter of whom went on to have a modestly successful solo career), attended North Central High School in Indianapolis, Indiana, and as a shy youth, wrote songs to express his emotions. When he was in eighth grade, Edmonds’s father died of lung cancer, leaving his mother to raise her sons alone. At this stage, Edmonds became determined to have a career in music and is a ten-time Grammy Award-winning American R&B musician, singer–songwriter and record producer. –Wikipedia

1 Every Time I Close My Eyes (feat. Mariah Carey & Kenny G) 2 When Can I See You 3 It’s No Crime 4 This Is for the Lover in You (feat. LL Cool J, Howard Hewett, Jody Watley & Jeffrey Daniel) 5 Whip Appeal 6 Someone to Love (with Jon B.) 7 And Our Feelings 8 Tender Lover 9 Never Keeping Secrets 10 Give U My Heart (with Toni Braxton) 11 My Kinda Girl 12 There She Goes 13 Slow Jams (with Quincy Jones feat. Tamia, Portrait & Barry White) 14 For the Cool in You 15 What If 16 Love Saw It (with Karyn White) 17 Fire and Rain 18 Where Is My Love? (with El DeBarge) 19 Mary Mack 20 Lovers

Related articles

‘Face Time: Manchild, “Funky Situation” (popdose.com)