1635: The Papal Stakes Author Eric FlintCo-Author Charles GannonLanguage EnglishSeries 1632 seriesGenre(s) Alternate HistoryPublisher BaenPublication date October 2, 2012Preceded by 1636: The Kremlin GamesFollowed by 1635: Music and Murder

1635: The Papal Stakes is a novel in the 1632 series, written by Eric Flint and Charles Gannon, published on October 2, 2012.[1] It is the third novel in the Southern European thread, which began with 1634: The Galileo Affair.

The book is a direct sequel to 1635: The Cannon Law. It begins in May 1635, a few weeks after the end of The Cannon Law, and ends in early August of that year. It deals with the attempt to rescue Frank and Giovanna Stone, and the attempt to get Pope Urban VIII to safety.[1]

Publisher's description[]

It’s springtime in the Eternal City, 1635. But it’s no Roman holiday for uptimer Frank Stone and his pregnant downtime wife, Giovanna Marcoli. They're in the clutches of would-be Pope Cardinal Borgia, with the real Pope–Urban VII –on the run with the renegade embassy of uptime Ambassador Sharon Nichols and her swashbuckling downtime husband, Ruy Sanchez de Casador y Ortiz. Up to their necks in papal assassins, power politics, murder, and mayhem, the uptimers and their spouses need help and they need it quickly.

Special rescue teams–including Harry Lefferts and his infamous Wrecking Crew–converge on Rome to extract Frank and Gia. And an uptime airplane is on its way to spirit the Pope to safety before Borja’s assassins can find him. It seems that everything is going to work out just fine in sunny Italy.

Until, that is, everything goes wrong. Now, whether they are prisoners in Rome or renegades protecting a pope on the run, it’s up to the rough and ready can-do attitude of Grantville natives to once again escape the clutches of aristocratic skullduggery and ring in freedom for a war-torn land.

Notes[]

Despite its place in the series' publication history, it takes place prior to the events in 1636: The Saxon Uprising and "Four Days on the Danube" in Ring of Fire III.

There appear to be continuity conflicts between this novel and "This'll Be the Day..." in Ring of Fire II, as "This'll Be the Day..." takes place around August 7, 1635. Presumably, The Papal Stakes supersedes "This'll Be the Day..." as canon.

The next book centering on the Catholic Church is 1636: The Vatican Sanction.