Sometimes writers (perhaps unwittingly) make their works somewhat autobiographical. They cannot completely free themselves from their life experience and transfer it to their work. These can be just observations, thoughts, questions, doubts, etc. However, John Galsworthy went even further! He told his love story in The Forsyte Saga! Meanwhile, by the standards of that time, it was quite scandalous.

The Forsyte saga was recognized as the best English drama of the 20th century. John Galsworthy received the highest award – the Nobel Prize. The novel turned out to be very lively – we empathize with the heroes, follow the development of relationships in a large family, alternately condemn them, visit the club, and enjoy horse races with them! The latter are still popular in England, although with the best Gamblorium betting sites, wagering has become even more convenient.

John Galsworthy’s Real Life Love Triangle

The main love of John Galsworthy’s life was Ada Cooper. She was the illegitimate daughter of Anne Pearson. The Pearson family was not part of high society – a mother with two illegitimate children (Ada had a brother) was naturally considered unsuitable company for respectable people. So, from an early age, the girl felt like an outcast, which later affected her character. It is unlikely that there was a warm relationship between mother and daughter. When Ada grew up, Anne did everything to make it more profitable to marry her off. Feeling constant pressure from her mother, in 1891, Ada quickly married Arthur Galsworthy, the cousin of the famous writer.

John Galsworthy met Ada Pearson Cooper (Irene Forsyte) when she married his cousin Arthur (Soames Forsyte). As you might guess, Ada’s marriage was not happy – like her whole life before. The marriage was concluded hastily, out of convenience, and, accordingly, was unhappy. But the handsome brother of boring Arthur – the future writer John Galsworthy – became interested in Ada. This sympathy turned out to be mutual.

But after a short time, Ada realized the marriage was a tragic mistake. She was unhappy! Being strangers, they cannot understand or love each other with Arthur. Meanwhile, Galsworthy felt compassion for the unfortunate girl. Besides, he was attracting Ada with his rich literary imagination. Thus, they began to communicate.

Ada & John: Challenge to Society

After John’s father died, they made their relationship public. They went to Manaton together for the first time as a married couple. By that time, Ada’s husband, Major Galsworthy, had begun divorce proceedings, during which the lovers went abroad. Galsworthy described all this in his novel. We all remember that Jolyon started to live openly with Irene to achieve a divorce from Soames. They get a divorce, get married safely, and live happily ever after. However, in life events unfolded somewhat differently.

Naturally, it was hard for Ada to decide on such a blatant challenge to public morality! She had suffered all her life from the consequences of her illegal origins. She was quite aware of contempt, pity, and ridicule. But she saw in Galsworthy a handsome, noble, honest, fair, intelligent, and kind person who could protect her. They considered their love not forbidden, but sublime, poetic, and eternal.

Would Galsworthy Be a Great Writer Without Ada?

Of course, before meeting Ada, John Galsworthy already understood that he had some kind of literary talent. Nevertheless, it was she who told him that he should write! It was his love for Ada that pushed the future writer to literature. He quit his unloved legal service and devoted himself to creativity.

Indeed, Ada had the gift of a muse. She strongly believed in the success of her beloved. His first attempts at writing were rather weak. But Ada knew how to awaken enthusiasm and self-confidence. John Galsworthy dedicated his most famous novel – The Forsyte Saga – to Ada in gratitude for her support.

Ada encouraged her husband’s literary activities! But in return, she demanded complete submission to her desires and needs. She did not let him go from her and wanted to be the only center of his life. Galsworthy considered her to be true perfection and more of a goddess than just a woman. He adored her and could not refuse her anything.

After the death of her husband, Ada went into a rage. It seems that any adequate person will find such a reaction to the death of a loved one rather strange. Besides, one can hardly imagine Irene in such a disgusting situation. Nevertheless, Ada felt betrayed and hurt! She was so distraught with grief that she exterminated John’s love letters addressed to her! She even almost shot his horses. Fortunately, at the last moment, the writer’s nephew prevented it.

How Did John Galsworthy’s Family Life Turn Out?

John and Ada lived together until his death. However, their life was not entirely carefree. In the Forsyte Saga, Jolyon has several children. The Galsworthy family had none. Was this something of a tragedy for them? This is not known. In real life, Ada was far from the fragile Irene. She was strong and enjoyed many sports. Some friends described her as a fairly muscular woman.

After 6 years of legal marriage with Ada, the writer met 19-year-old dancer Margaret Morris. Ada mobilized all her strength, and the love affair ended as soon as it began. Soon the writer became seriously ill. The disease progressed quickly and he was not even able to go to Sweden to receive the Nobel Prize.

Towards the end of his life, he suffered greatly but did not lose heart and continued to admire Ada. He died of a brain tumor at the age of 65. Ada outlived him for many years and died in 1956 at the age of 91. The Forsyte Saga is a masterpiece that continues to remain timeless. It resonates with everyone who reads it. Perhaps, if Galsworthy had not met Ada, the literary world would have been poorer by one brilliant work!