Information kindly provided by Diane Leggett, Local Studies Librarian at North Shields Central Library.

“An illustration from the trades directory of 1899….William Arthur Wilkinson must have had a very thriving business to have taken a full page to inform the whole of the North East of his mineral water manufacturing factory and wine and spirits trade, yet he came to North Shields from Gateshead in 1866 as a young hairdresser. It was not long, however, before he had given that up to pursue his very successful occupation. The business expanded and in 1898 in the Shields Daily News he was advertising his new improved premises at the corner of King Street and George Street. At this time he was living with his wife, Emma and large family at Phoenix House, King Street just opposite the factory. In 1900 tragedy struck the family and the factory when his son, also William Arthur, was injured by an explosion which shattered glass bottles. As a result he lost and eye as well as being badly cut around the face and neck. Wilkinson’s business would have been forgotten long ago by the average North Shields citizen, except for one incident and that ensures that almost everyone over the age of 50 brought up in North Shields remembers it…”

Extract from an article written in 1991 to mark the 50th Anniversary of the bombing. By Eric Hollerton

According to directories Wilkinson seems to have been an Ale and Porter merchant and mineral water manufacturer since 1879 or so – in Coach Lane, North Shields.

He is listed before that as a Gateshead Hairdresser and in 1875-76 Ward’s directory: “Wilkinson, Wm Arthur – soda water manufacturer, Elder’s Quay and hair dresser 48 Clive Street.”

From 1886 and 1890 directories he is at 51 King Street and by 1895 he has large adverts and is listed at King Street and George Street.

“Special Notice: The new wine and spirit stores, King Street Hall (Corner of King Street and George Street) North Shields are now open with a choice selection of very old Brandies, Whiskies, Wines, Rum, Clarets, etc. Beef and malt wines for invalids a speciality. Aerated waters of the best quality. Ales and Stout of unsurpassed quality. A choice selection of the finest brands of Cigars, Cigarettes and Tobaccos. Try our celebrated teas. “Smila” the new Temperance Drink (registered). W A Wilkinson, Proprietor – Advert.”

Shields Daily News of 20th June 1898 page 3 col 3

There was a piece in the Shields Daily News in September 1884 about employees of W A Wilkinson, mineral water manufacturers, annual excursion – but it didn’t say anything more than they went to London on a bus trip.