Former Wednesfield Club Chairman dies, aged 78

It is with great sadness that Wednesfield announces the death of former Club Chairman Arthur Wilkinson. Arthur died of complications surrounding pneumonia at New Cross Hospital on Sunday 14th June following a long battle with Alzheimer's disease, he was 78.

Arthur was Club Chairman serving two periods 1984 -1989 and 1991-1995. He was a fierce defender and strong fan of the club and became a reliable and approachable administrator.

At the start of 1991 the club was in dire trouble, facing falling membership and having few people willing to help with the day to day running of the club. Arthur stepped in and took the chair for his second period guiding the club to calmer waters before stepping down in 1995.

In 2000 Arthur was awarded the club's "Lifetime Membership", becoming only the third recipient of the honour, joining Paul Bodley and Roger Ellis - something he accepted with pride and humility.

During his life Arthur had served with distinction in the Royal Air Force during the late forties and early fifties, reaching the rank of Flight Sergeant before retiring in 1956.

In 1964, his love of the R.A.F led him to join the Wednesfield Squadron of the Air Training Corp, serving as Wing Commander until his retirement in 1986.

Wednesfield Chief Executive Paul Bodley paid the following tribute:

"Arthur was a true gentleman and good friend to many people. When he joined the club committee as Chairman in 1985, he brought a new professionalism and energy to the role, leading the club through some of its most successful years.

If I ever needed advice I went to Arthur. If I needed reassurance I went to Arthur. Even in later years I would ring him to discuss club business and ask for his opinion, which was always fair and objective. Wednesfield Aces has lost one of its most loyal and gracious members - a champion amongst champions."

Arthur leaves one Lynn who is married to Aces legend Alan Guest and two grandsons; Craig, a former Under 12 British Champion and Carl, a former Under 12 finalist, all of whom he was immensely proud.

The Funeral will take place at Bushbury Crematorium, Underhill Lane, Wolverhampton, on Wednesday 24th June at 4pm. Family flowers only. Donations to the Air Training Corps and The Alzheimer's Society.