We storm around Iowa on J&P Cycles Street Bob

“If you build it…”

Anamosa, Iowa, might not be the first town that pops into a motorcyclist’s mind. But much like Ray Kinsella carving a baseball diamond out of his cornfield, John Parham chased his own dreams in the cornfields of Iowa, and with his vision and dogged determination he turned his sleepy little hometown of Anamosa into a diamond of a destination for motorcycle enthusiasts. Parham went from hustling motorcycle parts and accessories out of his van at small regional events like the Dickeyville Hill Climb to building the motorcycle aftermarket empire known as J&P Cycles. He and his wife Jill also amassed one of the most incredible collections of motorcycles and memorabilia around, their collective passion now showcased in Anamosa’s The National Motorcycle Museum. Parham built it, and now they come.

Walk inside The National Motorcycle Museum and be prepared for an assault on the senses. Just inside the doors a life-sized replica of Joe Petrali’s streamlined EL Knucklehead looks primed to relive the day it set a land speed record of 136.183 mph in 1937. Next to it is “The Last Known Surviving Harley-Davidson Motorcycle Truck” in showroom condition, a vehicle I didn’t even know existed until I saw it with my own two eyes. To the left of these hundreds of and black and white photographs immortalize moments of motorcycle history. In the other direction there’s a maze of t-shirts and knick-knacks below posters of easy riding Peter Fonda and vintage Davenport dirt track fliers in the gift shop. Boundless visual stimulation and you’re not even in the museum yet.

On the day I stopped in there were 497 motorcycles on display according to museum Director Bill Barber. Artwork, signs, racing leathers, wind-up and cast iron toys, memorabilia, historic bicycles and themed collections literally cover the place from floor to ceiling. Your eyes don’t know where to look first. There were tributes to childhood heroes like Evel Knievel complete with a replica XR750 and a set of his leathers, toys, a pinball machine, and posters and photos signed by the daredevil himself. Nearby sat Steve McQueen’s 1947 Indian Chief chopper, the “King of Cool’s” scoot sporting a sweet girder fork that’s extended four inches, a left hand throttle, and a right hand tank shift with a foot clutch. Said to be one of McQueen’s favorite bikes to ride when he wanted to “escape from the world,” it was easy to envision McQueen flogging this weathered and worn chopper across the Mojave Desert as he made a beeline out of Hollywood.

Southern California’s “Kustom Kulture” was well represented, from Ed “Big Daddy” Roth’s super-groovy V6-powered trike called Asphalt Angel to the engraved helmet VonDutch always wore. Merkels are some of the most highly collectible motorcycles around and The National Motorcycle Museum has more than its share, including what’s said to be the “most original 1911 Flying Merkel Board Tracker” in the world, a prized possession from the E.J. Cole collection. Though Joseph Merkel only made motorcycles for 15 years, his engineering feats were way ahead of its time. According to the museum “Merkel experimented with self-starting and rear suspension almost 50 years before some American makers adopted it.” And speaking of iconic motorcycles. I lucked out the day I visited because they’d just uncrated a beautiful 1948 Vincent HRD and rolled it out on the floor. Turns out this Vincent was the world famous Rollie Free Bike, aka the “Bathing Suit Bike.” The picture of Free stretched out like Superman on its tank wearing only swimming trunks while he’s setting a land speed record on the Bonneville Salt Flats is one of the most famous motorcycle photos ever. The museum’s director said this motorcycle surprisingly had never been displayed in a museum until its stint in Anamosa. Being so close to this irreplaceable piece of motorcycling history was an honor indeed.

The Parhams’ love of motorcycles runs so deep they’ve even constructed a 50-foot-long board track exhibit inside The National Motorcycle Museum based on one built in Cincinnati, Ohio, in 1910. Spread around the track are at least a dozen vintage board trackers, from a 1908 Indian Single “Torpedo Tank” racer to a 1921 Harley-Davidson tracker. A biplane and triplane are suspended above the track. From the dimensions of the boards to the bank of the turn, the display captures the spirit of board track racing with its exhibit.

They’ve also captured the spirit of “picking” motorcycles thanks to a new “Barn Find” exhibit. From a rusted-out Indian Motorcycle frame to old bicycle wheels missing a spoke or two to push scooters, the exhibit has the feel of a dusty old barn. Finding a rusty Knucklehead or a Henderson Four tucked away in an old shed or barn has become a cultural phenomenon thanks to the success of the show American Pickers on the History Channel.

Which leads to another great thing about The National Motorcycle Museum. You never know who you’re going to bump into there. The place has known to attract a celebrity or two and is frequented by a veritable “Who’s Who” of the motorcycle industry. The day we were there who comes strolling in but Frank Fritz and Dave Ohrt. Turns out Frank grew up in nearby Davenport, Iowa, and he and the Parhams go way back.

“I’ve been friends with John and Jill for around 30 years. Probably maybe closer to 35 years I’ve known John. We’ve (American Pickers) sold him a lot of stuff for the museum. I’ve sold him motorcycles, I’ve bought motorcycles off him. I bought a 1968 Servi-Car from him from Anamosa that was an actual police Servi-Car here just before he passed away,” said Frank.

“I was with John when he was at the other place. I mean John started out in a van at the Dickeyville Hill Climb selling out of the back of his truck. That’s how John started out, just a regular guy. The thing about John was that he was an even-keeled guy, he was straight up the whole time. You never heard any bad things from him,” he added.

Before leaving, Frank and Dave climbed into the Barn Find exhibit for a quick photo op in a quintessential Pickers setting. It was a great way to wrap up my first visit to The National Motorcycle Museum. Before leaving I spoke with a visitor I’d seen walking around the museum for hours who got to meet Frank and shot a quick selfie together. He said that between seeing all of the great motorcycles and memorabilia in the museum and meeting the American Pickers star “it was the greatest day ever.” The museum can impact people in that way.

But that’s not the only place for motorcyclists to visit in Anamosa. Just up U.S. Highway 151 is the original J&P Cycles Retail Center. This place is living history, home to John and Jill’s ambitions. It’s seen its share of ups and downs thanks to corporate buyouts and restructuring but still forges on with Midwestern resiliency. And it’s still a full-fledged store. Need new levers? Exhaust? Intake? Take your pick, they’ve got a wide selection on-hand. The Anamosa J&P store also hosts one of the biggest motorcycle rallies in Iowa. Once known as J&P’s Open House, it’s now called the Iowa Rally. It’s a great way for J&P to give back to the riders that support them and the surrounding community. From a vintage bike show to live music to a long list of vendors, it’s a weekend of Iowa-style fun. Anamosa will host this year’s Iowa Rally June 23-24.

Inside the J&P Retail Center in Anamosa are a handful of custom motorcycles including a rowdy-looking 2014 Street Bob. I’d heard there’s some great riding in these parts and was eager to test the validity of these claims. To my good fortune J&P hooked me up with their rockin’ Dyna and let me run wild across the Iowa countryside.

While Harley’s Street Bob is already a real runner, J&P went next level with this one. I’m hung out trying grip the 12-inch Ness Modular Drag Bars. The Vance & Hines Super Radius pipes are providing a heart-pounding beat. An RSD intake is force-feeding the Big Twin gobs of fresh Iowa air while RSD Black Ops got my “free-wheels burnin’.” A stout set of Legend Air Shocks are primed to battle anything the road throws at me. Burly MX Pegs with a bite like a steel trap sit underfoot, and between the mid-controls, custom La Pera solo seat, and high bars I’m curled up in the crouching tiger position ready to rip.

Red barns splash the Iowa landscape with dabs of color like strokes from Grant Wood’s paintbrush as I hustle through the heart of “American Gothic.” Silos stand sentinel above the fields and pockets of air are filled with the rich smell of cow manure that makes these fields so fertile. Remember us talking about the Field of Dreams earlier? Turns out the location where they shot the movie is only about 40 miles from Anamosa and is still a popular tourist destination so that’s where I point the Street Bob.

In the distance clouds stack higher and higher as thunderheads build to the north. It’s the only storm in a 100-mile radius so of course I chart a course right for it. The horizon below it is an imposing purple, its boundaries hovering just outside Dyersville. Close to town the roads are slick from its recent passing but luckily it’s headed away from me. I pass below the fringe and catch a few wayward drops on my visor but I ride undeterred, eager to find the Field of Dreams.

Carved out of a cornfield, the baseball diamond’s red dirt infield and manicured green outfield looks exactly the way I remember from the movie. Ray Kinsella’s not around but a young family visiting from Australia is batting balls on the fabled field, the father pitching as his two young boys took turns swinging. Thoughts of slinging the Street Bob around the bases danced in my head, idle ideas spawned by the wicked disposition of the Dyna. I blame my temptation on my buddy Pat who used to work at J&P for building this bike that inspires wanton thoughts. Reason wins the day, as does the thought of spending the night in the local hoosegow. Joking aside, this is sacred ground for movie buffs, the Field of Dream themes of “family ties, faith, second chances, and the special relationship between baseball and the American people” striking chords of commonality and creating a dedicated fan base like few other movies have. Almost 30 years after they built it, people still come.

Leaving the field sun rays slant through the clouds, beacons of white and blue light streaming across the grey asphalt before me. The ethereal display makes me wonder if Shoeless Joe Jackson and other ghosts do indeed call these corn fields home. Wouldn’t surprise me if the guttural howl from the Vance & Hines Super Radius pipes could indeed wake the dead. I unleash another round of sonic waves with an emphatic twist of the throttle.

While the city of Dubuque was full of promise with its scenic location on the Mississippi River, ripping up rural roads enticed me more so I charted a course south on U.S. Route 52. The sun was slowly getting lower in the sky as it made its way westward. The further south I rode the more vegetation thickens and trees dot the landscape instead of corn stalks. The road begins to rise and roll as I skirt the Mighty Mississippi. To my delight, traffic is few and far between on this scenic stretch as straight lines give way to fast sweepers and tight turns. The J&P Street Bob is feasting on these roads like Thanksgiving dinner, gobbling them up like someone who hasn’t eaten in a week. Though the road is fast and flowing, there’s some serious kidney-punching bumps on this stretch. Every time I square one up I thank J&P for throwing on a set of Legends air shocks as they dutifully soften the blows and keep the Bob from getting out of sorts.

As the sun sets I roll into sleepy Sabula, known as landlocked Iowa’s only island town. But it wasn’t always an island. The town is perched on a patch of land surrounded by the Mississippi, a result of the Army Corps of Engineers constructing a lock and dam system back in the 1930s. Crossing over the two-way bridge to Savanna, Illinois, trees spring out of swampy waters. An old truss bridge covers the final stretch over the Mississippi, the Street Bob doing an uneasy dance over the steel grates of the antiquated Savanna-Sabula Bridge.

I pull into town just in time to catch them closing the doors of the Iron Horse Social Club. Turns out on slow nights they close up shop early and everybody migrates to the pub on the corner. But once Iron Horse Social Club owner Jerry Genbreau heard I had come all the way from Oregon to visit his establishment he graciously turned the lights back up and gave me free rein to check out the place.

Any place that has an old coffin-tanked Panhead sitting just inside its doors is good in my book. A giant Harley-Davidson neon sign cast an orange and red glow throughout the place. A menagerie of memorabilia fills the bowels of the old brick building, from a vintage gas pump to a cow skull and stuffed coyote to a collection of bras slung over a big beam overhead. But the true beauty of the bar is its collection of vintage motorcycles, from a 1929 Harley-Davidson OHV Peashooter to a specialized Crocker Speedway bike to Indian board trackers and flat track racers. Adding to the nostalgia are vintage signs, photographs, posters and old race jerseys. The third floor of the bar has been converted into a biker’s chapel complete with stain glass windows, pews, an altar, and a couple of rusted out motorcycles to round out the motif. Eccentric and funky, it’s easy to see why the Iron Horse Social Club has established itself as a must-see biker bar. Genbreau’s a gracious host, first offering to feed me and then offering me a room for the night. But I had an early rendezvous in Anamosa the next morning so back on the road I went.

A sliver of moon hung in the sky as the heat of the day gave way to the coolness of the night. Black gnats made kamikaze flights toward my headlights by the hundreds. Skies left and right of the road lit up in the distance, streaks of lightning flashing against the outline of intimidating black thunderheads. At times the corn stalks are so high and close to the road it feels like I’m in a dark tunnel. The Street Bob’s Harley Daymaker headlight throws out a strong beam and lights up a raccoon making a mad dash ahead of me. Iowa living must be treating these raccoons right because they’re some of the biggest I’ve seen. Cars pass by in the other direction every so often but for the most part I ride alone. In Maquoketa I finally find signs of civilization at the bowling alley, the epicenter of town on a Monday night because it seemed like half its residents were parked outside Timber Lanes. About 10 miles outside Anamosa the lightning is closer and the roads are slick with rain but thankfully the storm surrounds but never engulfs me.