Cambridge High School, Badichowdi, Hyderabad has announced an appointment notice for the engagement of various teachers. This job page offers complete info on teaching job vacancies. Read this page and apply accordingly.

Employer: Cambridge High School

Address: Badichowdi, Hyderabad Telangana, India

Email: Not mentioned in the advertisement

URL:Not Provided

Phone: 6301946275

Skills: Not mentioned in the advertisement

Experience: Not mentioned in the advertisement

Education: Not mentioned in the advertisement

Job Location: Hyderabad (View Jobs in Hyderabad Jobs in Telangana)

Want to get instant alerts about new jobs? Join us on Facebook

Cambridge High School, Badichowdi, Hyderabad is hiring various teachers

Trained, dynamic, motivated, and qualified candidates are being sought by Cambridge High School, Badichowdi, Hyderabad for the appointment in the following positions.

Job profile:

1. Teachers of English, Physics, and biology for the classes VIII-X

2. Teachers of English, Social, and Science for classes I-V

3. Pre-Primary Teachers

4. Nursery Teachers

5. Physical Education Teacher

Candidates should apply for the above job vacancies immediately.

The school is inviting lady teachers only.

No detailed qualifications and experience required for the said vacancies are mentioned in the advertisement.

Contact details:

Cambridge High School,

Badichowdi, Hyderabad

Telangana, India

Interested candidates are invited to attend the walk-in interview at the school premises along with an updated resume.

The advertisement has been issued on 23.06.2023 but no specific date of the interview is mentioned in the advertisement.

http://103.241.136.50/epaper/DC/HYD/510X798/2023-06-23/b_images/HYD_2023-06-23_maip2_9.jpg

About Employer

Cambridge High School, Badichowdi, Hyderabad is a reputed school.

Find more jobs: Teaching Jobs in India

Want to get instant alerts about new jobs? Join us on Facebook

Related Jobs

Teaching Job Vacancies in Cambridge High School, Saidabad, Hyderabad Employment of Teachers

Advertisement for the recruitment of various teachers has been published by the Cambridge High School, Saidabad, Hyderabad. Candidates should read this page to obtain complete details of the appointment notice.

School In-Charge & Teachers Recruitment in Midas High School, Nampally, Hyderabad

Midas High School, Nampally, Hyderabad has published an appointment notice for the employment of various Teachers and the School In-charge. Candidates should apply for the teaching vacancies immediately.

Sita Grammar School, Malerkotla CBSE School Recruitment PGT, TGT Teachers job vacancy

Sita Grammar School, Malerkotla affiliated to Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi has advertised for various teaching job vacancies, apply not later than 28.06.2023

D.A.V. Collegiate Senior Secondary School, Jalandhar recruitment of Lecturers job Vacancies

D.A.V. Collegiate Senior Secondary School, Jalandhar has issued an advertisement dated 24.06.2023 for the recruitment of Lecturers on a temporary/ ad-hoc basis in Punjab. Get all details on this page and apply within 15 days

Sanskriti KMV School, Jalandhar is looking for Senior Coordinator Job vacancies

Sanskriti KMV School, Jalandhar affiliated to Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi is looking for Talented, Qualified, eligible and experienced candidates for Non Teaching Staffs job vacancies, apply immediately

Engagement of Teachers in St. Little Theresa's High School, Secunderabad Teaching Job Vacancies

An employment notice has been declared by St. Little Theresa's High School, Secunderabad for the recruitment of various teachers as written hereunder. Candidates should apply for the appointment immediately.

Kotha Yellalah High School, Secunderabad Teaching Job Vacancies Recruitment of Teachers

Kotha Yellalah High School, Secunderabad has announced an appointment notice for the employment of various teachers as mentioned on this job page. Candidate should apply for the engagement immediately.

St. Maaz High School, Saidabad, Hyderabad Teaching Job Vacancies

St. Maaz High School, Saidabad, Hyderabad has announced a recruitment notice for the engagement of various teachers. Candidates should apply for employment immediately as per the info furnished hereunder.

CBSE Board Pallavi International School, Chintal, Hyderabad Teachers Walk-in-Interview

Pallavi International School, Chintal, Hyderabad affiliated with the Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi has advertised a recruitment notice for the appointment of various teachers. Candidates should attend the interview for the published teaching job vacancies.

Leela Concept School, Moti Nagar, Hyderabad Engagement of Teachers

Leela Concept School, Moti Nagar, Hyderabad has issued an appointment notice for the recruitment of various teachers as mentioned hereunder. Candidates should apply for the said teaching job vacancies immediately.

School In-Charge & Teachers Recruitment in Midas High School, Nampally, Hyderabad

Midas High School, Nampally, Hyderabad has published an appointment notice for the employment of various Teachers and the School In-charge. Candidates should apply for the teaching vacancies immediately.

Teaching Job Vacancies in Cambridge High School, Saidabad, Hyderabad Employment of Teachers

Advertisement for the recruitment of various teachers has been published by the Cambridge High School, Saidabad, Hyderabad. Candidates should read this page to obtain complete details of the appointment notice.