☰ DR.DAVARE UPS AIDED, BADICHOWDI

About DR.DAVARE UPS AIDED, BADICHOWDI

DR.DAVARE UPS AIDED, BADICHOWDI was established in 1940 and it is managed by the Pvt. Aided. It is located in Urban area. It is located in NAMPALLY block of HYDERABAD district of Telangana. The school consists of Grades from 1 to 7. The school is Co-educational and it doesn't have an attached pre-primary section. The school is Not Applicable in nature and is not using school building as a shift-school. Marathi is the medium of instructions in this school. This school is approachable by all weather road. In this school academic session starts in April.

The school has Private building. It has got 10 classrooms for instructional purposes. All the classrooms are in good condition. It has 2 other rooms for non-teaching activities. The school has a separate room for Head master/Teacher. The school has Pucca boundary wall. The school has have electric connection. The source of Drinking Water in the school is Tap Water and it is functional. The school has 4 boys toilet and it is functional. and 4 girls toilet and it is functional. The school has a playground. The school has a library and has 465 books in its library. The school does not need ramp for disabled children to access classrooms. The school has 4 computers for teaching and learning purposes and all are functional. The school is not having a computer aided learning lab. The school is Provided but not Prepared in School Premises providing mid-day meal.

✓ Instruction Medium: Marathi

✓ Male Teachers: 0

✓ Pre Primary Sectin Avilable: No

✓ Board for Class 10th Others

✓ School Type: Co-educational

✓ Classes: From Class 1 to Class 7

✓ Female Teacher: 0

✓ Pre Primary Teachers: 0

✓ Board for Class 10+2 Others

✓ Meal Provided but not Prepared in School Premises

✓ Establishment: 1940

✓ School Area: Urban

✓ School Shifted to New Place: No

✓ Head Teachers: 0

✓ Head Teacher:

✓ Is School Residential: No

✓ Residential Type: Not Applicable

✓ Total Teachers: 0

✓ Contract Teachers: 0

✓ Management: Pvt. Aided