☰ CAMBRIDGE PRIMARY SCHOOL,, BADICHOWDI

About CAMBRIDGE PRIMARY SCHOOL,, BADICHOWDI

CAMBRIDGE PRIMARY SCHOOL,, BADICHOWDI was established in 1977 and it is managed by the Pvt. Unaided. It is located in Urban area. It is located in HIMAYATNAGAR block of HYDERABAD district of Telangana. The school consists of Grades from 1 to 5. The school is Co-educational and it doesn't have an attached pre-primary section. The school is Not Applicable in nature and is not using school building as a shift-school. English is the medium of instructions in this school. This school is approachable by all weather road. In this school academic session starts in April.

The school has Rented building. It has got 10 classrooms for instructional purposes. All the classrooms are in good condition. It has 2 other rooms for non-teaching activities. The school has a separate room for Head master/Teacher. The school has Pucca boundary wall. The school has have electric connection. The source of Drinking Water in the school is Tap Water and it is functional. The school has 6 boys toilet and it is functional. and 7 girls toilet and it is functional. The school has no playground. The school has a library and has 1596 books in its library. The school does not need ramp for disabled children to access classrooms. The school has 12 computers for teaching and learning purposes and all are functional. The school is not having a computer aided learning lab. The school is Not Applicable providing mid-day meal.

✓ Instruction Medium: English

✓ Male Teachers: 0

✓ Pre Primary Sectin Avilable: No

✓ Board for Class 10th Others

✓ School Type: Co-educational

✓ Classes: From Class 1 to Class 5

✓ Female Teacher: 16

✓ Pre Primary Teachers: 0

✓ Board for Class 10+2 Others

✓ Meal Not Applicable

✓ Establishment: 1977

✓ School Area: Urban

✓ School Shifted to New Place: No

✓ Head Teachers: 0

✓ Head Teacher:

✓ Is School Residential: No

✓ Residential Type: Not Applicable

✓ Total Teachers: 16

✓ Contract Teachers: 0

✓ Management: Pvt. Unaided