Oracle plans 'world headquarters' in Nashville after moving HQ to Austin in 2020 "Software giant Oracle Corp. may move its world headquarters from Austin to Nashville in a bid to seize on the Tennessee capital's budding health care sector, co-founder Larry Ellison announced at the company’s health care summit Tuesday." (Chase Rogers and Shonda Novak, Austin American-Statesman)

$6.4B government subsidy leads Samsung to invest billions more in Central Texas "Samsung Electronics signed a preliminary memorandum agreement with the U.S. Department of Commerce on April 15, receiving $6.4 billion in government subsidies in exchange for an estimated $45 billion total investment within the region surrounding the Taylor manufacturing plant under construction." (Hayley McLeod, Community Impact)

EV supplier CelLink secures $362M federal loan for factory in Georgetown "CelLink Corp., the reported Tesla Inc. supplier that opened its 295,000-square-foot factory in Georgetown last year, has completed the requirements for a $362 million loan from the U.S. Department of Energy. (Justin Sayers, Austin Business Journal)

Legal showdown threatens to end Austin's light-rail plans "At issue is whether the Austin Transit Partnership (ATP) — a local government corporation created to build the city's largest-ever expansion of public transit — has the authority to repay debt with city property taxes." (Nathan Bernier, KUT 90.5)

Shell Plans Two Electric Vehicle Charging Hubs in Austin "Multinational petroleum giant Shell is leaning into a recently announced strategic pivot towards electric vehicles, with plans to nearly quadruple its existing network of EV charging stations by 2030 — and Austin appears to be one of the first cities on the list for the oil company’s Houston-based U.S. subsidiary, with at least two local properties owned by entities linked to Shell USA now in the permitting process for the construction of projects both using the name Shell EV Hub." (James Rambin, Towers)

Austin airport officials celebrate groundbreaking on 75,000-square-foot expansion "The project will add 75,000 square feet across four levels, increasing space for new security checkpoints, passenger processing and amenities." (Elle Bent, Community Impact)