This coming February, the Oracle Construction Technology Summit (CTS) will be back for its fourth instalment… and you’re invited!

So pencil in Thursday 13 February 2020 in Melbourne, Victoria – because it’s going to be a ripper!

Looking toward (and planning for) the future is something all businesses do (or at least, they should be!). But more often than not, we get so caught up in the appeal of future solutions, we lose sight of what’s in front of us. This year at CTS, we’re going to do things a little differently. Yes, we’ll absolutely look ahead at all sorts of emerging technologies – we’ll even bring parts of our Innovation Lab for show and tell! But importantly, we’re not going to overlook the growing number of available digital technology solutions, and instead, we’ll shine a light on them so you can see, first hand, how they can help solve your business challenges today!

And just to be clear, this isn’t all about Oracle solutions. Yeah we’ve got some great ones, but CTS isn’t just about us (that’d be a bit one-sided and boring)! This event is all about bringing together the best of the best, from startups to members of our burgeoning ecosystem.

Starting to get excited? You should be! As usual, CTS will provide the opportunity to join an exclusive community of like-minded professionals, discovering how technology is being used to improve the design, delivery, and operation of projects worldwide. We’ll also deliver a more interactive and hands on experience, helping you to better focus your day to understand how modern technologies can be applied now in solving some of the big challenges the industry (and potentially your business) is facing around productivity, innovation and quality.

With local and international keynote addresses, interviews with industry experts, and the opportunity to share ideas through networking, demonstrations, and workshops – it’s the Construction Technology event of the year not to be missed.

Oh, and did we mention British India will taking over the stage at wrap up?! Yes, for real.

Don’t miss out! Tickets are free, but limited. So register NOW!

Dr. Allison Stewart

Director, Precinct Policy & Strategy, Suburban Rail Loop Authority

Biography:

Dr. Allison is an experienced capital projects leader, strategist, and academic, and has experience working in the infrastructure, energy, defence, and mega-events industries. She has worked with a number of international projects in Tanzania, South Korea, Norway, Russia, Brazil and India among others. She is a recognised expert in the theory of mega-events, and her work has been cited by the Economist, the BBC, the Financial Times, and the Wall Street Journal among others. She completed her doctorate in mega-project management at the University of Oxford’s Said Business School.

Alex Hartmann

Construction and Projects Partner, Baker & McKenzie

Biography:

Alex specialises in advising clients in the construction and infrastructure sectors, including contractors and specialist subcontractors, government, state owned corporations, institutional property owners, telcos, developers, hotel and hospital operators, retailers, major equipment suppliers, financiers and consultants.

Alex works across both the non-contentious and contentious aspects of construction law, from contract structuring and procurement, drafting and negotiation through to advice on contract administration and dispute resolution (including adjudication, litigation, arbitration and alternative dispute resolution).

Alex has over 25 years’ experience, including 15 years working with Baker McKenzie in both Sydney and Melbourne offices.

Andy Verone

Global Vice President, Industry Strategy and Innovation, Oracle Construction and Engineering

Biography:

Andy Verone is the Global Vice President for Oracle’s Construction and Engineering Global Business Unit responsible for Innovation, Industry and Customer Strategy. Andy is also the cofounder of Oracle’s Construction and Engineering innovation lab located in Chicago, IL. Andy has over 30 years of executive and international business experience across the globe in the Engineering and Construction industry, including previously serving as Executive Vice President and Chief Information Officer at both Michael Baker International and Transfield Services (Broadspectrum). His background includes the implementation of global project-based information and delivery systems and collaboration management programs, as well as Board of Directors-level experience developing IT Strategic Plans and Governance programs. He also has managed large capital infrastructure projects and government contracts. Andy servers on the board of advisor of Construction Industry Institute (CII) the premier Research & Development center in the capital projects industry.

Andy McCutcheon

Global Sales Manager, Euclideon Holographics PTY LTD

Biography:

Andy McCutcheon began his career in the Canadian Military as a Special Forces Soldier.

After leaving the Military following the Iran/Iraq War in 1989, he returned to school and acquired a Commercial Pilot’s License. After flying a Cessna C206 on Floats in Canada’s near north, he moved to Toronto to Fly a Dassault Falcon 10 business jet for Sky Charter.

Sky Charter’s subsequent sale of its aircraft drove Andy to reinvent himself by combining his Military experience with his recent flying experience to create a unique, seamless service to the Entertainment Industry in Celebrity Personal Protection and Transportation Logistics.

Reinventing himself once again, Andy joined Ocean Magazine, Australia’s bespoke Superyacht publication as their State Manager for Western Australia, Queensland and Northern Territory, supplementing the magazines content as a technical writer for all new Aircraft, Vehicles and Superyachts being released here in Australia.

Several years later Andy moved over to Sensis in enterprise sales of print and digital media before being head-hunted to Reach Local, the global leader in digital media for the SME market.

In 2007 Andy pioneered the first new alcoholic beverages category in 50 years with the creation of his ‘Hard Iced Tea’ brand. With the market moving towards healthier drinking options, Hard Iced Tea was taking 25% beer market share in on premise sales leading to a buyout of the brand in 2013.

In 2015 Andy worked as the Director of Sales and Marketing for Shangri-La Hotel and Resorts in Hong Kong transforming their Traders Hotels into the new millennial focused, Hotel Jen brand.

In 2018 Andy joined Euclideon Holographics who are the global leader in multi-user hologram technology. Today he is the Global Sales Manager, Aerospace & Defence and works primarily on complex outcomes for companies like NASA, Airbus, Boeing Defence, Lockheed-Martin, Raytheon and Military units around the world. His Defence solutions have led to further integration with Bohemia Interactive to upgrade the current military (VBS) virtual battle system and HoloSuit for advanced high value and high risk immersive training.

Bob Hennessy

Group CIO, Lendlease

Biography:

Bob Hennessy is a senior executive who has been associated with technology enabled business change for 40 years. Bob has worked in executive management roles over the last 23 years as a CIO, COO and CEO across 5 industries.Bob’s experience as an executive in tough industrial sectors and volatile business conditions have given him rare combination of rich experiences which are invaluable for companies on the cusp of significant change. His combination of client side and sell side roles coupled with six years of entrepreneurial experience (buying, running, raising capital and selling) brings an appreciation of a range of dimensions of business through personal involvement that is not common.

Burcin Kaplanoglu

Executive Director, Innovation Officer, Oracle Construction and Engineering

Biography:

Dr. Burcin Kaplanoglu is a recognized industry technologist, thought leader, and keynote speaker. He leads industry strategy and innovation at Oracle Construction and Engineering. He is the co-founder of the Oracle Industries Innovation Lab. He was recognized as one of the 7 “AEC Innovators” for 2019 by @BD+C magazine. He was named one of Engineering News-Record's "Top 20 Contributors Under 40" in 2016. He is also an adjunct professor at Northwestern University's McCormick School of Engineering. Burcin was previously Vice President, Director of Operations at Lendlease’s Telecommunication Infrastructure Business Unit, where he was responsible for innovation, strategy and operations. During his 16 years at Lendlease, he led construction projects, spearheaded national real estate development programs, developed corporate operational systems, and initiated process improvements to operations. He frequently speaks and publishes articles related to Internet of Things (IoT), disruption of engineering and construction, investments, and construction technology, next generation of wireless communication (5G), and innovation leadership.

Chath Wianapathirana

Ph.D., Director of Analytics & Insights at Oracle Construction and Engineering

Biography:

Chath is the Director of Analytics & Insights at Oracle Construction and based in Melbourne, Australia. He is primarily focused on bringing analytics and data science products and services into the hands of customers across all CEGBU offerings. He leads a multi-disciplinary analytics product team to transform how data is used to generate actionable, predictive insights using innovative and cutting edge technologies. Chath specializes in Artificial Intelligence, applied machine learning and Business Intelligence. He is passionate about bringing data story to life by simplifying complex technologies into easy to use services that solve day to day customer challenges. He has a Ph.D. from Monash University on machine learning and has extensive hands-on experience building analytics & AI platforms. Chath’s research in applied machine learning across various industries has been published in many international peer-reviewed journals and conferences.

Craig Laslett

President, Australian Constructors Association

Biography:

Craig Laslett is passionate about ensuring our nation’s infrastructure is delivered efficiently and to the mutual benefit of all stakeholders.

Craig has an extensive background in the design, construction, operation and maintenance of significant public and private infrastructure assets. Over the past 40 years, Craig has led a number of complex and diversified businesses across the transport infrastructure, mining, resources, building and industrial sectors, including four years as Managing Director of Leighton Contractors and three years as CEO of Lendlease Engineering.

Craig is a well-known and respected member of the industry and is the President of the Australian Constructors Association, Chair of the Roads Australia Diversity Committee and a Co-Sponsor of the Construction Industry Leadership Forum. Craig is also Co-Chair of Career Trackers, a role that allows him to support personal growth opportunities within the sector and beyond, particularly for indigenous and disadvantaged youth.

Duhita Khadepau

Director, Analytics and Data Science, Assignar

Biography:

With 13+ years of experience in data warehousing, database designing and development of business applications at Zalora, The Iconic and Deputy, Duhita is now leading the Analytics and Data Science initiatives at Assignar. Assignar is Australia’s largest cloud-based operations management software for sub and self-perform contractors. The platform supports its customers by capturing and visualizing field data accurately, and in real-time. Assignar provides all stakeholders with a single source of truth about business operations to help contractors become more efficient and productive.

Dr. Davood Shojaei Lecturer

University of Melbourne and Member of the Surveyors Registration Board of Victoria (SRBV)

Biography:

Dr. Davood Shojaei is a lecturer in the Department of Infrastructure Engineering at the University of Melbourne. Davood is a member of the Surveyors Registration Board of Victoria. He has extensive experience over the last 15 years in designing and implementing a variety of research and industry projects, ranging from GIS, cadastre and BIM, to 3D visualisation.

Eldad Asoulin

Digital Engineering Manager, Lendlease

Biography:

Eldad Asoulin is currently a Digital Engineering manager with Lendlease on a large rail and commercial project in Sydney. He is an advocate of technology and a great believer of utilising technology to work smart in a practical tangible manner. He has comprehensive understanding of how AEC software affects business processes and objectives, facilitating and managing the creation of effective roadmaps and strategic planning within a range of companies.

With extended experience in educating and up-skilling staff at various levels in a range of software solutions, allowing for increased efficiencies across a range of client’s businesses.

And an in-depth technical knowledge of a range of AEC software enabling businesses to meet project deadlines and consequently achieving strategic objectives.

Frank Weiss

Senior Director, BIM and Innovation, Oracle Construction and Engineering

Biography:

Frank Weiss, based in Berlin, is a curious character. He is very excited and passionate about the digitization of the Construction & Engineering Industry. He was a co-Founder of www.conject.com, which was acquired by Aconex. At Aconex he served as a VP for BIM Strategy and Development globally. At Oracle, Frank Weiss is heading the global strategy for New Products, BIM & Innovation for the Construction and Engineering Global Business Unit. He represents Oracle as Strategic Advisory Council Member at building SMART International and has initiated several standardization initiatives.

Gwyllim Jahn

Co-founder, Fologram

Biography:

Gwyllim Jahn is the co-founder and creative director of Fologram, a Melbourne-based startup building mixed reality software solutions for Architecture, Engineering and Construction (AEC). Fologram’s software overlays physical environments with precise, interactive digital models, and Gwyllim will discuss high value use cases and immediate opportunities for implementing mixed reality in design and construction through several recently completed projects. By using Fologram to replace traditional 2D drawings and templates with interactive, shared, in-situ holographic models describing all stages of construction, All Brick were able to distribute construction tasks, reduce risk, improve precision and save construction time on the Royal Hobart Hospital. In the construction of a pavilion for the Tallinn Architecture Biennial, working from holographic construction information improved the effectiveness of traditional hand craft and provided a cheap, low tech alternative to the digital fabrication of extremely complex steam bent timber structures.

Glen Bugden

Director, Digital Solutions, Enstoa

Biography:

Glen is a Project Director with years of experience in delivering results. Glen leverages his extensive background in project controls and software implementations with his technical systems background to achieve high levels of client satisfaction. He has managed projects across a wide variety of industries including natural resources, healthcare and technology

Jordan Cram

CEO at Enstoa

Biography:

Jordan Cram is the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of Enstoa, Inc. As CEO, Jordan believes technology is an essential enabler for organizations to continuously innovate and optimize performance. For over 20 years he has used strategic business consulting and smart technology solutions to enable leading organizations, worldwide, to spend more strategically on improving operations – in the Middle East, China, Europe, North America, Australia and India.

Jordan has successfully created digital transformation visions and delivery teams for leading clients worldwide in healthcare, oil and gas, power and utilities, engineer and construction, public infrastructure, education and real estate. The organizational benefits realized have been substantial. One New York City hospital has documented over $20 million in realized savings in operating and capital expenditures. One year in, an oil and gas organization has already realized US$15 million of an expected $500 million benefit.

Recognizing the need for quick results, Jordan pioneered a nimble delivery approach for consulting and digital projects in the capital projects, infrastructure, and asset management industry. Understanding that is it critical to manage by fact, Jordan has relentlessly pursued data as a means for clients and partners to drive effective business decisions. Lastly, Jordan has built diverse and effective implementation teams recognizing that success is enabled through a unique combination of industry expertise, business consulting and IT competency.

Karthik Venkatasubramanian,

VP, Data Science & Analytics, Oracle Construction and Engineering

Biography:

Karthik is currently a VP at Oracle wherein he has global responsibility for defining and delivering the Data Strategy within Oracle’s Construction and Engineering Business Unit. In a career spanning 20 years across 4 continents, Karthik has been instrumental in building data and analytics capabilities from the ground-up for many organizations across several industries. He has successfully led several large scale digitization and transformation programs across IT, Sales, Marketing, Finance and Operations that have been the featured in case studies, patent applications, industry publications and international conferences.

Karthik is a passionate believer in creative innovation through the use of technology and infuses an element of “dataism” in almost every aspect of life. He regularly presents at Universities and industry events globally around the use of data to transform project delivery. His current focus is on the application of data science techniques in solving real world construction and engineering problems.

Kirsten Mann

Vice President Product Experience, Oracle Construction and Engineering

Biography:

Kirsten helps organizations become customer and people-focused, creating product and service experiences which meet real needs and achieve commercial outcomes. She’s built and led global teams – driving the creation of award winning products.

Kirsten has spent more than 25 years in the tech industry, focusing on the disciplines of product management, user experience and product development. Throughout this time, she’s collaborated with executive teams to drive business and people-centered processes through organisations.

Kirsten has led customer transformation initiatives which cultivated an understanding of user experience with organisation leaders - encouraging them to continually adopt UX, CX and Design Thinking practices. She firmly believes teams need to understand problems before jumping into solution mode and goals, metrics, and questions need to be clearly articulated to ensure a shared vision.

Michael Dyson

Managing Director ANZ & SE ASIA, SOTI

Biography:

Michael Dyson joined SOTI in August 2018 as Managing Director for Australia, New Zealand and South East Asia.

For more than 16 years, he has been a leading figure in the implementation of mobile and remote solutions for mission and business critical applications in Australia. With extensive experience across the First Responder, Healthcare, Utility, Transport and Logistics and Field Service sectors, Michael has worked with leading technology companies such as Panasonic to deliver successful project outcomes for Enterprise and Government.

A key contributor and speaker at conferences across Australia, Michael has addressed audiences on the challenges of developing and implementing mobile technology in business and mission-critical environments. Michael works with the broader team to build and expand the SOTI business across ANZ and South East Asia. Before joining SOTI, Michael held Management roles with Advanced Mobile IT, Panasonic Toughbook, Sensor Dynamics and Multimedia Technology.

Mick Douge

Director, Rail and Infrastructure, Suburban Rail Loop Authority

Biography:

A 1980 combi van tour of Europe led the civil engineer to a chance job offer on an offshore oil rig in the North Sea. It was a launchpad to a forty-year career spanning the infrastructure, mining, oil and gas, water and waste water sectors. An industry leader in major project management and delivery, Mick Douge has a wealth of global experience across safety and risk management, engineering and construction, and business strategy. As Director Rail and Infrastructure of Melbourne’s Suburban Rail Loop, Mick Douge leads the team behind the concept design and development of the nation’s biggest infrastructure project as it prepares for construction in 2022.

Mark Webster

Senior Vice President and General Manager, Oracle Construction & Engineering

Biography:

Mark’s 30 year career in the IT market includes sales and executive leadership roles at NCR Corporation, Sun Microsystems, Verizon Communications, Evolve/Primavera and Verdiem Corporation.

Mark works closely with our client leadership teams to deploy innovative and transformative business solutions with an emphasis on measurable results. His knowledge of the Enterprise Project and Portfolio Management marketplace make him a frequent contributor to industry events.

Mark resides in the Cleveland, Ohio area with his wife and two sons.

Michael Matošin

Associate, Strategy & Consulting, Enstoa

Biography:

Mike is a machine learning, data science and computational mathematical specialist at Enstoa. Michael leverages the most up-to-data models and methods to inform key business decisions and drive organizational value. A significant focus of his work is developing predictive models and analytics in order optimize systems and processes to deliver dynamic, best-in-class solutions.

Mike Antis

Global Vice president, Textura, Oracle Construction and Engineering

Biography:

Mike Antis is global vice president – Textura for Oracle Construction and Engineering. He joined Oracle in 2016 through the acquisition of Textura, where he held various executive and leadership roles in client services. Prior to joining Textura in 2005, Antis was a manager for Paragon Consulting Group Inc. and Braun Consulting Inc. He currently serves on the national board of directors for the ACE Mentor Group of America, which helps mentor high school students and inspires them to pursue careers in design and construction. Antis holds a bachelor’s degree in business process management and marketing from Indiana University and an M.B.A from the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University.

Oliver Greenwood

Vice President, Oracle Construction and Engineering

Biography:

Oliver is a Vice President within Oracle providing solution consulting on enterprise PPM software solutions into leading companies for over 15 years. He has worked with large multinational companies and partners principally in the E&C, Energy, Public Sector, Manufacturing and A&D across the globe. He is currently Oracle Construction and Engineering Executive Sponsor on several key customers in the UK, Japan, China and Australia. Oliver oversees the development, implementation and communication of the Global Sales Consulting strategy and the Channel and Alliance strategy for the Construction & Engineering Global Business Unit within Oracle. The team is responsible for matching customer requirements to Oracle solutions in order to drive value through hard benefits. Oliver is responsible for the support of license revenue in the Oracle Construction & Engineering Global Business Unit. The team expertise spans the complete spectrum of Aconex, Textura, Unifier, Primavera and complimentary Oracle application product offerings and is focused on supporting customers and partners in the selection of Oracle solutions. Additional responsibilities include internal & external enablement, demonstrations services & infrastructure, and chair of several industry and partner advisory boards around Oracle’s Construction and Engineering.

Rob Phillpot

Global Vice President, Product Strategy, Oracle Construction & Engineering

Biography:

Rob is the Global Vice President of Product Strategy for Oracle Construction & Engineering. He has strategic oversight across the full suite of construction and engineering products at Oracle, including Primavera P6, Textura, Unifier, Prime and Aconex.

Prior to Oracle, Rob was a co-founder of Aconex together with Leigh Jasper, and most recently was the Head of Product Strategy. After starting as a cloud-native application in Melbourne in 2000 (before cloud was the term it means today) Aconex grew internationally to be the largest of its kind in the world and supported iconic projects, including Marina Bay Sands, the Panama Canal expansion, Dubai Metro, Hong Kong airport and New York City Hall – all supported by staff in 42 cities around the world. After a successful float on the ASX in 2014, Aconex was acquired by Oracle for $1.6bn in 2018, which is the largest technology acquisition in Australian history.

Rob started his career as an auditor for Deloitte and then moved to the world of construction, where he worked for Multiplex on high-rise projects – which exposed Rob to the pain of dealing with the information flows between hundreds of companies on large projects and drove the genesis of the idea for Aconex. Rob has a Bachelor of Commerce and a Masters in Building from Melbourne University.

Steven Brant

Senior Director, Oracle Construction and Engineering

Biography:

Steve Brant is an engineer with a 38 year career spanning manufacturing, production engineering, building & infrastructure life safety and construction & engineering technologies.

Steve studied engineering in UK and migrated to Australia in 1981 to work with William Adams promoting growth of the emerging CNC machine tool industry. Steve next took his engineering skills to the production manufacturing industry where he was responsible for international sales of bespoke solid object product handling systems.

Steve moved to the construction sector in 2000 and in particular, building technologies at Siemens Australia as NSW Branch Manager of their new Fire Safety Division. Responsible for sales and support of Siemen’s high-tech fire detection and suppression systems as well as building a competitive fire contracting business he learned the importance of dependable quality systems.

After moving to Aconex in 2005, Steve ran the sales team across Australia and New Zealand before joining the leadership team as Australia & New Zealand General Manager and guiding the region through sustained growth.

Contributing to global company strategy as well as policy, product, sales, client service and marketing, the ANZ unit was the standout performer for Aconex and the prize component of its listing in 2014 and eventual sale to Oracle Corp in 2017.

Steve is currently a Senior Director at Oracle where he is involved in operational integration, sales & product strategy, staff mentoring and customer advocacy.

Steve has a wife, Sharon and two children, 20 and 25.