Oracle Corp., the American software company, will be building its world headquarters in Nashville.

The company's move to Music City has been years in the making. In 2021, Metro Council members voted to approve the proposed $1.2 billion investment plan for a 65-acre campus in East Nashville. The software giant's move to Nashville is expected to create 8,500 jobs over the next decade.

In 2020, Oracle moved its headquarters from Silicon Valley, Calif. to Austin, Texas. Oracle officials have previously stated that both the Nashville and Austin campuses will be U.S. headquarters locations.

During a "fireside chat" with former U.S. senator and longtime Nashville businessman and physician Bill Frist at the Oracle Health Summit, co-founder Larry Ellison said that the move to Nashville was fueled by the city's health care industry as well as employee interest.

Why was Nashville chosen as the new Oracle headquarters?

Nationally recognized as the it city in the healthcare industry, the Nashville area is home to various healthcare companies including HCA Healthcare, Community Health Systems, Acadia Healthcare, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, and more.

Ellison said Nashville's prominent health care industry is a major draw for the company because of its increasing emphasis on health care software products. Additionally, employees expressed interest in the city.

"We want to be in a health center and we want to be in a community and I use that word very precisely. We want to be part of a community where people want to live. Nashville is a fabulous place to live. It’s a great place to raise a family," said Ellison. "It’s got a unique and vibrant culture. As we surveyed our employees, Nashville ticked all the boxes. It's the center of the industry we’re most concerned about which was the healthcare industry."

What will Oracle be building in Nashville?

The company is working with Metro Nashville officials to plan infrastructure upgrades needed to support the buildings. Nashville leaders negotiated a deal for the company to invest in a pedestrian bridge connecting the two sides of the river, among other investments.

Ellison said the new campus will not look like a corporate campus, but instead a park. The park will include office buildings and a community clinic featuring the latest versions of Oracle software.

There will also be a floating stage which will function as a concert venue.

"We want to be part of the community," said Ellison. "Our people love it here and we think it’s the center of our future."

Construction has not yet begun on Oracle offices, however company officials have said the offices will be open and operating by 2030.

Previous coverage: Oracle America closes on Nashville riverfront site

What does this mean for the already approved Oracle deal in Nashville? How have Tennessee leaders responded to the news?

It's unclear how bringing a world headquarters to Nashville will impact the 2021 deal to bring an office campus.

When Metro Council members voted to approve the development plan back in 2021, many members and local activists expressed concerns over the approved deal. Concerns were raised regarding the proposed job creation, affordable housing and gentrification. However, former Mayor Jim Cooper applauded the plan, and said it would kick off a decade of prosperity.

In a statement, Mayor Freddie O'Connell agreed with Ellison regarding Nashville's promising location.

"Our health care industry, which has long been a shining star for Nashville, represents $68 billion in local economic impact and employs 333,000 regionally, according to the latest numbers from the Nashville Health Care Council," said O'Connell. "As mayor, I want you to know: Nashville is a great place to live and a great place to do business."

O'Connell said that since taking office, his office has been actively engaging with Oracle and it is clear that they intend to enhance the level of activity at the River North campus.

On X, Gov. Bill Lee expressed pride that Oracle's new world headquarters will be in Nashville. "Great news for job creation & economic growth across TN," he said.

What is Oracle and what do they do?

Oracle is a tech company which specializes in developing and marketing database software and technology, cloud-engineered systems and enterprise software products. Oracle's most known product is Oracle Database software which is used across various industries. Oracle's customers include companies in finance, healthcare, communications, education, hospitality, government, and more. According to LinkedIn, the top 10 companies using Oracle in the U.S. include Netflix, LinkedIn, Ebay, Airbnb and others.

Oracle was founded in 1977 by Ellison, Bob Miner, and Ed Oates in Santa Clara, Calif. In 2023, Oracle was included in Forbes' Global 2000, Best Employers for Women and World's Best Employers lists. In 2024, it ranked among the Best Employers for Diversity and America's Best Large Employers.

Reporter Sandy Mazza contributed to this story.

Diana Leyva covers trending news and service for The Tennessean. Contact her at Dleyva@gannett.com or follow her on X, the platform formerly known as Twitter at @_leyvadiana