John Addison is a Georgia native with a rapier wit and all the charm you’d expect from a son of the south. He’s the former co-CEO of Primerica, a leader in the financial services industry. John emerged as a leader shortly after joining the company in the early 1980s. He helped to shape Primerica’s culture as well as navigate a tedious break from Citigroup that skyrocketed profits and made National headlines in 2010.

Now “rewired” after his tenure with Primerica, John is the CEO of Addison Leadership Group, INC. He travels the world as a keynote speaker and consultant, he is also a best-selling author. John’s current passion is to cultivate new leaders with a heart for service and unification.

I’m glad you’re here.

I’ve spent much of my life honing my leadership skills by experience and learning from great leaders. Even today, you’ll often find me reading and studying because I am still becoming. I’ve said many times we aren’t really human beings but rather we are human becomings. I’m just a country boy from Covington, GA. I like to get my hands dirty in the garden, I love rumbling down a dirt road in my old truck, and I love cheering my Bulldogs on game day. I, as much as anyone else, am a work in progress regardless of the fact that I was the co-CEO of a multi-billion dollar corporation.

All the degrees and experience in the world isn’t what makes a great leader. Great leaders are born of the love of the service of others. You’ve seen this before: in your favorite teachers, in coaches, pastors, and the bosses you remember fondly. If you’ve played sports you may have noticed that the best coaches gain the most joy from watching their players develop and grow on the field and off. Winning is a very subjective term. We definitely want to win football games, but we win when the people we influence succeed by any measure.

There is a leadership crisis in the world today. It’s because so many of the people with the most influence in the world are not unifiers, they are the opposite. With every fiber of my being, I want to fix this. I am but one man! I’ve worked for years to cultivate new leaders. I want to impact more! ONE MILLION, in fact. It’s a big job. I’m looking for people who see this issue, who see the division, people who want to help. As I said, I’m glad your here! If you’re a unifier and you love to help others. If you understand that when we help others get what they want then we get what we want, I’d love you to learn more about #MissionLeadership. I think we can do great things together.