On a wintry Wednesday afternoon, we decided to embark upon our metro walk journey, and accordingly boarded the metro at ITO station around 2:30 pm. We got off at Kirti Nagar, which is primarily a residential colony, though our perception of it was as being home to Asia’s largest furniture market, reputed boutiques, and imported kitchen and traditional carpentry furniture makers.

As we exited from Gate No.1, the typical Delhi metro station scene unfolded before us, with our being surrounded by auto divers and witnessing long line of auto rickshaws, battery rickshaws and cycle rickshaws. The traffic in the area was extremely sluggish, and we thanked our stars that it wasn’t a hot summer afternoon. Further ahead, we saw a large open space with a lot of trees, which presented itself to us as a refreshing contrast amidst the dense surroundings.

We took a left from the metro scene into the Kirti Nagar main road, which was lined on the left side by buildings with commercial functions in the ground floor and residences in the upper floor. The shops included mobile stores, clothes stores, stationeries, photo studios, general stores and restaurants. The residences were moderately good-looking, probably owned by middle-income group families. On our right was a planned, posh DDA residential colony that spread itself over a vast area. The Kirti Nagar main road had a steadily moving traffic, and at wider points in the road, the movement was much freer. Having got satisfactorily near the heart of Kirti Nagar, we took a road on our left further into the area, and found that the road marked a natural progression from a hygienic locality at the mouth, to a line of slums at the very end of the road, beyond which were railway lines.

ORDER AND DISORDER

The primary roads in the area had been properly planned and intersected each other at perfect right angles, dividing the colony into broad sectors.

The boutiques, wood market and the other main commercial spaces of Kirti Nagar were concentrated in a huge sector on one corner of the colony. The other sectors were taken up by commercial-cum-residential blocks, whose standards varied according to their proximity to the railway lines – the nearer one got to the back, shabbier were the buildings. These buildings, mostly single-storeyed, had commercial functions facing the roads, with residences facing inwards.

Most of the shops spilled out on to the roads, which were also used by a number of food vendors. Hence, whereas the roads were ordered, there was a noticeable disorderliness in the way the buildings within were cropping up and spilling out. They were yearning to burst out from the boxes within which they had been forcibly enclosed.

CONTROL AND FLEXIBILITY

The residential area spoke of an imposed control, fought by an involuntary flexibility displayed by the buildings. The boutiques and wood market sector, on the other hand, could be clearly perceived as being properly chalked out and integrated within the larger plan. The outer roads in this area were planned too, but the difference was that the shops respected the boundaries instead of fighting them. Thus, this sector displayed a good balance between control and flexibility. Even the shopkeepers here acknowledged the well-balanced nature of the buildings. Thus we see that control does not always lead to order, nor does flexibility to disorder.

PERSPECTIVE : Citizen vs Government

On the way back, we ventured into the DDA colony on the other side of the main road, and not surprisingly, found that the residences were reminiscent of any other such colony in Delhi, not really standing out or making a mark. Open spaces were sprinkled neatly throughout the area, which were shared by the buildings surrounding them. The area had obviously been envisioned as homes for the elite class of people, and accordingly was it perceived by the residents as well. Here, the perspectives of the government and the residents neatly align, in contrast to the other side of the road. While the unplanned colonies might be seen as a problem by the government, the DDA colony is seen as an epitome of perfect planned development. Clean, straight roads and high walls everywhere dictated to us to keep out and keep moving. We did so.

As it got darker and the skies slowly closed out the remaining sunlight, we made our way back to the metro station, satisfied with our observations from the walk.