In 1999, Tony Bui directed ''Three Seasons,'' and wrote it with his brother, Timothy Linh Bui. The first American film to be shot in Vietnam, the Buis' three-part tale of the repercussions of the Vietnam War in the present-day Ho Chi Minh City attracted a lot of critical attention and became an art-house hit.

''Green Dragon,'' the new film from the Bui brothers, reverses much of ''Three Seasons.'' This time, Timothy Linh Bui directed, while brother Tony collaborated on the story. Instead of Ho Chi Minh City, the setting is America in 1975 -- specifically, Camp Pendleton in Southern California, the Marine base that became a temporary home to thousands of Vietnamese refugees, taken in by the United States government as the south fell into the hands of the North Vietnamese Army.

''Green Dragon'' drives for the same kind of bittersweet, conciliatory tone that ''Three Seasons'' achieved but loses its way in rhetorical excess and blatant sentimentality. Again, the Buis employ multiple storylines, but this time they are presented simultaneously and all center on a single figure -- that of Tai Tran (Don Duong, who was the lovelorn cyclo driver in ''Seasons''), a translator for the United States Army in Vietnam who has been appointed manager of the Pendleton encampment by the American officer in charge, Sgt. Jim Lance (Patrick Swayze).

Tai, a softspoken man who hides his sad eyes behind horn-rimmed glasses, has arrived from Vietnam with his sister's two young children in his charge. His nephew, Minh (Trung Nguyen), is old enough to know that something is wrong, but not old enough to be told that his mother has most likely been lost in the rush to exit the old country.

Withdrawn into silence and comic books, Minh stirs back to life only when he is befriended by Addie (Forest Whitaker), an American volunteer who works in the camp as a cook. Himself friendless and unhappy, he is a secret artist, and he delights Minh by drawing caricatures of the boy and asking the child to help him work on a mural he is painting -- a green dragon that takes up an entire wall of the kitchen.

Tai, in the meantime, has fallen for the beautiful but strangely aloof Thuy Hoa (Hiep Thi Le, of Oliver Stone's ''Heaven and Earth''), the daughter of a disgraced Vietnamese general. Tai's friend Duc (Billinger Tran) is also in love, having rediscovered his old Saigon flame, now unhappily married as a second wife to a formerly wealthy businessman.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.