CHICAGO, Jan. 27, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- International Star Registry is teaming up with Warner Bros. Pictures to celebrate the release of the new movie, Jupiter Ascending, in theaters beginning February 6th from Warner Bros. Pictures and Village Roadshow Pictures.

Channing Tatum and Mila Kunis star in Jupiter Ascending, an original science fiction action adventure from filmmakers Lana and Andy Wachowski.

Jupiter Jones (Kunis) was born under a night sky, with signs predicting that she was destined for great things. Now grown, Jupiter dreams of the stars but wakes up to the cold reality of a job cleaning other people's houses and an endless run of bad breaks. Only when Caine (Tatum), a genetically engineered ex-military hunter, arrives on Earth to track her down does Jupiter begin to glimpse the fate that has been waiting for her all along—her genetic signature marks her as next in line for an extraordinary inheritance that could alter the balance of the cosmos. You can find full details of the movie at www.jupiterascending.com.

Through Facebook, up to 25 Star Prize packages will be given away consisting of two tickets to see Jupiter Ascending and a film-themed 2015 calendar.

A favorite item of Hollywood's brightest stars since 1979, recipients have included celebrities, dignitaries and even royalty. "When people name a star, they feel connected to their unique place in the universe," said Rocky Mosele, President of ISR. "We all need to 'reach for the stars'."

Call (800)282-3333 or visit www.starregistry.com to see the full range of products. International Star Registry is headquartered in the United States with affiliate offices worldwide.

From the streets of Chicago to far flung galaxies whirling through space, Jupiter Ascending is written and directed by the Wachowskis. Award-winning producer Grant Hill, with whom they have collaborated since The Matrix Trilogy, is producing, together with Lana Wachowski and Andy Wachowski. Roberto Malerba and Bruce Berman serve as executive producers. Jupiter Ascending is a Warner Bros. Pictures presentation, in association with Village Roadshow Pictures, in association with Anarchos Productions. It will be distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures, a Warner Bros. Entertainment Company, and in select territories by Village Roadshow Pictures. www.jupiterascending.com

See Jupiter Ascending in theaters February 6th

© 2015 Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc. All Rights Reserved

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150127/171723

SOURCE International Star Registry

Related Links