Live-Action Film FandomName:Jupiter AscendingAbbreviation(s):JADirector:The Wachowskis (Lilly and Lana Wachowski)Production companies:Village Roadshow Pictures, RatPac-Dune Entertainment, Anarchos Productions, Warner Brothers Release date:6 Feb 2015 Genre:Space operaCountry:USA, AustraliaExternal links:IMDb

Wikipedia Click here for related articles on Fanlore.

Jupiter Ascending is a space-opera film written, produced and directed by the Wachowski sisters. It follows the story of Jupiter Jones as it is discovered that she is the reincarnation of the matriarch of the most powerful dynasty in the galaxy.

Fandom

From the dailydot article Why women love 'Jupiter Ascending’

The reaction of “is this how straight dudes feel all the time?” is pretty common among fans of Jupiter Ascending. With its everywoman heroine, nonsense dialogue (“Bees sense royalty,” Sean Bean solemnly explains, as a swarm of bees recognizes Mila Kunis as the genetic reincarnation of an alien queen), and neon-tinted action sequences, it’s basically a 13-year-old girl’s melodramatic anime fanfic writ large. Just to be clear, this is the precise gender-flipped equivalent of all those movies where some weak-chinned rando turns out to be the Chosen One, defeats a supervillain despite having no real personality or skills, and gets rewarded with a kiss from Megan Fox (or in the case of Wanted, Angelina Jolie). Jupiter Ascending is no worse, or more absurd, than any other sci-fi blockbuster of its type. The plot may be muddled and some of the dialogue clunky, but you could say the same of Star Wars—or Guardians of the Galaxy, which has a Rotten Tomatoes review score of 91 percent. (Jupiter scores 22 percent, which seems kind of egregious by comparison.)[1]

Tropes and Fanon

The inevitable, insufferable recurrence of Balem Abrasax[2]

Using “space” as a sort of prefix for any object or concept prominently featured in the movie; “space werewolf” or “space capitalism”[3]

Cain exhibiting canine behavior[4]

Fanworks

Fanfic

Ask Not For My Mercy by fiftysevenacademics (rapiddescent), Richard II of England/Balem Abrasax, Balem Abrasax visits Earth to determine if a full harvest will be profitable, but ends up in a battle of wits-- and more-- with King Richard II of England, with a long-term outcome that Balem doesn't anticipate.

Fanart

“Jupiter Ascending B-Movie” poster, Archived version by sarah531

“Three Wolf Jupiter” by whatwouldcaptainamericado

“Planet Hoarding Space Dragon” by meisterc

Jupiter Ascending: Math Meta, Archived version by i-haveaninternationalreputation

What do Jacobean revenge tragedies and Jupiter Ascending have in common? by fuckyeahjupiterascending

The Balem/Caine Fan Theory by thelelashiba[Dead link]

Jupiter Ascending is literally Gnostic propaganda by darklordreasonable

The Ethics of Jupiter Ascending Why I Am Not a Vegetarian, Archived version

Archives & Communities

Jupiter Ascending (2015) on AO3

Jupiter Ascending on FFN

fuchyeahjupiterascending on tumblr

jakink, a Jupiter Ascending kink meme

Jupiter Ascending Network[Dead link]

Resources

A “Jupiter Ascending” Tags Masterpost, Archived version

Glossary of Terms

Jupiter Ascending at Wikia