Category: Digital Marketing

Choose Your Own Career Adventures with Beki Adams

We met Beki last year at one of her regular Digital Wombats meet-ups when we based ourselves in Chiang Mai in Thailand in 2019 for a little while before moving onto Koh Phangan. We had the pleasure of catching up with Beki in person again before we left Thailand in December. Beki is a fellow multipassionate multipotentialite juggling many different projects at any one time! When she isn’t working she can be found running events for digital nomads, playing with her cats, exploring Thailand (the pandemic has also impacted her on this too) or wakeboarding.

Choose Your Own Career Adventures with Alice Johnson

As we return to our interview series we interview Alice, a vegan content writer and public health scientist. Like me, her nomad adventures have been paused this year due to the pandemic. Alice tells us how since going plant-based in 2015, she and her sister has made it their mission to discover the best food, travel destinations, sustainable fashion, and experiences available for vegans. Alongside this, Alice and her sister Lucy work together to use businesses as forces for good to promote a more vegan and sustainable world.

Choose Your Own Career Adventures with Ryan Connolly

My name is Ryan Connolly. I’m a 32 year old Scotsman living in Iceland. I run an adventure tour company in Iceland, called Hidden Iceland. I am the Marketing Manager and co-founder of the company along with local expert, Dagný Björg Stefánsdóttir and Australian geologist, Scott Drummond. I am currently running a boutique adventure tour company called Hidden Iceland that specialises in glacier hikes, ice cave exploration, northern lights hunting and off the beaten path travel.

Choose Your Own Career Adventures with Sophia Cheng

I’m Sophia, communications professional turned newbie activist. Office worker turned business owner. Rule follower to rule breaker. Long-term traveller who returned back home. Since October 2018 I’ve changed nearly every aspect of my life. One big aspect is ‘career’. I’m dedicating the next decade of my life to the climate crisis.

Choose Your Own Career Adventures with Jes Bailey

I am Jes. I am 28 years old. British, but have spent most of my adult life abroad. I love watersports, beaches, being warm and working with clients who change the world for good. Hopefully this interview will explain who I am a bit further. Right now, I have 6 crowdfunding campaigns live for my clients. They vary from tech-for-good, sustainable fashion, animal rescue, community development. Other than that I am working on preparing my business, Crowdfund 360 for 2020.

Choose Your Own Career Adventures with Matt Young

Originally from a rural town outside of Tampa, Florida, there was nothing global, worldly, nor ambitious in my upbringing. By all accounts, my family’s expectations were pretty low and stopped at “go to college.” So I had no pressure to do anything big, and had complete support in everything that has lead me to where I am now. I had been introduced to the art world pretty early on. By the time I was 15, my whole life was centered around being creative. Little did I know that the courses I enrolled in and the pure act of creating was shaping a mind that questioned everything and that quickly saw a flaw in the traditional work/life model.