Scott Sharik

Jeff Darville

Becky Phillips

Geneva College announces that Scott Sharik has been hired as the new Director of Human Resources and Jeff Darville has been appointed the Special Assistant to the President for Major Gifts. Current employee Becky Phillips has accepted the new position of Interim Director of Constituent Relations.

Scott Sharik earned his M.A. in Intercultural Ministries from Grace Theological Seminary in 2000 and his B.A. in English from the San Diego State University in 1988. Serving as Director of Children′s Ministries, Sharik has worked at Christ′s Covenant Church in Winona Lake, IN since 2007. He was Director of Human Resources at Grace College & Theological Seminary (1999-2007) and Grace Village Retirement Community (1996-1999). He is now working on campus.

Jeff Darville will be a key member of the Institutional Advancement staff who will work to identify and develop relationships in the Geneva community to strengthen the College′s resource base. Darville comes to Geneva with 10 years of sales and marketing experience. His most recently served at Apangea Learning, a Pittsburgh-based company offering online tutoring to K-12 students. He also served students in the admissions office at the Art Institute of Pittsburgh as an Assistant Director from 2006 to 2008. Darville graduated from Grove City College in 2000 with a bachelor′s degree in marketing management and completed his master of science in organizational leadership from Geneva College in 2008.

Becky Phillips's new position in Constituent Relations includes the areas of alumni, parent and church relations. Since 2005, Phillips has worked in various positions at Geneva College, most recently as the Associate Director of Church and Parent Relations. Before coming to Geneva, she worked at Pasadena Christian School, Pasadena, Ca. serving as the Assistant to the Principal following years of volunteering in the school's development department. She graduated from Geneva College in 1985 with a B.S./B.A. in accounting and a minor in data processing. She has already begun serving in her new position.