David Ray Robbins, 71, of Tracy, CA, passed away on April 23, 2022 at home with his family, after a hard battle with ALS.

David was born on January 19, 1951, in San Mateo, CA, as the first child of Ray and Judy Robbins. His first and favorite toys were cars and a guitar. His interest in hot rods grew as he researched the mechanics and later got a 1956 Chevy for his first car. His love for learning music had begun and would span a 65 year career in the industry.

At the age of 6, he started learning to play the steel guitar. After hearing the song “Sunday in Dixie”, featuring his pedal guitar idol, he set off to master his craft. Growing up, David played in the Robbins Family band in California. Two weeks after high school graduation in 1969, he signed with a gospel traveling band based out of the Southeast and on his first professional recording in Nashville, TN; he was on his way to becoming one of the most phenomenal steel guitar players around. As a member of both the Nashville Musician’s Union and Grand Ole Opry, Dottie West and Jean Shepherd were proud to have him as part of their respective bands. David’s music career reached another high with the founding of his Northern California band in the 1980’s ‘The Midnight Riders’ with former spouse of 46 years Wanda Robbins. His love of music became even more evident when he opened and worked his own steel guitar repair shop in Tennessee, and he, right up until his passing, frequently enjoyed playing in his father’s band with friends. His passion for creativity and talent can be summed up by his words: “It’s not how many notes you play, or how fast you play them, but how well they’re played.”

As a favorite hobby, you would find him working on a car, watching drag car racing or visiting a local race car track. His great discernment and natural ability to spiritually guide, led him to become a minister in 2007 under Church of God in Tennessee. An equal passion of David’s was family time. Weeks leading to and at his passing, he was surrounded by his father, daughter, siblings and more family. Everyone David knew will greatly cherish his impact on their lives, either through love, friendship, mentorship, spiritual teaching or his humor.

David was preceded in death by his son, Sean (2014) and his mother, Judy (2015). He is survived by his daughter Jennifer [Tim] Mask of Tracy, CA, father Ray Robbins of Tracy, CA, brother Gary Robbins of Stockton, CA, sister Donna Mizer of Tracy, CA, several family members and beloved friend Loren Nelson.

Celebration of Life will be on June 11, 2022 at 3 PM at the American Legion Hall in Tracy, CA, with remembrances and live music. Please reach out to the family directly regarding information on flowers or donations. No flowers will be accepted at American Legion Hall.