BROUGHT TO YOU BY: IN THIS ISSUE SONY PROMISES BREAKTHROUGH YEAR FOR MOBILE BUSINESS JAPANESE GIANT PUSHES XPERIA Z RANGE PAGE 3 DOCOMO PREPS BUSINESS MODEL REVAMP ASIAN OPERATOR TO SUPPORT OTT PLAYERS PAGE 6 FORD DRIVES INTO EUROPE WITH SPOTIFY PARTNERSHIP GLOBAL DEAL HERALDS MAJOR PUSH FOR FORD SYNC PAGE 10 Nokia focuses on mass market with device update By Steve Costello Nokia unveiled four new devices which Stephen Elop, its CEO, said are designed to “inspire more people, at more prices, and ultimately capture more volume as well as value in the marketplace”. Acknowledging that the company had gone through a transition that “hasn’t always been easy”, the executive said that it now has the “building blocks” in place to succeed in serving customers across a broad range of price points. Cont. on P3 f By Ken Wieland The opening keynote session at Mobile World Congress brought together the chief executives of AT&T, China Mobile, Telecom Italia, Telefónica and Vodafone. Under the theme of mobile operator strategies, talk of digital revolution and unprecedented industry transformation – spurred on by LTE and cloud-based technologies – was dominant. Randall Stephenson, AT&T’s chief executive, claimed the mobile industry was starting a new era. “LTE and cloud is the most powerful technological combination we have ever seen,” he said. “Technology innovation is moving at warp speed.” OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER OF MOBILE WORLD CONGRESS 2013 <strong>DAILY</strong> DAY TWO • TUESDAY 26TH FEBRUARY Stephenson anticipates mobile data traffic volumes in the US will increase by an enormous 30,000 per cent between 2012 and 2017, spurred on by access to cloud-based applications over low-latency and high-speed LTE networks. That expansion comes on the back of 75,000 per cent growth during the previous six years, driven by 3G networks and Apple’s iPhone. 3G transformed the mobile industry, added Stephenson, but the ‘cloud era’ will change other industries as well. But if the rapid development of networks and digital eco-systems is to continue, and help boost GDP in the process, much more investment will be required. Stephenson called for Qtel rebrands as ‘Ooredoo’ By Matt Ablott Qatar-based operator group Qtel is re-launching itself under a new brand – ‘Ooredoo.’ The operator unveiled the new brand – which translates as ‘I want’ in Arabic – at an exclusive event in Barcelona last night. It was also announced that football superstar Lionel Messi is to become the operator’s new global brand ambassador. All operating companies in which Qtel owns a majority interest will adopt the new brand over the next two years. This will see the phasing out of local brands such as Qtel in Qatar, Indosat in Indonesia, Wataniya in Kuwait, Nawras in Oman, Tunisiana in Tunisia, and Nedjma in Algeria. “The new brand signals our readiness to take the company to the next level,” said Group CEO Dr Nasser Marafih. Qtel claims to have been the world’s fastest-growing telco in terms of sales since 2006. It had a global customer base of more than 89.2 million at the end of Q3 2012, generating revenue of $6.8 billion for the first nine months of 2012. Featuring at last night’s launch was GSMA Director-General Anne Bouverot, Cherie Blair of the Cherie Blair Foundation for Women; and Dr Hamadoun Toure, Secretary General of the ITU. There was also an appearance by Qatari Olympic medallist Nasser al Attiyah. Qtel has also agreed to support the Leo Messi Foundation in return for the Barcelona FC star becoming its new brand ambassador. CEOs repeat call for lighter regulation lower taxes to encourage capital investment, as well as for regulators to think through their desired outcomes on spectrum allocation. “There is a choice of rapid adoption of latest technologies and capabilities, and all the downstream economic multipliers that come from that, or there is the other option of hyper competition and the lowest prices possible.” Stephenson echoed the views of Franco Bernabè, chief executive of Telecom Italia and GSMA chairman. “Excess competition in Europe is depressing the market,” he said, pointing to around 170 mobile network operators and over 700 MVNOs in the region. "Governments should avoid imposing excessive burdens on the industry in the form of specific taxes and spectrum charges." César Alierta, Telefonica’s chief executive, argued that internet players should help shoulder the burden of operators’ network and spectrum costs, claiming that regulators have been giving the likes of Google and Facebook a relatively easy time as they enjoy near-monopoly status. “Nowadays, the internet is dominated by only a few players that restrict our customer choice options,” he says. “If the same regulation applied to telcos was applied to other players – to break up monopolies – they would have been obliged to sell devices to competitors at cost with a small margin. There is not a level playing field.” Vodafone’s chief executive, Vittorio Colao, said that regulators in Europe have been over zealous in regulating wholesale and retail prices. “These markets are already very competitive,” he said. MOBILE WORLD CONGRESS <strong>DAILY</strong> 2013 | www.mobileworldcongress.com Tuesday 26th February PAGE 1