Jadranski Naftovod has bought the Bulinac solar power plant with a capacity of 5.2 MW, as part of its plan to diversify its business and become an energy company.

Croatian oil pipeline and storage operator Jadranski Naftovod (JANAF) said that through its subsidiary JANAF OIE it has bought 100% shares of Prudens Consilium and with it the Bulinac solar power plant, with a peak capacity of 5.1796 MW.

It is located near Bjelovar, a city in the northern part of the country.

The owners of Prudens Consilium were Maverick Wealth Management, Aquila Visum and V Solar. All three are registered in Croatia, according to the national business registry.

Vođinci solar power project is ready for construction

The Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development earlier decided that an environmental impact assessment study wasn’t necessary for the Bulinac photovoltaic plant.

State-owned JANAF took over its first PV project in late May. It purchased 100% of shares of Solar Energy Vođinci together with its Vođinci solar power project. The planned capacity is 14.28 MW, with a 9.99 MW grid connection.

The site is near the city of Vinkovci in Croatia’s east. The project is ready for construction, including building permits, and it is planned to come online by March 1, 2025, JANAF said.

The company has an open public call for solar and wind projects

Back in January 2022, the company adopted its transition and development strategy for the period from 2022 to 2030 with a vision to 2050. It envisages a green transformation of the business.

The company has an open public call for potential partners interested in developing and selling solar and wind power plants and projects.

JANAF will continue developing its renewable energy business to become an important player in the Croatian electricity market, President of the JANAF Management Board Stjepan Adanić said.

The company plans to invest in the geothermal segment as well and it is currently considering a number of greenfield and mature renewable energy projects. So far, JANAF has installed solar power plants on buildings at its oil terminals in Sisak, Žitnjak (in Zagreb) and Omišalj. It plans to do the same on land at its locations in Slavonski Brod, Omišalj and Žitnjak.