Jack Karlsson (Runic Swedish: ᚤᛆᚴᚴ᛫ᚴᛆᚱᛚᛋᛋᚮᛀ) (Born July 17th, 1945 in the IWU universe, Born July 17th, 2005 IRL) is the current Prime Minister of Sweden, he previously served as President from 1992 to 2002 and again from 2007 to 2017, he also previously served as Prime Minister from 1987 to 1992, and again from 2002 to 2007.

Early life

Jack Karlsson was born on July 17th, 1945, in Stockholm, Swedish SSR, in the Soviet Union, to Mattias Karlsson (1915-1992) and Jennie Frisk (1921-2014). His father worked as an Employee for the Soviet Documents Industry, His mother worked as an Artist for the Soviet Art Enterprises. He is of Finnish and Sami descent from his maternal great grandmother.

When he went to school at age 6, he was often bullied for his short-memory, however, despite this, he continued on. He had problems socializing with other students due to his autism which caused him to get bullied more, in which he adopted himself as an isolate from others.

When he graduated from School in 1961, he went to University in the Finnish SSR, during University he became friends with later President of Finland, Peetu Taivalkoski.

In 1962, Karlsson fell in love with his old childhood friend, they married in 1965 and had 3 children together Klas (born 1970), Emily (born 1975), and Ian (born 1980).

After graduating in 1967, he served in the military, he later left the Military in 1972 to work as an animator for the Soviet Film Industry.

Political career

After Sweden declared Independence in 1987, he became Prime Minister under Erik Gustafsson's government.

During the Finnish Civil War, he expressed his support for the former President of Finland, in 1990, he blamed Erik Gustafsson for his incompetent failures to stop Aake Tyyskä from taking over Finland, in which Karlsson said: "I am extremely disappointed that Gustafsson has failed his promises, had he done something to stop the war in Finland, we wouldn't be in this situation."

First Presidency (1992-2002)

in 1992, after Gustafsson resigned, a Snap-presidential election was held in Sweden, Karlsson won the election with 97% of the vote, he announced that as President, he would start relations with neighboring European countries. Although he supported the West, he was strongly against AEATO membership and wanted to try to improve Russian relations.

in 1993, after he was elected, an Insurgency took place in the Torne Valley, which spilled itself over to neighboring Norway. That led to a Brutal conflict that lasted from 1993-1997. after the insurgency ended with a ceasefire, Finland was barred from entering the Nordic Council after they accused Tyyskä's government of selling Military aid to the Separatists in the Torne Valley.

in 1997, he was Re-elected with a Victory of 9.56% of the vote, in which he promised new reforms.

Reforms

during his Economic reforms, Sweden's economy improved drastically compared to back in 1987, the economy rose to 75%, and poverty decreased.

Karlsson's government reforms led to a stricter but stable system, Prisoners would be given harsher sentences based on how serious the crime is, however, the judiciary is more independent and can decide on the sentence.

Karlsson's Military reforms went with Increasing the Swedish Armed Forces, it became more modernized in 2000 with stronger equipment in case a war were to break out.

The Education reforms helped schools for development, which replaced the old Soviet education system. Schools became free for younger children ages 6 to 15 and cheaper for 15 and onwards.

The Healthcare reforms changed from very poor during 1926-1987 to very good healthcare since 1998, healthcare would be free to anyone who needed help with diseases, vaccination became mandatory which led to many anti-vaccine activists being jailed. Abortion also became illegal unless the victim's been raped.

Foreign relations

Karlsson's government maintains diplomatic relations with other Nordic states and European states, such as Norway, Denmark, Iceland, Styrkuria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Sapmi, and Germany. In 2002, shortly after the Flag Revolution in Finland, Relations with Finland were Re-established, and Finland was allowed into the Nordic Council.

Relations with the American Republic are good but Karlsson is critical towards the American Republic's foreign policy, as he believes that nations can stabilize themselves without foreign intervention.

End of Presidency

In 2002, Karlsson announced he would not run for president in the 2002 elections, as he respects the term limits and has said he had been done with his tenure, however, he said he would run as Prime Minister in the Parliamentary elections.

When he became Prime Minister again, he was elected in support of Oskar Andersson, and during his time as Prime Minister, he also signed a new constitution based on the old constitution from the Swedish Empire, he also signed the Anti-corruption act and reformed the Naming System, by abolishing Russian Patronyms and Surnames, he also signed the Language declaration, in which Swedish would be the sole official language, and Finnish, Sami, Meänkieli, Gutnish, Jamtlandic and Elfdalian would be Official Regional languages.

His time as PM was short-lived, much like his predecessor Gustafsson, Oskar Andersson resigned after facing Protests in Gothenburg, being accused of Corruption and Mismanagement, this caused a Snap-presidential election, Karlsson won the election with 95.9% of the vote and became President again.

Second Presidency (2007-2017)

After he won the Presidency in 2007, He started modernizing the cabinet of Sweden, he also fired many corrupt officials from power, he also appointed the then-president Markus Olsson as Prime Minister of Sweden.

In 2008, he officially banned all Left-wing media, as part of his opposition to the left.

In 2012, he was re-elected again. This caused protests claiming the election was rigged. The government responded by silencing the protests. Karlsson also accused Russia of trying to set a coup against him.

In 2013, While he was having a meeting with Norwegian President Didrik Castberg, an assassination attempt was directed towards him, a Swedish anarchist tried to shoot him. However, the bullet failed to fire and the would-be assassin was sentenced to 26 years in prison for trying to kill the President.

In 2014, with the beginning of the Bosnian Civil War, he sent aid to the Bosnian government. He also took in Bosnian refugees to Sweden, to avoid the ongoing violence.

in 2015, he founded an organization called Heathen Rights, an NGO promoting Freedom and Human Rights for Heathens all over the world.

End of Second Presidency

in 2016, Karlsson announced he would not run for the 2017 Presidential elections.in Sweden, as part of respecting the legal election.

in 2017, he left office and was then appointed as Prime Minister in which he currently serves as of today.

Personal life

Karlsson is married and has 3 children and 4 grandchildren, Klas who has two children, works as a Representative to the Riksdag, and Emily who has one child, works as an actress for the Swedish Film Industry, Ian who has one child, works as an accordion musician.

Apart from his native Swedish, Karlsson speaks fluent English, Russian, German and Icelandic, can understand Norwegian and Danish, and has some Command in Styrkurian.

Karlsson enjoys Animation, calling it "The Living Art of the 20th Century."

Karlsson is an Asatruer, but he prefers a secular system and only practices it on holidays.

Karlsson's favorite instruments include the Accordion, Saxophone, Piano, and Bagpipes.

Health issues

Karlsson suffered from Pneumonia at birth and managed to survive in a small amount of time despite the poor healthcare system in Soviet Sweden, however, he has had cases of receiving pneumonia and brief heart attacks during state visits, which had sometimes made him thought about resigning from government.

in 2016, Karlsson was hospitalized after being reported with severe heart disease, which caused him to go inactive from the presidency, and so his son Klas was acting president for one week, he came back after getting fixed, and announced he would not run for the 2017 Presidential elections.

Criticism

He has been criticized by the foreign media for his Authoritarian Right-wing style of ruling, censoring Leftist media, he has also been accused of vote-rigging and expressing Islamophobic and Anti-christian views, forbidding Hijabs and Mosques as well as persecuting Muslims and Christians, which Karlsson replied: "I am not against any religion, I am against the denial of massacres against Heathens, I don't want war, I just want stability for all Humans in my country."

He has been accused by the Sami Council for oppressing Samis in Sweden, to which he responded "I am a descendant of the Samis from the Viking Era via my mother, we do not oppress them or give them special privileges, they must pay their taxes, if they refuse to pay their taxes, they'll be fined."