The Atari 7800 was a sleek and capable videogame console released in 1986. While it had a solid offering of its own games, the 7800 featured a prime system feature: full, built-in compatibility with the Atari 2600. While consoles of the past could play Atari 2600 games through the use of an optional adapter, the 7800 accepted these cartridges right in the main slot and played them without any extra add-ons. The Atari 7800 was originally designed to succeed the Atari 5200 in 1984, but the system's launch was shelved when Atari was sold to new owners who wanted to focus on the computer market instead. The console was, instead, officially launched two years later in response to Nintendo and SEGA entering the US home console market with the Nintendo Entertainment System and Master System respectively. Many of the console's planned features, such as a high score saving cartridge, were never released. With the 7800 launch, Atari put a focus on "budget" gaming, with many games selling for less than $19.99. Because the system was all ready to go back in 1984, most of the launch titles were arcade titles from several years prior. The system was very capable in visuals as seen in games like the bundled Pole Position II. But its sound system lacked: the system designers created a cheap sound chip that could be included in cartridges, but to keep costs low, Atari limited the sound chip in very few titles. With Nintendo locking up third-parties with its two-year exclusivity agreement, Atari also had a hard time convincing third-party companies to produce games for its console – as a result, the company went after the rights to popular games that were available only for computers. Its delayed release, its cancelled peripherals, and a lack of financial backing from the company's new owners all combined to ensure that Atari 7800 would never see any success beyond being a sexier way of playing Atari 2600 titles.

When purchasing any game console please note the "condition" listed and see the notes about completeness. Unless a system is listed as "deck only" it will include AV and AC cords and controller, has been cleaned, tested and system factory restored (if applicable.)

A Note on Item Conditions when ordering from us!

When shopping any of our websites or in our stores, you will notice that we segment games, systems and accessories into condition categories:

Brand New* - new or original seal in original packaging and includes original components.

Complete - Very Good* - item is complete in box (CIB) with all original components. It will include jewel case/box, artwork, instruction manuals and any included items where applicable. All items will show very little wear.

Complete - Good* -item is complete and will include jewel case/box, artwork and manual. Labels/Manuals/Boxes might show light to minor wear.

Complete - Acceptable* - item is complete with original case/artwork, manual and game. Item will show heavy wear from use.

Game Only/Game System Only/Accessory Only* - these items might not be complete. These items will be game or system/accessory only and might not include original boxes or manuals. These items will show wear from use and might also have sticker or marker residue on them.

Ugly* - they might not be pretty but they work! We sometimes get items that show label damage, dents, deep scratches, cracks, etc. We're happy to offer these at a discount. If you just want to play a game, check the Ugly’s out and save a few bucks to boot!

Game Manual Only -these listings are for loose game manuals. Many gamers are looking to complete their collections and often missing is the original game manual. These items are in good, complete, clean condition but might show light wear from use and could have the occasional dog ear/ink/sticker to a page.

*Downloadable content, if applicable, may have already been previously redeemed or no longer available. Some games are online only even if in physical form – please confirm before ordering.)

We offer a 30-day warranty on any item purchased from us. Contact us if there is an issue and we will work to troubleshoot, repair or replace the item. We can be reached via the Chat Bubble, via email: Sales@J2Games.com, or call us at the number listed at the top of the website.