Japanese diversified multinational financial group ORIX has announced that it will invest an undisclosed sum into Navigator II, an investment fund managed by Israeli venture capital firm theDOCK, which focuses on maritime innovation. It is understood that the final closing of Navigator II brings the fund to $30 million. The fund has already accomplished five deals, including co-leading Hoopo’s $10 million Series A alongside ZIM.

"We are thrilled to welcome ORIX as an investor in theDOCK's second fund," said Hannan Carmeli, Managing Partner at theDOCK. "This investment will not only provide additional capital to support our portfolio companies, but also bring valuable expertise and strengthen our global network. The financial services expertise of ORIX is interwoven into the maritime world hence we look forward to cooperating in order to drive innovation and growth in all aspects of the shipping sector.

Navigator II invests in startups developing technologies that address the issues of shipping, ports, and supply chain. The investment from ORIX is a sign of the increased interest of Japanese leaders in Israeli innovation and highlights the potential relationship between large corporations and emerging startups.

"We are excited to join theDOCK's second fund," added Ryujiro Tokuma, Executive Officer at ORIX. "theDOCK has a strong track record of identifying and investing in innovative companies that are driving the digital transformation of the maritime and supply chain industry. We believe that this investment aligns with ORIX Group’s sustainability efforts and commitment."

ORIX was established in 1964 and is a financial services group that provides products and services to its customers by pursuing new businesses. It started as a leasing business and has since expanded into other areas, such as lending, investment, life insurance, banking, asset management, automobile-related, real estate, and environment and energy-related businesses. It has locations in 28 countries.