Elizabeth is a graduate of the Bachelor of Arts program at the University of Guelph, the Personal Financial Planner Diploma program, and the Richard Ivey School of Business Leadership Program. Following a successful career in financial services for almost 30 years, Elizabeth took over the position of President & Chief Executive Officer at Kitchener and Waterloo Community Foundation in August 2017. In 2022, Elizabeth retired from the Community Foundation and now runs a successful vacation rental business in Ecuador. Elizabeth has volunteered for a number of organizations including the Kitchener-Waterloo Art Gallery Board of Directors, Operations Chairperson for Rick Hansen Wheels in Motion, and in various roles for Heart & Stroke Foundation, United Way and KidsAbility.

In 2008, Elizabeth’s 6-year old son, Dylan, passed away suddenly of heart complications due to undiagnosed Kawasaki Disease. After sharing her story for a number of years with everyone and anyone who would listen in order to spread awareness of the disease, she felt compelled to do more. In February 2014, Kawasaki Disease Canada was born and Elizabeth is co-founder and Chair of the Board of Directors. The organization was incorporated as a national not-for-profit in May 2014 and achieved charitable status in December 2015.

Connect With Elizabeth

Michelle Batthish is a pediatric rheumatologist at McMaster Children’s Hospital and Associate Professor of Pediatrics at McMaster University. She is also the physician lead of Ambulatory Care at McMaster Children’s Hospital and Vice-President, Pediatrics at the Ontario Rheumatology Association. Her clinical and research interests are in Kawasaki Disease, healthcare transition in patients with chronic rheumatic disease and quality improvement in pediatric rheumatology. She is co-chair of the Transition Working Group at the Canadian Rheumatology Association and is on the steering committee of the Transition Hub, a national network that seeks to bridge the gap between current treatment practices and evidence-based solutions for healthcare transition in Canada.

Learn More About Dr. Batthish

Leora has been a teacher with the York Region District School Board for close to 15 years. She is a passionate educator and advocate for children, with a focus on special education. She has worked with several vulnerable populations including those with developmental disabilities, acquired brain injuries, and complex educational needs.

In addition to teaching, Leora is passionate about mental health and the power of sharing experiences through social media. She shares her stories on a personal blog entitled lifelovemom.ca, as well as a variety of other social media platforms.

In 2014, Leora’s (then 2.5-year-old) daughter was diagnosed with Kawasaki disease. She endured a week-long hospital stay, multiple infusions and cardiac follow-ups. When she was released with no lifelong health effects, Leora vowed to use the opportunity to support other KD parents in any way possible.

Read About Her Daughter’s Story

Antara is a graduate of the Bachelor’s of Business Administration program from Wilfrid Laurier University, and holds a Professional Masters of Education Degree from Queen’s University. Antara is a senior leader in the Financial Services industry and has spent over 20 years building a successful career. She is currently focused on Organizational Learning & Development and enjoys helping Financial Advisors in their practices to increase Financial Literacy amongst Canadians.

In 2016, Antara’s eldest son was diagnosed and successfully treated for Kawasaki disease at the age of 3 without any complications. In the same year, Antara lost her middle son as an infant, to congenital heart defects. After sharing her stories to those who know her, Antara was compelled to do more and joined Kawasaki Disease Canada.

Antara brings a relentless commitment to raising awareness and education of Kawasaki disease to save a child’s heart. She leverages this platform passionately to work with and support parents, caregivers, paediatricians, cardiologists and those in the GTA community.

Connect With Antara

Jocelyn is a registered nurse working in the Emergency Department at Cambridge Memorial Hospital. She holds a Bachelor of Science in Biology from Queen’s University and later pursued a Bachelor of Nursing from Western University. Her passion for pediatrics was sparked during her final nursing placement at London’s Children’s Hospital in the Pediatric Emergency Department, where she observed the resilience of young patients and the significant impact nurses can have on their lives.

Deeply committed to giving back to her community, Jocelyn has volunteered her time to various organizations including the Humane Society, the Boys and Girls Club, and Habitat for Humanity. She is keen to integrate her passion for community service into her role as a nurse.

When not attending to patients in the fast-paced Emergency Department, Jocelyn enjoys competing in weekly trivia nights, reading a good book, soaking up the sun at the beach, or simply enjoying quality time with her pets.