The strategic agreement between ASTOR and Kawasaki Robotics was signed in Berlin and is valid from July 1. The cooperation has been ongoing since 2007 and its strengthening marks the next stage of development of the robotics market in the CEE region. ASTOR will be responsible for the development of sales, marketing and cooperation in the partner channel in 12 countries of Central and Eastern Europe, including Poland.

It is not only a strong proof of mutual trust, which is the foundation in business. It is also the result of over 13 years of our successful operations. We have not only strengthened and developed the Kawasaki Robotics brand in Poland, but we also develop robotics as a part of broad technological progress– said Stefan Życzkowski, ASTOR President. He also added that in his view signing such a significant contract proves how effective ASTOR company has been in making Polish industrial plants interested in investments in robotics.

It is more than simple appreciation of our sales results. We share a similar vision of cooperating with people, including the approach to clients. We strive to provide great after-sales technical support, with 24-hour robotics service. We also develop the skills of knowledge sharing within our Robotics Training Center, which is rapidly growing – Stefan Życzkowski summed up.

From the perspective of Kawasaki Robotics GmbH, cooperation between ASTOR and Kawasaki has reached a level that was above our expectations. We greatly appreciate marketing activities aimed at strengthening the Kawasaki Robotics brand in Poland and the professional style of operations of the entire ASTOR organization. This has led to a significant increase the Kawasaki Robotics share in the robots market in Poland. All that, plus a unique spirit of optimism that we always feel when meeting the team, has paved the way for the strong cooperation – confirmed Kenji Bando, the President of Kawasaki Robotics GmbH / Carsten Stumpf, Vice President of Kawasaki Robotics GmbH.

How will the cooperation be carried out?

The new structure of Kawasaki Robotics Central and Eastern Europe HUB (Kawasaki Robotics CEE HUB), which includes Estonia, Lithuania, Latvia, Belarus, Ukraine, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, Slovenia and Poland, is managed by ASTOR and is based in ASTOR Robotics Center in Krakow. The main purpose of the organization is to increase availability and speed of technical support. Also, situating a satellite of Kawasaki Robotics GmbH in Poland unlocks a potential for greater synergy within the region, due to culture similarities between countries and better understanding of the market in this part of Europe. The main tasks and goals of Kawasaki Robotics CEE HUB include development in the area of knowledge delivery and increase in sales of Kawasaki robots. Value that ASTOR adds to the new structure includes an experienced team of robotics engineers and extensive design, technical and training facilities, that provide robotic solutions tailored to Industry 4.0. They give a competitive advantage to all companies cooperating with ASTOR in Poland and from now on, also in the region of Central and Eastern Europe.