Italian screenwriter Leo Benvenuti, who was part of a team behind five decades of hit comedies from directors such as Pietro Germi, Mario Monicelli and Carlo Verdone, died Nov. 3 in a Rome hospital following heart surgery. He was 77.

Throughout his long career, Benvenuti worked with scripting partner Piero De Bernardi, starting with Valerio Zurlini’s 1954 feature “The Girls of San Frediano,” based on Vasco Pratolini’s novel.

During their 46-year collaboration, Benvenuti and De Bernardi penned scripts for Alberto Lattuada, Vittorio De Sica, Sergio Leone, Luigi Comencini, Dino Risi, Lina Wertmuller and Nino Manfredi, among many others.

Despite his heart condition, Benvenuti had continued working steadily in recent months, co-scripting Ugo Fabrizio Giordani’s “Coconut Heads,” which is currently in release, and comedian Piero Chiambretti’s debut, “All That’s Left Is Lost,” now in post.

At the time of his death, Benvenuti was working with De Bernardi, Suso Cecchi D’Amico and Monicelli on a project for television, following their two-part telefilm “Like When It Rains Outside,” directed by Monicelli, which went to air on pubcaster RAI in October.

Among the best-known films scripted by Benvenuti and De Bernardi are those written for Monicelli, including the massively successful “My Friends” and its two sequels, “Il Marchese del Grillo,” with Alberto Sordi, and “Let’s Hope It’s a Girl.”

Other memorable titles include Risi’s “The Bishop’s Bedroom,” De Sica’s “Marriage Italian Style,” with Sophia Loren and Marcello Mastroianni, and Manfredi’s “Between Miracles.” The team also wrote the long-running “Fantozzi” comedy franchise starring Paolo Villaggio.

Notable among Benvenuti’s excursions outside comedy is his work as co-scripter on Leone’s 1984 English-language gangster epic, “Once Upon a Time in America,” which starred Robert De Niro and James Woods.

He is survived by his wife Cristiana; two sons, Roberto and Francesco, both of whom work in the film sector; and two grandchildren.