April 25, 2021

This is a thought provoking biography of the physicist Riazuddin. This book gives a brief overview of his life and his contributions towards the development of physics in a developing country like Pakistan, his contributions in Pakistan Atomic Energy Commision (PAEC) as the member technical for making Pakistan's nuclear bomb, the establishment of National Center for Physics (NCP) at Quaid e Azam University (QAU) Islamabad and his pioneering work of international recognition in the field of particle physics and the development of The International Nathiagali Summer College (INSC) after the death of Dr. Abdus Salam.

This book further pays a tribute to the first Pakistani Noble Laureate in physics, Professor Abdus Salam who was awarded the Noble Prize of Physics in 1979 for his remarkable contributions in the theory of weak interaction, his legacy as the founding father of International Center for Theoretical Physics (ICTP) Triste, (Italy) which was his renowned creation, INSC (Pakistan) and Pakistan Space and Upper Atmospheric Research Commission (SUPARCO).

Moreover, this book talks about the problems in the development of science in developing countries (especially in Pakistan) and their suitable solutions.

Kashmir is the one of the major unsolved dispute in the South Asia since the Independence in 1947 between Pakistan and India. This book refers a suitable solution according to the UN security council resolutions by doing Austrianization of Kashmir, like the one which did in case for Austria, to resolve this issue between the two nuclear powers India and Pakistan which brings stability and prosperity in the South Asian region.

In the nutshell, this is an amazing book which motivates oneself to give his best in your desired field and produce the best results, not only for the betterment of your well-being but for the whole humanity. An elegant biography of a remarkable physicist. Recommend to the all especially those who belongs to Pakistan to strengthen the countries scientific and technological community.