CHRISTOPHER Eccleston was a hit during his spell as the nation's favourite time traveller in Doctor Who.

He starred in the BBC drama Come Home in 2018, but what else has Christopher appeared in and how old is the actor?

Who is Christopher Eccleston and how old is he?

Christoper Eccleston is a 54-year-old actor who came to prominence in the crime series Cracker.

Born in Manchester on February 16, 1964, Christopher was inspired to begin a career in acting after becoming enthralled in television dramas.

His early roles between 1991 and 1996 included stints on Inspector Morse, Agatha Christie's Poirot and the part of Nicky Hutchinson in Our Friends in the North.

Christopher Eccleston married his ex-wife Mischka in November 2011 but the couple split in December 2015. They have two children together, Albert and Esme.

When was Christopher Eccleston in Doctor Who?

It was announced in April 2004 that Christopher Eccleston would take on the role of The Doctor in the BBC's reboot of the popular sci-fi series.

His first episode as the time traveller was broadcast in March 2005 but he caused controversy by walking away at the end of the series.

In November 2008, showrunner Russell T. Davies claimed that Christopher was only ever contracted for one series due to the BBC being uncertain about the franchise's future.

Despite discussions about returning for the Doctor Who 50th anniversary special, Eccleston is yet to pick up his sonic screwdriver again.

What else has Christopher Eccleston been in?

Prior to his stint on Doctor Who, Christopher Eccleston had starred in movies such as Gone in 60 Seconds, 28 Days Later and Elizabeth.

Following his popularity since the sci-fi hit, he's since starred in G.I. Joe: The Rise of Cobra, Thor: The Dark World and Kray twins biopic, Legend.

Aside from Doctor Who, Christopher's television credits include The League of Gentlemen, Lennon Naked, Lucan, Fortitude, Safe House and The A Word.

In 2018 he starred as Greg in Come Home, a BBC drama about a couple who have been married for nineteen years before the wife, Marie, walks out.

Multiple time-frames, viewpoints, and flashbacks told Greg and Marie’s story, forcing viewers to confront their own truths.

After beginning his career on the stage, Christopher made his RSC debut as Macbeth in the summer of 2018.