Become part of the WGGS TV Family!

WGGS TV 16.1 is seen throughout Upstate South Carolina, Western North Carolina and North Georgia. The market is the 36th largest television market in the United States. We cover 10 counties in Upstate South Carolina: Oconee, Pickens, Greenville, Spartanburg, Cherokee, Union, Laurens, Greenwood, Abbeville, and Anderson, reaching a population of over 1.3 million people in the state. We are on Charter Cable, Northland Cable, DirecTV, and Dish Network in the Greenville-Spartanburg-Asheville-Anderson market. Our signal also reaches Transylvania, Henderson, Polk, Rutherfordton, and Buncombe counties in North Carolina, and into Stephens, Franklin, Hart, and Elbert counties in Georgia.

Music Video Production

WGGS TV has a 28×30′ music stage set, with 4 independent monitor lines, 32-track multitrack recording capability, a full lighting grid, and a full complement of stage props. We can accomodate anything from a large band/praise team/choir to a solo artist, with variable pricing for complexity of setup.

Product Delivery:

We can deliver your finished production on a variety of formats, from HD Blu-Ray, SD DVD, to any HD or SD file format you require!

Video Production

WGGS maintains a production studio and facilities to produce original programming. We have a lighted, configurable stage for music or dance productions, in addition to a variety of sets for other types of programming. We can design and build a set for you to meet the needs of your program. We can also produce and edit on-location shoots for full programs or commercials. Let us help you market your product! Contact Benjamin Payne at production@wggs16.com for production rates and schedules.

Airtime

We have many time slots available throughout the day, and we offer many options for program lengths, from :30 second commercial slots up to full hour program blocks. Contact Ed Griffis for information on available airtime at: etgriffis@gmail.com.

Packages

We can offer you special deals on combination production/airtime packages, or we can shoot a program or commercial here for you to use or air anywhere you want. Our studio packages offer a professional audio mix, up to 3 studio cameras, crew, and a director. We will customize a package for your particular budgetary and programming needs, and help you make the most of your production. Let us help you turn your dream into a reality and get your program on the air!

Video Production