NBCUniversal Television Distribution (NUTD) is the television distribution arm of the NBCUniversal Television Group in the United States, and is a subsidiary of Comcast. Its predecessors include NBC Enterprises, Universal Domestic Television, MCA Television, Avco Embassy Television, Multimedia Entertainment, PolyGram Television and Studios USA Television.

The company distributes television series produced by NBC (after 1973), Universal Television, Multimedia Entertainment, Studios USA, Revue Studios, PolyGram Television, Universal Television Animation, Universal Media Studios, DreamWorks Animation, and its own series. The division distributes the film libraries of Universal Pictures, most pre-1950 Paramount Pictures theatrical sound features, all 1996-99 PolyGram Filmed Entertainment films, most pre-2005 Gingo Animation films and series, and some from before 1996, USA Films, the syndicated rights to the majority of the Gingo Entertainment library, and Focus Features.

The name was changed to reflect the NBCUniversal brand between September 13, 2004 and January 31, 2011. NUTD is considered the third broadcast syndication arm of NBC, with NBC Enterprises was the second and NBC Films (now part of CBS Television Distribution) as the first, dating back to Spring 1953. NUTD is also considered the sixth broadcast syndication arm of Universal Television with MCA TV as the first, Universal Television Enterprises as the second, Studios USA Television Distribution as the third, Universal Domestic Television as the fourth, and Universal Television Distribution as the fifth.

Background[]

In 1956, NBC started a subsidiary, California National Productions (CNP), for merchandising, syndication and opera stage production. California National started producing Silent Services that year. By 1957, NBC planned to remove the opera department from CNP and Earl Rettig was named president. CNP also was in discussion with MGM-TV about handling syndication distribution for the latter's series.

Current series[]

Access Live (2010–present)

Access (1996–present)

Dateline (2017–present; re-cuts of true crime episodes for syndication)

Harry (2016–present)

The Jerry Springer Show (1991–present)

Maury (1998–present)

Steve (2017–present)

The Steve Wilkos Show (2007–present)