Synopsis (IMDb): “Everything changes for 15-year-old Mia when her mum brings home a new boyfriend.”

Storyline

Fish Tank is a British drama set in East London. The narrative of the film focuses on 15 year old Mia who lives with her mother and sister. The family has a poor relationship with Mia and her mother frequently in arguments. She has an interest in dancing and wishes to pursue it in a competition until everything changes. Her mother brings home a new boyfriend causing things to spiral out of control.

The opening sequence shows Mia and her relationships with family members, adults and other youth.

Enigma codes

This opening sequence introduce s a rough character and how she relates to others. After watching the opening the audience is left with various questions which helps take them in and watch more.

Why is Mia out of breathe?

Why was Mia in the empty flat? And how did she get in?

What has Mia done to Keeley? Why will Keeley not take her back?

Why did Keeley’s friend’s get angry with Mia?

Location The location of Fish Tank abides the generic conventions of a social realism. The urban environment in which Mia lives demonstrates the genre of the film to the audience. Having an estate as the home for the protagonists applies character development into the opening sequence too. From the run down housing estate we learn that the lead character and her family are a lower class family.

Characters

During the opening sequence we are introduced to Mia. Mia conforms to the conventions of a social realism through her clothing and appearance, her attitude and her language. She is dressed as a stereotypical ‘chav’ wearing tracksuits, a hoody and a sport bag. In addition she is wearing large ear rings The connotations of a chav are that they have little money, are aggressive and cause general trouble for the rest of the community. When the audience sees this, they naturally associate the character with these stereotypes. This is reflected through her language to all the characters she engages with in the opening sequence. She swears regularly, calling her friend a “bitch” even when she is apologising to her. Her accent also helps develop her character as she speaks with a lower class accent – dropping letters for example. The setting of the film, Mia’s clothing and her language all reflect her as a stereotypical aggressive, violent, urban youth.

Sympathy for Mia is invigorated as she is introduced without any close friends; Mia has had poor primary socialisation. Throughout the opening sequence Mia is rejected by others. Firstly by keeley when she attempts to apolgise. The effect of having this as the introduction to the character creates this sympathy for Mia which they will then carry through the film. After, her relationship with her sister is revealed. Mia is then sworn at by Keeley’s dad. When she approaches Keeley, Mia gets in a fight with the group. Each character Mia interacts with represents a different part of society. Mia is rejected by a her sister who reflects the attitude both children, and Mia’s family have towards her. Then by an adult (sybolising an older generation in society) and another teenager (her peers). Each engagement with other characters helps further develop Mia’s character.

Lighting

Fish Tank abides the conventional lighting of the social realism genre as the lighting is very natural throughout; the lighting is natural to keep the film realistic and conforming to the genre. It also helps the audience identify that this is an independent film that does not have a large budget and therefore does not have the funding for lighting like a mainstream film would.

Cinematography

Many of the shots are shaky in appearances suggesting that is has been filmed using a hand held camera. This effect make the film feel more realistic as though we are walking along next to them further exemplifying the genre.

At the beginning as Mia is bending over out of breath, she is seen in the bottom half of the screen:

The audience is look from above ‘down’ at her as she is found below the middle. This makes the audience feel of a higher status than her so we are elevated to a higher position therefore we have to look ‘down’ at her. The effect this shot has is that it evokes a sense of sympathy. Her positioning on the screen represents how she is not in the middle of the screen – and also society – but is at the bottom, symbolising her social status.

As Mia is on the phone, a high angled over-the-shoulder shot is employed. The focus of the shot is on the background, showing the audience the setting. It includes Mia in the shot, implying that this is where she lives.

Sound

The opening sequence does not include non-diegetic sound. The effect of only including diegetic sound is that the film is very realistic. Everything you see and hear is in the film. The first sound we hear is of Mia’s heavy breathing before creating the first enigma code. Background sound is audible helping give context to the scene.

Titles