Andreas von Bülow

Andreas was Minister for Research and Technology in the cabinet of [former German Chancellor] Helmut Schmidt, and was a SPD member of the German parliament for 25 years. While serving on a committee investigating the Schalck-Golodkowski affair [a corruption scandal involving the former East German intelligence service]he started to receive some intelligence about the 9/11 terrorist threats in NYC. Andreas von Bülow, 64, believed that ithe CIA were involved in 9/11 and subsequently wrote a book on this subject, Im Namen des Staates (In the Name of the State). Von Bülow is currently alawyer in Bonn.

"There are tracks like those of a stampeding herd of elephants."

Claus von Bülow

Claus von Bulow was born in Copenhagen, Denmark, on August 11, 1926. He was the son of a noted playwright, Svend Borberg and Ionna von Bulow Borberg, a beautiful woman who came from a well-to-do family. Claus was educated at private boarding schools and Cambridge University, where he received a law degree. He left the practice of law to work as executive assistant to oil billionaire John Paul Getty. It was at a party at Getty's estate that he met Princess Sunny von Auersperg. The American heiress, born Martha Crawford, had married an Austrian Prince with whom she had two children, Ala and Alexander. Claus fell in love with Sunny who was unhappy in her marriage. Sunny soon divorced her husband and moved back to the United States. On June 6, 1966, she married Claus von Bulow.

"He might look like the devel, but He`s such a cozy old thing... Have you seen him do his imaitation of Queen Victoria"

They seemed a fairy-tale couple: rich, handsome, cultured. But shortly after the birth of their daughter, Cosima, the marriage began to disintegrate. Sunny's reclusiveness and von Bulow's lack of gainful employment were among the differences that eroded their relationship. Claus complained publicly about his dissatisfaction with his marriage and began an affair with a former soap opera actress, Alexandra Isles, in 1979. Isles, a divorcee and mother of one son, insisted that Claus seek a divorce. In December of 1979 and again in December of 1980, Sunny von Bulow fell into a coma. She recovered from the first but the second was irreversible. On both occasions, it was noted that her blood sugar was dangerously low, possibly indicating a high level of insulin in her system. After the second coma, Sunny's children, Ala and Alexander, began an investigation of Claus which led to his indictment for attempted murder. The von Bulow trial drew enormous attention from the public and the media. It was the first time a trial was broadcast on television. After he was acquitted at his second trial, Claus no longer felt at home in America and moved back to England in 1987. He remains close to his daughter Cosima who shares, with Ala and Alexander, a family fortune estimated at one hundred and fifty million dollars.

From the court: Movie

Vivianna Bülow

Jewellery Designer, Sculptor Vivianna Bülow-Hübe's exhibition "BEYOND TIME - Themes by Torun" continues to tour the world with great success. The recents vernissages in Düsseldorf, Hamburg and and Munich were enthusiastically attended by Subud members and the general public, as well as the press and TV. One of the outstanding pieces in the exhibition is her sculpture titled The Spiral. How this piece came about is one of many fascinating stories that Vivianna recently told me in a two and a half hour video interview. This is how it went:

"I've always been fascinated by the spiral form. If you notice, when you pour cream into coffee it produces the same two armed spiral that is found in a galaxy. Spirals are also found in human DNA.