This list is frequently updated as titles leave and join Netflix. *New additions are indicated with an asterisk.

Netflix has made headlines by investing in highbrow dramas that win Oscars. But sometimes you don’t want that! Sometimes you just want to escape the increasingly insane world out there into an action movie. Netflix has made a few of their own, but the bulk of the best action films on their service are still Hollywood blockbusters from ‘90s modern classics to more recent box office hits to films that may have slipped under your radar. From Matt Reeves to Steven Spielberg, here are the best action movies currently on Netflix.

How We Pick Our Films

Critic Brian Tallerico watches and writes about movies and TV every day. To curate this list, he dives into Netflix’s catalogue every month to surface exciting, white-knuckle action titles — using his taste and a lifetime of cinema study as his guide, instead of whatever the algorithm happens to be pushing. After triple-checking to make sure they’re still available, he watches each and writes his recommendation. We highlight more than just the thrilling crowdpleasers: Filmmakers use action to punctuate drama, lighten or heighten the mood of a movie, and explosively make an impact on cinema. Read on to find something to watch.

1917

Year: 2019

Runtime: 1h 59m

Director: Sam Mendes

This Oscar winner doesn’t land on streaming services very often, so take this chance while you can. Sam Mendes directs a visceral recounting of a personal story told to him by his grandfather about his time in World War I, allowing the harrowing journey of a British soldier (George MacKay) to unfold in one unforgettable, unbroken shot.

Baby Driver

Year: 2017

Runtime: 1h 53m

Director: Edgar Wright

It’s a little harder to watch this movie now given what we know about some of its cast, but it’s still such a remarkably well-made piece of action filmmaking, the kinetically unforgettable story of a getaway driver who knows all the best tunes. Ansel Elgort, Jamie Foxx, and Lily James may be the stars of this movie, but it’s Wright’s showmanship that really steals the spotlight.

Back to the Future

Year: 1985

Runtime: 1h 56m

Director: Robert Zemeckis

Robert Zemeckis directed all three movies in one of the most beloved trilogies of all time. The story of a teen who goes back in time turned Michael J. Fox into a household name and still serves as the template for how to do this kind of family/sci-fi adventure. The two sequels may not be as good but they’re better than you remember. And all three are on Netflix.

The Big 4

Year: 2022

Runtime: 2h 21m

Director: Timo Tjahjanto

Have you seen The Night Comes for Us? You would remember if you have because director Timo Tjahjanto is a maniac, a madman who choreographs and shoots action scenes like no one else in the world right now. He returned in late 2022 for his Netflix original about a group of assassins who are forced into action when someone kills their mentor. It’s kind of like a live-action Looney Tunes with bazookas.

The Equalizer

Year: 2014

Runtime: 2h 12m

Director: Antoine Fuqua

Who’s your Equalizer? Queen Latifah? Maybe Edward Woodward? If you said Denzel Washington, Netflix is ready for you. The Oscar winner starred in the first film adaptation of the ‘80s TV series of the same name, playing an ex-Marine who has a certain set of skills. Two sequels followed, and the third part is also on Netflix now. Skip that one and go back to the beginning in this well-made action flick with a charismatic central performance from one of the best actors who ever lived.

*Fury

Year: 2014

Runtime: 2h 15m

Director: David Ayer

The director of Suicide Squad (the first one) is one of our more divisive blockbuster filmmakers, but everyone seems to agree that this 2014 war movie is among his best. Not only is the story of an American tank crew tightly made, but it features one of Ayer’s strongest cast, and one of the strongest of any war movie in the modern era, including Brad Pitt, Shia LaBeouf, Logan Lerman, Michael Pena, and Jon Bernthal, all totally bringing it.

Godzilla Minus One

Year: 2023

Runtime: 2h 5m

Director: Takashi Yamazaki

Netflix stunned people when they stealthily dropped this worldwide hit on their service on June 1st, making a movie that wasn’t even on VOD finally available at home. The winner of the Oscar for Best Visual Effects, Godzilla Minus One is a masterful blend of action and social commentary, considered by many to be among the best in this generations-spanning franchise.

Hardcore Henry

Year: 2015

Runtime: 1h 36m

Director: Ilya Naishuller

Have you ever wanted to see a movie that replicated the feel of playing a first-person shooter video game? Then Hardcore Henry is the one for you. The plot doesn’t really matter — there’s something about experiments and lost memories and whatever — as this is all an exercise in style. Writer/director Ilya Naishuller straps viewers into the perspective of his increasingly powerful hero and then unleashes him on enemies who want to stop him. At its peak, it’s got some adrenaline-pumping lunacy that’s admirable.

The Harder They Fall

Year: 2021

Runtime: 2h 19m

Director: Jeymes Samuel

The Harder They Fall came and went too fast in late 2021 and deserves to find a bigger audience on Netflix. The phenomenal Jonathan Majors stars in this stylish Western with tons of attitude, memorable characters, and brilliant set pieces. He’s joined by Idris Elba, Zazie Beetz, Regina King, Delroy Lindo, Lakeith Stanfield, Danielle Deadwyler, and many more in a film that feels like it will become bigger as its incredible cast become acting legends.

The Killer

Year: 2023

Runtime: 1h 59m

Director: David Fincher

Michael Fassbender gives his best performance in years as an icy hired assassin who struggles to hold things together when a job goes horribly wrong. It’s a movie about a self-proclaimed perfectionist who is constantly defying his own voiceover, a great film that’s alternately hysterical and thrilling. One of the best of 2023.

*The Man From U.N.C.L.E.

Year: 2015

Runtime: 1h 56m

Director: Guy Ritchie

This loose adaptation of the ‘60s TV show looked like it was going to be a major summer blockbuster, but it kind of ended up a box office bomb, killing a potential franchise before it really began. In part because of that fate, it’s developed a loyal cult following, people who adore its undeniably cool blend of action and a few of the most beautiful people in the world. With the recent success of Guy Ritchie’s The Gentlemen on Netflix, it’s a perfect time to chase that experience with this superior film.

The Matrix

Year: 1999

Runtime: 2h 16m

Director: The Wachowskis

Neo and the gang returned to HBO Max in late 2021 with The Matrix Resurrections, and the response was predictably divisive. You know what’s not divisive? The fact that the first movie still absolutely rules. The story of an average guy who learns that nothing is what it seems has influenced so much pop culture in the over-two decades since this movie was released. You can see Neo everywhere. (And you can watch the entire original trilogy on Netflix now.)

Mr. & Mrs. Smith

Year: 2005

Runtime: 2h

Director: Doug Liman

The fun new reboot series may be over on Prime, but Netflix has the one that started it all: The movie that gave the world Brangelina. Angelina Jolie and Brad Pitt star as a seemingly ordinary suburban couple who discover that they both have secret identities as competing assassins. When they get assignments to kill each other, all hell breaks loose.

Resident Evil

Year: 2002

Runtime: 1h 40m

Director: Paul W.S. Anderson

It’s hard to believe that it’s been two decades since people started adapting the Capcom video games into feature films. Not long after the cancellation of the Netflix series of the same name, the streaming giant has re-added the first (and still best) film along with the first sequel (2004’s Apocalypse) and the second-to-last (2012’s Retribution). Yes, it’s random, but that’s how Netflix has always been with this franchise.

RRR

Year: 2022

Runtime: 3h 5m

Director: S.S. Rajamouli

One of the biggest films in the world in 2022, this crazy action flick really took off in the United States when it dropped on Netflix. It’s hard to put into words just how much movie you get with RRR. It’s kind of all the movies — musical, romance, comedy, action, drama. Whatever you’re looking for, it’s in here. You’ll want to watch it twice.

Skyfall

Year: 2012

Runtime: 2h 23m

Director: Sam Mendes

The Daniel Craig era of James Bond has come to a close and so now history can look back and appreciate his entire run. Is the best film of his five the centerpiece? Arguably. This epic unpacking of the history of 007 is gorgeously shot by Roger Deakins and perfectly directed by Sam Mendes. It features a strong villain performance from Javier Bardem and great supporting work from Albert Finney and Judi Dench. Heck, it even has a killer theme song.

Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse

Year: 2023

Runtime: 2h 20m

Director: Joaquim Dos Santos, Kemp Powers, Justin K. Thompson

What a gift to Netflix subscribers for this to already be on the service so soon after playing in theaters and landing on Blu-ray. This is how you do a big-budget blockbuster sequel, developing the themes of the first movie and setting up the stake for what now appears will be one of the best trilogies in superhero history. Packed with so much detail and creativity, it’s a film you’ll want to watch over and over again.

Spider-Man 2

Year: 2004

Runtime: 2h 7m

Director: Sam Raimi

Most superhero movies on streaming services are the exclusive property now of Disney+ given their ownership of the MCU, but Sony superhero films are allowed to escape the clutches every now and then and find their way to other streaming services. Right now, all three films from Sam Raimi are on Netflix. The second film is easily still the best, but they’re all worth a rewatch (yes, even the third one).

Starship Troopers

Year: 1997

Runtime: 2h 9m

Director: Paul Verhoeven

The bugs! No one else but the director of Robocop could have made this unforgettable sci-fi/action epic about giant bugs from outer space. On the surface, it’s a wildly entertaining action movie about young soldiers trying to stop an unimaginable force. Dig deeper and you’ll find richly rewarding satirical levels about the military complex and even fascism. However you enjoy it, just enjoy it while you can.

The Woman King

Year: 2022

Runtime: 2h 14m

Director: Gina Prince-Bythewood

Living legend Viola Davis stars in this retelling of the all-female warriors of the kingdom of Dahomey in the 19th century. She plays General Nansica, who trains young women to follow in her footsteps, and leads a rock star ensemble of future stars that includes Thuso Mbedu, Lashana Lynch, and Sheila Atim. You’ll know all their names soon enough.

*World War Z

Year: 2013

Runtime: 1h 57m

Director: Marc Forster

The people behind this massive blockbuster took the relatively simple book of the same name by Max Brooks and made it into a globe-hopping epic about the end of the world on a massive scale. Brad Pitt stars as Gerry Lane, a United Nations investigator who tries to stop a zombie pandemic while it’s actually happening. It’s an imperfect adaptation but some of its imagery is unforgettable. And every list like this needs a few zombie movies.

If you subscribe to a service through our links, Vulture may earn an affiliate commission.