Secrets of Offenbach is a mod for registered Wolfenstein, made by Possum Trot. It was released on July 28, 2005.

Description[]

19 levels are featured, though the final level is merely an end game jump. Coding changes include ammo box, seamless level flow, extra added objects, changed ceiling colors, 4 keys and different enemy behavior. Most of the graphics and sounds were taken from various classic mods such as Operation: Panzerschiff, Totengraeber, The Final Solution, Western Wall I, Spear Resurrection, Projekt: Vertilgung, Schabbs 2000 and Operation: Letzterschutz. Some material was also found on the Image World - nevertheless, a handful of original edits were also featured.

Most of the 19 levels had already been released in Abandon 2: Purgatory! - however, as the long story below explains, these levels were later greatly edited, and in some cases removed altogether, as the mod progressed; but the July 28, 2005 release consisted of an older incarnation, dated to early May 2005 as these maps were in the process of being cleaned up or thrown out.

Storyline[]

January 19, 1944. The castle of Offenbach was infiltrated. Many alarms were peeping, officers shouting and running, and guards in chain reaction. The infiltrator was you, B.J. Blaczkowicz. But that's long time ago... Now it's February 4, 1953. The war is over, and you are relaxing home in USA. Then, at night, your phone rings. It's the boss of OSA (Office of Secret Actions) who wants you to travel back to Germany. He tells, that the "Neo-Nazis" are begun to come, and under a secret selection two days ago, they won - with same threads as the original Nazis did in 1933. The country is just getting better, and then they will come again. He ask you to ruin their new project "Todeskrieg", mission is to take over Denmark, Holland, or just - whole northern Europe. You agree. The next morning you say goodbye to your wife, and fly in an airplane to Berlin. Here you walk in ruins, crying people and poor ones. You know, that it is the Nazi regime that did this, so you are filled up with anger now. You have your best and first pistol, Luger P38 in your suitcase, which you put down on some grey bricks. These brick are the corridor entrance to Castle Heruthaus, where you heard that Schabbs, which you also killed, has become alive again. Causes are unknown. Many say that it's Doctor Mengele, but he is in court by now. Otherwise it can be himself? Well, he found Fettgesicht, who leaded the ruined project "Giftkrieg" in Castle Offenbach two years ago. He is now founded, and cremated. He will be in holiness for the Nazis.

Though, many say that Castle Heruthaus is haunted. It is not sure that it's true, but who knows?

Background[]

Having grown tired of the heavily-coded Project Wolfgeist, Possum Trot turned his attention to classic Wolfenstein 3D via mods such as Remake and Schabbs 2000 in January 2005. Around the same time, another project was announced and then cancelled. This was called Uber Deutschland and came about on a whim after WSJ had released his Heer guards pack. Possum Trot then experimented with coding himself, but without any satisfactory results. This experiment, initially titled Giftkrieg, quickly ended up buggy beyond salvaging, and was deleted. Possum Trot would not experiment with coding again.

Genesis - from Projekt: Amerika to Schabbs 7000[]

January and February 2005 saw incredibly tumultuous activity in getting Secrets of Offenbach off the ground. Initially, the storyline was loosely based on a possible invasion of the United States by Nazi Germany and Japan. At this stage, it was known as Projekt: Amerika. To realize this approach, it was decided that the coding should include two additional enemies, as there were two Japanese soldier sprites available on the Image World.

For this task, an Italian coder with whom Possum Trot had chatted with via The Wolf Planet Forums (which were run by Mario Maniac and Mega Luigi), was sought out to do the coding: Flamer46. Flamer46 was quick to respond and did the coding quite fast. However, some unspecified coding issues occurred when the enemies were added. Some other coding changes, such as seamless level flow, extra added sprites and 3D directional sprites had been implemented without fault, the EXE still lay dormant for a couple of weeks. Meanwhile this was happening, Possum Trot would quickly wrap up Project: Wolfgeist, cancel Uber Deutschland and plan level guides and schemes for the upcoming Projekt: Amerika.

Flamer46 eventually drifted from the scene; Possum Trot received a message via MSN Messenger from a person alleging to be his brother that he was in hospital and would no longer be able to do the job. Whether this was orchestrated by Flamer46 or not is not certain; nevertheless, Flamer46 would not be seen within the world of Wolfenstein 3D again aside for a brief surfacing in early 2007. To try and salvage the code, a quick association with Blade Nightflame, a Slovene coder who had recently joined the DieHard Wolfers' forum, sadly did not help the matters further. During February 2005, Possum Trot had struck up conversation with coder Havoc, and the two would collaborate on many projects from this moment on. Havoc was sent the Projekt: Amerika source, and initially had a hunch of what the problem had been and how to solve it. However, fresh off a long Schabbs 2000 session, Possum Trot was weary of large-scale coding changes, not showing much interest in 3D directional sprites and the extra added enemies though they were still included early on. Instead, a classic-inspired EXE with simple changes was constructed in its place and the original source discarded. The first maps were made in the first weekend of February 2005 and would revitalize Possum Trot's gist for mapping after the failure of Project Wolfgeist. At this stage, the mod was known as Schabbs 7000 (and would later be released in this guise).

Simultaneously, Havoc also helped Possum Trot solve an issue with his computer, a Windows XP, which could not properly play DOS EXE files at the time, with Possum Trot using his brother's Windows 98 for making and playing mods up until this time. This happened on the same day that Havoc sent over the first working EXE, forever making him a very special and highly revered collaborator.

Genesis - classic Wolfenstein 3D approach and map development[]

Mapping continued forward, with small breaks. Two quick side projects came and went; a Spear of Destiny set entitled Tod and Abandon 2: Purgatory!, which in the style of preceding work, was quickly abandoned. Come spring 2005, Possum Trot took his first break from mapping, his first after nine months of continuous map making. Coming back after four weeks of not having much to do with modding, his mapping skills improved, mainly due to increasingly playing nothing but Schabbs 2000 and Assassinate Hitler. Though he had initially played these mods shortly after discovering mods in 2003, it was only in spring 2005 that the mapping style of Gary Ragland stood out to him as being those truest to form, and from this point forward, Possum Trot would rely on that particular style for his mapping. After May 6, 2005, several sprites and walls had been replaced as the mod included laboratory areas. Rather than working out the kinks to do with the two additional enemies, the mutant was replaced by a scientist guard; this would later prove to be problematic.

Come summer of 2005, the mapping got more and more streamlined, and a number of screenshots were posted on the Dome in June. Though being classic in style, a lot of graphics were changed. Some came from the Image World, but others were found in mods by Mega Luigi and Mario Maniac, WSJ, Western Wall I, Spear Resurrection and old favorites The Final Solution, Totengraeber and Operation Panzerschiff. More recent offerings, such as scraps from the then-nascent Trench Warfare, were also put into use. During July 2005, Possum Trot went back to levels 1-17 and shined them up for incoming release. Some maps, however, were actually discarded with brand new maps being made in their place. 42 levels had been completed by July 26.

Corruption of files and truncated release[]

Though mapping progressed, and Possum Trot got more and more into MapEdit (now using Chris Chokan's 8.5 patch) the fact that maps could be saved externally, making proper backup, was not known to him.

On the morning of July 27, 2005, ready to continue mapping, Possum Trot opened MapEdit only to get a Purging Swap Space error. No other editor could load the map files, including ChaosEdit. Neither Brian Lowe or Havoc could get a grip on the issue. As mentioned earlier, backup was still an unknown concept to Possum Trot, and the only version of the mod that had been saved - either as a showcase to Brian Lowe or as a reference point for Havoc for coding changes and testing - dated from May 6, 2005; just before Possum Trot's growth as a mapper was in evidence. However, most of the maps in the released version had been made in February and March 2005, and did not show that much of a growth from Project: Wolfgeist and Purgatory! and this was also acknowledged in the Dome post and the manual. As only the maps had been corrupted, the sounds and graphics had been edited over the course of the spring and early summer 2005, making for uneven compatibility. As mentioned earlier, levels 1 through 17 had been reworked, replaced and fixed up after the graphical changes, but as these new reworked maps were forever lost, this was impossible to prove visually.

Legacy[]

Adamant to show that his mapping skills had improved, Possum Trot quickly assembled his next mod, Nazi Operation, releasing a demo only one week after the events of July 27. Swearing by backing up files relentlessly from then on, the only losses for Possum Trot (soon going by his real name Thomas) after this event were by the author's own hand.

Some of the maps had, and would, have the dubious honor of having appeared in both Schabbs 7000, Gex' Spear Levels Pack and Abandon 2: Purgatory! and over the course of late 2005 Thomas would distance himself greatly from the maps, only going back to revisit Secrets of Offenbach in time for its SDL port. This port was released on June 19, 2013. It was ported by Andy Nonymous with assistance from Havoc. As with other early projects, Thomas had envisioned to re-do the mod with levels in style with his mid-2005 mods to complete the mod and make it a better play. One level was finished for this project. But as with the other early mods, this idea was abandoned.

In 2015, Officer-Michael John released a VSWAP replacement for Secrets of Offenbach.

Leaved Wolfenstein[]

Still coming to grips with his English skills, Possum Trot had envisioned an ongoing concept of forgotten ideas and storylines in Wolfenstein 3D. In the wake of End of Destiny, being fascinated with The Final Solution, Totengraeber and obscure mods from the early 2000's was not exactly fashionable. Leaved Wolfenstein took its approach in the original storylines, but twisting them into an alternate storyline of sorts. Secrets of Offenbach being the first volume, and dealing with Episode 6, the following volumes should then have been based on Episodes 5, 4, 3, 2 and finally Episode 1. Nevertheless, the concept of Leaved Wolfenstein was left behind after the initial reboot after the break in spring 2005, and a new title screen was made. This was sadly lost together with most of the post-May 6, 2005 progress.

Certain areas in Project: Wolfgeist also had Leaved in the name, e.g. a laboratory level (5).

Screenshots[]

[]