The precise workflow is described in detail on the stem cell- specific pages of BMC (most often used for OA), Secretome/Exosomes and PRP (as combination therapy).

All therapies are divided into phases such as evaluation of the medical history (we analyze your current therapies and medical records), initial counseling and evaluation of potential, patient-individual benefit of a stem cell therapy (indication statement), preliminary examinations, diagnostics, consultation on all therapy options, preparation of an individual treatment plan including cost estimate, harvesting of tissue, production of the stem cell product, quality control of the product and application. There are two special features for osteoarthritis and arthritis patients. If your previous findings have not found the specific causes of your joint pain, we will examine you in advance with a precise and informative arthro-MRI or an MRI with non-radioactive contrast medium, if you wish. In addition, we often apply the stem cells (BMC) intra-articularly (i.e., directly in the joint). This means that we deliver the stem cells to the exact location where your pain originates.

Unfortunately, according to the risk-benefit ratio, we cannot treat children or pregnant women. In addition, other factors can also be exclusion criteria.

How Long Does a Stem Cell Therapy Take?

The initial analyses and counseling can be done without you having to travel to Offenbach (near Frankfurt/Main, Germany). This period can be 2 weeks up to months depending on the availability of patients slots. If you live further away, we will conduct the initial discussions by telephone or video conference. For the actual treatment, you will travel to Offenbach. Then, depending on the therapy, the tissue collection, quality control and treatment type it will take as follows:

BMC- and PRP-Therapy

Each donation and application of BMC on-site period: 2 days (consecutive days).

Secretome/exosome-Therapy:

Preparation and harvest of the fat (mini-liposuction) need once 2 days (consecutive days) in Offenbach, followed by enrichment of the mesenchymal stem cells (secretome/exosome) and quality control. Approximately 4 weeks after the isolation, the therapy begins according to the therapy plan determined with you. You will then come to Offenbach am Main (Germany) several times for the application. The shelf life of the secretome (exosomes) is 2 years.

How Much Does Stem Cell Treatment Cost?

Our treatments are always tailored to your specific situation, disease, stage and other factors. The therapies differ in the product used (BMC, secretome, PRP or hyaluronic acid), the frequency of treatment as well as the further examinations and your sedation and anesthesia wishes. A treatment for erectile dysfunction can cost from a few thousand to several thousand euros. You will receive a cost estimate for all treatments in advance so that you can accurately estimate what a treatment would cost in your individual case.

Does my Health Insurance Cover the Therapy Costs?

Unfortunately, at the moment it is assumed that health insurance companies do not cover the costs of experimental therapies (BMC, secretome, PRP), i.e. you will have to bear the costs entirely yourself.

Based on our specific diagnostics using ultrasound imaging of the penis and penile arteries (doppler and duplex US) as well as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and angiography (MRA) of the arteries supplying the penis, we can, in contrast to many other clinics, deliver the stem cells with image support, e.g. using CT, precisely to the affected area. This means we can inject into and at the site of damage or cause to specifically and quickly trigger an effect where needed. All interventions are performed under supervision and care of our anesthesiologist and are pain free.

A purely intravenous administration, as many other clinics do, is only performed for the secretome (exosomes) if this is to be used additionally as a supportive or preventive measure because joint problems are present in several places in the body as the secretome is aimed to centrally modulate the immune response in order to inhibit over-reactions.

Of course, we will thoroughly advise you in the early process and the on-site consultation in advance on all steps and discuss alternatives and expectations.

© https://www.researchgate.net/publication/342249238_Image_guided_sacroiliac_joint_corticosteroid_injections_in_children_an_18-year_single-center_retrospective_study

Safe Methods of Stem Cell Delivery in Erectile Dysfunction

There are different possible methods of application. The intravenous injection of ADSCs has been shown to improve erectile function . Injection of stem cells into the erectile bodies of the penis (intra-corporal) has also been applied, since it is both easy and appears logical . Peri-prostatic injection, with or without a concurrent intra-corporal injection, has also been performed , . All of these application forms can potentially help, as the regenerative effect of stem cells is mainly achieved by either indirectly by secreting growth factors locally via paracrine mechanisms or by direct migration of the cells to the major pelvic ganglia .

The safety, efficacy, and the mechanisms of both bone marrow (BM) and adipose tissue derived (ADSC) stem-cells for the treatment of ED has been amply evaluated in several pre-clinical trials. A research group has summarized the data27.

Almost all of the studies reported improved erectile function in various animal models of CN injury, vascular insufficiency, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, and aging. Whilst concerns about the possible promotion of malignant tumors remain whenever stem cells are being transplanted , the use of cell-free solutions like the ANOVA stem cell secretome, the collection of paracrine factors with which stem cells effect repair, has solved this problem, since it avoids the transplantation of the actual stem cells.

Despite the wide range of causes of ED, the common denominator is that until now there were only ways to treat the symptoms. Typical medications to treat Erectile Dysfunction (ED) and impotency are based on a substance group called “PDE-5 inhibitors”. Many other drugs have displayed temporal help against impotence in form of injections or creams. There is no clear answer on which of these ED treatment drugs is the best; as they have different properties and side effects. However, all of these drugs have one thing in common: they do not target the cause and therefore are not a “cure”. Their mode of action is based on temporarily overriding the symptoms of weak or no erections.

Regenerative medicine, and the use stem cells as one of their major tools in treating numerous conditions, allows us for a fundamentally different treatment approach. All causes of erectile dysfunction, except in the case of psychologically induced impotence, have some form of primary or secondary blood or nerve supply problem as their main cause. Stem cell-based regenerative therapies have the potential to promote both, angiogenesis (new growth of blood vessels and blood supply improvement) as well as neuro-trophy / neuro-protection (new growth and protection of nerve supply of the penis).

While there are some causes of ED which cannot be treated (i.e. psychologically induced ED), new discoveries in regenerative medicine and stem cells may be able to find the solution. However, it should be noted that a therapy success cannot be guaranteed with any type of treatment. Particularly in the case of experimental treatments such as stem cell therapy, the attending physician is obliged to perform a benefit-to-risk analysis for each patient and determine both the benefits and the risks for that particular patient. If the potential benefits outweigh the potential side effects, they may recommend experimental therapy. Find out about your therapeutic options at ANOVA - call us today.

What is Erectile Dysfunction / Impotence?

Erectile Dysfunctions (ED) is defined as the reduction of potency and libido. All age groups of men can suffer from weak penile erections, which renders their sexual intercourse problematic or even impossible.

What Causes Erectile Dysfunction - ED?

It can have a variety of causes, both physical and psychological. Most frequent reasons are diabetes, smoking, obesity or high blood pressure. Additionally, the effects of aging are partly responsible for impotence and ED.

How is Erectile Dysfunction - ED treated? What Medication is Used to Treat ED?

In the previous decade, the so called “PDE-5 inhibitors” medications were shown to be a successful group of drugs that improved the quality of life of many affected men. However, they offer limited help by temporarily overriding the symptoms of impotence and ED. With recent advancements in stem cell research, promising treatment options have emerged. We at ANOVA, a German Stem Cell Clinic, are the first in Europe to introduce a novel stem cell-based medical treatment approach to treat impotence: The ANOVA Stem Cell Secretome. Schedule an appointment today for more information on how we treat ED with stem cell-based therapies.

What are Stem Cells?

Stem cells are cells that possess the ability to divide into many subgroups of cells, and are responsible for many controlling functions in the body through their paracrine communication (growth factors, hormones, cytokines, anti-inflammatory factors, extracellular vesicles, exosomes and microRNA). We have a full length article describing some of the medically relevant properties of stem cells and stem cell derived treatments here.

Has Research on Stem Cells and ED Been Performed?

Over 20 pre-clinical studies have been published so far on different stem cell models and different damage models in animals for ED since 2004. In 2016, two Phase I study results were published for Bone Marrow Concentrate (BMC) and fat derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells (adMSCs). Both the human and animal studies universally showed an improvement with different interpretations of the results. A breakthrough study was published by Albersen et al. in 2010 that showed that the effects of stem cell injections cannot be accounted to direct differentiation and adherence of the injected stem cells, but rather from their paracrine substances.

Does Stem Cell Therapy Work for Erectile Dysfunction - ED?

The ANOVA Stem Cell Secretome Therapy as the next generation of stem cell-based therapies entails paracrine substances that have the potential to stimulate regeneration. It thus offers a new approach for the treatment of erectile dysfunction and impotence. We are the first in Europe to take full advantage of the stem cells and harness their regenerative powers via their secreted bio-compounds. With the ANOVA Secretome Therapy in combination with Bone Marrow Concentrate Stem Cells we are able to provide a safe way to use stem cells as a natural, personally tailored, regenerative therapy for the different underlying pathologies of erectile dysfunction and impotence.