Charlie Sheen’s very recent ex-wife, former real estate agent Brooke Mueller, has just come out with a slew of new accusations about Sheen—including that he once knocked her unconscious.

She also claims he’s threatened to have people (including her) killed, and that he called his manager a “stoopid Jew.” She says physical violence occurred even before their infamous Christmas Day row of 2009, which ended with the arrest of Sheen and divorce proceedings.

Sheen denies all of her allegations. And certainly his recent spate of media rants has only added to his credibility (ahem).

I have been wondering what would possess a woman—any woman—to marry a guy like Charlie Sheen, besides his obvious attributes of fame and money. Mueller, unless she’d been living in an airtight bunker for two decades, must have been familiar with her intended’s sordid romantic history. This history includes a bitter divorce from actress Denise Richards, who filed for the split while she was six months pregnant with their second daughter. At the time, Richards claimed, among other things, that Sheen was addicted to prostitutes and regularly viewed underage pornography on the Internet.

But that’s not all, folks! Long before Richards came on the scene, there was ex-girlfriend Brittany Ashland, who sued Sheen in 1996 for physical assault (Sheen pleaded no contest). Sheen recently told Piers Morgan that he never hit Ashland and that he was merely “trying to contain” her. He added that he even brought her to the plastic surgeon afterwards. Aw, that’s sweet.

But there’s more! In 1995, Sheen was outed as one of Hollywood Madam Heidi Fleiss’s best customers. And, in 1990, he accidentally shot his then-fiancee, actress Kelly Preston, in the arm. Preston was prescient enough to call off the engagement.

This isn’t even remotely the full scope of Sheen’s checkered pattern with women, but I don’t have all day. The point is that Brooke Mueller had many red flags regarding Charlie Sheen. More red flags than surround the Washington Monument. More red flags than are fluttering during a Memorial Day parade. You get the picture.

In fact, Donald Trump has revealed that he warned Mueller's parents (friends of his) not to let their daughter marry Sheen. And who wouldn't listen to marriage advice from Donald Trump?

So why does a woman marry a guy like Charlie Sheen?

“Some women like the bad boy,” says Manhattan psychotherapist Jonathan Alpert. “She loves the bad boy behavior when it’s not targeting her, but moment it’s turned on her, she doesn’t like it.”

Indeed it seems like Mueller now doesn’t like it. On Tuesday, she got Sheen stripped of his partial custody of their twin toddler boys.

Another theory is that Mueller isn’t exactly much for the conventional marriage herself. For a short time, she was reportedly living with Sheen and his two “goddesses” (ie young porn stars) at his mansion in Los Angeles. Mueller, like Sheen, has been treated for substance abuse. And, like Sheen, she doesn’t exactly crave privacy. Last year, she was filming a TV reality show with that personification of class, Paris Hilton.

“The very thing that can attract a woman to a man is the thing she can end up hating later,” says Alpert.

Perhaps this was a case of like minds meeting. Until, one fine day, like turned into hate.