ACTOR Charlie Sheen has been married three times throughout his time in Hollywood.

Fans of the Two and a Half Men star want to know more about his past marriage to Brooke Mueller.

Who is Charlie Sheen's ex-wife, Brooke Mueller?

Brooke Mueller was born in Ellenville, New York, on August 19, 1977.

The 46-year-old actress has appeared in multiple television shows and films.

According to her IMDb page, she is known for USA High (1998), Witchouse (1999), Strictly Sexual (2008), and Super Heroes: The Movie (2021).

Mueller wed actor Charlie Sheen on May 30, 2008. The pair had gotten engaged during the summer of 2007.

According to The Daily Journal, Mueller was a real estate investor at the time.

"She's just easy, and loving, and smart, and if everybody was just as happy to see me when I walk through a door as her, my life would be perfect,” Sheen had said about Mueller soon after their engagement.

Per Us Weekly, they were introduced by mutual friend Rebecca Gayheart, a model and actress.

When did Charlie Sheen and Brooke Mueller divorce?

Per Us Weekly, Sheen and Mueller split in 2010, having filed for divorce in November of that year.

Their divorce was finalized in June 2011.

How many children does Brooke Mueller have?

Mueller has two children, including fraternal twin boys with Sheen.

Per In Touch, Max and Bob Sheen were born seven weeks premature on March 15, 2009.

In an April 2009 interview with the outlet, the Hollywood star opened up about his family life.

"There are days I don't even want to go to work because I want to be with my family," he said at the time.

Sheen also shares daughters Sami and Lola Sheen with his second ex-wife, Denise Richards, as well as daughter Cassandra Jade Estevez with his ex-girlfriend Paula Profit.

"I feel like I'm doing something for the greater good. They're relying on me to make the right choices so they can have the life they deserve," he continued, referring to his kids.

Mueller told the publication at the time, "I finally feel like everything has fallen into place."