EXTECH/Exterior Technologies, Inc. (EXTECH) announced three types of KINETICWALL standard suspension systems for wind-driven façades – Drop-In, Pin-Mount and Rod-Mount, plus custom options. Suitable for both small- and large-scale projects, EXTECH's KINETICWALL suspension systems are paired with its flapper-panel designs, adding dynamic movement to building enclosures and wall systems. Popular applications include transit and parking facilities, cultural institutions and artistic installations.

"Our KINETICWALL systems respond to wind currents, creating the look of rolling waves across the flapper-panel wall system," described Jim Leslie, EXTECH's general manager. "Based on our extensive research of kinetic wall suspension techniques, we are confident that the Drop-In, Pin-Mount and Rod-Mount systems offer the greatest range of benefits in terms of longevity, performance and value. Each configuration possesses different performance and aesthetic characteristics and baseline costs."

EXTECH engineers and fabricates the KINETICWALL systems in its factory and typically unitizes them into panels ready for delivery and installation. Dimensions commonly range from 3 by 4 feet to 5 by 12 feet in vertical or horizontal orientations.

All of EXTECH's wind-driven, dynamic façade systems support a wide variety of flapper sizes and materials including metal, polycarbonate, PTFE and PVDF films. The spacers between the flappers reduce the collateral noise. During repair or maintenance operations, the flappers can be removed and replaced without any specialized tools.

For optimal cost and performance value, the KINETICWALL Drop-In suspension system is recommended. In this configuration, the T-shaped kinetic flappers easily are inserted into a specially designed "rung" extrusion system, significantly reducing the amount of time and labor required for installation.

The KINETICWALL Pin-Mount suspension system allows the flapper elements to seemingly float in front of the support rungs and side rails as a veil. This configuration minimizes the appearance of the supporting structure. The Pin-Mount system allows for mixing flapper shapes to create unique geometric patterns and for installation at various mounting points, facilitating changes in kinetic activity.

KINETICWALL Drop-In and Pin-Mount suspension systems accommodate a 90-degree range of motion. Offering a 360-degree range of motion for the individual flappers, the KINETICWALL Rod-Mount suspension system allows for intermittent views through the kinetic façade.

The Rod-Mount design minimizes the appearance of the horizontal supporting structure from within the building. It also permits increased air-flow and promotes passive cooling in climates that are not susceptible to freezing. The vertical side rails are more prominent within the façade and the flappers can be replaced with simple tools.