Patented Kinetic suspension technology from Tenneco Inc. is supplying ride control on the 2008 Toyota LandCruiser 200. Toyota has launched its breakthrough suspension technology, known as the Kinetic Dynamic Suspension System (KDSS), as standard on all five LandCruiser models except on the GXL turbo-diesel where it is offered as an option.

The KDSS system is designed to provide outstanding vehicle stability for the LandCruiser SUV, for both on- and off-road performance. It improves on-road ride, handling and steering feel by creating a flat operating stance during cornering and lane changing, according to Gregg Sherrill, Tenneco chairman and CEO. For challenging off-road maneuvers, the LandCruiser maintains control, balance and an even keel, while helping the driver maintain a comfortable ride, he adds.

“The growth in our ride control business is driven by customers who want improved handling and stability and unique ride characteristics that help differentiate their vehicles,” says Sherrill. “Our Kinetic technology is an excellent example of such differentiation, and we were proud to work with Toyota on this important launch.”

The LandCrusier is the second Toyota SUV to feature the KDSS suspension; Tenneco debuted its Kinetic technology on the 2004 Lexus GX470.

The system does not rely on the use of wires or electronics, but rather operates through the use of hydraulic pistons, which control the front and rear stabilizer bars.

“KDSS enables the new LandCruiser 200 to enjoy two previously contradictory benefits – longer wheel articulation for the most challenging off-road driving and the roll control needed for confident on-road driving,” Toyota notes.

The 2008 LandCruiser 200 was first launched in Australia, Toyota’s largest market for the full size LandCruiser, where the vehicle’s performance excels due to its exceptional durability and performance in the harsh Australian “outback” conditions, the automaker says.

Earlier this year, Tenneco announced that it anticipates achieving an average compounded annual original equipment-sales revenue growth rate of 11 percent to 13 percent between 2008 and 2012.