TENNECO (NYSE: TEN) is one of the world's leading designers, manufacturers and marketers of automotive products for original equipment and aftermarket customers, with full year 2021 revenues of $18 billion and approximately 71,000 team members working at more than 260 sites worldwide.

Through our four business groups, Motorparts, Performance Solutions, Clean Air and Powertrain, Tenneco is driving advancements in global mobility by delivering technology solutions for diversified global markets, including light vehicle, commercial truck, off-highway, industrial, motorsport and the aftermarket.

ADVANCED SUSPENSION TECHNOLOGIES (AST) is a key driver of growth and innovation at TENNECO and as a business unit within the Performance Solutions segment, AST plays an integral role in providing market-leading suspension solutions for vehicles on a global scale.

In AST, we work with world-renowned brands and industry leaders. With our heritage rooted in racing and motorsports, we develop cutting edge technology and next generation suspension. We're dedicated to helping drivers experience the perfect ride, and we deliver advanced suspension technologies that offer improved performance, comfort, and the power to differentiate vehicles. Our goal is to be the top choice for advanced suspension solutions in the two-wheel and four-wheel categories worldwide.

In our Advanced Suspension Technologies we are currently looking for KINETIC PRODUCT MANAGER.

The KINETIC PRODUCT MANAGER will take responsibility for the product line strategy, which includes new development, go-to-market and continuous improvement of the Kinetic product line.

The Kinetic product line is currently in a strong growth phase. After the introduction on the McLaren cars since 2014, we have grown the customer base with Rivian and AMG in 2021 and we have more programs in development with other OEMs. In parallel we are continuously improving the Kinetic system and its components (cost, performance and quality) and also develop new concepts to drive our longer term future. To support this growth, we are looking for a dedicated Kinetic Product Manager (M/F).

The PRODUCT MANAGER works intensively with the cross functional product development team for Kinetic consisting of product engineering, manufacturing development, supplier development, sales, legal and program management. The team follows the so-called NTI process. THE KINETIC PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT TEAM HAS ITS HOME ROOM IN THE MONROE ENGINEERING TECHNICAL CENTRE IN BELGIUM. The PRODUCT MANAGER leads the product definition and planning phases. In the execution phase, the product manager acts as team member and is responsible for the product management deliverables and guides the team to balance product performance and cost in line with the agreed product strategy. The product manager also supports the marketing activities and the sales team to bring the product to its first adopter and other future customers. As the main production location for Kinetic is in Gliwice Poland, the product manager will have close relations with the local team to work on continuous improvements and forecasting production demand.

PRINCIPLE RESPONSIBILITIES:

Understand the market, customers and competition for Kinetic type product offerings

Drive a holistic product strategy to support AST business growth

Develop and scope new product opportunities for Kinetic product line

Manage the product life cycle and drive continuous improvements.

Develop with sales the product-customer roadmaps and define product strategy

Work with cross functional product development team on NTI projects to meet product objectives

Development of sales tools and other promotion materials, supported by marketing.

Required Skills

Leadership skills

Results oriented

Proactive

Independent

Self-confident

Required Experience