By Bill Quinnan

For O.C. Register Special Sections

A change in leadership can sometimes be disruptive for a corporation’s internal culture, but Trace3 continues its record as an Orange County Register Top Workplace even with a new captain at the helm.

In August 2014, Tyler Beecher was named the new Chief Executive Officer of the Irvine-based solutions provider. Beecher succeeds company founder Hayes Drumwright, who remains in a leadership role as executive chairman.

“Tyler is a world-class technology executive who brings extensive experience in the IT trenches to our leadership team,” Drumwright said of his successor. “His deep background and broad knowledge prepare him to take Trace3 to the next level of operational excellence as a high-growth company and industry disruptor.”

Before joining Trace3, Beecher served as director of enterprise sales for NetApp and led high-performing sales teams at EMC, Cisco Systems and 3Com.

Trace3 has been named among the Register’s Top Workplaces consistently for the last five years, receiving a special award for “clued-in senior management” in 2013. Through anonymous surveys conducted during the Top Workplaces selection process, Trace3 employees have credited Drumwright with being an inspirational leader and for treating employees as family.

Drumwright, who founded Trace3 in 2002 with Dave Linder and Bret MacInnes, was also named the Ernst & Young Orange County/Desert Cities Entrepreneur of the Year in 2010 and received an Excellence in Entrepreneurship Award from the Orange County Business Journal in 2011. Under his leadership, Trace3 was ranked among CRN and Inc.’s lists of fast-growing companies in 2010 and 2011 and was recognized by industry giant Cisco Systems as its Innovation Partner of the Year for 2013.

Under Drumwright’s direction, the company reached $420 million in revenue in 2013. As the company continues to broaden its information-technology services portfolio under Beecher’s leadership, it aims to eventual achieve $1 billion in annual sales, Drumwright said.

Upon starting Trace3, Drumwright focused on what he calls “foundational success,” with corporate growth resulting from decisions that benefit employees, partners and clients collectively.

Another priority for the company has been smart recruiting. In outlining his hiring philosophy, Drumwright explained that high-performing employees – whom he calls “A players” – will produce three to four times what “B players” will produce.

“So, if I paid them 80 to 70 percent higher than market, I’d come out ahead,” he said.

Trace3 also makes it a priority to share its leaders’ vision for the company. For the past nine years, the firm has made an annual practice of releasing its company playbook, a business plan designed to explain the company’s goals and its strategies for achieving them, as well as its plans for limiting risks faced by the organization, including those related to competition, consolidation and economic conditions. The playbook is released each year to employees and then to customers and partners.

Beecher noted at Trace 3’s Evolution business conference in January that the playbook was one of the aspects of the firm that initially drew him to the organization, along with the company’s push for evolution, its universal customer-service focus and its ability to recognize emerging technologies, talented people.

“I think we all write playbooks. We have kind of a private playbook, and maybe sometimes we show a little bit of it to the world. But the idea that Trace3 was so bold as to call their shot … it was interesting that by sharing Trace3’s juice, people were really attracted to that message. They were attracted to that transparency,” he said.