In Queen of the North, O’Brien sweeps us back to the great upheaval of 1399 and introduces us to a little remembered key-player, Elizabeth Mortimer. Elizabeth was the wife of the tempestuous Henry ‘Hotspur’ Percy; great-granddaughter of Edward III; and cousin to both Richard II and Henry IV. With her royal blood and advantageous marriage, Elizabeth was a woman of power, wealth and influence, who played an almost forgotten, but key role in the ensuing turmoil for the throne. And the only literary reference to this is her, incorrect, portrayal as Lady Kate Percy in William Shakespeare’s Henry IV.

It was for this reason that O’Brien was so keen to write Elizabeth’s story. O’Brien portrays Elizabeth as a proud, clever and ambitious woman, who has a great love for her children and shares a passionate love with her first husband, Henry. When her cousin, Henry Bolingbroke landed in England, in 1399, with an army to bring their cousin Richard II to heel, he has the full support of Elizabeth’s powerful father-in-law, Henry Percy, 1st Earl of Northumberland and his eldest son, her husband. However Elizabeth very much has her own mind and that is if anyone else is to sit upon the throne, it should be her nephew, Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March.

And for this belief she is willing to risk everything in dangerous scheming and eventually outright treason – more than once! I didn’t particularly ‘like’ Elizabeth, but I did find her fascinating and her story truly moved me. I was heartbroken with Elizabeth, as Henry is brutally slain at the disastrous Battle of Shrewsbury; as she rides under his severed head on the gates of York; as she begs for his despoiled body to be returned; as she is separated from her children; and as she forced into a second marriage. So much sorrow, so much suffering, and yet it is worse because I knew, as much as she does but doesn’t want to admit, that she brought a lot of it upon herself.

Previously, I have not read anything about Elizabeth, so this was as much a history lesson as it was an entertaining read. A history lesson that O’Brien has again brought to life in glorious detail – from the sumptuous dress and life of court, to the daily life of a medieval woman writing her letters, using her still room and hosting guests; to the bloody battlefield. Something else I love about her writing is how characters overlap in her books, which makes it possible for us as readers to see the bigger picture of the time period. In this case, Henry IV and Thomas de Camoys were both in previous novels, The King’s Sister and The Queen’s Choice.

Overall, I thought Queen of the North was an evocative tragedy of love, loss, loyalty and betrayal, through the eyes of the fascinating Elizabeth Mortimer – she certainly wasn’t your dull, dutiful wife!

Queen of the North by Anne O'Brien is an engaging novel. Elizabeth Percy is an intriguing character - in many ways just as headstrong as her husband - Harry Hotspur, and with a firm belief in the value of her own royal birthright.

The blurb for the book is, sadly, misleading. Much of Elizabeth Percy's vitriol is not directed against Richard II, indeed she seems to really rather like him for the brief appearance he makes, but rather against the next king, Henry IV, who usurps the throne, with the support of the Earl of Northumberland and her husband, but who then fails to pay the desired blood price. It is Henry IV that she wishes to see removed from the throne of England, not Richard II, although it is her nephew that she wishes to replace him with. In this, her husband is very much in agreement.

There is a wonderful sense of impending doom throughout the first half of the novel, but I didn't feel as though the second half succeeded with quite the same sense of drama. That said, Elizabeth is too interesting a character to not want to read about all of her life, and I enjoyed the character's own journey to self-realisation that occurs by the final pages of the book.

All in all, a firm addition to Anne O'Brien's cast of somewhat 'unlikely' heroic women of the Middle Ages who have sadly been overlooked by the joy that is popular history.

Granddaughter of a royal prince, Elizabeth Mortimer has Plantagenet blood flowing through her veins so her dynastic marriage to Harry Percy, son of the Earl of Northumberland, is no surprise. Percy, known as Hotspur, is an able soldier and has been loyal to King Richard II despite his inept governance. When Elizabeth's exiled cousin Henry Bolingbroke lands in Yorkshire ready to take back his inheritance Hotspur and his father pledge loyalty and back Henry of Lancaster to the throne. Even when Richard is found to have died in captivity the Percys support Henry. Elisabeth, however, is interested in the rights of her nephew, Edmund of March, who technically is the heir to the throne. Even when a failed coup sees Hotspur killed, distraught Elizabeth cannot see how her family ties may have destroyed her marriage ties.

Once again Anne O'Brien has found a historical figure about whom much and yet little is known. Elizabeth Mortimer was closely linked to the politics of the throne through blood and marriage and her O'Brien has given her a voice. In common with O'Brien's other works this fictionalisation comes with a heavy dose of romance which can be irritating at times but the machinations and complexity of medieval history are carefully contextualised and handled well. It is hard to write a convincing novel about real characters in history and O'Brien's books are on the 'populist' end of the scale but are also a really good read.

If you’re looking for murder, treason, ambition and feuding families, then you’ve come to the right place. And that’s only the first page!

Anne O’Brien’s Queen of the North is a behemoth of historical fiction, spanning the tumultuous period that would one day lead to the Wars of the Roses: the 1300s. Harry Bolingbroke (soon to be Henry IV) challenges Richard II for the right to the throne, supported by the Percy family of the north. All except for Elizabeth Percy. Her family, the Mortimers, believe that her nephew should be on the throne instead- and she intends to do something about it.

Straight from the start, two things struck me about this novel: the strong female heroine, and the vividly-drawn historical world that we find ourselves in. O’Brien’s dedication to bringing the past to live is easy to see, as is the depth of her research; every page brings a new revelation about the intricate politics of the time, the border skirmishes with Scotland, or even the way in which medieval children were raised. Of particular interest to me (being Welsh!) was the story’s inclusion of Owain Glyndwr, the Welsh revolutionary who aimed to establish a Welsh kingdom once more.

That all made for a fascinating backdrop to the action taking place, but of course that means very little without a compelling narrative. O’Brien gives it to us with the Percy family and the heroine, Elizabeth. Elizabeth is an unusual woman for the standards of her time- outspoken, independent, and not afraid to get involved in men’s affairs. She’s very entertaining to read about, with a sassy internal monologue, and is a canny operator- which keeps you hooked as you try and guess what she’s going to do next. The only problem is her fixation with getting her nephew on the throne. This is the whole crux of the novel- I know!- but I found it quite wearing listening to her being bitter and plotting and falling out with her husband as a result. Sorry!

However, it’s Elizabeth’s relationship with her husband, Harry Percy- Harry Hotspur- that provides most of the focus of this book. I’d heard of Hotspur before of course, but this book does a great job of humanising him, showing you why he made the decisions he did- and shifting the focus, for once, to the importance that his wife may have had in trying to shape history.

Though I would like to have seen more of their relationship- it did tend to get drowned in exposition overloads and important meetings rather than letting us see much of them- it still went a long way to breathing life into the history tomes. With gallons of warmth, humour and intrigue, this read was one that had me hooked until the end. For people looking for the next Elizabeth Chadwick, or Philippa Gregory, this is it. The perfect summer read!

Three word review: vivid. Political. Dangerous.

Having enjoyed some of Anne O’Brien’s previous books, I was excited to learn that her latest novel, Queen of the North, was going to tell the story of Elizabeth Mortimer, wife of the famous Harry Hotspur, heir to the Earl of Northumberland in the late 14th and early 15th centuries.

The novel opens in 1399; King Richard II is still on the throne, but for how much longer? His power is weakening rapidly and the exiled Henry of Lancaster is preparing to return to England and reclaim his lands. Elizabeth Mortimer’s husband, Harry Percy (known as Hotspur), and his father, the Earl of Northumberland, are among the northern Lords who decide to take Lancaster’s side against the King. This worries Elizabeth, who is convinced that Lancaster’s ultimate goal is the throne of England itself – and soon she is proved right.

Although Lancaster is Elizabeth’s cousin, she is disappointed when the Percy family support him in deposing Richard and claiming the crown. She believes that her young nephew, Edmund Mortimer, has a stronger claim and she is determined to do whatever it takes to help him take his rightful place as King. This will bring Elizabeth into conflict not only with the newly crowned Henry IV but also with her husband and she will have to decide where her loyalties truly lie: with the Mortimers or with the Percys?

I loved Queen of the North; I think it’s my favourite of the five Anne O’Brien novels I’ve read so far. I really liked the northern setting, which gave me some glimpses of places I know and have visited, such as the Percy stronghold of Warkworth Castle when it was a living, working building rather than the semi-ruin it is today. The central two characters in the novel are well drawn, strong and convincing. I liked Elizabeth – although her obsession with putting her nephew on the throne becomes frustrating at times, it’s obvious that it means a lot to her and that she is only doing what she believes is right. With her husband reluctant to help and the old Earl completely in opposition, she takes matters into her own hands and although her actions are not always sensible I did admire her courage and persistence. I also liked Harry, nicknamed Hotspur because of his brave, reckless and impulsive nature. His relationship with Elizabeth is very convincingly portrayed – their personalities clash at times and they don’t always see eye to eye, but their love is strong enough to survive these differences of opinion.

Because we are seeing things through Elizabeth’s eyes, a lot of important events – such as battles, rebellions and some of Hotspur’s meetings with Henry IV – take place ‘off the page’. However, this does not mean that Elizabeth’s personal story is boring; she has plenty of adventures of her own as she tries to navigate her way through the various plots and schemes of the shrewd old Earl of Northumberland, the Welsh hero Owain Glyn Dŵr, and her own Mortimer relatives. There’s never a dull moment and in comparison to Anne O’Brien’s last book, on Joan of Kent, I think this is a much more exciting and compelling novel. Speaking of O’Brien’s other books, there is also some overlap here with The Queen’s Choice, which tells the story of Henry IV’s wife, Joanna of Navarre. This is a great read and one I would highly recommend.

The reign of Henry IV had always proved an elusive period in history for me - until now!😀

Sandwiches between the of Edward III and the tumultuous tears of the Wars of the Roses, the Lancaster kings have struggled to attract my attention. However, Anne O'Brien's Queen of the North has changed all that. She has brought the reign of Henry IV front and centre, recreating the lives of the king and his contemporaries in vivid, well researched detail.

The character of Elizabeth Mortimer Percy is a wonder to behold, both in her complexity and depth. The author has thoughtfully breathed life into this woman, giving her a personality which makes get leap off the page and grab the reader's attention. Her ambitions, trials and interaction with her friends, family and enemies are at the centre of this vivid tale of war, intrigue and betrayal, with all eyes on the ultimate price - the throne.

Queen of the North tells the story of Hotspur's rebellion with an uncanny historical accuracy, while infusing her characters with such depth and insight that the reader can imagine themselves a fly on the wall while rebellion is being plotted, ambitions are laid out in the open and family loyalties are tested to the limit.

This is a fabulous novel which will keep the reader enthralled from the first page too the last.

The story of Elizabeth Mortimer/Percy, Queen of the North and married to the heir of the Earl of Northumberland (Percy family). Henry Bolingbroke, banished from England after an uprising against King Richard II takes the opportunity to return to claim his lands after his father (Lancaster) dies, while Richard is engaged in a campaign in Ireland.

The Northern Lords decide to support Bolingbroke/Lancaster’s return and his claim for restitution of his lands, despite concerns that he may seek further power – the English Crown itself. But Lancaster takes a solemn oath on holy relics that he will support anyone more suitable for the throne of England. Elizabeth is wary. The Percy Lords (husband, and especially father) are persuaded by promises of land, power and titles.

Elizabeth’s Mortimer family has legitimate and stronger claims to the throne; namely the young Edmund Mortimer (a minor), so she is suspicious of Lancaster and the motivations of her Percy family. Her worst fears are realised when she hears that the Earl of Northumberland has taken King Richard into custody for Lancaster.

Being a woman (albeit of Royal descent) she is not listened to, apart from by her husband, in privacy. The old Earl dismisses her totally and it is fascinating to hear how she has to keep her own channels of information, how her independent spirit and belief in the correctness of inheritance keep her on her path. She is torn between loyalties between her Mortimer birth family and the Percys.

Plots and treason (a shifting commodity in those days!) abound. Families are raised and destroyed according to the monarch’s will. I always wondered why the powerful/power-crazed families of the time were driven to support others’ claims to the throne when they had to pay so dearly for failure. But this book really demonstrates these motivations – especially as in this case the throne was seized so deceitfully.

Anne O’Brien presents the period seamlessly well, as always. The often intricate family connections are clearly explained here; there are also 2 family trees (which always help as far as John of Gaunt’s family and successors are concerned). A fascinating story around the outrage of Henry of Lancaster seizing the English throne, the ‘mystery’ death of King Richard II and how those with legitimate claims tried to challenge this.

This little Ginger Book Geek is a history nerd although my tastes are usually limited to the last couple of centuries- what you might call modern history. I thought that it was about time I tried something different and so I picked up ‘Queen Of The North’ and began to read. Oh my goodness what a read this proved to be. I absolutely loved reading it but more about that in a bit.

I absolutely loved the setting in the North East of England, which is where I live. Place names were mentioned that are familiar to me. I didn’t realise how the boundaries have changed over the years and quite how big the Northumberland area was. Some names of the well to do families were familiar too. For example: the Percy family are just as important today as they were back then.

‘Queen Of the North’ was one hell of a rollercoaster ride of a read. Oh my there was more murder, intrigue, betrayal, family problems, treachery, disputes in this book than you would find in a week’s worth of episodes of a soap opera. There were lots of twists, turns and stomach churning moments and moments where I almost had to read through my hands as I genuinely feared what was going to happen next.

I was hooked on ‘Queen Of The North’ from the moment I read the prologue. The author’s writing style and her descriptions were so vivid that I literally felt as though I had suddenly been transported back to the 1300s & the early 1400s and living in a castle. It took me a little while to get used to the old fashioned language that was used back in the day but I soon got over that. Reading this book became an addiction that I just had to feed. I would pick the book up only intending to read a couple of chapters but that couple turned into 6 or 7 chapters. I am usually easily distracted as I usually have the attention span of a gnat and I am easily distracted but not in this case. I was able to shut everything out and just focus on the story, which was just as well because there were a few strands to the story and I was interested to see how they linked up an fed into the main story.

The author has clearly carried out a lot of research for this book and it shows. The author has very skilfully combined fact and fiction and the result is this book. The story flows really well. At the same time I have found myself developing an interest in the 1300s & 1400s, which I fully intend to develop just as soon as I can and I certainly felt as though I had learnt something. As a result of reading this book I also fully intend to go to visit Alnwick Castle in Northumberland to see if it is as beautiful as it sounded in the book.

In short I really did enjoy reading this book which serves as an introduction to the 1300s & 1400s and was my introduction to Anne O’Brien’s work. It was certainly different to the books I usually read and in this case a change was certainly as good as a rest. I would definitely recommend this author and her books to other readers. I can’t wait to read what comes next from Anne O’Brien but whilst I wait I will just satisfy myself with catching up with her other books. The score on the Ginger Book Geek board is a well deserved 4* out of 5*.

Queen of the North, Anne O'Brien

Review from Jeannie Zelos book reviews

Genre: General Fiction (adult), Historical

I love historical novels such as this which take real events, real people and weave a story of how things may have unfolded. History was a tough time for females, regarded as first fathers property, then belonging to husband, and for those like Elizabeth, with Royal blood, and connected to the current monarch they were his property too.

Politics back then was ever changing, those who supported the king could be traitor soon as the next contender the the throne wins through. It was a time when ambition ruled, when the house name was all and Elizabeth has been brought up strong in the sense of the Mortimer claim to the throne, and genuinely believes her nephew(s) has the right to be king now that Richard is dead. Henry is her cousin, and she believed his claim that he just wanted to reclaim his lands, taken by Richard, and is shocked when he breaks his sworn vows and deposes Richard. For a while the Percy star is high with Harry and his father being supporters of Henry. Slowly though the usual cracks break through, Henry admires what Harry has done, commands him into battles, and yet the financing...well, the royal coffers have other calls.

I adored Harry ( Hotspur as he's fervently known) – he inspired such love and loyalty in his people, was very honest in what he believed, didn't thrown in his lot and change with the wind as so many did back then. He and Elizabeth were a great couple, both strong headed, both ready to put their views forward, both brought up since babies with a certain destiny in mind, and supporting the family names. They clashed, heatedly, repeatedly, but the making up showed how truly they were in love, how much they respected each other even when they didn't agree. When Hotspur finally fell in battle I cried, even knowing it was coming, even though he died centuries ago. These characters felt so real to me, and their stories played out making me feel as if I was there with them, wondering what course of action was best next, what they could do to move things towards the destiny they believed was right.

Stars: Five, a wonderful read, transporting me back in time. Its my second Anne O'Brien novel, and I'm looking forward to catching up on some of the others.

ARC supplied for review purposes by Netgalley and Publishers