Nickelodeon will premiere CG-animated comedy series THE PENGUINS OF MADAGASCAR, a co-production with DreamWorks Animation, following Nickelodeon's 22nd Annual Kids' Choice Awards on Saturday, March 28, at 9:30-10 p.m. (ET/PT). The network will then feature two weeks of primetime premieres weeknights at 8-8:30 p.m. (ET/PT) from Monday, March 30, through Friday, April 10. Andy Richter and Tom McGrath, who co-created the penguins characters and directed both MADAGASCAR films, reprise their roles as Mort and Skipper from the feature films, and Nicole Sullivan rounds out the ensemble voice-over cast. The series will then move to its regular timeslot on Saturdays at 10-10:30 a.m. (ET/PT) beginning April 18.

THE PENGUINS OF MADAGASCAR, follows the exploits of the beloved penguin brothers from DreamWorks Animation's hit feature films MADAGASCAR ($532 million worldwide gross) and MADAGASCAR 2: ESCAPE TO AFRICA (nearly $579 million worldwide). Skipper, Kowalski, Rico and Private are a group of penguins who believe they are an elite strike force with top-tier commando skills that is headquartered at New York City's Central Park Zoo. Their orderly world is disrupted by the arrival of the Lemurs, who are led by the imperially deluded King Julien.

In the premiere episode, "Launchtime" (airing March 28) finds the penguins vacationing on the Moon after being completely frustrated by their pushy, loud and obnoxious lemur neighbors. As they arrive by homemade rocket, they meet a "moon cat" who has strange plans for Skipper and the penguins. Also in this episode, "Haunted Habitat" introduces viewers to Marlene, the otter, who is awakened by a spooky noise. She and Skipper then travel down to the sewer below the zoo and confront the mysterious "monster" to stop its creepy howling for good.

In the next two debuts during its premiere weeks, "Operation: Plush and Cover" (airing March 30) has Julien jealous after stuffed Mort dolls become popular at the zoo. Julien has them recalled and the real-life Mort is accidentally sent back to the factory along with his plush replicas. In "Happy Julien Day," (airing March 31) Maurice bribes the zoo animals to celebrate "King Julien Day" by offering them candy. Skipper refuses to take part, but is still unable to avoid the festivities.

In support of the launch, TurboNick, the network's broadband player, will stream Instant Replays of episodes post premiere, as well as short form content. Nick.com will also roll out THE PENGUINS OF MADAGASCAR-themed mini site (Nick.com/penguins) that will feature a personality quiz, e-cards, downloads, printables and messages boards. Sneak peeks and a playlist of dedicated content will be available via Nick's wireless partners, and the premiere episode will simulcast on Nickelodeon Mobile. Additionally, Nickelodeon will be highlighting THE PENGUINS OF MADAGASCAR in its March Video On Demand offering, including advanced screenings of premiere episode and dedicated short-form content.

For three weeks prior to the premiere of THE PENGUINS OF MADAGASCAR, the mini site (Nick.com/penguins) will launch a new mini-game each week. The games will enlist players to help the penguins create devices and vehicles that will get them to the Kids' Choice Awards on time. The site will also feature several Games of the Week throughout 2009.

Nickelodeon's recent "sneak peeks" of THE PENGUINS OF MADAGASCAR, which premiered over Thanksgiving weekend, drew an average of 14 million viewers (persons 2+, Nov. 28-30), including 7.2 million Kids 2-11.

The series features the all-new adventures of Skipper, Kowalski, Rico and Private, four penguins who take command at their Central Park Zoo home. While the brothers have their flippers full keeping their multi-species zoo neighborhood happy, at times their secret missions beckon them to venture out to New York City's busy subways and sewer systems. Just as the team thinks it has its urban acreage under control, a new neighbor moves in next door: Julien, a party animal and self-proclaimed "King of the Lemurs," with an entourage and overactive ego. Throughout the season, new animals will be introduced as well as old friends from the MADAGASCAR theatrical films.

THE PENGUINS OF MADAGASCAR is exec produced by Mark McCorkle and Bob Schooley, (KIM POSSIBLE and HERCULES, SKY HIGH). Additional voices include Jeff Bennett (ENCHANTED) as Kowalski, James Patrick Stuart (CSI: CRIME SCENE INVESTIGATION) as Private, John DiMaggio (FUTURAMA) as Rico, Nicole Sullivan (MAD TV) as Marlene, and Danny Jacobs (FUTURAMA) stars as Julien, King of the Lemurs. The series is being produced at the Nickelodeon Animation Studios in Burbank, California.