Published at: April 23, 2005, 4:04 p.m. CST by staff

Ahoy, squirts! Quint here with some awesome pics of the town being turned into SILENT HILL by Christophe Gans... Actually, from the look of the pics, I'd say this town is pretty Silent Hilled up already.

I ran into Roger Avary and Christophe Gans at the American Film Market last November and we had a little chat about SILENT HILL. They both assured me that they were adapting the game, not turning it into a horror actioneer like the RESIDENT EVIL films. This will be the first true HORROR movie adaptation of a HORROR game, according to Avary (who was sporting his crazy viking madman beard at the time, so when he was talking about this project his eyes flickered with excitement... well... the mixture of that crazy beard and his sparkling eyes... I'll admit it... he scared me...). Atmosphere and tension were top of the list, not crazy MATRIX effects and CG shoot-outs.

They also talked about finding this amazing little mostly deserted town in Canada that could have been the basis of the video game it was so creepily like the town in the game. From the looks of it, I'd say they found a great place and I can't wait to see the flick. Oh, yeah... and The Hollywood Reporter announced that Radha Mitchell is the lead in the film. She has a survivalist horror video game heroine look, that's for sure. Here's the link for the pics (my favorite is the theater with the double-bill of THE OMEGA MAN and THE LAST MAN ON EARTH!):

Hello Harry,

My hometown of Brantford Canada is standing in for the town of Silent Hill in Christopher Gan's upcoming "Centralia". Workers have been pretty busy the last week transforming the the oldest section of the city into a ghost town. You can see the fruits of their labours here:

CLICK IT HERE TO VISIT SILENT HILL, COURTESY OF HORROR-MOVIES.CA!!!

*note that these pics were taken a couple days ago, and the set designers have since planted a bunch of weeds and trash, and added a few junked cars and random shit. Overall the street has a really creepy atmosphere, and is yet another reason not to travel down that area after dark.