The “Silent Hill” film franchise continues with “Return to Silent Hill,” the latest adaptation of the hit horror anthology video game series. Variety has the first look at the famed monster Pyramid Head in the Christophe Gans-directed film, which is previewing at the Cannes Film Festival.

After helming the “Silent Hill” in 2006, Gans returns to direct the next installment from a script he co-with Sandra Vo-Anh and William Josef Schneider. The project is produced by Victor Hadida for Davis Films, Molly Hassell for Hassell Free Productions and David Wulf.

“Return to Silent Hill” is based on “Silent Hill 2,” the second and most popular game in Konami’s successful video game series, which has been named to top video game lists by Time Magazine, IGN and more. Originally released in 2001 for PlayStation 2, “Silent Hill 2,” is widely considered the best game in the series (and introduced the Pyramid Head character.)

Jeremy Irvine stars in the film as James, a man broken after his relationship with the love of his life, Mary (Hannah Emily Anderson), ends. According to its official synopsis, the action kicks off “when a mysterious letter from her calls him back to Silent Hill, he finds a once-recognizable town transformed by an unknown evil. While James desperately searches for Mary, he encounters terrifying creatures and begins to unravel the mystery of what happened to the town. But as he descends deeper into the darkness the secrets he uncovers lead to a horrifying truth, and James finds himself struggling to hold on long enough to save his one true love.”

The Veterans are handling international sales for the film, with CAA Media Financing representing domestic rights. A rough cut of the film screened Thursday.

“Return to Silent Hill” is the third film in the series, following 2006’s “Silent Hill,” which starred Radha Mitchell, Sean Bean and Laura Holden and grossed $100 million worldwide, and its 2012 sequel “Silent Hill: Revelation.” The horror video game franchise attracts more than 10 million gamers worldwide and continues to expand its footprint, too. In 2022, Konami announced plans to reboot the “Silent Hill 2” game, as well as to create three other new games.

Irvine is represented by UTA, Independent Talent Group and Schreck Rose Dapello Adams Berlin & Dunham. Anderson is represented by Gersh, Atlas Artists and GGA. Gans is represented by CAA.