INSIGHTS News

Press release under embargo until 08:00 BST, 17th November, 2021

New agreement will enable investors to access Arabesque S-Ray’s suite of ESG data products hosted on AWS Data Exchange, through GoldenSource ESG Impact.

GoldenSource clients will be able to leverage Arabesque’s new solution to help investors meet upcoming disclosure requirements of the Sustainable Finance Disclosure Regulation (SFDR).

Announcement comes as investor demand for ESG data surges, with one third of all assets under management globally now integrating sustainability factors.

17th November, 2021, London – GoldenSource and Arabesque today announced a new partnership enabling buy-side and sell-side investors to access Arabesque S-Ray’s suite of ESG data assets and insights hosted on AWS Data Exchange, through GoldenSource ESG Impact.

The partnership will allow GoldenSource clients to leverage S-Ray’s ESG metrics and raw emissions data on companies across the world’s major stock indices, together with business involvement filters for over 25,000 companies globally. Using big data and a quantitative, algorithmic approach, Arabesque’s capabilities draw on more than four million ESG data points daily from over 30,000 sources for performance measurements on sustainability, including corporate net-zero alignment.

Through a large network of ESG data provider partners and content specialists, the GoldenSource ESG Impact solution offers full depth and breadth of ESG data coverage, enabling users to make truly informed investment decisions. Going further, GoldenSource inbound APIs enable easy on-boarding of current and future structured and unstructured ESG content from new data sources. This makes it easier to find proxy data for firms for which ESG data is missing; for completing submissions for regulations such as SFDR; and for populating reports that demonstrate investments fall within clients’ sustainability mandates.

As part of the agreement, investors will also be able to gain access to Arabesque’s new ‘SFDR Data Solution’, a toolkit developed for asset managers and investment professions to ingest data needed for Sustainable Finance Disclosure Regulation (SFDR) reporting.

Speaking on today’s announcement, John Eley, CEO of GoldenSource, said:

“Taking action with ESG data has become an essential capability for financial firms, yet for most practitioners it’s a newly established discipline that’s evolving rapidly. As such, having Arabesque’s deep ESG data sets, created by practitioners for practitioners, via a serviced connection into our solution for taking action on ESG data, brings immediate capability and the flexibility to keep up as things evolve.”

Dr Daniel Klier, President of Arabesque, added:

“More than ever before, investors understand the critical need for high-quality ESG information to facilitate the transition to a more sustainable, net-zero future. Through this partnership with GoldenSource and their market-leading solution, we look forward to enabling institutional investors to leverage Arabesque’s range of ESG data assets and products for enhanced decision-making.”

Today’s announcement comes as investor interest in ESG information continues to grow, with more than $35 trillion now invested through ESG strategies, representing about a third of all professionally managed money around the world.

What is a cookie?

A cookie is a small text file containing data that is stored on your computer or mobile device once you visit a website. Cookies vary in their duration, some are stored indefinitely and others for shorter times. Cookies can be created both by the site you are visiting – ‘first party’ cookies, and by other sites that interact with the one you are visiting – ‘third party’ cookies.

Arabesque’s use of cookies

Arabesque uses cookies to improve your experience of our website, by remembering your user preferences for when you next visit the site. Some cookies are essential to allow you to navigate the website and the features available. Cookies are created both by Arabesque, which are first party cookies and by the third party sites listed in the ‘Cookie list’ below.

Arabesque uses cookies to remember your previously selected settings such as; country and acceptance of our terms and conditions, please note that no personal data is collected. The expiry dates for Arabesque cookies vary between one day and two years.

If you don’t want Arabesque to place cookies on your device there are a number of options available to you. You can modify your own browser settings to either:

reject all cookies;

only allow ‘trusted’ sites to write cookies; or

only accept cookies from www.Arabesque.com

Should you delete your cookie history, this may affect your experience of our website – the preferences selected on your previous visits to the site will not be remembered and you will have to reset these upon each visit to the site.

Types of cookies

Cookies can perform different roles on a website:

Strictly Necessary

Some cookies are essential for the operation of Arabesque’s website. These cookies enable you to access secure areas of the website which would require log on details.

Performance

This type of cookie allows us to analyse the use of the website allowing us to provide you with a high quality experience. This information will only be used to enhance user experiences.

Functionality

Functionality cookies allow Arabesque to remember the settings from a user's last visit, i.e. relevant country and investor type. These cookies also enable users to access videos and audio recordings available.

Targeting

Targeting cookies allow Arabesque to send you customised content via email and track which content you use.

Persistent

Persistent cookies help websites remember your information and settings when you visit them in the future. This result in faster and more convenient access since, for example, you don't have to login again. Besides authentication, other website features made possible by persistent cookies include: language selection, theme selection, menu preferences, internal site bookmarks or favorites, among many others. On your first visit, the website is presented in default mode. During your visit, you select your preferences and these preferences are remembered, through the use of the persistent cookie, the next time you visit the site.

Session

Session cookies are temporary cookie files, which are erased when you close your browser. When you restart your browser and go back to the site that created the cookie, the website will not recognize you. You will have to log back in (if login is required) or select your preferences/themes again if the site uses these features. A new session cookie will be generated, which will store your browsing information and will be active until you leave the site and close your browser.

Technical

Technical cookies are used to broadcast a communication on a network of electronic communication.

Third Party Cookie List

Google Analytics

Arabesque may use Google Analytics for the following purposes:

- Remarketing (showing our ads on third-party websites). Arabesque and third-party vendors, including Google, use cookies to inform, optimise and serve ads based on someone's past visits to a website.

Google Display Network Impression Reporting. Arabesque and third-party vendors, use cookies to report how our ad impressions, other uses of ad services and interactions with these ad impressions and ad services are related to visits to this Website.

Google Analytics Demographics and Interest Reporting. The website uses data from Google's Interest-based advertising or 3rd-party audience data (such as age, gender and interests) with Google Analytics to inform our marketing strategy.

You can opt out of Google Analytics for Display Advertising and customise Google Display Network ads using Google's Ad Settings page.

You can also opt out of Google Analytics using this browser add-on.

Duration varies from one day to two years. No personal data is stored.