These cookies record your activity on the Savills website and our partners may use that information to show you adverts that they think you will be most interested in when you visit other websites. We may also use information recorded by these cookies to see how well these adverts are performing.

Find out more about targeting and tracking cookies here.

Allow

Professional Expertise

David Morrison is Corporate Managing Director of Data Solution in Savills Tampa office, responsible for coordinating efforts to ensure a smooth implementation of Savills proprietary business intelligence tool, Knowledge Cubed, integrating lease administration technology system data (and other third-party portfolio database/software platforms) and first-class Savills market data into a single golden source of truth. David’s role facilitates successful real estate strategies by delivering real-time information driving educated business decisions and portfolio optimization strategies.

David has over 20 years of experience in residential and commercial real estate with a focus on technology innovations, business development, database oversight, data integrity, portfolio reporting, and tailored client solutions. Prior to joining Savills in 2020, David led global lease administration and portfolio management efforts for NBCUniversal and WeWork. Previously, David was a key performer at CBRE Group, Cushman & Wakefield, and Jones Lang LaSalle (JLL) working on notable client accounts such as Google, Barclays Bank, Lehman Brothers, and Goldman Sachs. David is responsible for identifying over $10 million in client savings/cost avoidance and has managed lease expense budgeting of more than $1.5 billion annually.

Awards, Achievements and Activities

David is a licensed real estate broker in North Carolina, a licensed real estate salesperson in New York, and is actively pursuing his real estate salesperson’s license in the State of Florida. David has also successfully completed the Deloitte Financial Advisory Services Lease Audit Training program, and he has received the New York Real Estate Institute’s Certificate of Completion in Property Management.

David is a volunteer for charitable causes such as Junior Achievement USA, Ronald McDonald House Charities of St. Petersburg, and the International WeLoveU Foundation. David also provides support to Dawning Family Services of Hillsborough County, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, and Smile Train.