SOLUTIONS BY INDUSTRY

Asset Management

Our mission is to simplify the complex world of Investment Management through the application of market-leading technology solutions.

Request a free demo

Improve Productivity and Reduce Manual Operational Processes with the FA Platform

The FA Platform sits at the very heart of an Asset Manager’s investment operations. Offering a complete front-to-back solution that delivers unbeatable flexibility and secure distribution to the whole organisation anytime, anywhere.

Born in the cloud, our enterprise solution will provide the backbone of your operations, handling all operations from onboarding, investment selection, portfolio management, compliance, rebalancing, corporate actions, reconciliation, book-keeping, fees and valuations.

Open Golden Source

Having a fully integrated golden source of data is essential in today’s market. Asset Managers can no longer rely on delayed data being aggregated from multiple systems to generate reporting. In addition, ensuring your golden source is “open” and supports interoperability in your ecosystem is even more important.

The FA Platform is truly open architecture, built on micro- services with an extensive library of API’s. This ensures we effortlessly become your golden source of data, allowing you to report on your entire business within minutes.

One System to Handle it All

One Platform. One Database.

Enterprise platforms that are functionally rich enough to support an entire business are at the forefront of the market. The FA Platform is leading this market with its ability to support both public and private markets, including digital and physical assets.

The FA Platform handles everything in one solution, ensuring you have a holistic view of your business without complex integrations and data transfers.

Competitive Cost of Ownership

The FA Platform is a cloud- native, SaaS solution built on microservices with open architecture and advanced API technology built in.

With one, all-in, subscription fee to manage your investment system, you’ll save on expensive hosting and hardware maintenance costs, numerous manual integrations and complex never-ending upgrades.

Reduce Operational Risk

Transparency and control over your operations.

FA Solutions has countless experience of replacing multi- database solutions that are supported by manual processes. Our standard solution for Asset Managers has automated, best- practice workflows available out-of-the-box and ensures your business is operating on the industry standard from go-live.

Fund Management

Streamline the workflows around managing multiple fund portfolios and share classes. Create and manage fee structures, handle the subscriptions and redemptions, fund reporting, calculating and processing NAVs, alongside maintaining your shareholder registry.

Learn More

Portfolio Management

Manage all your assets in one platform across public and private markets. Aggregate all your positions and cash in real time to aid decision making on your portfolio, alongside tracking all on-going orders and settlements.

Learn More

Compliance

Integrated pre and post trade compliance checking within your order raising process to enable 4-eyes checking. Intuitively stay in line with regulatory frameworks and client specific requirements to avoid costly mistakes and charges.

Learn More

Reconciliation

Flexible integration options with multiple banks and custodians to reconcile your investment data and easily identify any irregularities. The FA Platform provides the ability to run automated workflows with exception reporting and full audit trails.

Learn More

Corporate Actions

Automated corporate actions management within the FA platform reduces overall processing times and manual errors, ensuring all positions and cash are accurately up to date.

Learn More

Bookkeeping

Bridge the gap between managing your portfolios and financial administration with automated double entry bookkeeping connected to your accounting provider of choice.

Learn More

Take a look at these big numbers that make us look cool

4.8

Billion

Concurrent crypto meta NFTs minted today

512

TB

Volume of cat pictures and memes archived

What our clients are saying

“The platform will enable us to implement needed functions like capital calls and distributions for alternative products in a way that provides the control mechanism for us and offers new opportunities our customers demand. It’s critical for us that we’re able to satisfy our current customers but those of the future as well who are thinking about their future in ways we may not have imagined yet”

Micha StäheliInvestment Technology & Innovations, Zurich Invest AG

Quick caption here

Make people want to look at your gallery here

The text element is intended for longform copy that could potentially include multiple paragraphs. You can also use it for single lines of copy if you wish.

Industry Factsheets

Which area of your Asset Management business do you wish to enhance?

We have Factsheets for you to have a look.

Request a product demonstration to see how all our features work

Your Name(Required)

First Last

Email(Required)

Phone(Required)

Company(Required)

Country(Required)

AUM(Required)

Background to your situation

Phone

This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged.

Δ