How did we get here: The Onbrane Platform

The Foundation

Just about 4 years ago, the Onbrane platform was born with an ambition to create the primary debt market fabric – a single platform at the heart of the ecosystem that would build bridges between debt issuance steps, market actors, and even software used by the industry.

In these 4 years, we’ve been working hand in hand with the market, the end-users of the platform, to create a connected infrastructure that solved their well-identified pain points. From day one, we strived to bring unparalleled security, efficiency, and transparency to issuers, dealers, brokers, advisors, and asset managers’ workflows.

Notably, we made the Onbrane platform ESG native – offering the market a one-stop ESG solution to promote, negotiate, and capture investment opportunities in the sustainable debt market.

5 Pillars of the Onbrane Platform

In these 4 years, we set a solid foundation on our way to building the primary debt market fabric:

1. Created a virtual office to negotiate & issue debt from anywhere in complete security, now daily used by the public, financial, and corporate organizations;

2. Facilitated a full STP process by developing API connections with industry software such as OMS/TMS, and FX platforms;

3. Made impactful partnerships with data providers to build a golden source of market data;

4. We’ve built the most comprehensive ESG debt module on capital markets;

5. Developed Plug & Play Onboarding process, removing complexity and allowing our users to start using the platform as fast as possible.

Our Proud Milestones

Along the way, we celebrated exciting wins with our users:

We made history as the first platform to complete sustainable debt issuance;

Facilitated opening new lines between actors across geographies;

Issued over 1 billion € CPs in 24 hours on multiple occasions;

Reduced the rate of fat finger errors approximately by 85%;

So far in 2022, transaction volume on the platform has increased by 20, compared to the full year 2021.

Onbrane x Nasdaq: The birth of Nasdaq Primary

As we were enjoying fast growth with our users, we knew that we would eventually need a strategic partner to keep the momentum going.

For that, we couldn’t think of a better partner than Nasdaq. Here are a couple of reasons why:

Global Reach – Onbrane’s users are large global organizations that cover debt markets around the world. The partnership with Nasdaq, allows us to enhance our global presence and be everywhere our clients need us to be.

Keeping Neutrality – Nasdaq partnership scales up our offering while allowing us to remain a neutral player in the market. This was a crucial point for us as we want to keep catering to all debt market actors without competing with any party.

Secondary Market Capabilities – We believe that an efficient primary debt market needs to be closely connected to the secondary market. Nasdaq’s robust secondary market infrastructure brings more liquidity to the platform, which is one of the key factors in building a more efficient market altogether.

Focus on ESG – At Onbrane, we believe that debt markets play a critical role in enhancing access to necessary capital for a sustainability transition.

Our ESG module is built with this mindset. By creating the Sustainable Bond Network, Nasdaq has clearly demonstrated its commitment to accelerating ESG movement in debt markets, which is another significant factor underlying our partnership.

During our conversations with Nasdaq, it was clear that together we could offer the debt market a powerful tool that answers its pressing demand for security, efficiency, and transparency,

With our synergies, 6 values of the Nasdaq Primary powered by Onbrane emerged:

6 Values of Nasdaq Primary Powered by Onbrane

Issuers, Intermediaries, Advisors, and Investors finally on one single platform – Nasdaq Primary caters to every market participant across the value chain. The platform facilitates workflows between counterparts from pre-issuance activity all the way to debt distribution and trading on the secondary market.

A virtual office with a user experience like no other – Nasdaq Primary provides the market with a shared, secure, and connected OTC environment to negotiate and issue debt.

The platform is organized around an elegant UI/UX with a distinctive visual identity, where art and technology coexist in harmony.

Setting industry standards with our community – Nasdaq Primary is developed for and with market participants. Our global team works hand-in-hand with the public, corporate, and financial institutions of all sizes.

We create features that improve our users’ current processes, allowing us to set new and better industry standards together.

Leveraging cloud technology for enhanced security and agility – Nasdaq Primary is a web-based SaaS solution, architected to keep data and processes secure while evolving with the market’s fast-changing needs.

Joining Nasdaq Primary is easy, offering a flexible, step-by-step onboarding process and creating new benefits with each step.

Enhancing efficiency and transparency in the primary debt markets – Nasdaq Primary is effortlessly connected to the debt market ecosystem, thus maximizing end-to-end STP.

By replacing manual, repetitive actions with automized, fully auditable solutions, we enable our users to eliminate operational errors and save time.

Fueling sustainability across the debt markets – Nasdaq Primary provides a one-stop solution to simplify issuing and investing in sustainable debt products and provides its users with comprehensive data and analytics.

Our sustainable offering is aimed at fueling collaboration, transparency, and compliance, helping the primary debt market fulfill its critical role in financing the sustainability transition.

Get on board with Nasdaq Primary powered by Onbrane

What an adventure we have ahead of us, huh?

In the following weeks, we will take you through each of these 6 values, and break down in detail how they set a robust foundation for building a better, more sustainable primary debt market for all actors.