The Birth of a Nation is a 1915 American silent epic drama film directed by D. W. Griffith and based on the novel and play The Clansman, both by Thomas Dixon, Jr. Griffith co-wrote the screenplay, and co-produced the film. It was released on February 8, 1915. The film was originally presented in two parts, separated by an intermission.

Birth of a Notion is a Looney Tunes cartoon animated in 1946 and released in 1947. It was reissued as a Blue Ribbon Merrie Melodies cartoon, with the ending theme song still being that of the Looney Tunes cartoon. It features Daffy Duck, as well as a dog named Leopold and an unnamed mad scientist. Director Robert McKimson used his "Barnyard Dawg" character design as Leopold, while the scientist is a caricature, both visually and vocally, of Peter Lorre. The title is a play on The Birth of a Nation, but there is no other connection to that 1915 film. Birth of a Notion is one of three shorts that had been scheduled for direction by Bob Clampett before he left Warner Bros. Cartoons; the other two were Bacall to Arms and The Goofy Gophers, both of which were finished by Arthur Davis. Mel Blanc voiced Daffy Duck, Leopold and Joe Besser Duck, while uncredited Stan Freberg voiced the mad scientist.

It took Anna (Nicole Kidman) 10 years to recover from the death of her husband, Sean, but now she's on the verge of marrying her boyfriend, Joseph (Danny Huston), and finally moving on. However, on the night of her engagement party, a young boy named Sean (Cameron Bright) turns up, saying he is her dead husband reincarnated. At first she ignores the child, but his knowledge of her former husband's life is uncanny, leading her to believe that he might be telling the truth.

Birth of a Nation is a 1983 television play starring Jim Broadbent as teacher Geoff Figg. It was written by David Leland and directed by Mike Newell. It was originally broadcast on ITV on 19 June 1983 as the first in an untitled series of works by Leland, all loosely based around the British educational system, which subsequently acquired the overall title of Tales Out of School.