They’re both grandfathers, which seems preposterous until you do the math. When the groundbreaking documentary “Hoop Dreams” hit theaters in October 1994, the two subjects, Arthur Agee and William Gates, were 21 and 22, respectively. William’s daughter, Alicia, made her surprise appearance an hour into the film, just as William was beginning his junior year of high school. Alicia is 30 now and gave birth to a girl last August. William, 48, goes by Paw Paw. “At first, I was like, you’re too young to have a baby,” he says. “Then I said, ‘Well, I had you when I was 17. I guess 30 is OK.’ ”

Agee, 47, had a son and a daughter while he was in college. That was too late for them to appear on camera, but the audience learned about it when the final update appeared on screen. Agee has four grandchildren now, three by his son and one by his daughter. “Awww, it’s great,” he says. “I get to spoil ’em, and when I’m tired I get to get rid of ’em.”

It’s hard to picture them as grandfathers, just as it’s hard to believe it has been 25 years since “Hoop Dreams” was born. The movie was a cultural phenomenon when it was released, and a quarter century later it remains just as relevant. When The Athletic asked our staff to vote on the top 100 sports movies of all time, “Hoop Dreams” came in third. Nine other documentaries appeared on the list, all but one of which was produced after 1994. That is not a coincidence. At the time “Hoop Dreams” came out, documentaries were mostly relegated to public television and high school classrooms. A wide theatrical release was virtually unheard of, but the movie raked in nearly $12 million, making it the highest-grossing documentary of all time. That paved the way not only for full-length features like “When We Were Kings” (which tied for eighth on our list) and “Free Solo” (12th), but also the boomlet of TV-friendly docs such as the ones in ESPN’s 30 for 30 Series. That’s not to mention the reality TV explosion that began in the early 2000s. “Hoop Dreams” didn’t just touch the heart and stir the soul. It changed the game.

The movie lives on through on-demand outlets and streaming sites. Last summer, it made its theatrical debut in the UK. It is a staple of best-ever lists and serves as grist for interviews and panel discussions. “It was authentic in every way,” Agee says. “It doesn’t matter your ethnicity, whether you’re a man or a woman, there’s something in that movie you could relate to.” Adds Gates, “It was a movie that really tugged on the heart, where families were fighting not just for the basketball dream but the life dream. If you removed the basketball element, the script would still read the same.”

“Hoop Dreams” began as a three-week project for PBS that would chronicle activity on outdoor basketball courts in inner-city Chicago. The storyline morphed in real-time. The producers, Steve James and Fred Marx of Kartemquin Films, had latched onto a man named Earl Smith, who fancied himself a local talent scout. As the movie opens, Smith takes James and Marx to a court where they – and we – first discover Agee playing against his pals. Smith is intrigued by Agee’s talent, so he brings him to a basketball camp at St. Joseph, a private Catholic school in suburban Westchester. That’s where they – and we – first meet Gates, a hotshot prospect about to enter his freshman year.

After spending time with the boys and their families, the producers realized they might have a bigger story to follow. They used the footage to acquire more funding, swelling their budget to $750,000 and adding a third producer, Peter Gilbert, who helped them distill 250 hours of footage into a three-hour flick. They entered it in the Sundance Film Festival, where it won the Audience Award for Best Documentary. From there it moved into mainstream theaters, where it was bolstered by critics like Roger Ebert, the nationally syndicated, Chicago-based columnist who called it “one of the great moviegoing experiences of my lifetime.”

“Hoop Dreams” was ostensibly about two young players who dreamed of making the NBA, but Agee and Gates did not turn out to be ascendant superstars. Yet it is the very ordinariness of the movie that made it so extraordinary, and so lasting. Though we might prefer to leave Agee and Gates as we remember them, young and starry-eyed and certain they were bound for glory, that would miss the point. “Hoop Dreams” ended 25 years ago, but their story is still worth following. “That was one of the messages people got from it, that no matter how bad you’re struggling the next day is always coming,” Agee says. “My life didn’t stop when the camera stopped rolling.”

“I’ve been engulfed in death the last six years. Engulfed,” Agee says. He is speaking by phone from Franklin Park, Ill., a suburb of Chicago where he lives with girlfriend, Jennifer Genovesi, and their 12-year-old son, Devin. There is plenty of joy in Agee’s life, but tragedy remains a part of his narrative.

In December 2004, Agee’s father, Bo, was shot to death in his driveway. He was 52. A suspect was arrested and prosecuted, but he was acquitted. One of the most indelible scenes in “Hoop Dreams” showed Bo, who had left the family months before, reappearing shirtless at a playground where Arthur was playing basketball with friends. Bo plays a little hoops with his son and then leaves to buy drugs, waving cash at the loitering dealers as he saunters away. Bo cleaned up and became an ordained minister, piggybacking off his “Hoop Dreams” notoriety to gain audiences.

His murder rocked the family. Arthur’s mother, Sheila, moved back to her hometown of Birmingham, Ala. Arthur later discovered his father had taken out numerous credit cards in his name. He spent six months undoing the damage, and though he was furious for a while, his anger was tempered by time. “I have too many good memories to be bitter,” Agee says. “If you could mess up my credit again and give me my dad back, I would love that.”

Tragedy struck again in January 2014, when Arthur’s youngest brother, Joe, died of heart failure at the age of 33, leaving behind a wife and three daughters. “Imagine me having to make that phone call to my mama,” he says. Then in early 2017, three of his closest friends died in a car accident. One of the deceased was Courtney Hargrays, who was Agee’s teammate at Marshall High School and went on to play for Arizona State and Louisiana Tech. “That dude was like my little brother,” he says. “Everything stopped for me. It’s just a lonely feeling. You have to take it. Can’t nobody do nothing to help you feel better.”

Yet through all that sadness, Agee remains the same upbeat, free-spirited kid we first met on that playground. Unlike his father and so many of his childhood friends, he never fell prey to drugs and crime. He also never settled into a regular job. Rather, his full-time profession is being Arthur Agee from “Hoop Dreams.” He has spent the last two decades hopping from project to project, launching a clothing line, creating a foundation, acting in films (he got a cameo in “He Got Game,” which is No. 48 on The Athletic’s top 100 list), and producing documentaries. That included “Hoop Reality,” a 2007 film in which the protagonist is a tenacious young guard named Patrick Beverley. Agee and Gates have recently partnered with Chris Paul’s production company to create a sequel, which they are going to call “More Than A Dream.”

After finishing his college career at Arkansas State, Agee dabbled in the minor league USBL and had a brief stint with the Harlem Globetrotters. He had an opportunity to play in the CBA, but he turned that down to take a role in a movie. Many people have advised him over the years to stop trying to cash in on his appearance in the movie. Yet here he is, still bringing in the cash. “It irks me when someone says Arthur Agee should move on from the ‘Hoop Dreams’ thing,” he says. “I can never move on from it. I embrace it. ‘Hoop Dreams’ has opened doors that would have never been opened to me.”

Agee and Gates received $200,000 in royalties when the movie premiered, and though they still receive annual residual checks, that is not enough for them to live on. Much of Agee’s income comes from speaking engagements at schools, where he surprises the students by walking out immediately after they have watched the movie. Agee does a dozen or so engagements per year at a few thousand bucks a pop, but he also makes a lot of speeches for free. “I do that because of my dad,” he says. “He always told me my story is there for a reason. You never know who’s going to be inspired to do something great.”

Agee has five children, all by different mothers, and though he has remained a part of their lives and pays child support, that has added to his financial strain. In November 2017, he was arrested and charged with aggravated battery after a woman accused him of punching her. The charges were dropped. Agee calls it “an unfortunate incident” and says he never hit the woman. He adds that he is close to proposing to Genovesi, though after 19 years together she is understandably skeptical.

Agee is still tight with Sheila, a central figure in “Hoop Dreams” who recently beat stage four lung cancer. “She’s a tough-ass lady,” he says. He plays basketball twice a week at a community center — “I done put on some weight, but I still bust they ass” — and is tickled that Devin has inherited his father’s love for the game. Some grassroots coaches have approached Agee about getting Devin involved in their programs, but he has declined. It’s expensive, for one, but Agee also does not want Devin to feel pressure to chase anyone’s dreams other than his own. “I’m mostly pushing education and college on him,” Agee says. “I always tell him, you don’t have to live up to being Arthur Agee’s son or none of that. When you’re out on the court, don’t worry about making mistakes. Just be you. Have fun.”

Unlike Agee, Gates has not spent the last 25 years trying to live off his fame, but he enjoyed it more than he realized. That became apparent after he moved his family to San Antonio in 2012. “The first six months were terrible for me,” he says. “I was missing Chicago. I was missing that grind. And as crazy as this may sound, I was missing everybody knowing Will Gates. In San Antonio, they recognize me, but they don’t know me. So that was different.”

Even so, it was the right move. William and Catherine got married during his junior year at Marquette. At the time he had stepped away from the basketball team, but he played his senior year and got his degree in communications. Gates worked for a few years in Chicago’s Community Economic Development Association, but then he was laid off and fell on hard times. When the economy crashed in 2008, he moved his family into his mother’s house for eight months until he could get back on track.

Gates felt a call to the pulpit, so he completed a program at Moody Bible Institute. He started a ministry in Cabrini-Green, which was surprising considering he had spent so much of his childhood hoping to use basketball to get himself out of that neighborhood. It was rewarding work, but it was emotionally trying. During his 10 years there, Gates estimates that he presided over about 250 funerals, with 80 percent of the burials for crime victims under the age of 18.

In the late 1990s, the city of Chicago began dismantling Cabrini-Green and replacing it with more upscale housing. Gates saw that as an opportunity to give his family, and especially Catherine, a fresh start. “A lot of times she was in my shadow,” he says. “She was the husband of Will Gates from “Hoop Dreams.” I owed it to her to make the move, because it was something she always wanted to do.”

Besides Alicia, William and Catherine have three sons, and in August they will celebrate their 27th wedding anniversary. “Catherine has been an amazing person in my life,” William says. “She has stood the test of time, man. When things were rough, she stepped up to the plate. When things were great, she wasn’t overly into things. She’s just been really level-headed and focused on raising our children.”

Gates, alas, has also been touched by tragedy. In September 2001, his older brother, Curtis, was gunned down in a carjacking. As was the case with Bo Agee, the murderer was never convicted, and William suspects Curtis knew the man who killed him. Curtis was another major character in “Hoop Dreams.” Like William, he was a heralded high school prospect, but Curtis had to go to junior college because of poor academics. He then transferred to UCF but got frustrated with the coach and dropped out. The Gates’ biological father lived in Chicago but was absent from their home, so Curtis served as William’s de facto dad, pounding on him during one-on-one games and haranguing him to work hard so that he could avoid his brother’s mistakes. In the movie, a young William bridles at this brotherly tough love. “I always felt that Curtis should not be living his dreams through me,” he says.

As he grew older, however, William developed an appreciation for what Curtis was trying to teach him. A few months before Curtis was killed, William was training to make one final comeback with the Washington Wizards. After a difficult workout, he called his brother hoping for a good kick in the ass. Curtis, perhaps chastened by the way he was portrayed in the movie, opted for a gentle touch. “He didn’t want to be that Curtis Gates, but at that point I needed that Curtis Gates,” William says. “To this day, I think about the conversations we should be having. Now that I’m raising my own sons, he’s making a lot of sense. I see myself saying those same things to my boys.”

Gates experienced a similar evolution in his relationship with Gene Pingatore, his basketball coach at St. Joseph. The tension between the two is palpable throughout the film, but they developed a mutual affection later on. Gates sent his boys to Pingatore’s summer camp and spoke there many times. His oldest son, William Jr., played at St. Joseph for two years. When Pingatore died last summer at the age of 82, Gates attended his memorial, which may surprise those who recall the disdain Gates once showed toward his coach. “A lot of people have that take, but that was never our relationship,” Gates says. “At that time he was still learning me, I was still learning him. Any time I called Coach, he picked up the phone. He helped me whenever he could. He would call me out of the blue. ‘Hey William, just checking on you.’ He did this for all his athletes. It was heartwarming to see so many of his players come to his memorial.”

Soon after moving to San Antonio, William found a job with a day-labor service, but when the company moved he decided to apply as a parole officer with the Texas Department of Criminal Justice. He accidentally applied to be a corrections officer, and when he discovered the mistake he figured he might as well complete the training and give it a try. That’s why he reports for work each morning at the Texas state prison in Cotulla, where his job is to provide protection for the inmates. “I can’t believe I’m doing it, but you find a sense of purpose in it,” he says. “I wanted to show my boys that sometimes God puts things in front of your path, and you gotta do it.”

As his sons were coming through the high school ranks, William started a grassroots program called, naturally, Team Hoop Dreams. His oldest sons, William and Jalon, played for Houston Baptist, while his youngest, Marques, is a junior in high school who is drawing interest from mid-major schools. Gates doesn’t work as a pastor in an official capacity, but he does preach every few weeks at a church. He recently delivered a sermon on the COVID-19 pandemic, which he called “God’s Disruption.”

Gates delivers the final piece of dialogue in “Hoop Dreams,” and it is a powerful epitaph: “When somebody said, ‘When you get to the NBA, don’t forget about me,’ I should have said, ‘If I don’t make it, don’t forget about me.’ ” Gates never got to the NBA, and in some ways he has been forgotten, but he made peace with all of that long ago. “I never felt like I needed to be a superstar,” he says. “Curtis said in the movie, ‘I’m used to everybody loving Curtis Gates, but now I’m just a regular guy.’ But he didn’t mind going to work anywhere, and I never did either. I always thought being a regular old guy was what was in store for me.”

The only part of the story the producers failed to capture adequately was the relationship between Arthur and William. They spent barely a minute on camera together, which gives the impression they barely knew each other. In fact, they were close friends before James and Marx came onto the scene. Even while going to different high schools, they got together on weekends, when they would meet up at a playground and ball out. “Steve James and those guys found out later we were hanging out and they were like, why didn’t y’all tell us? We would have filmed that,” Arthur says. “I said, ‘Man, we were with you guys all week. There’s got to be some times without the cameras on us.’ ”

It’s possible they would have drifted apart over the years, but because of the movie they are bonded for life. They wouldn’t have it any other way. “We might not see each other for six months, but when we do it’s like we were just with each other the day before,” Agee says. “I can’t not talk about him. Every time I go out, especially when I’m speaking, I get asked about him. That’s my brother right there.”

It works like a great marriage. They’ve shared so much, yet they are different in all the right ways. “We’re definitely two opposites who need each other,” Gates says. “He’s always trying to take my feet off the ground, and I’m trying to keep his feet on the ground. Do I think there are times when he’s tried to push the ‘Hoop Dreams’ thing too far? Absolutely. But I’ve always been his supporter because in many cases, he has made it work for him.”

It will be a while before their grandchildren are old enough to watch “Hoop Dreams,” but their kids have seen it more times than they can count. That is, except for Marques Gates, who has only watched the first half. For a long time, William did not want his son to see him hurt his knee and derail his career. Marques is ready now, so the plan is for Chris Paul’s team to film him watching it for the sequel. It won’t be easy for Marques to see his father go through that, but that’s no reason to stop following the story. If there’s one thing the movie teaches, it’s that dreams won’t come true without a struggle. The pain is deep, but the next day is always coming.

(Top photo: Copyright 1994 Kartemquin Films)