“I’ll get married when I fall in love with somebody.” Eccentric billionaire Arthur Bach states. “I respect your integrity,” replies his stern father before adding “you just lost 750 million dollars.”

Thus ignites the plot of the 1981 romcom “Arthur,” a classic that stands up as a relic of the past as it bridges together the decades of the 70s and 80s now 40 years after its release. It stars Dudley Moore and Liza Minnelli, and the setting of old New York City thoroughly compliments the production.

Arthur Bach is a forty-something manchild who has never needed to work due to his families massive fortune. Arthur resides in a Manhattan penthouse decked out with model train and basketball hoop, and spends his days getting drunk and hitting on women. While modestly charming, Arthur is emotionally immature, and his arraigned marriage to an aristocrat is the only requirement for him to keep his fortune.

Dudley Moore is a titan of British comedy in the 60s and 70s, accompanying the Monty Python era and while a bit annoying at times in the movie, is good in his performance. Opposite Moore is Liza Minnelli, a name we all know but may have not seen on screen. Minnelli plays diner waitress Linda who serves as a perfect foil and immediately captures Arthur’s heart, putting a wedge in the inheritance. “I met a nice guy, but with my help he can become a prince.” Linda gushes to her father, the great Barney Martin in a pre-Seinfeld role.

“Arthur” won two Academy Awards; John Gielgud took Best Supporting Actor playing Arthur’s mentor and father figure Hobson, hysterical as an upper class nobleman dealing with the rowdy heir. The other award went for Christopher Cross’s amazing song that may be better known than the movie. Tragic elements struck as well when the film’s writer/director Steve Gordon would die of a heart attack a year after the release at the age of 44, with this being his only directed film.

The story is common theme and while there are some well delivered bits of comedy from all of the performers, it can feel slow in the second act despite its 97 minute run time. “Arthur” is a classic romantic story and is worth checking out, for the iconic names that star and the flawless backdrop of 1981 New York City.