About Oracle

On September 27, 1989, Oracle Financial Services Software was incorporated in India with limited liability. The company has its registered office in Mumbai, Maharashtra, India. Oracle Global (Mauritius) Limited holds majority ownership in the company through its subsidiary.

Together with its subsidiaries, the company is primarily engaged in delivering information technology solutions and business processing services to the global financial services industry. The company’s banking products meet the transaction processing and compliance requirements of corporate, retail, investment, treasury operations, and data warehousing.

Oracle Corporation (ORCL) History:

Oracle Financial Services Software Limited (OFSSL), a majority-owned subsidiary of Oracle Corporation, is a global leader in the provision of Financial Technology Solutions for retail banking, corporate banking, risk management, and finance. management of financial crime and compliance. The company is assisting its customers in delivering improved financial services; financial services that empower them to generate thriving economies, make institutions more robust, and protect them from financial crime are being provided. The company provides financial institutions with the most modern and complete cloud-ready banking apps in the world, as well as a technology footprint that answers their complex IT and business needs. Their solutions are based on an agile and adaptable architecture with innovation included for faster business outcomes and the option of on-premise or cloud deployment based on customer preference. It operates a services company that includes both custom consulting services and business process outsourcing services. The company was incorporated as Citicorp Information Technology Industries Ltd. on September 27, 1989. (CITIL). The company’s extensive offering of products, IT services, consultancy, and knowledge process outsourcing services covers the entire financial services industry. Having delivered value-based IT solutions to more than 810 financial institutions in 130 countries. OFSSL has fourteen development centres in India. Singapore and the United States. The company has a strong global presence, with sales, marketing, and customer service operations in 27 international locations managed by four subsidiaries (i-flex solutions, Inc. in the United States). iPSL in India, i-flex solutions b.v. in the Netherlands, and i-flex solutions pte. ltd. in Singapore). Additionally, thirty corporate business partners and thirty-two implementation partners represent i-flex globally. Additionally, the company has strong alliances and/or implementation partnerships with industry leaders like Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Sun Microsystems, and Intel. Citicorp Information Technology Industries Limited (CITIL) began operations in 1992 after being spun out from COSL (Citicorp Overseas Software Limited).

CITIL was recognized for achieving world-class processes and quality standards in 1995. It reached SEI CMM Level 4, becoming the first financial software company in the world and one of only six companies in the world at the time to achieve this distinction. CITIL founded the Center of Excellence for business intelligence in 1996 in order to provide specialist consulting, software, and data warehousing and business intelligence services. 1997 saw the introduction of FLEXCUBE, a comprehensive banking product suite for retail consumer corporate investment and internet banking consumer lending asset management and investor services including payments (SWIFTNet and SEPA). MicroBanker becomes the sixth worldwide banking product with 100 customers in 1998, and the FLEXCUBE gains traction and international leadership. In 1999, the FLEXCUBE Information Center introduced a Web-enabled corporate intelligence system and also built a Center of Excellence for CRM and the Java Center for financial services. In the year 2000, CITIL was renamed i-flex solutions limited. During the year 2000, a separate business unit was created to handle the Applications Service Provider (ASP) industry. A subsidiary of the company, i-fl ex solutions b.v., has opened in Amsterdam, the Netherlands. In 2001, the company built financial software development facilities in Pune and Chennai, as well as wholly-owned subsidiaries in the United States and Singapore. i-flex solutions b.v. in Amsterdam The Netherlands attains operational status i-flex Consulting has been established. EBZ Online, a software startup, merged with the company in 2002, allowing cooperative banks to gain access to i-Flexcube flex’s product. Dotex International is a joint venture backed by the NSE. IT & i-flex Solutions Ltd signed an agreement with BgSE Financials Ltd, a subsidiary of the Bangalore Stock Exchange, to provide Internet trading services to the exchange’s members. The Company entered the capital market with an Initial Public Offering (IPO) of 396,175,000 shares of common stock.

In 2002, I-flex established its first overseas software development center in Singapore. In 2003, the company’s main product FLEXCUBE rated as the top-selling universal banking solution in the world, and in the same year I-flex established a development center in New York. In 2003, Waters Magazine ranked Mantas as the Best Anti-Money Laundering and Best Compliance Solution. In 2003 and 2004, Waters Magazine recognized Mantas as the best anti-money laundering solution. In 2004, i-flex established a wholly-owned holding company in the United States, i-flex America, to carry out all future acquisitions in the United States. The company was presented with the Golden Peacock National Quality Award. i-flex Solutions partners with the first Caribbean International of Barbados for their internet banking and e-finance platform. The core banking system Flexcube received the Core Banking Solution of the Year and Application of the Year accolades from The Banker. The Company and YES Bank have inked a Global Strategic Memorandum to collaborate on technology-driven innovations to improve the quality and effectiveness of banking products and delivery processes. i-flex collaborated with People Soft to create and market an integrated banking industry solution.

In 2005, the company formed a strategic agreement with Castek Software Inc., a Toronto-based provider of Property & Casualty (P&C) insurance solutions. The decade-long collaboration between Oracle and i-flex was strengthened strategically in 2005. Oracle Corporation acquired Citigroup’s 41 percent equity stake in i-flex in August 2005 and issued an open offer to acquire up to an additional 20 percent stake from existing shareholders. i-flex is CMMi Level 5 assessed and BS 7799 certified compliant. Information security requirements and regulations are outlined in BS 7799. In the same year, i-flex and EDB Business Partner ASA reached an agreement to deliver comprehensive retail banking solutions to Nordic financial institutions. Reveleus was positioned in Gartner’s ‘Leaders Quadrant’ for its 2005 and 2006 Basel II Risk Management Application Software Magic Quadrants. Reveleus was also commended for its Compliance Initiative Innovation at The Banker Technology Awards, 2006. In 2006, the Black Book of Outsourcing identified i-flex BPO as the leading outsourcing provider for the mortgage banking industry. In 2007 the FLEXCUBE 10.0 was released.

Oracle Flexcube:

It enables financial organizations to adapt more quickly to market fluctuations, create and monitor operations, and ensure compliance. In addition to SWIFT 2007 upgrades, the suite offers SEPA payment processing. Since April 2008, a new version of FLEXCUBE Core Banking for IBM System z has been operational. The company changed its name from I-flex solutions Limited to Oracle Financial Services Software Limited in August of 2008. On 17 February 2009, Solix Technologies, the leading provider of enterprise data management solutions used by large enterprises to manage business-critical data, announced a global partner agreement with Oracle Financial Services Software Limited, a subsidiary of Oracle Corporation that holds a majority stake. Oracle Financial Services Software will embed Solix EDMS into Oracle FLEXCUBE to help automate archive and purge processes by classifying data, configuring and performing archiving and data migration procedures. Customers of Oracle FLEXCUBE will have greater control over enterprise data as a result. In addition, Oracle FLEXCUBE would be able to ensure that data can be restored fast and precisely when necessary. This, along with the ability to store real-time historical data, is anticipated to provide additional value to Oracle FLEXCUBE clients, thereby assisting them in meeting legal and regulatory requirements. At its meeting on 15 May 2009, the Board of Directors of Oracle Financial Services Software Ltd approved the acquisition of the remaining 10% of Oracle Financial Services Software S.A.’s equity capital, thereby making it a wholly-owned subsidiary of the firm. PRASAC Microfinance Institution (PRASAC) selected Oracle FLEXCUBE Universal Banking as its basic banking solution on 30 June 2009. The business stated on the same day that National Bank of Cambodia has picked Oracle FLEXCUBE as its operational banking platform. Oracle Financial Services Software announced the opening of a new local delivery center in Chile on 15 April 2010 to serve its industry-leading financial services software and solutions.

Oracle Financial Services Software announced on July 19, 2010 that ABC Banking Corporation Mauritius, formerly known as ABC Finance & Leasing Ltd (ABCFL), has chosen Oracle FLEXCIJBE Universal Banking and Oracle FLEXGUBE Direct Banking to consolidate its leasing business and establish a full-service bank. Oracle Financial Services Software Limited (OFSSL) informed the stock exchanges on 3 February 2011 that Allied Irish Banks plc (AIB), an Irish customer, had filed a lawsuit in the Irish High Court against Oracle Financial Services Software Limited and one of its subsidiaries, seeking damages in excess of 84 million Euro. The AIB’s claim asserts contract violation, misrepresentation, and carelessness. The company is vigorously defending itself against all of AIB’s charges, and it will also file a counterclaim against AIB for breach of contract and unpaid fees. Oracle Financial Services Software Limited (OFSSL) announced on April 14, 2011 that Helm Bank, a private financial institution in Colombia, has chosen Oracle software and hardware to manage its core banking customer-facing services and marketing responsibilities. Cadiz Asset Management (CAM), a wholly owned subsidiary of Cadiz Holdings (Cadiz), has selected Oracle FLEXCUBE Investor Servicing (FLEXCUBE) to support the in-sourcing of its retail client administration activities, as announced by Oracle Financial Services Software Limited (OFSSL) on 26 April 2011. Cadiz is a major specialist financial services organization that provides investment services to the South African market via two business segments, Cadiz Securities and Cadiz Asset Management. Oracle Financial Services Software Limited (OFSSL) announced on 15 July 2011 that Amana Bank in Tanzania has chosen Oracle FLEXCUBE Universal Banking and Oracle FLEXCUBE Direct Banking to construct its core transaction processing system and internet banking capabilities. Oracle Financial Services Software Limited (OFSSL) stated on 28 July 2011 that Bank Muanialat, the largest Islamic bank in Indonesia, had chosen Oracle FLEXCUBE Universal Banking to optimize its essential business operations, ensuring productivity and agile business practice for Shariah Banking. Oracle Financial Services Software Limited (OFSSL) announced the release of the Oracle FLEXCUBE Multi-Channel Solution on Direct and Mobile Channels for the financial services industry on 7 February 2012. On June 28, 2012, Oracle Financial Services Software Limited (OFSSL) announced the release of the latest version of the Oracle FLEXCUBE banking platform, Oracle FLEXCUBE 12.0, in order to assist banks in meeting the expectations of Gen Y clients.

On 30 April 2013, Oracle Financial Services Software Limited (OFSSL) announced that Mashreq Bank, one of the leading financial institutions in the United Arab Emirates, has successfully replaced over 40 legacy systems with Oracle FLEXCUBE Universal Banking and Oracle FLEXCUBE Direct Banking solutions across Qatar UAE Kuwait and Bahrain, with Egypt to follow shortly. On 22 May 2013, the promoter of the firm, Oracle Global (Mauritius) Ltd, successfully executed an Offer for Sale (OFS) through the Stock Exchange Mechanism, resulting in the promoter’s share in the company being diluted. Following the OFS, the current shareholding of the company’s promoter, Oracle Global (Mauritius) Ltd, is 75%, and the company complies with the SEBI Guidelines, including Clause 40A of the Listing Agreement on Minimum Public Shareholding. Oracle Financial Services Software Limited (OFSSL) announced on 17 July 2013 that Bank Muamalat, the largest Islamic bank in Indonesia, had successfully implemented Oracle FLEXCUBE Universal Banking to streamline its core business processes, thereby ensuring productivity and agile Shariah Banking practices. On 31 October 2013, Oracle Financial Services Software Limited (OFSSL) announced new Oracle FLEXCUBE capabilities that assist financial institutions with regulatory compliance, enhanced and more personalized client experiences, improved performance, and IT environment simplification. At its meeting on 10 November 2017, the Board of Directors of Oracle Financial Services Software Limited (OFSSL) acquired 99.99% of Mantas India Private Limited, a step down subsidiary of the Company, from Sotas Inc., another step down subsidiary of the Company. On May 9, 2019, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a restructuring of the ownership of its Indian step-down subsidiaries for the purpose of acquiring a controlling stake in Mantas India Private Limited and Oracle (OFSS) BPO Services Limited. In 2022, the Company bought its Indian step-down subsidiary Oracle (OFSS) BPO Services Limited, which is now its wholly-owned direct subsidiary.

Oracle Stock Price Analysis

Investing in stocks needs a thorough review of financial data to determine a company’s genuine net value. This is often accomplished by reviewing the company’s income statement, balance sheet, and cash flow statement. This can be tedious and time-consuming. It is easier to determine a company’s performance by examining its financial ratios, which help to make sense of the massive quantity of information contained in its financial statements.

Here are a few crucial tools that every investor’s research process must include.

PE ratio: – Price to Earnings ratio, which reflects how much an investor is prepared to pay every rupee of earnings. As a rule of thumb, stocks with a low P/E ratio are undervalued (it depends on other factors too). Oracle has a low P/E ratio of 14.56, making it relatively inexpensive.

Return on Assets (ROA) entails the following: – Return on Assets gauges a company’s ability to generate a profit from its investment in assets. In other words, ROA measures a company’s ability to turn the funds required to acquire assets into net income or profits. Oracle share price ROA of 29.09% is a positive indicator of future performance. (better standards are always preferred).

Current ratio: – The current ratio assesses the ability of a corporation to meet its short-term liabilities with its short-term assets. A greater current ratio is desirable so that the corporation can withstand unanticipated business and economic fluctuations. The Oracle snare price current ratio is 9.85.

Return on equity: – gauges a company’s capacity to create profits from the investments of its shareholders. In other words, the return on equity ratio indicates the amount of profit generated per rupee of common stockholders’ equity. Oracle share price ROE is 32.51 percent. (higher is preferable)

Ratio of debt to equity: – It is a useful statistic for evaluating the capital structure with performance. Oracle has a D/E ratio of 0, indicating that the company’s debt-to-equity ratio is minimal.

Top Shareholders of Oracle Financial Services Software Ltd

Shareholders No of Shares Shareholding Oracle Global Mauritius Limited 6,30,51,197 73% HDFC Trustee Company LTD A/C HDFC Multi Asset Fund 14,00,862 1.62% Life Insurance Corporation of India 30,42,572 3.52% Mutual Funds 43,46,509 5.03% Foreign Portfolio Investors Category I 62,39,058 7.22% Resident Individuals Holding Nominal Share capital up to of Rs. 2 Lakhs 64,16,578 7.43%

Top Management of Oracle Financial Services Software Ltd

Name Designation Chaitanya Kamat Managing Director & CEO S Venkatachalam Chairperson Avadhut (Vinay) Ketkar Chief Accounting Officer Harinderjit Singh Director Onkarnath Banerjee Company Sec. & Compli. Officer Sridhar Srinivasan Independent Director Richard David Jackson Independent Director Kimberly Woolley Director Yong Meng Kau Director Makardand Padalkar Whole Time Director & CFO Jane Murphy Independent Director

Key Highlights of Q2FY23 Quarterly Results for Oracle Financial Services Software Ltd.

The quarterly net income was Rs. 398 crores, down 11% year-over-year.

The quarter’s revenue was Rs. 1,376 crore, up 7% year-over-year.

The quarterly operating income was Rs. 540 crore, down 10% year-over-year.

The products division showed a 7% increase in revenue to Rs. 1,226 crores and an 8% drop in operating profits to Rs 552 crore.

The services business reported a 10% increase in sales to Rs. 150 crores and an 11% increase in operating income to Rs 40 crore.

FAQ’s

What is Oracle Share price and what are the returns for Oracle shares?

Oracle share price is INR 3021.60 as of 09 November 2022. Oracle has provided a return of approximately -17.94% in the past 5 year as on 1 November 2022.

What are the 52-week high and low of Oracle Share Price?

As on 09st November 2022:

52-wk high 4,543.25

52-wk low 2,883.25

What are the key metrics to analyze Oracle Share Price?

Key metrics to analyze any share price are and orcale share price were : 52-week high, a 52-week low, 1-year return, 5-year return, etc.

Who are the peers of Oracl Financial Services Software Ltd?

Peers of Oracle Financial Services Software Ltd include Mindtree, Mphasis, Coforge, Tata Elxsi, etc.

What is the market cap of Oracle Stocks?

The market cap of Oracle is INR 26.09 thousand crores as on 9th November 2022.

Interested in how we think about the markets?

Read more: Zen And The Art Of Investing

Check out all our “Investor Education Originals” videos on Youtube and get smart about investing.

Start investing through a platform that brings goal planning and investing to your fingertips. Visit kuvera.in to discover Direct Plans and Fixed Deposits and start investing today.

#MutualFundSahiHai #KuveraSabseSahiHai #PersonalFinance #InvestorEducation;