Friday morning, Agile Software Corp. (AGIL), a developer of product lifecycle management software products, said that its stockholders voted to adopt a merger agreement with enterprise software maker Oracle Corp (ORCL). Under the deal, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Oracle will be merged with and into Agile, and Agile will become a wholly-owned subsidiary of Oracle. Agile noted that more than 74% of its shares outstanding on the record date for the Agile special meeting were cast in favor of the merger agreement. Further, the company said that the merger is expected to be completed as soon as possible following the satisfaction of all of the conditions to closing. In May, Oracle said that it agreed to buy Agile Software through a cash merger for $8.10 per share, or about $495 million. The combination of the two companies enables the creation of an integrated, enterprise-wide product lifecycle management or PLM solution.

Approval of the merger agreement by Agile's stockholders satisfies one of the conditions to the completion of the merger. All government regulatory approvals, both U.S. and foreign, required to consummate the merger have been obtained. At that time, Oracle had said that the deal is expected to close in mid to late July 2007.

San Jose, California-based Agile's PLM software help engineers, manufacturing and supply chain professionals as well as executives drive the product innovation and introduction process, share product specifications and configurations and collaborate effectively across the supply chain in a variety of industries, including high-tech, life sciences, industrial manufacturing and consumer packaged goods. Agile has 1,250 PLM customers and over 10,000 visualization customers globally.

The acquisition would enable Oracle gain access to Agile's customers that include Lockheed Martin Corp. (LMT), McDonald's Corp (MCD) and Micron Technology Inc (MU). Further, Oracle would obtain an additional revenue stream from technical support that would help the company to boost its application-software products.

Charles Phillips, President of Oracle had said that the addition of Agile, which would serve as the foundation of the company's PLM offering, would further Oracle's strategy of delivering industry-specific enterprise applications and allow it to offer yet another strategic application to customers of Germany-based rival SAP AG (SAP).

Oracle stated that it intended to continue to sell and support Agile products as standalone and as an integrated solution with both Oracle and non-Oracle environments. Further, the company said that it plans to continue its investment in the Oracle PLM Data Hub, with a planned integration to Agile PLM.

Also in May, Agile Software said that it expects revenue for the fourth quarter to be in the range of $37-$38 million. The company also said that it expects non-GAAP earnings for the quarter in a range of $0.04-$0.06 per share. On a GAAP basis, Agile expects to report net loss in a range of $0.04-$0.06 per share for the fourth quarter.

For fiscal year 2007, Agile forecast non-GAAP earnings per share in a range of $0.07-$0.09 and revenues in a range of $133.7-$134.7 million.

In March, Agile reported a net loss for the third quarter that widened from a year ago, as higher expenses significantly outweighed a small increase in revenue. GAAP net loss for the third quarter widened to $5.8 million or $0.10 per share from $4.1 million or $0.08 per share in the year-ago quarter. Excluding items, non-GAAP net income for the third quarter was $488 thousand or $0.01 per share, compared to a non-GAAP net loss of $122 thousand or breakeven per share in the previous-year quarter. Revenue for the third quarter increased 1.2% to $33.19 million from $32.80 million in the same quarter last year.

Redwood City, California-based Oracle is aggressively pursuing its strategy of acquisition-led growth. In the past few years, the company has spent about $20 billion to buy more than 30 companies. In January 2005, the company completed its $11.1 billion purchase of PeopleSoft after a prolonged take-over battle. Besides PeopleSoft, Oracle has also acquired Siebel Systems Inc. for $6.1 billion. In July, it closed its acquisition of Portal Software Inc. for about $220 million. Some other deals of Oracle include MetaSolv Software Inc. and Stellent Inc.

For its recent fourth quarter, Oracle reported a 23% increase in net income from the year-ago quarter on strong software sales, boosted mainly by acquisitions of Siebel Systems and PeopleSoft as well as other software firms over the last few years. The company's GAAP net income for the fourth quarter increased to $1.6 billion or $0.31 per share from $1.3 billion or $0.24 per share in the year-ago quarter. Excluding acquisition costs, employee stock options expense, amortization of intangible assets and other items, non-GAAP net income for the quarter increased to $1.9 billion or $0.37 per share from $1.5 billion or $0.29 per share in the prior-year quarter. GAAP revenues for the quarter increased 20% to $5.83 billion from $4.85 billion in the same quarter last year.

In Friday's regular trading session, AGIL is currently trading at $8.09, up $0.01 or 0.12%. In the 52-week period, the stock has been trading in a range of $5.57-$8.10.

In Friday's regular trading session, ORCL is currently trading at $20.48, down $0.02 or 0.10%. In the 52-week period, the stock has been trading in a range of $15.36-$20.51.

For comments and feedback contact: editorial@rttnews.com