FOR THE CHILDREN is presented as the 3 life-journeys of Dr. Carol Sue Rosin, my husband Craig Babcock and myself (Suzzan) to identify how the enemy within can affect our lives. Carol graciously consented to baring her soul, as it were in sharing her deepest and often most painful experiences of her life. Openly and honestly, she allowed me to act as narrator to her incredible experiences with celebrities and a life altering encounter that has the potential to change the world. All the proceeds will be divided between keeping space free of weapons, which is essential for our children's future, and children's programs. In writing this book, we hope that all questions of Carol and Wernher von Braun are laid to rest once and for all. All three of us share the different messages and insights we received. For Craig's and my part that is only 22 years, for Carol more than 40 years of dedicated service. Ultimately, this book shares our lives and experiences, especially spiritual, and the messages we were given. As Carol's husband Jon Cypher, the celebrated actor says: We're at the Big Crossroads. Peer into the crystal ball and what do we see? Which path do we take? Less civility, more barbarism? Are we whistling in the dark? Crossing our fingers and praying angels or ETs will swoop down to rescue us and somehow save the day? FOR THE CHILDREN blazes a different path that leads to a new world. Through my wife Carol, and Suzzan and Craig's life journeys, the book reveals how our ancestors may have known more than we do!!!: that the modern "discoveries" of Noetics and the deeper functions of the mind are not innovations at all, but are a part of sacred teachings known as the Mysteries. We learn that the Fall of Humanity that is in all the world's sacred writings may identify a different enemy: one hiding in the background behind the archetypes of the various incarnations of the Devil. The authors say the problem is this "enemy" has a partner actually living inside us, our ego. They show how the ego is no friend to our true selves or spirit because it wrecks all our good intentions as often as it can. FOR THE CHILDREN explains how we can identify this villainous saboteur within through its everyday actions in our lives. Once we understand the real lie of separation we can then dispel the Great Illusion and embrace our true roles. This book is one of hope." Jon Cypher