Cape-based airman documents soldiers, civilians and history

The harried delegates chat eagerly at the first Iraqi National Assembly.

Click.

Smirking soldiers snack on sandwiches from the busiest Burger King in the Middle East.

Snap.

A man climbs to the top of a palm tree to harvest bundles of Saddam Hussein's exquisite dates.

Click-click.

These are photos from Lt. Col. Dan Epright's summer vacation.

He left his post at the Cape Cod Air Force Station, on the Massachusetts Military Reservation, as well as his wife and grown son to spend four months in Baghdad as commander of American Forces Network, Iraq.

He is one of the few field-grade public affairs officers in the Air Force. Under his command, 31 soldiers and airmen ran a radio station and created news broadcasts for the Pentagon Channel, a cable network.

It was the first time, in his 28-year Air Force career that Epright was deployed to a war zone.

And he chronicled every moment with the zeal of a historian.

Epright has copies of every newscast. He saved every e-mail he sent and received, including dozens of music requests from radio station listeners.

A farmer harvests bundles of dates from a palm tree outside the Republican Palace in Baghdad, where Saddam Hussein's office and apartments for his supporters were once located. Much of the time he had his camera, a digital Nikon D-100, by his side.

Epright flipped through about 2,500 photos on his computer recently, filling in the details for a visitor. There's a young Iraqi journalist, dressed in jeans, ear stuck to her cell phone. She's known for her fashionable head scarves, he said.

Those soldiers hanging out in the shade? They are just a few of the many American military folks he met.

"It's all about the people you bump into," he said. "A lot of these people are Jedi Knights who are going to save the world from the Dark Side."

There are also pictures of the first Iraqi National Assembly meeting in August.

Four Arab newsmen hang on every word uttered by a female delegate covered head to toe in black garments. She's pointing her thin, gloved finger tips to make her point. In the new, post-Saddam Iraq she can do that.

Snap.

These are the images of everyday courage.

Epright's a people person by nature, an airman turned newsman turned public affairs officer.

When he briefly left his active duty career for the reserves in the 1990s, Epright took on a new mission. He became the editor and publisher of La Vista View, a now defunct weekly newspaper he ran out of the basement of his Nebraska home.

It only lasted a few years - about as long as someone from a military family can stay in one place - but it is one of the pride's of his life.

Epright's deployment was a chance to return to journalism. He was front-row center, watching history unfold during the first Iraqi National Assembly meeting.

AFN staff videotape soldiers sending messages to their families for the Pentagon Channel at Camp Victory, which is a U.S. military installation at the Baghdad airport. Camp Victory is also where the court-martial was held for at least one soldier accused in the Abu Ghraib prisoner abuse scandal. Epright's job was to aid the world media.

In among the long days, the hot sun and the occasional mortars flying in his general direction, the convention was a moment of clarity. The birth of what he hopes will be a new democracy.

"We watched this happen. It was amazing," Epright said.

For a man with an appreciation for free speech - he tags his e-mails with the First Amendment - all that Arabic chatter was a beautiful sound.

"For 30 years, the Iraqis have had a boot on their necks, and now they are free to speak their own minds. And they like the sound," he said.

The national assembly meeting was originally closed to journalists. But the 1,300 delegates gradually agreed to allow Epright's videographers inside. Once there, they clamored to catch every debate, including a confrontation by a delegation that ultimately went to Najaf to negotiate with Shiite cleric Moqtada al-Sadr.

Among the historic events, one of Epright's favorite moments was one of the smallest.

His photos captured the moment like a slide show. A male delegate started shouting in the gallery, and reporters jumped to record his accusations that delegates were taking bribes.

A woman in a black burqa stepped into the field of microphones to say he was wrong. The money the delegates accepted was a stipend for travel expenses given to each delegate.

What she said was not as important as what she did. She was an Iraqi - an Iraqi woman - who expressed her opinion.

"Before we got there she would have been beaten for that, if not killed. She's part of the Iraqi assembly now," Epright said.

The sun's rays pierce the trees and fall on the young face of Spec. Anne Araigue.

Click.

Epright lived in a trailer behind the Republican Palace, near the Baghdad Convention Center, his crew's home-base of operations.

His unit was a mix of Marines, Army soldiers and Air Force airmen, many were young female reservists. They played a mix of American music on the radio station and honored all requests.

The soldiers' tastes were all over the map - country, metal, rap. Their demographics were mostly 18- to 26-year-old men, but anyone with a radio could hear broadcasts from Epright's unit.

"We got requests from little Iraqi girls," Epright said.

One day they broadcast from Camp Victory, a nearby base. They did the job the same as any radio station. They took requests and gave out prizes - radios for soldiers. But they traveled wearing helmets and Kevlar vests.

Their television newscasts covered issues important to soldiers - Iraqi National Guardsmen training so U.S. units could go home.

Now that he's back on Cape, Epright misses his unit.

"You go over, you make a lot of friends, and then you leave," he said. "And you worry about them."

He wants to call them on the phone, but he knows they are busy. He knows if he was there still, there would be work for him to do, too.

He stayed in Baghdad 120 days - a month longer then the required Air Force deployment.

"That country could be paradise in five years. They just need a little bit of help right now," he said.

An Iraqi National Guardsmen poses in his new uniform. He's mugging like Rambo high atop an armored vehicle donated by some other country.

Click-Click.

For each smile, profile and image captured by Epright's lens, there were a thousand more stories to tell.

Like the smoothie girls.

One day, in the restored ruins of the Baghdad Convention Center, two Iraqi girls emerged with blenders. They were going to sell smoothies.

Epright was impressed. Impressed enough to spread the word and drum up some business for the young entrepreneurs.

But one day when he went to the bar, the girls were selling only juice.

Someone had stolen their bananas.

Repeating the story brings unashamed tears to Epright's eyes. Here were two people trying to restore some semblance of normalcy in a war zone. To Epright, they were a microcosm of the country's troubles.

Like the volunteers who signed up to be Iraqi police even after others were murdered for doing the same, these people were "taking responsibility for their own country. They want their country to be normal."

(Published: November 12, 2004)