(Archived Content)

FROM THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS

JS-1242

Assets to be Frozen and

Transferred to Development Fund for Iraq

The Department of the Treasury today designated 16 immediate family members of senior officials of the former Iraqi regime pursuant to Executive Order 13315. The United States is submitting the names of these individuals, as well as the identities of 191 Iraqi parastatal (quasi-government) entities, to the United Nations with the recommendation that they be listed by the 1518 Committee under U.N. Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 1483.

UNSCR 1483 calls for freezing Iraq-related accounts and other financial assets – including those of the immediate family members of senior officials of the former Iraqi regime – and the transfer of these assets to the Development Fund for Iraq (DFI). The Resolution also requires UN member states to freeze and transfer to the DFI financial assets or economic resources of the previous Government of Iraq – and its state bodies, corporations or agencies – located outside Iraq on or before May 22, 2003. As a result, the measures involving the 191 Iraqi parastatal entities apply only to those funds, financial assets or economic resources that were located outside of Iraq on or before May 22, 2003.

“Everyday the hunt for Iraqi assets unveils more and more of Hussein’s thievery from the Iraqi people,” said Juan Zarate, the Treasury Department’s Deputy Assistant Secretary for Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes. “Taking international action to identify and freeze funds pilfered by the fallen regime is crucial to the reconstruction efforts in Iraq.”

The 16 individuals are as follows:

Sajida Khayrallah Tilfa (wife of Saddam Hussein)

Raghad Saddam Hussein al-Tikriti (daughter of Saddam Hussein)

Rana Saddam Hussein al-Tikriti (daughter of Saddam Hussein)

Hala Saddam Hussein al-Tikriti (daughter of Saddam Hussein)

Samira Shahbandar (wife of Saddam Hussein)

Ali Saddam Hussein al-Tikriti (son of Saddam Hussein)

Mohamed Barzan Ibrahim Hasan al-Tikriti (son of Barzan Ibrahim Hasan al-Tikriti, who is currently listed as a senior official of the former Iraqi regime on the United Nations list established pursuant to Security Council Resolution 1483)

Saja Barzan Ibrahim Hasan al-Tikriti (daughter of Barzan Ibrahim Hasan al-Tikriti)

Ali Barzan Ibrahim Hasan al-Tikriti (son of Barzan Ibrahim Hasan al-Tikriti)

Noor Barzan Ibrahim Hasan al-Tikriti (daughter of Barzan Ibrahim Hasan al-Tikriti)

Khawla Barzan Ibrahim Hasan al-Tikriti (daughter of Barzan Ibrahim Hasan al-Tikriti)

Thoraya Barzan Ibrahim Hasan al-Tikriti (daughter of Barzan Ibrahim Hasan al-Tikriti)

Jawhar Majid al-Duri (wife of Izzat Ibrahim al-Duri, who is currently listed as a senior official of the former Iraqi regime on the United Nations list established pursuant to Security Council Resolution 1483)

Sundus abd al-Ghafur (wife of Izzat Ibrahim al-Duri)

Nidal al-Rabi’i (wife of Izzat Ibrahim al-Duri)

Intissar al-Ubaydi (wife of Izzat Ibrahim al-Duri)

The Department of the Treasury is taking these steps to help the international community identify Iraqi assets connected to the designated individuals and identified parastatals. Treasury is also encouraging other countries to undertake independent investigations to identify other Iraqi-related assets, publish similar listings, and return identified funds to the DFI.

The United States is reviewing other entities that may be covered by UNSCR 1483, for later designation and submission to the U.N., as appropriate.

Among the entities identified today are:

Automobile State Enterprise

Central Petroleum Enterprise

Chemical, Petrochemical, Mechanical And Metallurgical Training Center

Directorate General Of Contracts And Purchasing

Directorate General Of Medical Supplies

General Establishment For Grain Trading

Iraqi Oil Tankers Company

Iraqi State Export Organization

Iraqi State Import Organization

Iraqi Trading State Company

National Chemical And Plastic Company

National Tobacco State Company

State Company For Electrical Industries

State Company For Oil Projects (SCOP)

State Enterprise For Petrochemical Industries

State Organization For Chemical Industries

State Organization For Oil Products And Gas Distribution

To ensure the minimum possible disruption of ongoing activities by any of the listed entities, the United States has taken the following steps:

The Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) and Iraqi Ministries vetted the list. In addition, CPA notified representatives of the Iraqi Governing Council in advance of listing.

The U.S. Treasury Department’s Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) has issued a new general license permitting most transactions with these entities.

The names and entities have been submitted to the UN for listing under a chapeau emphasizing that the obligation to freeze and transfer to the DFI assets of Iraqi public entities “ applies only to those funds or financial assets or economic resources that were located outside of Iraq on 22 May 2003” and “ does not require (1) the freezing of the funds, financial assets or other economic resources of these entities that are deposited with or by, or have otherwise accrued to, them after 22 May 2003, or (2) the prohibition of post-22 May transactions by these entities, provided that such assets are not otherwise covered by paragraph 23 of resolution 1483.” (This chapeau also heads the November 21, 2003 UN 661 Committee listing of certain Iraqi public entities.)

In contrast, the obligation to freeze and transfer the assets of Saddam Hussein, senior officials of his former regime, their families and entities or agents owned or controlled by Saddam or senior members of his regime, applies to their assets held before, on or after May 22, 2003.

In addition to the U.S. submission to the United Nations, the Treasury Department’s OFAC has published detailed guidance for U.S. persons regarding the parastatal entities, which is available through OFAC’s website, www.treas.gov/ofac.

Assets of the listed parastatals that have been blocked as of May 23, 2003 must remain blocked. Transactions by U.S. persons with these parastatals occurring after May 23, 2003 are authorized.

It is important to note that the entity on this list identified with an asterisk (*), Iraqi State Enterprise for Foodstuffs Trading, has been previously identified as Specially Designated National (SDNs) of Iraq.

The general licenses mentioned above do not apply to SDNs. Consequently, all transactions (whether before or after May 23, 2003) with the Iraqi State Enterprise for Foodstuffs Trading would remain prohibited, unless specifically licensed by OFAC. As with other entities on the SDN list, U.S. persons must freeze any assets of the Iraqi State Enterprise for Foodstuffs Trading which might come under their control.

The Treasury Department worked in close consultation with the U.S. Department of State in the identification of these 191 entities. Today’s action illustrates the Bush Administration’s commitment to continue to spearhead the worldwide search for Iraqi assets looted by the former Iraqi regime, so that these funds can be used in the reconstruction of Iraq and denied to insurgents and terrorists. The Treasury Department will continue to work closely with the Department of State to identify additional individuals and entities subject to UNSCR 1483 and Executive Order 13315.

-30-