Saddam Hussein was installed as president of Iraq in 1979. It was a rise to power that required overcoming a birth in poverty and a teenage and early adult life spent in struggle. Hussein was born in 1937 in Tikrit, Iraq. He grew up in a very poor area of Iraq and did not finish the equivalent of high school until 1959, when he was twenty-two. His official biography notes that his father died before he was born (although some accounts suggest that his father abandoned the family) and his mother remarried. His step-father rejected Saddam, putting him to work as a sheep-herder rather than sending him to school. When he was ten, he went to live with an uncle (his mother's brother) in Baghdad, who was a passionate Arab nationalist. For most of his teenage years, he was a member of a violent street gang. He combined his political leanings with this violent streak, by joining (at age 19) the radical Baath party, which had as its goal the overthrow of the Iraqi government. Within two years, he led an assassination attempt against Iraqi leader Abdul Karim Qassim during which Hussein was shot in the leg. The assassination failed, and Hussein escaped to Egypt in 1959.

Shaped by his uncle's nationalist influence, Hussein became impressed with Egyptian leader Gamal Nasser, chief advocate of pan-Arabism. His experience of Nasser's Egypt cemented Hussein's political thinking around the ideas of Arab unity and secular nationalism. He lived in Cairo for four years, where he completed his education, married, and was arrested twice for violent altercations.

Hussein returned to Iraq after the successful Baathist coup of 1961, in which Qassim was overthrown. He worked in the internal security forces as an interrogator and practiced torture as a regular part of his job. Another coup landed Saddam in jail for two years, until he escaped in 1966. He quickly consolidated control over the Baath Party's internal security organization, and when the party regained control over Iraq in a 1968 coup, Hussein became the head of the new government's internal security network. Over the next ten years, he strengthened his personal control over the internal police, and in 1979 removed his own cousin from the presidency through an internal party coup.

At the Baath party meeting called to formalize his leadership, Hussein accused some twenty high party officials of conspiracy. Over the next few days, small groups of senior party officials were required by Hussein to kill each of the so-called traitors. Published sources have suggested that nearly 500 people were executed when Hussein came to power. In this manner, he was able not only to purge the party of possible rivals, but to bloody the hands of many party members. If revenge were sought, Hussein guaranteed that he would not face it alone. He thus created a loyal cadre of followers.

From 1979 to the fall of 1990, Saddam Hussein was able to build an Iraq in which his decisions were law. Whenever rivals emerged (following the practice of the street gangs of his youth), Hussein did not hesitate to eliminate them. His experiences would be important in shaping his view of the Persian Gulf Crisis.

By early January 1991, as he faced the international coalition that had formed in response to his invasion of Kuwait, two facts emerged as very likely, if not certain: (1) the U.N. Coalition was going to use force once the U.N. authorized deadline passed, and (2) Iraqi military forces would lose on the battlefield. Given these two likely consequences, the question emerges, Why did Saddam Hussein fail to comply with the U.N. demand that he withdraw Iraqi forces from Kuwait?

To understand his thinking, you must understand why he decided to invade Kuwait in the first place, for it was the first decision that limited his options when the second decision had to be made.