ROLLO Lord ROLLO.

THE sirname of Rollo is of very great antiquity, and appears to be originally from Denmark, from thence to France, and from France to Britain.

Fordun, that learned historian, mentions one Rello, a Dane, a man of rank and figure, in the reign of king Gregory the Great, who was crowned at Scoon in the year 875.

The same author afterwards says, that king Charles III. of France, son-in-law to Edward the elder, king of England, about the year 900 converted to the Christian faith one Rollo, a famous general of Normandy (afterwards called Robert Rollo.) To him he gave his daughter Gilla in ma••riage, and with her the whole dukedom of Normandy, to be held of the kings of France, according to the words of that celebrated author: Normaniam ei de∣dit cum Gilla filia sua, &c. afterwards, et i••se Rollo teneret Normaniam de rege Francorum sicut de domino suo, &c. and he was the first duke of Normandy.

He was succeeded in that dukedom by his eldest son William, who was father of Richard, father of a second Richard, father of the famous Robert duke of Normandy, whose natural son William conquered and became king of England, anno 1066.

Puffendorf, in his introduction to the hi∣story of Europe, says,

"That William the Conqueror was son of Robert duke of Nor∣mandy, descended from Rollo, who was of Danish extraction, &c. &c."

Robert Rollo, the first duke of Normandy, besides his successor William, had several o∣ther sons who settled in Normandy, and they and their posterity retained the sirname of Rollo.

Some of their descendents came over to England with William the Conqueror, and being nearly related to that great prince, had considerable commands in his army.

Richard de Rollo, a son or grand-son of one of these, came to Scotland in the reign of king David I. settled in Perth-shire, and was progenitor of all the Rollos in Scotland.

In a charter to Robert de Bruis, of the manor of Elwick, or Ailewick, Ricardus de Rollo, Walterus Espec, Petrus de Bruis, &c. are witnesses. The charter is without date; but must have been granted in or before 1141, in which year Robert de Bruis died.

Of this Richard was lineally descended

I. JOHN ROLLO, the undoubted ancestor of this noble family.

He flourished in the reign of king David II. who succeeded to the crown, anno 1329, and obtained a charter from that prince, di∣lecto et fideli suo, Johanni Rollo, &c. of a te∣nement in Edinburgh, dated 23d July 1369, to which William bishop of St. Andrews, Patrick bishop of Dunkeld, chancellor, Robert high steward of Scotland, earl of Strathearn, the king's nephew, William earl of Douglas, and many others, are witnesses.

This John de Rollo was clerk of council when the instrument was taken by king Ro∣bert II. in his first parliament, when John, his eldest son's title, as apparent heir to the crown, was ascertained, to which the seals of the bi∣shops and nobility are appended, anno 1371.

In a charter to Laurence de la Haya, dat∣ed in the year 1376, John de Rollo is a wit∣ness.

He died soon thereafter, leaving issue a son,

II. JOHN ROLLO of Duncrub, who suc∣ceeded him. He is the first we have found so designed; and that hath ever since been one of the chief titles of the family.

He got a charter under the great seal from king Robert II. confirming to him the lands of Duncrub, Fyndony, Pitenclethy, Lidea∣thy, Pitmedie, &c. in the earldom of Strath∣earn, and shire of Perth,

"to the said John, and Duncan Rollo, his eldest son, and the heirs-male of his body, lawfully begotten; which failing, to the said John Rollo his nearest heirs whatsomever."

The confir∣mation is dated at Methven, the 13th day of February, the tenth year of the king's reign, 1381.

This John was clerk and secretary to king Robert III. from whom he got a grant of ten pounds sterling per annum, out of the customs of Innerkeithing, for his good and ••aithful services, dated 20th August 1400; to which the bishops of St. Andrews and Glasgow, Ro∣bert earl of Fife and Menteith, Archibald earl of Douglas, &c. are witnesses.

He died in the beginning of the reign of king James I. and was succeeded by his son,

III. DUNCAN ROLLO of Duncrub, design∣ed son and heir apparent of John, in the char∣ter 1381, above narrated.

He is witness in a charter by Robert duke of Albany, governor of Scotland, to John earl of Buchan, his son, anno 1413.

He died before the year 1437, leaving is∣sue a son,

IV. ROBERT ROLLO of Duncrub, who succeeded him.

In the first parliament held by king James II. at Edinburgh, this Robert Rollo is men∣tioned as one of the lords of the articles and judges of causes, together with lord Graham, lord Borthwick, lord Gray, &c. they being in all nine in number, in October 1437.

He died in the beginning of the reign of king James III. and was succeeded by his son,

V. ROBERT, who got a charter from king James III.Roberto Rollo de Duncrub, of the lands of Petty, &c. anno 1464.

He afterwards got a charter, under the great seal, of several other lands, dated 25th December 1466.

He died before the year 1500, and was succeeded by his son,

VI. WILLIAM, who got a charter under the great seal, Willielmo Rollo de Duncrub, of the lands of Duncrub, and many others, in Perth-shire, all erected into one free barony, to be called the barony of Duncrub, in all time coming, dated 26th August 1511.

He died before the year 1538, having married a daughter of the family of Oliphant, by whom he had a son,

VII. ROBERT ROLLO, his apparent heir, who married Janet, daughter of William lord Graham; but died before his father, leaving issue a son,

VIII. ANDREW, who succeeded his grand∣father, and got a charter under the great seal from king James V. Andreae Rollo de Duncrub, et Mariotae Rollo spo••sae suae, et Georgio corum filio, of the lands of Bello, Bokello, Petty, and many others in Perth-shine, dated 21st March 1540.

Also a charter under the great seal from queen Mary, of the lands and barony of E∣dendoning, &c. dated 18th July 1547.

He married Marjory, daughter and co∣heiress of sir David Rollo of Ballachie, by whom he had four sons, and two daughters.

1. George, his heir.

2. James Rollo of Thanesland, who carried on the line of this family.

3. William of Ballogrie.

4. Sir Walter, who got a charter under the great seal, Waltero Rollo militi, et domi∣nae Jeanae Stewart, ejus sponsae, terrarum baro∣niae de Gardin, &c. 19th September 1601.

1st daughter, Marjory, married, 1st, to George Graham of Inchbraco; 2dly, to John Graham of Balgowan.

2. Mary, married to Laurence Oliphant of Gask.

He died anno 1560, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

IX. GEORGE, who got a charter under the great seal, Georgio Rollo de Duncrub, of of the lands of Pitmedie, &c. 22d December 1574.

And another charter of the lands of Blac∣berry-hill, Fairnyknows, &c. to him and Walter Rollo his brother, dated 23d March 1576.

He got also a confirmation of a charter, formerly granted quondam Andreae Rollo de Duncrub, of the land•• of Easter-Rossie, &c. The confirmation is dated 4th November 1579.

But he dying without issue on 6th May 1581, was succeeded by his brother,

IX. JAMES ROLLO of Duncrub, who married Agnes, daughter of Robert Collice of Balnamoon, by whom he had a son,

Sir Andrew, afterwards lord Rollo, and two daughters.

1. Marian, married to James Bruce of Pitfouls, Esq;.

2. Jean, married to Alexander Blair of Rossiehall.

He died before the year 1590, and was succeeded by his son,

X. Sir ANDREW ROLLO of Duncrub, who, being a man of fine parts, and great in∣tegrity, was much in favour with king James VI. who conferred upon him the honour of knighthood

He then got a charter under the great seal, domino Andreae Rollo de Duncrub, militi, of the lands and barony of Rossie, &c. &c. dated 26th June 1621.

And being in no less favour with king Charles I. he obtained from that prince a com∣mission under the great seal, dilecto et fideli suo domino Andreae Rollo de Duncrub, to be she∣riff-principal of the county of Perth, &c. dat∣ed at Holyroodhouse, 25th September 1633.

He afterwards got a charter under the great seal from the same prince, of the lands of Kippans, &c. dated 5th February 1639.

And another charter of the lands and ba∣rony of Tillycultry, in the shire of Clackman∣nan, dated 1st March 1644.

He was a great loyalist, a firm and steady friend of the royal family, and never desert∣ed their interest, whereby he suffered many hardships.

King Charles II. in consideration of the many good, faithful, and free services, done and performed to his majesty and his progenitors, by the said sir Andrew and his predecessors, &c. was pleased to raise him to the dignity of the peerage, by the title of lord Rollo of Duncrub, by patent to him and his heir••-male whatsomever, dated 10th January 1651.

The lord Rollo was afterwards fined by Oliver Cromwell, in the sum of one thousand pounds sterling, for his adherence and attach∣ment to the royal family, anno 1654.

He married Catharine Drummond, daugh∣ter of James lord Maderty, by whom he had five sons, and four daughters.

1. Sir James, afterwards lord Rollo.

2. Sir John, who got a charter under the great seal, Johanni Rollo, militi, filio legitimo secundo genito domini Andreae de Duncrub, ter∣rarum baroniae de Bannockburn, &c. dated 25th July 1636.

3. Mr. Laurence Rollo of Rossie.

4. Mr. Andrew Rollo, who, being bred to the Church, was parson of Dunning.

5. Sir William Rollo, a youth of great honour and spirit, who joined the great Mon∣trose as soon as he declared for his majesty, was taken prisoner at the unfortunate battle of Philiphaugh, condemned and executed at Glasgow, in October 1645.

1st daughter, Margaret, married to sir John Drummond of Carnock, and had issue.

2. Jean, married, 1st, to John Rollo of Powhouse, Esq; 2dly, to John Drummond of Pitkellony.

3. Anne, married to William Mercer of Clevedge, and had issue.

4. Isabel, married to William Haliday of Tillibole, and had issue.

He died in an advanced age, anno 1659, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XI. JAMES, second lord Rollo, a staunch loyalist, and a man of great worth and merit.

He had the honour of knighthood confer∣red upon him, when a young man, by king Charles I. and, upon his father's resignation, obtained from that prince a charter under the

great seal, domino Jacobo Rollo juniori de Dun∣crub, militi, of the barony of Duncrub, &c. dated 18th March 1642.

He married, 1st, lady Dorothea Graham, daughter of John fourth earl of Montrose, by whom he had no issue.

He married, 2dly, lady Mary Campbell, daughter of Archibald seventh earl of Argyle, by whom he had two sons, and one daughter.

1. Andrew, his heir.

2. Major Archibald Rollo.

His daughter, Margaret, married to sir George Oliphant of Newton.

He died anno 1671, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XII. ANDREW, third lord Rollo, who married Margaret Bal••our, daughter of Robert lord Burleigh, by whom he had two sons, and three daughters.

1. John, master of Rollo, a young man of fine parts, and great hopes; but was unfor∣tunately killed in a private quarrel by— Graham younger of Inchbraco, 29th May 1691, without issue.

2. Robert, afterwards lord Rollo.

1st daughter, Emilia, married to William Irvine of Bonshaw, Esq; and had issue.

2. Isabella, married to Robert Johnston of Wamphray, Esq; and had issue.

3. Susan, married to Robert Gillespie of Cherryvalley, Esq; in the kingdom of Ireland, and had issue.

4. Jean, who died unmarried.

He died 1st March 1700, and was succed∣ed by his son,

XIII. ROBERT, fourth lord Rollo, a man of singular merit and great integrity.

He married Mary, eldest daughter of sir Harry Rollo of Woodside, by whom he had four sons, and three daughters.

1. Andrew, now lord Rollo.

2. Harry, who was an officer in the army, and married Anne, sister of James lord Ruth∣ven; but died without issue.

3. John, who married Cicily, daughter of James Johnston merchant in Edinburgh, and hath issue.

4. Clement, married to Maria-Aemelia Ir∣vine, eldest daughter of John Irvine of Bon∣shaw, Esq; and hath issue.

1st daughter, Mary, married to David Drummond of Pitkellony, Esq; and hath issue.

2. Jean, married to captain Robert John∣ston of Wamphray, and hath issue.

3. Isabel, married to John Aytoun of Inch∣dairny, Esq; and hath issue.

He died anno 1758, and was succeeded by his eldest son,

XIV. ANDREW, fifth lord Rollo, who be∣taking himself to a military life, served in the army with great reputation, and rose to the rank of a colonel.

In America, where he acted as a brigadier∣general, he gave many signal proofs of his mi∣litary capacity in the service of his king and country.

He married Catharine, daughter and co∣heiress of lord James Murray of Dowally, third son of John marquis of Athole, by whom he had a son,

John, master of Rollo, also an officer in the army, a youth of great hopes and spirit; but died at Martinico, in the flower of his age, much regreted.

He had several other children, who all di∣ed young.

ARMS.

Or, a cheveron between three boar's heads erazed azure.

CREST; on a wreath, a stag's head coup∣ed proper.

SUPPORTERS; two stags of the last.

MOTTO; La fortune passe par tout.

CHIEF SEAT,

At Duncrub in Perth-shire.