Rollo May (1909-1994) is the father of Existential Psychotherapy in the United States and indeed has inspired Yalom, Bugental and countless others through his teachings and books. He edited the first book in the field in 1958, Existence, and authored the seminal books Love and Will and The Meaning of Anxiety. He is a legendary teacher, scholar and psychotherapist.

Rollo May was born April 21, 1909, in Ada, Ohio. His childhood was a difficult one: His parents didn't get along and eventually divorced, and his sister had a psychotic breakdown. After a brief stint at Michigan State (he was asked to leave because of his involvement with a radical student magazine), he attended Oberlin College in Ohio, where he received his bachelors degree.

After graduation, he went to Greece, where he taught English at Anatolia College for three years. During this period, he also spent time as an itinerant artist and even studied briefly with Alfred Adler. When he returned to the US, he entered Union Theological Seminary and became friends with one of his teachers, Paul Tillich, the existentialist theologian, who would have a profound effect on his thinking. May received his BD in 1938.

May suffered from tuberculosis, and had to spend three years in a sanatorium. This was probably the turning point of his life. While he faced the possibility of death, he also filled his empty hours with reading. Among the literature he read were the writings of Søren Kierkegaard, the Danish religious writer who inspired much of the existential movement, and provided the inspiration for May's theory.

He went on to study psychoanalysis at White Institute, where he met people such as Harry Stack Sullivan and Erich Fromm. And finally, he went to Columbia University in New York, where in 1949 he received the first PhD in clinical psychology that institution ever awarded. May's dissertation was published as The Meaning of Anxiety. After receiving his PhD, he went on to teach at a variety of top schools. In 1958, he edited, with Ernest Angel and Henri Ellenberger, Existence, which introduced existential psychology to the US.

In 1983 May published a work that attempted to explain how "classic" existential thought related to psychoanalysis. The Discovery of Being: Writings in Existential Psychology was a collection of essays exploring the views of Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, and Freud, among others. May was determined to illustrate that psychology and existentialism were concerned with the same issues and could cooperate towards a better understanding of the human condition.

May was a founder and faculty member of Saybrook Graduate School and Research Center in San Francisco. He spent the last years of his life in Tiburon, California, until he died in October of 1994.