The McCarthy Tapes: The 1968 political campaign

December 8, 2006 - “The McCarthy Tapes” takes the listener back to the 1968 campaign through audio recordings of the Eugene McCarthy archive, which documents a turbulent time in America's history. McCarthy’s political legacy will forever be defined by 1968, when McCarthy turned his opposition to the Vietnam War into a crusade for the presidency.

Boundary Waters is a legacy of the Wilderness Act

September 3, 2004 - MPR’s Bob Kelleher traces the individuals and movement that led to the U.S. 1964 Wilderness Act, creating the nation's system of federally protected wilderness. Minnesota's Boundary Waters Canoe Area was one of the first. Several Minnesotans played prominent roles, including then U.S. Senator Hubert Humphrey and a junior college administrator from Ely, named Sigurd Olson.

The firm and Skip Humphrey's arrangment with it over fees

January 19, 1998 - State Attorney General Skip Humphrey's lawsuit against big tobacco interests is going to trial. But critics of his contract with an outside lawfirm, arguing the case, say private lawyers could get rich at the expense of state taxpayers.

Baseball & Football money and ownership

January 17, 1998 - In sports news: It was a nail-bitter last night as the Minnesota Timberwolves edged Houston 116-to-115 last night in overtime. The Wolves have won four straight. The Wolves take on the Mavericks tonight in Dallas. Gametime is 7:30 p.m. Minnesota Vikings board chairman John Skoglund says there's an outside chance the team will not be sold -- because of the NFL's lucrative new television deals. And if the Vikings ownership group doesn't sell the team, Skoglund says Dennis Green probably would stay as head coach. Major league baseball and the Minnesota Twins are trying to block Attorney General Humphrey's antitrust investigation into the possible move of the Minnesota Twins to North Carolina. The actions were filed yesterday in state and federal courts.

Remembering Humphrey's legacy on 20th anniversary of his death

January 12, 1998 - It's been twenty years since that man from Minnesota, Hubert H. Humphrey the Second, died at the age of 66 on a bitterly cold January 13th. The former Senator and Vice President was an unabashed liberal, proud of his work on legislation establishing civil rights, Medicare, and the Peace Corps - programs and policies still in place today. As Minnesota Public Radio's Laura McCallum reports, historians say the anniversary of Humphrey's death is a chance to look back on his legacy.

Humphrey Musuem opens in Waverly

December 6, 1996 - A new Minnesota museum honoring the late Senator and Vice-president Hubert Humphrey has opened in his adopted hometown of Waverly in Wright County. The fledgling museum hopes to compliment the state's other sources of Humphrey material - the University of Minnesota's Humphrey Institute and the Minnesota Historical Society. Organizers say they'll focus on Humphrey's rural roots, and try to educate young people about his place in history.

Two parts. Call-in with Skip Humphrey. Interview from 1982 with Meridel Le Sueur, who died yesterday.

November 15, 1996 - A call-in program with studio guest Hubert H. Humphrey III, Minnesota's Attorney General. He will be answering MPR listener questions about the prevention of violence. Part 2: Excerpt from a 1982 interview with writer Meridel Le Sueur, who died Thursday at the age of 96.