Akif Name Meaning in English

What does the name Akif mean? What is the meaning of the name Akif, lucky number, lucky stone, origin and religion.

Akif, Akef or Aqif Arabic: عاكف‎‎) is a masculine given name, it may refer to: one who sits in aitekaf (a sitting in last days of ramadan, done by Muslims to purify themselves). This name is mentioned in sura e Baqara (2nd sura of quran)

Akif Name Meaning, Origin & Details

Meaning: Devoted to, dedicated to, persevering in, busily engaged, Focused, attached, intent Gender: Boy Origin: Arabic Religion: Muslim Suitable for: Boys / Male / Guys Hardness: Easy to pronounce, Akif is a short name Uniqueness: It is a common name Short & Easy: Yes Syllables: 4 Letters and 1 Words

Akif Name Meaning in Urdu ⟶

Related or Similar Names

If you like the meanings or synonyms of name Akif; we have created list of popular names that can be considered as alternative of the name Akif.

Below names are with similar meaning as Devoted to, dedicated to, persevering in, busily engaged,Focused, attached, intent. Explore the list below for names that not only share a similar meaning to "Devoted to, dedicated to, persevering in, busily engaged,Focused, attached, intent" but also encapsulate the essence and significance associated with the name "Akif."

Need Sibling Names For Akif?

Brothers sibling names for Akif can be chosen from the list below.

Akif Name Lucky Number 3

Akif Name Numerology And Personality

Akif has the numerology 3. The religion is Muslim. These people with numerology 3 are known to be very expressive and they are very verbal about everything that they want or they like in their life. The meaning of this beautiful name is Devoted to, dedicated to, persevering in, busily engaged,Focused, attached, intent. These people are known to be opinionated and that is what makes them different from others.

They are also thought to be social birds because they like to socialize so much. the gender of this name Akif is Boy. These are the people who know how to enjoy their life the most and that is because they know the joy of living. And they are also known to be very fond of art.

These people are very much into art and that is what makes them extremely creative with everything that they decide to do.

Popular personalities with Akif Name.

Akif Name Wallpaper

Akif name 3D wallpaper and writing styles, Write Akif name on photo online, Akif name writing style online, Write Akif name on image online, Write Akif name pic & wallpaper, Akif 3D name wallpapers editing, Akif new wallpaper, Akif 3d name creator online, Akif name background maker, Create my name in style for Akif

See Akif Name Wallpaper ⟶

How People Search Akif