Ohorongo Cement Vacancies 2024: X2 Job Openings Apply on Before 21 June 2024

Ohorongo Cement Vacancies 2024:- The Ohorongo Cement notification issued to accept online applications for the vacant post of Sales Assistant, Creditors Clerk. All the candidates who are eligible for the post of Sales Assistant, Creditors Clerk are required to fill out the Ohorongo Cement application forms using the official website portal of Ohorongo Cement at www.ohorongo-cement.com.

The Ohorongo Cement Recruitment authority will accept the registration forms through online mode only. Applications for the Post of Sales Assistant, Creditors Clerk vacancies can fill out the applications Form on before 21 June 2024.

It’s important for any kind of post interested candidates to carefully review the educational qualifications, age limit, and other requirements specified in the official notification of Ohorongo Cement to ensure they meet all the criteria before applying.

Ohorongo Cement Vacancies List & Requirement for Vacant Posts

Ohorongo Cement , which has the support and respect of the countrymen, has provided you a golden opportunity to join the Ohorongo Cement . Here we will know what are the requirements for Vacancies in the Ohorongo Cement and how this process can be completed.

There are many requirements for Vacancies in the Ohorongo Cement like citizenship, education, and age limit.

Job Profile Requirements Closing Date Sales Assistant

Two years working experience with specific exposure to office administration or a Diploma in Office Administration or equivalent.

Grade 12.

Excellent communication and interpersonal skills.

Professional appearance with friendly and helpful approach towards people.

Ability to organize own workload, take initiative and good judgement.

Ability to work extremely accurate.

Must be able to work independently, but also in team situations.

Must be able to maintain confidentiality.

Good level of computer literacy (MS Word and MS Excel)

Strong communication skills.

Excellent telephone etiquette and skills.

Must be inter-cultural intelligent.

Excellent English and Afrikaans is a prerequisite, Oshiwambo would be a distinct advantage.

21 June 2024 Creditors Clerk

Grade 12 with Accounting.

SAP Experience, preferably within a manufacturing environment.

Sound knowledge/understanding of VAT.

Computer Literate.

MS Office knowledge (MS Excel & MS Word)

Fluent in English.

Good communication and interpersonal skills.

Demonstrate sound work ethics.

Ability to organize own workload and take initiative to resolve problems.

Work extremely accurate with attention to detail.

Effectively manage time to meet deadlines and payment dates.

21 June 2024

How to do Apply for Ohorongo Cement Vacancies 2024

For Vacancies in Ohorongo Cement , one has to apply online. Candidates can apply by visiting the official website and filling the required information. Candidates should ensure that they are providing correct and complete information.

Follow us on Google News

Important Links Official Ohorongo Cement Careers Portal www.ohorongo-cement.com Notification View PDF Now Apply Online Go to Official Apply Online Link From Here Closing Date 21 June 2024 Join Whats App Channel Follow Now Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Twitter

Ohorongo Cement Vacancies FAQ

What services are provided to assist in the Ohorongo Cement application process?

For help in applying online, candidates can check the official website or contact for latest information.

Where can I get detailed information about the Ohorongo Cement Vacancies process?

Detailed information is available on the official website of Ohorongo Cement , from which candidates can get all the news and updates.

How to know important dates of Ohorongo Cement Recruitment 2024 ?

Candidates can check the official website or local newspaper for the dates of the Vacancies process.