Press Release

Ohorongo Cement (Pty) Ltd, is one of Namibia’s first cement manufacturers and owns one of the most modern cement plants in Africa.

The donation was handed over by Mr. Hans-Wilhelm Schütte, the Managing Director of Ohorongo Cement, to the Minister of Home Affairs, Immigration, Safety and Security, Hon. Dr. Albert Kawana, on Wednesday, 14 June 2023.

Ohorongo Cement (Pty) Ltd, responded to a kind request from the Minister of Home Affairs, Immigration, Safety and Security that sought aid in improving the living conditions of police officers deployed at the various border posts around the country.

The request was well received and urgently responded upon as Ohorongo Cement’s token of appreciation and recognition of the valuable work that the police officers do in ensuring a safe Namibia.

While the donation aimed at the improvement of the living standards of the police officers at various postings within the country, “we feel this is also a fulfilment of our obligation towards the Namibian nation as corporates in assisting our Government in conducting some of these vital services such as ensuring a safe Namibia” said Schutte.

In his acceptance remark, Hon. Dr. Albert Kawana, expressed gratitude towards Ohorongo Cement (Pty) Ltd for their noble gesture and showed great appreciation as Ohorongo Cement (Pty) Ltd was the first corporate to respond to his call for assistance.

Ohorongo Cement (Pty) Ltd demonstrated patriotism and unwavering support to the Government of Namibia by their noble gesture and such mutual corporations and understandings breeds success for the nation, said Hon. Dr. Kawana.

The donation is considered a great contribution to the construction project aimed at ensuring conducive living standards for the Namibian Police Officers deployed at the various border posts across the country, who safeguard the internal affairs of the Namibian nation at large.

The Honorable Minister assured Ohorongo Cement (Pty) Ltd, that the donation will be utilized positively for its intended purpose and will be accounted for in accordance with a transparent accounting process.

The Minister further emphasized that some of the materials to construct proper living facilities such as cement are now in place and hence the construction process will speed up.

Major General Elias Mutota of the Namibian Police was overwhelmed by the meaningful donation which he themed an encouragement to the police officers in carrying out their job in the reduction of crime.

Ohorongo Cement remains open to meet the Namibian government halfway where and when they can do so.

The day ended on the words of Ohorongo Cement’s Managing Director; “a safe nation is a prosperous nation to conduct business activities and live in as Namibians.”