Rupert Arthur Goddard went peacefully to be with his Heavenly Father on May 17, 2020 at the age of 81 years. Rupert was born in Christchurch, Barbados on June 27, 1938 to Gwendolyn Lolita Browne and Charles Cledan Goddard.

Rupert's childhood was ruled over by his beloved maternal grandmother Lillian Gertrude Browne who instilled in her grandchildren the love of God. In 1960, at the age of 22 years he moved to England to answer the British Government's call for workers from the Commonwealth. He established himself and lived in Rugby (UK) for 13 years holding a few different positions for British Rail. In Rugby life was busy but happy. There he married his beautiful fiancée Joan Margaret Stanley and their son Nigel was born. Rupert was a co-founder of the Rugby West-Indian Club: a cultural and supportive hub for the local West-Indian community. Through that organisation, trips across England were organised along with well attended Friday night dances, which provided entertainment for the whole family at the sound of reggae, calypso, ska and rocksteady: music that Rupert deeply enjoyed.

After attending his brother Horace's wedding in Montreal in 1970, Rupert fell in love with Canada. In 1973 he returned and took up residence in Montreal where he lived until his passing. In Montreal he studied electroplating. Rupert worked for many years at Dominion Lock and later for a good friend who opened his own company. Chances are he plated some of the keys and locks that you use at home. He enjoyed his retirement years visiting Barbados at his residence in St. George and staying the summer months in Montreal.

Rupert was a fervent Christian. He chose to become an Anglican in his youth and remained faithful to this denomination for the rest of his life. He was quite active in St. Mark's Anglican Church, becoming a warden and a member of the church choir. Nothing was too great to donate to his church. His deep social consciousness led him to become a member of Barbados House Montreal. This organization regrouped many expatriate Barbadians with the focus to improve their social, cultural and economic lives. Here too, Rupert contributed to all the organization's activities by donating food for functions: coconut bread, conkies, fish cakes and whatever culinary delights he made. He was an excellent cook and enjoyed his childhood foods. He added to the life of the association as a member of the Barbados House Choral group.

Rupert was a protective father and brother, a dedicated husband, and a generous grandfather. He deeply cherished every minute spent with his family. In his final years Rupert endured through disease bravely and with faith. He stayed strong till the very end.

He leaves to celebrate his life Joan Margaret his beloved and devoted wife of 57 years, his son Nigel (Daniela) and his adored granddaughters Clara and Sofia. Rupert was predeceased by his parents, his older sister Iona Odessa and his brothers Michel and Carlton Maclaren. He will be missed by his remaining siblings: Horace Ishmael (Pat), Norma, Evelyn, and J. MacDonald and many more family members and friends in Canada, England, Italy, Barbados and other Caribbean islands and the United States of America.

We wish to thank the Nephrology and "3 West" medical and nursing teams at the Lakeshore General Hospital where Rupert was cared for. We especially appreciate Doctor Alexandro Zarruk for his care and compassion in Rupert's last moments.

The Celebration of Life service in Montréal will take place on Saturday June 20, 2020 at 10 AM. Due to the present situation and measures taken, only immediate family can be present. We warmly invite you to virtually attend the live stream of the service. Please contact the family for further details.

In lieu of flowers kindly consider donating to St. Mark's Anglican Church (514-747-4566; www.stmarkstpeter.org).

Funeral arrangements entrusted to Urgel Bourgie.