HANNA, Rupert Edward 1892 - 1971

Rupert Edward (Rupe) HANNA was the 6th child of David HANNA and Susan Anna SMITH. He was born on the 28th April 1892 at Moulamein NSW.

Rupert HANNA was apprenticed earlier in life to William CLARK, Hairdresser of Jerilderie, and he lived in Nowrani Street, Jerilderie NSW, with his sister Lillian Margaret, her husband John Joseph HORGAN and other HORGAN children after the death of his mother Susan Anna in 1911.

During 1917 he married Alice May SAMUELSON in Jerilderie. In 1920 he was living at Osborn Street, Finley NSW where he owned and ran a barbershop and billiards saloon. Electoral Roll records show that during 1930 and 1936 Rupert and Alice were residing at Murray Street, Finley NSW. Records to date show that he had three sons, Rupert Bernard HANNA who was born at Berrigan NSW on 1 November 1920, Ronald Edward HANNA born on the 3rd July 1926 in Finley NSW and Neville was born during 1942 also at Finley. A daughter Doris May was also born and today resides at Finley NSW.

Rupert Edward HANNA died in Finley 1971 aged 78. His death certificate states that he died on the 17th January 1971 at Finley Hospital, suffering from senile myocarditis. His attending physician was Dr. C.S VEAR. Rupert HANNA was buried on the 19th January 1971 in the Church of England portion of the Finley Cemetery. The Reverend R. W. GINNS conducted his service and witnesses to his burial were R. K. HEARNS and L.D. SRUCCSSEY. His son Ronald Edward HANNA was the informant of his death. The address given at the time of his death was 52 Finley Street, Finley NSW and his occupation was shown as "Hairdresser".

Soldiers Farewelled

Newspaper ItemExtracted from the Jerilderie Herald and Urana Advertiser dated Friday 4 August 1916

There was a large attendance at the Town Hall on Friday evening last when three of the youngest soldiers of this district - Privates Val. Rochfort, E. Stevens and J. Shannon were farewelled prior to their departure on active service. The function must rank as one of the most enjoyable of its kind yet promoted by the Jerilderie Recruiting Committee, for, on a rough estimate, the floor was occupied during the greater part of the evening by at least 80 couples, not including a considerable number of other, friends and well-wishers who had assembled to bid the boys good bye. Dancing was temporarily suspended during the early part of the evening while the presentations were made. This pleasing duty was performed by the Mayor (Ald.L. Therburn) who, in an appropriate speech, made glowing reference to the fine spirit of patriotism with which their young soldier guests were imbued and ex pressed the hope that he would in the near future have the pleasure of welcoming them home again. To Privates- Rochfort and Stevens he handed orders for wristlet watches, and explained that; Private Shannon had, already received, a similar gift at a farewell tendered him at Berrigan (from which town he had enlisted). In the course of his remarks the Mayor said that this might be termed a unique occasion, inasmuch as the lads were representative of three families who had already responded most generously to the call. Private Rochfort two brothers and Private Shannon's father and uncle had also gone to the front before him. Such a record of patriotism was to be highly commended, and he wished the boys every success and a speedy return. The Mayor's remarks were supplemented by an appropriate speech from Mr. J. A. T, Rochfort, and the lads were accorded three hearty cheers and musical honours. Private Rochfort, on behalf of himself and his comrades suitably returned thanks. Before vacating the platform the Mayor took advantage of the opportunity to address a few remarks in reference to Mr. R. Hanna, another Jerilderie volunteer who was present. This young man had not long ago been challenged to enlist, and he answered by immediately sacrificing his business interests and doing so. After a short stay in camp he contracted rheumatics and was afterwards, unfortunately discharged as unfit. No one perhaps was more disappointed than "Rupe," but he had proved himself a trier, and was accordingly to be commended. The Mayor also drew attention to the local Red Cross Society's intention of sending Xmas boxes containing suitable gifts to the Jerilderie District boys at the front. It was the Society's intention to send one to every soldier and he hoped that all present would lend their assistance in compiling the gifts, which could either be forwarded to the Secretary of the Red Cross or to Mr. Jas. Fox. After the National Anthem had been sung dancing was resumed and a most pleasant time was spent. Two factors which greatly contributed to the general enjoyment were the excellent music supplied by Mrs. Wilson (assisted by Mrs. Meillon and Miss Elliott), and Messrs. Wilson (violin) and McVittie (cornet); and the tasty refreshments prepared by the ladies of the town. The rendering of Auld Lang Syne and the National Anthem brought a most enjoyable evening to finality. Privates Rochfort, Stevens and Shannon left to re-join their respective units on Saturday morning carrying with them the best wishes of all for their future welfare.

HANNA - SAMUELSON - Wedding

Newspaper ItemExtracted from the Jerilderie Herald and Urana Advertiser dated 7 December 1917

A wedding of general interest was celebrated at Jerilderie on Friday evening last, when Mr. Rupert Hanna, youngest son of the late Mr. and Mrs D. Hanna, of Jerilderie, was united in the holy bonds of matrimony with Miss Alice Samuelson, eldest daughter of Mr and Mrs G. Samuelson of South Coree, Jerilderie. The bride, who was given away by, her father, was attended by her sister, Miss Vera Samuelson in the capacity of bridesmaid, and the bridegroom was ably supported by Mr T. Thomas. After the ceremony the wedding party adjourned to the residence of Mr. Ewen Smith where a sumptuous spread was laid out and partaken of by numerous friends and well-wishers of the happy couple. The usual toasts were honoured, and a very enjoyable evening was spent. We join with their numerous friends in wishing the newly wedded couple many years of felicity.

France's Day Ball - Rupe HANNA

Newspaper ItemExtracted from the Jerilderie Herald and Urana Advertiser dated Friday 13 July 1917

At a meeting of the Anzac Buffet Committee last Saturday in the Town Hall, it was decided that as the response to the fund had been so good over £100 having been subscribed - they would devote their efforts in assisting France's Day Fund. It was unanimously resolved to hold a ball in aid of the fund, at the same time inviting contributions in support of this charitable movement. Mrs E. Robinson and Mr Rupe Hanna, assisted by the ladies, were appointed lion, secretaries. It might be mentioned that Mr R. Hanna, after vainly endeavouring to get to the front, resolved to do his best to help in other ways. He is one of the most enthusiastic, energetic and unselfish workers for all these charitable movements in the town or district.

Click to Enlarge Image

Thumbnail 1 This is the Barber Shop and Billard Saloon Rupert HANNA ran at Finley NSW. This photo was taken in the early 1920's and shows Rupert outside the Saloon, his sister Irene and Mr. E. Hickey who ran the Bootmaker Shop.

Thumbnail 2 This is the grave of Rupert Edward Hanna and his wife Alice May Samuelson at the Finley Cemetery.

Thumbnail 3 This photograph was taken pre WW1. It shows Rupert James White on the left, Rupert Edward Hanna in the centre. The young man on the right hand side is unknown. Rupert White married Rupert Hanna's sister Doris May Hanna in 1922.