Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi spent Sunday searching for a new economy minister after political infighting forced Giulio Tremonti to resign on the eve of an important budget meeting with the European Union.

Berlusconi has temporarily taken over for Tremonti, who resigned Saturday after a four-hour cabinet meeting that began Friday night and ran into the next day. In his interim role, the prime minister's first duty will be to attend a meeting of EU finance ministers in Brussels on Monday, which is due to discuss a warning to Italy over its 2004 budget deficit.

In Rome on Sunday, the Italian news media was touting Mario Monti, the European Union competition commissioner, as the most likely replacement for Tremonti. Other possible candidates include several former bank executives and a former director general of Italy's Treasury Ministry.

But Berlusconi is said to favor Monti, who as a well-respected commissioner in Brussels could smooth over budget squabbles between Italy and the Union. Monti is also not closely linked to any political party, making him palatable to Berlusconi's coalition partners.

The squabbles with Brussels were at the root of the latest upheaval in Berlusconi's cabinet. Tremonti had long been at odds with Deputy Prime Minister Gianfranco Fini, the leader of the National Alliance, the second-largest party in the governing coalition after Berlusconi's Forza Italia. Fini has been in favor of increased government spending to prop up weak industries and southern Italy, a depressed region where the National Alliance gets much of its electoral support.

It was Fini who demanded that Tremonti resign after he presented the cabinet with a plan to cut government spending by €5.5 billion, or $6.8 billion. The cuts are necessary to keep Italy's budget deficit below 3 percent of gross domestic product, the maximum allowed by European Union budgetary laws. The EU has been calling on Italy to make €7 billion in budget cuts.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.