Tremonti: "Here is how and why Berlusconi transformed the Italian economy"

"The greatness of man is double: politics and business"

© Agenzia Nova - Reproduction reserved

“The greatness of man is double. It's multi-level." Giulio Tremonti, now chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Chamber for the Brothers of Italy, told Corriere della Sera that he has always been Silvio Berlusconi's public accounts man. Deputy prime minister, once finance minister and three times at the head of the unified ministry of economy and finance (MEF), Tremonti is the one who did not hesitate to call Berlusconi to the rigor when the latter, as prime minister, risked getting caught the hand. He is one of the few who had the courage: “Not everyone is aware of how profoundly Silvio Berlusconi has changed Italy. Italy, attention: not only Italian television”. “I'm talking about – explains the former minister – the fact that it was commercial. Until Berlusconi's televisions, Italians bought what they saw in shop windows. There was no other possibility. With commercial television, goods and assets have begun to be seen on the screen”. And that “really changed everything. Given the impact television had on audiences, it was a tremendous boost for the media industry. From this point of view, it changed Italy. It's not just the fact of having created a large group, but it is having made a decisive contribution to the entire Italian economy”. And the political side; “It's the best-known side, the one that developed to the end. There is only, always, to remember who marked an interruption in this story”.

The reference is to what Silvio Berlusconi called the 2011 coup: “Yes. I remain convinced that the famous couple Angela Merkel and Nicolas Sarkozy have actively contributed to the Italian spread. The history is there to see. The Berlusconi government fell due to the letter signed by the outgoing and incoming governors of the ECB inspired by Angela Merkel and Nicolas Sarkozy”. The fact remains that Silvio Berlusconi did not question his and Forza Italia's membership in the European People's Party until his last day: “Ah, there's no doubt about that. But the real story is what I just repeated,” concluded Tremonti

Read also other news on Nova News

Follow us on the social channels of Nova News on Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Instagram, Telegram

© Agenzia Nova - Reproduction reserved

Latest news

Harris on CNN: “Trump’s words about my race? It’s the usual script”

US Vice President Kamala Harris said her values ​​“have not changed,” even though her tenure under the Biden administration has given her “a new perspective.”

Leonardo Bertulazzi, a Red Brigades fugitive, arrested in Argentina

The man, arrested in Buenos Aires, took part in the kidnapping of naval engineer Piero Costa, which took place in Genoa on 12 January 1977

Gaza, Borrell: "There is no unanimity on sanctions against Israeli ministers, but I will present the proposal"

"I will use my role as High Representative who, according to the treaty, can make proposals to the Council"

Japan-Italy: Blue and Space Economy Protagonists at Villaggio Italia in Tokyo

Organized by the Navy and the Air Force, the double conference brought together a series of exceptional speakers

Rome: Fire in Muratella, smoke reaching the center and a runway closed at Fiumicino airport

This afternoon's fire is the latest in a series of incidents that have occurred in the last 24 hours in the same area of ​​the capital.

Other news

Budget Law, Meloni: "We will not abolish the single allowance, be wary of imaginative reconstructions"

"We continue to work for a better and fairer Italy, after years of disasters of the left", said the Prime Minister together with the Minister of Economy and Finance Giancarlo Giorgetti

Indo-Pacific: Air Force Mission Enters Fourth Phase – Video

Two F-35Bs of the Armed Forces, with a small contingent of about 40 people, were embarked on the aircraft carrier Cavour of the Navy, for joint training

Tajani meets with the President of the European Parliament Roberta Metsola – video

“A friend of Italy with whom we will continue to work to build a strong, united and supportive Europe”

Africa: French diplomats and security agents targeted in Kinshasa and Ouagadougou

The climate of suspicion and intolerance towards France in several countries of sub-Saharan Africa shows no signs of abating

Venice Biennale: Three Colombian Labs at the “Homo Faber” Exhibition

The works of Alexandra Agudelo (goldsmith), Dayra Benavides (masks and carnival) and Gilberto and Oscar Granja (Pasto paintings) will be exhibited, representing the most precious passages of life, from childhood, to travels, dreams and love stories, until death.