Global supply chain and operations consultancy Maine Pointe has appointed Mary Lyons as executive vice president and chief human resources officer (CHRO). Lyons brings with her a wealth of experience, leaving Accenture’s management consulting arm after serving nearly three years as a managing director, leading the firm’s global talent and organization group.

Lyons will drive innovation within the consulting firm by identifying and developing the talent Maine Pointe needs to further its reputation and international appeal as an industry powerhouse. Maine Pointe’s “Total Value Optimization” approach has industry experts from within the firm work with clients to streamline and transform their supply chains, attempting to deliver the greatest value to customers at the lowest cost to businesses. Maine Pointe’s industry experts, then, are a huge drawing point for potential clients, which seek advice from the best of the best in any given industry.

“Our highest priority is to support clients by identifying and developing the best talent in the industry,” Steve Bowen, Maine Pointe CEO, said in a statement. “Mary brings a long history of innovation and transformation in development on the consulting business, and we are pleased she has chosen to join us to support and develop our growing steam.”

Lyons also was a talent leader and partner at PwC. She spent the bulk of her career at PRTM Management Consultants, working first as a consultant, then partner and global chief CHRO. She joined PwC when it acquired PRTM in 2011.

“I am thrilled to be joining Maine Pointe and have the opportunity to work with the team on the global people and talent agenda, Lyons said. “Maine Pointe’s growth trajectory directly correlates to the sustainable growth it delivers its clients, and I am looking forward to being a part of that growth.”

This year has been rife with change to Maine Pointe’s upper echelons. Christopher Brumitt was recently named head of the aerospace and defense practice, while industry experts Tony Planos and Barry Dull were brought in as senior advisors for the firm’s oil and gas practice.

Maine Pointe is headquartered in Boston, and has further offices in Canada, Switzerland, and China.