Inspire 27 alumnotes 2000s Robyn Cannon Lobdell ’00 and her husband, Jeremy, announce the birth of Ezra Martin on June 25, 2007. They reside in La Plata, Missouri, where Jeremy is a pastor and Robyn is a piano instructor. Michael ’00 and Julie Lamborn Munro ’00 announce the birth of Alexandra Raeann on October 3, 2006. She joins her sister, Elise (2), at home in Albany, Ohio. Michael attends medical school at the Ohio State University, and Julie stays home with the girls. She also enjoys being a NICU nurse one weekend a month. Christopher Recktenwald ’00 graduated from Northwestern University on June 16, 2007. He earned a master of business administration degree from the Kellogg School of Management and a master of engineering management degree from the McCormick School of Engineering. After spending a few weeks volunteering in the Central African Republic and vacationing in Europe, Chris returned to Detroit. He is employed by PRTM, a management consulting firm. Aaron ’00 and Jackie Smith Warriner ’00 announce the birth of Logan on September 12, 2006. He recently celebrated his first birthday with family and friends. They reside in Pennsville, New Jersey. Mary Zuleger ’00 and John Daft were married June 15, 2007 in Neenah, Wisconsin. Mary is a first-grade teacher at Fox Valley Christian Academy, and John is a senior participant accountant for M&I Trust Company. They reside in Appleton, Wisconsin. Chuck ’01 and Emily Andrews Archibald ’02 announce the birth of Olivia Marie in February 2007. They reside in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. Chuck is a damage appraiser for Progressive Insurance. Emily quit her advertising sales job to be at home with Olivia. She works part time at home as an administrative assistant for their church, Living Hope Presbyterian Church. Diana Lyons ’01 and Steven Powell were married July 28, 2007, in Liverpool, England. After their honeymoon in Lisbon, Portugal, they have returned to the University of Liverpool, where they first met while working towards master’s degrees in Victorian literature. They are now both pursuing their doctorates in English literature. Timothy Miller ’01 earned his Ph.D. in philosophy of religion from the University of Oklahoma in 2007. Josh ’01 and Katie Michael Williams ’04 were married August 4, 2007, in Hagerstown, Maryland. They enjoyed a honeymoon in Los Cabos, Mexico, and now reside in Columbus, Ohio. Josh is a trust examiner for the Ohio Department of Commerce, and Katie is a nurse at the OSU Medical Center. Jody ’02 and Sarah Pollock Fox ’01 announce the birth of Jordan Alisse on July 21, 2007. Big sister Camryn Joy (18 months) welcomed her home in Columbus, Ohio. Jody is a youth pastor at Parsons Baptist Church and attends Southern Baptist Theological Seminary in Louisville, Kentucky. Sarah enjoys staying at home with the girls. Andrea Gensel ’02 received her master of business administration degree with a focus in human resource management from the University of Phoenix on April 30, 2007. She has worked in the accounting department at Caterpillar for the past five years and hopes to transition to the human resources department. She resides in Peoria, Illinois. Cedarville Grad Named “Woman of Distinction” Lori Greenawalt ’84 has been selected by the Philadelphia Business Journal and the National Association of Women Business Owners as one of 30 “Women of Distinction” for 2007 for her “professional excellence and community involvement.” In addition, the American Woman’s Society of CPAs has named Lori the 2007 recipient of its Public Service Award for her “significant contribution of time and talent to public service outside the accounting profession.” Lori runs KPMG’s Internal Audit, Regulatory, and Compliance Service practice in Philadelphia and recently launched KPMG’s Contract Compliance Services practice in the Mid-Atlantic region. In 2005, she received KPMG’s highest award for volunteerism, the Chairman’s National Volunteerism Award. Lori is also a founding leader of the Philadelphia office of KPMG Network of Women and serves on KPMG’s Women’s Advisory Board. A resident of Haddonfield, New Jersey, Lori has been an active volunteer in the Philadelphia area for many years. She is on the board of the Children’s Crisis Treatment Center, teaches Sunday School to seventh and eighth graders, and has organized food drives for the Neighborhood Center in Camden, New Jersey. She also volunteers internationally, having made four trips to remote parts of Peru with Medical Ministries International, helping medical professionals set up clinics and treat patients.

RkJQdWJsaXNoZXIy MTM4ODY=