June 24, 2011, NEW YORK — PwC and PRTM, a global management consulting firm, today announced that they have entered into a definitive merger agreement whereby PwC will acquire PRTM. Upon completion of the acquisition, PRTM will join the PwC global Advisory practice, which ranks among the world’s largest providers of consulting services.

“The PRTM team will provide our firm with significant capabilities in the areas of operational strategy, … Read the rest

December 2, 2010. The November 2010 issue of CNN Money Magazine released a study of the 50 Best Jobs in the United States. The study used a number of criteria to rank positions, including:

Satisfying nature of the position

Potential position growth

Flexibility

Median salary

Stress

Among jobs like ER Physician, Physical Therapist, Risk Management Manager, Test Software Engineer, Sales Director etc, Management Consulting landed third place on the … Read the rest

November 17, 2010. Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Ltd., one of the world’s largest networks for accounting and professional services, is talking with Roland Berger Strategy Consultants on a potential business combination. Deloitte’s takeover is aimed at creating a global strategy market leader with an annual revenue of about $2.8 billion.

The parties will make a decision by mid-December, Deloitte Germany Chief Executive Martin Plendl told reporters on a conference call today. … Read the rest

OCTOBER 11, 2010. With their fees under pressure and merger and acquisition activity still sluggish, management consulting firms are turning to emerging markets like China and India for growth.

The consultants’ emphasis on developing markets is yet another shift for an industry that has had to refocus its work force multiple times over the past decade. During the dot-com boom, clients sought e-commerce advice. After Sept. 11, they looked for … Read the rest

1. Referred to the first month of your relationship as a “diagnostic period”.

2. Talks to the waiter about process flow when dinner arrives late.

3. Takes a half day at the office because, “Sunday is your day.”

4. Congratulates your parents for successful value creation.

5. Tries to call room service from the bedroom.

6. Ends any argument by saying, “let’s talk about this off-line.”

7. Celebrates anniversary by … Read the rest

1. I’m a t-shirt and jeans kind of person.

2. Do you pay overtime?

3. I hate flying.

4. I’m useless without ten hours of sleep a night.

5. There are lies, damn lies, and statistics.

6. Do you cover rental cars for collision?

7. Stanford taught me that working in teams is great for slackers.

8. I think three letter acronyms are for people too stupid to remember whole … Read the rest