Thomas Stephens Lough Ph.D. – Member of ‘Kent State

25’

Thomas Stephens Lough was a professor of sociology and

professional jazz pianist. Radical feminist, sociologist, and peace

activist, Lough, one of the “Kent State 25” died on Oct. 11 from

heart failure. He was 80.

Lough was a professor of sociology at Sonoma State University,

where he taught, among other courses, Social Movements, Political

Sociology, Social Psychology and Globalism.

He was an evaluator for Sonoma State’s Project Censored, where

last year he was named one of four new national judges. Most

recently he was named to the Project Censored Hall of Fame in

perpetuity. His research included the energetics of social

structure and the relationship among agriculture, patriarchy,

genocide and ecocide.

Lough was an associate professor of Sociology at Kent State

University, and faculty advisor to Students for a Democratic

Society (SDS) and was on the steering committee of the Concerned

Citizens of the Kent State University Community (CCC).

He was the only professor indicted by the Grand Jury following

the Kent State Massacre, in which four students died and 11 were

seriously injured protesting the invasion of Cambodia and the

Vietnam War.

FBI internal documents would later show “that allegations of

improper conduct on the part of Prof. Thomas Lough were unfounded …

(Shirley Bills and Scott L Bills, Kent State/May 4: Echoes through

a Decade. Kent Ohio: Kent State University Press, 1988, p.

305).

Before joining the Kent State faculty, Lough served in the Arms

Control and Disarmament Agency, Department of State, U.S.

Government, and subsequently as Senior Foreign Affairs officer in

the Disarmament Affairs Division of the United Nations. Lough held

and earned BSME in mechanical engineering, an AM in Sociology and a

Ph.D. in Sociology, all from the University of Michigan, Ann

Arbor.

Lough was committed to his field, to activism and above all to

his students. He was also an accomplished ragtime jazz pianist.

He is survived by his wife, SSU sociologist Dr. Elaine Wellin;

his sister Evelyn Montgomery; four children: Alex and his partner

Jacquita, Martha and her husband Richard, Janet, Joseph and his

wife Kirsten, and by seven grandchildren.

An open memorial service and potluck to celebrate his life will

be held on Saturday, Nov. 22, 1 p.m. in Youth Annex, 425 Morris

Avenue, Sebastopol, next to the community center. Lough’s family

has invited those who wish to make a donation in Lough’s memory to

donate to Project Censored, Sonoma State University, Rohnert Park,

CA 94928 at projectcensored.org.

Michael Harold Jennings – Leaves behind ‘good boy’

Gus

Michael Harold Jennings died Oct. 8, 2008. Jennings worked for

the City of Santa Rosa for more than 30 years. His last position

was Industrial Waste Inspector working in a program for the City

that he developed. He created community wherever he went, with his

jokes, teasing and laughter, at the bowling alley, Cursillo, the

YMCA swimming pool or the Lions Club.

Jennings was a loving and caring individual, putting his own

needs second to those of others. In the early days, he was so

involved with just making a buck to feed the family, he had very

little time to devote to personal growth. This was mainly because

of his unselfish nature. As his family demands decreased, he

finally had the opportunity to relax, and grow. He had the

opportunity to explore ideas, thoughts, technologies, recreational

opportunities, hobbies, and the loves he had never had the time to

experience.

Jennings was proceeded in death by his daughter Vicky Lynn

Jennings.

He is survived by his wife, Linnea Tennison of Camp Meeker; his

good boy Gus; his mother, Geraldine Pugh of Sonoma; five children,

Michael Jr. (Nancy) of Tacoma; Daniel (Naomi) of Hawaii; Robert

(Lana) of Germany; David of Canada; and Candace Moore (John) of

Gualala; brothers Jerry (Raylene) of Sonoma; Bob (Suzanne) of

Sonoma; Ray Pugh (Bonnie) of Washington State; his sister Kay Lewis

of Sacramento; and his friend and kidney donor Mike and Barbie

Cieslewicz.

Jennings is also survived by 10 grandchildren and three

great-grandchildren.

A celebration of his life will be held at 11 a.m. on Oct. 27 at

Negri’s in Occidental. His friends are invited to come and share a

joke or story.

Elvira R. Muzzin – Born in northern Italy

Elvira, R. Muzzin died in Healdsburg Oct. 14, 2008 at the age of

98. She was the loving wife of the late John Muzzin and beloved

mother of Art (Ruby), Albino, Angelo (Joan) and Luigi (Amy) Muzzin

and the late Rita Calkin. Elvira was the adored grandmother of: 11

grandchildren, 10 great-grandchildren, and three

great-great-grandchildren.

She was the last of 12 children born in northern Italy outside

of Venice. Elvira and John came to Cleveland, Ohio in 1927, where

she worked in a woolen mill. She and her family moved to Sonoma

County in 1946. Elvira worked at The Rex Café in Geyserville,

Italian Swiss Colony Winery, and Bucks Ranch in Guerneville over

the years. She loved gardening, cooking and was very devoted to her

family. The family wishes to extend their gratitude to Tony’s Care

Home for their care of Elvira over the past six years.

Friends are invited to attend a Rosary, Thursday, Oct. 23, 2008

at 7 p.m. at St. John’s Catholic Church in Healdsburg. A Funeral

Mass will be celebrated Friday at 11 a.m. at the church. Interment

will follow at Calvary Cemetery, Santa Rosa. Contributions may be

made to Memorial Hospice, 821 Mendocino Ave., Santa Rosa, CA,

95401.

Roger O. “Bud” Rose – Lifelong resident of

Geyserville

Roger O. “Bud” Rose, a lifelong resident of Geyserville passed

away peacefully at the age of 85 after complications from a bad

fall resulting from a series of mini-strokes. Bud was born Aug. 13,

1923, son of Mildred and Russell Rose. The second of six boys, Bud

is survived by Milton (Dint) and Gerald (Jerry), and preceded in

death by Jim, Jack and the incomparable Fred (Bino). He learned to

work as a youngster growing up on a farm in the Great Depression,

and never really stopped-taking tractor jobs through age 84. Bud

married his high school sweetheart, Ruth Brunk, in early 1944, as

he entered the U.S. Army. He finished the year in a tank in Belgium

during the Battle of the Bulge. Working his way from private to

sergeant in a matter of months, Bud turned down a promotion

incentive to re-enlist for the opportunity to “return to Sonoma

County.” He never left until his passing on Oct. 13, 2008. Doing

their best to contribute to the post-war baby boom, Bud and Ruth

raised children Dave, Donna, Pete and Danny, who provided him with

five grandchildren. He was preceded in death by Ruth and Danny.

During the period from the 1940’s to the 1990’s, Bud was one of the

most respected people in the Russian River Valley. His working life

included successive careers as an orchardist, owner of a Ford

tractor and implement business, a GMC truck dealership, and doing

custom farm work with four bulldozers. Community was a major part

of Bud’s life. He was a charter member of the Geyserville Kiwanis,

a 50-year member of the Sotoyome Masonic Lodge, and a long-time

member of the Geyserville Fire Department, where he exercised his

prodigious welding skills to help build a fire truck. He served as

a member of the Fraternal Order of Eagles, the Geyserville Grange,

and was a lifelong member of the Geyserville Christian Church. A

final involvement was as a member of the Sonoma County Shrine, for

which he was an active member of the Shrine Parade Band. A memorial

celebration of this robust life will be held at 1 p.m. on Nov. 1,

2008 at the Geyserville Grange. Remembrances to the Sonoma County

Shrine Club, Attn: Robert Barnes, 101 Enterprise Dr., Rohnert Park,

CA 94928 will be graciously appreciated.

Ray B. Anderson – Navy Veteran

Ray B. Anderson passed away in Santa Rosa on Oct. 9, 2008 at the

age of 85. He is survived by Nadine, his college sweetheart and

loving wife of nearly 60 years; three children, Wayne (Laurie)

Anderson of Tehachapi, CT, Connie Anderson and Mark Anderson both

of Torrance, CA and grandson Erik Anderson of Napa, sister,

Margaret Wilford of Vero Beach, FL and numerous nieces and nephews.

Preceded in death by his father Peter who came from Sweden, through

Ellis Island, as a teenager and gained his citizenship by serving

in the U.S. Navy in WWI and his mother Jane Hughes who was an Army

Nurse in WWI; a sister Ida Toohey and brother Ted Anderson. Born

Aug. 23, 1923 in Ames, Iowa and raised in the small town of Gilbert

where he attended school; playing baseball and basketball, and

founding an FFA Chapter earning him the first Agricultural

Engineering Scholarships awarded by Sears Roebuck to Iowa State

College. Two years later the draft called him into service and he

hitch-hiked into Des Moines and enlisted in the Navy. There he was

accepted into the Naval Aviation Cadet program to pursue his dream

of becoming a pilot. Following the war he returned to college and

received his degree in Aeronautical Engineering. Ray moved to

California to work for Northrop Aircraft Co. at the time of the

original “Flying Wing”. He joined an active reserve squadron at Los

Alamitos so he could continue to fly. In 1948 Ray and Nadine were

married in Hollywood in the Chapel at the Chapman Park Hotel on the

“Bride and Groom” radio show. Then in 1950 he received a telegram

ordering him back to active duty for 2 more years during the Korean

Conflict. Returning to California he worked for Douglas Aircraft

Co. and attended graduate school night classes at USC, earning his

Master’s Degree in Mechanical Engineering. Still a pilot he flew

his Classic Cessna 195 with the Pilots West Flying Club. Many years

later he would host a Healdsburg fly-in for that group. Ray flew

his family all over the country on countless camping trips, special

events and family visits. Ray retired in 1981 moving to Healdsburg

to live and farm near the countryside airport so he could continue

to fly his classic Cessna. A long time member of the International

195 Club, he hosted a 3 day fly-in in 1985; bringing 34 classic

195’s to the Healdsburg airport. He planted a Kiwifruit Vineyard

and pioneered a fresh frozen Kiwi-apple juice which was sold along

with the fruit at local farmers markets, grocery stores and produce

stands. Ready for a second retirement he became a Zinfandel grape

grower for Quivira Winery. Always a history buff and always

carrying a camera he became historian for the Pacific Coast Air

Museum. A celebration of Ray’s life will be held in his hangar on

the Healdsburg Airport, 100 Heidelberger Way off Lytton Springs

Road on Saturday, Oct. 25, 2008 at 2 pm. Bring your memories and

come help us say goodbye. Memorial donations may be made in Ray’s

name to the Pacific Coast Air Museum, 2230 Becker Blvd., Santa

Rosa, CA 95403.