Sir John Anderson, LLD, FRSE, was born at Woodside near Aberdeen, on 9th December 1814, a few months after the death of his father, who was a Merchant in that Village. He received at the Village School the usual good Education which has long been the advantage possessed by children of every Rank in Scotland. When at Home he was carefully looked after by his mother, a woman of a remarkably affectionate nature, and also by his Stepfather, a man held in high esteem in the neighbourhood for extreme uprightness of character, as well as for being possessed of an extensive general knowledge far above the average. It was probably from the influence which he exercised on the young boy that he, like his Stepfather, developed a taste for Reading and a great desire to. acquire Knowledge. This love for Books induced him at a very early period to become the Honorary Librarian of the Church Library at Woodside, and people who were Readers then, and have now grown old, relate how pleased and able the Librarian was to advise them as to the Books they should select.

On leaving the Village School, at the ago of 13, he was apprenticed as a Mechanic at the Woodside Cotton Works of Messrs. Gordon Barron & Co. where he remained for about 10-yrs. Near to Woodside, which stands on the banks of the River Don, were large cotton-mills, and in these his Stepfather Mr Kempt held a responsible position as Manager of the Engineering Shops. It was through his influence that his Stepson was taken into these Mills, 1st as a Boy Clerk, and afterwards to serve an Apprenticeship of 7-yrs as an Artizan in the Shops. In these Workshops the young lad was under the same kind and intellectual eye as in his home, and he rapidly grew to be an excellent Workman.

From the 1st he took great interest in Machinery. While an Apprentice, in his spare hours, among other things he made for one of his friends a Wooden Clock which kept good time, and to another he presented a Lathe of his own Manufacture. He did not occupy all his spare time in these amusements; regularly in the Evenings he walked into the City of Aberdeen, 2-miles distant, to attend at the Mechanics Institute the Classes for Mechanical Drawing and other subjects. He was also at this time the centre of a small number of kindred spirits about his own age, who met in the Evening to discuss Chemical & Scientific questions, and to solve, as best they could, difficulties with which they had no better means of grappling.

As the term of his Apprenticeship drew to an end, he resolved that there was at Woodside no sufficient scope for a Career, and he determined to go South, so that he might become thoroughly acquainted with the best Mechanisms, and the Modes of executing Work in the 1st Workshops of the Kingdom, and obtain if he could, a situation which would give him a favourable opening. At the age of 25-yrs, on the day his Apprenticeship ended, he left Woodside for Manchester, and went to work with Messrs William Fairbairn & Co, a Firm to which he had been recommended by his Stepfather. He did not, however, remain there many months. He followed his Profession in the Works of Messrs Sharp Roberts & Co, Manchester Mr Penn, Greenwich; & Mr David Napier, London. During this period, which lasted from 1839 to 1842, the young man was storing his mind with a complete knowledge of the various Metals, and their best treatment under various circumstances. He was not, however, without anxiety as to his future. The state of Trade was at the time particularly bad, and many men were being discharged. So gloomy indeed was the Outlook, that Anderson seriously contemplated going Abroad to push his fortune in the Colonies; but before he could carry out this resolution, the circumstances arose which determined the course of his future life. Mr. D Napier, in whose Works he was employed in the Spring of 1842, had, it appears, been employed from time to time by the Ordnance Department, and was then engaged in Constructing an Engine for the Royal Brass Foundry in the Arsenal. In connection with this, General Dundas, the then Inspector of Artillery, had called on Mr Napier at his works, and the General mentioned incidentally that he was looking for a young engineer to take charge of the brass-gun manufacture, and of some new works in connection with it at the Arsenal. Mr. Anderson was at once suggested by Mr. Napier as being a suitable person; but the General hesitated when he noticed the apparently extreme Youth of the pale-faced young man pointed out to him. It was, however, settled then and there that Mr Anderson should be sent to the Brass Gun Foundry, to have charge of the Erection of the Engine, and the General would then have ample opportunity for observing how he managed matters, and be able to judge of his fitness for the Vacant Post.

The Erection of the Engine, for some reason, entailed more than the ordinary trouble, and so conspicuous was Anderson’s earnestness in the matter, that General Dundas determined to offer him the Appointment of Engineer of the Royal Brass Foundry. The pay attached to the Office was low, indeed less than he was earning at Napier’s, but the Field in the Arsenal was so open and inviting to an enthusiast in his Profession, that he did not hesitate to accept the Offer. This being, as it were, the point of departure in his life for the Special Work he was to perform for the Country, it may be convenient to note the conditions of the situation. On the one hand, there was an energetic Mechanic burning with desire to succeed, who from the Apprenticeship he had served, and from what he had seen in the best Workshops of the Country, possessed a thorough knowledge of Mechanical Construction in all its Branches. Besides this, he was a good Draughtsman & Calculator, for although he had never learned to use the Higher Mathematics, he possessed a rare faculty in working out, by the simplest rules, questions of Strains and similar problems of considerable complexity. He had also acquired, in the various ways above described, a sound knowledge of the Laws of Gases & Liquids, and besides all this, his excellent Memory was stored with general Information.

He was, however, devoid of Experience in conducting Work, for, as has been shown, he never remained beyond a few months in any of the large Establishments where he might have had an opportunity of rising to a Superior position. Anderson was from the 1st imbued with the conviction that properly designed Machines could be made to relieve mankind of much Manual Labour, and later in life he often spoke of the development of Labour-saving Machinery, expressing his conviction that enormous strides would yet be made in that direction. The introduction of Machine-tools was one of his steady aims throughout his Service in the War Department, and it is believed that it was in the Arsenal that their advantages were 1st clearly seen and brought into play. From his 1st entry to the Arsenal his daily Labour was excessive. Actively Superintending during the day, and Inventing in his quiet home at night, was for 8-yrs, with little rest, the Record of his Life. For not only had he the care of the Gun Foundry, but the Authorities, finding that they had in Anderson an Engineer of rare talent, entrusted him with the preparation of New Machinery for the Manufacture of Powder at Waltham Abbey. It is easy to understand that the elaborate action of the Granulating-Machine, incorporating-Mills, Dusting-machinery, etc, required for its perfecting much anxious thought, but one by one the difficulties were overcome, and the Manufacture was brought to a high pitch of Efficiency.

There he gradually introduced much-needed Reforms in the System of Working, and invented New Machines to be used in the Construction of Cannon & in the Casting of Rifle Bullets. During the 1st 8-yrs of his Service, he devised no fewer than 16-New & Valuable Machines for executing different processes in the Manufacture of Guns, Bullets, Percussion Caps, etc. One Bullet Machine turned out 40,000 Bullets per hr. In 1853 the valuable Services which had been rendered by him in Several Branches of the Ordnance Service by his Inventions & Adaptations of Machinery received substantial recognition from the Government. In the same year he was appointed to Report upon the capabilities of the Government Rifle Factory at Enfield for Manufacturing Bayonets by Machinery; and the result of the Enquiry was the Establishment by the Government of a Small-arms Factory at Enfield in entire accordance with his Plans, where after the 1st few years were produced annually 100,000 Muskets with Bayonets complete, at a cost of less than £2 each.

In 1854, during the Crimean War, he erected within 2-months a Shell Factory covering more than 3000 sq yds, and containing the necessary Steam-engines, Steam-hammers & Machines of various descriptions, many of them original and specially devised, the whole of which was in full Operation within that time. In 1859 the Manufacture of Armstrong Guns was taken up by the Government, and he was chosen to Superintend the Work as Chief Inspector of Machinery. In 1866 he was appointed Superintendent of Machinery to the War Department. This Post he occupied till 1872, when he retired after 30-yrs of Service. He became a Member of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers in 1856, and was elected a Member of Council in 1861, and a Vice-President in 1868.

In 1858 he contributed a paper on some applications of the copying or transfer principle in the production of Wooden Articles (Proceedings, page 237); and in 1862 another on the application of the copying principle in the Manufacture & Rifling of Guns (Proceedings, page 125). He also published a Work on the Strength of Materials, besides many Technical Pamphlets.

Sir John Anderson of Woodside:

The Instigator of the Aberdeen Schools ‘Dux Award’ – gifted £6,000 to Build a Library to the Citizens of Woodside in Perpetuity lest interfering hands would rest the Award for other Purposes. (he knew his Compatriots well). The Library was Built in 1882. It used to be called the Anderson Library. It is a large Granite Building styled like a Church; a permanent Free Library, together with 50,000 volumes, forming one of the most complete of its kind in Scotland. On its initial Opening, the Library was used to great success, however, after 10-yrs the Library was in trouble. The small income the Library made on the selling of Cheque Books & Catalogues did not allow for many new Books to be Purchased, leaving the people of Woodside with the same Stock. The Library was saved in January 1932, when it became the largest Branch Library in Aberdeen. This helped to boost the stock available to the people, and the next twenty years was the Library’s most successful, averaging at 70,000 books borrowed every year. The beautiful Building itself was Designed by Architect, Arthur Clyne, under the strict instructions of Sir John. He was determined the Building should stand sure for Generations.

Sir John left the Public Service in 1872. The great expenditure of strength both of body & mind which had been put forth in the years 1842 to 1866, began gradually from the end of that period to be felt. Attacks of Asthma & Bronchitis from time to time began to trouble him and required that he should be most careful of his Health. No doubt induced by the Dust levels of Foundries & Gunpowder Mills. He, therefore, retired to St Leonard’s on Sea with his Books. It was difficult to believe that the once strong man, familiar with the hurry & bustle of life, could easily settle clown to quiet Retirement; but as his strength of body gradually failed he seemed to accept the situation with resignation and even content.

The Honour of Knighthood was conferred upon him in 1878.

He had been before this Elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and the University of St Andrew’s had, in 1871, conferred on him the Honorary Degree of LLD. Subsequently, in 1881, he was presented with the Freedom of the City of Aberdeen, an Honour which he highly prized, as it has been but rarely Bestowed.