The Battle of Hattin (Arabic: معركة حطين‎) took place on 4 July 1187, between the Crusader states of the Levant and the forces of the Ayyubid sultan Salah ad-Din, known in the West as Saladin. It is also known as the Battle of the Horns of Hattin, due to the shape of a nearby extinct volcano.

The Muslim armies under Saladin captured or killed the vast majority of the Crusader forces, removing their capability to wage war. As a direct result of the battle, Muslims once again became the eminent military power in the Holy Land, re-conquering Jerusalem and most of the other Crusader-held cities. These Christian defeats prompted the Third Crusade, which began two years after the Battle of Hattin.

Related Suggestions

Anti-semitism: Israel's Narrative of Endless Cycle of War

'Terrorist Organization'? Unpacking Israel's War on UNRWA

What Happens If Iran and Israel Go to War?

War Widens in the Middle East

Jewish Rabbi Admits Islam is the Oldest Religion

Neocons Closer than Ever to War with Iran

U.S. Prepares to Defend Israel from Iran Retaliation

The Endgame of Zionism: Confronting a Historical Blunder and Its Consequences

Are Israel and Iran on the Brink of All-Out War?

Warning of Catastrophic Conflict in Middle East

Dear West: Your ‘Age of Monsters’ Has Begun!!

The One Child Pharoah Didn't Kill

COMMENTS DISCLAIMER & RULES OF ENGAGEMENT

The opinions expressed herein, through this post or comments, contain positions and viewpoints that are not necessarily those of IslamiCity. These are offered as a means for IslamiCity to stimulate dialogue and discussion in our continuing mission of being an educational organization. The IslamiCity site may occasionally contain copyrighted material the use of which may not always have been specifically authorized by the copyright owner. IslamiCity is making such material available in its effort to advance understanding of humanitarian, education, democracy, and social justice issues, etc. We believe this constitutes a 'fair use' of any such copyrighted material as provided for in section 107 of the US Copyright Law.

In accordance with Title 17 U.S.C. Section 107, and such (and all) material on this site is distributed without profit to those who have expressed a prior interest in receiving the included information for research and educational purposes.