Tuesday, April 06, 2004

Runnels Family Back On Political Field, But With A Twist, Courts to Make Call On Rep. Beam Foe, And: Ex-Dendahlite Noticed In Texas

Philip Runnels

They were one of the most prominent Democratic families in southern NM history, but their latest entrant onto the political field has split with tradition and is seeking a seat in the State House as a Republican. "I'm the black sheep of the family," joked Philip Runnels in a conversation from his office in Alamogordo where he presides as general manager over three radio stations.

Philip's dad, Dem Harold Runnels, served as U.S. Congressman form southern NM from 1971-1980. Philip says he got the Republican bug while living in Paris, Texas. He moved to Alamogordo to preside over three of the seven stations of Runnels Broadcasting and is now challenging fellow Republican State Rep. Gloria Vaughn, who is seeking a sixth term in the House.

"I was hoping Gloria would not run again, but she has and I decided to stay in." said the hopeful.

Runnels' mother, Dorothy, ran to replace her husband in Congress when he passed in 1980. She ran as a write-in candidate along with Joe Skeen who ultimately took the seat in one of the most famous elections in state history. "She is still a Democrat, living in Lea County, and at 82, still very active, But my political beliefs do make for interesting discussion when we sit down to Thanksgiving dinner," Runnels remarked.

Runnels' brother Matt, president of the broadcasting business, is still a loyal Democrat and the Chair of the Grant County Democratic Party in Silver City.

As for brother Mike Runnels, who served as NM Light Guv under Gov. Toney Anaya in the 80's, Philip reports he is practicing law in Ruidoso. Mike also served many years as Sandoval County District Attorney. The family sold their oil-related business years ago.

Philip, 55, is a long shot in his bid to oust the popular Vaughn. But the former Navy jet pilot says "she will retire someday," and if he doesn't win this time, there may be another run in the future, but it will still be as a Republican. That probably would not bother his late father all that much. In his heyday the conservative Harold "Mud" Runnels pulled as much support from the GOP as he did from the Dems.

PUSHING THE BEAM

Longtime Dem State Rep. Gail Beam has no Republican foe in her re-election bid, but up until this week she did have a Green Party opponent ready to take her on; that is until the Bernalillo County Clerk's office said Trey Smith was not registered in the ABQ Southeast Heights district at the time the Guv issue the election proclamation as required. But Smith says he has proof showing he was indeed registered there at the time. The clerk still says he's off the ballot, so Smith is headed to district court. The Beam House district is one of the "Greenest" in the state making it important to the party that Smith stay on the ballot. The Smith episode follows disqualification by the Secretary of State of the Green Party's Congressional candidates from their party's primary ballot. That ruling is also headed to the courts.

DEAR JOHN DENDAHL, I AM FINE. HOW ARE YOU?

Remember Kevin Moomaw? He was right-hand man to former NM GOP Chair John Dendahl, until John went left on the drug legalization issue, and Kevin steered his way over to Texas. Before their parting of the ways, Moomaw and Dendahl made major strides in electing Republicans here. Now, Moomaw is plotting strategy for Texas Lieutenant Guv David Dewhurst. Apparently the former executive director of the NM GOP is getting the job done. Capitol Inside, a leading political newsletter in the Lonestar State, ranks Moomaw #2 on its list of best GOP Texas political consultants. Moomaw still keeps up with NM politics and remains a behind-the-scenes player. Meanwhile, retired marine colonel Alan Weh, the apparent new chair-to-be for the state GOP arrives back in ABQ from Iraq today where he served as chief of staff for the Coalition Military Assistance Training Team.

HESS YNTEMA---PAID POLITICAL

We welcome paid advertising from NM's political candidates, and when they come aboard, we give them space to tell us about themselves. Hess Yntema is a GOP candidate for the Public Regulation Commission. Here is his pitch to his fellow R's as he seeks the nomination to fill the ABQ seat being vacated by Herb Hughes.

“My experience at City Hall and as an attorney has taught me that independent skepticism is usually the best approach to matters in which taxpayer or ratepayer funds or public safety are at issue. Often, detailed investigation will disclose key facts that are not apparent at first glance. On the PRC, I intend to exercise thorough, independent and where appropriate skeptical oversight over the public utilities, telecommunications companies and insurance companies which are regulated by the Commission. When environmental issues are implicated in a regulatory decision, conservation of public resources should be an important consideration.

For more on the Yntema candidacy click on his ad. And for details on how you or your candidate can get before New Mexico's most likely voters, give me a call at 505-243-4059 or email me at jmonahan@ix.netcom.com. There's a link at the top right of this page.

Make our site one of your 'favorites.' Bookmark it now and send a link to interested friends.

(c)NM POLITICS WITH JOE MONAHAN 2004

Not for reproduction without permission of the author