Italian Bronze Bust of "Hypnos", the God of Sleep first quarter 20th century, after the ancient Roman bronze (itself a copy of a 3rd century BCE Hellenistic sculpture) excavated at Civitella d'Arna, P

A Greek style Hypnos, God of Sleep, after the Antique, figural sculpture rising on a custom base, a replica of the Head of Hypnos in the British Museum, London, 13"h

DESCRIPTION: A replica of the ancient Greek god of sleep, Hypnos, exclusive to the British Museum. This magnificent replica is cast and hand-finished in the UK from resin, using a mould taken from the

A composite Greek God motif head bust in an antiqued green bronze patina resting on a black stand marked at the side of the neck '1962 SMC' and at the base 'Sculpture Masterworks Co.'.

Huge hand painted mixed medium Hindu God bust. Very heavy and hollowed within. Ships in large box with stand. Estimated more than 50 yrs old. Contemporary art is art produced at the present period in

A choice Roman bronze applique in the form of Mars, 1st - 2nd Century AD, the god's bust nicely detailed wearing a crested helmet and aegis with head of a gorgoneion on his chest. The pieces is beauti

Metal bust of Hindu figure, no apparent inscriptions or markings, subject a bust of a head possibly of a Hindu figure/god, bust sits atop a dark wooden block, piece measures 7 inches at tallest point,

Greek God Poseidon Bust Marble Base Mythology This is a charming bust of the Greek mythological god Poseidon, god of the seas. The bust is made from ceramic painted with greens and browns to give it a

This is a charming bust of the Greek mythological god Poseidon, god of the seas. The bust is made from a stone resin painted with greens and browns to give it a metal patina look. Moreover, the bust s

A framed silver thread Arabic textile having Arabic script, loosely translated, "God never sleeps, he's alive, his power from sky and land, he gives advice and knows everything about people, around th

Full title: A carved stone bust of God the Father, 16th C. Description: H 82,5 cm H 87,5 cm (incl. stand)