By Heather Van Meter

After 25 years as a trial judge, including nearly 18 years serving as an Article III judge for the District of Oregon, Judge Anna Jaeger Brown will transition to “senior status” on July 27, 2017, which will create a vacancy on Oregon’s U.S. District Court to be filled by presidential nomination and confirmation by the U.S. Senate. Judge Brown plans to reduce her caseload and work less, with greater ability to select her caseload and control her time. She looks forward to having more time to be with her husband, Paul, to whom she has been married for nearly 40 years, and with her large extended family. She also intends to spend time traveling, gardening, knitting, and enjoying life away from the bench.

Judge Brown’s long, distinguished career as a trial lawyer and judge in Oregon was born when she was in the night program at Lewis & Clark Law School (then known as Northwestern School of Law at Lewis and Clark College) and while she clerked during the day for Multnomah County Circuit Judge John C. Beatty, Jr. Judge Beatty’s daily docket immediately drew her to trial court work. Once admitted to the Oregon bar in 1980, she joined the Portland-based Bullivant Houser Bailey law firm and, in 1986, she became one of the first two women elected to the firm’s partnership. She was then one of a small group of women trial lawyers in Oregon handling civil jury cases, and in time, she broadened her professional focus to consider judicial service. Judge Brown is forever grateful to Governor Barbara Roberts who, in 1992, first appointed her to a vacancy on the Multnomah County District Court and just four years later appointed her to a circuit court vacancy. There, Judge Brown presided over many routine and complex criminal, family law, and civil matters, including the highly publicized Williams v. Phillip Morris jury trial, Oregon’s first tobacco-products-liability case whose punitive damages award was reviewed in multiple Oregon appellate and U.S. Supreme Court decisions.

In 1999, while President Bill Clinton sought to fill numerous federal judicial vacancies through an active Republican-controlled Senate, Judge Brown submitted her name for consideration to fill the vacancy created when U.S. District Judge Malcolm F. Marsh took senior status. With her sterling reputation as a trial lawyer and judge, together with the unanimous support of Senators Ron Wyden and Gordon Smith, she was easily nominated, confirmed, and sworn in as a member of the U.S. District Court of Oregon on October 26, 1999.