Heyday at Warner Brothers

In 1941 Rapper was given his first directing assignment, Shining Victory, a stately adaptation of A.J. Cronin’s play about a research psychologist (played by James Stephenson) whose dedication to his work blinds him to the love of his assistant (Geraldine Fitzgerald). Even better was One Foot in Heaven (1941), a bit of Americana with Fredric March as a minister who struggles with the problems of church and state. The Gay Sisters (1942), though, was a leaden soap opera starring Barbara Stanwyck, Fitzgerald, and Nancy Coleman as wealthy siblings. Now, Voyager (1942), from an Olive Higgins Prouty novel, was a soap opera of a much higher grade. Davis had one of the defining roles of her career as a repressed Bostonian who is transformed while under the care of a psychiatrist (Claude Rains) and later falls in love with an unhappily married man (Paul Henreid). Both Davis and Gladys Cooper (as her tyrannical mother) received Academy Award nominations. Now, Voyager remains one of the most fondly remembered cinema romances of the 1940s.

The Adventures of Mark Twain (1944) was a rather plodding take on the great writer’s life; March played the title role, and Alexis Smith was cast as his wife, Olivia. Rapper next made The Corn Is Green (1945), an adaptation of a hit Broadway play by Emlyn Williams. Davis gave a convincing performance as Miss Lilly Moffat, an English teacher who dedicates her life to the impoverished students of a Welsh mining town in the late 19th century. Rapper returned to biopics with Rhapsody in Blue (1945), which centred on the Gershwin brothers—Robert Alda as George and Herbert Rudley as Ira; Oscar Levant, a longtime friend of George’s, played himself. The acclaimed music and solid performances compensated for the film’s fanciful embroidering of the facts. In 1946 Rapper reteamed with Davis, Rains, and Henreid on Deception, a florid melodrama that was among the director’s best pictures; it was based on Louis Verneuil’s play Monsieur Lamberthier. Davis played a music teacher whose marriage to a cellist (Henreid) is threatened by her former lover (Rains), an egotistical composer.

In 1947 Rapper turned once more to Broadway adaptations, utilizing his strengths as a former stage director. The Voice of the Turtle, from John Van Druten’s play, was a rare romantic comedy for the director. Ronald Reagan was appealing as a soldier on leave, and Eleanor Parker played an actress who falls in love with him. Rapper’s contract with Warner Brothers expired, and, though he later did more work for the studio, he never again reached the modest heights he had attained as their employee.

Later films

Rapper’s first freelance project was Anna Lucasta (1949), with Paulette Goddard as the title character, a prostitute whose family wants her to marry a family friend in the hopes of getting his money. It was a role that originated in Philip Yordan’s Broadway production of the same name, which featured African American actors. In addition to casting changes, the play’s sexual references were largely omitted. Rapper’s 1950 adaptation of Tennessee Williams’s The Glass Menagerie was a prestigious assignment, and it was a respectable if uninventive transcription of the stage success. Jane Wyman starred as Laura, a crippled recluse; Gertrude Lawrence as her Southern-belle mother; and Kirk Douglas as the suitor who tries to bring Laura out of her shell. Another Man’s Poison (1951) also came from the stage. The crime drama, which was based on Leslie Sands’s play, starred Davis in one of her campiest roles, as a mystery writer who kills her estranged criminal husband when he suddenly reappears. When his partner in crime (Gary Merrill, Davis’s then-husband) discovers the murder, he blackmails her.

Get a Britannica Premium subscription and gain access to exclusive content. Subscribe Now

After the widely panned Bad for Each Other (1953), Rapper found success with Forever Female (1953), a sprightly comedy with Ginger Rogers as a mature stage actress who reluctantly admits that a younger actress (Pat Crowley) is more appropriate for the ingenue role they both covet. Rapper’s knowledge of the theatre (and its temperamental stars) supplied the film with its considerable verisimilitude. The drama Strange Intruder (1956) had difficulty overcoming a far-fetched storyline: a dying soldier, thinking that his wife (Ida Lupino) has been unfaithful, asks his friend (Edward Purdom) to kill his children. The Brave One (1956) was a sentimental but effective tale of a Mexican boy who tries to save his pet bull, Gitano, from the bullfighting arena. The Oscar-winning script was written by then-blacklisted Dalton Trumbo under the pseudonym of Robert Rich, and Trumbo would not take possession of the statuette for almost 20 years. Rapper’s biggest project in some time was Marjorie Morningstar (1958), his adaptation of Herman Wouk’s best-selling novel about a New York girl (Natalie Wood) who dreams of an acting career and, while working at a summer camp in the Catskills, has an affair with the charismatic entertainment director (Gene Kelly) of a nearby resort. Again Rapper was able to capitalize on his own background to authenticate the story’s summer-stock setting.

Rapper’s career subsequently took a precipitous fall. After working on two Italian productions, he returned to Hollywood to make The Christine Jorgensen Story (1970), a tawdry account of the first gender-reassignment case in the United States, with John Hansen as the protagonist. Eight more years passed before Rapper helmed his final picture, Born Again, a dramatization of the religious conversion of Charles Colson (Dean Jones), a convicted Watergate felon. After working as a dialogue director on Sextette (1978), a Mae West musical, Rapper retired. He died just weeks before his 102nd birthday.

Michael Barson