I liked this medical drama. Could so easily been a drag, yet the characters are complex, yet simple enough to identify with, and the story doesn't go the simple route, nor overboard to cause the drama. Very respectable performance from James Stephenson in what would be one of his last roles passing away less than 2 months after the release of Shining Victory (1941). He earned one Academy nomination during his brief Hollywood career, for his role in The Letter (1940), and he could just as well gotten another one for this subtle non-spectacular part.

Okay Scottish set melodrama about a narcissistic doctor on the brink of a medical breakthrough who violates all sorts of regulations and norms because he’s some sort of misunderstood genius and the assistant who loves him because…she likes the way he treats her? Woof.

Imagine if Daphne du Maurier was hired to punch up a psychiatric procedural script… you’d get Shining Victory. A thoroughly unlikeable protagonist on the page might have been rendered sympathetic by a more likable actor. James Stephenson seems to embrace the nastiness in the way a fine character actor would a villain role. An interesting set design, James Wong Howe’s moody photography and good supporting performances can’t save the melodramatic, sexist script.

Shining Victory is a dour Scottish set medical melodrama directed by Irving Rapper that over at MGM would have been a Walter Pidgeon and Greer Garson special. But over at Warner Bros. and with a less prestigious budget, we have Kames Stephenson ersatz Walter Pidgeon and Geraldine Fitzgerald as the Garson type. These type of 40s melodramas often end up being rather stale and boring. But Shining Victory also suffers from the fact it's not particularly likeable or endearing either.

Very good and somewhat surprising medical melodrama. Geraldine Fitzgerald is excellent, as is Stephenson.

(I did not notice a Bette Davis appearance, but I was not looking for her.)

Update: I’ve gone back and skimmed through the movie and still find no sign of Bette.