LEADERSHIP development & executive coaching

For high-integrity, forward-looking companies, teams, & leaders.

available now!

Expansive impact

AN INVITATION TO LEAD IN EVERYDAY MOMENTS

Expansive Impact offers practical solutions to everyday leadership challenges. It will empower you to feel more confident as a leader, and create significant positive change without relying on outside forces or circumstances. With fresh language, powerful inquiries, and a nuanced exploration of the often opposing tensions we hold as leaders, this book is a guide to improving both your leadership, and your life.

We are Zing Collaborative

LEADERSHIP. IMPACT. ALIVENESS.

We are grateful to work with some of theworld’s best companies and leaders.

We empower leaders to strengthen their impact, effectiveness, confidence, connection, compassion, courage, communication, and self-awareness.

We facilitate positive change within individuals and across teams.

Our approach is both transformational, and practical.

We’ve been called “life changing,” and our offerings have been described as “the best leadership program I’ve ever been part of—by far,” “my favorite day of work, ever,” and “the best gift my organization has given me in 18 years.”

If you are looking to build and strengthen the leadership capacity of your organization while engaging and empowering your most talented team members, you are in the right place.

Contact us here to learn more about our Expansive Impact™️ Signature Experience for your team or organization.

What we do

LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT for TEAMS & organizations

We partner with a select number of organizations each year to create Expansive Impact™️ through in-house leadership development experiences; leadership coaching and executive coaching for team members; workshops, off-sites, and retreats; and opportunities to train-the-trainer. Some people call this “leadership training” or “manager training,” but we find it to be much more than that…and so do our clients, once they experience it.

Sign up for Friday Favorites

Called, by many readers, “The only email I look forward to getting each week,” Friday Favorites is a weekly reset, delivered to your inbox on Friday mornings.

Welcome to the

Zing Collaborative Blog

Blog

Learn More

about who we are, our values, and our commitment to a triple bottom line.

Client Love