,

Agencies

Updated On Jun 6, 2024 at 11:51 AM IST

Read by: 100 Industry Professionals

Read by 100 Industry Professionals

Ex-Avaya, Five9, Glia, and Talkdesk industry leaders join forces to revolutionise customer experience (CX) with the launch of Zingly, a Collaborative Customer Experience (CCX) Platform. The patented customer-facing technology combines GenAI, digital interactions, and telephony, providing infinite scale to enterprises, and hyper personalisation to consumers, resulting in revenue acceleration and lasting customer relationships.

With this launch, Zingly is today announcing it has raised a $10 million seed funding round from Dell Technologies Capital, WestWave Capital, Scribble Ventures, Formus Capital, Geekdom Fund, Array Ventures, Firebolt Ventures, Burst Capital, and from leaders in the CX industry.

Advt

Today, customers are still primarily required to call 800 numbers and punch numbers into an interactive voice response (IVR) whenever they need to communicate with businesses. For customers, phone calls are an outdated and frustrating experience, and for businesses, they’re an expensive and unscalable method of communication. Meanwhile, businesses are seeing 10x traffic on their website and apps while experiencing declining call center traffic.

Technology advancements in CX have typically focused on operational savings driven by cloud migration and agent support tools, but have often neglected the end customer. Zingly rectifies this imbalance by providing customers with Zingly-Rooms—a patented, always-on space where customers can instantly connect and collaborate with businesses, eliminating the need for calls.

This is driven by the company’s Generative AI product technologies, including Relationship-AI and Zingly-Buddy. Zingly focuses on eliminating friction and accelerating engagement use cases like customer acquisition, onboarding, customer service and success, and many more. This is done through a modern no-code-low-code platform that integrates into any tech stack (CRM, existing contact center technologies, customer support systems, and core operations) and intelligently combines cutting-edge Generative AI, humans, and data. The end result is an innovative collaborative space that can scale to support service and sales operations for businesses of all sizes, while providing hyper-personalisation for customers.

Advt

Founded in 2021 by Gaurav Passi, a former executive at Avaya and Five9, Zingly was born out of a recognition that traditional contact centre solutions were becoming obsolete. With global inflationary pressures driving up the cost per call and limiting scalability due to the finite number of agents, the need for industry disruption was clear. Passi teamed up with seasoned CX, CRM, and CCaaS leaders from Five9, Talkdesk, and Glia to launch Zingly.

“Traditional contact center solutions are out of date and simply not personable for customers, or scalable for businesses. The math is clear, there are approximately 16.5 million call center agents globally handling potentially billions of customers. More importantly, the frustration and long wait times associated with traditional calling and rigid workflow-driven chatbots have created what we call a fear of reaching out (FORO) among customers. Our vision with Zingly is to destroy FORO and make it collaborative for customers and businesses to come together,” said Gaurav Passi, CEO and founder of Zingly.

Currently focusing on high-value industries such as financial services, healthcare, and product companies, Zingly is able to help organisations modernise their customer experience seamlessly by integrating with their existing technology stacks. As an example, Zingly is working with a Fortune 500 provider to engage with 5x more customers than traditional 1:1 phone conversations, while also reducing typical conversion time from 60 to 18 days, resulting in tens of millions of dollars of revenue uplift. Most importantly, it allowed them to innovate on top of their core infrastructure like Salesforce and Avaya without any disruption.

Looking ahead, Zingly is rapidly expanding its teams in data science and engineering, sales, and marketing with plans to double its headcount by the end of next year. On track to be driving millions of quality customer interactions this year, Zingly is accelerating its mission to help companies collaborate with their customers and build relationships bigger than business.

By ,

Agencies

Join the largest community of IT industry professionals in Southeast Asia

Subscribe to our newsletter to get latest insights & analysis.

Get updates on your preferred social platform

Follow us for the latest news, insider access to events and more.