Zing, the innovative company behind the Sirius Stiletto 100 and WiFi-enabled Sandisk Sansa Connect player, could be the target of a Dell acquisition deal. Apparently, the company wants to integrate Zing's technology into consumer entertainment devices:

"In a move that reflects the renewed interest and energy being directedat its consumer business, Dell plans to use Zing and its capabilitiesto continue improving the entertainment experiences it provides itscustomers."

This won't be the first time Zing CEO Tim Bucher, who founded the company in 2005, has sold a company; he was a founding member of WebTV, which was acquired by Microsoft. After that, Bucher worked as an Apple executive until Steve Jobs fired him in 2004, saying, according to Bucher's wrongful termination lawsuit,

"People sometimes think you are manic-depressive…. I'm not sure what I

am going to do, but I think I am going to have to ask you to leave thecompany."

So far, Bucher's designs have found their way into products that leave the iPod behind in terms of functionality. If they let the Zing team continue to work their magic, Dell could stand a better chance of cracking the portable entertainment market than it did last time, especially if it can beat Apple to the punch on integrating a music store into the player.

The 34 Best Prime Day Deals Under $100

A selection of our favorite cheap-ish Prime Day Deals from security cameras to water filters.

We Spent Thousands of Hours Listening to Find the Best Wireless Headphones

Whether you need workout earbuds or gaming over-ears, these WIRED-tested picks sound like a million bucks.

Extreme Hail Storms Are Wrecking Solar Farms—but Defending Them May Be Easier Than It Seems

Climate change is making hail storms more intense, so designers have to find novel solutions to protect panels from expensive damage.

Quora’s Chatbot Platform Poe Allows Users to Download Paywalled Articles on Demand

WIRED was able to download stories from publishers like The New York Times and The Atlantic using Poe’s Assistant bot. One expert calls it “prima facie copyright infringement,” which Quora disputes.

The Best Instant Coffees to Convince Your Friends Coffee Crystals Can Be Good

These instant coffees prove that fast doesn’t have to mean foul.

Which Amazon Fire Tablet Is Best for You?

Whether you need a travel-friendly slate or something affordable for the kids, we tested every model to find the right one for every occasion.

The Best Fitbit for Every Type of Activity

Whether you’re tracking sleep or training for a 10K, we’ve tested the best Fitbits for your health and fitness.

The 28 Best Movies on Max (aka HBO Max) Right Now

Mad Max, Stop Making Sense, and Dune are just a few of the movies you should be watching on Max this month.