People recommend Kaanch - The Broken Glass movie

Movie Is being made - in 2009.

DOWNLOAD Kaanch - The Broken Glass NOW!

Color Info: Color

Countries: India

Languages: Hindi

In movie played:

Dinesh Lamba (actor)

Shivaji Satham (actor)

Milind Soman (actor)

Birth Notes: India

Spouse: 'Mylène Jampanoï' (qv) (2006 - present)

Birth Date: 4 November 1965

Rajesh Vivek (actor)

Esha Deol (actress)

Fluent in English, Hindi and Tamil, Scorpion Esha be born by the cross of November 2, 1982 to Hema 'Dreamgirl' Malini, and Dharmendra 'He-Man' Deol. She individual a younger sister, Ahana, and two step-brothers, Sunny and Bobby, both famous Bollywood super-stars in their of interest rights. Bobby be married to Tanya Ahuja, and has a adolescent. Esha studied in the Jamnabai Narsee School, excel at football, later go on to attend Oxford University and obtain a Masters Degree in Media Arts and Computer Technology. She also widely read classical rumba form from her mom, the daughter of Jaya Chakraborty. Having Bollywood friends, she apply close-fisted to be an actress and gloominess in the footsteps of her parents and half-siblings, and land a front role in 'Koi Mere Dil Se Pooche' in 2002. She deliver her terribly initial clout next to 'Dhoom' in 2004 and went on to another hit after hit in 'Kaal' 'No Entry', and 'Dus'. She demonstrated her versatility when she permitted a cynical character-role in 'Ankaee' in 2006. She has also acted in a Tamil motion optical 'Aiyatha Ezhuthu'. Amongst her friends at Bollywood be Kareena Kapoor and Abhishek Bachchan. She like to donkey evaluate and listen to music. She will shortly be see in Just Married, and has started film in the subsequent to cinema; Cash, Darling, and Honeymoon.

Height: 5' 6"

Quotes: "Face your fears and live your dreams.", "An actress is all about acting, revealing is not even in the job!"

Birth Notes: Bombay, Maharashtra, India

Birth Name: Deol, Esha Dharmendra

Daughter of 'Hema Malini' (qv) and 'Dharmendra (I)' (qv). She has inherited her mother's beauty and her father's acting talents., Half-sister of 'Bobby Deol' (qv) and 'Sunny Deol (I)' (qv), and elder sister of 'Ahana Deol' (qv). Granddaughter of 'Jaya Chakravarthy' (qv)., Classically-trained Indian dancer in the Odissi style, along with her mother and sister. Her mother is also trained in the Bharatanatyam style, and together, they have performed in many dance recitals., Favourite Perfume: Estee Lauder's Pleasure, Speaks Tamil fluently, which caused 'Mani Ratnam' (qv) to offer her a role in his Tamil film, _Ayitha Ezhuthu (2004)_ (qv)., Has received over eight awards for her performance in her film debut in Boney Kapoor's _Koi Mere Dil Se Poochhe (2002)_ (qv), a love story while exploring the relationship between a mother and a daughter., As a part of the _LOC Kargil (2003)_ cast, Esha received a national award for being a part of the film., Her favorite actresses are 'Kajol' (qv) and 'Julia Roberts (I)' (qv)., Has a Masters Degree in Media Arts and a Bachelor Degree In Computer Technology at Oxford University, Prefers to speak English, as she is not too fluent in Hindi., Great friends with 'Aishwarya Rai' (qv) and 'Abhishek Bachchan' (qv), The name 'Esha' comes from Sanskrit and is derived from the Upanishads to mean "the divine beloved"., Longtime close friends with actress 'Kareena Kapoor' (qv)., Esha's physically fit body is a result of work-outs at Barbarian Power Gym, which is owned by her Rakhi brother, Satya.

Birth Date: 2 November 1981

Nina Kulkarni (actress)

Shilpa Shetty (actress)

Articles: "The Observer Food Monthly" (UK), March 2008, pg. 60, by: Eva Wiseman (interview) Rob White (photograph), "What's in Your Basket?", "Sunday Mirror" (UK), 7 February 2007, pg. 7, by: Nikhita Mahajan, "My Soulmate", "The Independent" (UK), 3 February 2007, Iss. 6334, pg. 14, by: Deborah Orr, "Triumph of decent values", "The Independent" (UK), 2 February 2007, Iss. 6333, pg. 12, by: Jonathan Brown and Robert Verkaik, "Shilpa tours the media with message of peace, love and self-promotion", "The Independent" (UK), 29 January 2007, Iss. 6329, pg. 9, by: Martin Hodgson, "Hollywood beckons for Shilpa after victory in Celebrity Big Brother", "The Independent" (UK), 18 January 2007, Iss. 6320, pg. 3, by: Justin Huggler and Saeed Shah, "Mass appeal of a star said to have 'the best body in Bollywood'"

Interviews: "The Independent" (UK), 30 October 2007, Iss. 6564, pg. 18, by: Izaac Sanderswood, "The 5-Minute Interview: 'People have this misconception that I am prim and proper'"

Among outstandingly few actress, Shilpa Shetty be nominated all for her maximum primordial motion montage 'Baazigar'. The behind year she deliver another blockbuster slap 'Main Khiladi Tu Anari' where on earth she starred next to Akshay Kumar and Saif Ali Khan. However, the proceeding years her cinema one-time to overtake at the storage lay institution, nonetheless she apply receive nit-picking commendation for quite a lot of of her performance. Then enclosed by 1998, 'Pardesi Babu' was released and citizens notice her again. Two years subsequently she in due course delivered a super hit, 'Dhadkan'. Since consequently her occupation enjoy taken an aware spin. In 2002, she have several release and films close to 'Hathyar' and 'Rishtey'. They coagulate her kudos in place of a first-rate actress. In 'Rishtey' she stole the corroborate from superstar Anil Kapoor and Karishma Kapoor. However, it was in 2004 that her piece in 'Phir Milenge' that bring her to the zenith actress document. In 2005, she delivered discreet hit like 'Fareb' (where she costarred with sister Shamita Shetty and 'Manoj Bajpai' (qv)) and Dus. Though she has work with top actor, different lots Bollywood actresses who be any scared out of your wits of or demure out valid with top actresses, Shilpa has worked with numerous exceptional actresses (such as 'Juhi Chawla' (qv), 'Raveena Tandon' (qv), 'Manisha Koirala' (qv), 'Tabu (I)' (qv), 'Kajol' (qv), 'Mahima Chaudhry' (qv) and 'Konkona Sen Sharma' (qv)) and be said to ration a tremendous rapport with her co-stars. Today her career boast of her versatility. In 'Baazigar' she play a unsubstantiated conservatory scholar, in 'Aag' a engaging small town girl, in 'Main Khiladi Tu Anari' a boulevard dancer, in 'Himmat' a seductive cop, in 'Dus' an anti-terrorist agent, in 'Fareb' a medical doctor and housewife, in 'Phir Milenge' an HIV bubbly, in 'Pardesi Babu' a charming municipal lass, in 'Dhadkan' she is controlled to betray her lover, in 'Khamosh' a prostitute, in 'Jung' a sensational sceptre dancer, in 'Tarkieb' a promiscuous militia nurse, in 'Rishtey' a comical and tragic performance as a fisherwoman, in 'Darna Mana Hai' a housewife haunted via apples and in 'Shaadi Karke Phas Gaya Yaar' a gloomy role where she show business a rule turned housewife. In 2000, Shilpa reinvented herself and become bunch as one of the hottest actresses in the industry! She is the just Bollywood actress who has be see to do a divided resting on eyeshade and is known today to have the most advantageous article in Bollywood. She is also celebrated as a gracious dancer. Shilpa Shetty laugh profoundly when she was childlike. She immobile laughs most of the circumstance. According to Shilpa's mother (Sunanda), Shilpa was a bad kid and was call a "fightercock" as she largely fight with her younger sister (Shamita). Her mom also acknowledge that she was a very bright and vivacious child and her pet heading is "Manya" but her mom call her "babucha" or "Honeybunch". Shilpa go to school at St. Anthony's Girl's convent in Chembur, then she went to Podar College. Shilpa was her school team's baseball boss. She is a black belt karate first past the post. She actively participate in her father's chemical conglomerate. Acting was the only point she had not try her foot at. Shilpa is known to have a great facility of humor and has the massiveness to explode joke on herself. She'll create laughing even in yesteryear you crack a pull somebody`s leg. Shilpa's favorite actors encompass Tom Cruise and Jackie Chan. Shilpa's fashion of overheads a haven would be to awaken up progressively, provoke fry, keep watch on movies, practise out and devote time with her family connections. She is also a considerable defender of print, very Tiger and Leopard prints. Her legroom is brimming with with all the disparate compassionate of prints. Even her bolster bag.

Height: 5' 10"

Birth Notes: Tamil Nadu, India

Salary History: _"Celebrity Big Brother" (2001)_ (qv)::£200,000

Magazine Covers: "Cinéblitz" (India), 1 May 2007, "Society" (India), 1 March 2007, "Sunday Mirror" (UK), 7 February 2007, "Cinéblitz" (India), 1 November 2000

Where Now: (December 2004) Mumbai, India

Older sister of 'Shamita Shetty' (qv), (2000) Sued Stardust India magazine because the magazine produced a report about her on-off relationship with Akhsay Kumar. According to her opinion, the article made her name disgraced and she lost some offers on films. She won the lawsuit., Indian top model, Captain of her school's baseball team. She is also a black-belt karate champion., Won Best Supporting Actress for _Pardesi Babu (1998)_ (qv) at the Zee Gold Bollywood Awards., Sahara One crowned her the 2004 DIVA of the year., Shilpa and Shamita are the first sisters to appear in a film together in the history of Bollywood., Shilpa is considered to have the best body in Bollywood., AIDS activist and PETA supporter., Her appearance on _"Celebrity Big Brother" (2001)_ (qv) caused a huge racism and bullying row. As several house mates didn't approve of her presence, they made fun of her accent, cooking and native country. Following these incidents, broadcasting network Channel 4 received a record-breaking 40,000 complaints, and the controversy developed into a diplomatic crisis between the UK and India. Even Prime Minister 'Tony Blair (I)' (qv) and Chancellor of the Exchequer 'Gordon Brown (I)' (qv), while visiting India, condemned these acts of unfairness and intolerance (January 2007)., Beside her native language Tulu, she speaks English, Hindi, Kannada, Marathi, Gujarati, Telugu, Tamil and Urdu., Shilpa's cousin - Prem Shetty - was credited with a 'Special Thanks' on the acclaimed Indian art house film entitled 'The Last Monk' which premiered at the Cannes FIlm Festival 2006., Winner of _"Celebrity Big Brother" (2001)_ (qv), series 5., Her movie Phir Milenge was viewed by the United Nations who appreciated the movie for its support of AIDS awareness., Received critical acclaim and nominations for her performances in movies like: Baazigar, Dhadkan, Rishtey and Phir Milenge., She donated all the money she made from her movie 'Phir Milenge' to an AIDS charity., Is diabetic.

Birth Date: 8 June 1975

Partho Ghosh (director)