GOLDEN girl Jill Halfpenny and her hubby actor Craig Conway have split after four years of marriage.

The couple, who have a two-year-old son Harvey together, are set to remain good friends and are even due to star in the same movie together.

A source close to the pair said: “It all happened quite a while ago but they’re definitely still friends.

“It’s sad, but they get on together now much better than they did before.

“The amount of work they are doing might have had something to do with their breaking up but it’s not something they’ve ever really wanted to talk about.

“They’re both very private people.”

The couple, who still own a house together in leafy Stocksfield in Northumberland’s Tyne Valley, now live in separate homes in London, their son living with Jill.

The movie they are set to star in together is also being filmed in the capital.

Former Gateshead St Edmund Campion School pupil Jill spent three months on stage at London’s Noel Coward Theatre as one of the stars of the Calendar Girls stage play, and is currently wowing crowds as Paulette, the kooky hairdresser in Legally Blonde.

Jill has also spoken of a new man in her life.

The star revealed: “I’ve recently separated from my husband so I’ve downsized my whole wardrobe by about half, which was hugely cathartic.

“I have a new partner who is very complimentary of both my tomboy look and my glamorous look.”

Ex-EastEnders actress Jill and Craig met eight years ago when they both starred in a stage version of George Orwell’s 1984 at Newcastle Playhouse.

The couple initially lived together in London but soon after bought their Northumberland home.

Craig, who has starred in The Descent and Doomsday, left Jill stunned when he proposed to her on stage at the end of the Theatre Royal’s Christmas Eve performance of Cinderella, where she was playing the Fairy Godmother. The pair brought Newcastle city centre to a standstill when they wed in February 2007, at St Andrew’s Church, watched by close friends and family.

Their son Harvey was born the following year.

Despite their split the pair are now both due to star in the new film How To Stop Being A Loser, alongside the likes of Withnail and I actor Richard E Grant and Hollyoaks star Gemma Atkinson.

The production will see Craig playing a romance guru called Ampersand.

It won’t be the first time Jill and Craig have starred in the same production.

They were also in Peter Flannery’s The Bodies at Newcastle’s Live Theatre, and in 2006 they had a six-week run together in the Theatre Royal’s Jack and the Beanstalk pantomime.

Their agents at Ken McReddie Associates said: “It is an amicable separation and also deeply private so therefore there will be no further comment.”