In 2010 Jill Halfpenny got divorced from her husband of three years, fellow actor Craig Conway. Two years later, she’s starring in a revival of Abigail’s Party, the Mike Leigh-devised play in which a suburban couple invite a few neighbours round for a drinks party, during the viciously entertaining course of which marital tensions bubble to the surface and forced pleasantries give way to sour and drunken recriminations as well as embarrassing stabs at unfaithful flirtation – with Demis Roussos’s Forever and Ever spinning piquantly away behind the leather settee.

“Isn’t it tough?” I ask Halfpenny – not immediately, you understand, but a short way into the lunchtime chat she snatches mid-rehearsal for the show at the Menier Chocolate Factory. Isn’t it tough getting divorced and then having to play Beverly, the housewife who almost can’t stand the sight of her estate agent husband – and continually belittles him? The part – made famous by Alison Steadman in the original 1977 Hampstead production, which achieved instant classic status thanks partly to being filmed for the BBC’s Play for Today – has ample scope to make people laugh: the pat little phrases, the condescending putdowns flicked this way and that like cigarette ash, the blithe lower-middle-class affectation. But it’s also mining something dark and wildly discontented.

The way Halfpenny, 36, sweetly bats back this question, after only a brief hesitation, says quite a lot about her. “It doesn’t hinder me, it doesn’t impinge,” she explains, her Geordie accent perfectly and amiably sunny with it. “I think it probably helps, because I have a deeper understanding of where you can get to in a marriage. Had I approached this at the age of 20, I wouldn’t have had such an appreciation of where Beverly and Laurence are at.

“I think it can actually be cathartic,” she adds. “I don’t think it’s ever good to repress things. Actors are lucky to be able to bring feelings to the surface rather than bottling them up.”

And that’s as much as she wants to open up about the subject, and how her own experience with Conway – with whom she has a three-year-old son, Harvey – might prepare her, or otherwise. She will talk – after a technical fashion – about how she accesses emotion in performance without reliving an experience – but the marital turmoil she has gone through isn’t up for inspection. She gives away a little (she has a new man in her life, actor Chris Ellis-Stanton) but not too much.

Director Lindsay Posner, who has taken a gamble in casting her on the strength of a few meetings and her vivacious Olivier Award-winning supporting turn as the hairdresser Paulette in the hit musical Legally Blonde – says: “She’s capable of switching on a certain sort of comic vanity and toughness – she’s got the right energy to drive and dominate this show.”

In conversation, you see that: she may only be 5ft 3in tall (she needs heels to lord it over Andy Nyman’s Laurence) but she’s no pushover – there’s an unshakeable focus behind the chatty exterior.

What to some might look like quite a scattershot CV has more canniness to it than first meets the eye. The youngest of three sisters in a working-class Gateshead family, she made early, determined strides into acting. She debuted in local pantomime – Snow White – aged eight, and got herself an agent at the age of 12, joining the Tyneside-set BBC teen soap Byker Grove in 1989, when only 14.

Eager to become as versatile as possible, she went to a London drama school, avoided musicals on graduating and built up an impressive portfolio of screen credits, tacking pretty deftly between becoming well known and not getting typecast – on EastEnders, she hung around Albert Square just long enough as Phil Mitchell’s unlikely bride – an undercover cop called Kate – to get noticed, but not to outstay her welcome. Ditto her stints on Coronation Street and Waterloo Road. She won Strictly Come Dancing in 2004 – with dance partner Darren Bennett – but regarded that as a fun stepping stone, not a peak.

If there has been a particular thread to her roles – and femme fatale Roxie Hart in Chicago, her only other big West End musical, fits this brief – it’s likeable duplicity. “I get a lot of characters who may be doing something morally wrong but are doing it for reasons that come from the heart,” she says. “I’m never the out-and-out stereotype bitch, which is much more interesting.”

Such a pedigree can’t hurt with Beverly, who, as Halfpenny notes, walks a fine line between appearing unaware of how wounding she’s being and knowing exactly when she’s sticking the knife in.

Halfpenny is fully conscious of how iconic Steadman’s performance was – “I know it holds a special place in a lot of people’s hearts” – and hasn’t watched it again for obvious reasons. “I think the worst thing you could do would be to go and do an impression with this role. The only way you should approach it is to do it your own way.”

Does her own way include bringing a Geordie accent to the role? “It’s so rooted within Essex rhythms that to try to do it in any different accent would be very difficult.” I can almost hear her inwardly groan at my assumption: “I’m proud to be a Geordie but it can be a disadvantage because people assume you can’t do anything else. I have to convince them I don’t always talk like this.”

To her mind Beverley isn’t a monster and even warrants sympathy. “When you learn about her upbringing – her mother and father haven’t spoken to her for 20 years – you see why a woman who’s been brought up like that and carries so many insecurities could take them out on others.”

Leigh came in for the cast read-through. “On a scale of one to 10 of intimidation it was 11 – it was big time,” she says, laughing. “The only way the situation could have been more intimidating would be if Alison Steadman had been sat next to him. At the end he said that as a rule he doesn’t like read-throughs because that’s not how he works, but that he enjoyed it. He took Lindsay aside and said: 'You’ve cast that well.’ We all breathed a sigh of relief.”