Maria Christina of the Two Sicilies

Luisa Carlotta of the Two Sicilies – An ambitious Infanta

Luisa Carlotta of the Two Sicilies was born at the Palace of Portici on 24 October 1804, the daughter of King Francis I of the Two Sicilies and his second wife, María Isabella of Spain. She had one surviving half-sister from her father’s first marriage to Maria Clementina of Austria and ten full siblings from [read more]

Queens Regent – Maria Christina of the Two Sicilies

A regent is “a person appointed to administer a state because the monarch is a minor, is absent or is incapacitated.” Maria Christina of the Two Sicilies was born on 27 April 1806 as the daughter of King Francis I of the Two Sicilies by his second wife, Maria Isabella of Spain. On 11 December 1829, she became the [read more]

Queens Regnant – Isabella II of Spain

Isabella was born in Madrid on 10 October 1830 as the eldest daughter of King Ferdinand VII of Spain and his fourth wife, who was also his niece, Maria Christina of Bourbon-Two Sicilies. Her father had been married three times before, but he had only had two short-lived children with his second wife. His first [read more]

Burial Places of the Queens of Spain

Anna of Austria – El Escorial (San Lorenzo de El Escorial, Spain) Barbara of Portugal – Convent of the Salesas Reales (Madrid, Spain) Beatrice of Portugal – Monastery of Sancti Spiritus (Toro, Spain) Berengaria of Barcelona – Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela (Galicia, Spain) Berenguela of Castile – Abbey of Santa Maria la Real de Huelgas (Burgos, Spain) Blanche of Bourbon – Monasterio de San Francisco de Jerez [read more]

To provide the best experiences, we and our partners use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us and our partners to process personal data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site and show (non-) personalized ads. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions.

Click below to consent to the above or make granular choices. Your choices will be applied to this site only. You can change your settings at any time, including withdrawing your consent, by using the toggles on the Cookie Policy, or by clicking on the manage consent button at the bottom of the screen.