LeAnn Rimes is an international multi-platinum selling acclaimed singer and ASCAP award-winning songwriter. She has sold more than 48 million units globally, won 2 Grammy® Awards; 12 Billboard Music Awards; 2 World Music Awards; 3 Academy of Country Music Awards; 2 Country Music Association Awards and one Dove Award. At 14, Rimes won "Best New Artist" making her the youngest solo artist to take home a Grammy® Award, and at 15, she became the first country artist to win "Artist of the Year" at the Billboard Music Awards.

In 2022, LeAnn was presented with the prestigious ASCAP Golden Note Award, which is an award presented to genre-spanning songwriters, composers and artists who have achieved extraordinary career milestones.

Out of the 63 singles she has released throughout her expansive career, LeAnn's ballad "How Do I Live" holds the record as Billboard's Hot 100 all-time #1 hit by a female artist and currently ranks #6 on Billboard's "Greatest of All Time: Hot 100 Songs" list. 15 of her multi-genre singles are top-10 hits, including "Can't Fight the Moonlight," which went #1 in 11 countries.

The last couple of years have been quite a resurgence for LeAnn. In 2022, the world-renowned singer had a big year including the release of her 19th album god's work (EverLe Records via Thirty Tigers/ The Orchard). The album, which features a roster of accomplished artists including Ziggy Marley, Mickey Guyton, Aloe Blacc, Ben Harper, and more, was listed as #9 on Variety's "The Best Albums of 2022." They said: "You won't find a richer collection of melodic writing on any album released this year, with the twists and turns that maybe only someone capable of all that virtuosic vocalizing could think to take a set of songs into."

She performed songs from the project on national shows including LIVE With Kelly and Ryan and TODAY. In April of the same year, LeAnn headlined an episode of the iconic music series CMT Crossroads entitled LeAnn Rimes & Friends alongside Mickey Guyton, Carly Pearce, Ashley McBryde, and Brandy Clark, who helped commemorate Rimes' career and recognize the path she blazed forward for women in all genres.

LeAnn also served as the inspiration judge on the discovery+ competition series, Meet Your Makers Showdown, alongside Chrissy Metz and Mark Montano in November 2021 and won season four of FOX's The Masked Singer, with Entertainment Weekly stating that she delivered .".. the most beautiful performance in the history of The Masked Singer."

In honor of the 2019 Record Store Day, the Grammy-winning superstar unveiled her first-ever LIVE recording as an exclusive vinyl release titled Rimes: Live at Gruene Hall where Rimes celebrated music of all genres. And during the 2018 holiday season she starred and served as an Executive Producer in Hallmark's It's Christmas, Eve, which earned the highest TV original movie debut to-date for the channel premiering to over 4.3 million viewers. Earlier that year, Rimes revealed a new EP for her fans titled Re-Imagined that featured five new versions of some of her record-breaking hits, including an epic duet with the music icon Stevie Nicks. In 2017, LeAnn released Remnants, which debuted at # 4 on Billboard's Independent Album Chart, peaked at #3 on iTunes ® overall charts in its first week, garnered two #1 Billboard Dance hits with "Long Live Love" and "LovE is LovE is LovE," and one Top 5 hit with "Love Line." Additionally, for her Remnants UK Tour, she joined Elton John at the historic Hyde Park in London.

Passionate about using her voice to help heal the world, LeAnn was honored with the Ally of Equality Award by the Human Rights Campaign for her over 20 years of support of equal rights, the 2019 HOPE Award for Depression Advocacy, and 2009 ACM Humanitarian Award, among other recognitions. She continues to channel her voice in new ways, releasing CHANT: The Human & The Holy (EverLe Records / Thirty Tigers) in 2020, which spent 5 weeks at #1 on iTunes New Age Chart, as well as her iHeartRadio mental health and wholeness podcast, Wholly Human, that brings her lifestyle blog, Soul of EverLe, to life. Wholly Human, which currently has three seasons, previously reached #2 on iTunes Health & Fitness Chart, placed in the Top 35 overall for podcasts worldwide and was named as one of the 15 best mental health podcasts that educate and empower listeners by Good Housekeeping.