Time Difference

WAT (West Africa Time) is 6 hours ahead of Central Daylight Time

11:30 pm23:30 in Gombe, Nigeria is 5:30 pm17:30 in CDT

Gombe to CT call time

Best time for a conference call or a meeting is between 3pm-6pm in Gombe which corresponds to 8am-11am in CT

11:30 pm23:30 WAT (West Africa Time) (Gombe, Nigeria). Offset UTC +1:00 hour

5:30 pm17:30 Central Daylight Time (CDT). Offset UTC -5:00 hours

11:30 pm23:30 Gombe, Nigeria / 5:30 pm17:30 CDT

Central Time

Central Time (PT) is a general term used to describe the areas that observe either the Central Standard Time (CST) or Central Daylight Time (CDT) in the United States and Canada. CT is not static but switches between CDT and CST.

Territories observing the time zone are primarily in North and Central America. It runs through several Mexican and U.S. states, as well as several Canadian provinces and Central American countries.

Countries: It is used in following countries: Belize, Canada, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, El Salvador, United States.

Principal Cities: The largest city in the CST timezone is Mexico City from Mexico with population about 12.294 million people. Other major cities in the area are Chicago, Houston, Iztapalapa, Ecatepec.

French: HNC - Heure Normale du Centre

Spanish: CT - Tiempo Central Estándar, CT - Zona Centro

Central Time (PT) is a general term used to describe the areas that observe either the Central Standard Time (CST) or Central Daylight Time (CDT) in the United States and Canada. CT is not static but switches between CDT and CST.

Territories observing the time zone are primarily in North and Central America. It runs through several Mexican and U.S. states, as well as several Canadian provinces and Central American countries.

Countries: It is used in following countries: Belize, Canada, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, El Salvador, United States.

Principal Cities: The largest city in the CST timezone is Mexico City from Mexico with population about 12.294 million people. Other major cities in the area are Chicago, Houston, Iztapalapa, Ecatepec.

French: HNC - Heure Normale du Centre

Spanish: CT - Tiempo Central Estándar, CT - Zona Centro

CT representations, usage and related time zones

W3C/ISO-8601: International standard covering representation and exchange of dates and time-related data

-06 - basic short

-0600 - basic

-06:00 - extended

Email/RFC-2822: Internet Message Format Date Standard, typically used for timestamps in email headers

-0600 - sign character (-) followed by a four digit time providing hours (06) and minutes (00) of the offset. Indicates six hour and zero minutes time differences to the west of the zero meridian.

Military/NATO: Used by the U.S. military, Chinese military and others

Sierra - Military abbreviation for CT

S - short form of 'Sierra'

CT Abbreviation: Several time zones share CT abbreviation and it could refer to these time zones

Central Time - UTC -6

Chuuk Time - UTC +10

Time zones with the GMT -6 offset:

CST - Central Standard Time

CT - Central Time

MDT - Mountain Daylight Time

EAST - Easter Island Standard Time

GALT - Galapagos Time

S - Sierra Time Zone