OKLAHOMA CITY -- Luke Ridnour may be in need of a rest -- or a good travel agent -- after being traded for the fourth time in less than a week.

The Oklahoma City Thunder sent the veteran guard and cash to the Toronto Raptors on Tuesday in exchange for a trade exception and the rights to forward Tomislav Zubcic.

It was just the latest move for Ridnour: After averaging 4 points and 2 assists for Orlando last season, he was dealt to Charlotte last Wednesday in a deal involving Memphis and then almost immediately sent to the Thunder along with a conditional 2016 second-round draft pick for guard Jeremy Lamb.

And now he's on the move again. Ridnour has played for five NBA teams in 12 years, and the former Oregon Duck has a career scoring average of 9.3 points per game.

The Thunder will have one year to exercise the trade exception. Zubcic was the 56th overall pick in the 2012 draft and has yet to play in the NBA.

Knicks: New CEO in town

NEW YORK -- Madison Square Garden named long-time talent agency executive David "Doc" O'Connor as its next chief executive.

O'Connor, a managing partner at Creative Artists Agency in New York, takes over for Tad Smith, who was hired to lead the auction house Sotheby's.

Madison Square Garden Co., which owns the New York Knicks, Rangers, Liberty, said in March that it would separate its sports and entertainment operations from its media business.

The media unit runs the MSG Network, MSG+ and regional sports networks. The entertainment division produces and presents live productions like the Radio City Christmas Spectacular, concerts and other events.

"We are extremely pleased to welcome Doc, who brings with him an extensive understanding of the entertainment and sports worlds, including deep industry relationships and a history of successfully creating platforms for growth," said Executive Chairman James Dolan. "We are confident that his expertise will be crucial to our efforts to strengthen our legendary brands."

O'Connor joined Creative Artists more than 30 years ago working its mailroom, advancing rapidly to become an agent in its motion picture department. In 1995, he took over daily oversight of the agency.

Creative Artists' roster includes the Knicks forward Carmelo Anthony, as well as Oklahoma City Thunder forward Kevin Durant, Los Angeles Clippers guard Chris Paul, and Indiana Pacers forward Paul George.

O'Connor officially joins the company on July 15. .