Entry Fields

Primary Name

For the Primary Name, always use the name by which the hardware is best known. List any others in the "Note to Admin" box and we will add them as alternative names. If there is a widely known English name, that name is the one we typically prefer. Otherwise use the native language name.

Release Date

Use the first release date for the hardware, regardless of where in the world it was released. The date can be tricky for obscure or old items. Try to find at least the year of release.

Hardware Category

The hardware category defines what type of item it is. If you can't find a specific category that applies to your hardware item, odds are that "Add-On/Accessory" is what you are looking for. If not, then make a note of it in the "Note to Admin" box section.

Manufacturer

Select all of the official manufactures. If the company is not in the database yet you can submit them using the Create Company form.

Description

The description provided should be of reasonable length (i.e. not a sentence long) and describe the key features of the hardware. The description must have an attribution and be formatted properly to ensure that links show up correctly and text configuration on the site is uniform. If you need help, we have a tool that will handle all of the formatting for you. There is a link that can be found on the top of the description box labeled 'Attribution formatting'. Use it and you will save a lot of time.

Descriptions from websites, other than the ones listed below, cannot be used:

A Good User Summary - A user written entry is the most preferred.

Manufacturer Website - The official website of the item's producer.

Manual / Box - Anything taken from the packaging that the item came in.

Wikipedia or Wikia - Other websites also using the CC BY-SA license are acceptable.

Special Banner

Knock-off and unlicensed hardware items are allowed into the database. These require that the below banner be added to the top of the description. Copy and paste the code below into the description box: