Today we are going to learn everything there is to know about video game genres, subgenres, and game types. This guide is the longest and most detailed of its kind, and it provides a thorough overview of every video game category ever created along with video trailers of sample games from each genre.

At CodaKid, we live and breathe video games, and have used them to teach coding for kids for over 100,000 students across the globe. Many of the game genres here serve as excellent educational tools that we know inside and out. If you are interested in learning how to make games from the genres in this article, we hope you’ll check us out!

Understanding video game genres is interesting for gamers, designers, and students of video games alike. For gamers in particular, it can introduce readers to new game categories as well as new games in genres that they already love.

What are Video Game Genres?

Video game genres are categories of games that have similar gameplay and gameplay mechanics. For example, a role playing game (otherwise known as an RPG) is a classic video game genre played by millions of people every day. The common thread in most RPGs is that you play as a character that gains strength and experience as you tackle increasingly more difficult challenges and levels.

Most video game genres also have sub-genres which help divide the genre into tighter and narrower categories. For example, sub-genres of the RPG genre include Action RPGs, MMORPGs, Roguelike RPGs, Tactical RPGs, Sandbox RPGs, and more.

Below, we have provided an exhaustive list of video games genres, sub-genres, and examples of games in each category.

1. Action Games

Action games are one of the most popular video game genres in the world and typically feature physical challenges that are overcome by jumping, fighting, and shooting. Excellent hand-eye coordination and twitch reflexes are typically required in action games, and the action normally revolves around the user’s character who must pass the series of challenges in order to progress to the next level. The primary subgenres we will cover in the Action Games section are platform games (or platformers), shooters, fighting games, Beat-em Up Brawler Games, Stealth Action Games, Survival Games, Battle Royale games and PlayerUnknown’s Battlegrounds (PUBG)

Platformers

The platform video game genre (also known as platformers) focuses primarily on jumping and climbing. In platform games the user’s character will navigate terrain, platforms, ladders, and other puzzles and try to reach the end of the level alive.

2D Platformer (Donkey Kong, Mario Bros): 2D platformers are platform games played from a side view using 2D graphics. The 2D platformer was a very popular genre in the 1980s with the release of Donkey Kong and Super Mario Bros. Donkey Kong was the first video game that allowed players to jump over obstacles and across floor gaps. Mario Bros introduced 2-player cooperative play which was

3D Platformer – SuperMario Odyssey, Sonic Forces: 3D platformers took the platform genre and introduced 3D gameplay and polygonal 3D graphics.

Shooters

The shooter video game genre, often abbreviated as “shooters”, is a subgenre of action video games in which the player’s primary goal is to defeat the character’s opponents with the weapons available to him. These weapons are usually rifles or other long-range weapons that can be used in conjunction with other items such as grenades for indirect offensive, armor for additional defense, or accessories such as telescopic sights to alter the weapons’ behavior. Ammunition, armor, or health, as well as upgrades that enhance the player character’s weaponry, are frequent resources in many shooter games. In both isolated single player and networked multiplayer contexts, shooter games put the player’s spatial awareness, reflexes, and quickness to the test. Shooter games are divided into several subgenres, all of which rely on the avatar participating in combat with a weapon against either code-driven NPC adversaries or other avatars controlled by other players.

3D Shooter

First-person shooter – Call of Duty, Halo Infinite, Half-life

Third-person shooter – Fortnite, Splatoon

2D Shooter

Top Down Shooter – Galaga

Side-scroller Shooter – Defender, Cuphead

Fighting Games

A fighting game (sometimes known as a versus fighting game) is a video game genre in which two (or more) players fight each other. Blocking, grappling, counter-attacking, and chaining attacks together into “combos” are all common combat techniques in fighting games. Hand-to-hand combat—often involving some type of martial arts—is used by the characters in most battles. The fighting game genre is linked to but separate from the beat ’em up genre, which pits one or more player characters against a huge number of computer-controlled enemies.

Fighting games include duels between two fighters who use exaggerated martial arts movements. They are mostly focused on brawling or combat sports, while some varieties include weaponry. On-screen fighters are normally shown from the side, and even 3D fighting games are mostly played in a 2D plane of motion. Although some games allow players to travel between parallel planes of movement, most games limit characters to moving left and right and jumping. Recent games have a tendency to be represented in three dimensions and to allow side-stepping, but they still play like two-dimensional games.

2D Fighters – Street Fighter

3D Fighters – Super Smash Bros, Tekken, Soul Calibur

Beat-em Up Brawler Games – Castle Crashers, Double Dragon

Stealth Action Games

In contrast to most action games, stealth action games require the player to avoid alerting attackers at all costs. The current stealth game’s basic gameplay elements are to avoid battle, make as little noise as possible, and strike foes from the shadows and behind. Completing goals without being discovered by enemies, sometimes known as “ghosting,” is a popular strategy in stealth games. While avoiding detection may be the sole way to complete a game, there are usually several paths or styles of play that can be used to accomplish a goal. Players can hide behind items or in the shadows, and strike or rush past enemies who are facing the opposite direction. If the player draws the attention of attackers, they may be able to hide and wait for the enemies to stop looking for them. As a result, planning and trial-and-error become crucial. When the player is discovered, certain stealth games place a greater focus on physical combat abilities. Some games give you the option of killing or just knocking out an enemy. Even if ghosting is optional or poorly supported by a game, players may try to avoid battle for moral reasons or to demonstrate competence. These games were dubbed “sneak ’em up” games early on in the creation of the stealth genre.

2D Stealth – Metal Gear and Metal Gear 2, Assassin’s Creed

3D Stealth – Metal Gear Solid is credited as the first 3D stealth game, while popularizing the hiding-behind-cover game element.

Survival Games

Survival games are considered an extension of a common video game theme in which the player character is stranded or separated from others and must work alone to survive and complete a goal. The player generally starts out with a minimal amount of equipment and must attempt to remain alive as long as possible by crafting tools, weapons, shelters, and collecting resources.

In addition to being playable as a single-player game, survival games are often designed to be played in multiplayer mode, with the persistent world hosted on game servers. This video game genre has many examples, including the list of popular games below:

3D Survival Games – Rust, Ark: Survival Evolved, SCUM, Subnautica, The Long Dark, The Forest

2D Survival Games – Terraria, Starbound, Stardew Valley, Junk Jack, Deadlight, The Swapper, Shelter

Battle Royale

One of the most popular of the video game genres, Battle Royale is typically a multiplayer online video game that combines last-man-standing gameplay with survival, exploration, and scavenging elements of a survival game. In most cases, games consist of many individual players, pair of two players or a small squad (typically three or five players). The goal of battle royale games is to eliminate as many opponents as possible within a diminishing amount of area, with the last player or team standing victorious. Players start with minimal equipment and must eliminate all opponents while avoiding being trapped outside of the restricted area.

3D Battle Royale – Call of Duty: Warzone, Apex Legends, Fortnite, PlayerUnknown’s Battlegrounds

2D Battle Royale – Surviv.io, Zombsroyale.io, Buildroyale.io, Mobg.io

2. Action-Adventure Games

An action-adventure game includes elements from both an action game and an adventure game. Many aspects of action-adventure games are similar to those of action games, but they also offer a storyline, characters, an inventory system, dialogue, and other features of adventure games. Action-adventure games typically include a combination of complex story elements, which are displayed for gamers using audio and video. The story highly depends on the movement of the player’s character, which triggers the events of the story and thus affects the flow of the game.

Survival Horror

Survival horror refers to a subgenre of action-adventure video games that include horror game elements. The character of the player is vulnerable and under-armed, putting the emphasis on puzzle-solving and escape, rather than the player taking an offensive strategy. The games usually challenge the player to manage his inventory and ration scarce resources such as ammo. A survival horror story generally involves investigating and confronting horrible forces, and therefore many games turn common elements of horror fiction into gameplay challenges.

3D Survival Horror – Back 4 Blood, State of Decay 3

Metroidvania

The player can explore a wide interconnected world map in Metroidvania games, while entry to certain areas is typically restricted by doors or other obstacles that can only be overcome if the player has obtained unique objects, equipment, weapons, powers, or information within the game. Maps are non-linear, and players are usually required to travel the map many times throughout the game. Larger games generally include save spots and even the ability to transfer the player rapidly between specific rooms on different sides of the map, it minimizes needless backtracking in the game stages.

2D Metroidvania – Hollow Knight, Dust: An Elysian Tail, Metroid: Samus Returns, Ori and the Blind Forest

3D Metroidvania – Metroid Prime

3. Adventure Games

Adventure games are single-player games with a compelling story. More than any other video game genre these games depend heavily on their plot and scenario to provide an engaging single-player experience. Puzzles, decoding messages, locating and using tools, opening locked doors, and discovering and exploring new places are all part of adventure games. Solving a puzzle allows you to explore new regions of the game environment and learn more about the plot. An inventory management interface is a distinct gameplay style in many adventure games. Because players can only pick up certain objects in the game, they usually understand that only those objects that can be picked up are essential.

Graphic Adventures

Graphic adventures are adventure games in which the player’s environment is conveyed through graphics. Graphic adventure games can use a range of input methods, ranging from text parsers to touch screen interfaces. The avatar will be shown differently in different graphic adventure games. Many adventure games feature painted or pre-rendered backgrounds, or a context-sensitive camera that is positioned to show off each area to the best extent, although some games use a first-person or third-person perspective where the camera follows the player’s moves.

2D Graphic Adventures – The Silent Age, Blacksad: Under the Skin, Four Last Things

3D Graphic Adventures – Sherlock Holmes: The Devil’s Daughter, Adventure Time: Finn & Jake Investigations

Text Adventures

Text adventures (also known as interactive fiction) are text-based games in which worlds are described in the narrative and the player interacts with the worlds using typically basic commands. Interactive fiction is software that simulates scenarios in which players control characters and change the environment through text commands. Literary narratives, either in the form of interactive narratives or interactive narrations, are what these works are. These works can also be viewed as a type of video game, either as an adventure game or as a role-playing game. In common use, the phrase refers to text adventures, a sort of adventure game in which the entire interface is “text-only.” However, graphical text adventures still fall under the text adventure category if the primary method of interaction is typing text.

Text Adventure Games – A Dark Room, AI Dungeon, The Dreamhold, Zork, Spider and Web

Visual Novels

Visual novels differ from other game genres in that they have far less gameplay. The majority of player input is mainly limited to clicking to keep the text, images, and sound going while making narrative decisions. Another distinguishing feature of visual novels is their great emphasis on writing, as the narrative is provided through text. Playing visual novels is extremely similar to reading a book because of this feature. Most visual novels have several storylines and endings; the mechanic in these games is usually a series of multiple-choice decision points when the player chooses which path to take the game in.

2D Visual Novel Games – Zero Escape, The Death Trap, Ace Attorney, EVE

Interactive Movie

A video game or other interactive media that simulates a cinematic film is referred to as an interactive film. The phrase “movie game” is used in the video game industry to describe a video game that displays its gameplay in a cinematic, scripted format, frequently using full-motion video of either animated or live-action footage. Interactive movies are animated or filmed with actual actors (or, in some cases, produced with 3D models) and follow a core storyline. Alternative scenes (such as ‘Game Over’ scenes) are filmed to be triggered after the player’s incorrect (or alternate permitted) acts.

3D Interactive Movie Games – Batman: The Telltale Series, Batman: The Enemy Within, Guardians of the Galaxy: The Telltale Series

Real-time 3D Adventures

They added some of the qualities more often associated with action games, such as freedom of motion and physics-based behavior, to traditional adventure gaming.

Uru: Ages Beyond Myst, Shadow of Memories, realMyst, Shenmue

4. Role-Playing Games

In Role-Playing games the player assumes the role of a character that grows in strength and experience over the course of the game. The player is required to overcome difficult challenges and/or defeat monsters, to gain experience points which represent the character’s progress in a chosen profession or class and allow the player to gain new abilities once a set amount is obtained.

Action RPG

An action role-playing game (often abbreviated action RPG or ARPG) is a combination of core elements from both action games and role playing genres. Averse to turn or menu-based combat, action RPGs emphasize real-time combat where the player has direct control over the characters.

The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt, Nier: Automata, The Witcher 3: Cyberpunk 2077, Sands of Salzaar, Wasteland 3, Wild Hunt, Assassin’s Creed Origin, Assassin’s Creed Odyssey, Grand Theft Auto, Super Mario Bros, Ratchet and Clank

MMORPG

A massively multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG) is a type of role-playing video game in which a huge number of people interact in a virtual world. MMORPGs differ from single-player or small multiplayer online RPGs in the amount of players who can interact with each other, as well as the game’s persistent universe (typically hosted by the publisher), which continues to exist and expand even when the user is offline and away from the game. An MMORPG may be run on multiple separate servers, each representing its own world, with players from one server unable to interact with those from another, depending on the number of players and the system architecture; World of Warcraft is a good example, with each separate server housing several thousand players.

MMORPG Games: World of Warcraft, Final Fantasy XI, The Lord of the Rings Online: Shadows of Angmar, and The Elder Scrolls Online, Guild Wars 2

Roguelikes

The name and gameplay aspects of the roguelike video game subgenre come from the 1980 computer game Rogue. A roguelike (or rogue-like) is a type of role-playing video game that features a dungeon crawl through randomly generated levels, turn-based gameplay, grid-based mobility, and the player character’s irreversible death. The majority of roguelikes have a high fantasy storyline, owing to their inspiration from tabletop role playing games like Dungeons & Dragons.

Roguelike Games: NetHack, Rogue Legacy, Enter the Gungeon, Dead Cells, FTL: Faster Than Light, Slay the Spire, Spelunky 2, Hades, The Binding of Isaac

Tactical RPG

Tactical Role playing games is a subgenre of role-playing video games, that combines core elements of role-playing video games with those of tactical (turn-based or real-time) strategy video games. It is also known as Strategy role-playing games and in Japan as simulation RPGs (both abbreviated SRPGs). They principally refers to games which incorporate elements from strategy video games as an alternative to traditional role-playing game (RPG) systems. Several massively multiplayer online games (MMOs) have combined multiplayer online gaming with tactical turn-based combat. The genre has its origins in tabletop role-playing games, where each player has time to decide his or her characters’ actions.

Tactical role-playing games are a subgenre of role-playing video games that integrate aspects from both role-playing and tactical (turn-based or real-time) strategy games. It’s also known as strategy role-playing games and simulation role-playing games in Japan (both abbreviated SRPGs). As an alternative to standard role-playing game (RPG) systems, they primarily refer to games that incorporate features from strategy video games. Multiplayer online gaming has been mixed with tactical turn-based combat in a number of massively multiplayer online games (MMOs). The genre has its roots in tabletop role-playing games, in which each player has the freedom to choose the actions of his or her characters.

Tactical RPGs: Final Fantasy Tactics, Suikoden Tactics, Vanguard Bandits and Disgaea, Arc the Lad II, Arc the Lad III, Arc the Lad: Twilight of the Spirits

Sandbox RPG

A sandbox game is one in which the player has few limits on his or her character and is free to wander and change the virtual world at his or her leisure. In contrast to a progression-style game, a sandbox game emphasizes roaming and allows the player to choose their own tasks. A sandbox game, rather than having segmented zones or numbered levels, takes place in a “world” over which the player has entire control from start to finish. A sandbox game is a type of open-world or free-roaming game.

Sandbox RPGs, often known as open world RPGs, provide the player a lot of flexibility and usually feature a world that is more open and free-roaming (meaning the player isn’t bound to a particular path by rocks, fences, or other obstacles). Sandbox RPGs are similar to other sandbox games, such as the Grand Theft Auto series, in that they have a large number of interactable non-player characters, a large amount of content, and typically some of the largest worlds to explore and the longest playtimes of any RPG due to an impressive amount of secondary content not critical to the main storyline.

Sandbox RPGs: Kynseed, Dragon Slayer series by Nihon Falcom, the early Dragon Quest games by Chunsoft, Zelda II by Nintendo, Wasteland by Interplay Entertainment, the SaGa and Mana series by Squaresoft, System Shock 2 by Irrational Games and Looking Glass Studios, Deus Ex by Ion Storm, The Elder Scrolls and Fallout series by Bethesda Softworks and Interplay Entertainment, Fable by Lionhead Studios, the Gothic series by Piranha Bytes, and the Xenoblade Chronicles series by Monolith Soft.

First-person party-based RPG

First-person party-based RPGs are also known as DRPG (Dungeon RPG). In this type of RPGs, the player guides a group of adventurers through a dungeon or labyrinth in first-person perspective, usually in a grid-based setting. Because the player moves the entire party across the playing field as a single entity, or “blob,” they are also known as “blobbers.” The majority of “blobbers” are turn-based, but other series like Dungeon Master, Legend of Grimrock, and Eye of the Beholder are real-time.

First-person party-based RPGs: Wizardry, Might and Magic and Bard’s Tale series, Etrian Odyssey, Elminage series

JRPG

JRPGs (Japanese Role-Playing Games) are a type of role-playing game that differs from those played in the West. JRPGs are frequently made by Japanese developers, but this is not always the case. The term “JRPG” comes from the term “console RPG,” which refers to games like Dragon Quest and Final Fantasy. Because the term JRPG now refers to a wide spectrum of RPGs, it is no longer considered a genre, but rather an umbrella term. A game is characterized as a JRPG if it satisfies the criteria that one would expect to find in one. Japanese role-playing games have a more linear plot and a predetermined cast of characters. They typically have a large number of adversary encounters and may require grinding in order to progress further in the game.

JRPG Games: Pokemon, Final Fantasy Series, Kingdom Hearts (Action-RPG), Chrono Series, Tales Series, Megami Tensei, Secret of Mana (Action-RPG), Mother Series (Earthbound), Super Mario RPG: Legend of the Seven Stars, Persona Series, Dragon Quest Series

5. Simulation Games

A simulation video game is a broad genre of video games that are intended to closely resemble real-world events. A simulation game tries to mimic real-life activities in the form of a game for a variety of goals including teaching, analysis, prediction, or just entertainment. In most games, there are no clearly defined objectives, and the user is free to control a character or environment. Because simulation games require more engagement than simply reading about or studying concepts and ideas, they may alleviate the tedium associated with more traditional approaches of courses. Students will be able to experience topics through “living” them. As a result, the implementation of simulation games may help students become more motivated and interested in studying. Simulation games can provide players with a better understanding of how people see the world, such as their moral and intellectual quirks. They can also assist in creating empathy for others and understanding of personal and interpersonal values by allowing players to see the moral and ethical consequences of their decisions.

Construction and management simulation

CMSs are usually single-player games since competition would force players to sacrifice originality in favor of efficiency and a scramble for resources. They usually offer a free-form construction mode where players can create whatever they like, appealing to a player’s feeling of creativity and need for control. As a result, many CMSs have no win condition, despite the fact that players can always lose by running out of resources. The player must correctly manage their economy in order to develop larger inventions and earn more creative power in these games. Construction and management simulations rarely have a storyline progression, and the level design is typically a simple place where the player can build. Some games contain pre-built situations, such as achieving a certain level of property or surviving brutal conditions, as win conditions. However, success in one scenario rarely has an impact on the outcome of another, and players can normally try them in any order.

3D CMSs – Construction Simulator Pro 2017, SimCity BuildIt, City Builder 17 Federal Prison, Skyscraper Construction Sim 3D, Space City Construction Sim 3D

Life simulation

Players are given the ability to influence the lives of autonomous individuals or creatures in life simulation games, which are about “maintaining and expanding a virtual life.” Artificial life games are linked to artificial life research in computer science. Commercial A-life games, on the other hand, “implement only a fraction of what A-life research studies” since “they’re intended for amusement rather than research.” God games, which concentrate on controlling tribal worshipers, as well as artificial pets, which focus on one or more animals, fall under this wide category. It also contains genetic artificial life games, in which players manage animal populations across multiple generations.

3D Life simulation – The Sims, Shelter 2, Eco, Seventh Cross: Evolution

2D Life simulation – New York Nights: Success in the City, Jones in the Fast Lane, Little Computer People, E.V.O.: Search for Eden

Vehicle simulation

Players can drive or fly a vehicle in vehicle simulation games. This vehicle could be based on a real vehicle or a creation of the game designer. Vehicles in the air, on the ground, across the water, and even in space fall under this category. Vehicle simulations can include a range of objectives, such as racing, warfare, or simply getting the feel of operating a vehicle. In most cases, these games allow the player to see the action through the eyes of the pilot or driver. A wide range of vehicles is included in this category, including aircraft, spaceships, boats, cars, trucks, motorcycles, and so on. This concept includes a wide range of driving simulators, including both real and virtual racing environments. A variety of flight simulators, including civilian, military, and fantastical vehicles, are also available. Despite being advertised as sports games, racing games follow the design standards of a vehicle simulation, according to Rolling and Adams. The physical and tactical difficulty of driving a vehicle is the main gameplay in a vehicle simulation. Mastery of vehicle control is the factor that motivates players to keep playing even after the game’s objectives have been met. Players must learn to use appropriate speed and steering, as well as prevent crashes by observing speed indicators.

3D Vehicle Simulators – F1 2021, Dirt Rally 2.0, Forza Motorsport 7, Flight Simulator 2020, Euro Truck Simulator 2, City Bus Simulator

6. Rhythm Games

A rhythm game, often known as rhythm-action, is a type of action game that tests the player’s ability to keep rhythm. Dance games like Dance Dance Revolution and music-based games like Donkey Konga and Guitar Hero are examples of this category. The player is challenged to hit buttons at specific moments in games of this genre: the screen displays which button the player must click, and the game awards points for precision as well as synchronization with the beat. The screen in certain rhythm games shows an avatar performing in response to the player’s controller inputs. The avatar is more important to spectators than it is to the player, therefore these graphical replies are normally in the background. The player’s avatar plays against a computer-controlled opponent in single-player modes, whereas multiplayer versions allow two player-controlled avatars to compete head-to-head. Because of the popularity of rhythm games, a market for specialized input devices has emerged. Musical instrument controllers, such as guitars, drums, and maracas, are among these. The player must step on pressure-sensitive pads on a dance mat to participate in dancing games. Most rhythm games, on the other hand, allow for more traditional input devices like control pads.

Rhythm Games – Dance Dance Revolution, Guitar Hero, Osu, Beat Saber, Frets on Fire

7. Strategy Games

Strategy games are popular video game genres that emphasize thinking and planning over direct instant action in order to win. A player must execute a series of activities against one or more opponents, with the purpose of reducing opposing troops. Victory is accomplished through greater planning, with luck playing a minor role. In most strategy video games, the user is granted a godlike view of the game universe and indirectly commands the game units. As a result, most strategy games include tactical and strategic factors, as well as elements of warfare to varying degrees. These games frequently test the player’s ability to explore and manage an economy, in addition to fighting.

4X

Traditionally, the 4X game genre is defined by having the following four gameplay conventions. These four X’s stand for EXplore, EXpand, EXploit, and EXterminate.

Explore – Players send scouts over a map to reveal nearby territory.

Expand – Players claim newer territory by establishing new settlements or increasing the power of existing ones.

Exploit – Players collect and use resources in areas they control, with the goal of increasing the efficiency of that use.

Exterminate – it refers to the act of attacking and eliminating other players. Because all territory in some games is eventually seized, eliminating a rival’s presence may be the only way to expand further.

In 4X games, research is crucial since technological advancement is a source of conquest. Superior military technology or higher numbers are frequently used to win battles, with battle tactics having a lower role. A technology tree is common in 4X games, and it reflects a number of improvements that players can unlock in order to get new units, structures, and other skills. Technology trees in 4X games are often larger than those in other strategy games, with a wider range of options. Empires must invest in new technology and produce research resources. 4X games are recognized for their strategic depth and challenging gameplay. In most cases, gameplay takes precedence over the graphics. Other strategy games focus on the battle, but 4X games provide more precise control over diplomacy, economy, and research, allowing for a wider range of options. This also requires the player to manage multiple strategies at the same time while planning for long-term goals. The majority of 4X and equivalent strategy games include several methods to win. For example, in Civilization, players can win by conquering all of their opponents’ cities, but they can also win by achieving technological advancements (such as being the first to launch a spacecraft to a new planet), diplomacy (such as reaching peace agreements with all other nations), or other means. Multiple victory conditions aid the human player, who may need to change plans as the game continues and opponents obtain vital resources before he or she does.

4X Games – Dominions 5: Warriors of the Faith, Dominions 5: Warriors of the Faith, Warhammer 40,000: Gladius – Relics of War, Interstellar Space: Genesis, Shadow Empire, Interstellar Space: Genesis

Artillery

Artillery games are two- or three-player (typically turn-based) video games that include tanks (or simply cannons) attempting to destroy one another. Most often, the primary elements of the game are to aim at the opponent(s) on a ballistic trajectory (in its simplest form, a parabolic curve). Before firing, the player is usually expected to input an angle and velocity, and games frequently ask the player to adjust for wind and other conditions. Although the game might be classified as a shooter because players fire projectiles at one another, it mainly resembles a strategy video game.

Artillery Games- Worms: A Space Oddity, Death Tank, Worms 2: Armageddon, Worms Reloaded, Worms: Battle Islands, Worms Ultimate Mayhem, Hogs of War 2

Auto-battler (Auto Chess)

An auto battler, often known as auto chess, is a type of strategy video game that typically include chess-like components in which players deploy characters on a grid-shaped battlefield, who automatically fight with the opposing team’s characters without the player’s control. Similar to a battle royale, auto battler games often involve multiple players competing against each other as individuals. Each player deploys a team of troops, known as minions, with the goal of forming the most powerful team possible. After each player has chosen their initial units, they are partnered up at random for a series of one-on-one fights. In combat, both players’ units are placed on the board and fight each other automatically, usually without the player’s interaction. When one team is entirely destroyed, with none of that player’s units able to fight any longer, the loser receives a hit point penalty and the game continues on to the next phase. After the battle phase, players purchase units that can be merged to create stronger versions of the same units at the start of each round. Many categories can be assigned to units, and combat bonuses are provided for stacking multiple troops of the same type. A player is eliminated from the contest if they lose all of their health.

Auto-battler (Auto Chess) – Teamfight Tactics, Hearthstone Battlegrounds, Dota Underlords, Hearthstone Battlegrounds, Auto Chess, Royale Age: Battle of Kings

Real-time strategy (RTS)

Real-time strategy (RTS) is a subgenre of strategy video games in which all players play at the same period, in “real-time. Each player in a real-time strategy game places structures and movements several units under their indirect control to secure regions of the battlefield and/or destroy their opponents’ assets. It is possible to produce extra units and structures in a normal RTS game, but this is usually limited by the need to spend collected resources. Controlling specific points on the map and/or holding specific sorts of units and structures dedicated to this goal are used to obtain these resources. The screen in a typical real-time strategy game is divided into two areas: a map area that displays the game world and terrain, units, and buildings, and an interface overlay that contains command and production controls, as well as a “radar” or “minimap” overview of the entire map. The player is usually placed somewhere on the map with a few units or a building that can build further units or buildings. To access more sophisticated units in the tech tree, the player must often, but not always, create specified structures. RTS games frequently, but not always, involve the player to develop an army and use it to protect themselves against a simulated Human wave attack or to destroy enemies who have bases with their own unit creation capacities. RTS games occasionally have a fixed number of units that the player can control and do not allow the player to build more.

Real-time strategy (RTS) – Dune: Spice Wars, Knights of Honor II: Sovereign, Company of Heroes 3, Men of War II, Homeworld 3, Ratten Reich, Terminator: Dark Fate – Defiance, Starship Troopers – Terran Command

Real-time tactics (RTT)

Real-time tactics (RTT) is a subgenre of tactical wargames that are played in real-time to simulate operational warfare and military tactics. It differs from real-time strategy games in that it lacks traditional resource management and base or unit construction, as well as a higher emphasis on individual units and complicated combat tactics. Real-time strategy games urge players to focus on logistics and production as much as or more than fighting, whereas real-time tactics games focus on tactical and operational aspects of warfare such as unit formations and terrain exploitation for tactical advantage. Real-time tactical gaming is also distinguished by the requirement that players fulfill tasks using just the combat forces available to them and by the supply of a realistic (or at least convincing) representation of military tactics and operations. The military tactical and realistic focus of real-time tactics games, as well as the comparatively short risk/reward cycle, provide a far more rapid, intense, and accessible experience of battlefield tactics and mêlée than other genres of strategy games.

RTT Games: Total War: Warhammer, Shadow Tactics: Blades of the Shogun, Sudden Strike 4, Men of War: Assault Squad 2, Steel Division 2

Multiplayer Online battle arena (MOBA) – Dota, League of Legends

MOBA is a type of strategic video games in which two teams of players combat against each other on a predefined battleground. Each player controls a single character with a unique set of skills that progress through time and contribute to the team’s overall strategy. Each team’s ultimate goal is to destroy their opponent’s main structure, which is located on the opposite side of the battleground. In some MOBA games, the goal is to defeat the opponent team’s whole squad. Computer-controlled forces aid players by spawning in groups and marching forward along specified tracks toward their opponent’s base, which is highly fortified by defensive structures. MOBAs are a sort of multiplayer online video game that began as a subgenre of real-time strategy, however, players rarely develop buildings or troops.

MOBA Games – Bleeding Edge, Marvel Super War, Star Wars: Force Arena, Infinite Crisis, Heroes of the Storm

Tower Defense Games

Tower defense (TD) is a strategy game subgenre in which the goal is to defend a player’s territories or belongings by blocking opposing attackers or preventing enemies from accessing exits, usually by building defensive structures on or along their attack path. This usually entails constructing a variety of structures that automatically obstruct, hamper, attack, or destroy enemies. Because of its real-time origins, tower defense is considered a subgenre of real-time strategy video games, even if many modern tower defense games feature aspects of turn-based strategy. A key strategy in the genre is the strategic placement and selection of defensive pieces.

The following are the basic gameplay features of tower defense:

Territories, possessions, and domiciles (together, the “base”) that the player or players must defend.

Multiple waves of oncoming “enemy” must be defended against.

Tower features, such as towers or barriers, are placed in the way of attacking opponents.

Modern tower defense has the following characteristics:

Players can place obstructions on their bases that will damage or kill attacking enemies before they destroy their base.

Repair of obstructions.

Upgrade of obstructions.

A currency that can be used to buy upgrades and repairs.

Multiple paths can be traversed at the same time by an enemy.

Usually, each wave has a certain number and type of enemies.

New maps and levels can be unlocked.

A tower that can move.

Tower Defense Games– Plants vs Zombies: Game of the Year, Dungeon Warfare 2, Dungeon Defenders II, Zombie Builder Defense, OTTTD: Over The Top Tower Defense

Turn-based strategy (TBS)

Turn-Based Strategy Games are a type of military simulator or a subgenre of strategy games that are often entirely abstract. The players take control of a number of pieces or units and take turns managing them on a rectangle or hexagonal grid. Each turn, players typically move a unit, assault an opponent unit, or exploit natural resources, most commonly by recruiting additional units or constructing more fixed facilities. Each unit can typically move and then perform one more action per round. Play usually ends when a certain goal is met, such as the destruction of all enemy units (or structures), though timed games are also popular.

Turn-based strategy (TBS) – Battlestar Galactica: Deadlock, Stars in Shadow, Aggressors: Ancient Rome, Interstellar Space: Genesis, Total War: Three Kingdoms, Total War: Attila

Turn-based tactics (TBT)

Turn-based tactics (TBT), also known as tactical turn-based (TTB), is a computer and video game genre of strategy video games that simulate the considerations and circumstances of operational warfare and military tactics in small-scale confrontations rather than the more strategic considerations of turn-based strategy (TBS) games through stop-action simulations. Turn-based tactical gameplay is defined by the expectation that players execute tasks using only the combat forces available to them, and by the supply of a realistic (or at least convincing) representation of military tactics and operations. Turn-based tactics are also defined by turn-based gameplay, as the genre’s name suggests. Tactical and miniature wargaming, the recreation of warfare scenarios using miniatures or even simple paper chits with very complex rules, are the origins of the genre. Because of the tactical consequences of elevation, hard cover, and line of sight, turn-based tactics games frequently offer more detailed and complex settings than other strategy games.

Turn-based tactics (TBT) – Phantom Doctrine, Legions at War, Blood Bowl 2, Star Wars Tactics, Hired Guns: The Jagged Edge

9. Wargames

Wargames are a type of strategy video game in which the focus is on strategic or tactical warfare on a map. Depending on whether the game is turn-based or real-time, and whether the focus is on military strategy or tactics, wargames generally fall into one of four archetypal categories. A wargame, as opposed to abstract games like chess, is a game that realistically simulates battle. Wargaming can be done for fun, to teach military officers how to think strategically, or to research the nature of potential conflicts. Many wargames reproduce specific historic conflicts, and they can encompass whole wars, as well as campaigns, battles, and lower-level encounters within those wars. There are many wargames that replicate land battles, but there are also wargames that simulate sea and air conflict.

Wargames – Hegemony, Wargame: Red Dragon, Total War, Close Combat, Steel Panthers

Grand strategy wargames

A grand strategy wargame, or simply grand strategy game (GSG), is a wargame that focuses on grand strategy: military strategy at the level of movement and resource use of a nation state or empire. It’s a genre that shares a lot of similarities with 4X games, but it’s “asymmetrical,” meaning that players are more restricted to a specific arrangement and aren’t divided into equally free factions when it comes to exploring and completing the game in an open environment. Grand strategy games are particularly valuable in education and international affairs studies since they go beyond simple warfare to include economics, geography, history, and politics.

Grand strategy wargames – Hegemony Rome: The Rise of Caesar, Imperator: Rome, Dominions 4: Thrones of Ascension, Fate of the World, Hegemony Gold: Wars of Ancient Greece

10. Sports Games

A video game that simulates the practice of sports is known as a sports video game. Most sports, including team sports, track and field, extreme sports, and combat sports, have been replicated with a game. Physical and tactical challenges are present in sports games, which put the player’s precision and accuracy to the test. Most sports games seek to simulate athletic aspects such as speed, strength, acceleration, precision, and so on. These games, like their respective sports, are held in a stadium or arena with clearly defined borders. Recorded audio is frequently used in sports games to give play-by-play and color commentary.

Team Sports

Team sports games are one of the oldest forms of video game genres. They simulate playing a sport ranging from football to soccer to rugby to baseball. Some games, such as Arch Rivals and NBA Jam, poke fun at the genre, while others, such as Madden NFL and FIFA, attempt to emulate the authenticity and feel of playing a live game. Team sports games are competitions between opposing teams in which players compete directly and concurrently to achieve a goal. To earn points, teammates are typically tasked with facilitating the movement of a ball or other comparable object according to a set of regulations.

Team Sports Games: – MLB The Show 22, Pro Evolution Soccer 2019, NBA 2K22, WCC 3

Racing

Racing video games are video games in which players control a vehicle that competes against other vehicles on a series of racetrack or levels, with the objective of reaching the finish line first. Some racing video games, such as Sonic R, do not require the use of automobiles; some games only depict characters running.

There are numerous racing sub-genres, all of which are distinct from one another. While they all have the similar goal of racing to the end of the track before everyone else, each sub-genre has its own gameplay and focus.

Arcade racing video games – Arcade-style racing games prioritise enjoyment and a fast-paced experience, as automobiles race in a variety of ways. Arcade-style races have significantly more liberal physics than simulation racers, which is a crucial aspect that distinguishes them from simulation racers. Whereas in real racing (and its simulation versions), the driver must slow down significantly to take most turns, arcade-style racing games urge the player to “powerslide” the car into a turn, allowing the player to maintain their pace. Collisions with other racers, track barriers, or traffic vehicles are frequently overdone in comparison to simulation racers.

Futuristic racing video games – Futuristic racing games are a form of racing game in which players race against the clock or other vehicles in science fiction vehicles such as sci-fi cars or other sci-fi vehicles. Vehicle combat may be included in a number of futuristic racing games.

Kart racing video games – Kart racing games offer simplified driving principles while incorporating hazards, unique track designs, and a variety of action components. Kart racers are also known for casting characters as “wacky” vehicle drivers who have appeared in many platform games or cartoon television series. Kart racing games are more arcade-like than other racing games, and they frequently include rounds where player characters can launch projectiles at each other or earn power-ups. Typically, vehicles in such games move more like go-karts, with no gear lever or clutch pedal.

Simulation racing video games – The goal of simulation racing games is to accurately simulate the physics and handling of a car. If they can’t get an official license for genuine vehicles or racing leagues, they’ll use fantasy cars that look like real ones. The physics of vehicular behavior are crucial to the experience. Professional race driver rigours (such as dealing with a car’s tyre condition and fuel level) are frequently incorporated as well. Simulated racing games prioritize proper turning skill and precision racing moves (such as trail braking).

Racing Games – Forza Horizon 5, Forza Motorsport 7, Need for Speed Payback, NASCAR Heat 3, F1 2021

Esport Competitive Games

The term esports refers to video games played in competitions by both amateurs and professionals. Esports generally fall into a few major categories. Fighting games, first-person shooters (FPS), real-time strategy (RTS), and multiplayer online battle arena games (MOBA) make up the majority of esports titles, with MOBAs being the most popular in terms of participation and viewership. Hundreds of players from around the world compete for the prize pool. The following is a list of games with a professional scene that are presently or have previously existed, organized by genre and roughly chronologically. Of all of the video game genres, the Esports genre is one of the fastest growing.

Esport Competitive Games:- Apex Legends, Arms, Brawlhalla, Call Of Duty, Clash Royale, Counter Strike: GO, Dota 2, eFootball, Fifa 22, Fortnite, Forza, Gears Of War

Sports-based fighting

Sports-based fighting games, such as boxing and wrestling video games, are titles that fit well into both the fighting game and sports game genres. As a result, they’re frequently divided into subgenres of their own. Many incorporate real-world franchises or fighters, and the fighting is often significantly more realistic than in standard fighting games (though the degree of realism varies).

Sports-based fighting: – Fight Night, UFC 2009 Undisputed, EA Sports UFC, WWE

Individual Sports

Individual Sports Games include solo sports such as skateboarding and snowboarding and the games within this video game genre typically try to simulate reality as much as possible.

Individual Sports Games: Shredders Snowboard Sim, Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater 1 + 2, Shaun White Snowboarding: Road Trip, SSX

9. Puzzle Games

Puzzle games put the player’s problem-solving skills to the test, requiring them to recognize patterns, solve sequences, and complete words. Crossword puzzles, word-search puzzles, number puzzles, relational puzzles, and logic puzzles are examples of distinct puzzle genres. Puzzles are frequently designed for fun purposes, but they can also result from significant mathematical or logical issues. Logic and conceptual challenges are the focus of puzzle games. While many action and adventure games incorporate puzzle aspects into their level design, a real puzzle game prioritizes problem solving as the primary gameplay activity.

Trivia Games

Trivia is a form of game in which players (either individually or in groups) are asked questions about various topics and must answer as many of them correctly as possible thereby earning points. Trivia contests are commonly held as part of parties, events, and pub entertainment. Normally, contestants are divided into teams, with the winning team being the one with the highest score.

This type of game is intended so that players have fun while playing, and its major goal is to encourage conversation and good argument among participants, in addition to the benefit of developing and growing your knowledge, whether in general or in more particular areas. In reality, Trivia winners are not required to receive a prize, and generally everyone is fine with that because the main goal is to have fun while learning.

Trivia questions and answers can be tailored to any audience and used in schools and universities to help students build language skills and test their knowledge and abilities.

Trivia Games: Trivia Crack, QuizUp, Trivial Pursuit

Logic Games

The Logic video game genre requires solving logic puzzles or navigating difficult environments such as mazes in order to pass levels and score points. Tile-matching puzzle games are among the most popular casual games because they are perfectly suited to informal play. Adventure and instructive games regularly cross into this category. Tetris, a puzzle game, is credited with altering gaming and bringing the puzzle genre to a wider audience.

Logic Games: Cut the Rope, Candy Crush Saga, Atsumari, Color Cross (Nintendo DS), Mario’s Picross (Nintendo 3DS), Angry Birds 2, Blocktrix, Armadillo Run

10. Idle Games

This genre involves games that orient the player with a trivial task, such as clicking a cookie; and as the game progresses, the player is gradually rewarded with certain upgrades for completing said task. In all, these games require very little involvement from the player, and in most cases they play themselves; hence the use of the word “idle”.

Idle games

An idle game is one in which the player does not interact with the game while it develops. Idle games can be actively played, operate in the background, or even reward the player for returning. The player chooses how to play the game in each situation, yet the game is flexible enough to be played in any way. Idle games must allow for some mechanisms to operate in the background while the player is not playing; otherwise, the game will not be called idle. Idle games do not require a player’s continual attention, therefore they can be active while the player is doing other things, or even while the player is sleeping. This style of gameplay can be incredibly pleasant for the gamer because they feel as if they are being rewarded for their idleness.

Cookie Clicker, Clicker Heroes, Forager, Realm Grinder, Time Clicker

Casual games

Casual games are video games that do not need a significant amount of time to play, win, or enjoy. A “casual gamer,” on the other hand, is a person who enjoys any video game without devoting a considerable amount of time to it, and who plays it on the spur of the moment, irregularly, or seldom. Casual games, as opposed to hardcore games, are usually web-based and aimed for a broad, mass market audience. Casual games can be of any genre and feature any style of gameplay. They usually have fewer rules, shorter sessions, and take less expertise to master. They don’t anticipate being familiar with typical mechanics, controls, or tropes. As a result, they can play and win in much less time. They can also typically be played in short bursts. In contrast to more “hardcore” games, which can take up to 40 hours to complete the game’s final stage. Solitaire, developed by Microsoft, is widely regarded as one of the first very successful casual games for the PC.

Casual Games: Angry Birds, Antique Road Trip, Awem Games, Awakening (video game series), Fairway Solitaire, Microsoft Solitaire, Microsoft Mahjong, Pac-Man, FarmVille, Pinball, Plants vs Zombies

Party game

Party games are usually multiplayer video games that allow a large number of players to compete. Party games, in general, are a collection of basic mini-games ranging from collecting more of a specific item than other players to having the fastest time at anything. They’re made to be simple to use and operate.

Party Games: Mario Party Superstars, Crab Game, Clubhouse Games: 51 Worldwide Classics, The Jackbox Party Pack Series, Sonic Shuffle, Among Us

Programming games

Programming games are video games that are used to teach software programming skills. A programming game typically includes computer programming features that allow the player to execute instructions in a domain-specific programming language. It’s usually depicted as a visual language that makes the programming concept easier to understand. In programming games, the player has no direct control over the game’s outcome. Instead, to direct the behaviors of the actors, a computer program or script is developed in a domain-specific programming language (usually robots, tanks or bacteria, which seek to destroy each other). Before submitting their programs to a central server, players are provided tools to design and test their programs in the game’s domain-specific language. The server then runs the program against other players and reports the results to the player, who can then make adjustments or enhancements to the program based on the results. Programming games could be placed within the Educational Games video game genre, but as they are so unique e felt that they deserved their own category.

CodaKid RoboHacker, CodeCombat, CodinGame, Lightbot, Shenzhen I/O, Game Builder Garage, Code.org

Board games/card games

Classical board games are divided into four general categories: race games (such as Pachisi), space games (such as Noughts and Crosses), chase games (such as Hnefatafl), and games of displacement (such as chess). Many board games have been adapted into video games, with the computer serving as one or many opponents. Many board games can now be played versus a computer or against other players online.

Some websites (such as boardgamearena.com, yucata.de, and others) allow participants to play in real time and see their opponents’ actions right away, while others send email notifications after each move. Print-and-play games, which can be purchased and printed, have been impacted by the Internet and cheaper home printing. Some games employ external media to accompany the game, such as audio cassettes or DVDs.

There are computer adaptations of many popular board and card games. Traditional games can benefit from AI opponents to assist enhance one’s ability. World-class computer programs are available for chess, checkers, Othello (also known as Reversi), and backgammon. In China and Japan, mahjong and related games are extremely popular. Go is popular in East Asia, despite the fact that programming a computer to play Go is infamously difficult. )))

Massive multiplayer online (MMO)

A massively multiplayer online game (MMOG) is a type of video game that allows a huge number of people to play at the same time over the internet. These games are usually set in a shared environment that the player can enter after purchasing or installing the game program. Many game designers have incorporated online multiplayer modes into many typically single-player games as a result of the phenomenal expansion of MMOGs. MMO games create a whole ecosystem within the title, from having a complex setting to a large player base that interacts and completes missions with one another to having a functional economy that affects all players equally.

MMORPGs (massively multiplayer online role playing games) are one of the most popular types of MMOG, but the concept is far broader than that. Online gameplay has become a must-have feature in many first-person shooters (FPS), racing games, and even fighting games, in addition to RPGs and real-time strategy (RTS) games. For many gamers, the ability to compete against players from all over the world in a variety of online-only game types outweighs the single player mode that many of these games were built for.

Massively multiplayer online first-person shooter games (MMOFPS): Firefall, Dust 514, Global Agenda, Huxley, Neocron, Planetside 2, World War II Online

Massively multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPG): AdventureQuest 3D, New World, Neverwinter, Nexus: The Kingdom of the Winds, Pirates of the Burning Sea, Priston Tale, World of Warcraft: The Burning Crusade, World of Warcraft: Wrath of the Lich King

Massively multiplayer online real-time strategy games (MMORTS): Age of Empires Online, DarkSpace, Dawn of Fantasy, Lord of Ultima

Advergames

An advergame (also known as an advertisement game) is a type of video game advertising in which the game is created by or in close collaboration with a corporate body for the aim of promoting a specific brand. Advergames are typically free, released online, and compatible with a variety of devices. The brand, company, product, institution, or service being advertised is usually the protagonist of these games.

Advergaming is a non-intrusive technique to reach out to the general audience. Users interact with the game on their own volition. Advergames are simple to create. A brand can incorporate its style and values into a unique product that reflects it by creating a video game from scratch (or adapting an existing format). They have a decent probability of becoming viral online. The games are highly addicting and amusing, and they also have a social component (just look at Candy Crush’s Facebook success!). As a result, there’s a significant probability they’ll be shared. They’re easily quantifiable. It can track all of a user’s interactions with the game, including how much time they spend playing, how many times they log in, and what screen they exit.

Advergames: Big Bumpin’, PocketBike Racer, Volkswagen Polowers, Magnum, M&Ms, Doritos VR Battle, Chipotle Scarecrow, Volvo – The Game, McDonald’s Treasure Land Adventure

Art games

An art game is an interactive work by a visual artist that challenges cultural preconceptions, offers important social or historical critique, or tells a tale in a creative way. A specified way to win or experience success in a mental task, passage through a succession of stages (that may or may not be hierarchical), and a focal character or icon that represents the player, according to the article. While art games may combine features from other genres, such as RPG elements, puzzle-solving, or shooting, they remain a distinct genre. They tend to straddle the line between what is and isn’t a game, straddling the line between interactive art and conventional perceptions of what a game is. Art games are a technique to examine and remark on games as a genre. They experiment with interactivity and even the concept of “play” in order to push the medium in new directions, sometimes employing methods that aren’t even fun. Whether you find art games fascinating or irritating, they are sure to spark discourse and urge us to think about games beyond the surface level.

Art games: – The Tomorrow Children, Outer Wilds, Islands: Non-Places, Journey, Scrape Scraperteeth, Airport Security

Educational games

Educational games are games that are either purposefully developed for educational reasons or that offer secondary educational value. Educational games are those that are designed to help individuals learn about specific subjects, broaden concepts, reinforce development, grasp a historical event or culture, or assist them in mastering a skill while they are playing. Board, card, and video games are examples of game kinds. This educational tool has grown popular as educators, governments, and parents recognise the psychological need for and benefits of gaming on learning. Games are stories that teach goals, rules, adaptation, problem solving, and interaction through interactive play. They meet a basic need to learn by offering delight, intense participation, structure, incentive, ego fulfillment, adrenaline, creativity, social connection, and emotion in the game itself while learning is taking place.

For teachers attempting to provide core courses, reading, and new skills, educational video games play an important role in the school curriculum. Gamification of education allows students to take an active role in their education while also developing technical skills that will be useful in their academic and professional lives. Several recent studies have found that video games, whether violent or not, can aid in the development of intellectual and emotional qualities that enhance academic progress in children.

Educational games: – Lola Panda, History of Biology, The Magic School Bus, Get Water, Animal Jam, The Oregon Trail, Minecraft: Education Edition

Exergames

Exergaming, also known as fitness gaming or exer-gaming, is a name for video games that also serve as a kind of exercise. Technology that tracks body movement or reaction is used in exergaming. The genre has been praised for shattering the perception of gaming as a sedentary activity and encouraging people to live more active lives. Exergames are thought to have evolved as a result of technological advancements aimed at making exercise more enjoyable.

Exergames have been shown in lab experiments to deliver light to moderate intensity physical activity. During the COVID-19 epidemic, exercise games proved to be a helpful addition for rehabilitation programmes, particularly balanced rehabilitation for the elderly. Exergaming is a particularly effective strategy for motivating ill children in their rehabilitation efforts since children are frequently more receptive to the concept. According to a comprehensive research published in 2021, exercise games can lower BMI, enhance body fat percentage, and increase cardiorespiratory fitness. Exergames can be used to supplement treatment for a range of patient demographics, including geriatrics, Parkinson’s disease, cerebral palsy, and spinal cord injuries, according to a comprehensive review published in 2020.

Exergames: – Ring Fit Adventure, Nike+ Kinect Trainin, Wii Fit U, Jump Rope Challenge

Video Game Genres: Conclusion

This exhaustive guide to video game genres covers most of the most popular video game categories, yet sometimes certain games are difficult to place or sometimes even seem to fit into multiple video game genres.

We are always open to feedback. If we missed any video game genres or other important games that you feel we should include in our guide, please leave a comment below!

We hope that you have enjoyed our Ultimate Guide to Video Game Genres.