AUBURN HILLS – Until now, Nazr Mohammed was best remembered as the San Antonio Spurs’ starting center in the 2005 NBA Finals. From this point on, he will be known as the player who replaced Ben Wallace.

On the first day ATF – After The ‘Fro – Mohammed agreed to a four-year guaranteed contract (with an option for a fifth year) worth approximately $24 million with the Pistons. Though Mohammed has a modest resume compared to Wallace, the league’s four-time Defensive Player of the Year, he will likely be the Pistons’ starting center on opening day.

Wallace bolted the Pistons on Monday night, agreeing to a four-year, $60 million deal with division rival Chicago. Wallace’s departure left the Pistons scrambling for another big man and they settled on the 28-year-old Mohammed, an eight-year veteran who has played for four NBA teams.

After some strong performances during the 2005 NBA playoffs, Mohammed fell out of favor with Spurs coach Gregg Popovich last season. Mohammed started just 30 of 80 regular-season games, averaging 6.2 points and 5.2 rebounds in 17.4 minutes. He has averaged 7.1 points and 5.7 rebounds during his career.

The Pistons also regained the services of backup guard Lindsey Hunter, who agreed to a two-year, $4.5 million contract. Free agents cannot sign contracts until July 12.

Pistons president of basketball operations Joe Dumars cannot comment on the acquisitions during the league’s moratorium period. Mohammed’s agent, Michael Higgins, did not return messages seeking comment.

Mohammed’s strengths are his rebounding and mobility. The 6-foot-10 Mohammed ranked fourth in the NBA in offensive rebounds per 48 minutes this season. He’s also more of an offensive threat and a much better free-throw shooter than Wallace, averaging 66 percent at the foul line for his career.

Beyond that, Mohammed pales in comparison to Wallace. He is not a shotblocker, averaging just 0.7 per game in his career, and he doesn’t possess Wallace’s instincts on defensive rotations. Mohammed also has trouble catching the ball, which makes him turnoverprone.

Mohammed was on the Pistons’ radar screen five years ago when he was a free agent, but he wound up signing with Atlanta. He has also played for Philadelphia and New York.

The Pistons were also interested in Portland’s Joel Pryzbilla. His agent, Bill Duffy, was even quoted as saying Monday night the Pistons were the frontrunners for his services. But Pryzbilla apparently got cold feet at the prospect of replacing the enormously popular Wallace and decided to re-sign with the Trail Blazers.

The Pistons used their entire mid-level salary exception, which is expected to be slightly over $5 million as a starting point, to secure Mohammed. That leaves them with limited flexibility to make improvements to their bench.

They have a bi-annual exception to sign another free agent for $1.75 million in the first year, but those contracts can only last two seasons. Their only other option is a trade but they don’t have a lot of assets unless they’re willing to trade a starter or sixth man Antonio McDyess.

Dale Davis’ expiring $3.5 million contract has some appeal to opposing general managers, and the Pistons also have two fi rst-round draft picks next season – their own and Orlando’s as part of the Darko Milicic trade.

Hunter, who contemplated retirement, drew some interest from Phoenix, but there was little doubt he would stay with Detroit. He has been promised a front-office position after his playing career.