Former San Antonio Spurs center Nazr Mohammed had plenty to say about his time in San Antonio in a poignant article on The Player's Tribune.

Mohammed, who announced he completed his Bachelor of Liberal Arts with Kentucky, took time to reflect on his NBA career. He highlighted the basketball lessons on and off the court during his NBA career and says the game gave him a Ph.D. in basketball.

And Mohammed says the Spurs helped him earn that Ph.D.

It was with the Spurs that I got a Harvard Business School–type education from Gregg Popovich and his staff of great assistant coaches — guys like Brett Brown, Mike Budenholzer and P.J. Carlesimo. San Antonio was also where I met R.C. Bufford and Sam Presti. Sam would mentor me years later in Oklahoma City, while R.C. would give me lessons in the Business of Basketball without even knowing it.

Mohammed played with the Spurs from 2004-06. He was part of the 2005 Spurs championship team that defeated the Pistons in a thrilling 7-game series.

It would be his only NBA title and while he appreciates the basketball skills he picked up with the Spurs, Gregg Popovich's approach to the game and life stands out.

What stands out most is how Coach Popovich balanced the pursuit of championships with teachings about how blessed we were to play and coach a game that kids play. He taught me that there are bigger things in life than basketball. That always gave me balance. There were times I thought Pop was going to rip into us after a bad loss. But instead he’d do something like talk about the troops in Iraq who were sacrificing their lives for our freedom.

Mohammed averaged 6.2 points per game and 5.5 rebounds per game in San Antonio. The Spurs traded for him in 2005 with the Knicks in exchange for Malik Rose.

He would play for various teams after him time with the Spurs was over playing for the Thunder, Pistons, Bobcats, and Bulls. He retired from basketball in 2015 but Popovich's teaching still resonate with him.

But my biggest takeaway from Coach Popovich was how to balance basketball and life, and be appreciative every time I stepped on the court.