THE DINING CARS of the high-speed ICE are a culinary wasteland. But with their dented red-leather couches, they serve well as social hubs for the temporary traveling communities moving 150 miles per hour throughout Germany. When I boarded the train in Berlin, it was the place to meet companions en route to the forty-ninth edition of Art Cologne. It was dealer Johann König who invited me to his table, where we spent the whole journey enjoying a lengthy breakfast, which grew into lunch the longer it lasted. Cell signals aren’t stable on the ICE, but König managed to work the phone whenever the train was slowing down or approaching a station. At home, König had been busy rebranding his gallery and moving into a defunct Brutalist concrete church from the 1960s by architect Werner Düttmann that underwent a three-year-long renovation.

Why invest so much in a gallery space? Isn’t this the age of art fairs? Yes, he goes to fairs. But he also believes in grand exhibitions. The more spectacular the space the better. König talked about a popular Cologne-based comic who shares his name. The dealer fosters a certain obsession with his namesake—he told me that he was even toying with the idea to let him represent his gallery at his booth. But that would require more preparation, and, said König quoting König: “Being funny is hard work!”

The next day I was reminded of the Königs’ words at the fair’s preview. In the early hours, the Düsseldorf-based artist Hans-Peter Feldmann walked the halls slowly, holding a protest sign that seemed more a poem than anything: “Hell erstrahlen alle Mienen bei dem schönen Wort verdienen.” It’s almost impossible to translate in all its intended ambiguity: “Light shines on all the faces when it comes to the beautiful word earning.” Was it some sort of self-criticism by a former “anti-artist” now embraced by the market? Or a slick Publikumsbeschimpfung?

At least there was a historical resonance: Forty years ago German artist Timm Ulrichs walked among visitors of the Cologne art fair wearing a sandwich board. With big black glasses, blind man’s stick, and an armband for the visually impaired, Ulrichs sported a sign written in bold black letters: “Ich kann keine Kunst mehr sehen!” (I can see no more art!) In contrast, during his intervention Feldmann wore an elegant anthracite-colored suit that gave him the aura of a businessman. No better place than a major fair to stoke the ashes of issues once hotly debated.

Art Cologne these days is a very orderly affair: modern and postwar art in the lower level, established contemporary in the middle, and young galleries in the upper floor, which also houses an immense VIP lounge. This new setup and the spacious booths that come with it seemed to go over well with collectors and dealers alike. Everyone except the critics, of course, who distrust the lush hum of a well-oiled business machine. Some crave astonishment. And it’s true that these days there are fewer moments of bazaar-ness. But that is probably a good thing.

After some years of crisis, Cologne is again the undisputed leading trade fair in the region: It’s the place where the majority of collectors, curators, and museum directors from Germany and the Benelux visit. “After last year, we were quite doubtful at the beginning, but now we are really satisfied with this year’s fair,” dealer Daniel Buchholz told me during a book launch for artist Cameron Jamie at Walther König on Ehrenstraße, Cologne’s traditional gallery district. “But the dinners got out of hand,” Buchholz added half earnest, half jokingly. “Sometimes I feel not like a gallerist but a party caterer. Instead of dinners, we will do more apertifs in the future.” I am tempted to believe Buchholz, who enjoyed a cigarette on König’s premises. Maybe there are small solutions, as shown at the Petrit Halilaj happening at Kölnischer Kunstverein. Director Moritz Wesseler had booked Metzgerei Innhoven for catering, who made their—quite spectacular—bratwurst on site: Mera Rubell, who was in front of me in the queue, seemed impressed.

The week was a cascade of dinners and afterparties: On Tuesday, the Freundeskreis für Moderne Kunst celebrated Michael Krebber and R. H. Quaytman with the Wolfgang Hahn Prize. The dinner took place at Flora, a late-nineteenth-century building in the botanical garden. On Wednesday I attended a gallery dinner hosted by David Zwirner, Gisela Capitain, and Daniel Buchholz at Alter Wartesaal right next to Cologne’s central station. Zwirner saluted the crowd of artists, collectors, and curators with a toast to Art Cologne, which he said is improving steadily. Another toast followed, by painter Georg Polke, son of Sigmar, whose impressive traveling retrospective is currently at the Ludwig Museum. After, the Ludwig’s Leonie Radine took me to the Schmitz, where artists Gerd and Uwe Tobias were celebrating their birthday in the basement. CFA’s Bruno Brunet rocked the dance floor to “Carbonara,” an early-1980s anthem by the German band Spliff. It was a quite different tune on Thursday night, when the art crowd celebrated the birthday of Cologne DJ-hero Tobias Thomas in the basement of Hallmackenreuther. Yes it’s true: Monika Sprüth, Andreas Gursky, and Johann König love techno, Cologne style.

On Saturday I took the train to Düsseldorf to see exhibitions at the Kunstverein (Anna Franceschini) and the Kunsthalle (Ian Cheng, Wu Tsang, Jordan Wolfson). Since Susanne Pfeffer introduced “post-Internet” to institutional audiences with her Material Show at Kassel’s Fridericianum a few years ago, “Post” is very hip again. Even ironic references to good old poststructuralism are cool: “If you want to teach me French philosophy / I’ll sleep with you,” artist and Berlin It Boy Dan Bodan crooned into the mic at Düsseldorf artist hangout Salon des Amateurs. At the bar I bumped into the smart young dealer Max Mayer. He’s a regular at the Salon. “They call it the ‘Post-Kraut Hacienda’ on TripAdvisor,” Mayer said, handing me a bottle of beer. Silently, we listened to Bodan’s sad and beautiful songs floating through the night like futurist sound tracks for Edward Hopper paintings.