Tag: Eduard

Eduard Messerschmitt Bf 109G-4/R6 of Uffz. Peter Düttmann in 1/72 Scale

Peter Düttmann was one of the later arrivals to JG 52, joining the Group in May of 1943 just a few weeks before his twentieth birthday. He quickly found his footing and was credited with his first victory, a Polikarpov Po-2 biplane, on 21MAY43. He was an aggressive pilot who scored steadily, but was himself shot down several times, including three times in one day on 23JAN44. His best day was on 07MAY44 when he was credited with nine aerial victories during two sorties.

Düttmann survived the war and was credited with a total of 152 victories. Although he himself was shot down several times, he always managed to evade capture and walk back to German lines. Peter Düttmann survived the war and passed away in January 2001.

Messerschmitt Bf 109G-4/R6 of Uffz. Peter Düttmann, 5./JG 52, Russia, July 1943

Eduard Messerschmitt Bf 109F-4 of Oberleutnant Viktor Bauer in 1/72 Scale

Viktor Bauer opened his account on 15MAY40 with a victory over an RAF Hurricane. He was to score a total of four victories in the West before JG 3 was withdrawn and re-equipped with the Bf 109F-2 in preparation for Operation Barbarossa.

Bauer scored heavily against the Russians, downing 15 Soviet aircraft during the first month of the war in the East, including 5 SB-2 bombers on 26JUN41. On 23JUL41 his Messerschmitt was hit by defensive fire from a DB-3 bomber, Bauer attempted a crash landing but was severely injured. He did not return to combat until February 1942. He continued to score regularly until 10AUG42, when his Messerschmitt was again hit by defensive fire, wounding him again. After a lengthy convalescence, he was placed in command of a series of training units in France. While he was promoted regularly, eventually reaching the rank of Oberst (Colonel), he did not return to combat. He was credited with 106 victories during the war, and passed away in December 1969.

The model depicts the Bf 109F-4 of Oberleutnant Viktor Bauer, 9./JG 3, at Shchigry USSR, June 1942.

Eduard Messerschmitt Bf 109G-6/R6 of Leutnant Manfred Dieterle in 1/72 Scale

Manfred Dieterle was a “Wilde Sau” (wild boar) pilot of JG 300. Wilde Sau was a Luftwaffe tactic using single-seat fighter aircraft to intercept Royal Air Force bombers at night. In practice, the need for defensive fighters was so dire that they also flew daytime interceptions against American bombers. Dieterle was credited with downing five RAF bombers at night, 3 American bombers by day, as well as 4 Herrauschuss, or separating a bomber from formation.

Messerschmitt Bf 109G-6/R6 of Leutnant Manfred Dieterle, 3./JG 300, Bonn-Hangelar, Germany March 1944

Eduard Messerschmitt Bf 109G-6/R6 of Hauptman Anton Hackl in 1/72 Scale

Anton Hackl flew throughout the war, his final tally was 192 confirmed victories. He was one of the seeming rare Experten who was able to successfully transition from the East to the West, claiming 105 victories against the Soviets and another 93 against the Western Allies. He claimed 34 four-engined bombers, making him the Jagdwaffe’s most successful pilot against the “heavies”. He was himself shot down eight times and wounded four. He survived the war.

Messerschmitt Bf 109G-6/R6 of Hauptman Anton Hackl, III./JG 11, Germany, January 1944

Bf 109G Comparison Build – Hasegawa, Fine Molds, Tamiya, Eduard Kits – Part III

SUMMARY

The Hasegawa kit is now 30 years old and is beginning to show its age. Not that it was a bad kit for its time but it has been clearly surpassed by the newer tools. Like most Hasegawa kits the deficiencies are most apparent in the cockpit area and the wheelwells, both of which are minimalist and lack any detail. The outlets on the coolers on the undersides have been simplified and are best cut out and replaced. The nose is slightly undersized, as are the fuselage bulges for the gun breeches. On the plus side fit is good and the kit goes together without any issues. If you are not too picky this kit can make for a quick “pallet cleanser” or a practice kit for a beginning modeler, but it won’t stand up to scrutiny without some extra work.

The Fine Molds kit has been my Messerschmitt of choice for almost two decades now, and there are still a few lurking in the stash. With the exception of the later tall-tail variants just about all the major versions from the F-series on are provided for. Cockpit detail is shallow and most modelers will want to make some enhancements here as this will be visible even on closed canopy builds, thanks to the flat panels on the canopy. The canopy is molded as a single piece, so if you want to pose it open, get out the razor saw. You’ll also need the saw to drop the slats and flaps, this is time-consuming and is always a tedious part of the build for me. Build ‘em if you’ve got ‘em, but not the kit to get now if you’re buying new.

The Tamiya G-6 is an excellent kit and a joy to build, it is everything you’d expect a kit from Tamiya to be. Cockpit detail is excellent right out of the box and the canopy can be posed open to show it all off. The landing gear is well detailed and the engineering ensures proper alignment, the only issue with this is the gear must be installed during the major construction which risks breakage. I’m not put off by this but others might be. Looking at the sprues Tamiya does not appear to be planning any other versions, so the G-6 is all we’re likely to get from them. There are not a lot of options there either. There is a drop tank but none of the fairly common R6 wing gun packs, the packs on this build are spares from Eduard kits. My biggest disappointment with this kit is the need to cut out the slats and flaps, a rather surprising omission from an otherwise excellent effort.

The Eduard kits are the most detailed Messerschmitts in the scale and represent the best value – my Dual Combo pack was less than $30 from Hannants. The decal sheet provides fourteen options with stencils which is almost worth the price alone. Also included are canopy masks and PE frets. The kit itself has parts for just about any option you’d want as well as spares for the tiniest of the fiddly bits – a nice touch. There will be plenty of parts left over for the spares box! Surface textures are outstanding and feature finely engraved rivets. The biggest innovation is the kit comes with separate slats and flaps for the first time, no more cutting. You will have to pay close attention to the instructions to get the most out of this build, many of the parts options are similar and PE is always tricky to work with, but the result is a gem of a model. You could make the argument the Eduard kit is over-engineered, but the true Messerschmitt aficionado will appreciate the attention to detail and the plethora of options provided in the box. This is a more complicated build than the Tamiya kit, but the Eduard kits are the best detailed and the best value for the money.

Part I here: https://inchhighguy.wordpress.com/2024/04/19/bf-109g-comparison-build-hasegawa-fine-molds-tamiya-eduard-kits-part-i/

Bf 109G Comparison Build – Hasegawa, Fine Molds, Tamiya, Eduard Kits – Part II

Part III here: https://inchhighguy.wordpress.com/2024/05/03/bf-109g-comparison-build-hasegawa-fine-molds-tamiya-eduard-kits-part-iii/

Bf 109G Comparison Build – Hasegawa, Fine Molds, Tamiya, Eduard Kits – Part I

Part II here: https://inchhighguy.wordpress.com/2024/04/26/bf-109g-comparison-build-hasegawa-fine-molds-tamiya-eduard-kits-part-ii/

Eduard Messerschmitt Bf 109F-4 of Unteroffizier Hans Döbrich in 1/72 Scale

Hans Döbrich spent his entire combat career flying with JG 5 “Eismeer” over the northernmost sector of the Eastern Front. He was officially credited with 65 victories over Soviet aircraft, and claimed another 19 which were unconfirmed. He himself was shot down on three occasions, the last time suffering wounds which ended his flying days. Döbrich survived the war.

Messerschmitt Bf 109F-4 of Hans Döbrich, 6./JG 5, based at Petsamo Finland in September 1942.

Construction posts here: https://inchhighguy.wordpress.com/2023/07/27/messerschmitt-bf-109f-comparison-build-in-1-72-scale-eduard-az-models-and-fine-molds-kits-part-i/

Eduard Messerschmitt Bf 109F-2 of Leutnant Jürgen Harder in 1/72 Scale

Jürgen Harder was one of three brothers who served in the German military in WWII. Harro was also a fighter pilot and was shot down and killed by a Spitfire on 12AUG40; Rolf served in the artillery and was killed in APR43. The “Harro” inscription on this aircraft is in remembrance of his brother, a practice not uncommon in the German military.

Harder was credited with his first victory on the opening day of Barbarossa, a MiG-1. He was able to bring his total to 10 before the III Gruppe was transferred to the Mediterranean Theater in November 1942. There Harder continued to score steadily against the Western Allies. In February 1944 he was promoted to Gruppenkommandeur of I./JG 53. He was credited with two B-24 Liberators on 25APR44, one by ramming, which brought his score to 50.

He was promoted to Geschwaderkommodore of JG 11 in January 1945, facing the Soviet onslaught in the defense of Berlin. On 17FEB45 his wingman observed Harder’s Messerschmitt suddenly dive into the ground, killing him instantly. An investigation determined he had been asphyxiated by fumes from a faulty engine. Harder was credited with 64 confirmed victories and was awarded the Oak Leaves to the Knight’s Cross.

Messerschmitt Bf 109F-2 of Jürgen Harder, Stab III/JG 53, Sobolewo Germany, June 1941.

Eduard Bf 109F-4 photographs here: https://inchhighguy.wordpress.com/2023/08/10/eduard-messerschmitt-bf-109f-4-of-unteroffizier-hans-dobrich-in-1-72-scale/

Messerschmitt Bf 109F Comparison Build in 1/72 Scale – Eduard, AZ Models, and Fine Molds Kits Part IV

SUMMARY

Fine Molds

I have built over seventy of the Fine Molds Messerschmitts over the years, often in batches of a dozen or more so this kit holds no surprises for me. The cowling panels need a couple (but only a couple!) swipes of the sanding pad on the ends for a perfect fit, and you must pay attention to get the boattail aligned properly. On the deficit side the cockpit sidewall detail is very shallow and should be built up even on a closed canopy build. The flat panels of the canopy are free of distortion and so will still allow much of the interior to be seen. The canopy itself is molded as a single piece, so modelers wanting to display an open canopy will have to either replace the part or get out the razor saw. While the razor saw is out you’ll also want to cut out the slats and flaps, as Messerschmitts are only very rarely seen on the ground without them dropped. Fine Molds provide parts for all the major versions from the F-series through the K, with the odd exception of the tall-tail versions of the G-6 and G-14. This is a good, solid kit which builds up well.

AZ Model

It became obvious during construction that many of the parts in the AZ kit were “inspired” (to be generous) by the Fine Molds kit. With both on the bench simultaneously, it was easy to see where some panel lines had been added or removed from the FM parts, in some cases there were “ghost” images in the parts where the molds had still picked up the modifications. Therefore, the best comparison for the AZ kits is to the Fine Molds kits which inspired them. On the plus side the cockpit detail is better on the AZ kit, especially on the sidewalls where the detail is much deeper. The AZ kit still needs the slats and flaps cut loose so they can be posed naturally, with the exception of the lower radiator flap sections which are molded separately. There are also a few more parts for the spares box. On the down side, the nose section is noticeably undersized and there is just not a good way for the modeler to correct this. The contour of the upper section also looks off, especially right behind the spinner and at the “shoulders” of the cowl. Fit is not quite as good as the FM kit but still not bad. AZ has boxed the entire range of Messerschmitt sub-types, and there are newer boxings touting re-tooled fuselage parts so perhaps the issues with the nose have been corrected if you get the right boxing.

Eduard

The Eduard Messerschmitt is the new kid on the block, and the new release comes with lots of bells and whistles in the form of two PE frets, Kabuki tape masks, and a generous (and interesting) decal sheet. Surprisingly, the price point for all this was still about the same as what I paid for the AZ and Fine Molds kits on a model-for-model basis.

The Eduard kit raises the bar across the board. The surface detail is quite impressive and is some of the finest I have ever seen on any kit in any scale. The parts fit well and did not require filler, however the horizontal tail piece will need some trimming to slot together. The fit of the cowl guns and their troughs is fiddly so take your time there. The cockpit looks great without anything additional being needed, and the canopy can be posed open to show it all off. Eduard molds all the smaller bits for the entire range of Messerschmitts on a single sprue so there are loads of parts for the spares box to update other kits. They have also provided duplicates for the worst of the bustoffables such as aileron mass balances, radio masts, and gun barrels, so the modeler is saved anxiety when a small but necessary part offers itself as a sacrifice to the carpet monster. But the biggest advance is all the slats and flaps are molded separately, so no more need to cut these loose to get a Messerschmitt which looks right on the ground. In addition, the ailerons and rudder are also separate pieces and can be deflected if one chooses. This is the new king of 1/72 scale Messerschmitt kits, I am anxiously awaiting the release of the rest of the series!

More finished photographs here: https://inchhighguy.wordpress.com/2023/08/08/eduard-messerschmitt-bf-109f-2-of-leutnant-jurgen-harder-in-1-72-scale/