Gentlemen,

Happy to report that I have just conducted a purchase of my 1st lot of Luftwaffe related autographs. In total, there are 13 items in which I have a signed pictures of Hajo Herrmann, Gunther Rall and Peter Duttmann. I have a wonderful print signed by the the artist, Len Ortega and signed by Gerd Thyben. Lastly, there are other autographs by Walter Wolfrum, Herbert Wehnelt, Ernst Sheufele, Helmut Ruffler, Heinze Lange, Edu Neumann, Wolfgang Falck and Georg Griener. I can't wait to have these all professionally framed.

Regards,

Joel

Edited July 25, 2008 by buellmeister

Paul,

thank you for your kind words. I'm further investigating as we speak on those who are still with us. Gunter Rall is still with us and I know that Gerd Thyben passed away in 2006.

Nesredep,

Thank you my friend...I got lucky being the right bidder on this ensemble. Makes me want to collect more...

Regards,

Joel

Edited July 26, 2008 by buellmeister

Gentlemen,

Thank you as well. I seem to have caught the Luftwaffe bug... Hmmmm, now I need a couple of daggers to display with them..

Regards,

Joel

I am... channeling... collar tabs...

Something is coming through....

it's a word, no a name....

not a name...

a place...

Lowwwwwwwwelllllllllll.

One matching tab per photo, I think. :catjava:

When I got into collecting aviation prints, Gunther Rall was one of the first aces that I met. Since then I've met quite a few: Adolf Galland, Walter Krupinski, Hans-Ekkehard Bob, Heinz Lange, Hajo Herrmann, Viktor Petermann, Drewes, Zorner, Gunther Bahr, Karl Johanssen, Peter Spoden, and many more. Great guys and great stories.

Bob

A great set and a wonderful print, Joel. You were very fortunate to be able to get all that in one shot!

--Kevin

Guys,

Many Thanks once again!

Rick,

I do believe your right on needing Luftwaffe Collar Tabs. I have never owned a collar tab from any branch and that certainly they would be a wonderful addition to the framing and future displys. Amongst Pilot's Badges, Bomber Clasps, Visor Caps, Flight Suits and the list goes on....

Bob,

What an experience that must have been to meet those Luftwaffe Greats!

Edited July 27, 2008 by buellmeister

Peter Spoden will be here in the States next week so I hope to go up and meet with him again. He has written his own book...

http://www.nachtjaegerspoden.de/index.html

Check out his website.

Bob

I couldn't find any details of his U.S. trip on the site. Do you know where/when he will visit?

He is coming over to West Virginia for a family reunion... I think his two sisters live here in the U.S. Then he's going to Washington, D.C. He'll be here the first part of August but I don't have exact dates yet. I wouldn't expect it to be on his website since it is a personal trip.

Bob