I always say I’ve never kept a diary. Never needed to. Music obsessives (and I’m sure I’m not alone) don’t. We can put on a record and instantly be transported back to the bygone age.

So it is I can confidently tell you that in the spring of 1991, the 15-year-old me was sitting in his grandad’s living room watching The Chart Show. It was the turn of the Rock Chart that week and I heard a song that was one of the ones that shaped my life. The Almighty’s “Free N Easy” began a love affair with the band that endures to this day (although my favourite song of theirs is “Jonestown Mind” which came out a few years later).

The bare facts are that former New Model Army guitarist Ricky Warwick formed The Almighty with Andy ‘Tantrum’ McCafferty and Warwick’s former school friends, drummer Stump Monroe and bass guitarist Floyd London.

The real truth is way more important. Their first album “Blood, Fire And Love” spawned the single “Wild And Wonderful” (which got that prick Bruno Brookes suspended on Radio One when he played the unedited version) and was basically the “biker” album. Greasy, obsessed with groove and the sound of young kids enjoying their first taste of rock n roll excess, “Full Force Lovin’ Machine” rather underlines that, but look deeper and there are hints of other stuff. The strings on the title track, the craft in “Gifthorse” and if “Lay Down The Law” even more than any other, owes a debt to Motorhead, then shouldn’t all rock n roll?

But I found all of this out after saving my pocket money to buy “Soul Destruction”. That was my entry point to the band, and it remains probably one of the top ten albums I’d take to that mythical desert island with me.

And here’s where I normally say, “I haven’t listened to it for 20 years and it’s been fun listening to it again this week” but on this occasion that’s not true. I listened to its best tracks a lot. And there are lots of them.

If the debut is youth and vigour, the second is obsessed with sex and religion. “Crucify” thunders its way through, “Love Religion” is still a fists in the air moment, and “Bandaged Knees” is one of the finest ballads ever made (although not even the best on this album, we’ll get to that) “is this here the season to enjoy, or the season to inject?” Sings Warwick, and perhaps gives a signpost to his solo career.

Working with producer Andy Taylor (Duran Duran) on these works perfectly, and “Devils Toy” – one of the singles – is proof.

“….Destruction” is that perfect mix of uncompromising and accessible. The harmonica-drenched “Hell To Pay” goes to blues, and at one point Warwick sings: “I don’t give two fucks what you say”. At another he suggests that he’s “screaming at the asphalt to take me to bed” and yet, it’s as catchy as any hard rock anthem.

“Loaded” ends the whole thing sort of by bringing us full circle. The Hells Angels could (and probably have) had this as walk-on music.

But….well….remember the diary thing? Well in the Autumn of 99, the world’s longest unrequited love affair that had gone on entirely in my head for three years came to an end when I told her I loved her in front of her boyfriend at someone else’s wedding (none of this is made up). When I skulked out of the place in embarrassment, and text my mate starting with the words “Ummm I think I’ve done something silly”, I pressed play on the CD that was in my car. It was (and again, I swear this isn’t made up) “Soul Destruction” and the song that came on was “Little Lost Sometimes”. There’s a line before the chorus: “so many miles between us and so many endless roads” and well…..this one is the finest ballad ever made, and it’s still her song.

Never re-released on vinyl before, these stand as arguably their best albums (although I’d make a case for “Crank” their fourth album – it was certainly my entry point into punk rock).

I’m writing this a few days before this lineup makes their (perhaps last-ever) return to the stage. In Manchester next week, I’ll be there, watching an Almighty lineup of any description play live for the first time in almost 16 years.

When I do, I’ll be watching – along with Iron Maiden and The Wildhearts- my favourite band.

And I might get nostalgic.

Rating: guess