Jamal Crawford scored 18 points, including two crucial 3-pointers in the fourth quarter, and the Atlanta Hawks beat the Boston Celtics for the second time this season, 93-85 last night.

Trailing 45-39 at the half, the Hawks dominated the third quarter and pushed their lead as high as 15 points. Boston fought back and pulled within two in the final period, but Crawford stymied the visiting team's comeback.

Atlanta's valuable sixth man converted a four-point play after being knocked into the seats on a 3-pointer from the corner. But his biggest shot was an even longer jumper from behind the arc that sealed it with 52.5 seconds left.

All five Atlanta starters scored in double figures, including Mike Bibby with 17.

Paul Pierce scored 21 to lead the Celtics.

Crawford's four-point play was the 21st of his career, which trails only Reggie Miller's 24 on the NBA career list. He scrambled after a loose ball in the corner and threw up what looked like a desperation shot with plenty of time on the shot clock. Despite getting slammed by Kendrick Perkins, which sent Crawford sprawling into the first row, the ball hit nothing but net.

The slender guard slapped hands with at least a half-dozen fans, then sank the free throw that made it 78-67 with about 7 minutes to go.

But the Celtics weren't done, ripping off a 9-0 run to pull to 78-76 on Pierce's lay-in off a turnover with 5:27 remaining.

The Hawks called timeout and got themselves together. Bibby hit an open 3 from the top of the key, Josh Smith hit another long jumper from just inside the arc, and Al Horford sank a hook shot over Perkins. Then, with the clock running down, Atlanta took care of the dirty work to finish off the Celtics.

Smith and Horford both hustled for offensive rebounds, Horford got back to steal a breakaway pass, and Crawford delivered the decisive blow - his 3 with just under a minute to go that pushed Atlanta to a 91-82 lead. He skipped back toward the bench and leaped up against Smith to celebrate.

Atlanta won its second straight after season-worst four-game losing streak. The Hawks also made it two in a row over the Celtics, following a 97-86 win at Boston on Nov. 13.

Boston played its fourth straight game without star forward Kevin Garnett, who sat out because of a hyper-extended right knee. The Celtics also were missing backup guard Tony Allen, who stayed at the hotel battling flulike symptoms.

The Hawks dominated the third quarter, erasing Boston's 45-39 halftime lead and then some. Atlanta shot 61 percent (11 of 18) in the period, held the Celtics to 5-of-22 shooting (23 percent) and pushed its lead as high as 68-53 on the high-flying Smith's lay-in of an alley-oop pass from Crawford.

But Boston kept it from being a blowout, scoring the final seven points to close to 68-60 going to the fourth. Pierce sparked the run with a 3-pointer.

Perkins and Ray Allen added 15 points apiece for the Celtics.