Jamal Crawford isn’t a free agent, so his avenue to join the Warriors is not currently clear. But there’s a path formulating behind the scenes that may lead him back to the Bay Area.

The Clippers, Nuggets and Hawks are currently engaged in three-team trade talks, according to multiple reports, that includes the sign-and-trade of Danilo Gallinari to Los Angeles, while Atlanta would scoop up a first round pick and take back the contract of Crawford.

The Hawks, in a complete rebuild, would have no need for one year of Crawford at a huge price, while Crawford, at age 37, prefers to play on a contender.

So it’s possible the two work out a buyout agreement, which would unhook Crawford back onto the market, where the former Warrior — he played 54 games for Golden State back in the 2008-09 season — could link back up with the newer, upgraded model of this Bay Area franchise.

Crawford showed interest last offseason when he was a free agent on July 1. Apparently the two sides had talks. But the Clippers came calling with a big payday — three years, $42 million — and Crawford returned.

But there’s reason to believe, if he gets the choice, this time Crawford would prefer a shot at his first NBA title with the Warriors, David West style. He’s friends with several players on the team, including Kevin Durant, through a bit of a Seattle connection.

But there’s a chance Crawford never gets that chance. He has two years and nearly $29 million left on his current deal. Only $3 million is guaranteed on the second year. So if the Hawks were to buy him out this summer, they’d owe him about $17.2 million.

USA Today’s Sam Amick reported that Atlanta, now run by former Warriors executive Travis Schlenk, would need Crawford to give a chunk of that $17.2 million back in order to work out an agreement. And now ESPN’s Chris Haynes is reporting that teams like the Cavaliers and Spurs have reached out to Atlanta about a possible trade, which the Warriors, at his current price, would have no interest.

So there are many hoops to jump through and road bumps to get past. But keep your eye on Crawford and, if the situation is right, don’t be surprised if he lands in Oakland.