Eldar Ryazanov, whose rueful satires puncturing the absurdities of everyday life in the Soviet Union and the Russia of the post-Gorbachev era made him one of Russia’s most popular film directors and screenwriters, died on Monday in Moscow. He was 88.

His death was announced by the Russian filmmakers’ union Kinosoyuz.

While still in his 20s, Mr. Ryazanov became an instant sensation with his first feature film, the musical comedy “Carnival Night.” Released in the Soviet Union in 1956, it was a harbinger of the post-Stalin thaw and the emergence of a new postwar generation. It depicted the struggle of Communist Youth League members trying to organize a fun-filled New Year’s Eve party at a local cultural center, opposed by an overbearing bureaucrat determined to make it an educational event.

For the next 30 years, Mr. Ryazanov perfected a genre he called “sad comedy,” exposing the foibles of party officials and ordinary citizens alike, wielding the scalpel deftly enough to remain in the government’s good graces. He was a master of every comedic shade, the newspaper Novaya Gazeta wrote in an appreciation, “from lyric to satiric, from slapstick to tragicomic fantasy.”

Only one of his films, “A Man From Nowhere,” was banned outright. Made in 1961, it followed the adventures of a Stone Age man who visits the Soviet Union and comments, a little too acerbically, on the manners and customs he observes.

Mr. Ryazanov’s comedy “Irony of Fate,” about a Moscow doctor who goes on a bender, winds up in Leningrad and does not realize his mistake — the apartment buildings and their interiors are all clones of one another — became a national institution after being broadcast on television in 1975. Every year thereafter, it was shown on New Year’s Eve and wove its way into the fabric of Russian life.

“It is Russia’s ‘A Christmas Carol,’ ‘Miracle on 34th Street’ and ‘It’s a Wonderful Life’ rolled into one,” The Washington Post wrote in 1998. Affection for the movie helped make the 2007 sequel, “The Irony of Fate 2,” directed by Timur Bekmambetov, the highest-grossing film in Russian history.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.