Thanks to his 17 year-and-counting union with wife Keely Shaye Smith, Irish actor Pierce Brosnan is part of an extremely elite Hollywood club: marriages that last.

Since meeting at a beach party in Mexico on April 8, 1994, the duo have been virtually inseparable and are renowned for their unflinching adoration of one another and loved-up public displays of affection.

Smith and Brosnan married at Ballintubber Abbey in County Mayo, Ireland, on August 4, 2001. Their wedding was covered by HELLO! Magazine and featured a lavish fireworks display, seven-tier cake and an ornate ice sculpture of Rodin’s ‘The Kiss’.

Do Pierce Brosnan and Keely Shaye Smith have any kids?

They share two sons, Dylan Thomas Brosnan (born 1997) and Paris Beckett Brosnan (born 2001).

Before meeting Keely, Brosnan was married twice to Australian actress Cassandra Harris who tragically passed away from ovarian cancer in 1991, aged just 43.

They had one son together, Sean (born 1980), while Brosnan also adopted Cassandra’s two children Charlotte and Chris after their biological father passed away in 1986.

In a heartbreaking turn in 2013, Brosnan’s adopted daughter Charlotte lost her life to ovarian cancer, the same illness that caused her mother’s death.

How old is Keely Shaye Smith?

Smith was born in Vallejo, California on September 25, 1963 making her 55 years old.

Interesting facts about Pierce Brosnan’s wife

11. She got her start on MTV

A young Smith appeared in the 1986 MTV music video’ Stuck With You’ by Huey Lewis, a song which spent three weeks at number one on Billboard’s Hot 100.

10. Her wedding dress MAY have inspired Kate Middleton’s

Ok, we have no concrete proof of this statement, but a picture speaks a thousand words…

9. She is an award-winning environmental activist

During the height of her journalistic career, Keely Shaye Smith acted as an environmental correspondence for ABC’s The Home Show, a role which earned her two Genesis Awards and a Special Achievement Award at the 1991 Environmental Film Festival.

She has also been honoured for her commitment to sustainability and environmental awareness by Women in Film, Earth Communications Office, Malibu Times, Organic Style Magazine and Heal the Bay.

Smith also offered expert advice as a gardening consultant on Good Morning America.

8. She worked as a primetime TV presenter

Smith served on NBC’s primetime hit show Unsolved Mysteries from 1994 until 1997.

7. Pierce Brosnan describes her as his ‘North Star’

Brosnan has credited wife Keely for helping him to heal after the death of his first wife.

He has often described her as his North Star, a guiding force who is always looking out for his best interests and happiness.

Brosnan regularly refers to his wife as ‘My Girl’ on Instagram, and frequently shares heartwarming throwback pictures of the pair from the early days of their relationship.

6. She’s a Libra

Smith was born on September 25, 1963 making her a Libra in the zodiac.

According to The Horoscope, Smith’s birth date makes her confident, social and possessive of a deep understanding of empathy and emotion.

5. Brosnan and Smith have some seriously good genetics

Smith is mother to Dylan and Paris Brosnan, both of whom are successful models lighting up catwalks around the world.

4. She also starred on the silver screen

In addition to her modelling, presenting and activism, Smith starred in Norman’s Corner (1987), The Opponent (1988) and General Hospital (1989).

In 2018, she tried her hand at producing and directing the environmental documentary Poisoning Paradise, a film focusing on the threat faced by Hawaii from increasing pollution.

3. The couple are known for their charitable work

Smith and Brosnan gave HELLO! access to their wedding reception for the equivalent of $735,000 AUD, donating the entire fee to school building projects in Tibet.

The loving pair are also involved with fundraising and awareness initiatives for causes including cancer, AIDS, animal advocacy and poverty.

2. She has been scrutinised for her weight gain

Smith worked as a glamour model before meeting Brosnan, and for many years was known for her envy-inducing, svelte physique which she flaunted on red carpets around the world.

Six months after welcoming their second son, Paris, Smith showcased her jaw-dropping post-baby bod in her form fitting wedding dress.

But in recent years, she exhibited dramatic weight gain which prompted many gossip columnists and pop culture fans to speculate as to the cause.

Smith has been the target of vile trolls, some of whom have compared her to the rotund Bond villain Goldfinger.

Keely reportedly experimented with a number of fad diets to help her lose weight, including the controversial Atkins and South Beach regimes.

1. She reportedly lost 48 kilos

After years of vicious taunting and swirling rumours about her weight gain, Smith reportedly overhauled her diet and lifestyle which resulted in a triumphant weight loss of almost 48 kilos (roughly 100 pounds).

After stepping out on the red carpet at the premiere of Brosnan’s Mamma Mia 2 in July 2018, the media went wild over Smith’s slimmed down appearance.