Pierce Brosnan has starred alongside some of Hollywood's best-loved actresses. However, for the past 20 years, there has only been one leading lady in his life. Pierce's wife Keely Shaye Smith is an American author, actress, and journalist with immense experience in modelling, acting, and TV reporting. She is among the few Hollywood celebrities who have managed to keep away from scandals that make most fans to be interested in reading about Brosnan's wife.

Keely Shaye Smith is currently a correspondent for ABC's The Home Show. She started acting in minor roles in the 1980s and made an appearance on Norman's Corner in 1987 and The Opponent in 1988.

Smith has been married for twenty years to her husband Pierce Brosnan with whom they have directed a documentary, Poisoning Paradise, in 2017. Apart from being a famous actress, Keely is a mother of five-two children with Pierce and three boys from Pierce's first marriage.

Keely Shaye Smith's profile summary

Full name: Keely Shaye Smith

Gender: Female

Age: 59 years (as of 2022)

Date of birth: September 25, 1963

Star sign: Libra

Nationality: American

Ethnicity: White

Weight: 154.3 pounds

Height: 5 feet 8 inches

Hair colour: Dark brown

Eye colour: Dark brown

Residence: California, United States

Occupation: Journalist/ director

Net worth: $100 million

Marital status: Married

Spouse: Pierce Brosnan

Children: Dylan Brosnan, Paris Brosnan, Charlotte, Sean, and Christopher Brosnan

Instagram: Keely Shaye Brosnan

Keely Shaye Smith's bio

Keely Shaye Smith was born on September 25, 1963, in Vallejo, California. In 1990, she acted as Valerie Freeman in the drama series, General Hospital. She also worked for ABC's The Home Show as a correspondent for almost six years.

From 1994 to 1997, she was working as a correspondent on NBC's primetime show Unsolved Mysteries and then served as an entertainment correspondent for CBS's show Entertainment Tonight.

Apart from her roles in movies, she has a passion for the environment and she has dedicated a part of her life towards saving endangered species. Keely has worked with different organizations together with the Natural Resources Defense Council and the International Fund for Animal Welfare to stop a proposed project of a salt factory from being built in Laguna San Ignacio, Mexico.

In 1994, she met Pierce Brosnan and in August 2001, the two got married. Keely has two sons with Pierce, Dylan Thomas, and Paris Becket Brosnan. She is also the stepmother of Brosnan's sons Charlotte, Sean, and Christopher Brosnan from his first marriage.

Keely Shaye currently lives with her husband and children in Malibu, California. She is still involved in working as a journalist and TV personality.

What happened to Keely Shaye Smith?

The mother of two started to gain weight after the birth of her two kids. Despite being normal for a woman to gain weight after childbirth, Keely's situation escalated to obesity.

Besides obesity, Keely Shaye's health issues began due to other unspecified reasons. For instance, she once shared details of having a problem with her thyroid glands although she didn't talk much about it. It was also reported that the journalist's health got worse in 2011 after she had food at a restaurant, forcing her to sue the management.

Also, based on Keely's photographs, it is believed that she gained around 70 pounds after getting married and having children. Due to her new weight, her fans started to speculate that her husband, Pierce, would leave her. However, that was not the case. The couple is still going strong and they celebrated 20 years of being together recently.

Keely Shaye Smith's weight loss surgery

When the media covered Keely Shaye Smith's weight loss and body transformation, many critics speculated that she had undergone liposuction surgery to shed some weight fast.

She, however, shut down the rumours saying they were false. Instead, she preferred the natural way of losing weight which lead her to embark on healthy eating habits and working out sessions.

What dress size is Keely Shaye Smith's?

Keely has a fantastic fashion sense, that the public has been interested in for the longest time. The mother of two has, however, never revealed her dress size. Despite Keely Shaye Smith's weight changes, she has always been celebrated for her fashion sense and style.

Keely Shaye Smith's net worth

Keely Shaye Smith has accumulated immense wealth from her career and assets. Through her different sources of income, Keely has been able to accumulate wealth that is estimated to be worth $100 million combined with her husband's wealth.

Keely Shaye Smith's quick facts

What nationality is Keely Shaye Smith? She is a white American.

Where was Keely Shaye Smith born? The actress was born on September 25, 1963, in Vallejo, California.

How old is Keely Shaye Smith? She is 58 years old.

How many kids does Keely Smith have? Keely has two sons with her husband, Pierce. She is also a stepmother to three boys from Pierce's first marriage.

What is Keely's current weight? Her current weight is 70 kgs or 154.3 pounds.

How did Keely Shaye gain weight? Keely started gaining weight after the birth of her first child.

What disease does Keely Shaye Smith have? She has suffered from obesity since she delivered her firstborn child.

Throughout her career, Keely Shaye Smith has achieved so much other than being a famous actress, a wife and a mother. Despite experiencing body changes in the course of her motherhood journey, she has remained focused on her taste of fashion and natural ways of managing weight. Presently, she has divided her attention to her family and to fighting for the rights of the endangered species.

Tuko.co.ke published an article about Laurel Coppock, her husband, family, her commercial and net worth. Coppock is an American actress who started her acting career in 2007. Her famous movies include Modern Family, Broke Girls and Workaholics. In addition, Coppock is renowned for her role in the Toyota commercial.

Coppock is among the famous female stars in Hollywood. Even at 51 years old, she still holds the crucial role of some top TV shows ever produced. Discipline and persistence have helped her to achieve her goals throughout her career.

Source: TUKO.co.ke