BRITANNIA INDUSTRIES: MAINTAINING A MARKET LEAD1

On August 13, 2014, Nusli Wadia, chairman of the Wadia Group, informed stakeholders at the company’s 95th annual shareholders’

meeting that the difference between his company-owned Bangalore based food products corporation, Britannia Industries Limited

(Britannia), and Parle Products (Parle), the Mumbai-based private limited company, was only 3 per cent. Wadia made it known that he

intended to bridge that gap within three years.2 However, by April 2015, less than one year later, Britannia, India’s most recognized

biscuit3 brand, had overtaken Parle, owner of India’s famous biscuit brand Parle-G, with a market share of 28 per cent in terms of value.4

Wadia’s decision to elevate Varun Berry to managing director of the company in May 2013 had surprised many analysts. His

instructions to Berry were precise: Grow faster than the market, and grow Britannia’s market share and profitability by making the

operations more efficient.5 The market had become tougher and the competition stiffer. Parle, ITC Sunfeast (ITC Limited’s biscuit

brand), and many other local, Indian state-based companies like Priyagold, Bisk Farm, and Anmol were pushing their products and

encroaching upon Britannia’s market space.6 It was important for Britannia to further consolidate its leadership position without losing

market share. Increasing the price alone was not an option in this highly competitive market. In response, ITC Limited (ITC) followed

aggressive strategies and launched new biscuit products with attractive packaging and higher price points, such as Sunfeast Dark F antasy

biscuits. Britannia’s closest competitor, Parle, introduced Hide & Seek Fab and Golden Arcs biscuits, adding to its repertoire of the

popular and fast-moving Parle-G and Hide & Seek.

Britannia had created a market for healthy biscuits through its product NutriChoice, but it lagged behind its competitors in the cream

biscuit category.7 The company needed to come up with a strategy to maintain and defend its leadership position. What could Britannia

do to remain India’s number-one biscuit maker? How could it stay ahead of its rivals in the area of prod uct innovation? In a market

swamped with near-identical product packaging, what strategy could Britannia adopt to avoid an identity

BRITANNIA

The Wadia Group-owned Britannia was over 123 years old.8 As a major force in India’s food industry, Britannia saw a change of the

guard in April 2014 when Berry replaced Vinita Bali as the managing director.9 The company exported a variety of brands to more than

75 countries, with Middle Eastern countries occupying the largest share.10 Britannia’s market share for 2014 was 35. 33 per cent by

value.11

Britannia ended the financial year 2014/15 with a top line of ₹77.05 billion and a bottom line of ₹6.88 billion (see Exhibit 1).12

History

Britannia’s journey began circa 1892, when a nondescript Kolkata baker made the first batch of biscuits for officers of the British Raj

and their families.13 What started as a small but very successful venture went on to become Britannia when, in 1918, the Gupta brothers,

along with Englishman C. H. Holmes as their partner, purchased and coined the name. In 1924, the Britannia Biscuit Company became a

subsidiary of the U.K.-based biscuit major Peek, Frean & Co. Ltd.14

After changing hands several times, in 1978, when Britannia went public, its Indian shareholding was 62 per cent, while U.K.-base d

Associated Biscuits International held 38 per cent. Within a year, Britannia became Britannia Industries Ltd., and over the course of the

next several years, its 38 per cent share was owned by Nabisco, Rajan Pillai, and, later, by Group Danone and Nusli Wadia, who was

made chairman of Britannia in 1993, following a Danone-Wadia partnership.

Relations between Danone and Wadia soon soured when Wadia hurled accusations against Danone in quick su ccession. In 2006, he

accused Danone of violating partnership agreements and launching the Tiger brand of biscuits, branching out in several countries

without Britannia’s consent. In 2007, Wadia asked the Indian government to question Danone’s investme nt in the nutraceutical firm

Avesthagen as a breach of the non-compete agreement. After a long battle, Danone sold its 25.48 per cent stake in Britannia to Wadia in

April 2009, which made him the majority shareholder of the company with 50.96 per cent ownership. From then on, Britannia had only

strengthened its position in the biscuit market.15

Product Portfolio

Britannia competed in the two major segments of India’s food industry: baked goods and dairy. While the baked goods comprise d

biscuits, cakes, breads, and rusks, the dairy products includ ed milk, butter, cheese, ghee, dahi, milk-based ready-to-drink beverages, and

dairy whitener (see Exhibit 2).16