Milicich has named seven new faces from the group which secured qualification for the 24-nation age-group finals by winning the OFC U-20 Championship in April.

Defender Liam Higgins, midfielder Cameron Lindsay and forward Sean Lovemore all make the cut after staking successful claims during the Suwon International Cup in Korea immediately following the qualifiers.

Youngsters Scott Basalaj and Tim Payne force their way into the squad after impressing during the U-17 World Cup in Mexico, while another goalkeeper, Coey Turipa, is a late replacement due to injury to James McPeake. Melville United’s Mikey Kramer, uncapped at age-group level, is the squad’s bolter.

All White Chris Wood is unavailable for the tournament due to club commitments, while 2009 U-17 centre-back Gordon Murie is not considered due to injury.

The Junior All Whites have set their sights on continuing the success of New Zealand teams at World Cups and Milicich believes his players have the necessary attributes to deliver a result in their group games against Cameroon, Uruguay and Portugal.

“New Zealand has been to an U-20 World Cup only once before and didn’t qualify out of the group stage,” he says.

“In fact, we have never picked up a point at this tournament, so that is our goal first and foremost. The squad is a strong group and among them are some experienced campaigners at this age level who are starting their careers as professional footballers.”

Milicich can take heart from the Junior All Whites’ recent performances in Korea where they played upcoming World Cup opponents Uruguay, losing 1-0, and beat Nigeria 4-3, who earlier defeated Cameroon in the African qualifiers.

With a warm-up match against the Wellington Phoenix on Sunday, an acclimatisation tour to Los Angeles taking in two matches against local opposition, as well as a final tune-up in Colombia prior to their opening match, Milicich believes this preparation could be crucial to success at the tournament.

“Those four matches against quality, professional opposition will be played at an intense, quicker level of football than what we are used to which will be very similar to those we will face at the World Cup with matches against Cameroon, Portugal and Uruguay.”

The Wellington Phoenix match is promoted as a family affair with a friendly 2pm kick-off and tickets priced at $10. Children aged 15 years and under will gain free entry if wearing a football shirt and the match will also be an alcohol-free event.

The Junior All Whites depart for Colombia on July 18 with their first game against Cameroon on July 30.

Junior All Whites squad for FIFA U-20 World Cup Colombia 2011

Goalkeepers

1-Stefan MARINOVIC (SV Wehen Wiesbaden, Germany)

20-Scott BASALAJ (Lower Hutt City)

21-Coey TURIPA (Brisbane Wolves, Australia)

Defenders

3-Nick BRANCH (Central United)

6-Nikko BOXALL (Central United)

10-Anthony HOBBS (Waitakere City)

14-James MUSA (Waitakere City)

16-Luke ROWE (Unattached)

17-Mikey KRAMER (Melville United)

19-Liam HIGGINS (Lower Hutt City)

Midfielders

4-Ryan CAIN (Western Suburbs)

7-Cameron LINDSAY (Blackburn Rovers, England)

12-Andrew MILNE (Auckland City)

13-Colin MURPHY (Onehunga Sports)

15-Marco ROJAS (Melbourne Victory, Australia)

18-Adam THOMAS (Melville United)

Forwards

2-Andrew BEVIN (Napier City Rovers)

5-Sean LOVEMORE (Onehunga Sports)

8-Ethan GALBRAITH (Lower Hutt City)

9-Tim PAYNE (Waitakere City)

11-Dakota LUCAS (Waitakere City)

Management

Chris MILICICH (Head Coach)

Andy HEDGE (Assistant Coach)

Mark OATES (GK Coach)

Craig ALEXANDER (Team Manager)

Justin LOPES (Physiotherapist)

Kurt OLSEN (Sports Scientist)

Simon WILKINSON (Team Doctor)

Allan JONES (Technical Advisor)

FIFA U-20 World Cup Colombia 2011

July 29 – August 20

New Zealand v Cameroon

Cali, Colombia

July 30, 2011

5pm (10am July 31 NZT)

New Zealand v Uruguay

Cali, Colombia

August 2, 2011

5pm (10am August 3 NZT)

New Zealand v Portugal

Cali, Colombia

August 5, 2011

5pm (10am August 6 NZT)

Story courtesy of New Zealand Football.

For more on New Zealand football go to www.nzfootball.co.nz