Kwame Baah-Acheamfuor

Chairman, ITU-T Study Group 12 / MoC, Ghana

Kwame is the current Councillor for Ghana at International Telecommunication Union (ITU) Council. He is also the Chairman of International Telecommunication Union (ITU) Study Group responsible for Performance, Quality of Service and Quality of Experience in his second term of office. Kwame was the Chairman of the Committee for Work programme and Organisation of the ITU Telecom Standardization sector at the World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly in 2016. He has been involved in the development and approvals of over fifty global telecommunications standards. He has represented Ghana at ITU Council, Conferences, Assemblies and has also been an invited speaker at several ITU Workshops. Kwame Baah-Acheamfuor is an experienced telecommunication engineer for 18 years and has been involved in multi discipline communication services licensing, telecommunication networks planning, operations and maintenance. He joined the National Communications Authority (NCA) of Ghana in 2006 and has been responsible for technical regulations planning, monitoring and compliance. Kwame Baah-Acheamfuor holds a Master of Business Administration (MBA) degree in Project Management from the Ghana Institute of Management and Public Administration (GIMPA) and a Bachelor of Science degree in Electrical and Electronic Engineering (Majors in Telecommunications and Electronics) from the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology. Vincent Barriac

Chairman, Working Party 2 of ITU-T Study Group 12; R&D Engineer, Orange, France

Vincent Barriac is an R&D engineer with Orange. More specifically, he works as an expert in quality of service assessment tools and methods, with a strong involvement as technical support and advising for operational entities throughout the entire Orange Group, present in several European and African countries, about QoS supervision strategies and voice quality enhancements, for both mobile and fixed services. His most recent activities concern the evolution of QoS monitoring in modern networks (adaption to 5G and NFVs, introduction of machine learning) and in the context of stronger regulatory requirements. Involved since more than 25 years in ITU-T, he has been taking part in the development of several standards in his area, like P.56x P.86x series, and more recently as editor of the G.1028 series. He is currently ITU-T SG 12 WP2 chairman and rapporteur for Q.15/12.