Peet did not start writing his first novel until he was 52. For 15 years previously he and his wife Elspeth had worked on more than 100 short books for the education market, primarily with Oxford University Press. But he was restless by nature, and when he confessed his boredom to Elspeth she suggested turning his hand to fiction.

The result was Keeper (2003), the first of three stories featuring the imaginary South American sports journalist and football fanatic Paul Faustino. Peet’s vivid rendering of the sport’s ecstasies and the shady financial dealings behind the scenes found widespread acclaim, and he received the Branford Boase Award for best first novel.

Keeper and its sequels, The Penalty (2006) and Exposure (2008), stood apart from more conventional football books in their scepticism and weighty handling of the subject matter. Peet set out deliberately to subvert the genre , and his books were as much concerned with the history and politics of his (fictionalised) South American setting as with the beautiful game.

“Keeper is about fathers ultimately and also conservation, commitment and ambition,” he said. “The Penalty is about religion essentially and Exposure is about all sorts of stuff. The football is just a tenuous linkage between these things.”

Between the Faustino novels came Tamar, a wholly different sort of story. Both a family mystery and a war novel, the plot weaves together two interlocking narratives set 50 years apart. It was Peet’s most exhaustively researched book. For the wartime experiences he conducted extensive interviews with the father of a close friend who had been an SOE agent, and spent time filtering through archives in Amsterdam.

In spare moments he would go for drives around the Dutch countryside on what he called “location shoots”, giving fuel to the intensely visual imagination that informed his writing process. “I have to make little movies,” he told The Daily Telegraph. “I have to sit and film.”

The eldest of three children, Malcolm Peet was born on October 5 1947 at North Walsham, Norfolk, into what he described as an emotionally impaired household. His father was a retired professional soldier who later owned a confectionery factory; his mother worked as a part-time bookkeeper, and Malcolm’s grandmother lived with the family in an overcrowded council house. To escape he would go on long bicycle rides into the countryside, and became obsessed with football.

Aged 10 and a half he won a scholarship to the local grammar, but struggled to fit in. “It was a bit like Hogwarts,” he recalled, “minus the magic. And the fun. And the girls.” Corporal punishment took place on Fridays and the National Anthem was played on the slightest pretext. A fictionalised version of the school appeared in Peet’s semi-autobiographical novel Life: An Exploded Diagram (2011).

He began drawing in earnest while reading English and American Studies at the University of Warwick, and went on to take a PhD in American political cartoons and graphics at Exeter. The promise of a regular salary lured him into teaching, after which he tried to scratch a living as an illustrator. When that failed – along with his first marriage – he spent the next 10 years working as a builder and decorator in Devon, where he met Elspeth.

Peet’s primary ambition as an author was to write the books he would have most have liked to read at 16, and he was unafraid to pass judgment on other writers in his field. There were, in his view, two main types of book in the young-adult category: the quick and easily digestible “chicken nuggets” and the more nuanced “vegetarian wholefood” – though he was quick to insist that the ideal diet should be a mixture of both.

What mattered above all was the quality of the writing, which could elevate even the most well-worn tropes of teen fiction . Peet was being only slightly glib when he referred to himself as the “Jamie Oliver” of children’s literature.

Together with his wife, Peet continued to write picture-books for younger children. His first novel for adults, the blackly comic Murdstone Trilogy, was published in 2014. He was diagnosed with cancer towards the end of the year.

Mal Peet’s first marriage ended in divorce and in 1987 he married Elspeth Graham. She survives him, as do his three children.