A year after making its debut, Undisputed — the first boxing video game since 2011 — is leveling up with new features to bring boxing fans a truly unique experience inside the ring. Following a delay, the Steel City Interactive-produced game announced Career Mode will be released on February 12, 2024.

With over 60 different punches, cutting edge footwork mechanics, 14 unique fight venues and a roster featuring over 50 licensed boxers in the Early Access version including the likes of Joe Frazier and Sugar Ray Robinson, Undisputed offers an unparalleled and authentic boxing game.

Available on PC via an Early Access version, Undisputed will eventually be available on PlayStation 5, PS4, Xbox One, and Xbox One Series S and X. The final version of the game is also expected to feature over 200 fighters with punch stats from CompuBox.

Career mode and character creator further enhances what's already a completely immersive experience. Here's everything you need to know about Undisputed's new features along with when you can expect full access.

MORE: Every active and historical boxer in new 'Undisputed' video game

Undisputed Career Mode

The initial career mode is playable for any of the licensed fighters in the game.

That includes a male roster of Canelo Alvarez, Terence Crawford, and Tyson Fury plus past legends like Joe Frazier and Sugar Ray Robinson. Undisputed also features an expanded women's roster of playable boxers including Katie Taylor, Natasha Jonas and Jessica McCaskill, with more to come.

Career mode gives boxing fans the opportunity to forge a unique path to world champion status while controlling some of the sport's biggest names.

Undisputed Video Game release date for Career Mode and Character Creator

Steel City Interactive announced Career Mode will officially be released on February 12, 2024.

Undisputed Video Game Character Creator

Fight fans can create their own character and “build your legacy.”

MORE: History of boxing video games

Create your own boxer: Choose male or female and customize your fighter from hairstyle to body weight (which determines your weight class), clothing and fighting styles.

Build your team: Assemble the best team of manager, cutman and coach around your fighter to progress and develop skills, and earn money, fame, and experience as you rise up the ranks.

Negotiate your path to success: Choose the opponents you want to fight and which to avoid. Negotiate fight contracts to earn the most rewards

Coach Advice System: In-ring action includes innovative, dynamic advice that adjusts to your gameplay. Adaptive AI ensures every opponent fight different to keep you on your toes with every fight.

Training camps: Fine-tune your skills in fight camps, where your training choices — vitality, movement speed, health, defense — determines your strategy for upcoming fights.

Media opportunities: Gain exposure and build your character's brand outside of the ring

The end of a fighter's journey could result in just competing in great bouts, or winning gold. Various titles are at play in the game, including the WBO, WBC, IBF, and customized Steel City Interactive belt.