CSI? Directed by Quentin Tarantino?! I don't care how disappointing QT's post-Jackie Brown career has been, Call The Cops was in there like a ferret up a drainpipe or, as Tarantino would say, a muthafucker up a drainpipe staging a home invasion. Hell yeah.

And speaking of hell ... The episode, Grave Danger, is at times a gloriously slick, malevolent depiction/study of torture. It is two hours long, co-scripted by CSI creator Anthony Zuiker and based on "a story by Quentin Tarantino" - that story, it's tempting to say, being the famous gimp subplot in Pulp Fiction.

Yes, this is Tarantino going back to his roots, reminding everyone that, beneath that cheesy acting and film geek's grin and latter-day kung fu kick, he is (or, if he's just dusted the idea out of his old files, was) one sick puppy.

The first half-hour is exhilaratingly dark and nasty - following the Tarantino signatures established in his three early crime films so tightly as to border on the formulaic. The young, clean-cut CSI agent Nick Stokes is driving through Las Vegas singing along to a country & western song when he is called to a crime scene and discovers signs of terrible violence and injury - namely, a neatly-arranged pile of intestines.

Tarantino then gets to play torturer (with both the psychopath's victims and the viewers), indulging in a number of vintage peeper shots referencing favourite sick thrillers like The Boston Strangler and Blue Velvet. Two CSIs playing a Dukes Of Hazzard board game is classic Tarantino.

As television goes, it is fantastically, gratuitously gory and tinged with the grim B-movie humour with which he made his name. Torture implements (pliers, hollow-point bullets) are shot in loving close-up and, predictably, two blonde twins are taped up, tied up and shot for no reason other than to give Grissom the chance to casually create a parallel between blood spatter patterns and Jackson Pollock.

Admittedly, some of it looks like an after-thought. Dream scenes should have been banned after The Sopranos disaster, and a cameo by Tony Curtis and his hair is so fleeting as to be too token.

The main flaw is that Tarantino is so good at setting up tension, our anticipation of fear, along with the fact that - with Tarantino - anything is seemingly possible, it actually gets less scary as it reaches its climax, not more.

A large part of the two hours is spent with Grissom, Tarantino and viewers sadistically watching Stokes in a glass coffin suffering unbelievable hell - especially when he starts being eaten alive by fire ants. Not that Grave Danger is about Stokes or Grissom. It's all about Tarantino.

Grave Danger is so brilliantly shot and lit, it reminds you Tarantino could, and should, still be making the most exciting movies or television in America. But he isn't.

The final half-hour palls as he becomes hamstrung by the formula of the CSI franchise. The story runs out of twists. Overall, although it trades too much on his Pulp Fiction pedigree, it's one of the sickest things he's ever done. In terms of sheer terror, the man is a modern-day Hitchcock or put in another way: one sick bastard.

Meanwhile back in Blighty, the spring crop of rather mediocre British cops shows is coming to an end.

New Tricks - in which none of the cops were cops, or had been cops for many decades - has gone, although its (bewilderingly high) ratings mean that, unlike its four lead characters, it is unlikely to be pensioned off just yet.

Last week also saw the end of Murphy's Law , or as Call The Cops prefers to call it, Murphy's Moustache.

As last month's column mentioned, Murphy's Law wasn't that bad. It was, though, probably the first cop show to be ruined by a moustache since Magnum PI. Not only that, it looked as if it was the same moustache. Perhaps it was the original's son and hair (geddit?!). That thing must have its own agent.

Either way, you had to feel for poor Jimmy Nesbitt who was trying so hard to put those Yellow Pages ads behind him and do something gritty. It's one thing being upstaged by cute little kids, but being upstaged by a moustache (your own moustache) has got to hurt. The question is what does Nesbitt do with it now. Keep it in a box under the bed or mount it (as it were) and hang it on the wall?

Anyway, the last episode started with the now-traditional coda "Previously on Murphy's Law..." Yes I think we can keep up. The point about 24 was that it was complicated.

So many show are using this device now, we're possibly only days away from "Previously on Emmerdale..." Actually that might be quite useful.

Murphy's Law started promisingly but faded fast. The cliches kept on coming. Murphy was a super-cool, quick-quipping maverick who could pull off any undercover operation necessary. It was never his fault when colleagues involved in his case got killed or the case went pear-shaped (or moustache-shaped) thanks, inevitably, to the suits upstairs or MI6.

Murphy's trusty lieutenant inevitably took a "bullet" and Murphy inevitably copped off with his witness's wife.

As for Nesbitt, he was OK. His problem as a serious actor is that everything he says sounds like a voiceover.

It's difficult to know what to say about 55 Degrees North - so unstintingly average is almost everything about it. There was absolutely nothing particularly wrong with it but even a really terrible cop show like Rosemary & Thyme is more enjoyable than that.

Tonight sees the final episode of Murder In Suburbia - ITV's bizarre pairing of Caroline Catz and Lisa Faulkner as two drop-dead gorgeous detectives/spinsters who giggle about solving cases that the scriptwriters at Scooby Doo would turn down.

Like Murphy's Law, nothing about Murder In Suburbia is remotely plausible. Faulkner's character in particular has to be pretty much the most idiotic police officer on television. Why any writer would lumber one of their own heroines with a name like DS Emma Scribbins ("Scribbs") is anyone's guess.

I know it's meant to be "comic" but besides the rather pedantic point that it isn't, the combination of comedy and crime is not natural. Not right.

Speaking of comedy, or the lack of, a final word about the "parody" of CSI on The Lenny Henry Show which has been running for (count 'em) eight weeks now. (Someone should investigate how that happened.)

Even the imaginary title, ForenSIC: UK shows you how truly horribly lacking in finesse this was, and that was before it was wedged two or three times in interminable five-minute sections into every single episode.

I hope you saw it - probably the worst, most laboured, unfunny sketch in the history of unfunny sketch shows.