David William Donald Cameron became Prime Minister of the United Kingston in May 2010 when he led a Conservative and Liberal Democrat coalition government. He continued as Prime Minister from May 2015, leading a Conservative government.

David Cameron, a descendant of King William IV’s, was born into a wealthy British family on October 9, 1966, in London, England. Once he became head of Britain’s Conservative party, Cameron sought to modernise it and shed its right-wing image. He was elected the Conservative MP for Witney in West Oxfordshire in 2001 and was also a member of the influential House of Commons Home Affairs Select Committee from 2001 to 2003.

Cameron was then appointed Shadow Secretary of State for Education and Skills after the 2005 General Election and, on a mandate to change and modernise the Party, he was elected Leader of the Conservative Party in December 2005.

When Gordon Brown resigned as Prime Minister, Cameron replaced him, thus at age 43 becoming the youngest prime minister of the United Kingdom since 1812.

David Cameron married Samantha Sheffield in 1996. They had four children however their eldest child, Ivan, suffered from cerebral palsy and severe epilepsy, and passed away in February 2009. The Camerons live in London and West Oxfordshire.

The Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, the Right Honourable David Cameron MP, will make an official visit to Jamaica as a special guest of the Government of Jamaica arriving on Tuesday, September 29 and departing Wednesday, September 30.

While in Jamaica, Prime Minister Cameron will be involved in several official activities in Kingston and St. Andrew including a floral tribute in honour of soldiers of World Wars I and II; bilateral discussions with Prime Minister Portia Simpson Miller; a Reception with representatives of the Jamaican Government, business community and civil society; and an address to a Joint Sitting of the Houses of Parliament.

Arrival

Inspection of the Guard of Honour

Signing the Guestbook at the Office of the Prime Minister

Reception at Vale Royal

Prime Minister Cameron at Parliament

Wreath Laying at Cenotaph at National Heroes Park

Departure

News Stories

UK Prime Minister Arrives

UK PM Announces £300 Million Grant Fund for the Caribbean

£60 Million Aid Package for Caribbean