Madonna arrives at the screening of her documentary "I'm Going To Tell You A Secret," Tuesday, Oct. 18, 2005, in New York. The film follows the singer/actress through her Re-Invention tour and her spiritual journey to Israel.

Singer Madonna attends the screening of her new documentary film "I'm Going To Tell You A Secret" at Loews Lincoln Square on Oct. 18, 2005, in New York. The film will air Oct. 21 on MTV.

As security surrounds her, Madonna smiles at fans as she arrives at the New York screening of her documentary "I'm Going To Tell You A Secret," Oct. 18, 2005.

Madonna's long-time friend, director Jonas Akerlund, arrives at the screening of "I'm Going To Tell You A Secret," Tuesday, Oct. 18, 2005, in New York. Akerlund directed the documentary that follows Madonna through her Re-Invention tour.

Heiress Nicky Hilton arrives at the screening of Madonna's documentary "I'm Going Tell You A Secret," Tuesday, Oct. 18, 2005, in New York.

Madonna poses for a photo backstage during MTV's 'Total Request Live' at the MTV Times Square Studios on Oct. 17, 2005, in New York. The singer was promoting her new documentary, "I'm Going To Tell You A Secret." It airs on MTV Friday, Oct. 21, 2005.

Singer Madonna looks out the window at fans on the street while onstage during MTV's "Total Request Live" at the MTV Times Square Studios on Oct. 17, 2005, in New York. MTV will air a documentary following the singer/actress through her Re-Invention tour on Friday, Oct. 21.

Madonna poses with finalists of a dance competition held onstage during MTV's "Total Request Live" at the MTV Times Square Studios on Oct. 17, 2005, in New York.

Madonna dances with finalists of a dance competition onstage during her appearance on MTV's "Total Request Live" at the MTV Times Square Studios on Oct. 17, 2005, in New York.

"I was editing my documentary which had a lot of serious moments and I thought I need a break. I need to dance. I need to lift myself up. I need to just have fun. The record came as an antidote. It's kind of not that thought out; kind of a no brainier," Madonna said. She is shown during an Oct. 17, 2005, appearance promoting the film at MTV's New York studios.

Looking like a disco diva, Madonna struts onstage for an appearance on MTV's "Total Request Live," Oct. 17, 2005, in New York. She says most of the songs on her soon-to-be-released album, "Confessions on a Dance Floor," are a throwback to the disco era.

Singer Madonna hugs a fan onstage during MTV's "Total Request Live" at the MTV Times Square Studios on Oct. 17, 2005, in New York.