Considering that power pop (or pop rock, or pop with loud guitars) inhales youthful ardor and exhales youthful despair, a middle-aged man can look awfully silly performing it.

Unless he ignores the contradictions and just has a good time, the way Rivers Cuomo did when he and his band Weezer played the Eagles Ballroom Thursday night.

Cuomo, 39, still looked awfully silly, but by his own choice: No one, presumably, forced him to wear a blond wig at one point, or to pretend to pass out drunk at another.

Many of Weezer's most popular songs over the last 15 years, pretty much all of which were slotted into the long set list, made a similar choice to be maturely juvenile.

"The Greatest Man That Ever Lived (Variations on a Shaker Hymn)" practically parodied every grandiose rock epic ever made since the Who's 1966 classic "A Quick One, While He's Away" (which itself was an extended joke).

"(If You're Wondering If I Want You To) I Want You To" longingly glanced backward from the blank inertia of a relationship to its better days. (Germantown resident and radio-contest winner Mike Wagner assisted on vocals.)

And "Pork and Beans" barely concealed a curmudgeonly sneer beneath its bleached-and-polished melody.

Weezer didn't even bother trying to conceal its influences, either in props or in music.

Beach balls bounced as if at a Jimmy Buffett show during the hopeful vacation fantasy "Island in the Sun," confetti left over from Kiss' old supply flew during the bouncily woeful "Buddy Holly," and a riff from the Pixies crossed with the groove from Henry Mancini's "Peter Gunn Theme" created the looming, paranoiac shadows of "Hash Pipe."

All of it had a touch - or a generous palmful - of show biz, but the members of Weezer weren't overdosing on irony or its inferior substitute, sarcasm.

Instead, they poured odd commitment and energy into the songs.

None was more energetic and odder than Cuomo. Freed from absolutely having to hold an instrument - thanks to touring member Josh Freese, whose presence on drums allowed Patrick Wilson to play guitar alongside Brian Bell - Cuomo rarely stopped moving (albeit with dorky stiffness).

Considering his age and his band's unsteady reputation as a live act, this freedom allowed him and Weezer a kind of second youth, ripened by age and practice.