Re: John C. Wright book search

By:Joe Key

Date: 7/12/2004, 10:42 pm

In Response To: Re: John C. Wright book search (Frank Arey)

Another trip to the Camden Library today and another discovery. I laid the book "Memoirs of the Civil War Era" by Colonel John C. Wright that had been punched for a 2 ring binder beside the book "Memoirs of Colonel John C. Wright" by Colonel John C. Wright C. S. A. published by the Rare Book Publishers and noticed for the first time their titles were different! This to me is an indication that the book punched for a 2 ring binder is the first or one of the first editions of the book. Meanwhile, the librarian is searching for information as to where the book came from.

I was told today that the stamped numbers were placed in books by the library for control purposes and the 726959 in the Rare Book Publishers book indicates that it was placed in the Camden Library in 1972. Would this not have been about 10 years prior to some of the other copies of this book being copyrighted?

While at the library I made a quick inventory of all the books I could find by the Rare Book Publishers and came up with a total of 7. All were marked 32 with the ink number except one and it was marked 36. The stamped numbers indicated that all the books were placed in the Camden Library in 1972 and all the last 2 digits of these numbers were in sequence. I did not take time to copy all the info on the title pages, but will list what I have.

1. Memoirs of Colonel John C. Wright, by Colonel John C. Wright C. S. A., Rare Book Publishers.

2.43d Regiment Of Indiana Volunteers, by Col. William E. McLean, Terre Haute, IND, C. W. Brown Printing and Binding, 1903, Rare Book Publishers.

3. Campaigns Of Walkers's Texas Division, by a private soldier, Rare Book Publishers.

4. Fourteen Hundred And Ninty One Days In The Confederate Army, a journal kept by W. W. Heartsill, Rare Book Publishers.

5. Shelby And His Men or The War In The West, published by John N. Edwards 1867, republished by his wife, Jennie Edwards 1897, Press of Hudson - Kimberly publishing company, Kansas City, MO, Rare Book Publishers.

6. History Of The First Regiment Iowa Cavalry, by Charles H. Lothrop, surgeon M. D., Beers & Eaton, Printers, Mirror Office, Lyons, Iowa 1850, (a complete roster of the regiment), Rare Book Publishers.