The Godfather Part II is a 1974 American epic crime drama movie starring Al Pacino and Robert De Niro. The film’s plot continues as Vito’s influence within the criminal underworld is steadily increasing, whereas his son Michael’s professional trajectory is experiencing a decline. To restore his reputation, Michael is compelled to confront his adversaries, including his siblings. Francis Ford Coppola helmed the direction and also adapted the screenplay with Mario Puzo. Notably, The film has won 6 Oscars, received 11 Academy Award nominations, and was the first sequel to ever win Best Picture.

Here’s how you can watch and stream The Godfather Part II via streaming services such as Paramount Plus.

Is The Godfather Part II available to watch via streaming?

Yes, The Godfather Part II is available to watch via streaming on Paramount Plus.

The film chronicles Vito Corleone’s family business that’s related to the Corleone crime syndicate and shares his early life in Sicily and 1910s New York. It also presents tracks of Michael Corleone’s efforts in the 1950s to extend the family’s operations to Las Vegas, Hollywood, and Cuba. It can be seen that Vito’s influence within the criminal underworld is continuously increasing, whereas his son Michael’s fortunes are declining. Michael tries his utter best to confront his adversaries, even if it means facing off against his brother.

The Godfather Part II cast members include Al Pacino as Don Michael Corleone, Robert De Niro as Vito Corleone, James Caan as Sonny Corleone, Diane Keaton as Kay Corleone, John Cazale as Fredo Corleone, Talia Shire as Connie Corleone, and Lee Strasberg as Hyman Roth.

Watch The Godfather Part II streaming via Paramount Plus

The Godfather Part II is available to watch on Paramount Plus.

Paramount Plus is an American digital subscription streaming service that offers a wide variety of on-demand and live-streaming video content. It brings together live sports, breaking news, and a vast array of entertainment choices.

You can watch the film via Paramount Plus by following these steps:

Go to ParamountPlus.com

Select ‘Try It Free’

Choose your plan:

$5.99 per month or $59.99 per year (Essential)

$11.99 per month or $199.99 per year (with SHOWTIME)

Enter your personal information and create your account

The Paramount Plus Essential plan includes tens of thousands of episodes and movies, the NFL on CBS, the UEFA Champions League, 24/7 news coverage with CBS News, and limited ads.

Furthermore, the Paramount Plus with SHOWTIME plan includes all of the above, removes the ads except in limited circumstances, and also includes SHOWTIME originals, movies, and sports along with CBS live TV and college football. Nonetheless, you’re able to download shows to your mobile device.

The Godfather Part II’s synopsis is as follows:

“In the continuing saga of the Corleone crime family, a young Vito Corleone grows up in Sicily and 1910s New York. In the 1950s, Michael Corleone attempts to expand the family business into Las Vegas, Hollywood, and Cuba.”

NOTE: The streaming services listed above are subject to change. The information provided was correct at the time of writing.