Paramount Pictures has leased to‐the television networks for about $76‐million the rights to 42 recent motion pictures, including “The Godfather” and “The Godfather, Part II,” in a new treatment that will turn the two movies into a miniature television series.

Francis Ford Coppola, director of the “Godfather.” films, piens to carry his epic of a Mafia family into a third Phase byre‐editing and reassembling the two parts and incorporating into the TV version numerous scenes cut from both films to reduce their running time in theaters.

With the unused footage, the new version is expected to run 9 or 10 hours, schedu??ed over several nights. NBC‐TV, which paid around $7‐million for a single showing of “The Godfather” last year, has reportedly paid $15‐million for a single run of the two films in Mr. Coppola's new form. That version is expected to be ready for broadcast in the 1976 season.

In the release of films to TV, Paramount, a subsidiary of Gulf and Western Industries, Inc., has also sold ABC the rights to 21 movies and to CBS 19. According to industry sources, those sales of rights will bring around $61‐million when the details of the agreements are completed.

The separate transactions are among the largest made by the networks for packages of movies. Most of, the films are being leased for multiple showings, but a few, like “Murder on the Orient Express” and “Chinatown,” are being issued by Paramount for a single

Other! Mies include “The Great Gatsby,” “Serpico,” “Death Wish,” “Catch‐22,” “The Longest yard,” “Lady Sings the Blues,” “Paper Moon,” “Save the Tiger,” “Romeo and Juliet” and “The Friends of Eddie Coyle.”

The films will become available to the networks in the fall of 1976, but their scheduling will be at the network's option.

Reached by telephone, in San Francisco yesterday, Mr. Coppola said his desire to combine the two “Godfather” films for television grows largely out of his wish to use the scenes—some of which were, he said, among his favorites—that had to be deleted.

“We constantly had to cut out stuff that we liked, and often it was the textural stuff. It had to go, because it didn't advance the narrative,” Mr. Coppola said.

“But I always knew that at some point I would put the two films together, whether for movie exhibition or for television, with all the material that was cut out.”

He said he planned to take ,both movies completely apart and to re‐edit them into perhaps four 90‐minute segments that would allow for conunerIcial breaks.

The story of the fictive CorIeone family, which spans several generations, would be retold chronologically, eliminating much of the flashback technique used in “The Godfather, Part II,” Mr. Coppola indicated.

Neither he nor Paramount officials could say what percentage of the $15‐million from the NBC sale would go to Mario Puzo, author of the novel on which the films were based who shared screenwriter credit with Mr. Coppola.

“There's no breakdown of the deal, as yet. It all has to be worked out. Even my own deal hasn't been settled,” Mr. Coppola said.

‘No New Writing’

But he pointed out that Mr. Puzo would probably not take an active part in the new treatment of the films “since there'll probably be no new writing involved, only recutting.”

Mr. Coppola said he could not be sure when he would begin working on the new version or whether he could have it ready for NBC next fall, because he is busy at the moment with other projects.

Robert Howard, president of NBC‐TV, said the network had not yet decided whether it Would play the four or five parts on successive nights or successive weeks.

“All that we're sure of so far is that it will be scheduled at 9 o'clock,” Mr. Howard said. Under the new industry code, which designates the early part of the evening for family viewing, programs dealing with violence or sophisticated subject matter are to be scheduled after 9 P.M.

“The Godfather,” which had gross receipts of $85‐million in theaters making it the leading box‐office attraction of all time, was received in 42.4 million homes last November, when it was televised in two parts by NBC. The two parts were among the 10 highestrated movies ever shown on TV.