BRIDGTON — Charles Harry Adams Jr., 71, passed away on Tuesday, Aug. 20, 2013, at Maine Medical Center in Portland after a short bout with stomach cancer.

He was born on Sept. 28, 1941, the third child, second son of Charles H. Adams Sr. and Ferne Whitlock Adams.

He attended local elementary schools and after attending Casco High School for a short time at the age of 17, he enlisted in the U.S. Marine Corps, serving a four-year enlistment. Entering boot camp he was a 97-lb. weakling almost; but came out six inches taller and 60 lbs. heavier. While in the service he received his GED.

After his service years he became a painter and spent the next 50 years doing so.

After an automobile accident in 1963, which left the fingers on his left hand permanently crooked, this disability did not interfere with his ability to pitch softball, winning a state championship in 1984, nor with swinging a golf club, or wielding his paint brush. This accident resulted in his being called “The Hammer.” Oh, but he really loathed shopping.

He was a member of the American Legon Post #155, of Naples from 1980 –2013.

Charles was predeceased by his father, Charles H. Adams Sr. and five brothers: Austin, Billy, Michael, George and Richard.

He is survived by his mother Ferne; three sisters, Sally Wentworth and husband Nelson of Lisbon Falls, Elizabeth Chute and husband Larry of Casco, Charlotte-Anne and companion Calvin Nicholus of Sebago; three brothers, John of Naples, Fred and wife Dusty of Naples, and Steven and companion Ann of Windham; daughter Emily Nikline and husband Darrin, and daughter Ellie-Piper of Maples Valley, Wash.; many aunts, uncles, nieces, nephews, cousins and a multitude of friends. He will be sadly missed by everyone.

Funeral arrangements are made by Hall Funeral Home, Casco. A graveside service will be held at 11 a.m. on Saturday, Aug. 31, 2013, at the Edes Falls Cemetery in Naples, with a gathering to follow at the American Legion Hall on Rte. 11 in Naples.

In lieu of flowers, donations in his memory may be made to Maine Medical Center, P3CD Unit, in care of the Development Office, 22 Bramhall St., Portland, ME 04102, or to the Jimmy Fund.

A special thank you goes to the doctors, nurses and CNAs of the P3CD unit.