TAITO Corporation, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Square Enix Holdings Co., Ltd., announced that EXIT DS was shipped to North American retailers today. An inventive and addictive action puzzle game, EXIT DS returns to the portable arena making full-use of the touch screen functionality of Nintendo DS.

Players take on the role of professional escape artist Mr.Esc to dodge disaster and use their wits and bravery to rescue survivors and find the fastest way out of dangerous situations. Faced with fires, floods, earthquakes, sinking ships and other life-threatening emergencies, players must weave their way through over 100 stages to rescue a range of people and creatures in distress. A unique puzzle game that combines strategic thinking with fast-paced action, EXIT DS will have players running, climbing and jumping to safety as quickly as possible.

Stay cool, calm and collected as the stylishly rendered Mr.Esc to save the day!

STORY

Rescue the helpless and guide them out of harm's way! As Mr.Esc, players will be faced with a variety of complications ranging from natural disasters to injured companions. With over 100 obstacle-ridden puzzles, quick thinking and fast action are essential for survival. Give the right commands, utilize items and race against time to exit each stage with style.

FEATURES

Simple touch control and DS portability combine to create an accessible and addictive action puzzle experience

The art of escaping is enhanced by stylish characters and smooth animation

Various companions, from adults and children to dogs and aliens, await the players' commands as they make their way to safety alongside Mr.Esc

Players can put their puzzle-solving expertise to the test with over 100 danger-filled stages

A Wi-Fi ranking system enables players to compare their scores with escape artists around the world

EXIT DS is rated E (Everyone). Please visit the Entertainment Software Rating Board (ESRB) website at www.esrb.org for more information about ratings. EXIT DS will be available at North American retailers for the suggested retail price of $19.99 (USD). The official website can be found at https://na.square-enix.com/exitds.

About TAITO Corporation

TAITO Corp. (TAITO) is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Square Enix Holdings Co., Ltd. Headquartered in Tokyo, Japan, TAITO operates core businesses such as game arcade operations, coin-operated game machines, and mobile phone content services. A seminal part of gaming history, TAITO caused a worldwide sensation with its arcade legend, SPACE INVADERS®, and developed such fan favorites as EXIT and ARKANOID™. Today, TAITO continues to thrill game lovers of all generations by offering both classic and new family-oriented titles on the latest gaming platforms. TAITO delivers a wide range of entertainment experiences with the goal of providing consumers with fresh surprises and new discoveries. More information on TAITO can be found on the Internet at https://www.taito.com/.

About Square Enix Co., Ltd. and Square Enix, Inc.

Square Enix Co., Ltd. (Square Enix), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Square Enix Holdings Co., Ltd., with headquarters in Tokyo, Japan, develops, publishes and distributes entertainment content including interactive entertainment software and publications in Asia, North America and Europe. Square Enix brings two of Japan's best-selling franchises – FINAL FANTASY®, which has sold over 85 million units worldwide, and DRAGON QUEST®, which has sold over 46 million units worldwide – under one roof. Square Enix is one of the most influential providers of digital entertainment content in the world and continues to push the boundaries of creativity and innovation.

Square Enix, Inc. is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Square Enix Holdings Co., Ltd. with offices in Los Angeles, California. It handles operations in North America, including development, localization, marketing and publishing of Square Enix titles. More information on Square Enix can be found on the Internet at https://www.square-enix.com.