Newcastle Jets have sensationally sacked coach Branko Culina and sought permission to terminate the contract of his injured son Jason.

In a move which comes completely out of the blue on the cusp the new 2011/12 A-League campaign, Culina – also sacked from his previous job in charge of Sydney FC – has been given his marching orders despite overseeing the Jets’ entire preparation.

The serious knee injury to Jason, which has ended his season and possibly his career, is believed to be at the crux of the issue.

“The decision to terminate the contracts was made after a long deliberation by the Newcastle Jets’ Advisory Board,” said Jets’ chief executive officer Robbie Middleby, who played under Culina at Sydney FC.

“The club believes that it is highly unlikely that Jason will return to the A-League in the near future, following medical advice.”

Culina Snr had been signed on a five-year extension until 2015 late last year, while Jason Culin was on a three-year playing deal.

“Jason’s injury could mean the Jets are without their marquee player for up to three seasons – not a good result for the club, supporters, sponsors and players,” owner Nathan Tinkler said.

“While I acknowledge the difficult timing of this announcement, I am confident in the character of the Jets’ players and staff who will quickly put this matter behind them and enjoy a great season.”

It makes for a bizarre A-League season opener on Saturday between the now-coachless Jets and Melbourne Heart, who have been thrown into turmoil by the decision to sack Simon Colosimo as captain.

“We thank Branko for his contribution to the club and wish him all the best for the future,” captain Jobe Wheelhouse said.

“We are professional footballers and after our long pre-season it is important we remained focused on Saturday’s game.”

“When faced with this type of adversity it can often spur players and the team on to greater performances.”

“We are hopeful for a big turn out at Ausgrid Stadium, and our members and can be assured that we will do Newcastle proud.”