Newcastle Jets sensationally have sacked coach Branko Culina and applied to also terminate the contract of his son, Socceroos midfielder Jason Culina, just four days out from the new A-League season.

The Jets made the shock announcements in a statement on Tuesday afternoon, little more than an hour after Branko Culina had attended the A-League's official season launch in Sydney.

There the experienced mentor appeared in good spirits and was upbeat about his side's chances ahead of the Jets' opening match against Melbourne Heart on Saturday.

The statement said Culina's five-year coaching contract had been terminated immediately and that the club had also applied to Football Federation Australia to have Jason Culina's marquee deal "set aside".

It comes after the star off-season signing from Gold Coast United was last week ruled out for the entire season due to knee surgery.

The Jets said National Youth League coach Craig Deans would take over the coaching role for Saturday's match, with an announcement on a "new coaching structure" to be made in the near future.

Jets' chief executive officer Robbie Middleby said in a statement: "The decision to terminate the contracts was made after a long deliberation by the Newcastle Jets' Advisory Board.

"The club believes that it is highly unlikely that Jason will return to the A-League in the near future, following medical advice."

Jets owner Nathan Tinkler, who took over the club last season, acknowledged the timing of the announcement was not ideal but backed the club's staff and players to get on with the new season.

"Jason's injury could mean the Jets are without their marquee player for up to three seasons - not a good result for the club, supporters, sponsors and players," Tinkler said.

"While I acknowledge the difficult timing of this announcement, I am confident in the character of the Jets' players and staff who will quickly put this matter behind them and enjoy a great season."

Is is the second time Culina has been sacked by an A-League club after he parted ways with Sydney FC following a brief stint in 2007.

Culina was signed by the Jets as a technical director in 2009 before taking on the head coaching role due to the sudden departure of Gary van Egmond to the Australian Institute of Sport.

After doing well in the role despite injury woes and hovering doubts over the club's future, Culina was rewarded with a new five-year contract when Tinkler took over the club last season.

The change is set to rock the Jets ahead of their season opener at Ausgrid Stadium.

The club posted a statement on its website from newly-appointed captain Jobe Wheelhouse, with the midfielder urging the fans to turn out and support the team.

"We thank Branko for his contribution to the club and wish him all the best for the future," Wheelhouse said.

"We are professional footballers and after our long pre-season it is important we remained focused on Saturday's game.

"When faced with this type of adversity it can often spur players and the team on to greater performances."

Earlier at the season launch at the Sydney Football Stadium, Culina had spoken of how he was enjoying his time at the club under Tinkler's ownership.