Rocky and Bullwinkle (The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show) is an American animated television series originally broadcast from November 19, 1959 on the American television networks ABC and NBC and Italian on Rai 1, Junior TV, Nickelodeon, Cartoon Network and Boomerang

The current general title was imposed for home video releases more than 40 years after the series' original airing and was never used when the show was televised; TV broadcasts of the show were broadcast under the titles Rocky and His Friends 1959-1961 (and again in Canada in 1963), The Bullwinkle Show 1961-1964, and The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show (or The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle) .

Produced by Jay Ward Productions, the series is structured as a variety show, with the main feature being the serialized adventures of the two main characters, the anthropomorphic flying squirrel Rocket J. (“Rocky”) Squirrel and the moose Bullwinkle J. Moose. The main antagonists in most of their adventures are the two Russian spies Boris Badenov and Natasha Fatale, who both work for the Nazi-like dictator Fearless Leader. Supporting segments include "Dudley Do-Right" (an old-time melodrama parody), "Peabody's Improbable History" (a dog named Mr. Peabody and his time-traveling boyfriend Sherman) and "Fractured Fairy Tales" (classic fairy tales told in a comical way), among others.

Rocky and Bullwinkle is known for quality writing and witty humor. Mixing puns, cultural and topical satire and self-referential humor, it has attracted both adults and children. It was also one of the first cartoons whose animation was outsourced; the storyboards were sent to Gamma Productions, a Mexican studio also employed by Total Television. The art has an unstable and crude feel and the animation is extremely limited even by television animation standards of the time, yet the series has long been held in high regard by those who have seen it; some critics have described the series as a well-written radio show with pictures.

The show was mixed multiple times during its broadcast, airing in the afternoon, prime time, and Saturday morning cartoon slots, and has influenced other animated series from The Simpsons to Rocko's Modern Life. Segments from the series were later recycled into the Hoppity Hooper show.

There have been numerous film adaptations of the various segments of the series, such as the 2000 film The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle, which mixed live-action and computer animation; and the 1999 live-action film Dudley Do-Right. Both films received negative reviews and were not financially successful. In contrast, an animated film adaptation of the “Peabody's Improbable History” segment, Mr. Peabody & Sherman, had positive reviews in 2014. An animated series that aired also based on “Peabody's Improbable History”, The Mr. Peabody & Sherman Show, debuted on Netflix in October 2015.

Another animated series based on the main and final segments, The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle premiered on Amazon Prime Video on May 11, 2018.

In 2013, Rocky and His Friends and The Bullwinkle Show were ranked the sixth best television cartoon of all time by TV Guide.

History

The idea for the series came from Jay Ward and Alex Anderson, who previously collaborated on Crusader Rabbit, based on the original property The Frostbite Falls Revue. This original show never went beyond the proposal stage. It featured a group of forest animals running a television station. The group included Rocket J. Squirrel (Rocky), Oski Bear, Canadian Moose (Bullwinkle), Sylvester Fox, Blackstone Crow and Floral Fauna. The show in this form was created by Alex Anderson. Bullwinkle's name comes from the name of an automobile dealership in Berkeley, California called Bullwinkel Motors. Anderson changed the order of the last two letters of the name and named his moose.

Ward wanted to produce the show in Los Angeles; however, Anderson lived in the San Francisco Bay Area and did not want to relocate. As a result, Ward hired Bill Scott as the lead writer and co-producer at Jay Ward Productions, and wrote the Rocky and Bullwinkle feature films. Ward was joined by writers Chris Hayward [20] and Allan Burns; they eventually became known for creating The Munsters with Allen who would co-create The Mary Tyler Moore Show. In a 1982 interview, Scott said, “I got a call from Jay asking if I was interested in writing another series, an adventure script with a moose and a squirrel. I said, 'Sure.' I didn't know if I could write an adventure with a moose and a squirrel, but I've never turned down a job ”.

Production

The series began with the pilot Rocky the flying squirrel. Production began in February 1958 with the hiring of voice actors June Foray, Paul Frees, Bill Scott and William Conrad. Eight months later, General Mills signed an agreement to sponsor the cartoon program, provided the show ran on a late afternoon time slot when it could be aimed at children. Subsequently, Ward hired the rest of the production staff, including writers and designers. However, no animators were hired. Advertising executives at Dancer, Fitzgerald and Sample, General Mills' advertising agency, have created an animation studio in Mexico called Gamma ProductionsSA de CV, originally known as Val-Mar Animation. This animation outsourcing for the series was considered financially attractive by main sponsor General Mills, but caused endless production problems. In a 1982 interview with animation historian Jim Korkis, Bill Scott described some of the problems that arose during the production of the series:

We quickly discovered that we couldn't depend on Mexican studios to produce something of quality. They were getting the job done very quickly and there were all kinds of mistakes, glitches and whistles ... They would never check ... The mustache poked up and down at Boris, Bullwinkle's horns would change, the colors would change, the costumes they would disappear… When we finally saw it, it was already on the air.

The show premiered on November 19, 1959, on the ABC television network under the title Rocky and His Friends twice a week, Tuesday and Thursday afternoons, after American Bandstand at 17:30 PM ET, where the program was. top rated daytime network. The show moved to the NBC network beginning September 24, 1961, airing in color, and first appeared on Sundays at 19pm, just before Walt Disney's Wonderful World of Color. Bullwinkle's feedback right away due to airing in front of perennial favorite Lassie. A potential move to CBS prompted NBC to reschedule the show for late Sunday afternoon (00:17 pm) and early Saturday afternoon in its final season. NBC canceled the show in the summer of 30. It was bought by ABC, but they weren't interested. However, reruns of the episodes aired on ABC's Sunday morning schedule at 1964am until 11, by which time the series went into syndication. A 00-minute shortened version of the series was syndicated in the 1973s under the title The Rocky Show. This version was sometimes shown alongside The King and Odie, a 15-minute version of Total Television's King Leonardo and His Short Subjects. The King and Odie were similar to Rocky and Bullwinkle in that it was sponsored by General Mills and animated by Gamma Productions. NBC later aired reruns of the Bullwinkle Show at 60:15 pm ET on Saturday afternoon during the 12-30 television season.

On TV, the series had extensive runs on Nickelodeon (1992-1996), Cartoon Network (1996-2005) and Boomerang (mid-2000s). Since the late 2000s, The Program Exchange has typically licensed the series for short-term runs only; nationwide, the series saw limited broadcasts on WGN America (2009), VH1 Classic (2012) and Boomerang (2013).

Characters

The main characters and heroes of the series were Rocket “Rocky” J. Squirrel, a flying squirrel, and his best friend Bullwinkle J. Moose, a dull but good-natured moose. Both characters lived in the fictional city of Frostbite Falls, Minnesota, allegedly based on the real city of International Falls, Minnesota. The intriguing villains in most episodes were the evil spies Boris Badenov (a pun on Boris Godunov) and Natasha Fatale (a pun on femme fatale), who were always trying to "catch Moose and Squirrel". Other characters included Fearless Leader, the dictator of the fictional nation of Pottsylvania and Boris and Natasha's superior; Gidney & Cloyd, little green men of the Moon armed with pin pistols; Captain Peter “Wrongway” Peachfuzz, the captain of the SS Andalusia; various US government bureaucrats and politicians (such as Senator Fussmussen, a recurring figure who opposed the admission of Alaska and Hawaii to the Union on grounds of xenophobia); and the inevitable spectators, Edgar and Chauncy.

Technical data

Original title The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show

Country United States

Author Jay Ward, Alex Anderson, Bill Scott

Producer Jay Ward, Bill Scott

Music Frank Comstock (st. 1-2), Fred Steiner (st. 3-5)

Studio Jay Ward Productions, Gamma Productions, Producers Associates of Television, Inc.

Network ABC, NBC

1st TV November 19, 1959 - June 27, 1964

Episodes 132 (complete)

Episode duration 23 min

Italian network Rai 1, Junior TV

Gender comedy, surreal, slapstick, satire