The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle is a 2000 American live-action/animated adventure slapstick comedy film directed by Des McAnuff and produced by Universal Pictures, based on the television cartoon of the same name by Jay Ward. Animated characters Rocky and Bullwinkle share the screen with live actors portraying Fearless Leader (Robert De Niro, who also co-produced the film), Boris Badenov (Jason Alexander) and Natasha Fatale (Rene Russo) along with Randy Quaid, Piper Perabo, Kenan Thompson and Kel Mitchell. June Foray reprised her role as Rocky, while Keith Scott (no relation to original voice actor Bill Scott) voiced Bullwinkle and the film’s narrator. It also features cameo appearances by performers including James Rebhorn, Paget Brewster, Janeane Garofalo, John Goodman, David Alan Grier, Don Novello, Jon Polito, Carl Reiner, Whoopi Goldberg, Max Grodenchik, Norman Lloyd, Jonathan Winters and Billy Crystal. The film follows a young rookie FBI agent named Karen Sympathy enlisting the help of Rocky and Bullwinkle to stop Boris, Natasha, and Fearless Leader from taking over the United States.

Released on June 30, 2000, the film was a box office bomb, grossing $35.1 million worldwide against its $76 million budget (making it one of the biggest box office bombs in history) and received mixed reviews with criticisms toward its writing, plot, and humor while praising the performances, visual effects, and faithfulness to its source material.

Monkeybone (20th Century Fox, 2001)

Monkeybone was a 2001 black comedy dark fantasy film based on Kaja Blackley’s graphic novel Dark Town. Monkeybone starred Brendan Fraser, Bridget Fonda and Whoopi Goldberg. Produced for $75 million, Monkeybone brought in a measly $7.6 million and became another box office bomb of 2001.

In a coma, cartoonist (Fraser) finds himself trapped within his own creation and must find a way to get back while racing against the treacherous Monkeybone (voiced by John Turturro).

Fever Pitch (MGM, 1985)

Fever Pitch presents the story of an investigative journalist who gets hooked on the subject of his story — organized gambling. Fever Pitch was a box office bomb, grossing a measly $600,000. It was nominated for four Razzie Awards and is listed in the Official Razzie Movie Guide as one of the 100 Most Enjoyably Bad Movies Ever Made.

Fever Pitch starred Ryan O’Neal, Catherine Hicks, Giancarlo Giannini, Bridgette Anderson and Chad Everett. The film was written and directed by Richard Brooks and turned out to be Brooks’ final film.

Jury Duty (TriStar Pictures, 1995)

Jury Duty was an American comedy that starred Pauly Shore, Tia Carrere, Stanley Tucci, Brian Doyle Murray and Shelley Winters. It was the final film of Billie Bird.

Tommy Collins (Shore) is an unemployed erotic dancer living in his mom’s trailer park. After his mom and her boyfriend move to Vegas, Collins is left on his own. While rooting through the trash, Collins finds a discarded summons for jury duty. He

decides to try out because jurors get free accommodations and $5 a day.

Shore won a Golden Raspberry award for Worst Actor. You’d be hard pressed to find someone who liked the film. It was essentially universally panned by critics and was a loss for the studio. Made for $21 million Jury Duty only brought in just over $17 million at the box office.

The Adventures of Pluto Nash (Warner Brothers, 2002)

This 2002 American science fiction comedy film was shopped around for an astounding 15 years(!) before it hit the big screen. In fact, the film was

shot in 2000 and sat on the shelf for a further 2 years(!) According to critics and movie-goers, it should have stayed in the dark. Pluto Nash is considered to be one of the biggest box office bombs. With a budget of $100 million, the film only re-couped just over $7 million worldwide. Ouch!

Star Eddie Murphy tried to put a positive spin on things in an interview with Barbara Walters, quipping, “I know the two or three people that liked this movie.” Thank goodness people still rented DVDs in those days; Pluto Nash racked up almost $25 million in rental income. (Probably because people wanted to see for themselves that it really was that bad.)