When colourful TV cook Clarissa Dickson Wright died suddenly at the age of 66, hundreds turned up for her funeral in Edinburgh a year ago on Tuesday.

The most outspoken half of the Two Fat Ladies culinary partnership was seen off in style, her coffin decorated with a wreath made from her favourite ingredients – red chillies, sage, broccoli, cardamom and artichokes.

Although Clarissa was mourned by her fans, one person who didn’t share their grief was her estranged elder sister Heather. She had no wish to go to the funeral. When friends phoned her after Clarissa died, she’d say, ‘I hope you’re not ringing with commiserations.’

Scroll down for video

She’s still as annoyed about Clarissa as she had been when their feud began more than 30 years ago. At the heart of it is Clarissa’s claim that their late father, distinguished surgeon Arthur Dickson Wright, was a violent alcoholic.

There was also the simmering rancour over the £2.8 million inheritance from their mother’s will, which Heather says Clarissa refused to share and instead used to finance 12 years of drunken high living – and the pursuit of men.

The Clarissa loved by TV viewers for her defiantly high-calorie recipes – all the while overweight and unkempt – was a fantasist, insists Heather. Clarissa’s claims in her 2007 memoir Spilling The Beans that their father was a brutal drunk who beat her and their mother Aileen, known as Molly, are ‘a total betrayal of a great man’.

Clarissa was the last-born of the four Dickson Wright children – 20 years younger than Heather, 17 years younger than June and 13 years younger than Anthony. ‘We were given so much; we didn’t want for anything,’ says Heather.

‘We had a lovely home and upbringing and a first-rate education. So how she could say such things about my father I just don’t understand, and I want people to know the truth. He never hit any of us. He sometimes had a temper, but he wasn’t violent. It was a very wicked thing for her to say.’

In her autobiography, Clarissa said her father had hit her with a red-hot poker. ‘Crazy. Absolute nonsense,’ says Heather, now 87. ‘I think she turned into some kind of Walter Mitty character. I suppose it was all done for publicity. My parents used to go to many social events and if he’d ever knocked my mother about and beat her up as Clarissa said, she couldn’t have looked so good.’

Clarissa also wrote that her father once banged her brother Anthony’s head against the garage wall so hard he caused a hairline fracture.

‘All he did was shake Anthony because he was playing cricket in the garden and had broken father’s tomato plants. Clarissa would only have been three at the time. As for suggesting he was an alcoholic, he never was. He could never have carried out the great work he did if he was a boozer. He worked very hard all the time.

'I remember he used to come into dinner at 8pm and if he were worried about a patient he’d go out again and not come back until 2am. He was called the Robin Hood of St Mary’s [the London hospital where he worked]. He was terribly dedicated and would do late-night operations as well. You couldn’t possibly do that if you were an alcoholic.’

Arthur and Molly, an English convent-educated Australian heiress he met while working in Singapore as a doctor, married in 1927. As Arthur’s career blossomed they moved into a magnificent mansion in London’s St John’s Wood near Lord’s cricket ground.

The house had nine bedrooms, three bathrooms, a library, a drawing room and four wine cellars. They entertained lavishly, but the marriage began to falter in the late 1960s and they split up. Far from their father being the aggressor, says Heather, it was Clarissa who was violent towards him. Indeed, her explosive temper earned her the nickname Krakatoa, after the Indonesian volcano.

Tired of the abuse he was getting from 21-year-old Clarissa, and with his marriage disintegrating, in September 1968 Arthur, who was then 71, left home and went to stay with his brother Douglas. ‘From then on, Clarissa kept him at bay,’ recalls Heather.

‘He had to get his solicitors to retrieve his clothes. When Douglas came to speak to her about it, she threatened him with a shotgun.’ With her father out of the way Clarissa began to dominate her mother. ‘She got rid of the servants, saying Daddy refused to pay for them. It was total possession and control. She turned into a monster.’

Heather recalls her father trying to make contact with his wife again. ‘I don’t think he ever stopped loving her. He knew the side door at home was left open on a Tuesday for the dustman, so he’d go there hoping to see her. Mother called me and said, “He’s downstairs. What shall I do?” I told her to go and put her arms around him. And she said, “Oh, what would Clarissa say? No, I couldn’t risk it.” So she was frightened of her.

‘As a result, Mother became a recluse. One day she noticed her beloved Bristol car was missing. When she said she’d ring the police, Clarissa said, “I’m a barrister, I’ll trace it.” What Mother never knew was that Clarissa was driving the Bristol herself. She crashed it in west London one day and then said that mother’s portrait, which she’d promised to give me, was wrecked because it had been in the boot. But I gather it now hangs in her godchild’s sitting room in Scotland.’

Molly died after a heart attack in 1975. Heather, June and Anthony were expecting a share of her £2.8 million estate (worth £16 million today) but Clarissa inherited it all. ‘She had destroyed the original will, which we’d always understood left everything to be divided between the four children, although we had no proof,’ says Heather.

‘Clarissa replaced it with a will drawn up by her solicitor which left her everything. I went to court because I believed my mother had left instructions for Clarissa to look after me. Clarissa and I came to an agreement giving me a one-third share of the estate, but she never went through with it.’ Her mother had also promised Heather her jewellery – worth around £100,000 at the time. ‘Clarissa said, in front of my husband, that it was quite safe, that it was all in a vault, but I never ever saw any of it.’

Their father, who had suffered several strokes and was confined to a wheelchair, died a few months after Molly. In his will he left his entire £2 million estate to his brother Douglas, together with a note explaining why he had excluded his children.

Heather had ‘married a man old enough to be her father’. June had ‘married a man old enough to be her son, and had a child out of wedlock’. Anthony ‘was to have inherited, but not now he’s seeing Heather’. Clarissa ‘was an afterthought who has twice caused me grievous bodily harm and of whom I go in fear of my life’.

It was a harsh verdict on a woman once so full of promise. Clarissa became a barrister at the age of 21, the youngest woman to be called to the bar, but at 28 she began to lose control thanks to her mother’s money.

Over the years that followed, says Heather, Clarissa squandered it all on high living, chartering yachts and planes, gambling and endless partying. By the age of 40 she’d blown the lot. It was the dispute over the will that made Heather decide she wanted nothing more to do with her sister and they remained estranged right up to Clarissa’s death. In fact, the last time they saw each other was at the funeral of their brother Anthony, who had died aged 57 in 1992. Clarissa’s autobiography only deepened the rift.

Heather believes Clarissa was never happy because she constantly chased good-looking young men but didn’t have any success with them, even though she lavished money on them. If she couldn’t find a man in any of the smart Belgravia pubs she frequented, she’d try her luck in less salubrious places. But as she degenerated into alcoholism, and with the fortune spent, she ended up homeless.

‘She turned up on my doorstep and asked if she could stay for two weeks, but she stayed for two months!’ says Heather. ‘We ended up having a tremendous argument and I threw her out. She was very violent. I have a mark on my neck from when she once tried to strangle me.

‘She was in love with an Old Etonian boyfriend of mine called Bill, although he didn’t want to know. She followed him home one night and found him with a young waiter. She threw the waiter out of the window, gave Bill a black eye and pulled the telephone out of the wall so he couldn’t call the police. When she was a barrister at Gray’s Inn she became something to do with the rugby team and used to go into the changing rooms. My brother said, “That’s the closest she’s ever going to get to a naked man!”’

But Clarissa must have had some success with men – in Spilling The Beans she claimed she once had sex behind the Speaker’s chair in Parliament, with an MP she refused to name. Says Heather, ‘I think Clarissa had sexual problems. She became very masculine – very butch. Her strong masculinity put her against my father, it was like a man fighting another man. I think it was alcoholism that did it. All the alcohol changed her. She’d drink a bottle of vodka before breakfast and get through two bottles of gin during the day.’

With her world collapsing around her – in 1983 she was disbarred from practicing law for professional misconduct – and with no money, Clarissa joined Alcoholics Anonymous, remaining sober from 1987 until her death.

She became a TV cook by chance. She was running a cooks’ bookshop in Edinburgh when in 1994 she was asked to team up with Jennifer Paterson to make a pilot cookery programme. That evolved into the Two Fat Ladies, which ran for four series until Jennifer died in 1999.

Although viewers were led to believe Clarissa and Jennifer were great friends, Heather reveals that was far from the truth. ‘Jennifer couldn’t stand her and called her “that dreadful woman”. When they were filming they stayed in different hotels. Before Jennifer knew she was ill, she loaned Clarissa a large sum of money. Later, when Jennifer learned she had cancer, she bitterly regretted it, and remarked, “That bloody woman. Now I’ll never get my money back.”’

Heather, who is married to accountant Derek Stretton and lives in Hove, says she loved both her parents, and that what Clarissa said about them still pains her. ‘She betrayed my father by saying untrue things about him. In the end, my poor mother was living in fear of her.’

Arthur was offered a knighthood but turned it down, saying, ‘If my wife became a Lady she would spend even more money!’ Says Heather, ‘I think the greatest reward for him was the plaque in the ward named after him at St Mary’s. It says, “Dickson Wright, the last of the great General Surgeons”. He would have been very proud.’