Mr. Gethro Rosenwald Williams Sr.

Gethro Rosenwald Williams Sr., 92, of the "Devils Race Track Community" in Four Oaks, NC, entered into God’s kingdom on October 22, 2023. He was born on April 22, 1931, to the late James E. Williams and Mable McDaniel.

Gethro, lovingly known as Rosenwald, was a devoted husband, father, and grandfather. He was preceded in death by his wife Rancy Layuria Altman, and sisters Alma Williams and Mattie Williams Atkinson. He is survived by his children Larry Williams Sr., Clarry Williams Gathers, Jerry Williams, Rosenwald Williams Jr., and Martice Williams Sr.; 25 Grandchildren, 36 Great Grandchildren, 5 Great Great Grandchildren; siblings Betty Williams, Essie Wiliams, Clarissa Davis, Christine Adams and James Williams; paternal Uncle Robert Williams; and a host of cousins, nieces and nephews.

Walk-Thru: Thursday October 26, 2023 from 1:00 pm until 5:00 pm at Walter Sanders Funeral & Cremation Services Chapel 302 S. Bright Leaf Blvd, Smithfield.

Funeral Service: Friday October 27, 2023 at New Generation Christian Church 4223 Wilsons Mills Rd, Wilsons Mills, NC viewing 11:00 am until 12:00 noon with Funeral Services at 12:00 noon.

Click on the Add Comments Line below to leave a message for the family of Mr. Rosenwald Williams.

Guest Book

Family or Deceased Name: Williams Family

Your Name: Rev. Dr. Robert O'Neal, Jr.

Email: pastor@onealtabernacle.org

Message: We at The Tabernacle can only imagine the grief and sorrow that you bear. May you find comfort during this time as God strengthens your heart with His love and peace.

With caring thoughts and prayers from Rev. Dr. Robert O’Neal, Senior Pastor and the church family of O’Neal Revival Tabernacle, 500 Richardson Rd, Zebulon NC.

Date: 11/1/23

Family or Deceased Name: The Williams & The Gaither's Families

Your Name: Sis. Bettie & kenneth Revell & The Revell's

Email: bettiejoeann2451@gmail.com

Message: We're so deeply sorry for your lost; he will be missed of his kindness and wisdom, but most of all his family & his church families, we know his love love will continue to shine thorough us all, by what he gave to each of us individually cherish those moments with a smile upon your face; because he'll be smiling right back. May the blessing of his joy always bring peace into your ♥. Be Blessed.

Date: 10/28/2023

Family or Deceased Name: Rosenwald Williams

Your Name: Janet Langston Barefoot

Email: nanajay1964@hotmail.comn

Message: We are So sorry for your loss. Prayers sent to all the family.We dearly Loved Mr. Buck , and he will be missed. Heaven gained an angel . The Bob Langston Family

Date: 10-27-2023

Family or Deceased Name: Mr.Rosenwalt Williams

Your Name: Bruce and Minnie Bennett

Email: maeminnie1946@gmail.com

Message: Prayers and condolences to the Williams family we are so sorry for your loss.May the Lord comfort and strengthen the family friends and church family.To be absent from the boby is to be present with the Lord.

Date: 10-27-23

Family or Deceased Name: Mr. Rosenwald Williams

Your Name: nettielong Long

Email: nettielong@centurylink.net

Message: Sending love and prayers to the Williams family. Always been a man of faith and being knowing him all my life. God has received another angel and take your rest. You are going to be missed. So family I love you and I know the feeling . You all had many years of loving from him

Date: 10- 26- 2023

Family or Deceased Name: Apostle Clarry and family

Your Name: Bertha Williams

Email: berthadubose55@gmail.com

Message: To the Family of Deacon Rosenwald Williams Aka sportiest Deacon in Johnston County I'm sooooo sorry for your loss Praying 🙏 that God will send his Angels down from Heaven to comfort and strengthen you and your Family ya'll know how I felt about your dad I love him as if he was my dad I'm sooooo glad God let our path cross your dad was a God fearing man he was humble caring and loving. He loved his family his church and everyone he came in contact with Deacon Rosenwald really displayed two of God's most important principles he loved God with all his soul and he loved and treated God's people the way he wanted to be loved and treated you know I love you all and I will continue to Pray for you and your Family.

Date: 10262023

Family or Deceased Name: Gethro Rosenwald Williams

Your Name: Robyn H Norwood-Lee

Email: rnorwoodlee1@gmail.com

Message: To my dear family,

Regardless of what I say, it will never be enough to describe the love and appreciation that I have for this man. He is the reason my baptism request was fulfilled 11 years ago, and I'll never forget him.

Prayers of comfort and strength during this difficult time.

Rest in heaven, Sir, until we meet again.

Love always,

Date: 10/23/2023

Family or Deceased Name: Michael Hardy

Your Name: Brookie Glaspie

Email: bglaspie201@yahoo.com

Message: I'm so sorry for your loss. May God's love and peace comfort you and the family now and in the days that fallow.

Date: 10/24/23

Family or Deceased Name: Deacon Rosenwald Williams

Your Name: Ernestine A Draughon

Email: andersonernestinedraughon@gmail.com

Message: This pillar in the earth is not here amongst the earth any longer. From my earliest memories I recall going down for our families to come together for fellowship, work, chores or just to play. I affectionately called him daddy. This man lived the life that others could follow. He kept a standard that mentored and counseled many. He has received his heavenly rest and for that we can give thanks.

Date: 10-24-23

Family or Deceased Name: Gethro Rosenwald Williams

Your Name: Robyn H Norwood-Lee

Email: rnorwoodlee1@gmail.com

Message: To my dear family,

Regardless of what I say, it will never be enough to describe the love and appreciation that I have for this man. He is the reason my baptism request was fulfilled 11 years ago, and I'll never forget him.

Prayers of comfort and strength during this difficult time.

Rest in heaven, Sir, until we meet again.

Love always,

Date: 10/23/2023