Experimental gestures series 9-2021 Pastel and pencil hand size scale Remarks one dancer is bone slender toothy straight jet black hair and bangs “Only speed catches movement” –Edgar Degas Devils Beyond The Waves Twi lite Planet Far, Far Away Down The Wa-Bash, Waa-Bash..

Vidal Toreyo – METAMORPHOPSIA – abstract deformation The METAMORPHOPSIA series of paintings belongs to abstract deformation. What does metamorphosis mean? Why did the painter call his series of works that way? Metamorphopsia is a general term for a variety of visual perception disorders. They can be as a result of disorders of the central nervous […]

TRANQUILIDAD, the series of abstract paintings is performed with a unique technique developed by Jan Astner. Light layers of paint are applied with a damp sponge. The drawing is gradually washed out. This way the artist obtains the effects of transparency and luminosity. One image has many such layers. The delicate texture obtained as a […]

Jan Astner TRANQUILIDAD abstract forms The works of Jan Astner are associated with an extensive catalog of abstract forms. His abstraction is born from the desire to convey one’s own world of feelings. The artist studies his reactions to social, sociological and psychological problems and relationships between people. To achieve his goal, he created his […]

O-A: What is art to you? Is creating an urge, necessity or maybe an incontournable, essential way of life? Tanya Angelova: Art has been part of my life from the very beginning. I graduated from an arts high school and then from the Academy of Fine Arts. Art is my way of life and the […]

Imagen de mi última obra pictórica: Jose Manuel Mulero. Título: “Entre el cielo y la tierra”, (2021); 80cmx100 cm. An image of my last pictorial work: -Jose Manuel Mulero. Title: “Between heaven and earth”. (2021); 80cmx100 cm. Mixed technique on canvas. .

New works inspired by the sounds of the wind, rain and the forms of gravel ground Styles of art: Color Field Painting, Geometric Abstraction, Process Painting . . Wendy Cohen – New paintings