Perhaps, just perhaps, Paolo Di Canio will last longer at Swindon Town than many pundits have predicted. The Robins' first win in the league since the opening day of the season was achieved in the sort of rumbustious style that characterised the Italian's own playing career, with the goals that changed the game scored by substitute Alan Connell, the first barely 30 seconds after Di Canio had brought him on.

Di Canio might even be in the West Country for the long term if, as he claimed after the match, the incident last Tuesday – when he came to blows with his own player, Leon Clarke – had actually served to unite his squad behind him. "I'm lying to say we can forget it, and the lads were shocked, but I said to my staff the next day the atmosphere felt different, and that even if we lost against Rotherham, we were going to show we were a group," said Di Canio.

Their reaction to going behind certainly confirmed his players are not easily disheartened. Alex Revell, bought by Rotherham to replace their former top scorer Adam le Fondre after his summer move to Reading, had not had a sniff of a chance when he rose to nod Ryan Cresswell's header beyond the Swindon goalkeeper, Mattia Lanzano, but the home side's response was impressive.

It was co-ordinated by Matt Ritchie, a 21-year-old midfielder who was waiting at the far post when Mehdi Karrouche's corner was missed by Rotherham's central defenders. His low volley was deflected into the net by the United full-back Tom Newey.

Ritchie should have put Swindon ahead 10 minutes into the second half. Raffaele De Vita's pull-back left him in front of an open goal, six yards out, only for him to allow the ball to roll under his boot. Lukas Magera's snap shot soon afterwards hit a post, but Revell's second, another emphatic header, put Rotherham back in front.

Only briefly, however. Danny Schofield's reckless challenge on Magera deserved a second yellow card and Di Canio immediately brought on Connell. It was a move that came off spectacularly, as Connell headed a corner past Logan and then again, from Ritchie's cross, with nine minutes remaining.

"Paolo is an emotional guy, but he's the sort of manager you want to work hard for," said Connell. The celebrations, in all of which the players pointedly involved Di Canio, were spectacular – possibly because, Connell revealed, the manager had promised them their first day off training since the season started.