Di Canio’s options between the sticks are fairly limited at present, with number one Wes Foderingham supported by first-year professional Leigh Bedwell, while both Phil Smith and Mark Scott have been released after their contracts with the Robins expired.

Mattia Lanzano still has a year to run on his current deal, but the young Italian is unlikely to feature again for Swindon after struggling to settle in England following his switch from USD Gavorrana last summer.

And while Luke McCormick is set to train with Town following his release from prison later this month, there is no guarantee that the former Plymouth stopper will ever be handed a pro deal at the County Ground.

Football League members voted to increase the number of options available from the bench from five to seven at their AGM in Portugal this week, and Di Canio recognised the need to reinforce his ranks accordingly.

“In terms of the quality we need for the future and in terms of the physical integrity, we need players because from next year there will be seven players on the bench,” he said.

“I will bring every time a goalkeeper. I want a healthy goalkeeper, that has no problem when he kicks the ball and goes out for one month.”

Meanwhile, the Town boss has admitted that the discussions regarding the club’s and his own future, which preceded a two-year extension to his County Ground contract, have stalled his business in the transfer market.

But with significant backing now in place, Di Canio is ready to immerse himself in the pandemonium of the close season.

“We have a budget to build, in my opinion, a good team - otherwise I wouldn’t sign,” he said.

“You know me, I’m not crazy, I’m not here for employment. I was ready to sign for less money to have more budget, because to have success you can have a bit less money.

“It’s better to have more money to spend on players because the players go on the field. The quality gives you victories. The players and a good squad gives you the chance to go up and up and become one of the best managers and improve as a manager.

“We have the right budget to build something positive. It’s obvious that we have to be quick otherwise all the players go everywhere.”