So much potential here with the shower of shite Swindon has produced over the past 20 years. From what I've seen, this is what I would go with:

GK: Mattia Lanzano. Brought from the Italian 4th division to oust the popular playoff hero Phil 'Barmy Army' Smith from the number 1 spot. Spent most of the game pointing and being a pointless shot stopper. Him being so shit was a blessing in disguise as we signed Foderingham to replace him.

LB: Yinka Casal. Signed from holland for six figures, was shit and had a fact haircut.

CB: Hasney Aljofree. Spent his time at Swindon starting fights with the fans.

CB: Alberto Comazzi. Had the pace Of a turtle and a worse turning circle than an oil tanker, got paid a bomb too by the Paolo brigade.

RB: Franklin Anzite: who?

CM: Lillian Nalis. Hard as nails we were told, absolute passenger.

CM: Ali N'Diaye, an ever present at palace with Paul Hart, was testament to Paul Harts management abilities

CM: David Prutton: what a pile of shite this journeyman was, used to flick his hair quite nicely but that's as good as it got.

ST: Hamdi Razak: signed from French lower league, don't think he touched the ball once but assaulted everyone in his path.

ST: Thomas Dossevi! Only player I've ever seen at Swindon who had a Mustang, had a worldy on his friendly debut against Nottm Forest. Wilson would have been crucified had he not signed him but his favourite destination was off side and was allergic to the goal net.

ST: Elliot Benyon: How do you solve a problem like replacing Charlie Austin....

For Crewe:

GK: Rhys Taylor - 'Flapper' as I called him was a diabolical keeper and acted like he made the big-time being a Chelsea Youth GK. Now plying his trade at Macclesfield Town after a series of keeping mistakes eventually cost us a concrete playoff place.

RB: Darren Moss - We paid £170K to Shrewsbury for this utter waste of space. A shocking player who wasn't fit for purpose in the Championship or League One, ended up playing for Nantwich Town where he couldn't hold a regular place and Bangor City.

CB: Danny O'Donnell - O'Donkey, signed from Liverpool for a fee of up to £300K, was a key part of the squad that ended up going from mid-table League One to lower half of League Two thanks to his ineptitude, released, ended up at Shrewsbury then Stockport where he couldn't even make their team in the Conference North. Now living in Australia.

CB: Thierry Audel - Signed from Macclesfield for a nominal fee. Barely played but was shit. Loaned to Lincoln. Given a second chance this season. Barely played but was shit. Loaned to Lincoln. Lincoln sent him back. Released. Went back to Macclesfield.

LB: Anthony Tonkin - We paid £150K to Stockport for the LB version of Darren Moss. Eventually ended up at Yeovil, Oxford and in the non league with Aldershot.

RM: Joel Grant - Wasn't too bad but we did pay £130K to Aldershot for him and he definitely wasn't worth the fee. Very lazy footballer who had bags of talent but didn't know how to apply it with us.

CM: Antoni Sarcevic - Signed from Woodley Sports for a small fee. Had a horrendous attitude problem. He was overweight, unfit and didn't like running. Did have potential but tended to miss sitters when he was included in the side. Sold to Chester after a training ground bust-up with Davis and Baker and he's now at Fleetwood and I saw the gobshite was sent off again against Chesterfield for mouthing off.

CM: Jamie Moralee - Signed from a Watford side who were relegated to League One, the former £450K player failed to score a single goal for us and was gash and very weak. Now Rio Ferdinand's agent.

LM: Lee Molyneux - Contentious one, signed from Accrington with a bit of fanfare given his knack for scoring goals. In his defence he was a LB but Davis tried to convert him into some lower league Gareth Bale when he lacked pace. Molyneux and the Dull one didn't see eye to eye and he was a disruptive influence in the dressing room. Currently preparing for a Conference tour with Micky Adams and Tranmere.

ST: Anthony Elding - £200K for a work-shy, talentless, idle bugger. Possibly one of the worst players I've ever seen play for us. Three year contract was cancelled after about 15 months.

ST: Pavol Suhaj - Signed from AS Trencin in Slovakia, was pitiful, the lowlight being a lone striker in a 6-1 crushing against Cardiff. Released and subsequently couldn't make the Nantwich Town team in the Northern Premier League. Bit of a cult hero unlike the rest.

Subs:

GK: Bartek Fogler - Don't know who we even signed him from but he never played a game, just a few appearances on the bench. Often seen in Bar Seven down Nanny Road the night before a game.

SUB: Mike West - £30-£35K signing from Ebbsfleet, seemed to be okay but wasn't worth the money due to constantly being in our treatment room. Looked very weak.

SUB: Steven Schumacher - Signed from Bradford on a free but was on a decent wage. Was absolutely crocked for two years and never looked like the player he became at Bury. Personally thought he was a poor signing but I know some fans will disagree with me on this one. Now at Fleetwood with gobshite.

SUB: Rob Wakenshaw - The original Crewe flop, signed from Rochdale with previous experience from Everton back when they won the title with one of the best squads in the history of football. 1 goal in 22 games later he was shown the door.

SUB: Calvin Zola - Tranmere must've pissed themselves that they got £200K for this talent deprived lump. Useless footballer now residing in the Stevenage treatment room.

SUB: Juan Ugarte - Signed on a free from Wrexham where he achieved infamy for scoring 5 in a game vs Hartlepool. Was a crock for us though and retired through injury.

SUB: Lee Matthews - Pathetic crocked forward signed on a free from Port Vale. He failed to score for us and was duly released.

Honourable Mentions to Andy White, Vadaine Oliver, Scott Shearer, Wayne Collins (second spell) and Bradden Inman (permanent spell)

I was so excited when we signed Juan Ugarte from Wrexham, he seemed to score 3 or 4 every week for them. He went on holiday had a surfing accident or something came back overweight and just generally useless, never been seen since I don't think.