Neil Evans is to give his perspective on everyone who put on a Red shirt in our amazing record-breaking season. First up is part one including Mattia Lanzano through to Alan Connell, squad nos.1 to 17.

Ratings are made out of 10. Anyone who was in the squad but didn’t play automatically gets a default 5 out of 10…e.g Nathan Thompson

Part One:

1. Mattio Lanzano: 4 out of 10

Bless him, FL action just proved to be a tad too much for the young Italian – as anyone who saw his rather hapless display at Burton will testify

2. Jay McEverly: 7 out of 10

Goodness knows how PDC contacted or even knew Jay was surplus to requirements at Barnsley but thankfully he did. An odd time for his debut at Wembley but slotted in immediately at left back. His quality will be needed at the next level

3. Callum Kennedy: 6 out of 10

Never let anyone down and has the sweetest left foot. Still a young player I rate highly..though I have a sinking feeling he may be moved on. If so, that will be a huge shame. I’m not sure if PDC thinks as highly of him as many Town fans

4. Aiden Flint: 7.5 out of 10

Would undoubtedly have been in the League Two team of the season had injury not struck. A more aptly named central defender you could not find! A beast in defence and an increasing threat from set plays. Quicker than I realised and certainly not a ‘rabbit’…another exciting prospect.

5. Joe Devera: 7.5 out of 10

A real breakthrough year for Joe. Versatile and efficient defender who did whatever was asked of him…Another star in a stand out defence.

6. Alberto Comazzi: 5.5 out of 10

Obviously homesick and the wrong move at the wrong time in his career but he fought had and was a model pro.

7. Paul Caddis: 8.5 out of 10

The thing about Caddis was we only really appreciated his immense contribution when he got injured. Ritchie wasn’t the same without Caddis and vice-versa. An engine like few players I’ve seen in recent years and an immaculate crosser of a ball. Captain Caddis did himself and the club proud.

8. Simon Ferry: 8 out of 10

Probably our most reliable midfielder over the season. So much attention went on Ritchie (rightly) that Ferry slipped a little under the radar but some of his skill and passing was a joy to see. His underpants, however, was not!!

9. Paul Benson: 9 out of 10

The goalscorer we needed, acquired at the time when he was wanted most. I have to admit I thought he was past it when I heard he’d signed…WRONG! The man’s touch, predatory instincts in the box and hold-up play were magnificent. Benno took straight to us and we were just his cup of tea. More goals a certainty in League One.

10. Matt Ritchie: 9 out of 10

Mercurial match winner capable of blistering shots and mazey dribbles…telepathic understanding with Caddis which brought the best out Matt. A superstar and loyal (he was never interested in Bournemouth!)..deservedly stand-out player in League Two. On his day unplayable.

11. Etienne Esajas: 5 out of 10

Fleeting glimpses of the winger…man he has one heck of a shot on him though…could not force himself into contention.

12. Alan McCormack: 9.5 out of 10

We’re told nobody is perfect but at STFC this man is as close as it gets. Converted midfielder into ball playing centre-back. Played like it was his position all his life. Pacey, combative when necessary, and elegant; his run and goal at Northampton was the stuff of legend. My player of the season.

13. Oliver Risser: 7 out of 10

I’m sure that plenty had their doubts about STFC’s first ever Namibian player but, boy, did he win the doubters over. Another with a shot like a cannon..my only criticism was he didn’t shoot enough and sometimes lost his way in games but a good signing nonetheless.

14. John Bostock: 8 out of 10

Not many apps or subs and again a strange debut at the JPT final but Bostock is class. I would be very surprised if we could get him but a year’s loan from ‘Arry would do very nicely in League One please!

15. Nathan Thompson: 5 out of 10

Didn’t see enough of the lad to give a higher mark but another youngster with ability.

16. Lee Cox: 5 out of 10

To be honest I didn’t see anything in Lee that Risser and J.Smith didn’t already have. Found his limited displays disappointing.

17. Alan Connell: 8 out of 10

Deserves a 10 for patience when often on the bench. A fox in the box when we needed it and a tremendous grafter. I am a fan and I hope he lines up for us again next season

OK that’s the halfway point…there will be a part two to follow. Feel free to agree/disagree/throw rotten fruit at my assessment. After all, footie’s all about opinions!