Henry Albert "Hank" Azaria (born April 25, 1964) is an American film, television and stage actor, director, voice actor, and comedian. He is noted for being one of the principal voice actors on the animated television series The Simpsons (1989-present), on which he performs the voices of Moe Szyslak, Apu Nahasapeemapetilon, Chief Wiggum, Comic Book Guy, Carl Carlson and numerous others. Azaria, who attended Tufts University, joined the show with little voice acting experience, but became a regular in its second season. Many of his performances on the show are based on famous actors and characters; Moe's voice, for example, is based on actor Al Pacino.

Alongside his continued voice acting on The Simpsons, Azaria became more widely known through his live-action appearances in films such as The Birdcage (1996) and Godzilla (1998). He has continued to star in numerous films including Mystery Men (1999), America's Sweethearts (2001), Shattered Glass (2003), Along Came Polly (2004), Run Fatboy Run (2007), Night at the Museum: Battle of the Smithsonian (2009) and The Smurfs (2011). He also had recurring roles on the television series Mad About You and Friends, and starred in the drama Huff (2004-2006), playing the titular character, as well as appearing in the popular stage musical Spamalot. Originally primarily a comic actor, in recent years Azaria has taken on more dramatic roles including the TV films Tuesdays With Morrie (1999) and Uprising (2001). He has won four Emmys and a Screen Actors Guild Award. Azaria was married to actress Helen Hunt from 1999 to 2000.

Lovelace

Biographical, Drama Directed by: Rob EpsteinWith: Amanda Seyfried, Hank Azaria, James Franco,...Story of Linda Lovelace, who is used and abused by the porn industry at the behest of her coercive husband, before taking control of her life.

Happy Feet 2

Animation (modern) Directed by: George MillerMumble's son, Erik, is struggling to realize his talents in the Emperor Penguin world. Meanwhile, Mumble and his family and friends discover a new threat their home, one that will take everyone working together to save them.

The Smurfs

Family, Fantasy, Animation (modern) Directed by: Raja GosnellWhen the evil wizard Gargamel chases the tiny blue Smurfs out of their village, they tumble from their magical world and into ours.

Hop

Comedy, Animation (modern) Directed by: Tim HillWith: François Déborah, Kaley Cuoco, Hank AzariaBlending state-of-the-art animation with live action, Hop tells the comic tale of Fred (James Marsden), an out-of-work slacker who accidentally injures the Easter Bunny (voiced by Russell Brand) and must take him in as he recovers. As Fred struggles with the world's worst houseguest, both will... Read more ...

Night at the Museum 2

Family, Action, Comedy, Adventure Directed by: Shawn LevyWith: Ben Stiller, Robin Williams, Ricky Gervais,...In the sequel, the Museum of Natural History is closed down for upgrading and the exhibits are put into storage at the Federal Archives in Washington, D.C. Amy Adams will play an undetermined historical figure who has a crush on security guard Larry (Stiller).

Run, Fat Boy, Run

Comedy Directed by: David SchwimmerWith: Simon Pegg, Hank Azaria, Thandie NewtonRun, Fatboy, Run" centers on a charming but oblivious overweight guy who leaves his fiancee on their wedding day only to discover years later that he really loves her. To win her back, he must finish a marathon while making her realize that her handsome, wealthy fiance is the wrong guy for her.

Great Expectations

Directed by: Alfonso CuarónWith: Ethan Hawke, Gwyneth Paltrow, Hank AzariaModernization of Charles Dickens' classic story finds the hapless Finn as a painter in New York City pursuing his unrequited and haughty childhood love.