A spacious second floor flat within the locally admired Whitecraigs Court development, ideally placed for a wide selection of local Giffnock and Newton Mearns amenities.

This wonderful luxury apartment enjoys an enviable position within the building, which is serviced by a lift, with attractive open outlooks and spacious accommodation formed over one level.

The flat benefits from beautifully presented communal garden grounds, allocated off-street parking and a lock-up style garage.

The accommodation comprises in full: security-controlled entrance foyer, welcoming entrance hall with storage cupboard which extends into a further dining hall, again with storage cupboard, open plan lounge/dining room, fitted dual aspect breakfasting kitchen with integrated appliances and two generously sized double bedrooms both featuring fitted wardrobes and en-suites. The principal bedroom also has a dressing area and the en-suite has been replaced recently. This impressive flat is completed by a bathroom with decorative tilling.

The high specification finish includes security entry system, double glazing, gas central heating and fresh, tasteful decoration throughout with quality carpets and floor coverings.

The development features allocated resident and visitor car parking facilities with the garage benefitting from a remote-control door.

The excellent position of this flat offers easy access to a great selection of local amenities including banks, healthcare centres, libraries, supermarkets and is especially close to The Avenue shopping centre. Additional facilities include the award winning Rouken Glen Park with Patterton and Whitecraigs train stations ensures speedy commute to Glasgow City Centre and beyond. Local sports and recreational facilities include Parklands Country Club, Cathcart, Williamwood, and Whitecraigs Golf Clubs and several private bowling, tennis, and rugby clubs along with East Renfrewshire Council's own excellent sports and leisure facilities at Eastwood Toll.