Seldom available, a spacious classically styled extended four bedroom semi detached family home, set within generous garden grounds, located close to popular schools, Rouken Glen Park and Whitecraigs Train Station.

The property has been well maintained by the present owner and retains a number of original features. The flexible accommodation extends to around 2,263 Sqft (210 Sqm) and comprises:

Ground Floor: Entrance vestibule. Large, welcoming reception hall with staircase to upper floor and storage. Cloaks/Guest WC. Generous bay windowed drawing room with feature fireplace, enjoying tree lined views to the front of the property. Bright and spacious bay window sitting room with feature fireplace. Dining room affording aspects over the rear garden. Kitchen fitted with a range of floor and wall mounted cabinets. The kitchen is open plan to a dining/family area with doors opening to a deck terrace, overlooking the mature rear garden. Ample space for table and chairs.

First Floor: Split level upper landing. Four bedrooms. House bathroom and separate WC.

A particular feature of this home is the well kept attractive mature garden grounds which provide privacy and seclusion.

A driveway provides ample parking for several cars and leads to a single detached garage. Large cellar providing extensive storage.

The cellar and attic would allow further development subject to the relevant consents, if desired.

Whitecraigs and its neighbouring suburbs of Newton Mearns and Giffnock are acknowledged for their standard of local amenities and provide a selection of local shops, supermarkets, restaurants, regular bus and rail services to Glasgow City Centre, banks, library and health care facilities. The property is conveniently located for access to The Avenue Shopping Centre, Waitrose, Aldi and Tesco at Greenlaw Village Retail Park and is only a short walk to Whitecraigs Train Station.

This popular suburb is located approximately 9 miles to the South of Glasgow's City Centre and is conveniently situated for commuter access to nearby M77/M8 & Glasgow Southern Orbital.

Sports and recreational facilities can be found locally to include Parklands Country Club, East Renfrewshire, Cathcart and Whitecraigs Golf Clubs, Whitecraigs Tennis Club, Eastwood Theatre and Rouken Glen Park, voted Best Park in the UK 2016, as well as East Renfrewshire Council's own excellent sports and leisure facilities at Eastwood Toll.

For those with young families, the property sits within the catchment area for some of Scotland's highest attaining primary and secondary schools, including Mearns Castle and St. Ninian's High Schools. The property is located approximately 0.75 miles from the private Belmont House School and within easy reach of various pick up points for Glasgow's other private schools.

EPC: Band D

The home report can be viewed and downloaded from the Onesurvey website:

Please follow the instructions.

Viewing Advised.