Masters Touch is a church that has been serving the community for 13 years. Founded by Kimmie and Lorine Montgomery, located at (3702 N Franklin Ave Flint, MI 48506), our mission is to provide spiritual guidance and support to all who seek it. We believe in creating a safe and welcoming environment for everyone, and strive to ensure that no one is left behind.

We’re a diverse church with a wide range of ministries and activities, including weekly services, Bible studies, prayer meetings, and social events. Our goal is to help people build a deeper relationship with God and connect with each other in meaningful ways.

Pastor Kimmie R. Montgomery,born on November 29th, 1959 in Tabor City, NC. Our Senior Pastor and founder of Masters Touch Christian Outreach Center. He is married to his lovely wife, Lorine Montgomery, of 43 years and they have four children together. He has thirteen years of pastoral experience and is a firm believer in Christ. Pastor Montgomery has studied under great leaders of Soul Saving Station of South Carolina, University of Biblical Studies of Eastside Fellowship NC and Rhema Bible Church of Tulsa, OK.Pastor Montgomery believes his responsibly is to reach and nurture those who are not in fellowship with the LORD Jesus. He is a minister who is driven to advance the kingdom of God through his commitment to the ministry. His vision is to change lives by touching hearts with the love of GOD. Pastor Montgomery achieves this by ministering beyond the four walls; this means ministering to homeless shelters, nursing homes, and where ever there is an opportunity to spread the word of Jesus.

He is personable minister who is passionate about connecting people with God and encouraging believers to live out their faith. He is also a minister who has the unique ability of bridging the gap between the church community and the secular world, creating opportunities for spiritual growth in both. Pastor Montgomery is a great shepherd for the flock God has placed him responsible for.