Christel Khalil is an actress best known for The Young and the Restless (1973), W.I.T.C.H. (2004) and need to speak (2022). She was previously married to Stephen Hensley. She won the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding youngest Actress in a Drama Series after four nominations in the order.

Christel Khalil was born in 30 November 1987 (Age: 35 Years, as in 2023) in Los Angeles, California, United States. Christel Khalil is 5 feet and 2 inches tall, and her body weight is around 51 Kg.

Christel Khalil Biography, Lifestyle, Wiki, Height, Weight, Birthday, Age, Movies, TV Serials, Instagram, Salary, Net Worth, Income, Boyfriend, Family, Father, Mother, Husband, Affairs, Marriage Life, Phone Number, Photos, House, Cars, Awards & Facts

Biography/Wiki

Personal Life

Education

Physical Statistics And More

How tall is Christel Khalil?

How much does Christel Khalil weigh?

How old is Christel Khalil?

Body Measurements

Eye Color

Family & Relationship

Parents & Siblings

Boyfriend & Husband

Career

What is Christel Khalil’s Salary?

Christel Khalil Charges $ 32,000 Per Episode and her main source of income is Acting, Modeling, and Brand Endorsements.

What is Christel Khalil’s Net Worth?

Christel Khalil has an estimated total Net Worth of $17 Million.

Cars And Bikes Collection

Christel Khalil has a lot of luxury Cars collection including :

Not Known

Some Lesser Known Facts About Christel Khalil

• Khalil is best known for her depiction as Lily Winters on the CBS cleaner pieces The Young and the Restless.

• At the 39th Day Emmy Awards on June 23, 2012, she won the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding youngest Actress in a Drama Series after four nominations in the order.

• In August 2018, she blazoned her decision to downgrade from being on contract with the show and rather continue on a recreating base.

• Khalil explained the decision was driven by her desire to have further freedom in both her professional and particular life.

• She continued to make sporadic appearances on the show until being approached by current head pen and co-executive patron Josh Griffith in January 2020, to return to rephotographing on a regular base.

• Khalil has had small places in pictures similar as Dragon Fury, Matilda, Interview With the homicide and White Like the Moon.

• She played Cornelia Hale in W.I.T.C.H., and also appeared on That is So Raven and Malcolm in the Middle, among other shows.

• Khalil also performed in Los Angeles theater products before landing her part on The Young and the Restless. In 2012, she appeared in the music videotape for musician Johnny Britt’s single” Beautiful Queen”.

• In spring 2019, she starred in the independent her comedy We Need To Talk, written by pen- director Todd Wolfe. In September 2008, she married musician Stephen Hensley.

• Her Young and the Restless co-star Elizabeth Hendrickson served as bridesmaids and Brighton James served as stylish man.

• Khalil said one of her favorite pursuits is traveling. She loves to witness other societies and her peregrination make her feel connected to herself.

FAQ

1. What is the current Net Worth of Christel Khalil?

At present, the Net Worth of Christel Khalil is $17 million.

2. Where was Christel Khalil born?

The birthplace of Christel Khalil is Los Angeles, California, United States.

3. What is Christel Khalil’s true ethnicity?

She believes in Christianity.

4. What is the educational qualification of Christel Khalil?

Christel Khalil completed her Graduation.

5. Is Christel Khalil Married?

Christel Khalil is married to Stephen Hensley In 2008.