Four days of music and entertainment at the Campo Marzo park—train station area.

Food / drink booths.

Thursday – from 4 p.m. Main event the LIVE by “Catarrhal noise”

Friday – from 6 p.m.: “90 WONDERLAND: Closing Summer Tour” Djing

Saturday – from 4 p.m.: “HOLI: Il Festival dei Colori” – The Holi Festival Of Colours.

Saturday – from 4 p.m.:Main event the LIVE by “Derozer”.

www.comune.vicenza.it

Prize winning Winery in the court of a venetian Villa. We produce red and white DOC wines. It is possible to organize visits and tastings in English and also, near the Villa, the Piovene family restored two little houses to host visitors.

Hairdresser primarily concerned with natural sustainability, indeed all our products are completely organic and natural. Our field of excellence is haircare, in which we can provide you top quality performance regarding cut and color.

A calm and elegant atmosphere within their wide, warm inner and external spaces. Proposals for every occasion like Weddings, Business meeting, Special and Romantic Occasions. We offer a Hospitality service for short and longer stays.

The historic cellar, located within the city walls of the Castle of Soave, is the heart of the winery, that operates in respect to the traditions and customs of its Soave Classico region wines. Available three different tastings which include a visit to the historic cellar to rediscover ancient traditions and flavors of the area.

Carmen Vision Care is an optical, optometric and orthoptic center dedicated to the visual well-being of the person. At our clinic you will be able to carry out optometric and orthoptic visits. We are specialized in customized contact lenses and vision therapy. At our store you will find also eyeglasses and sunglasses from the best niche brands for men, women and children.

Located underneath the Palladian Basilica. Jewelry and watches store since 1910, it is a historic family business where you can find the best Italian jewelry brands and a selection of prestigious and sophisticated watches.

A team of highly specialized professionals able to solve all dental pathologies of children and adults is waiting for you in downtown Vicenza. They speak good English.

Find thousands of well selected and affordable second-hand items. Sell what you no longer use and get your money in cash.