Follow this if you can. That seemed to be the invitation Jonathan Lethem sent with his first three novels, each of them written when he was in his 20s, a university dropout who worked in used-book stores, reading voraciously and ignoring borders among literary genres.

Inspired by the hardboiled detective fiction of Raymond Chandler, Ross Macdonald and James Crumley​, Lethem's debut, Gun, with Occasional Music (1994), warps that genre and includes inventions entirely his own, among them an unforgettable trigger-happy kangaroo, that gave the novel a cult following from the moment it appeared. His next novel, Amnesia Moon (1995), pays homage to another hero, Philip K. Dick, and unfolds in an eerie post-apocalyptic American dreamscape.

Anyone who moved from those books to As She Climbed Across the Table (1997), with its campus setting and echoes of John Barth​ and Don DeLillo​, might mistake these novels as the work of three different and equally fascinating writers.

Lethem embraces his influences. He speaks of what inspires him – books, films, art and music – as talismans and creative totems. In his essay collection, The Ecstasy of Influence, he writes about his perpetual status as a fan who wants, always, to be astonished.

"I identify with the way a method actor talks about inhabiting a role," he says, speaking by phone from his home in southern California, where he is the Roy Edward Disney Professor in Creative Writing at Pomona College. "You're in an improvisation against everything that you know about life and that you know about language. It's all up for grabs at any given point."

In his body of work – nine novels and five story collections, including the forthcoming Lucky Alan – Lethem segues from the above genre-twisting narratives to magic realism and multi-generational sagas.

"I've always had the appetite to do a lot of things," he says, "and it comes directly out of my reading life. It's not enough to have a road map or have a script and follow it. You will always want to break out of it. It's a way to insist on freshness, this readiness to activate every resource in the improvisation, to never know what you're doing next. That's the goal."

Now in his early 50s, recipient of a National Book Critics Circle Award for Fiction (Motherless Brooklyn, 1999) and a non-fiction nominee for that award (The Ecstasy of Influence, 2011), Lethem has become the definition that he set for himself while still in his 20s: writer as a moving target.

"Take someone like Thomas Berger, who wrote a war novel, a Western, a crime novel, and he was a brilliant satirist of small-town America," Lethem says. "He was always reinventing himself. I thought, `That's what I want to be like. I want to have that kind of fun.' "

The excitement and pleasure that Lethem finds in his talismans come through in his own work, including The Fortress of Solitude (2003), his first novel in a (mostly) realist tradition. Set in Brooklyn, where Lethem was born in 1964, the novel follows two motherless boys, the white Dylan Ebdus (named after another hero, Bob Dylan) and African-American Mingus Rude, as they come of age in the 1970s. The novel became a New York Times bestseller and earned Lethem a legion of new readers who could, by then, go back to the author's back catalogue to find five radically diverse novels.

The title of his breakthrough, Motherless Brooklyn, whose narrator has Tourette's syndrome, highlights what resides at the centre of all Lethem's work. His mother died when he was 13, and his fiction continually investigates loss, whether in the form of a person, memory or language. Lethem's mother, a political activist, inspired the multi-generational Dissident Gardens (2013), his most recent novel. His father was an avant-garde painter. In The Ecstasy of Influence, Lethem writes of the models who came to his childhood home to pose nude. He followed them into the studio, picked up a sketchpad and declared himself an apprentice artist.

"There's been this incredible gift in my life, living with a working artist," Lethem says. "The first thing was that it humanised my sense of what it was to commit to an art form or an art practice. It's the opposite of an exotic life that I've chosen for myself, but I know that a lot of artists have to fight their way against scepticism from without and within. I had this crazy head start."

In 1982, with "a kind of intermittent seriousness", Lethem entered Bennington College as a prospective art student. While the other critically acclaimed American writers of his generation, among them Jonathan Franzen​, Ann Patchett and David Foster Wallace, all graduated from esteemed universities, Lethem soon left Bennington. In Moby-Dick, a whaler becomes Ishmael's Harvard and Yale. For Lethem, bookstores provided a background that continues to inspire him. As the narrator says in one of the stories in Lucky Alan, "We worked in bookstores, the only thing to do."

"That's where I wanted to be," Lethem says. "Being a bookseller was like being a fetishist or a curator. I wanted to make these things because I loved them, and I want other people to love them. I was into used books, which is, for me, the greater love. A new book looks a little like a package of processed cheese to me. It looks more like a piece of advertising than a thing to devour. Used books have sunk into cultural use, and that's when books start to really live."

For that reason, Lethem has always wanted his books to be published in mass-market editions like the pulp originals he collects of his heroes Charles Willeford, Jim Thompson and Philip K. Dick.

"There are certain writers, the way I feel about them, maybe they were published very beautifully or eccentrically, and collecting their first editions makes me orgasmic. The American editions of Italo Calvino's books, for instance. Here's someone who tried something new every time. He's another model, like Berger, for that aspiration to be a dozen different writers."

Lethem considers another inspiration, Bob Dylan, to be the greatest artist of his time. In his Rolling Stone interview with the singer-songwriter, he notes that Dylan's "panoply of styles and stances was itself the greatest measure of his genius". Providing a list of the signed or special editions in his library would be "like giving out a list for some burglar", Lethem says, but he admits that a personalised copy of Dylan's memoir, Chronicles, is among his most notable possessions.

Lethem is making his second visit to Australia this month. He came several years ago on an "incognito" trip, snorkelling the Great Barrier Reef and walking around the base of Uluru.

Australia and New Zealand have long occupied his imagination, he says. This began with the musical groups of the 1980s and '90s: "The Go-Betweens, The Chills, Chris Knox, but the band that is my fixation above all is The Go-Betweens. Each of their primary six records in their first formation, it's like they're a different band each time out."

Another Australian, novelist Christina Stead, has become an influence on his more recent work. "With Dissident Gardens," Lethem says, "it was one of her unfinished, last books, I'm Dying Laughing, which would have been one of her greatest novels and sort of is anyway, although she didn't get to fix everything. And The Man Who Loved Children is one of the deepest books about family life that's imaginable. It helped me go all the way in Fortress."

For someone who deems himself "polymorphous perverse" as a reader, writer and, perhaps most importantly, a fan, Lethem continues to thrive from the parade of styles and possibilities he discovered in his years as a bookseller.

"How could I refuse the invitation to work with a full range of things you could do with language and the novel?" he asks. "There are so many ways it can succeed or beautiful ways it can fail. I want to experience those possibilities. The greatest pleasure for me is always to be disarmed, to feel that language as I read or as I write is discovering what it can do, what it wants to do. You want to be startled. You want to be amazed."

Lucky Alan and Other Stories is published this month by Jonathan Cape, $45. Jonathan Lethem is a guest at Sydney Writers' Festival on May 22-24.