The Battle of Stratus occurred in 429 BC when a Spartan-led army under Cnemus launched a failed assault on the Acarnanian capital of Stratus during the Peloponnesian War. The Spartan attack failed with great slaughter, and the defeat at Stratus was soon followed by another defeat at the Battle of Rhium.

History[]

In the summer of 429 BC, not long after the Athenian defeat at the Battle of Spartolos, the Ambraciots and Chaonians, being desirous of reducing the whole of Acarnania and detaching it from Athens, persuaded the Spartans to equip a fleet from their confederacy and send 1,000 heavy infantry to Acarnania, representing that if a combined movement were made by land and sea, the coast Acarnanians would be unable to march, and the conquest of Zakynthos and Cephalonia easily following on the possession of Acarnania, the cruise round Peloponnese would be no longer so convenient for the Athenians. The Peloponnesians would also have a hope of taking the Athenian base at Naupactus. The Spartans accordingly sent off a few vessels with their high admiral Cnemus, and they sailed to Leucas. While the ships from Corinth, Sicyon, and the vicinity were getting ready, and those from Leucas, Anactorium, and Ambracia, which had arrived before, were waiting for them at Leucas, Cnemus and his 1,000 heavy infantry had run into the gulf, giving the slip to the Athenian admiral Phormio, and began at once to prepare for the land expedition. His army included both Greeks and the barbarian Chaonians, led by Photys and Nicanor, Molossians and Atintanians led by Sabylinthus, and Paravaeans under King Oroedus. King Perdiccas II of Macedon tried to send 1,000 Macedonians to support the Spartans, but they arrived too late. With this force, Cnemus set out without waiting for the fleet from Corinth.His force sacked the open village of Limnaea and advanced to the Acarnanian capital of Stratus, taking it.

Battle[]

The Acarnanians, finding themselves invaded and surrounded, sent for help to Phormio, who responded that he could not leave Naupactus unprotected. The Spartans advanced upon Stratus in three divisions, with the intention of encamping near it and attempting the wall by force if they failed to succeed by negotiation. The center was occupied by the Chaonians and the rest of the barbarians, with the Leucadians and Anactorians and their followers on the right, and Cnemus with the Peloponnesians and Ambraciots on the left, each division being a long way off from, and sometimes even out of sight of, the others. The Hellenes advnaced in good order, keeping a lookout until they encamped in a good position. However, the self-confident Chaonian barbarians rushed on to attack Stratus with the rest of the barbarians rather than make camp, and the Stratians ambushed them as they came close to the city. Great numbers of the panicked Chaonias were slain, and, as soon as the brave Chaonians were seen to be in retreat, the rest of the barbarians fled. At nightfall, Cnemus withdrew his army to the River Anapus, 9 miles from Stratus, recovering his dead next day under truce. He then fell back upon the Oeniadae's city before the enemy's reinforcements caem up, and from hence each returned home, and the Stratians set up a trophy for the battle with the barbarians.