Twice in this chapter, according to the commentators, Plutarch has confused a pair of military engagements, Spartolos with Poteidaia and Nikias' campaign in the Megarid during 427 with that of Demosthenes in 424. In both instances this view seems to me to be of doubtful validity. In one case I would propose that instead of confusing two campaigns Plutarch simply misunderstood a very difficult passage in Thucydides, while in the second there is only flimsy evidence for rejecting Plutarch's version.

His statement that the Athenians under the command of Kalliades and Xenophon were defeated in Thrace by the Chalkidians refers to the battle of Spartolos (Thuc. 2. 79), but it has become a critical dogma that Plutarch 'gives Kalliades as the commander, clearly by confusion with Kallias son of Kalliades',3 who led the Athenian forces at the battle of Poteidaia (Thuc. 1. 62–3). The only apparent reason for this view is the coincidence of the names Kallias and Kalliades, but the frequent occurrence of these names makes this coincidence of no significance.

page 160 note 6 In addition to the evidence cited by Holden, xlii-xlvii, there are other indications that Plutarch paid close attention to Thucydides' narrative. In the first place he has excerpted a wealth of information from Thucydides about the morale of the Athenian army in Sicily. Or consider his treatment of Nikias' Korinthian campaign (6), where he has taken a minor detail from Thuc. 4. 44. 6 and transformed it into an important example of Nikias' devotion to duty.

page 161 note 1 1. 46. 2; 1. 116. 1; 3. 3. 2; 3. 19. 1; 4. 42. 1; 5. 4. 1; 8. 35. 1. The use of at 2. 13. 1 is different from the others since there Thucydides is not talking about the command of a military force. Dover couples this instance with 1. 116. 1 as examples of meaning ‘only one often’.

page 162 note 4 Since Thucydides does no explicitly mention the capture of the island, it must be inferred, as, for example, by Beattie, 25, who translates, ‘Then he built a wall to protect his position on the mainland (sc. as well as capturing the island) at a point where the island, which is not far from the mainland, could be counter-attacked via a bridge over a marsh.’

page 162 note 5 Plutarch clearly derives his idea of the speed of Nikias' operations from Thuc. 3. 51. One difficulty remains: Thucydides says nothing about shutting the Megarians up in the city. I suggest that this is Plutarch's inference from their failure to oppose Nikias. Plutarch seems to think that this was a campaign by land, while Thucydides seems to indicate that Nikias went by sea.