The studio is a basic creative subject in the study program. Its central content is the students' own design practice. For this practice, the studio provides them with the material conditions given by a specific space and a specific media or technological orientation. It provides them with a welcoming and stimulating environment for reflection and contextualization of their own creative intentions in ongoing communication with teachers and other students. A pair of leading pedagogues is responsible for running the studio. The student works individually on her own creation and/or collectively in a studio group. When working, he respects the ethical rules agreed by the group based on the basic principles of equal rights and opportunities, respect for others, solidarity and ecological sustainability. Takes good care of the shared space. During the individual or collective realization of partial and more complex authorial outputs, students acquire conceptual thinking about their work, technical skills and knowledge of relevant material processes or technological procedures, the ability to verbally articulate their own intention, orientation in relevant theoretical approaches and disciplines, an overview of topics in the current field of design and broader public debates, the ability to critically evaluate and contextualize one's own creative practice. The schedule and specific content of studio practice, teaching methods and criteria and assessment methods are defined in the opening hours of each semester. They thus reflect the composition of the students in the studio as well as the current design, social and environmental context. The assignment or topic of the studio practice has an individual or collective character and is determined by personal agreement between the students and the responsible teachers. The creative process is accompanied by ongoing presentations and consultations. Consultations can take place both collectively in the form of periodic studio meetings and individually. Students are also motivated to consult their creative practice with other personalities working in the field. Technological and theoretical support for work on studio projects is provided by managers in cooperation with cabinets and KTDU.

The Studio 7 course is intended to provide the student with suitable conditions for the realization of the Diploma Thesis. Students are no longer involved in collaborative studio activities, but focus on completing the Diploma Thesis and creating its documentation.