Zhejiangosaurus is considered to be a dubious species. However, the rest of them could make nice additions to the game. Some of other species that could make nice additions to the game include:

Kunbarrasaurus, A small herbivorous ankylosaurian dinosaur that lived during the Cretaceous period found in the the Allaru Formation of Australia. The holotype specimen represents the most complete dinosaur skeleton ever found in Eastern Gondwana (Australia, Antarctica, Madagascar, and India) and the most complete ankylosaurian skeleton from the entirety of the Gondwanan continents.

Shamosaurus, A basal ankylosaurid ankylosaur from early Cretaceous period found in the Dzunbain Formation and the Hamrin-Us site in the Dornogovi Province. .

Aletopelta, A basal ankylosaurid dinosaur from Southern California that lived during the late Cretaceous period in what is now the Point Loma Formation. It's name means wanderer shield; a reference to the fact its remains were washed away into the ocean shortly after it died where it formed a miniature reef and was scavenged upon by invertebrates and sharks, which why some of the bones are missing or damaged.

Antarctopelta, A ankylosaurian dinosaur with only one known species, A. oliveroi, which lived in Antarctica during the late Cretaceous period. (The dinosaur on the left of the picture.)

Talarurus, A genus of ankylosaurid dinosaur that lived in Asia during the late Cretaceous period, about 96 million to 89 million years ago. It's name means basket tail or wicker tail.

Gargoyleosaurus, It is one of the earliest ankylosaurs known from relatively complete fossil remains. The holotype was discovered in 1995 at the Bone Cabin Quarry West locality, in Albany County, Wyoming in exposures of the late Jurassic section of the Morrison Formation. Its name means gargoyle lizard.

Zuul, a genus of herbivorous ankylosaurine dinosaur from the Campanian Judith River Formation of Montana. It is known from a complete skull and tail, which represents the first ankylosaurinae known from a complete skull and tail club, as well as the most complete ankylosaurid specimen thus far recovered from North America.

Borealopelta, A genus of nodosaurid ankylosaur from the Lower Cretaceous of Alberta, Canada. It was discovered at an oil sands mine north of Fort McMurray, Alberta. The specimen is remarkable for being among the best-preserved dinosaur fossils of its size ever found.

Europelta, A genus of nodosaurid dinosaur from Spain that lived during the Early Cretaceous (early Albian stage, ~113.0 Ma) in what is now the lower Escucha Formation of the Teruel Province. It is known from two associated partial skeletons, and represents the most complete ankylosaur known from Europe. It is the largest member of the clade Struthiosaurini.

Struthiosaurus, A genus of nodosaurid dinosaurs that lived in the late Cretaceous period from Austria, Romania, France and Hungary in Europe.

Liaoningosaurus, An unusual genus of basal ankylosaurid dinosaur from the Liaoning Province, China that lived during the early Cretaceous period in what is now the Yixian and Jiufotang Formation. It is the oldest ankylosaurid to have had a tail club. It has been speculated by some experts that it may have hunted or scavenged, based on the preserved gut contents showing that it may have eaten fish and may have been semi-aquatic, but this has been heavily debated. I do think if they add it to the game the developers should make it so this species requires a lot of water in its enclosure and maybe require it to have a fish feeder in its enclosure.