Monday, May 13th, 2024

Multiple graded stakes winner Maple Leaf Mel earned New York-bred Horse of the Year, champion 3-year-old filly and champion female sprinter honors during the New York Thoroughbred Breeders Inc.’s Annual Awards Ceremony Monday night at Sacred Saratoga on the property of GMP Farm in Schuylerville.

Bred by Joe Fafone and campaigned by Bill Parcells’ August Dawn Farm, Maple Leaf Mel won the East View Stakes at Aqueduct against fellow New York-bred fillies before back-to-back successes in the Grade 3 Miss Preakness at Pimlico and Grade 3 Victory Ride at Belmont Park. The daughter of Cross Traffic suffered a fatal injury in the final strides – while on the lead and headed to a certain victory – of the Grade 1 Test Stakes at Saratoga Race Course. Trained by Melanie Giddings and Jeremiah Englehart, Maple Leaf Mel won five of six starts overall and earned $399,650.

The 2023 New York-bred Horse of the Year and divisional champions were chosen by a vote of New York turf writers, handicappers, photographers and television and radio hosts and analysts conducted by the NYTB.

A Commemorative Awards Dinner Program was written and produced by ST Publishing (the team behind The Saratoga Special and Thisishorseracing.com) for Monday night’s event and includes profiles of all the finalists. The program is available here.

New York’s 2023 honorees:

New York-Bred Horse of the Year, Champion Three-Year-Old Filly, Champion Female Sprinter

Maple Leaf Mel (Cross Traffic-City Gift, by City Place)

Breeder: Joe Fafone.

Owner: August Dawn Farm.

Trainers: Melanie Giddings and Jeremiah Englehart.

Foaling farm: Waldorf Farm in Valatie.

Champion Two-Year-Old Male

The Wine Steward (Vino Rosso – Call to Service, by To Honor and Serve)

Breeders: Sequel Thoroughbreds LLC, Lakland Farm and Mark Toothaker

Owner: Paradise Farms Corp. and David Staudacher

Trainer: Mike Maker

Foaling farm: Sequel Stallions in Hudson

Champion Two-Year-Old Filly

Cara’s Time (Not This Time – Zindra, by Macho Uno)

Breeder: Stephen Crestani Jr.

Owner: Richard Greeley

Trainer: Mitch Friedman

Foaling farm: New Hill Farm in Hoosick Falls

Champion Three-Year-Old Male

Hejazi (Bernardini – G Note, by Medaglia d’Oro)

Breeder: Chester and Mary Broman

Owner: Zedan Racing Stables Inc.

Trainers: Bob Baffert, Tim Yakteen

Foaling farm: Chestertown Farm in Chestertown

Champion Older Dirt Male

Dr Ardito (Liam’s Map – Delightfully So, by Indian Charlie)

Breeders: Fred Hertrich III and John Fielding

Owners: Michael Dubb and Michael Caruso

Trainer: Chad Brown

Foaling farm: Waldorf Farm in Valatie

Champion Older Dirt Female

Classy Edition (Classic Empire – Newbie, by Bernardini)

Breeders: Chester and Mary Broman

Owners: Robert and Lawana Low

Trainer: Todd Pletcher

Foaling farm: Chestertown Farm in Chestertown

Champion Turf Male

Red Knight (Pure Prize – Isabel Away, Skip Away)

Breeder/Owner: Trinity Farm

Trainer: Mike Maker

Foaling farm: Keane Stud in Amenia

Champion Turf Female

Silver Skillet (Liam’s Map – Catcha Rising Star, by Red Giant)

Breeder: Robert Chasanoff

Owners: Reeves Thoroughbred Racing, Tango Uniform Racing and Steven Rocco

Trainer: Christophe Clement

Foaling farm: Blue Chip Farms in Wallkill

Champion Male Sprinter

Bold Journey (Hard Spun – Polly Freeze, by Super Saver)

Breeders: Fred Hertrich III and John Fielding.

Owners: Pantofel Stable, Wachtel Stable and Gary Barber

Trainer: Bill Mott

Foaling farm: Waldorf Farm in Valatie

Steeplechaser

Kiyomori (First Samurai – The Grey Express, by King’s Theatre)

Breeder/Owner: Greg Hawkins

Trainers: Todd Wyatt and Janet Elliot

Foaling farm: River Valley Farm in Gansevoort

Broodmare of the Year: City Gift (City Place – For My Wife, by Not For Love)

New York-Bred Trainer of the Year: Linda Rice

New York-Bred Jockey of the Year: Manuel Franco

New York Breeder of the Year: Stonewall Farm

Click here for the 2023 NYTB Annual Awards Dinner program.