Enter terms

Novar%20controls?page=4:

New ownership brings great opportunities: Novar Ireland Ltd. settles in with Honeywell

Since the acquisition of Novar by Honeywell just over a year ago, Novar Ireland Ltd. has settled into life under the new ownership, which has brought many positives including investment in new products and an expanded sales team.

Where to go for security products

A range of security products is featured in the new shortform catalogue from ADE.

ADPR261s- Innovative alarm panel heads ADE’s exhibits at IFSEC

ADE’s unique cost-effective, innovative intruder alarm panel, Logic 6, will take pride of place in ADE’s display of security products on the Novar stand at IFSEC (Q40). Logic Six utilises proximity technology in the shape of a key fob that enables ...

ADE launches secure website for installers

Full details of all ADE security products, and much more, can be found on the newly updated ADE website

Voltimum at the 2004 ECA Electrical Industry Conference

Between 8th and 15th May 2004, the great and the good of the electrical industry congregated in Vilamoura for the annual ECA Electrical Industry Conference. Voltimum was there too.

Voltimum at the 2004 ECA Electrical Industry Conference

Between 8th and 15th May 2004, the great and the good of the electrical industry congregated in Vilamoura for the annual ECA Electrical Industry Conference. Voltimum was there too.

Making alarm setting easier for the elderly

Especially suitable for burglar alarm control panels in the homes of elderly and infirm people is the SIMPLE SET from ADE. This is a proximity tag reader that can be fitted into Optima and Accenta G3 panels, so enabling users to set and unset the control ...

NHS Trust in Draka FiretufPlus

FiretufPlus has been installed in the fire alarm system at the new DTC Care Centre at Hinchingbrooke Hospital.

VoltiNEWS- June 2007 #2

Welcome to this month's edition of VoltiNEWS, the newsletter for the Irish electrical industry. Enclosed you will find the latest product innovations, legislative issues, technical expertise and training from the leading organisations in the industry. ...

On My Desk... Eamon Conway, MK Ireland Managing Director

Have you ever wondered what the industry's influential figures have on their desk? From switch samples to Sam Maguire Cup photographs, you can tell a lot about a person by their desk. This is why Voltimum's roving reporter, Frankie Snobel, scoped out ...

Voltimum UK has announced that ITW Construction Products (Spit) has joined Voltimum UK as its first tooling and fixings manufacturing partner

Voltimum welcomes the first tooling and fixing partner to www.voltimum.co.uk

ADE helps security installers to advance their business

A scheme to help security installers improve the effectiveness of their businesses has been launched by ADE, the leading UK manufacturer and supplier of security products.

Only protected 13A sockets outdoors- don’t use anything else!

Waterproof 13A sockets should be the norm in gardens and other outdoor applications, says MK Electric’s Jonathan Sparkes, He points out that it is safer and more convenient to connect mains powered electrical equipment used outdoors via 13A RCD protected ...