Movie Details

Actors: Max Martini, Nick Chinlund, Danny Arroyo, Gary Kasper, Kiko Ellsworth

Director: David Jackson

Genres: Action & Adventure

Sub-Genres: Action & Adventure

Studio: Genius Products (TVN)

Format: DVD - Color,Widescreen

DVD Release Date: 04/21/2009

Original Release Date: 01/01/2008

Theatrical Release Date: 01/01/2008

Release Year: 2009

Run Time: 1hr 28min

Screens: Color,Widescreen

Number of Discs: 1

SwapaDVD Credits: 1

Total Copies: 0

Members Wishing: 0

MPAA Rating: R (Restricted)

Languages: English

Similar Movies

Similarly Requested DVDs

Member Movie Reviews

K. K. (GAMER)

Reviewed on 12/28/2022...

Pretty good fight scenes and plotline! A must watch for Street and MMA fighters!

3 of 4 member(s) found this review helpful.

Adam C. (i12bnmovie) from SAINT LOUIS, MO

Reviewed on 7/13/2009...

This was a 100% predictable movie from start to finish. The only reason I wanted to see it was because of Max Martini. I love The Unit. I went into this movie not expecting much, and it met those low expectations. There was over the top dialog. It was over the top acting. I don't know what the director was thinking. I hope that David Mamet comes knocking on Martini's door for another film. Martini needs better movies or a better agent. I think he should get the same agent as Statham.

2 of 3 member(s) found this review helpful.

Movie Reviews

Great Action... Great Fights... Beautiful Women...

XKAL | USA | 04/14/2009

(5 out of 5 stars)

"The "Street Warrior" is Jack Campbell, played by Max Martini, an

ex-army ranger, who comes back home to discover his brother beaten near

death because of an underground no holds barred fight club. He enters

the gauntlet to avenge his brother and bring order to the town that has

been corrupted by the ring leader, played by Nick Chinlund.

"Street Warrior" supplies us with tons of great action fight scenes

that are at times vicious. Various styles of fight techniques are

used... martial arts, boxing, wrestling, street brawling, luchador, and

lots of cheat moves. What more can you ask from a fight movie? Well,

how about some beautiful women? Street Warrior has lots of great eye

candy as well to keep your interest piqued between the fists and blood.

The acting is very good and believable by the entire cast. Props to Max

Martini and Nick Chinlund on their performance, but also to the

characters of Baldus, played by Gary Kasper, the evil white supremacist

Nazi fighter who entices the rabid paying audience by yelling "Hate

Me!", and the character of Santo, played by Danny Arroyo, the luchador

fighter who befriends Campbell and is forced to fight in order to save

his wife and children.

Fighting, sex, blood, dancing women and great action... What more can

you ask from a fight movie? "Street Warrior" is well worth the rental or purchase."