Psychotic redneck Judd owns a dilapidated hotel in rural East Texas, where he murders people who upset him or his business, and then feeds their remains to his large pet crocodile in the swamp beside his hotel.

The world's water supply has dried up due to some sort of apocalypse. A beautiful woman holds the secret to where one of the last springs being guarded by a group of Amazons. A "Road Warrior" like crew captures her and tries to make her talk through brutal torture. The hero (Styrker) unites with some of the remaining "good guys" and the Amazons and frees the woman. They go on to a "Road Warrior" type of concluding battle with the bad guys.

Part crime caper gone awry, part survival horror film, this 1970s set thriller depicts a harrowing fight for survival after a pair of wannabe crooks botch a bank heist and flee into the desert, where they inexplicably stumble upon Carnage Park, a remote stretch of wilderness occupied by a psychotic ex-military sniper.

An evil spirit Possesses the corpse of a diseased man. It must absorb the life energy of the living, in order for the corpse to not rot away. It moves to the suburbs, where, a neighbor begins to suspect something isn't right.

A veteran cop (David Carradine) investigates the crimes of an anarchist street gang that causes chaos wherever they go. Meanwhile, his wife (Nancy Kwan), a police counselor, investigates a teenage runaway case which leads to the same gang. Showdowns ensue that pits sides together in a violent series of confrontations.

Following clues to the origin of mankind, a team finds a structure on a distant moon, but they soon realize they are not alone.

In 19th century Japan, Nathan Algren, a US army captain, is hired by the Japanese emperor to train his army in the modern warfare techniques. Captain Algren finds himself trapped in a struggle between two eras and two worlds.

After being set-up and betrayed by the man who hired him to assassinate a Texas Senator, an ex-Federale launches a brutal rampage of revenge against his former boss.

Will's soon-to-be ex-wife mysteriously vanishes at a gas station. He delves into the town's criminal underbelly while running from the authorities in a race against time to find her.

Three people - a rich couple and a crew member - are shipwrecked on a tropical island and their subsequent fight for survival becomes even tougher when they begin to turn on each other.

After a 10 year stint, former bootlegger and notorious criminal Al Capone starts to show signs of dementia, forcing him to face the demons of his violent past.

A long time ago in a distant fairy tale countryside, a young girl leads her little brother into a dark wood in desperate search of food and work, only to stumble upon a nexus of terrifying evil.

When three redneck brothers agree to help a woman save her godson from an abusive stepfather, they become targets on the run from an odd cast of characters.