Vodohod Company took the first two places in the River Cruise nomination according to the results of online voting at the Russian Traveler Awards 2022, annually organized by the Russian Traveler magazine. The first place with an absolute majority of votes gained the cruise to the Solovetsky Islands on the motor ship Alexander Pushkin. The second place was taken by Two Capitals cruise between Moscow and St. Petersburg on the motor ship Mustai Karim.

From June 1 to October 31, 2022, through online voting, over half a million people were able to estimate Russia`s tourism opportunities and cast their vote for the best sightseeing routes and crafts, for worldwide tourist destinations and cultural attractions of Russian regions, for favorite hotels and cruises.

Voting took place in 10 nominations, including Cultural and Historical Site, Excursion and Tourist Route, River Cruise, Health Resort, Fest/Hoilidays, National Dish, Folk Craft and others.

The results of the Russian Traveler Awards were announced on December 5 at the award ceremony at the PALMIRA Business Club Hotel in Moscow.

It is symbolic that Vodohod was awarded by the famous Russian traveler, blogger and TV presenter Sergey Dolya, who knows firsthand about river cruises and went with Vodohod to the Yenisei Expedition on the ship Maxim Gorky.

We thank everyone who voted for Vodohod river cruises! Together we develop the world of river travel and open new points on the tourist map of Russia!

Special thanks to the editorial staff of Russian Traveler magazine and the organizers of the Russian Traveler Awards 2022 for a bright unifying event in the travel industry, for professionalism and promotion of Russian travel brands!

Remark:

Russian Traveler magazine is an inspiring guide to Russia and the countries and destinations popular among Russian travelers. Travel ideas are accompanied by proven practical information, recommendations from experts and the latest trends and news in the world of travel.

Russian Traveler magazine is published five times a year.

The motto of the magazine is "Dream. Plan. Travel. Share."