This year, Vodohod’s fleet operated on the domestic Russian market and its 14 of 26 ships took part in the navigation 2020 as the rest of the fleet was laid up because of the embargo on international clients. Since its first voyage in late June 2020, Vodohod had the great pleasure of providing more than 35’000 guests from Russia the singular opportunity to travel. That’s 438 departures to-date that Vodohod operated from June to November of 2020.

What’s new

Vodohod launched the Mustai Karim, the first luxurious 5-star vessel built in Russia in several years, and fully refurbished the Maxim Gorky, a ship for Siberia expedition cruising down the Yenisei River.

In August 2020, Vodohod continued its year by launching a new-brand river-sea vessel – the Mustai Karim. Featuring modern European design, the ship interior resembles a five-star hotel with floor-to-ceiling windows, SPA area, beautiful and intimate restaurants and bars featuring specially created menus designed by a multi-award-winning chef. The 5-star ship successfully carried out several cruises between the most popular routes from Moscow to St. Petersburg visiting the Kizhi Ensemble of wooden architecture, the UNESCO World cultural and natural heritage site.

In September 2020, the Mustai Karim pioneered a completely new innovative itinerary with cruises on the Azov Sea and the Black Sea to Rostov-on-Don and received many rave reviews from its Russian clients.

In July 2020, Vodohod initiated the first expedition river cruise through the heart of Siberia from Krasnoyarsk. Expedition cruises on the Yenisei River is a completely new product on the Russian market and Vodohod’s mission is to show the undiscovered rivers and places of wild Russia to the world.

Expedition cruises are carried out onboard the Maxim Gorky, a small newly refurbished and custom designed 5-star vessel named after a famous Russian writer. The ship can accommodate just 94 guests, which guarantees the personal attention and satisfies even the most sophisticated tastes. Guests onboard the Maxim Gorky will enjoy spacious cabins with a modern natural design, SPA area, entertainment complex and a high-level service. The ship sails from Krasnoyarsk to Dudinka and vice versa visiting ethno cultural complexes, local tribes and old believers’ villages, wild nature of Siberia including the Putorana Plateau, the area of which is five times bigger than Belgium and has the UNESCO World Heritage status.

Continuing a series of successful innovations, Vodohod commenced cruises to the Solovetsky Islands, the cultural and historic ensemble, which has a unique church complex including the Solovetsky Monastery – the crown jewel of the UNESCO World Heritage site.

To reach a unique archipelago located in the western part of the White Sea, Vodohod renovated the four-deck ship, the Alexander Pushkin, taking into account all-important technical features. The ship is equipped with everything necessary for clients’ comfortable stay. In season 2020, cruises to the Solovetsky Islands became a highlight among clients what even made the Alexander Pushkin almost fully booked for 2021.

Covid-free or how onboard service operates

The outbreak of the coronavirus infection is a serious trial for the entire tourism industry and it has brought us a new challenge. This year, Vodohod had to react promptly in order to achieve evidence-based adaptable and sustainable solutions. The resulting Health and Safety Plan has been created taking into account the regulations of the Federal Service for Surveillance on Consumer Rights Protection and Human Wellbeing and the most valued international requirements and recommendations. Based on current regulations, the following measures were implemented:

pre-boarding health questionnaires were required,

guests and crew were both subject to daily temperature checks,

crew had received in-depth updated training,

express Covid-19 testing on a regular basis,

a hands disinfection with non-contact sanitizers,

daily disinfection of cabins and common areas,

the disinfection of the ship’s ventilation system using virucidal disinfectants,

social distancing and some others.

The health and safety of passengers, crew, and the communities where ships visit are an operational imperative and the top priority for Vodohod. Vodohod will continue to update its plans as global responses to the pandemic evolve, incorporating all the latest knowledge, guidelines, and protocols.

What’s coming

Vodohod remains focused on the future and has its fleet and crew ready to resume sailing on the Russian waterways in spring 2021, as long as international travel restrictions are lifted and guests can travel safely.

Vodohod created its first mobile app, which next year will be available in English. Here clients can find such functions and features as information about their cruise ship, available services, information about onboard purchases, audio guide, media player, chat with a hotel manager and news.

One more Vodohod’s innovation is a new booking engine, which helps both clients and travel agencies. Clients will be able to book additional services easily while purchasing a cruise online. The new booking system will also effectively simplify the work with travel agencies worldwide.

Furthermore, citizens of 52 countries will be able to visit Russia with an electronic visa starting January 1, 2021. The e-visa system is a timesaving process, which will definitely help to experience a stress-free travel and avoid a paperwork. Applications for electronic visas can be submitted on a special website of the Foreign Ministry or via a mobile application.

The warm and professional service, care and attention experienced during a river cruise with Vodohod remain as important as ever, and the new health and safety protocols just an additional peace of mind for Vodohod’s guests while on board. Vodohod is confident that the upcoming season will create incredible experiences and cherished memories that are well worth the wait taking into account all the new safety rules and preventive measures.

About Vodohod

Vodohod LLC is the largest river cruise company in Russia and a full cycle tour operator, uniting under its control all the links in the service chain: the development of travel routes, transportation, catering, excursions, entertainment, and staff training. For 16 years of its existence, Vodohod has brought to the market about 90 destinations both in the European part of Russia and in Siberia. A team of over 2000 people takes care of the guests, helping to discover the many wonders of Russia. Across Vodohod’s fleet of 26 ships (12 ships are dedicated to international guests), ranging from 3 to 5 stars Vodohod prides itself on offering an authentic Russian experience both onboard and on shore.

Follow Vodohod on Social Media:

Facebook: facebook.com/VODOHOD

Instagram: instagram.com/vodohod_intl/

Website: vodohod-cruises.com

Tel.: +44 2034 572896