Horna / Behexen – Split Tape/CD/LP

Featuring cult names from the harsh Finnish wasteland, this split showcases two unique but compatible strains of bleak, raw Black Metal. Seven immense offerings (four from HORNA and three from BEHEXEN) clock in at over 40 minutes, crawling into the darkest recesses of the mind and inflicting a plague of scathing sickness. Emerging from an otherworldly abyss to serenade, enchant and ensnare, the music remains precisely as it was two years ago – but artwork has been upgraded to include select lyrical extracts. HORNA’s scornful, charismatic muse is bitter and caustic, reeking of immeasurable malice and wholesome wrath. Attaining an equally eerie state of grim majesty, misanthropic blood brothers BEHEXEN emit three epic, menacing anthems of swirling, ritualistic blackness – fierce yet richly textured and ambient. The clandestine art of both entities materialises mysteriously through impenetrable darkness, curling a tenebrous hand around your soul, extinguishing all light therein. This corrosive coalition never received the distribution it richly deserves when originally released by Canadian label Autistiartili Records in 2004 and now Woodcut Records and Debemur Morti Productions aims to right that wrong. HORNA / BEHEXEN is a pact made in Hell; surrender to the gathering darkness.

Split (2020 Remaster) by Horna/Behexen

Behexen – From The Devil´s Chalice Tape/CD/LP/T-Shirt

Originally this material was only intended to be released as 3 x 7″ vinyl box-set, to celebrate Behexen’s 10th year journey on the path guided by our Lord. Due to countless delays and other problems the release of box-set was delayed already for a ridiculous three years. Thus, the whole original idea was watered down and lost it’s meaning completely.

Recorded at Fantom Dungeons during September 2004.

Legendary album n casette format first time ever! New 4 panel digipack cd! Also original “From The Devil´s Chalice” T-Shirts are reprinted. Designed by Helgorth Babalon Graphics.

Line-up:

Horns – Drums

Hoath Torog – Vocals

Reaper – Guitars, Bass

Gargantum – Guitars

From The Devil´s Chalice (2020 Remaster) by Behexen

Behexen – By The Blessing of Satan Tape/CD/T-Shirt

Behexen took its form in 94 when Torog (vocals), Horns (drums) & Reaper (guitars) formed the band. Black metal was the keyword since the very first day! The first demo “Reality is in evil…” saw the moonlight in 95, the second demo “Eternal Realm” in 97 and the third demo “Blessed be the darkness” in 98. At this point Reaper left the band. For his replacement Behexen took Gargantum in guitar and Lunatic in bass in order to do liverituals. “Blessed be the darkness” brought forth the deal from Sinister Figure and the debut album “Rituale Satanum” was recorded in summer 99. Due to countless problems the band drifted away from the rip-off label and waited 3 years to get that deal to expire. During this period Veilroth joined in for 2nd guitar. This line-up has lasted up till today. After this Behexen signed the deal with the Finnish Woodcut Records in May 2003. The second full-length album “By the Blessing of Satan” was recorded in May 2003. Behexen is and will be BLACK METAL in its blackest and rawest form!

Legendary album on casette format and single Gatefold LP first time ever! New deluxe 8 panel digipack CD! Also original “By The Blessing of Satan” T-Shirts are reprinted. Designed by Helgorth Babalon Graphics.

Line-up:

Torog – Vocals

Gargantum – Guitar

Reaper – Guitar

Horns – Drums