~

Debemur Morti Productions is, quite frankly, a monolithic name in the black and extreme metal scene. Having released countless classics over the years and still relentlessly discovering modern black gold on the regular (to the point where they were Dex‘s “label of the year” in 2020), they’re nigh on unstoppable. Now, to celebrate the impressive milestone of the 200th Debemur Morti Productions release, Ukrainian experimentalists WHITE WARD have composed a two-track EP – rather fittingly entitled Debemur Morti.

Formed in 2012 and taking root in raw depressive Black Metal, the band rapidly shed all boundaries, taking inspiration from an array of dark atmospheres – including the writings of H.P. Lovecraft and I.M. Banks. Exploring themes of borderline death states, aberrant afterlife worlds and strange mental disorders the WHITE WARD sound adapts the expansiveness of instrumental jazz and the depths of existential despair, and on Debemur Morti is primed to embark much further on their divergent sonic journey. This new work of art cycles from their near-trademark smoky neo-jazz saxophone ambience, through hypnotic contemporary Black Metal aggression and, on the titular opener that we are beyond honoured to present to you today, into emotive piano-led songcraft showcasing a flawless guest vocal performance from none other than the legendary Lars Nedland (BORKNAGAR, SOLEFALD).

The EP was recorded at Jenny Records and Lipky Recording Studio. Valentyn Zhulenko (NUG) recorded and co-produced the EP, while Alex Sedin of Ghostalgy Prods mixed and mastered the songs. That striking photography for the artwork was shot by Lucas DeShazer. Below, to complement your listening experience, please find a short interview done by Jonathan of DMP with mastermind Yurii of WHITE WARD.

DMP: Dear Yurii, thank you very much for answering these three questions about the coming first new song ‘Debemur Morti’. Would you be so kind as to tell us a few words about the composing process for this new track? Did everything start with a riff? And did you have a clear vision of how the structure of the song should be and how it should sound in the end?

Yurii: Yes! It started with one riff, but then I seriously broke my arm and was not able to play guitar, of course. But sometimes your desire and power is stronger than physical issues, so I finally decided to try composing all the music only with computer software, and it worked! So, all you hear in this song, besides the first riff, was composed by me without guitar and with one hand. It was a real challenge for me as a composer and now I am very happy that I coped with it and that I did not disappoint the other guys from the band and, of course, Phil from DMP.

I almost never have a clear vision concerning the structure when I start the composing process. It all grows spontaneously. I just knew I would need a part fitting for clean vocals, so I started trying some different ideas.

DMP: One of the outstanding features of this song is the use of clear vocals by Lars Nedland (BORKNAGAR, SOLEFALD). Was the part in the song specifically composed for his voice and vocals? Or did you know you wanted some clean singing in the beginning and then searched for a fitting voice? And how did you get into contact with Lars?

Yurii: We contacted Lars almost at the same time the idea for the EP as the 200th release was born. Phil talked to Lars when he bought our records, and Lars told him that he does not mind recording some vocals for us. And, of course, we agreed! We were shocked a little bit and it is an honour for us.

Yes, I tried to compose parts fitting for epic clean vocals. And I think it was totally successful. We are really happy with the result and proud of it. This collaboration means very much to us. And we hope one day we will perform this song live together with Lars.

Debemur Morti releases 25th June via Debemur Morti Productions. Pre-orders available now.

~

Pre-order Debemur Morti on digital, 10″ LP and CD from Bandcamp HERE, or on CD and 10″ LP from the Debemur Morti productions webstore HERE.

Support WHITE WARD:

Official Facebook

Official Bandcamp

Official Instagram

Official VK

Official YouTube

~