Hello community!

My name is Aravind. I would like to announce a monthly FoundationDB meetup that I’m helping organize in Adobe’s HQ in San Jose, CA.

Our main objective is to build a supportive environment where people who work with FoundationDB can connect, share their ideas, and learn from one another’s experiences. Additionally, we provide opportunities for networking and informal knowledge exchange, allowing attendees to forge meaningful connections and expand their professional networks.

If you are interested in attending, please RVSP on the meetup.com page. If you would like to present in the meetup, please send me a message via the meetup page.

The first event is scheduled for .

How Tigris Leverages FoundationDB for Global Metadata Storage

Himank Chaudhary [Co-founder & CTO, Tigris Data]

Tigris is a globally distributed S3-compatible object storage service. Tigris uses FoundationDB as the underlying storage engine to store the metadata. In this talk we will share the technical details around why we chose FoundationDB and how we are using it at scale to power our object storage service.

Planned upcoming talks

FDB Cluster Management - Senthil Kumar Ramamoorthy [Snowflake]

Benchmarking FDB in Azure and AWS clouds - Aravind Sriram [Adobe]

Building a GraphDB using FDB

Consistent replication between FDB and DataLake

We will have two interesting talks at this inaugural hybrid meetup event - FoundationDB Meetup [In-Person and Online], Wed, May 15, 2024, 6:00 PM | Meetup

Talk 1 :

Title: How Tigris Leverages FoundationDB for Global Metadata Storage

Speaker: Himank Chaudhary (Co-founder/CTO, Tigris)

Speaker Bio:

Himank is the Co-Founder and CTO of Tigris Data where he is building a globally distributed object storage service. Prior to co-founding Tigris, Himank was the tech lead of Docstore, Uber’s distributed database that powered petabytes of data and facilitated millions of queries per second in a geo-distributed hybrid cloud deployment. Himank Chaudhary - Tigris Data Inc | LinkedIn

Talk Summary:

Tigris is a globally distributed S3-compatible object storage service. Tigris uses FoundationDB as the underlying storage engine to store the metadata. In this talk, Himank will share the technical details around why they chose FoundationDB and how we are using it at scale to power our object storage service.

Talk 2:

Title: Encryption in FoundationDB

Speaker: Ata E Husain Bohra (Snowflake)

Speaker Bio:

Ata is a core member of Snowflake’s FoundationDB team. Snowflake has been working with FoundationDB for more than a decade. Ata is an industry veteran with over 10 years of experience designing/implementing large-scale distributed systems. Prior to Snowflake, he played an instrumental role in building and productionizing Uber’s Distributed Ledger platform. He is a startup enthusiast and has worked at multiple successful startups as a core member of the distributed filesystem team. Ata E Husain Bohra - Snowflake | LinkedIn

Talk Summary:

Snowflake enhanced FoundationDB by designing/implementing an enterprise-grade native encryption data-at-rest solution. The talk deep-dives into encryption at-rest architecture, supported configuration modes, and ability to integrate with existing enterprise’s encryption infrastructure.

Hi Folks,

I’m delighted to share that our monthly FoundationDB meetup initiative is off to a fantastic start! Our inaugural meetup saw over 60 attendees, including key members of the FoundationDB team from Apple and Snowflake such as Jingyu Zhou, Joshua McManus, Ata E Husain Bohra and Stephen Pimentel. Thanks to everyone who was able to make it to the event. It was a pleasure connecting with you all! If anyone is interested in presenting at the meetup (remote or in-person), please reach out to me.

The next meetup event is scheduled for Jun 20th at Adobe HQ in San Jose. Please RSVP here.

Recording of the talks

Snowflake enhanced FoundationDB by designing/implementing an enterprise-grade native encryption data-at-rest solution. In this talk, Ata E Husain Bohra (Technical lead manager, Snowflake) will deep dive on the encryption at-rest architecture, supported configuration modes, and ability to integrate with existing enterprise’s encryption infrastructure.

Tigris is a globally distributed S3-compatible object storage service. Tigris uses FoundationDB as the underlying storage engine to store the metadata. In this talk, Himank Chaudhary (Co-founder & CTO, Tigris data) will share the technical details around why they chose FoundationDB and how we are using it at scale to power our object storage service.

This month’s meetup will take place in Adobe’s San Jose office on Thursday, June 20th at 6PM PST.

I will be presenting on Adobe’s FDB usage and journey. RSVP here to reserve your spot for either in-person or remote attendance -

FoundationDB Meetup [In-Person and Online], Thu, Jun 20, 2024, 6:00 PM | Meetup

Talk Summary:

Adobe Experience Platform’s core capability is delivering personalized customer experiences at scale. Identity Graphs are an integral concept to making this a reality. Adobe’s Identity Graph system manages over 50 billion identities, enables real-time ingestion of over 400,000 messages per second, and supports millions of API lookups per second.

In this talk, Aravind will provide insights into this large-scale distributed system and deep dive into how FoundationDB is leveraged as the backing store for the Identity Graph system. He will also dive into Adobe’s FoundationDB journey, including benchmarking FoundationDB in Azure and AWS clouds, Kubernetes vs VM deployment, fault-tolerance testing, and HA strategies.