Overview: WFDM (1400 AM, "Radio Latina 94.3") is an American radio station licensed to serve the community of Fort Walton Beach, Florida, United States, on the frequency of 1400 kHz and W233BH-FM. It first ...

Overview: WJSB (1050 AM) is a radio station broadcasting a Country music format, simulcasting WAAZ-FM/104.7. Licensed to Crestview, Florida, United States, the station serves the Ft. Walton Beach area. The station ...

Overview: WSBZ (106.3 MHz) is a commercial FM radio station broadcasting a Smooth jazz format. Licensed to Miramar Beach, Florida, United States, the station serves the Ft Walton Beach metropolitan area. The station ...

Overview: WWEO-LP (103.9 FM) is a radio station broadcasting a religious radio format. Licensed to DeFuniak Springs, Florida, United States, the station serves the Ft. Walton Beach, Florida, area. The station is ...

Overview: WXEI-LP (95.3 FM) is a radio station broadcasting a News/Talk radio format. Licensed to Crestview, Florida, United States, the station serves the Crestview/Fort Walton Beach area. The station is currently ...

Overview: WPSM (91.1 FM) is a radio station broadcasting a Contemporary Christian format. Licensed to Fort Walton Beach, Florida, United States, the station serves Fort Walton Beach and most of northwest Florida ...

Overview: WZEP (1460 AM) is a radio station broadcasting a Variety format. Licensed to DeFuniak Springs, Florida, United States, the station serves the Ft. Walton Beach area. The station is currently owned by Tom ...

Overview: WFSH (1340 AM) was a radio station licensed to Valparaiso-Niceville, Florida, United States. The station served the Ft. Walton Beach area. The station was last owned by Flagship Communications, Inc ...

Overview: WDSP (1280 AM) is licensed to DeFuniak Springs, Florida, United States, the station serves the Walton County, area, playing a commercial-free format of independent music. The station is currently owned ...

Overview: WPNS (1140 AM) is an American radio station broadcasting an adult standards format.

Overview: WAAZ-FM (104.7 MHz) is a commercial FM radio station broadcasting a country music format. Licensed to Crestview, Florida, United States, the station serves the Ft Walton Beach metropolitan area. The ...

Overview: WZLB (103.1 FM) is a radio station broadcasting a classic rock music format. Licensed to Valparaiso, Florida, United States, the station serves the Ft. Walton Beach area. The station is currently owned ...

Overview: WTKE-FM (100.3 FM) is a radio station broadcasting a sports/talk format. Licensed to Niceville, Florida, United States, the station serves the Fort Walton Beach area. WTKE-FM is owned by [receiver] Lee ...

Overview: WHWY (98.1 FM, "Highway 98") is a radio station with a country music format. Licensed to Holt, Florida, United States, the station serves the Fort Walton Beach area. The station is currently owned by ...

Overview: WTJT (90.1 FM) is a radio station broadcasting a Christian radio format. Licensed to Baker, Florida, United States, the station serves the Ft. Walton Beach area. The station is currently owned by Okaloosa ...

Overview: WAKJ is a Christian radio station licensed to DeFuniak Springs, Florida, broadcasting on 91.3 MHz FM. The station is owned by First Baptist Church, Inc.

Overview: WFTW (1260 AM, "NewsTalk 1260") is a radio station serving the Fort Walton Beach, Florida area with a news/talk radio format. This station broadcasts on AM frequency 1260 kHz and is under ownership ...