Mark Rydell, who directs the new biodrama "James Dean," knew its subject as a friend.

"He was as motivated and as ambitious a guy as I've ever met. Driven, driven," Rydell says.

Although Dean starred in only three major films -- "East of Eden," "Rebel Without a Cause" and "Giant" -- he became a Hollywood legend before he was killed at age 24 in a car crash on Sept. 30, 1955.

Rydell, now 67, says he was attracted to the movie "James Dean" -- which premiers on Turner Network Television on Sunday at 8 p.m. -- because it enabled him to revisit an era of "idealism and passion" when "we were trying to become young artists."

Back in the 1950s, before either of their names were up in lights, aspiring actors Rydell and Dean hung out in New York bars, studied at the Actor's Studio, competed for roles. In 1953, they were cast as underage youths in a bar in an Omnibus teleplay, William Inge's "Glory and the Flower," starring Hume Cronyn and Jessica Tandy.

"I knew how tortured he was," says Rydell, who went on to direct for television and the movies, including "On Golden Pond," for which he was nominated for an Oscar.

Rydell says his own psychoanalysis gave him insight into Dean. He believes that Dean's estranged relationship with his father made him seek out father figures like director Elia Kazan.

"He was desperately in search of that kind of connection," says Rydell.

That theory gives the movie, scripted by Obie-winning playwright Israel Horovitz, "a spine and a climax" when added to the known facts of Dean's brief life, the director says.

"But the truth of it is, this is a not a documentary. It's a drama. As it says at the end of the show, it's an educated guess," says Rydell, who thinks biographies without a point of view are tedious.

He considers it moot to discuss what Dean might have done had he lived; Rydell doubts Dean could have lived.

"He was such a reckless person -- with his motorcycles, his bullfighting, his racing cars -- testing the limits of every possible situation in an attempt to identify himself."

Horovitz's script was in development at Warner Bros. for years, and several stars, including Leonardo DiCaprio, toyed with the idea of playing Dean. In the end, the relatively unknown 23-year-old James Franco was selected. Michael Moriarty plays Dean's father, Winton.

Executive producer Bill Gerber, who took the project to TNT, says Rydell was chosen as director not because he knew Dean but because of his body of work.

"We vaguely knew there was some connection, but we didn't know they were pals."

Gerber describes Rydell as "an actors' director" and a "professional who doesn't waste a penny" -- able to cram a first-class feature into a cable budget.

Rydell didn't mind the limitations of a $10.3 million project "You have to invent. You have to be clever, you have to be creative. ... Theaters are rife with crap that costs a fortune."

Rydell, the son of a Wall Street stockbroker, studied music at Juilliard before segueing into acting. He's a firm believer in the Method, practiced by actors like Dean, who was "able to take the pain of his life and pour it into his work."

An actor must "stay in touch with the child within," Rydell says, since "as you grow older you lean toward more paternal characteristics." As a director, he likes creating an environment in which people can "realize their dreams with impunity."

Exuberant and overflowing with conversation, Rydell talks in the living room of his multi-story Venice beach house, which functions as home and office. His wife, Esther; oldest son, Christopher; youngest son, Alexander; and grandson, Austen, all wander in to join the conversation.

Esther declined to appear in "James Dean," but the rest of the family have roles. Christopher, a professional actor, plays Kazan's assistant. The boys make cameo appearances. Rydell's ex-wife, actress Joanne Linville, plays gossip columnist Hedda Hopper. Daughter Amy plays Christine White, who auditioned with Dean at the Actor's Studio and became his roommate.

Rydell himself, slicked up with snake-oil charm and a thin mustache, portrays Jack Warner, the type of Hollywood studio boss who would "rather tell a bad joke than make a good movie," but who signed the talented Dean to a $1 million contract.

Yes, Rydell knew Warner, too. Rydell came to Hollywood in 1956 to appear in the teen gang film "Crime in the Streets," and Warner, he says, "was interested in me. He talked to me about a three-picture deal and I said with the arrogance of youth and being from New York, 'I need script approval.'"

With no expletives deleted, Warner told him to get out of his office.

As an actor, Rydell seems to favor brutish characters with killer grins. He did a 1956-62 stint as ne'er-do-well Jeff Baker on the soap opera "As The World Turns." He was the villain in Robert Altman's "The Last Goodbye."

Most recently, Rydell co-stars in Woody Allen's upcoming "Hollywood Ending."

"He plays a movie director and I play his best friend, his agent, somebody who's been with him 34 years," Rydell says. "It's hysterical, so funny I could barely keep a straight face. He said to me, 'You've got to stop laughing.'"

As much as he admires Allen, the effusive Rydell couldn't tiptoe around the shy auteur. He practiced some of that Actor's Studio Method identification

"I grabbed Woody and hugged and kissed him in front of everybody. The crew were all shocked by the intimate way I treated him, but it was the only way I could make the relationship work since we were supposed to be friends for 30 years ... I figured what do I have to lose?" Rydell laughs.

Find this link at Today.com

http//www.tnt.tv/index.html"

http//www.tnt.tv/index.html