Mark Rydell (born March 23, 1929, New York, New York, U.S.) is an American actor and director who was best known for helming On Golden Pond (1981).

Rydell trained at the Juilliard School of Music and The Actors Studio. He initially worked as a jazz pianist, and in 1952 he made his Broadway debut, appearing in Seagulls over Sorrento. The following year Rydell began acting on television, and from 1956 to 1962 he had a lead role on the popular television soap opera As the World Turns. In 1956 he appeared in his first feature film, Don Siegel’s juvenile delinquent saga Crime in the Streets. Rydell later acted in several TV series before moving behind the camera in 1963 to direct episodes of Ben Casey. He subsequently worked on such shows as I Spy, The Fugitive, and Gunsmoke.

Britannica Quiz

Pop Culture Quiz

In 1968 Rydell made his film-directing debut with The Fox, a brooding adaptation of a D.H. Lawrence novella, starring Sandy Dennis and Anne Heywood as housemates whose rural life—and lesbian relationship—is disrupted when a handsome stranger (played by Keir Dullea) moves in unexpectedly. The entertaining The Reivers (1969), which was based on William Faulkner’s comic (and final) novel, starred Steve McQueen as a high-spirited handyman who takes a young boy (Mitch Vogel) and a friend (Rupert Crosse) on a car ride to Memphis. Far less lively was The Cowboys (1972), an acerbic western starring John Wayne as an old rancher who recruits 11 youngsters to help him on an epic cattle drive; along the way, they battle an outlaw (Bruce Dern). Rydell next directed Cinderella Liberty (1973), a bittersweet romantic drama about a sailor (James Caan) and a jaded prostitute (Marsha Mason, nominated for an Academy Award) who is raising a son. Harry and Walter Go to New York (1976) was a strained comedy starring Caan and Elliott Gould as a pair of unsuccessful vaudeville performers who decide to become bank robbers.

In 1979 Rydell had his first major hit with The Rose. The drama featured Bette Midler in a breakthrough role as a Janis Joplin-like rock singer who is self-destructive. Frederic Forrest played her boyfriend, and both performers were nominated for Oscars. Rydell then scored his biggest success—both critically and commercially—with On Golden Pond (1981), Ernest Thompson’s Oscar-winning adaptation of his play about the joys and pains of growing old. Henry Fonda (in his last feature film) and Katharine Hepburn portrayed long-married New Englanders, and Jane Fonda was their angry daughter. Hepburn and Henry Fonda won Oscars, and the film and Rydell were also nominated. In addition, On Golden Pond was one of the highest-grossing movies of the year.

Rydell’s next films, however, were less successful. The River (1984) was a well-meaning but flawed drama, in which Mel Gibson and Sissy Spacek starred as a farming couple who struggle to avoid foreclosure and then must deal with a flood. The film was largely ignored by moviegoers, as were For the Boys (1991), a show business saga starring Midler and Caan as USO performers whose turbulent romance spans a half century, and Intersection (1994), in which Richard Gere portrayed a man who, during a fatal car crash, reexamines his love life.

Rydell had more success with James Dean (2001), a television film in which James Franco effectively embodied the iconic actor; Rydell cast himself as Jack Warner, an executive at Warner Brothers. His final film as a director was the gambling drama Even Money (2006), which featured Kim Basinger, Danny DeVito, Ray Liotta, and Forest Whitaker. In 2007 Rydell directed an episode for the TV miniseries Masters of Science Fiction.