Prior to Friday’s game against the Orlando Magic, Steve Nash provided an update on Blake Griffin, who is ramping up behind the scenes and supporting his new teammates from the bench. Nash wouldn’t provide a return date for Griffin but it should be noted that Griffin in on the Nets road trip that continues Sunday in Washington.

Nash did not provide a return date for Griffin but says the six-time NBA All-Star is looking “really really good right now” and his return date is coming. The Nets head coach also noted how Griffin is doing everything the organization is asking him to do and is addressing all the steps needed to return.

“I don’t know but I think he is getting closer and he’s doing great. “He looks good, is improving, and is working hard off the floor as well,” Nash said. “I think he is addressing all of the things he needed to address to land safely back in the game and transition into our team, which is not always easy. You don’t want to take that for granted. He has to adapt to the way that we play, new teammates, new system, and new style. He is doing everything you can ask for.

“Just his presence is important because he is an intelligent, mature, and experienced player. We are looking forward to having him back. I don’t know when that will be but it’s coming. He does look really good right now.”

On Thursday, Blake himself appeared on “Pardon My Take” from the Barstool Sports network. In what was a wildly fun show, Griffin gave his thoughts on a topic that’s been discussed into the ground on the internet: Can he still dunk? For reference, Blake hasn’t dunked in an NBA game in 464 days (and counting!).

Blake’s response was, well, see for yourself.

“You want some breaking news? I have dunked and I have played 5-on-5,” said Blake Griffin with a deadpan, before going onto explain that his dearth of dunks can also be attributed to playing in just 19 total games since the year 2019.

Here’s a full clip of the segment on dunking. We’d recommend you watch it. It’s hilarious!

Could Scary Hours get one hour spookier? And what about this tonight from Michael Grady...

Scary indeed.