Sources close to the Orlando Magic peg Clippers’ guard Steve Blake as the team’s primary free agent acquisition. Sources say the Magic could offer a similar package to what was given to Brandon Bass last summer ($4 years roughly $16 million). Blake is expected to have several suitors this week and may make a a visit to Orlando early in the process.

Lakers, Magic, Kings among teams interested in Cameron Johnson?

In what was viewed as a down year — slogging through adductor, ankle, calf, leg and shoulder injuries — Johnson still averaged 13.4 points and 4.3 rebounds in 58 games. He shot 39.1 percent from deep, just off his 39.2 career mark. His size (6-foot-8), age (28) and shooting ability combine to make Johnson valuable. Only 10 NBA players 6-7 or taller averaged more than his 2.4 made 3-pointers last season. While the Kings, Magic and Lakers are interested, one recent report claimed the Spurs, Raptors or Warriors could be a “dark horse.”

Mark Bryant is joining the Knicks coaching staff, SNY NBA Insider Ian Begley reported on Wednesday. Begley noted that Bryant, 59, is widely viewed as one of the top big man coaches in the NBA. He joins a Tom Thibodeau coaching staff that has seen a great run of recent success in getting a great deal of output out of less-than-heralded big men, like Isaiah Hartenstein’s emergence last season.

Wells Fargo plans to drop its name from the South Philadelphia sports arena, the home of the Flyers and 76ers, after the bank’s contract expires in 2025. “Wells Fargo regularly reviews and adjusts our overall sponsorship strategy,” a Wells Fargo spokesperson said in a statement on Wednesday. “As such, we have made the business decision not to renew the naming rights contract to Wells Fargo Center. We value our relationship with Comcast Spectacor and we look forward to collaborating on live entertainment and sporting events at the Wells Fargo Center through the end of our contract in August 2025.”

Bobby Marks: Utah announced that they have waived Kenneth Lofton Jr. and Darius Bazley. Both players contracts were set to be guaranteed $400K if they were on the roster past July 25. Utah has $37.7M in salary cap space. To reach the minimum salary floor, Utah has to spend $23.7M by the first day of the regular season. The window to renegotiate the $18M Lauri Markkanen contract begins on August 6.

Luol Deng: I normally don’t pay attention to these type of comments, but as an African, a leader in my community, and the president of the South Sudan Basketball Federation, I feel it is important to respond. This is for those who have asked about these comments, those who are offended by them, and everyone who has followed our story. I’m not upset or angry at these ignorant remarks made by my former colleagues; I was more disappointed to see them coming from two individuals I’ve always respected. The comments made by Paul Pierce showed misinformation and a lack of research. However, he used it as a teachable moment to shed positivity once he was informed. Thank you to Paul Pierce for apologising, that i can respect.

Luol Deng: As for Gilbert’s comments, they were certainly more disrespectful and cruel. Personally, I don’t care much. I would never trade places with anyone; being African is special. However, for young African and African American kids who admire and listen to Gilbert, these comments can make you think less of yourself and make the rest of the world think less of Africans. Those who are easily misled may make comments that reflect self-hate more than pride. There is nothing about our history that we should run away from.