CityBeat, a weekly alternative newspaper in Cincinnati, is accusing the nonprofit responsible for much of the development in Cincinnati's urban core of violating its First Amendment rights.

The Cincinnati Center City Development Corp., otherwise known as 3CDC, recently began seizing distribution boxes belonging to CityBeat and other publications from sidewalks Downtown and in Over-the-Rhine.

3CDC said it began removing what it described as abandoned and unsightly boxes as part of its directive to help beautify the city through its recent merger with Downtown Cincinnati Inc. However, Cincinnati officials did not sanction the move, the development group acknowledged.

CityBeat publisher Tony Frank said 3CDC has no right to remove any of the boxes because it restricts access to CityBeat's and others' content, which is protected under the U.S. Constitution.

"We feel this is a direct violation of our First Amendment rights (to freedom of speech and freedom of the press),'' Frank told The Enquirer. "We’re seeking counsel and talking to our legal team.''

Putting 'private property' in a public right of way

3CDC, a private nonprofit development group, said it has identified 238 distribution boxes throughout Downtown and OTR, of which 183 are abandoned and 55 are in active use.

Those numbers don't include The Enquirer, which no longer has vending machines on the streets Downtown or in OTR.

3CDC has collected more than 100 boxes so far, including eight to nine belonging to CityBeat, according to Joe Rudemiller, a 3CDC spokesman. Others include boxes for apartment and car advertising publications.

Rudemiller said the development group's ultimate goal is to replace the boxes with planters, flowers or "something more visually appealing.''

"We feel like these boxes are private property, and they (vendors) don't have the right to put private property in the public right of way,'' he said.

Frank said CityBeat first learned of 3CDC's plans in April when it received a letter from the development group that it planned to remove boxes it deemed unsightly.

CityBeat offered to work with the 3CDC and pick up some of its unused boxes and spruce up others with a fresh coat of paint and new labeling, Frank said.

He said he thought both parties were in agreement on the compromise until late last month.

That's when 3CDC notified CityBeat that it would remove some of its newspaper boxes Downtown along Second Street to accommodate the filming of American Ninja Warrior, which took place from May 24-26.

'The boxes cost money.'

3CDC promised to replace the boxes after filming was completed, Frank said, but circulation drivers discovered the boxes were still missing well after the filming ended, and another box was missing from in front of City Hall.

During a follow-up meeting, Frank said he learned 3CDC wanted to remove all of the newspaper's boxes from public rights of way Downtown and in Over-the-Rhine.

"Removing all of our boxes is not going to work for us,'' he said. “We’ve been around since 1994. We feel like we are part of the community&mldr;and that people want us there.”

Frank said boxes in Downtown and Over-the-Rhine account for about 35 percent of CityBeat's print circulation, and removing the boxes has a direct impact on the newspaper's profitability.

"The boxes cost money. We have to pay our circulation drivers (to deliver to the boxes). And we don't know how many copies were in the boxes that had paid advertising in them,'' Frank said. "Some may not agree with everything that we say...but the reality is our papers are being picked up at those boxes, and there’s a very large audience behind it.''

Frank said 3CDC has offered to allow CityBeat to set up its distribution boxes inside some of the Downtown and OTR parking garages it controls.

That's a non-starter, according to Frank: "Who’s gonna pick them up there?''