The blue lamp is perhaps one of the most famous symbols of British policing and is recognised around the world as an icon of the service. They have been a feature of police station architecture from as early as the 1860s and are still found on many police buildings today.

The lamp also lent its name to the film that launched the career of PC George Dixon, perhaps the most famous fictional police officer of the 20th Century. Released in 1950, The Blue Lamp tells the story of a police officer killed during a robbery and the subsequent hunt for and arrest of his killer. The film, starring Dirk Bogarde, Bernard Lee, Robert Flemyng and Jack Warner as PC Dixon, was a great success, being the most watched film of 1950 and won the BAFTA Award for Best British Film.

The character of Dixon proved so popular that, despite dying in the film, he reappeared in 1955, again played by Jack Warner, in the television series Dixon of Dock Green. The show became a great favourite with the public and 432 episodes were produced. Dixon finally hung up his truncheon in 1976, by which time Jack Warner was 80 and 25 years past his most famous character’s real life retirement age.

The character is perhaps best remembered for opening every episode with the much impersonated greeting ‘Evening all’.

This is example of the classic blue lamp can be found on Swinton Police Station in Salford, Greater Manchester.

The building is the headquarters of Greater Manchester Police's Salford Division.

To find out more about Greater Manchester Police please visit our website.

www.gmp.police.uk

You should call 101, the new national non-emergency number, to report crime and other concerns that do not require an emergency response.

Always call 999 in an emergency, such as when a crime is in progress, violence is being used or threatened or where there is danger to life.

You can also call anonymously with information about crime to Crimestoppers on 0800 555 111. Crimestoppers is an independent charity who will not want your name, just your information. Your call will not be traced or recorded and you do not have to go to court or give a statement.