Villa Rica, Georgia

Fairfield Plantation is located between Villa Rica and Carrollton in Carroll County. Although outside city limits, Fairfield Plantation residents receive mail through Villa Rica Post Office and contribute to the economies of both Villa Rica and Carrollton as well as to the economy of Douglas County.

The local area was settled following an 1825 treaty with the Creek people. The city, originally named Hixson, became home to northeastern farmers and gold miners and was later incorporated as Villa Rica ("Rich Village") in 1881. Villa Rica actually enjoyed a small gold rush in the late 1820's, which was largely overshadowed by the Dahlonega gold rush.

Carrollton, Georgia

Just like Villa Rica, Carrollton came to be on land that once belonged to the Creek Indian Tribe. The act that created Carroll County was passed in December 1826; the name of the county came from Maryland's Charles Carroll, the last living signer of the Declaration of Independence.

Carrollton's square is named after William Charles Adamson, a Carrollton attorney and judge who served as a Congressman for 21 years. In Congress, Adamson was Chairman of the Committee on Labor, helped create the Department of Labor, and authored the Adamson Act, which created an eight-hour workday for railroad workers and later became the standard for the duration of the modern workday.

University of West Georgia

"Just west of Atlanta, a spirited University lies nestled among the rolling hills and tranquil lakes of Carrollton."

University of West Georgia opened its doors as an agricultural and mechanical school in 1906. Over the decades, West Georgia has evolved to become a major part of the University System of Georgia. With an enrollment of over 12,000 students and more than 85 programs of study, UWG grants degrees at the bachelor's, master's, specialist, and doctoral level.

local attractions

Carrollton Mainstreet

Historic Banning Mill

Little Vine Vineyards

McIntosh Reserve

Pine Mountain Gold Museum

Southeastern Quilt and Textile Musem

Sweetwater Creek State Park

Villa Rica Mainstreet

Carrollton Greenbelt Trail

Printer's Ale Brewery

Carrrollton Cultural Arts Center

Six Flags Over Georgia