#1 Best Places to Live in Carroll County .

Villa Rica

Suburb of Atlanta, GA ,

89 Niche users give it an average review of 3.9 stars.

Featured Review: Current Resident says I like how our recreation center is open to everyone in Villa Rica but with things like the basketball center, there is an hourly cost to use. There are lots of amusement/arcade places in Georgia... .

Read 89 reviews.

Overall Niche Grade : A minus ,

Population : 17,354 ,

#2 Best Places to Live in Carroll County .

Carrollton

Town in Georgia ,

109 Niche users give it an average review of 4.1 stars.

Featured Review: Current Resident says Carrollton is where I’ve grown up and I will say there’s a lot more diversity now than there was in it many years ago. There’s many different people here and they all have such different... .

Read 109 reviews.

Overall Niche Grade : A minus ,

Population : 26,622 ,

#3 Best Places to Live in Carroll County .

Temple

Suburb of Atlanta, GA ,

11 Niche users give it an average review of 3.8 stars.

Featured Review: Current Resident says I happen to love the people within this community, and the schools' systems are amazing. The roads are always taken care of, and the county truly cares! .

Read 11 reviews.

Overall Niche Grade : B+ ,

Population : 5,395 ,

Whitesburg

Town in Georgia ,

2 Niche users give it an average review of 4.5 stars.

Featured Review: Current Resident says It's very quiet and peaceful. Barely any crime with cheap real estate. Close to all the necessary stores and shops but not crowded. .

Read 2 reviews.

Overall Niche Grade : B+ ,

Population : 659 ,

Bowdon

Town in Georgia ,

13 Niche users give it an average review of 3.7 stars.

Featured Review: Current Resident says Although living in a small town has it's down sides, I love living here. All of my family is here, as well as my friends. Everyone is just right down the road. Every knows each other. One of my... .

Read 13 reviews.

Overall Niche Grade : B ,

Population : 2,590 ,

Roopville

Town in Georgia ,

3 Niche users give it an average review of 4.3 stars.

Featured Review: Current Resident says Roopville is a very small town. It's family-friendly, quite, and small. If you're looking for nightlife, it's definitely not the place for you because there isn't any. But if you are looking for a... .

Read 3 reviews.

Overall Niche Grade : B ,

Population : 423 ,