Browse the 1,569 new homes in Villa Rica, Georgia below. If there is a new home being build to match your needs you are sure to find it here. There are currently 38 home builders in Villa Rica to choose from in 102 new home communities across the Villa Rica area. Choose from 1,306 home plans or the 173 quick move-in homes to find the perfect home for you in the Villa Rica area.

As one of the cities of Carroll and Douglas Counties in Georgia, Villa Rica's residential areas are attractive and ideal for peaceful and quiet living, just some of the reasons why new residents are attracted to it.

The city's rich history makes its tourism thriving. The places that made it to the list of National Register of Historic Places continue to grow, which includes The Williams Family Farm and The Dorough Round Barn and Farm. The Pine Mountain Gold Museum must be the king of all the city's historical destinations, where the gold mining history comes to life. There are also nature trails that let visitors peek at what remains in the gold mining activity.

Golf being a favorite pastime, the residents are fond of going to the Fairfield Plantation Golf & Country Club and The Frog not just to play but to be amazed by the stunning view of nature that surrounds it. Parks are favorite venues for relaxing as well, and one of the most visited is the Lamar Woody Recreation Center, a 130-acre park where the 8-acre lake and one small pond are the highlights. With facilities such as ball fields, picnic areas, and playgrounds, the parks are what you can call a one-stop fun place for the family.

For the convenience of the residents, there are big shops for them to source their daily needs in the likes of Walmart Supercenter and Walgreens. Conveniently located just off Interstate 20, it opens opportunity to enjoy upscale shopping in the nearby shops of Atlanta. And when it comes to satisfying the palate, the residents just head to Downtown Villa Rica for a good line-up of restaurants. From all-time favorites such as Burger King, KFC, McDonald's and Pizza Hut, to the favorites of the world like Greece's Olive Tree, Mexico's El Ranchito, and Japan's Sumo Steak House, there is no place better to have sumptuous dishes than in the comforts of the Downtown area.

The happenings in Villa Rica make its people busy and lively. No occasion is celebrated plainly, for even The Mill's Farmers Market is upbeat and bustling, where buyers and sellers, as well as people who adore food and fun, meet. The Gold Rush Festival must be one of its biggest events where the prides of the city are showcased on the streets in the form of floats and parades, musical concerts, food booths, and art displays. Thomas A. Dorsey Festival is another highly-anticipated event that pays tribute to the founder of Gospel Music. Big events are equally celebrated with a bang, such as the 4th of July, Christmas and New Years Eve.

Courtesy of the small-town feel Villa Rica possesses, as well as its mixed features and characters, new residents find satisfaction and pleasure in living in this city. If you're looking for new houses for sale in Villa Rica, New Home Source will be on your side to serve as your guide in looking for a home. The realty website has an extensive list of for-sale or for-lease properties in Villa Rica and all the cities of Georgia. With the website's user-friendly features, you will discover how convenient it is to own a new home in the city of Villa Rica.

Not finding the right community in Villa Rica? Expand your search to browse all Atlanta area neighborhoods.

You can also focus your search across the Atlanta area to the many 55+ communities in Atlanta, condo developments, or luxury communities.

Narrow Your Search by Price

Stay within your budget. Here are all of the Villa Rica subdivisions with new homes in typical price ranges for this area.

Under $500k

Under $600K

Market Overview: New Homes in Villa Rica, GA

Here is a quick overview of new housing developments in Villa Rica and the new construction market for new build homes in Villa Rica:

CityVilla RicaStateGeorgiaMetro AreaAtlantaSubdivisions102Move in Ready Homes173Homes Under Construction105Starting Price$189,013Average Price$334,781Price Per Square Foot$156New Home Builders38Builders in Villa Rica

Pulte Homes

LGI Homes

Artisan Built Communities

Customizable Options in Villa Rica